Vera Effigies Reverendi Patris ROBERTI SANDERSON Lincolniensis Episcopi AEt.
76 1681.


XXXVI. SERMONS. VIZ.

XVI. AD AULAM. VI. AD CLERUM. VI. AD MAGISTRATUM. VIII. AD POPULUM.
With a large Preface.

BY The Right Reverend FATHER in GOD, Robert Sanderson, Late Lord Bishop of
LINCOLN*

The Eighth Edition; Corrected and Amended.

Whereunto is now added the Life of the Reverend and Learned Author, Written by
ISAAC WALTON*

(...) Printed for (...) and (...) and are to be sold by (...) next door to the
Dolphin-Inn in West-Smithfield. MDCLXXXVI.

Collegium Emmanuelis Cantabrigiae.


THE LIFE OF Dr. Sanderson, LATE LORD BISHOP OF LINCOLN.

Written by IZAAK WALTON.

The Third Impression.

ECCLES. 3.

Mysteries are revealed to the Meek. LONDON, Printed for B. Took, T.
Passenger, and T. Sawbridge, and are to be sold by Thomas Hodgkin, next door to
the Dolphin, in West-Smithfield. MDCLXXXVI.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND AND HONORABLE GEORGE Lord Bishop OF WINCHESTER, PRELATE
of the GARTER, And one of His Majesty's Privy Council.
My Lord,
IF I should undertake to enumerate the many Favors and Advantages I have had
by my very long Acquaintance with your Lordship. I should enter upon an
Employment, that might prove as tedious, as the Collecting of the Materials for
this poor Monument, which I have erected, and do dedicate to the Memory of your
beloved Friend Dr. Sanderson: But, though I will not venture to do that; yet, I
do remember with pleasure, and remonstrate with gratitude, that your Lordship
made me known to him. Mr. Chilingworth, and Dr. Hammond; men, whose Merits
ought never to be forgotten.

My Friendship with the first was begun almost Forty years past, when I was as
far from a thought, as a desire to outlive him; and farther from an intention
to write his Life: But the wise Disposer of all men's Lives and Actions has
prolonged the first, and now permitted the last; which is here dedicated to
your Lordship (and as it ought to be) with all humility, and a desire that it
may remain, as a public Testimony of my Gratitude,

My Lord, Your most Affectionate old Friend, And most humble Servant, IZAAK
WALTON.

THE PREFACE.
I Dare neither think, nor assure the Reader, that I have committed no Mistakes
in this Relation of the Life of Dr. Sanderson; but am sure, there is none that
are either wilful, or very material. I confess, it was worthy the employment of
some Person of more Learning and greater Abilities than I can pretend to; and I
have not a little wondered that none have yet been so grateful to him and
Posterity, as to undertake it: For as it may be noted, That our Savior had a
care, that for Mary Magdalens kindness to him, her Name should never be
forgotten: So I conceive, the great satisfaction many Scholars have already
had, and the unborn World is like to have, by his exact, clear and useful
Learning: and might have by a true Narrative of his matchless meekness, his
calm Fortitude, and the Innocence of his whole Life: does justly challenge the
like from this present Age; that Posterity may not be ignorant of them: And
it is to me a wonder, that it has been already fifteen years neglected. But, in
saying this, my meaning is not to upbraid others (I am far from that) but
excuse my self, or beg pardon for daring to attempt it.

This being premised I desire to tell the Reader, that in this Relation I have
been so bold, as to paraphrase and say, what I think he (whom I had the
happiness to know well) would have said upon the same occasions; and if I have
been too bold in doing so, and cannot now beg pardon of him that loved me; yet,
I do of my Reader, from whom I desire the same favor.

And, though my Age might have procured me a Writ of Ease, and that secured me
from all further trouble in this kind; yet I met with such persuasions, to
undertake it, and so many willing informers since, and from them and others,
such helps and encouragements to proceed, that when I found my self faint, and
weary of the burden with which I had laden my self, and sometime ready to lay
it down; yet time and new strength has at last brought it to be what it now
is, and here presented to the Reader; and with it this desire: That he will
take notice that Dr. Sanderson did in his Will or last sickness advertise that
after his death nothing of his might be Printed; because that might be said to
be his, which indeed was not; and also, for that he might have changed his
Opinion since he first writ it, as it is thought he has since he writ his Pax
Ecclesiae. And though these Reasons ought to be regarded, yet regarded so, as
he resolves in his Case of Conscience concerning rash Vows, that there may
appear very good second Reasons, why we may forbear to perform them. However,
for his said Reasons, they ought to be read as we do Apocriphal Scripture; to
explain, but not oblige us to so firm a belief of what is here presented as his.

And I have this to say more; That as in my Queries for writing Dr. Sanderson's
Life, I met with these little Tracts annexed; so in my former Queries for my
Information to write the Life of venerable Mr. Hooker, I met with a Sermon,
which I also believe was really his, and here presented as his to the Reader.
It is affirmed (and I have met with reason to believe it) that there be some
Artists, that do certainly know an Original Picture from a Copy; and in what
Age of the World, and by whom drawn: And if so, then I hope it may be as safely
affirmed, that what is here presented for theirs, is so like their temper of
mind, their other writings, the times when, and the occasions upon which they
were writ, that all Readers may safely conclude, they could be writ by none but
venerable Mr. Hooker, and the humble and learned Dr. Sanderson.

And lastly, the trouble being now past, I look back and am glad that I have
collected these Memoirs of this humble Man, which lay scattered, and contracted
them into a narrower compass; and, if I have by the pleasant toil of so doing,
either pleased or profited any man, I have attained what I designed when I
first undertook it: But I seriously wish, both for the Readers, and Dr.
Sanderson's sake, that Posterity had known his great Learning and Virtue by a
better Pen, by such a Pen, as could have made his Life as immortal as his
Learning and Merits ought to be.

I. W.

THE LIFE OF Dr. Robert Sanderson, LATE LORD BISHOP OF LINCOLN.
DOctor Robert Sanderson, the late Learned Bishop of Lincoln, whose Life I
intend to write with all truth and equal plainness, was born the nineteenth day
of September, in the year of our Redemption, 1587. The place of his Birth was
Rotheram in the County of York: a Town of good note, and the more, for that
Thomas Rotheram, sometime Archbishop of that Sea, was born in it; a man, whose
great Wisdom and Bounty, and Sanctity of Life, gave a denomination to it, or
has made it the more memorable; as indeed it ought also to be, for being the
birthplace of our Robert Sanderson. And, the Reader will be of my belief, if
this humble Relation of his Life can hold any proportion with his great
Sanctity, his useful Learning, and his many other extaordinary Endowments.

He was the second and youngest Son of Robert Sanderson of Gilthwait-hall in
the said Parish and County, Esquire by Elizabeth one of the Daughters of Richard
Carr of Buterthwate-hall, in the Parish of Ecclesfield in the said County of
York, Gentleman.

This Robert Sanderson the Father, was descended from a numerous, ancient and
honorable Family of his own Name: for the search of which truth, I refer my
Reader, that inclines to it, t^ Dr. Thoriton's History of the Anti^^ities of
Nottinghamshire, and other Records; not thinking it necessary here to engage
him into a search for bare Titles, which are noted to have in them nothing of
reality: For, Titles not acquired, but derived only, do but show us who of our
Ancestors have, and how they have achieved that honor which their Descendants
claim, and may not be worthy to enjoy. For if those Titles descend to persons
that degenerate into Vice, and break off the continued line of Learning, or
Valor, or that Virtue that acquired them, they destroy the very Foundation
upon which that Honor was built; and all the Rubbish of their Degenerousness
ought to fall heavy on such dishonorable Heads; ought to fall so heavy, as to
degrade them of their Titles, and blast their Memories with reproach and shame.

But this Robert Sanderson, lived worthy of his Name and Family* of which one
testimony may be, That Gilbert, called the great and glorious Earl of
Shrewsbury, thought him not unworthy to be joined with him as a Godfather to
Gilbert Sheldon, the late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; to whose Merits and
Memory Posterity (the Clergy especially) ought to pay a Reverence.

But I return to my intended Relation of Robert the Son, who (like Iosia that
good King) began in his Youth to make the Laws of God, and Obedience to his
Parents, the Rules of his life; seeming even then, to dedicate himself and all
his Studies, to Piety and Virtue.

And, as he was inclined to this by that native goodness, with which the wise
Disposer of all hearts had endowed his: So this calm, this quiet and happy
temper of mind (his being mild and averse to oppositions) made the whole course
of his life easy and grateful both to himself and others: And this blessed
temper, was maintained, and improved by his prudent Fathers good Example; as
also, by his frequent conversing with him, and scattering short and virtuous
Apothegms with little pleasant Stories, and making useful applications of them,
by which his Son was in his Infancy taught to abhor Vanity and Vice as
Monsters, and to discern the loveliness of Wisdom and Virtue; and by these
means and God's concurring Grace, his knowledge was so augmented, and his
native goodness so confirmed, that all became so habitual, as 'twas not easy
to determine whether Nature or Education were his Teachers.

And here let me tell the Reader, That these early beginnings of Virtue were by
God's assisting Grace blessed with what St. Paul seemed to beg for his
Philippians; namely, That he Phil. 1. 6.
that had begun a good Work in them, would finish it. And Almighty God did: For
his whole life was so regular and innocent, that he might have said at his
death (and with truth and comfort) what the same St. Paul said after to the
same Philippians, Chap. 3. 17.
when he advised them to walk as they had him for an Example.

And this goodness, of which I have spoken, seemed to increase as his years
did; and with his goodness his learning, the foundation of which was laid in
the Grammar School of Rotheram (that being one of those three that were founded
and liberally endowed by the said great and good Bishop of that Name.) And in
this time of his being a Scholar there, he was observed to use on unwearied
diligence to attain learning, and to have a seriousness beyond his age, and
with it a more than common modesty; and to be of so calm and obliging
behavior, that the Master and whole number of Scholars loved him as one man.

And in this love and amity he continued at that School, till about the
thirteenth year of his Age; at which time his Father designed to improve his
Grammar learning, by removing him from Rotheram to one of the more noted
Schools of Eaton or Westminster: and after a years stay there, then to remove
him thence to Oxford. But, as he went with him, he called on an old Friend, a
Minister of noted learning, and told him his intentions; and he, after many
questions with his Son, received such Answers from him, that he assured his
Father, his Son was so perfect a Grammarian, that he had laid a good foundation
to build any or all the Arts upon; and therefore advised him to shorten his
journey, and leave him at Oxford. And his Father did so.

His Father left him there to the sole care and manage of Dr. Kilbie, who was
then Rector of Lincoln College: And he, after some time and trial of his
manners and learning, thought fit to enter him of that College, and not long
after to matriculate him in the University, which he did the first of July
1603. but he was not chosen Fellow till the third of May 1606. at which time he
had taken his degree of Bachelor of Arts; at the taking of which Degree, his
Tutor told the Rector, that his Pupil Sanderson had a Metaphysical brain, and a
matchless memory: and that he thought he had improved, or made the last so by
an Art of his own invention. And all the future employments of his life proved
that his Tutor was not mistaken.

I must here stop my Reader, and tell him, that this Dr. Kilibie was a man of
so great Learning and Wisdom, and so excellent a Critic in the Hebrew Tongue,
that he was made Professor of it in this University; and was also so perfect a
Grecian, that he was by King James appointed to be one of the Translators of
the Bible: And that this Doctor and Mr. Sanderson had frequent Discourses, and
loved as Father and Son. The Doctor was to ride a Journey into Darbyshire, and
took Mr. Sanderson to bear him company: and they resting on a Sunday with the
Doctor's Friend, and going together to that Parish Church where they then were,
found the young Preacher to have no more discretion, than to waste a great part
of the hour allotted for his Sermon in exceptions against the late Translation
of several words (not expecting such a hearer as Dr. Kilibie) and showed three
Reasons why a particular word should have been otherwise translated. When
Evening Prayer was ended, the Preacher was invited to the Doctor's Friends
house; where, after some other Conference, the Doctor told him, He might have
preached more useful Doctrine, and not have filled his Auditors ears with
needless Exceptions against the late Translation; and for that word, for which
he offered to that poor Congregation three Reasons, why it ought to have been
translated, as he said; he and others had considered all them, and found
thirteen more considerable Reasons why it was translated as now printed: and
told him, If his Friend, then attending him, should prove guilty of such
indiscretion, he should forfeit his Favor. To which Mr. Sanderson said, He
hoped he should not. And the Preacher was so ingenious as to say, He would not
justify himself. And so I return to Oxford.

In the year 1608. ( July the 11th.) Mr. Sanderson was completed Master of
Arts. I am not ignorant, that for the attaining these Dignities, the time was
shorter than was then, or is now required; but either his birth, or the well
performance of some extraordinary exercise, or some other merit, made him so:
and the Reader is requested to believe that 'twas the last; and requested to
believe also, that, if I be mistaken in the time, the College Records have
misinformed me: But I hope they have not.

In that year of 1608, he was ( November the 7th.) by his College chosen
Reader of Logic in the House, which he performed so well, that he was chosen
again the sixth of November. 1609. In the year 1613. he was chosen Sub-Rector of
the College, and the like for the year 1614. and chose again to the same
Dignity and Trust for the year 1616.

In all which time and employments, his abilities and behavior were such, as
procured him both love and reverence from the whole Society; there being no
exception against him for any faults, but a sorrow for the infirmities of his
being too timorous and bashful; both which were, God knows, so connatural, as
they never left him; And I know not whether his Lovers ought to wish they had;
for they proved so like the Radical moisture in man's body, that they preserved
the life of Virtue in his Soul, which by Gods assisting grace never left him,
till this life put on Immortality. Of which happy infirmities (if they may be
so called) more hereafter.

In the year 1614. he stood to be elected one of the Proctors for the
University. And 'twas not to satisfy any ambition of his own, but to comply
with the desire of the Rector, and whole Society, of which he was a Member; who
had not had a Proctor chosen out of their College for the space of sixty years
(namely, not from the year 1554. unto his standing;) and they persuaded him,
that if he would but stand for Proctor, his merits were so generally known, and
he so well beloved, that 'twas but appearing, and he would infallibly carry it
against any Opposers; and told him, That he would by that means recover a right
or reputation that was seemingly dead to his College. By these and other like
persuasions he yielded up his own reason to theirs, and appeared to stand for
Proctor. But that Election was carried on by so sudden and secret and by so
powerful a Faction, that he mist it. Which when he understood, he professed
seriously to his Friends, That if he were troubled at the disappointment, 'twas
for theirs, and not for his own sake: For he was far from any desire of such an
employment, as must be managed with charge and trouble, and was too usually
rewarded with hard censures, or hatred, or both.

In the year following he was earnestly persuaded by Dr. Kilibie and others, to
renew the Logic Lectures which he had read some years past in his College:
and that done, to methodize and print them, for the ease and public good of
Posterity.

And though he had an averseness to appear publicly in print; yet after many
serious solicitations, and some second thoughts of his own, he laid aside his
modesty, and promised he would; and he did so in that year of 1615. And the
Book proved, as his Friends seemed to prophecy, that is, of great and general
use, whether we respect the Art or the Author. For Logic may be said to be an
Art of right reasoning: an Art that undeceives men, who take falsehood for
truth; and enables men to pass a true Judgment and detect those Fallacies which
in some men's Understandings usurp the place of right reason. And how great a
Master our Author was in this Art, may easily appear from that clearness of
Method, Argument, and Demonstration, which is so conspicuous in all his other
Writings. And that he who had attained to so great a dexterity in the use of
reason himself, was best qualified to prescribe rules and directions for the
instructions of others. And I am the more satisfied of the excellency and
usefulness of this his first public Undertaking, by hearing, that most Tutors
in both Universities teach Dr. Sanderson's Logic to their Pupils, as a
Foundation upon which they are to build their future Studies in Philosophy. And
for a further confirmation of my belief, the Reader may note, That since this
his Book of Logic was first printed, there has not been less than ten thousand
sold: And that it is like to continue both to discover truth, and to clear and
confirm the Reason of the unborn World.

It will easily be believed that his former standing for a Proctors place, and
being disappointed, must prove much displeasing to a man of his great Wisdom
and Modesty, and create in him an averseness to run a second hazard of his
credit and content; and yet, he was assured by Dr. Kilby, and the Fellows of
his own College, and most of those that had opposed him in the former Election,
That his Book of Logic had purchased for him such a belief of his Learning and
Prudence, and his behavior at the former Election had got for him so great and
so general a love, that all his former Opposers repented what they had done;
and therefore persuaded him to venture to stand a second time. And upon these
and other like Encouragements, he did again, (but not without an inward
unwillingness,) yield up his own reason to theirs, and promised to stand. And
he did so; and was the tenth of April, 1616. chosen Senior Proctor for the year
following, Mr. Charles Crook of Christ-Church being then chosen the Junior.

In this year of his being Proctor there happened many memorable accidents part
of which I will relate; namely, Dr. Robert Abbot, Master of Balial College, and
Regius Professor of Divinity (who being elected or consecrated Bishop of Sarum
some months before) was solemnly conducted out of Oxford toward his Diocese,
by the Heads of all Houses, and the other Chiefs of all the University. And it
may be noted that Dr. Pridiaux succeeded him in the Professorship, in which he
continued till the year 1642. (being then elected Bishop of Worcester) at which
time our now Proctor Mr. Sanderson succeeded him in the Regius Professorship.

And in this year Dr. Arthur Lake (then Warden of New College) was advanced to
the Bishopric of Bath and Wells: A man of whom I take my self bound in Justice
to say, That he made the great trust committed to him, the chief care and whole
business of his life. And one testimony of this truth may be, That he sat
usually with his Chancellor in his Consistory, and at least advised, if not
assisted in most sentences for the punishing of such Offenders as deserved
Church Censures. And it may be noted, That after a Sentence for Penance was
pronounced, he did very rarely or never, allow of any Commutation for the
Offense, but did usually see the Sentence for Penance executed; and then, as
usually preached a Sermon of Mortification and Repentance, and so apply them to
the Offenders, that then stood before him, as begot in them, then, a devout
contrition, and at least resolutions to amend their lives; and having done
that, he would take them (though never so poor) to dinner with him, and use
them friendly, and dismiss them with his blessing, and persuasions to a
virtuous life, and beg them for their own sakes to believe him. And his
Humility, and Charity, and all other Christian Excellencies were all like this.
Of all which the Reader may inform himself in his Life, truly writ and printed
before his excellent Sermons.

And in this year also, the very prudent and very wise Lord Elsmere, who was so
very long Lord Chancellor of England, and then of Oxford, resigning up the
last, the right honorable, and as magnificent, William Herbert Earl of
Pembroke, was chosen to succeed him.

And in this year, our late King Charles the First (then Prince of Wales) came
honorably attended to Oxford; and having deliberately visited the University,
the Schools, Colleges, and Libraries, He and his Attendants were entertained
with Ceremonies and Feasting suitable to their Dignity and Merits.

And in this year King James sent Letters to the University for the regulating
their Studies; especially of the young Divines: Advising they should not rely
on modern Sums and Systemes, but study the Fathers and Councils, and the more
Primitive Learning. And this advice was occasioned by the indiscreet inferences
made by very many Preachers out of Mr. Calvin's Doctrine concerning
Predestination, Universal Redemption, the Irresistibility of God's Grace, and
of some other knotty Points depending upon these; Points which many think were
not, but by Interpreters forced to be Mr. Calvin's meaning; of the truth or
falsehood of which I pretend not to have an ability to judge; my meaning in
this Relation being only to acquaint the Reader with the occasion of the King's
Letter.

It may be observed, that the various accidents of this year did afford our
Proctor large and laudable matter to dilate and discourse upon: And, that
though his Office seemed, according to Statute and Custom, to require him to do
so at his leaving it; yet he chose rather to pass them over with some very
short Observations, and present the Governors, and his other Hearers, with
rules to keep up Discipline and Order in the University; which at that time was
either by defective Statutes, or want of the due execution of those that were
good, grown to b^ extremely irregular. And in this year also, the Magisterial
part of the Proctor required more diligence, and was more difficult to be
managed than formerly, by reason of a multiplicity of new Statu^e^, which begot
much confusion; some of which Statutes were then and not till then, and others
suddenly after, put into an useful execution. And though these Statutes were
not then made so perfectly useful, as they were designed, till Archbishop
Laud's time (who assisted in the forming and promoting them;) yet, our present
Proctor made them as effectual as discretion and diligence could do: Of which
one Example may seem worthy the noting, namely, That if in his Night-walk he
met with irregular Scholars absent from their Colleges at University hours, or
disordered by drink, or in scandalous company, he did not use his power of
punishing to an Extremity; but did usually take their names, and a promise to
appear before him unsent for next morning: And when they did, convinced them
with such obligingness, and reason added to it, that they parted from him with
such resolutions as the man after God's own heart was possessed with, when he
said to God, There is mercy with thee, and therefore thou shall be feared. And
by this, and a like behavior to all Psalm* 13^
men, he was so happy as to lay down this dangerous employment, as but very
few, if any have done, even without an Enemy.

After his Proctors Speech was ended, and he retired with a Friend into a
convenient privacy; he looked upon his Friend with a more than common
cheerfulness, and spoke to him to this purpose. I look back upon my late
employment with some content to my self, and a great thankfulness to Almighty
God, that he has made me of a temper not apt to provoke the meanest of
mankind, but rather to pass by Infirmities, if noted; and in this Employment I
have had (God knows) many occasions to do both. And when I consider how many of
a contrary temper, are by sudden and small occasions transported, and hurried
by Anger to commit such Errors, as they in that passion could not foresee, and
will in their more calm and deliberate thoughts upbraid, and require
repentance! And consider, that though Repentance secures us from the punishment
of any sin, yet how much more comfortable it is to be innocent, than need
pardon: And consider, that Errors against men, though pardoned both by God and
them, do yet leave such anxious and upbraiding impressions in the memory, as
abates of the Offender's content: When I consider all this, and that God has
of his goodness given me a temper that he has prevented me from running into
such enormities, I remember my temper with joy and thankfulness. And though I
cannot say with David ( I wish I could) that therefore his Psalm 130.
praise shall always be in my mouth; yet I hope, that by his grace, and that
grace seconded by my endeavors, it shall never be blotted out of my memory;
and I now beseech Almighty God that it never may.

And here I must look back, and mention one passage more in his Proctorship,
which is; That Gilbert Shelden, the late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, was
this year sent to Trinity College in that University; and not long after his
entrance there, a Letter was sent after him from his Godfather (the Father of
our Proctor) to let his Son know it, and commend his God-son to his
acquaintance, and to a more than common care of his behavior; which proved a
pleasing injunction to our Proctor, who was so gladly obedient to his Fathers
desire, that he some few days after sent his Servitor to entreat Mr. Shelden to
his Chamber next morning. But it seems Mr. Shelden having (like a young man as
he was) run into some such irregularity as made him conscious he had
transgressed his Statutes, did therefore apprehend the Proctor's invitation as
an introduction to punishment; the fear of which made his Bed restless that
night; but at their meeting the next morning, that fear vanished immediately by
the Proctor's cheerful countenance, and the freedom of their discourse of
Friends. And let me tell my Reader, that this first meeting proved the beginning
of as spiritual a friendship as humane nature is capable of; of a friendship
free from all self ends: and it continued to be so, till death forced a
separation of it on earth; but it is now reunited in Heaven.

And now, having given this account of his behavior, and the considerable
accidents in his Proctorship, I proceed to tell my Reader, that this busy
employment being ended, he preached his Sermon for his degree of Bachelor in
Divinity, in as eligant Latin, and as remarkable for the method and matter, as
has been preached in that University since that day. And having well performed
his other Exercises for that degree, he took it the nine and twentieth of May
following, having been ordained Deacon and Priest in the year 1611. by John
King, then Bishop of London, who had not long before been Dean of
Christ-Church, and then knew him so well, that he owned it at his Ordination,
and became his more affectionate Friend. And in this year, being then about the
29th of his Age, he took from the University a License to preach.

In the year 1618. he was by Sir Nicholas Sanderson, Lord Viscount Castleton,
presented to the Rectory of Wibberton, not far from Boston in the County of
Lincoln, a Living of very good value; but it lay in so low and wet a part of
that Country, as was inconsistent with his health. And health being (next to a
good Conscience) the greatest of God's blessings in this life, and requiring
therefore of every man a care and diligence to preserve it; and he,
apprehending a danger of losing it if he continued at Wibberton a second
Winter, did therefore resign it back into the hands of his worthy Kinsman and
Patron, about one year after his donation of it to him.

And about this time of his resignation he was presented to the Rectory of
Boothby Panel in the same County of Lincoln; a Town which has been made
famous, and must continue to be famous, because Dr. Sanderson, the humble and
learned Dr. Sanderson, was more than forty years Parson of Boothby Panel, and
from thence dated all or most of his matchless Writings.

To this Living (which was of less value, but a purer Air then Wibberton) he
was presented by Thomas Harrington of the same County and Parish, Esquire a
Gentleman of a very ancient Family, and of great use and esteem in his Country
during his whole life. And in this Boothby Panel the meek and charitable Dr.
Sanderson and his Patron lived with an endearing, mutual, and comfortable
friendship, till the death of the last put a period to it.

About the time that he was made Parson of Boothby Panel, he resigned his
Fellowship of Lincoln College unto the then Rector and Fellows; And his
resignation is recorded in these words.

Ego Robertus Sanderson per, etc.
I Robert Sanderson, Fellow of the College of St. Mary's and All Saints,
commonly called Lincoln College, in the University of Oxford, do freely and
willingly resign into the hands of the Rector and Fellows, all the Right and
Title that I have in the said College, wishing to them and their Successors,
all peace, and piety, and happiness, in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost.

Amen.
May 6. 1619. Robert Sanderson.

And not long after this Resignation, he was by the then Bishop of York, (or
the King, Sede vacant,) made Prebend of the Collegiate Church of Southwell in
that Diocese; and shortly after of Lincoln by the Bishop of that See.

And being now resolved to set down his rest in a quiet privacy at Boothby
Panel, and looking back with some sadness upon his removal from his general
and cheerful Acquaintance left in Oxford, and the peculiar pleasures of a
University life; he could not but think the want of Society would render this
of a Country Parson still more uncomfortable, by reason of that want of
conversation; and therefore he did put on some faint purposes to marry. For he
had considered, that though marriage be cumbred with more worldly care than a
single life; yet a complying and prudent Wife, changes those very cares into so
mutual Joys, as makes them become like the Sufferings of St. Paul, which he
would not have wanted, because Colos. 1. 24.
they occasioned his rejoicing in them. And he having well considered this, and
observed the secret unutterable joys that Children beget in Parents, and the
mutual pleasures and contented trouble of their daily care and constant
endeavors to bring up those little Images of themselves, so, as to make them
as happy as all those cares and endeavors can make them: He, having considered
all this; the hopes of such happiness turned his faint purpose into a positive
resolution to marry. And he was so happy as to obtain Anne, the Daughter of
Henry Nelson Bachelor in Divinity, then Rector of Haugham in the County of
Lincoln (a man of noted worth and learning.) And the giver of all good things
was so good to him, as to give him such a Wife as was suitable to his own
desires; a Wife, that made his life happy by being always content when he was
cheerful; that was always cheerful when he was content; that divided her joys
with him, and abated of his sorrow, by bearing a part of that burden; a Wife,
that demonstrated her affection by a cheerful obedience to all his desires,
during the whole course of his life; and at his death too; for she outlived
him.

And in this Boothby Panel he either found or made his Parishoners peaceable,
and complying with him in the constant, decent, and regular service of God. And
thus his Parish, his Patron and he lived together in a religious love, and a
contented quietness: He not troubling their thoughts by preaching high and
useless notions, but such, and only such plain truths as were necessary to be
known, believed, and practiced in order to the honor of God and their own
salvation. And their assent to what he taught was testified by such a
conformity to his Doctrine, as declared they believed and loved him. For it may
be noted he would often say, That without the last, the most evident truths
(heard as from an Enemy, or an evil liver) either are not, (or are at least the
less) effectual; and usually rather harden, than convince the hearer.

And this excellent man, did not think his Duty discharged by only reading the
Church-Prayers, Catechizing, Preaching, and administering the Sacraments
seasonably; but thought (if the Law, or the Canons may seem to enjoin no more,
yet) that God would require more than the defective Laws of man's making, can
or does enjoin; even the performance of that inward Law, which Almighty God
has imprinted in the Conscience of all good Christians, and inclines those
whom he loves to perform. He considering this, did therefore become a Law to
himself, practicing not only what the Law injoyns, but what his Conscience told
him was his Duty, in reconciling differences, and preventing Lawsuits, both in
his Parish and in the Neighborhood. To which may be added his often visiting
sick and disconsolate Families, persuading them to patience, and raising them
from dejection by his advice and cheerful discourse, and by adding his own
Alms, if there were any so poor as to need it; considering how acceptable it is
to Almighty God, when we do as we are advised by St. Paul, help to bear one
another burden, either of sorrow or want: and Gal. 6. 2^
what a comfort it will be, when the Searcher of all hearts shall call us to a
strict account as well for that evil we have done, as the good we have omitted;
to remember we have comforted and been helpful to a dejected or distressed
Family.

And that his practice was to do good, the following Narrative may be one
Example, He met with a poor dejected Neighbor that complained he had taken a
Meadow, the Rent of which was 9 l. a year; and when the Hay was made ready to
be carried into his Barn, several days constant rain had so raised the water,
that a sudden Flood carried all away, and his rich Landlord would bate him no
Rent; and that unless he had half abated, he and seven Children were utterly
undone. It may be noted, That in this Age there are a sort of people so unlike
the God of mercy, so void of the bowels of pity, that they love only themselves
and children; love them so, as not to be concerned, whether the rest of mankind
waste their days in sorrow or shame; People that are cursed with riches, and a
mistake that nothing but riches can make them and theirs happy. But 'twas not
so with Dr. Sanderson; for he was concerned, and spoke comfortably to the poor
dejected man; bade him go home and pray, and not load himself with sorrow, for
he would go to his Landlord next morning, and if his Landlord would not abate
what he desired, he and a Friend would pay it for him.

To the Landlord he went the next day; and in a conference the Doctor presented
to him the sad condition of his poor dejected Tenant; telling him how much God
is pleased when men compassionate the poor: and told him, That though God loves
Sacrifice, yet he loves Mercy so much better, that he is best pleased when he
is called the God of mercy: And told him the riches he was possessed of were
given him by that God of mercy, who would not be pleased, if he that had so
much given, yea, and forgiven him to, should prove like the rich Steward in the
Gospel, that took his fellow servant by the throat to make him pay the utmost
farthing. This he told him. And told him, That the Law of this Nation (by which
Law he claims his Rent) does not undertake to make men honest or merciful;
(that was too nice an undertaking:) but does what it can to restrain men from
being dishonest or unmerciful, and yet that our Law was defective in both: and
that taking any Rent from his poor Tenant, for what God suffered him not to
enjoy, though the Law allowed him to do so, yet if he did so, he was too like
that rich Steward which he had mentioned to him; and told him that riches so
gotten, and added to his great Estate, would, as Job says, prove like gravel in
his teeth; would in time so corrode his Conscience, or become so nauseous when
he lay upon his Deathbed, that he would then labor to vomit it up, and not be
able: and therefore advised him (being very rich,) to make Friends of his
unrighteous Mammon, before that evil day come upon him: But however, neither
for his own sake, nor for God's sake, to take any Rent of his poor dejected sad
Tenant, for that were to gain a temporal, and lose his eternal happiness. These
and other such reasons, were urged with so grave and so compassionate an
earnestne^s, that the Landlord forgave his Tenant the whole Rent.

The Reader will easily believe that Dr. Sanderson, who was himself so meek and
merciful, did suddenly and gladly carry this comfortable news to the dejected
Tenant; and will believe also, that at the telling of it there was a mutual
rejoicing. 'Twas Job 31.
one of Job's boasts, That he had seen none perish for want of clothing: and
that he had often made the heart of the widow to rejoice. And doubtless Dr.
Sanderson might have made the same religious boast of this, and very many like
occasions: But since he did not, I rejoice that I have this just occasion to do
it for him; and that I can tell the Reader, I might tire my self and him in
telling how like the whole course of Dr. Sanderson's Life was to this which I
have now related.

Thus he went on in an obscure and quiet privicy, doing good daily both by word
and by deed, as often as any occasion offered it self; yet not so obscurely,
but that his very great Learning, Prudence and Piety were much noted and valued
by the Bishop of his Diocese, and by most of the Nobility and Gentry of that
County. By the first of which he was often summoned to preach many Visitation
Sermons, and by the latter at many Assizes. Which Sermons, though they were
much esteemed by them that procured and were ^it to judge them; yet they were
the less ^alu'd, because he read them, which he was forced to do; for though he
had a^ extraordinary memory (even the Art of i^) yet he was punished with such
an innate, invincible fear and (...), that his memory was wholly useless, as
to *the repetition of his Sermons, so as he had ^^it them; which gave occasion
to say, when some of them were first printed and exposed to censure, (which was
in the year 1632.) That the best Sermons that were ever re^^^, were never
preached.

In this contented obscurity he continued, ^ill the learned and pious
Archbishop L^ud, who knew him well in Oxford (for he was his contemporary
there) told the King ('it was the knowing and conscientious King Charles the I.)
that there was one Mr. Sanderson, an obscure Country Minister, that was of such
sincerity, and so excellent in all Casuistical Learning, that he desired his
Majesty would take so much notice of him as to make him his Chaplain. The King
granted it most willingly, and gave the Bishop charge to hasten it, for he
longed to discourse with a Man that had dedicated his Studies to that useful
part of learning. The Bishop forgot not the King's desire, and Mr. Sanderson
was made his Chaplain in Ordinary in November following, (1631.) And when the
King and he became better known to each other, then, as ^^^s said, that after
many hard Questions put to the Prophet Daniel, King Darius found* an excellent
Dan. ^.
Spirit in him; so 'twas with Mr. Sanderson and our Excellent King; who having
put many Cases of Conscience to him, received from Mr. Sanderson such
deliberate, safe, and clear Solutions, as gave him so great content in
conversing with him, (which he did several times in private.) That at the end
of his months Attendance the King told him: He should long for the next
November; for he resolved to have a more inward Acquaintance with him, when
that month and he returned. And when the month and he did return, the good King
was never absent from his Sermons, and would usually say, I carry my ears to
hear other Preachers, but I carry my Conscience to hear Mr. Sanderson, and to
act accordingly: And this ought not to be concealed from Posterity, That the
King thought what he spoke: For he took him to be his Adviser in that quiet
part of his life, and he proved to be his Comforter in those days of his
affliction, when he was under such a restraint as he apprehended himself to be
in danger of Death or Deposing. Of which more hereafter.

In the first Parliament of this good King (which was 1625. he was chosen to be
a Clerk of the Convocation for the Diocese of Lincoln, which I here mention,
because about that time did arise many disputes about Predestination, and the
many Critical Points that depend upon, or are interwoven in it; occasioned, as
was said, by a disquisition of new Principles of Mr. Calvin's (though others
say they were long before his time.) But of these Dr. Sanderson then drew up
for his own satisfaction such a Scheme (he called it Pax Ecclesia) as then gave
himself, and has since given others such satisfaction, that it still remains
to be of great estimation. He was also chosen Clerk of all the Convocations
during that good Kings reign. Which I here tell my Reader, because I shall
hereafter have occasion to mention that Convocation in 1640. that unhappy long
Parliament, and some debates of the Predestinarian Points, as they have been
since charitably handled betwixt him, the learned Dr. Hammond, and Dr. Pierce,
the now reverend Dean of Salisbury. And here the Reader may note, that in
Letters writ to the said Dean, Dr. Sanderson seems to have altered his Judgment
in some Points, since he writ his Scheme called Pax Ecclesia, which he seems to
say in his last Will, besides other reasons to think so.

In the year 1636. his Majesty then in his Progress took a fair occasion to
visit Oxford, and to take an entertainment for two days for himself and his
honorable Attendants, which the Reader ought to believe was suitable to their
dignities: But, this is mentioned, because at the King's coming thither May 3.
Sanderson did then attend him; and was then (the 31 of August) created Doctor
of Divinity; which honor had an addition to it, by having many of the Nobility
of this Nation then made Doctors and Masters of Art with him: Some of whose
names shall be recorded and live with his (and none shall outlive it.) First
Dr. Curle and Dr. Wren, who were then Bishops of Winton and of Norwich (and had
formerly taken their Degrees in Cambridge) were with him created Doctors of
Divinity in his University. So was Merick the Son of the learned Izaac
Causabon; and Prince Rupert (who still lives) the then Duke of Lenox, Earl of
Hereford, Earl of Essex, of Barkshire, and very many others of noble Birth (too
many to be named) were then created Masters of Arts.

Some years before the unhappy long Parliament, this Nation being then happy
and in peace (though inwardly sick of being well) namely in the year 1639. a
discontented party of the Scots Church were zealously restless for another
Reformation of their K^rk Government; and to that end created a new Covenant,
for the general taking of which they pretended to petition the King for his
assent, and that he would enjoin the taking of it by all of that Nation: but
this Petition was not to be presented to him by a Committee of eight or ten men
of their Fraternity, but by so many thousands, and they so armed, as seemed to
force an assent to what they seemed but to request; so that though forbidden by
the King, yet they entered England, and in their heat of Zeal took and plundered
New Castle, where the King was forced to meet them with an Army; but upon a
Treaty and some concessions, he sent them back (though not so rich as they
intended, yet) for that time without bloodshed: But oh! this Peace and this
Covenant were but the forerunners of War, and the many miseries that followed:
For in the year following there were so many chosen into the long Parliament,
that were of a conjunct Council with these very zealous, and as factious
Reformers, as begot such a confusion by the several desires and designs in many
of the Members of that Parliament (all did never consent) and at last in the
very common People of this Nation, that they were so lost by contrary designs,
fears and confusions, as to believe the Scots and their Covenant would restore
them to that former tranquillity which they had lost. And to that end, the
Presbyterian Party of this Nation did again, in the year 1643. invite the
Scotch Covenanters back into England* and hither they came marching with it
gloriously upon their Pikes, and in their Hats with this Motto, For the Crown
and Covenant of both Kingdoms, This I saw and suffered by it. But when I look
back upon the ruin of Families, the bloodshed, the decay of common honesty,
and how the former piety and plain-dealing of this now sinful Nation is turned
into cruelty and cunning! when I consider this, I praise God that he prevented
me from being of that Party which helped to bring in this Covenant, and those
sad confusions that have followed it. And I have been the bolder to say this of
my self, because in a sad discourse with Dr. Sanderson, I heard him make the
like grateful acknowledgment.

This digression is intended for the better information of the Reader in what
will follow concerning Dr. Sanderson. And first, That the Covenanters of this
Nation, and their Party in Parliament, made many Exceptions against the
Common Prayer and Ceremonies of the Church, and seemed restless for another
Reformation: And though their desires seemed not reasonable to the King and the
learned Dr. Laud, then Archbishop of Canterbury; and many others; yet to quiet
their Consciences, and prevent future confusion; they did in the year 1641.
desire Dr. Sanderson to call two more of the Convocation to advise with him,
and that he would then draw up some such safe alterations as he thought fit in
the Service Book, and abate some of the Ceremonies that were least material,
for satisfying their consciences* and to this end he and two others did meet
together privately twice a week at the Dean of Westminster's House, (for the
space of five months or more.) But not long after that time, when Dr. Sanderson
had made the Reformation ready for a view, the Church and State were both
fallen into such a confusion, that Dr. Sanderson's Model for Reformation became
then useless. Nevertheless the Repute of his Moderation and Wisdom was such,
that he was in the year 1642. proposed by both Houses of Parliament to the King
then in Oxford, to be one of their Trustees for the settling of Church affairs,
and was allowed of by the King to be so; but that Treaty came to nothing.

In the year 1643. the two Houses of Parliament took upon them to make an
Ordinance, and call an Assembly of Divines, to debate and settle
Church-controversies (of which many that were elected were very unfit to
judge:) in which Dr. Sanderson was also named by the Parliament, but did not
appear, I suppose for the same reason that many other worthy and learned men
did forbear, the Summons wanting the King's Authority.

And here I must look back and tell the Reader, that in the year 1642. he was (
July 21.) named by a more undoubted Authority to a more noble employment, which
was to be Professor Regius of Divinity in Oxford; but though Knowledge be said
to puff up, yet his modesty and too mean an opinion of his great Abilities, and
some other real or pretended reasons (expressed in his Speech, when he first
appeared in the Chair, and since printed) kept him from entering into it till
October 1646.

He did for about a years time continue to read his matchless Lectures, which
were first de Iuramento, a Point very Seraphical, and as difficult, and at that
time very dangerous to be handled as it ought to be. But this learned man, as
he was eminently furnished with Abilities to satisfy the Consciences of men
upon that important Subject; so he wanted not courage to assert the true
obligation of it, and Oaths, in a degenerate Age, when men had made perjury a
main part, or at least very useful to their Religion. How much the learned
World stands obliged to him for these and his following Lectures de
Conscientia, I shall not attempt to declare, as being very sensible that the
best Pens fall short in the commendation of them: So that I shall only add,
That they continue to this day, and will do for ever, as a complete standard
for the resolution of the most material doubts in that part of ^asuistical
Divinity: And therefore I proceed to tell the Reader, That about the time of
his reading those Lectures (the King being then Prisoner in the Iste of Wight)
that part of the Parliament then at Westminster sent the Covenant, the Negative
Oath, and I know not what more to Oxford, to be taken by the Doctor of the
Chair, and all Heads of Houses: and all the other in^eriour Scholars of what
degree soever, were also to take these Oaths by a fixed day; for those that did
not were to abandon their Colleges and the University too, within 24 hours
after the beating of a Drum; And if they remained longer, they were to be
proceeded against as Spies.

Dr. Laud the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earl of Strafford, and many others,
had been formerly murdered, but the King yet was not; and the University had
yet some faint hopes that in a Treaty then in being, betwixt him and them that
confined him, or pretended to be suddenly, there might be such an Agreement
made, that the Dissenters in the University might both preserve their
Consciences, and the poor Subsistence which they then enjoyed by their
Colleges.

And being possessed of this mistaken hope, That the men in present Power were
not yet grown so merciless, as not to allow manifest reason for their not
submitting to the enjoined Oaths, the University appointed twenty Delegates to
meet, consider, and draw up a Manifesto to them, why they could not take those
Oaths but by violation of their Consciences: And of these Delegates Dr. Shelden
(late Archbishop of Canterbury) Dr. Hammond, Dr. Sanderson, Dr. Morley (now
Bishop of Winchester) and that most honest, very learned, and as judicious
Civil Lawyer, Dr. Zouch, were a part; the rest I cannot now name; but the whole
number of the Delegates requested Dr. Zouch to draw up the Law part, and give
it to Dr. Sanderson, and he was requested to methodize and add what referred to
Reason and Conscience, and put it into form. He yielded to their desires, and
did so. And then after they had been read in a full Convocation, and allowed
of, they were printed in Latin, that the Parliaments proceedings and the
Universities sufferings might be manifested to all Nations; and the Imposers of
these Oaths might repent, or answer them: but they were past the first; and for
the latter, I might swear they neither can, nor ever will. And these reasons
were also suddenly turned into English by Dr. Sanderson, that all those of
these three Kingdoms might the better judge of the cause of the Loyal Parties
sufferings.

About this time the Independants (who were then grown to be the most powerful
part of the Army) had taken the King from a close to a more large imprisonment,
and by their own pretenses to liberty of Conscience, were obliged to allow
somewhat like that to the King, (who had in the year 1646. sent for Dr.
Sanderson, Dr. Hammond, Dr. Sheldon (the late Archbishop of Canterbury) and Dr.
Morley (the now Bishop of Winchester) to attend him, in order) to advise with
them, how far he might with a good Conscience comply with the Proposals of the
Parliament for a Peace in Church and State; but these having been then denied
him by the Presbyterian Parliament, were now by their own rules allowed him by
those Independants now in present power. And with some of those Divines, Dr.
Sanderson also gave his attendance on his Majesty in the Isle of Wight;
preached there before him, and had in that attendance many, both public and
private Conferences with him, to his Majesty's great satisfaction. At which
time he desired Dr. Sanderson, that being the Parliament had then proposed to
him the abolishing of Episcopal Government in the Church, as inconsistant with
Monarchy, and selling theirs and the Cathedral Church-Land to pay those
Soldiers that they had raised to fight against him, that he would consider of
it, and declare his judgment: He undertook to do so, and did it; but it might
not be printed till our King's happy restoration, and then it was. And at Dr.
Sanderson's then taking his leave of his Majesty in this his last attendance on
him, the King requested him to betake himself to the writing Cases of
Conscience for the good of Posterity. To which his answer was, That he was now
grown old, and unfit to write Cases of Conscience. But the King was so bold
with him as to say; It was the simplest answer he ever heard from Dr.
Sanderson; for no young man was fit to be made a Judge, or write Cases of
Conscience. And let me here take occasion to tell the Reader this truth, very
fit, but not commonly known; that in one of these Conferences this
Conscientious King was told by a faithful and private Intelligencer, that if he
assented not to the Parliaments Proposals, the Treaty 'twixt him and them would
break immediately, and his life would then be in danger; he was sure he knew
it. To which his answer was, I have done what I can to bring my Conscience to a
compliance with their Proposals and cannot, and I will not lose my Conscience
to save my Life; and within a very short time after, he told Dr. Sanderson and
Dr. Morley, or one of them that then waited with him, That the remembrance of
two Errors did much afflict him, which were, his assent to the Earl of
Strafford's death, and the abolishing Episcopacy in Scotland; and that if God
ever restored him to be in a peaceable possession of his Crown, he would
demonstrate his Repentance by a public Confession and voluntary Penance (I
think barefoot) from the Tower of London, or Whitehall, to St. Paul's Church,
and desire the people to intercede with God for his pardon. I am sure one of
them that told it me, lives still, and will witness it. And it ought to be
observed, that Dr. Sanderson's Lectures de Iuramento were so approved and
valued by the King, that in this time of his imprisonment and solitude, he
translated them into exact Enlish, desiring Dr. Iuxson (then Bishop of London)
Dr. Hammond, and Sir Thomas Herbert (who then attended him in his restraint) to
compare them with the Original. The last still lives, and has declared it, with
some other of that King's excellencies, in a Letter under his own hand, which
was lately showed me by Sir William Dugdale, King at Arms. The translation was
designed to be put into the King's Library at St. James's, but I doubt, not now
to be found there. I thought the honor of the Author and the Translator to be
both so much concerned in this Relation, that it ought not to be concealed from
the Reader, and it is therefore here inserted.

I now return to Dr. Sanderson in the Chair in Oxford, where they that complied
not in taking the Covenant, Negative Oath, and Parliament Ordinance for Church
Discipline and Worship, were under a sad and daily apprehension of Expulsion;
for the Visiters were daily expected, and both City and University full of
Soldiers, and a party of Presbyterian Divines, that were as greedy and ready to
possess, as the ignorant and ill natured Visiters were to eject the Dissenters
out of their Colleges and Livelyhoods: But notwithstanding Dr. Sanderson did
still continue to read his Lecture, and did to the very faces of those
Presbyterian Divines and Soldiers, read with so much reason, and with a calm
fortitude make such applications, as if they were not, they ought to have been
ashamed, and begged pardon of God and him, and forborne to do what followed. But
these thriving sinners were hardened; and as the Visiters expelled the
Orthodox, they without scruple or shame, possessed themselves immediately of
their Colleges; so that with the rest, Dr. Sanderson was (in June 1648) forced
to pack up and be gone, and thank God he was not imprisoned, as Dr. Shelden,
Dr. Hammond, and others then were.

I must now again look back to Oxford, and tell my Reader, that the year before
this expulsion, when the University had denied this Subscription, and
apprehended the danger of that Visitation which followed, they sent Dr. Morley,
then Canon of Christ-Church (now Lord Bishop of Winchester) and others, to
petition the Parliament for re-calling the Injunction, or a mitigation of it,
or to accept of their Reasons why they could not take the Oaths enjoined them;
and the Petition was by Parliament referred to a Committee to hear and report
the Reasons to the House, and a day set for hearing them. This done Dr. Morley
and the rest went to inform and fee Counsel, to plead their Cause on the day
appointed: but there had been so many committed for pleading, that none durst
be so bold as to undertake it cordially; for at this time the privileges of
that part of the Parliament then sitting were become a Noli me tangere; as
sacred and useful to them, as Traditions ever were, or are now to the Church of
Rome; their number must never be known, and therefore not without danger to be
meddled with. For which Reason Dr. Morley was forced, for want of Counsel, to
plead the Universities Reasons for not compliance with the Parliaments
injunctions; and though this was done with great reason, and a boldness equal
to the Justice of his Cause, yet the effect of it was, but that he and the rest
appearing with him were so fortunate, as to return to Oxford without
commitment. This was some few days before the Visiters and more Soldiers were
sent down to drive the Dissenters out of the University. And one that was at
this time of Dr. Morley's pleading, a powerful man in the Parliament, and of
that Committee, observing Dr. Morley's behavior and reason, and inquiring of
him, and hearing a good report of his Principles in Religion, and of his
Morals, was therefore willing to afford him a peculiar favor; and that he
might express it, sent for me that relate this Story, and knew Dr. Morley well,
and told me, He had such a love for Dr. Morley, that knowing he would not take
the Oaths, and must therefore he ejected his College, and leave Oxford; he
desired I would therefore write to him to ride out of Oxford when the Visiters
came into it, and not return till they left it, and he should be sure then to
return in safety; and that by so doing he should without taking any Oath or
other molestation, enjoy his Canons place in the College. I did receive this
intended kindness with a sudden gladness, because I was sure the party had a
power to do what he professed, and as sure he meant to perform it, and did
therefore write the Doctor word; to which his Answer was, That I must not fail
to return my Friend (who still lives) his humble and undissembled thanks,
though he could not accept of his intended kindness; for when Dr. Fell ( then
the Dean) Dr. Gardner, Dr. Pain, Dr. Hammond, Dr. Sanderson, and all the rest
of the College, were turned out, except Dr. Wall, he should take it to be, if
not a sin, yet a shame to be left behind with him only. Dr. Wall I knew, and
will speak nothing of him, for he is dead.

It may be easily imagined, with what a joyful willingness these self-loving
Reformers took possession of all vacant preferments, and with what reluctance
others parted with their beloved Colleges and Subsistence: but their
Consciences were dearer than both, and out they went; the Reformers possessing
them without shame or scruple, where I will leave these Scruple-Mongers, and
proceed to make an account of the then present Affairs of London, to be the
next employment of my Readers patience.

And in London all the Bishops Houses were turned to be Prisons, and they
filled with Divines that would not take the Covenant, or forbear reading
Common Prayer, or that were accused for some faults like these. For it may be
noted, That about this time the Parliament sent out a Proclamation to encourage
all Laymen that had occasion to complain of their Ministers, for being
troublesome or scandalous, or that conformed not to Orders of Parliament, to
make their complaint to a select Committee for that purpose; and the Minister
though one hundred miles from London, was to appear there and give
satisfaction, or be sequestered; (and you may be sure no Parish could want a
covetous, or malicious, or cross-grained complainant:) by which means all
Prisons in London, and in many other places, became the sad habitations of
Conforming Divines.

And about this time the Bishop of Canterbury having been by an unknown Law
condemned to die, and the execution suspended for some days, many Citizens
fearing time and cool thoughts might procure his Pardon, became so maliciously
impudent as to shut up their shops, professing not to open them till Justice
was executed. This malice and madness is scarce credible, but I saw it.

The Bishops had been about this time voted out of the House of Parliament, and
some upon that occasion sent to the Tower, which made many Covenanters rejoice,
and most of them to believe Mr. Brightman (who probably was a well meaning man)
to be inspired when he writ his Comment on the Apocalypse; a short Abridgment of
which was now printed, cried up and down the Streets and called Mr. Brightman's
Revelation of the Revelation, and both bought up and believed by all the
Covenanters: And though he was grossly mistaken in other things, yet, because he
had there made the Churches of Geneva and Scotland, (which had no Bishops) to
be Philadelphia in the Apocalypse, that Angel that God loved; and the power of
Prelacy to be Antichrist, the evil Angel, which the House of Commons had now so
spued up, as never to recover their dignity: Therefore did those Covenanters
rejoice, approve, and applaud Mr. Brightman, for discovering and foretelling
the Bishops downfall; so that they both railed at them, and at the same time
rejoiced to buy good penny-worths of all their Land, which their Friends of the
House of Commons, did afford both to themselves and them, as a reward for their
zeal and diligent assistance to pull them down.

And the Bishops power being now vacated, the common people were made so happy,
as that every Parish might choose their own Minister, and tell him when he did,
and when he did not preach true Doctrine: and by this and the like means
several Churches had several Teachers, that prayed and preached for and against
one another; and engaged their hearers to contend furiously for truths which
they understood not; some of which I shall mention in what will follow.

I have heard of two men that in their discourse undertook to give a character
of a third person; and one concluded he was a very honest man, for he was
beholden to him; and the other that he was not, for he was not beholden to him.
And something like this was in the designs both of the Covenanters and
Independants (the last of which were now grown both as numerous and as powerful
as the former:) for though they differed much in many Principles, and preached
against each other, one making it a sign of being in the state of grace, if we
were but zealous for the Covenant; and the other not: for we ought to buy and
sell by a Measure, and to allow the same liberty of Conscience to others, which
we by Scripture claim to our selves; and therefore not to force any to swear
the Covenant contrary to their Consciences, and probably lose both their
Livings and Liberties too. But though these differed thus in their conclusions,
yet they both agreed in their practice to preach down Common Prayer, and get
into the best sequestered Livings; and whatever became of the true Owners, their
Wives and Children, yet to continue in them without the least scruple of
Conscience.

They also made other strange Observations of Election, Reprobation, and
Free Will, and the other Points Dependant upon these; such as the wisest of the
common People were not fit to judge of: I am sure I am not, though I must
mention some of them historically in a more proper place, when I have brought
my Reader with me to Dr. Sanderson at Boothly Panel.

And in the way thither I must tell him, That a very Covenanter and a Scot too,
that came into England with this unhappy Covenant, was got into a good
sequestered Living by the help of a Presbyterian Parish, which had got the true
Owner out. And this Scotch Presbyterian being well settled in this good Living,
began to reform the Churchyard, by cutting down a large Ewe Tree, and some
other Trees that were an ornanament to the place, and very often a shelter to
the Parishioners: and they excepting against him for so doing, were by him
answered, That the Trees were his, and 'twas lawful for every man to use his
one as he, and not as others thought fit. I have heard (but do not affirm it)
That no action lies against him that is so wicked as to steal the winding sheet
from off a dead body after it is buried; and have heard the reason to be,
because none were supposed to be so void of humanity; and, that such a Law
would vilify that Nation that would but suppose so vile a man to be born in
it: I speak this because I would not suppose any man to do what this Covenanter
did: And whether there were any Law against him I know not, but pity the Parish
the less for turning out their legal Minister.

We have now overtaken Dr. Sanderson at Boothy Panel, where he hoped to have
enjoyed himself, though in a poor, yet in a quiet and desired privacy; but it
proved otherwise: For all Corners of the Nation were filled with Covenanters,
Confusion, Committee Men and Soldiers, defacing Monuments, breaking painted
Glass Windows, and serving each other to their several ends, of Revenge, or
Power, or Profit; and these Committee Men and Soldiers were most of them so
possessed with this Covenant, that they became like those that were infected with
that dreadful Plague of Athens; the Plague of which Plague was, that they by it
became maliciously restless to get into company, and to joy (so the Historian
Thuc idides.
says) when they had infected others, even those of their most beloved or
nearest Friends or Relations; and so though there might be some of these
Covenanters that were beguiled, and meant well; yet such were the generality of
them, and temper of the times, that you may be sure Dr. Sanderson, who though
quiet and harmless, yet was an eminent Dissenter from them, could therefore not
live peaceably; nor did he: For the Soldiers would appear, and visibly oppose
and disturb him in the Church when he read Prayers, some of them pretending to
advise him how God was to be served more acceptably which he not approving, but
continuing to observe order and decent behavior in reading the Church Service
they forced his Book from him, and tore it, expecting extemporary Prayers.

At this time he was advised by a Parliament Man of Power and note, that loved
and valued him much, not to be strict in reading all the Common Prayer, but
make some little variation, especially if the Soldiers came to watch him; for
if he did, it might not be in the Power of him and his other Friends to secure
him from taking the Covenant, or Sequestration for which Reasons he did vary
somewhat from the strict Rules of the Rubric. I will set down the very words
of Confession which he used, as I have it under his own hand; and tell the
Reader that all his other variations were as little, and very much like to this.

His Confession.
OAlmighty God and merciful Father, we thy unworthy Servants do with shame and
sorrow confess, that we have all our life long gone astray out of thy ways like
lost sheep; and that by following too much the vain devices and desires of our
own hearts, we have grievously offended against thy holy Laws, both in thought,
word, and deed* we have many times left undone those good duties, which we
might and ought to have done; and we have many times done those evits, when w^
might have avoided them, which we ought not to have done. We confess, O Lord,
that there is no health at all, nor help in any Creature to relieve us; but all
our hope is in thy mercy; whose justice we have by our sins so far provoked:
have mercy therefore upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us miserable offenders*
spare up good God, ^^^ confession (...), that we perish not; but according to
thy gracious promise ^^ declared unto mankind in Christ Jesus our Lord, Restore
us upon our true Repentance into thy grace and favor. And grant, O most
merciful Father, son his sake, that we henceforth study to serve and please
thee by leading a godly righteous, and a sober Life, to the glory of thy holy
Nam^^, and the eternal comfort of our own Souls, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

In these and other provocations of rearing his Service Book, a Neighbor came
on a Sunday, after the Evening Service was ended, to visit and condole with him
for the affront offered by the Soldiers. To whom he spoke withly a domposed
patience, and said; God has restored me to my desired pr^vicy with my Wife and
Children, where I hoped to have met with quietness; and it proves not so; but I
will labor to be pleased, because God, on whom I depend, sees it is not ^it for
me to be quiet. I praise him that he has by his grace prevented me from making
shipwreck of a good Conscience to maintain me in a place Doctor ^f the Chair.
of great reputation and profit: and though my condition be such, that I need
the last; yet I submit: for God did not send me into this World to do my own,
but suffer his Will, and I will obey it. Thus by a sublime depending on his
wise and powerful, and pitiful Creator, he did cheerfully submit to what God
had appointed; still justifying the truth of that Doctrine and the reason of
that Discipline which he had preached.

About this time that excellent Book of the King's Meditations in his Solitude
was printed, and made public; and Dr. Sanderson was such a lover of the
Author, and so desirous that not this Nation only, but the whole world should
see the character of him in that Book, and something of the cause for which he
and many others then suffered, that he designed to turn it into Latin: but when
he had done half of it most excellently, his Friend Dr. Earl prevented him, by
appearing to have done it, and printed the whole very well before him.

And about this time his dear and most intimate Friend, the learned Dr.
Hammond, came to enjoy a quiet conversation and rest with him for some days at
Boothby Panel, and did so. And having formerly persuaded him to trust his
excellent memory, and not read, but try to speak a Sermon as he had writ it.
Dr. Sanderson became so compliant as to promise he would. And to that end they
two went early the Sunday following to a Neighbor Minister, and requested to
exchange a Sermon; and they did so. And at Dr. Sanderson's going into the
Pulpit, he gave his Sermon (which was a very short one) into the hand of Dr.
Hammond, intending to preach it as 'twas writ; but before he had preached a
third part, Dr. Hammond (looking on his Sermon as written) observed him to be
out, and so lost as to the Matter, especially the Method, that he also became
afraid for him; for 'twas discernable to many of that plain Auditory: But when
he had ended this short Sermon, as they two walked homeward, Dr. Sanderson said
with much earnestness, Good Doctor give me my Sermon, and know, that neither
you, nor any man living, shall ever persuade me to preach again without my
Books. To which the reply was, Good Doctor be not angry; for if I ever persuade
you to preach again without Book, I will give you leave to burn all the Books
that I am Master of.

Part of the occasion of Doctor Hammond's visit was at this time, to discourse
Dr. Sanderson about some Opinions, in which if they did not then, they had
doubtless differed formerly; 'twas about those knotty Points, which are by the
Learned called the Quinquarticular Controversy; of which I shall proceed, not
to given any* Judgment (I pretend not to that) but some short Historical
Account which shall follow.

There had been, since the unhappy Covenant was brought, and so generally taken
in England, a liberty given or taken by many Preachers (those of London
especially) to preach and be too positive in the Points of Universal
Redemption, Predestination, and those other depending upon these. Some of which
preached That all men were, before they came into this world, so predestined
to salvation or damnation, that 'twas not in their power to sin so, as to lose
the first, nor by their most diligent endeavor to avoid the latter. Others,
That 'twas not so; because then God could not be said to grieve for the death
of a sinner, when he himself had made him so by an inevitable decree, before he
had so much as a being in this world; affirming therefore, that man had some
power left him to do the will of God, because he was advised to work out his
salvation with fear and trembling; maintaining, that it is most certain every
man can do what he can to be saved; and as certain that he that does what he
can to be saved, shall never be damned: And yet many that affirmed this to be a
truth, would yet confess, That that grace, which is but a persuasive offer, and
left to us to receive or refuse; is not that grace which shall bring men to
Heaven. Which truths, or untruths, or both, be they which they will, did upon
these or the like occasions come to be searched into, and charitably debated
betwixt Dr. Sanderson, Dr. Hammond, and Dr. Pierce (the now reverend Dean of
Salisbury) of which I shall proceed to give some account, but briefly.

In the year 1648. the 52 London Ministers (then a Fraternity of Sion College
in that City) had in a printed Declaration aspersed Dr. Hammond most heinously,
for that he had in his Practical Catechism affirmed, That our Savior died for
the sins of all mankind. To justify which truth, he presently makes a
charitable Reply (as it is now printed in his Works.) After which there were
many Letters past betwixt the said Dr. Hammond, Dr. Sanderson, and Dr. Pierce,
concerning God's grace and decrees. Dr. Sanderson was with much unwillingness
drawn into this Debate; for he declared it would prove uneasy to him, who in
his judgment of God's decrees, differed with Dr. Hammond (whom he reverenced
and loved dearly) and would not therefore engage himself in a Controversy, of
which he could never hope to see and end: nevertheless they did all enter into
a charitable disquisition of these said Points in several Letters, to the full
satisfaction of the Learned; those betwixt Dr. Sanderson and Dr. Hammond being
now printed in his Works* and for what past betwixt him and the learned Dr.
Pierce, I refer my Reader to a Letter sent to me and annexed to the end of this
Relation.

I think the Judgment of Dr. Sanderson was by these Debates altered from what
it was at his entrance into them; for in the year 1632, when his excellent
Sermons were first printed in 4o the Reader may on the Margent find some
accusation of Arminius for false Doctrine; and find, that upon a review and
reprinting those Sermons in folio in the year 1657. that accusation of Arminius
is omitted. And the change of his judgment seems more fully to appear in his
said Letter to Dr. Pierce. And let me now tell the Reader, which may seem to be
perplexed with these several affirmations of God's decrees before mentioned,
that Dr. Hammond in a Postscript to the last Letter of his to Dr. Sanderson,
says, God can reconcile his own contradictions, and therefore advises all men,
as the Apostle does, to study mortification, and be wise to sobriety. And let
me add further, that if these 52 Ministers of Sion College were the occasion
of the Debates in these Letters; they have, I think, been the occasion of
giving an end to the Quinquarticular Controversy; for none have since
undertaken to say more; but seem to be so wise, as to be content to be ignorant
of the rest, till they come to that place, where the secrets of all hearts
shall be laid open. And let me here tell the Reader also; that if the rest of
mankind would, as Dr. Sanderson, not conceal their alteration of Judgment, but
confess it to the honor of God and themselves; then, our Nation would become
freer from pertinacious Disputes, and fuller of Recantations.

I am not willing to lead my Reader to Dr. Hammond and Dr. Sanderson where we
left them together at Boothly Panel, till I have looked back to the long
Parliament, the Society of Covenanters in Sion College, and those others
scattered up and down in London, and given some account of their proceedings
and usage of the late learned Dr. Laud, then Archbishop of Canterbury, whose
life seemed to be sacrificed, to appease the popular fury of that present time.
And though I will forbear to mention the injustice of his death, and the
barbarous usage of him, both at his Trial and before it; yet my desire is, that
what follows may be noted, because it does now, or may hereafter concern us;
that is, to note, That in his last sad Sermon on the Scaffold at his death, he
did (as our blessed Savior advised his Disciples,) Pray for those that
persecuted and despitefully used him. And not only pardoned those Enemies; but
passionately begged of Almighty God that he would also pardon them; and
besought all the present beholders of this sad sight, that they would pardon
and pray for him: But though he did all this, yet, he seemed to accuse the
Magistrates of the City, for not suppressing a sort of people whose malicious
and furious Zeal, had so far transported them, and violated all modesty; that
though they could not know, whether he were justly or unjustly condemned, were
yet suffered to go visibly up and down to gather hands to a Petition, that the
Parliament would hasten his Execution. And he having declared how unjustly he
thought himself to be condemned, and accused for endeavoring to bring in
Popery (for that was one of the Accusations for which he died) he declared with
sadness, That the several Sects and Divisions then in England (which he had
labored to prevent) were now like to bring the Pope a far greater harvest,
than he could ever have expected without them. And said, these Sects and
Divisions introduce profaneness under the cloak of^ an imaginary Religion;
and, that we have lost the substance of Religion by changing it into Opinion;
and, that by these means the Church of^ England, which all the Jesuits
machinations could not ruin, was fallen into apparent danger by those
(Covenanters) which were his Accusers. To this purpose he spoke at his death:
for which, and more to the same purpose, the Reader may view his last sad
Sermon on the Scaffold. And it is here mentioned, because his dear Friend Dr.
Sanderson seems to demonstrate the same fear of Popery in his two large and
remarkable Prefaces before his two Volumes of Sermons; and seems also with much
sorrow to say the same again in his last Will, made when he was and apprehended
himself to be very near his death. And these Covenanters ought to take notice
of it; and to remember, that by the late wicked War began by them, Dr.
Sanderson was ejected out of the Professors Chair in Oxford; and that if he had
continued in it (for he lived 14 years after) both the Learned of this and
other Nations had been made happy by many remarkable Cases of Conscience, so
rationally stated, and so briefly, so clearly, and so convincingly determined,
that Posterity might have joyed and boasted, That Dr. Sanderson was born in
this Nation, for the ease and benefit of all the Learned that shall be born
after him: But, this benefit is so like time past, that they are both
irrecoverably lost.

I should now return to Boothby Panel where we left Dr. Hammond and Dr.
Sanderson together, but neither can now be found there: For, the first was in
his Journey to Londoni, and the second seized upon the day after his Friends
departure, and carried Prisoner to Lincoln, then a Garrison of the Parliaments.
For the pretended reason of which Commitment, I shall give this following
account.

There was one Mr. Clarke, (the Minister of Alington, a Town not many miles
from Boothby Panel,) who was an active man for the Parliament and Covenant;
and one that, when Belvoire Castle (then a Garrison for the Parliament) was
taken by a Party of the King's Soldiers, was taken in it, and made a Prisoner
of War in Newark, (then a Garrison of the Kings;) a man so active and useful
for his Party, that they became so much concerned for his enlargement, that the
Committee of Lincoln sent a Troop of Horse to seize and bring Dr. Sanderson a
Prisoner to that Garrison; and they did so. And there he had the happiness to
meet with many, that knew him so well as to reverence and treat him kindly; but
told him, He must continue their Prisoner, till he should purchase his own
enlargement by procuring an Exchange for Mr. Clarke then Prisoner in the King's
Garrison of Newark. There were many Reasons given by the Doctor of the
Injustice of his Imprisonment, and the Inequality of the Exchange, but all were
uneffectual: For done it must be, or he continue a Prisoner. And in time done
it was upon the following Conditions.

First, That Dr. Sanderson and Mr. Clarke being Exchanged, should live
undisturbed at their own Parishes; and if either were injured by the Soldiers
of the contrary Party, the other having notice of it, should procure him a
Redress, by having satisfaction made for his loss, or for any other injury; or
if not, he to be used in the same kind by the other Party. Nevertheless, Dr.
Sanderson could neither live safe, nor quietly, being several times plundered,
and once wounded in three places; but he, apprehending the remedy might turn to
a more intolerable burden by impatience or complaining, forbore both: and
possessed his Soul in a contented quietness, without the least repining. But
though he could not enjoy the safety he expected by this Exchange, yet by his
Providence that can bring good out of evil, it turned so much to his advantage,
that whereas his Living had been Sequestered from the Year 1644, and continued
to be so till this time of his Imprisonment, he, by the Articles of War in this
Exchange for Mr. Clarke, procured his Sequestration to be recalled, and by that
means enjoyed a poor but more contented subsistence for himself, his Wife and
Children, till the happy Restoration of our King and Church.

In this time of his poor, but contented privacy of life, his Casuistical
Learning, Peaceful Moderation and Sincerity, became so remarkable, that there
were many that applied themselves to him for Resolution in perplexed Cases of
Conscience; some known to him, and many not; some requiring satisfaction by
Conference, others by Letters; so many, that his life became almost as restless
as their minds; yet -- as St. Paul accounted himself a Debtor to all men, so
he, for he denied none. And if it be a truth which holy Mr. Herbert says, That
all worldly joys seem less, when compared with showing mercy, or doing
kindnesses; then doubtless this Barnabas, this son of Consolation, Dr.
Sanderson might have boasted for relieving so many restless and wounded
Consciences; which, as Solomon says, are a burden that none can bear, though
their fortitude may sustain their other Calamities: and if words cannot express
the joy of a Conscience relieved from such restless Agonies; then Dr. Sanderson
might rejoice, that so many were by him so clearly and conscientiously
satisfied; and would often praise God for that ability, and as often for the
occasion; and, that God had inclined his heart to do it, to the meanest of any
of those poor, but precious Souls, for which his Savior vouchsafed to be
Crucified.

Some of those very many Cases that were resolved by Letters, have been
preserved and printed for the benefit of Posterity; as namely,

1. Of the Sabbath. 2. Marrying with a Recusant. 3. Of unlawful Love. 4. Of a
Military life. 5. Of Scandal. 6. Of a Bond taken in the King's Name. 7. Of the
Engagement. 8. Of a rash Vow.
But many more remain in private hands, of which one is of Symony; and I wish
the World might see it, that it might undeceive so many mistaken Patrons, who
think they have discharged that great and dangerous trust, both to God and Man,
if they take no money for a Living, though it may be parted with for other ends
less justifiable, which I forbear to name.

And in this time of his retirement, when the common people were amazed and
grown restless and giddy by the many falsehoods, and misapplications of Truths
frequently vented in Sermons, when they wrested the Scripture by challenging
God to be of their party, and called upon him in their Prayers to patronize
their Sacrilege and zealous Frenzies in this time, he did so compassionate the
generality of this misled Nation, that though the Times threatened such an
undertaking with danger; yet, he then hazarded his safety by writing the large
and bold Preface now extant before his last 20 Sermons, (first Printed in the
dangerous Year 1655.) In which there was such strength of Reason, with so
powerful and clear convincing Applications made to the Nonconformists, as being
read by one of those dissenting Brethren, who was possessed of a good
sequestered Living, and with it such a spirit of Covetousness and
Contradiction, as being neither able to defend his error, no yield to truth
manifested (his Conscience having slept long and quietly in that Living) was
yet at the reading of it so awakened, (for there is a Divine Power in reason)
that after a conflict with the reason he had met, and the damage he was to
sustain if he consented to it (and being still unwilling to be so convinced, as
to lose by being over-reason'd) he went in haste to the Bookseller of whom
'twas bought, threatened him, and told him in anger, he had sold a Book in which
there was false Divinity; and that the Preface had upraided the Parliament, and
many godly Ministers of that Party for unjust dealing. -- To which his Reply
was, ('it was Tim. Garthwaite) That 'twas not his Trade to judge of true or false
Divinity, but to print and sell Books; and yet if he, or any Friend of his
would write an Answer to it, and own it by setting his Name to it, he would
print the Answer, and promote the selling of it.

About the time of his Printing this excellent Preface, I met him accidentally
in London in sad-coloured Clothes, and God knows, far from being costly: the
place of our meeting was near to Little Britain, where we had been to buy a
Book, which he then had in his hand: we had no inclination to part presently;
and therefore turned to stand in a corner under a Penthouse (for it began to
rain) and immediately the Wind rose, and the rain increased so much, that both
became so inconvenient, as to force us into a cleanly house, where we had
Bread, Cheese, Ale, and a Fire for our ready money. This rain and wind were so
obliging to me, as to force our stay there for at least an hour, to my great
content and advantage; for in that time he made to me many useful observations
of the present Times with much clearness and conscientious freedom. I shall
relate a part of them, in hope they may also turn to the advantage of my
Reader. -- He seemed to lament, that the Parliament had taken upon them to
abolish our Liturgy, to the grief and scandal of so many Devout and Learned
Men, and the disgrace of those many Martyrs, who had sealed the truth and
necessary use of it with their Blood: and that no Minister was now thought
godly that did not decry it; and, at least, pretend to make better Prayers ex
tempore: and that they, and only they that could do so, prayed by the Spirit,
and were godly; though in their Sermons they disputed; and evidently
contradicted each other in their Prayers. And as he did dislike this, so he did
most highly commend the Common Prayer of the Church, saying, The Holy Ghost
seemed to assist the Composers: and, that the effect of a Constant use of it,
would be, to melt and form the Soul into holy thoughts and desires: and, beget
habits of Devotion. -- This he said: and that the Collects were the most
passionate, proper, and most elegant comprehensive expressions that any
Language ever afforded; and that there was in them such Piety, and that, so
interwoven with Instructions, that they taught us to know the Power, the
Wisdom, the Majesty, and Mercy of God, and much of our Duty both to Him and our
Neighbor; and that a Congregation behaving themselves reverently, and putting
up to God these joint and known desires for pardon of sins, and their praises
for mercies received, could not but be more pleasing to God, than those raw
unpremeditated expressions which many understood not, and to which many of the
hearers could not say Amen.

And he then commended to me the frequent use of the Psalter or Psalms of
David; speaking to this purpose, That they were the Treasury of Christian
Comfort, fitted for all persons and all necessities; able to raise the Soul
from dejection by the frequent mention of God's Mercies to repentant Sinners;
able to stir up holy desires; to increase joy; to moderate sorrow; to nourish
hope, and teach us patience, by waiting God's leisure for what we beg: able to
beget a trust in the Mercy, Power, and Providence of our Creator; and to cause
a resignation of our selves to his Will; and then (and not till then) to
believe our selves happy. This he said the Liturgy and Psalms taught us; and
that by the frequent use of the last they would not only prove to be our Souls
comfort, but would become so habitual, as to transform them into the image of
his Soul that composed them. -- After this manner he expressed himself and
sorrow, concerning the Liturgy and Psalms; and seemed to lament that this,
which was the Devotion of the more Primitive Times, should in common Pulpits be
turned into needless debates about Free Will, Election, and Reprobation, of
which, and many like Questions, we may be safely ignorant, because Almighty God
intends not to lead us to Heaven by hard Questions, but by meekness and
charity, and a frequent practice of Devotion.

And he seemed to lament very much, that by the means of irregular and
indiscreet Preaching, the generality of the Nation were possessed with such
dangerous mistakes, as to think, They might be religious first, and then just
and merciful; that they might sell their Consciences, and yet have something
left that was worth keeping; that they might be sure they were elected, though
their Lives were visibly scandalous; that to be cunning was to be wise; that to
be rich was to be happy, tho it is evidently false; that to speak evil of
Government, and to be busy in things they understood not, was no sin. These,
and the like mistakes, he lamented much, and besought God to remove them, and
restore us to that humility, sincerity, and single-heartedness, with which this
Nation was blessed, before the unhappy Covenant was brought amongst us, and every
Man preached and prayed what seemed best in his own eyes. And he then said to
me, That the way to restore this Nation to a more meek and Christian temper,
was to have the Body of Divinity (or so much of it as was needful to be known
by the Common people) to be put into 52 Homilies, or Sermons, of such a length
as not to exceed a third or fourth part of an hours reading; and these needful
Points to be made so clear and plain, that those of a mean capacity might know
what was necessary to be believed, and what God requires to be done; and then
some plain applications of trial and conviction: and these to be read every
Sunday of the Year, as infallibly as the blood circulates the body at a set
time; and then as certainly begun again, and continued the Year following.

And, he explained the reason of this his desire, by saying to me, -- All
Grammar Scholars, that are often shifted, from one to another School, learn
neither so much, nor their little so truly, as those that are constant to one
good Master: because, by the several Rules of teaching in those several
Schools, they learn less, and become more and more confused; and at last, so
puzzled and perplexed, that their learning proves useless both to themselves and
others. And so do the immethodical, useless, needless Notions that are
delivered in many Sermons, make the hearers; but a clear and constant rule of
teaching us, what we are to know, and do, and what not, and that taught us by
an approved authority, might probably bring the Nation to a more Conscientious
practice of what we know, and ought to do. Thus did this Prudent Man explain
the reason of this his desire: and oh! that he had undertaken what he advised;
for then, in all probability it would have proved so useful, that the present
Age would have been blessed by it: and, Posterity would have blessed him for it.

And at this happy time of my enjoying his company and this discourse, he
expressed a sorrow by saying to me, O that I had gone Chaplain to that
excellently Accomplished Gentleman, your Friend, Sir Henry Wootton! which was
once intended, when he first went Ambassador to the State of Venice: for by
that Employment I had been forced into a necessity of conversing, not with him
only, but with several Men of several nations; and might thereby have kept my
self from my unmanly bashfulness, which has proved very troublesome, and not
less inconvenient to me; and which I now fear is become so habitual as never to
leave me: and besides, by that means I might also have known, or at least have
had the satisfaction of seeing one of the late Miracles of Mankind, for general
Learning, Prudence, and Modesty, Sir Henry Wootton' s dear Friend, Padre Paulo,
who, the Author of his Life says, was born with a bashfulness as invincible, as
I have found my own to be: A man whose fame must never die, till Virtue and
Learning shall become so useless as not to be regarded.

This was a part of the benefit I then had by that hours conversation: and I
gladly remember and mention it, as an Argument of my happiness, and his great
humility and condescension. I had also a like advantage by another happy
Conference with him, which I am desirous to impart in this place to the Reader.
He lamented much, that in those times of Confusion many Parishes, where the
maintenance was not great, there was no Minister to officiate; and that many of
the best Sequestered Livings were possessed with such rigid Covenanters as
denied the Sacrament to their Parishioners, unless upon such conditions, and in
such a manner as they could not with a good Conscience take it: This he
mentioned with much sorrow, saying, The blessed Sacrament did, even by way of
preparation for it, give occasion to all conscientious Receivers to examine the
performance of their Vows, since they received that last seal for the pardon of
their sins past; and also to examine and research their hearts, and make
penitent reflections on their failings; and that done to bewail them seriously,
and then make new Vows or Resolutions to obey all God's Commands better, and
beg his grace to perform them. And that this being faithfully done, then the
Sacrament repairs the decays of grace, helps us to conquer infirmities, gives
us grace to beg God's grace, and then gives us what we beg; makes us still
hunger and thirst after his righteousness, which we then receive, and being
assisted with our own endeavors, will still so dwell in us, as to become our
Sanctification in this life, and our comfort on our last Sick-beds. The want of
this blessed benefit he lamented much and pitied their condition that desired,
but could not obtain it,

I hope I shall not disoblige my Reader, if I here enlarge into a further
Character of his person and temper. As first, That he was moderately tall; his
behavior had in it much of a plain comeliness, and very little (yet enough) of
ceremony or courtship; his looks and motion manifested an indearing affability
and mildness, and yet he had with these a calm, and so matchless a fortitude,
as secured him from complying with any of those many Parliament Injunctions,
that interfer'd with a doubtful Conscience. His Learning was methodical and
exact; his Wisdom useful; his Integrity visible; and his whole life so
unspotted, so like the Primitive Christians, that all ought to be preserved as
Copies for Posterity to write after; the Clergy especially; who with impure
hands ought not to offer Sacrifice to that God, whose pure Eyes abhor iniquity;
and, especially in them.

There was in his Sermons no improper Rhetoric, nor such perplexed divisions,
as may be said to be like too much light, that so dazles the eyes that the
sight becomes less perfect: But in them there was no want of useful matter, nor
waste of words; and yet such clear distinctions as dispelled all confused
Notions, and made his hearers depart both wiser, and more confirmed in virtuous
Resolutions.

His Memory was so matchless and firm, as 'twas only overcome by his
bashfulness: for he alone, or to a Friend, could repeat all the Odes of Horace,
all Tully's Offices and much of Iuvenal and Persius without Book; and would
say, The repitition of one of the Odes of Horace to himself, (which he did
often) was to him such Music, as a Lesson on the Viol was to others, when they
played it voluntarily to themselves or Friends. And though he was blessed with a
clearer Judgment then other men; yet he was so distrustful of it, that he did
usually over-consider of consequences, and would so delay and reconsider what
to determine, that though none ever determined better, yet, when the Bell
tolled for him to appear and read his Divinity Lectures in Oxford, and all the
Scholars attended to hear him, he had not then, or not till then, resolved and
writ what he meant to determine; so that that appeared to be a truth, which his
old dear Friend Dr. Sheldon would often say of him, namely, That his judgment
was so much superior to his fancy, That whatsoever this suggested, that
disliked and controlled; still considering and reconsidering, till his time was
so wasted, that he was forced to write, not (probably) what was best, but what
he thought last. And yet what he did then read, appeared to all hearers to be
so useful, clear, and satisfactory, as none ever determined with greater
applause.

These tiring and perplexing thoughts begot in him some averseness to enter
into the toil af considering and determining all Casuistical Points; because
during that time they neither gave rest to his Body or Mind. But though he
would not suffer his Mind to be always laden with these knotty Points and
Distinctions; yet the study of old Records, Genealogies, and Heraldry, were a
recreation, and so pleasing, that he would say they gave a pleasant rest to his
mind. Of the last of which I have seen two remarkable Volumes; and the Reader
needs neither to doubt their truth or exactness.

And this holy humble Man had so conquered all repining and ambitious thoughts,
and with them all other unruly passions, that, if the accidents of the day
proved to his danger or damage, yet he both began and ended it with an even
and undisturbed quietness: always praising God that he had not withdrawn food
and raiment from him and his poor Family; nor suffered him in the times of
trial to violate his Conscience for his safety, or to support himself or them
in a more splendid or plentiful condition; and that he therefore resolved with
David, That his praise should be always in his mouth.

I have taken a content in giving my Reader this Character of his Person, his
Temper, and some of the Accidents of his life past; and much more might be
added of all: But I will with sorrow look forward to the sad days, in which so
many good Men, Clergymen especially, were sufferers; namely, about the Year
1658. at which time Dr. Sanderson was in a very pitiful condition as to his
Estate: And in that time Mr. Robert Boil (a Gentleman of a very Noble Birth,
and more Eminent for his Liberality, Learning and Virtue,) and of whom I would
say much more, but that he still lives) having casually met with, and read his
Lectures de Iuramento, to his great satisfaction, and being informed of Dr.
Sanderson's great Innocence and Sincerity, and that he and his Family were
brought into a low condition by his not complying with the Parliaments
injunctions, sent him by his dear Friend Dr. Barlow, (the now Learned Bishop of
Lincoln,) 50 l. and with it a request and promise: The request was, That he
would review the Lectures de Conscientia, which he had read when he was Doctor
of the Chair in Oxford, and print them for the good of Posterity; (and this Dr.
Sanderson did in the Year 1659.) And the Promise was, That he would pay him
that, or if he desired it, a greater Sum yearly, during his Life to enable him
to pay an Amanuensis, to ease him from the trouble of writing what he should
conceive or dictate. -- For the more particular account of which, I refer my
reader to a Letter writ to me by the said Dr. Barlow, which I have annexed to
the end of this Relation.

Toward the beginning of the Year 1600. when the many mixed Sects, and their
Creators, and merciless Protectors, had led, or driven each other into a
Whirl-pool of Confusion both in Church and State: when amazement and fear had
seized most of them by foreseeing, they must now not only Vomit up the
Churches, and the Kings Land, but their accusing Consciences did also give them
an inward and fearful Intelligence, that the God of opposition, disobedience,
and confusion, which they had so long and so diligently feared, was now ready
to reward them with such wages as he always pays to Witches for their obeying
him. When these Wretches (that had said to themselves, We shall see no sorrow,)
were come to foresee an end of their cruel reign, by our Kings return, and such
Sufferers as Dr. Sanderson (and with him many of the oppressed Clergy and
others) could foresee the Cloud of their afflictions would be dispersed by it.
Then the 29th. of May following, the King was by our good God restored to us,
and we to our known Laws and Liberties, and then a general joy and peace seemed
to breath through the three Nations; the suffering and sequestered Clergy (who
had like the Children of Israel, sat long lamenting their sad Condition, and
hanged their neglected Harps on the Willows that grow by the Rivers of Babylon)
were after many thoughtful days, and restless nights, now freed from their
Sequestration, restored to their Revenues, and to a liberty to adore, praise,
and pray to Almighty God publicly in such order as their Consciences and Oaths
had formerly obliged them. And the Reader will easily believe that Dr.
Sanderson and his dejected Family rejoiced to see this happy day, and be of
this number.

At this time of the conformable Clergies deliverance, from the Presbyterian
severities; the Doctor said to a Friend. I look back on this strange and happy
turn of the late times, with amazement and thankfulness; and cannot but think
the Presbyterians ought to read their own Errors, by considering that by their
own rules the Independants have punished, and supplanted them as they did the
Conformable Clergy, who are now ( so many as still live) restored to their
lawful right; and, as the Prophet David has taught me, so I say with a
thankful heart. Verily, there is a God that judges the earth: And, a reward
for the righteous.

It ought to be considered (which I have often heard or read) that in the
Primitive times, men of learning, prudence, and virtue were usually sought for,
and solicited to accept of Episcopal Government, and often refused it. For,
they conscientiously considered that the Office of a Bishop was not made up of
ease and state, but of labor and care: that they were trusted to be of God's
Almoners of the Churches Revenue, and double their care for the Churches good,
and the poor; to live strictly themselves, and use all diligence to see that
their Family, Officers, and Clergy, became examples of innocence and Piety to
others; and that the account of that Stewardship must at the last dreadful day
be made to the Searcher of all hearts: and for these reasons they were in the
Primitive times timorous to undertake it. It may not be said that Dr. Sanderson
was accomplished with these, and all the other requisites required in a Bishop,
so, as to be able to answer them exactly; but it may be affirmed, as a good
preparation, that he had at the Age of 73 years (for he was so old at the
King's return) fewer faults to be pardoned by God or Man, than are apparent in
others in these days, in which (God knows) we fall so short of that visible
sanctity and zeal to God's glory, which was apparent in the days of Primitive
Christianity. This is mentioned by way of preparation to what I shall say more
of Dr. Sanderson; as namely, That at the King's return Dr. Sheldon, the late
prudent Archbishop of Canterbury (than whom none knew, valued, or loved Dr.
Sanderson more or better) was by his Majesty made a chief Trustee to commend to
him fit men to supply the then vacant Bishoprics. And Dr. Sheldon knew none
fitter than Dr. Sanderson, and therefore humbly desired the King that he would
nominate him: and that done; he did as humbly desire Dr. Sanderson that he
would For Gods and the Churches sake take that charge and care upon him. Dr.
Sanderson had, if not an unwillingness, certainly no forwardness to undertake
it, and would often say, He had not led himself, but his Friend would now lead
him into a temptation, which he had daily* prayed against; and besought God, if
he did undertake it so, to assist him with his grace, that the example of his
life, his cares and endeavors might promote his glory, and help forward the
salvation of others.

This I have mentioned as a happy preparation to his Bishopric* and am next to
tell that he was consecrated Bishop of Lincoln at Westminster the 28th of
October, 1660.

There was about this time a Christian care taken, that those whose Consciences
were (as they said) tender, and could not comply with the Service and
Ceremonies of the Church, might have a satisfaction given by a Friendly debate
betwixt a select number of them, and some like number of those that had been
Sufferers for the Church Service and Ceremonies, and now restored to liberty;
of which last some were then preferred to power and dignity in the Church. And
of these Bishop Sanderson was one, and then chose to be a Moderator in that
debate, and he performed his trust with much mildness, patience and reason; but
all proved uneffectual: For there be some prepossessions like jealouses, (which
though causeless, yet) cannot be removed by reasons as apparent as
demonstration can make any truth. The place appointed for this debate was the
Savoy in the Strand: and the Points debated were, I think, many; (and I think
many of them needless) some affirmed to be truth and reason, some denied to be
either; and these debates being at first in words, proved to be so loose and
perplexed, as satisfied neither Party. For sometime that which had been
affirmed was immediately forgor, or mistaken, or denied, and so no satisfaction
given to either party. And that the debate might become more satisfactory and
useful, it was therefore resolved that the day following the desires and
reasons of the Non-conformists should be given in writing, and they in writing
receive Answers from the conforming party. And though I neither now can, nor
need to mention all the Points debated, nor the names of the dissenting
Brethren: yet I am sure Mr. Richard Baxter was one, and I am sure also one of
the Points debated, was Concerning a Command of Lawful Superiors, what was
sufficient toward its being a lawful Command? -- this following Proposition
was brought by the conforming Party.

That Command which commands an act in it self lawful, and no other act or
Circumstance unlawful, is not sinful.

Mr. Baxter denied it for two Reasons, which he gave in with his own hand in
writing thus: One was, Because that may be a sin per accidens, which is not so
in it self; and may be unlawfully commanded, though that accident be not in the
command. Another was, That it may be commanded under an unjust penalty.

Again, this proposition being brought by the Conformists, That Command which
commands an act in it self lawful, and no other act whereby any unjust
penalty is enjoined, nor any circumstance whence per accidens any sin is
consequent which the Commander ought to provide against, is not sinful.

Mr. Baxter denied it for this reason then given in with his own hand in
writing, thus: Because the first act commanded may be per accidens unlawful,
and be commanded by an unjust penalty, though no other act or circumstance
commanded be such.

Again, this Proposition being brought by the Conformists, That Command which
commands an act in it self lawful, and no other Act whereby any unjust
penalty is enjoined, nor any circumstance whence directly or per accidens any
sin is consequent, which the Commander ought to provide against; has in it all
things requisite to the lawfulness of a Command, and paticularly cannot be
guilty of commanding an act per accidens unlawful, nor of commanding an act
under an unjust penalty.

Mr. Baxter denied it upon the same Reasons.

Peter Gunning. John Pearson.


These were then two of the Disputants, still live, and will attest this; one
being now Lord Bishop of Ely, and the other of Chester. And the last of them
told me very lately, that one of the Dissenters (which I could, but forbear to
name) appeared to Dr. Sanderson to be so bold, so troublesome, and so illogical
in the dispute, as forced patient Dr. Sanderson (who was then Bishop of
Lincoln, and a Moderator with other Bishops) to say with an unusual
earnestness, That he had never met with a man of more pertinacious confidence,
and less abilities in all his conversation.

But, though this debate at the Savoy was ended without any great satisfaction
to either party, yet both parties knew the desires and understood the abilities
of the other much better than before it: and the late distressed Clergy, that
were now restored to their former rights and power, were so Charitable, as at
their next meeting in Convocation to contrive to give the Dissenting Party
satisfaction by alteration, explanation, and addition to some part both of the
Rubric and Common Prayer; as also by adding some new necessary Collects, with
a particular Collect of Thanksgiving. How many of these new Collects were
worded by Dr. Sanderson, I cannot say; but am sure the whole Convocation valued
him so much, that he never undertook to speak to any Point in question, but he
was heard with great willingness and attention; and when any Point in question
was determined, the Convocation did usually desire him to word their
intentions, and as usually approve and thank him.

At this Convocation the Common Prayer was made more complete by adding three
new necessary Offices; which were, A form of Humiliation for the murder of
King Charles the Martyr, a thanksgiving for the Restoration of his Son our
King; and for the baptizing of persons of riper age. I cannot say Dr. Sanderson
did form or word them all, but doubtless more than any single man of the
Convocation; and he did also, by desire of the Convocation, alter and add to
the forms of Prayers to be used at Sea (now taken into the Service Book.) And
it may be noted, That William, the now most Reverend Archbishop of Canterbury,
was in these employments diligently useful; especially in helping to rectify
the Calendar and Rubric. And lastly, it may be noted, that for the satisfying
all the dissenting Brethren and others, the Convocations Reasons for the
alterations and additions to the Liturgy, were by them desired to be drawn up
by Dr. Sanderson; which being done by him, and approved by them, was appointed
to be Printed before the Liturgy, and may be now known by this Title, -- The
Preface: and begins thus -- It has been the wisdom of the Church.

I shall now follow Dr. Sanderson to his Bishopric, and declare a part of his
behavior in that busy and weighty employment. And first, That it was with
such condescension and obligingness to the meanest of his Clergy, as to know
and be known to most of them. And indeed he practiced the like to all men of
what degree soever, especially to his old Neighbors or Parishioners of Boothby
Panel; for there was all joy at his Table when they came to visit him: then
they prayed for him, and he for them with an unfeigned affection.

I think it will not be denied but that the care and toil required of a Bishop,
may justly challenge the riches and revenue with which their Predecessors had
lawfully endowed them; and yet he sought not that so much, as doing good with
it both to the present Age and Posterity; and he made this appear by what
follows.

The Bishops chief House at Buckden, in the County of Huntington, the usual
Residence of his Predecessors (for it stands about the midst of his Diocese)
having been at his Consecration a great part of it demolished, and what was
left standing under a visible decay, was by him undertaken to be erected and
repaired; and it was performed with great speed, care, and charge. And to this
may be added, That the King having by an Injunction commended to the care of
the Bishops, Deans, and Prebends of all Cathedral Churches, the repair of them,
their Houses, and an augmentation of the revenue of small Vicarages; He, when
he was repairing Bugden, did also augment the last, as fast as Fines were paid
for renewing Leases: so fast, that a Friend taking notice of his bounty, was so
bold as to advise him to remember, he was under his first fruits, and that he
was old, and had a wife and children that were yet but meanly provided for,
especially if his dignity were considered. To whom he made a mild and thankful
answer, saying, It would not become a Christian Bishop to suffer those houses
built by his Predecessors to be ruined for want of repair; and less justifiable
to suffer any of those poor Vicars that were called to so high a calling as to
sacrifice at God's Altar, to eat the bread of sorrow constantly, when he had a
power by a small augmentation to turn it into the bread of cheerfulness: and
wished, that as this was, so it were also in his Power to make all mankind
happy, for he desired nothing more. And for his Wife and Children, he hoped to
leave them a competence; and in the hands of*a God, that would provide for all
that kept innocence, and trusted in his providence and protection, which he had
always found enough to make and keep him happy.

There was in his Diocese a Minister of almost his Age, that had been of
Lincoln College when he left it, who visited him often, and always welcome,
because he was a Man of Innocence and open-heartedness: This Minister asked the
Bishop what Books he studied most, when he laid the foundation of his great and
clear Learning? To which his Answer was, That he declined reading many Books;
but what he did read, were well chosen, and read so often that he became very
familiar with them; and told him they were chiefly three, Aristotle's
Rhetoric, Acquinas's Secunda Secundae, and Tully, but chiefly his Offices,
which he had not read over less than 20 times, and could at this Age repeat
without Book. And told him also, the learned Civilian Doctor Zouch (who died
lately) had writ Elementa jurisprudenti^e, which was a Book that he thought, he
could also say without Book; and that no wise man could read it too often, or
love, or commend it too much; and he told him the study of these had been his
toil: But for himself, he always had a natural love, to Genealogies and
Heraldry; and that when his thoughts were harassed with any perplexed Studies,
he left off, and turned to them as a recreation; and that his very recreation
had made him so perfect in them, that he could in a very short time give an
account of the Descent, Arms, and Antiquity of any Family of the Nobility or
Gentry of this Nation.

Before I give an account of his last sickness, I desire to tell the Reader
that he was of a healthful constitution, cheerful and mild, of an even temper,
very moderate in his diet, and had had little sickness, till some few years
before his death; but was then every Winter punished with a Diarrhed, which
left him not till warm weather returned and removed it: And this Distemper did,
as he grew elder, seize him oftener, and continue longer with him. But though it
weakened him, yet it made him rather indisposed than sick, and did no way
disable him from studying, (indeed too much.) In this decay of his strength,
but not of his memory or reason (for this Distemper works not upon the
understanding) he made his last Will, of which I shall give some account for
confirmation of what has been said, and what I think convenient to be known,
before I declare his death and burial.

He did in his last Will give an account of his Faith and Persuasion in Point
of Religion and Church Government, in these very words:

I Robert Sanderson Dr. of Divinity, an unworthy Minister of Jesus Christ, and
by the providence of God Bishop of Lincoln, being by the long continuance of an
habitual distemper brought to a great bodily weakness and faintness of spirits,
but (by the great mercy of God) without any bodily pain otherwise, or decay of
understanding, do make this my Will and Testament (written all with my own
hand) revoking all former Wills by me heretofore made, if any such shall be
found. First, I commend my Soul into the hands of Almighty God, as of a
faithful Creator, which I humbly beseech him mercifully to accept, looking upon
it, not as it is in it self (infinitely polluted with sin) but as it is
redeemed and purged with the precious blood of his only beloved Son, and my
most sweet Savior Jesus Christ, in confidence of whose merits and mediation
alone it is, that I cast my self upon the mercy of God for the pardon of my
sins, and the hopes of eternal life. And here I do profess, that as I have
lived, so I desire and (by the grace of God) resolve to dye in the Communion of
the Catholic Church of Christ, and a true Son of the Church of England; which,
as it stands by Law established, to be both in Doctrine and Worship agreeable to
the Word of God, and in the most, and most material Points of both, conformable
to the Faith and practice of the godly Churches of Christ in the primitive and
purer times, I do firmly believe: led so to, not so much from the force of
custom and education (to which the greatest part of mankind owe their
particular different persuasions in point of Religion) as upon the clear
evidence of truth and reason, after a serious and unpartial examination of the
grounds, as well of Popery as Puritanism, according to that measure of
understanding, and those opportunities which God has afforded me: and herein I
am abundantly satisfied, that the Schi^m which the Papists on the one hand, and
the Superstition which the Puritan on the other hand, lay to our charge, are
very justly chargeable upon themselves respectively. Wherefore I humbly beseech
Almighty God the Father of Mercies, to preserve the Church by his power and
providence, in peace, truth, and Godliness, evermore to the worlds end: which
doubtless he will do, if the wickedness and security of a sinful people (and
particularly those sins that are so rife, and seem daily to increase among us,
of Unthankfulness, Riot, and Sacrilege) do not tempt his patience to the
contrary. And I also farther humbly beseech him, that it would please him to
give unto our gracious Sovereign, the Reverend Bishops, and the Parliament,
timely to consider the great danger that visibly threatens this Church in point
of Religion by the late great increase of Popery, and in point of Revenue by
sacrilegious enclosures; and to provide such wholesome and effectual remedies as
may prevent the same before it be too late.

And for a further manifestation of his humble thoughts and desires, they may
appear to the Reader, by another part of his Will which follows.

As for my corruptible Body, I bequeath it to the Earth whence it was taken, to
be decently buried in the Parish Church of Bugden, toward the upper end of the
Chancel, upon the second, or (at the farthest) the third day after my decease;
and that with as little Noise, Pomp, and Charge as may be, without the
invitation of any person how near soever related unto me, other than the
Inhabitants of Bugden; without the unnecessary expense of Escutcheons, Gloves,
Ribonds, etc. and without any Blacks to be hung any where in or about the House
or Church, other than a Pulpit-Cloth, a Hearse-Cloth, and a Mourning Gown for
the Preacher; whereof the former, (after my Body shall be interred) to be given
to the Preacher of the Funeral Sermon, and the latter to the Curat of the
Parish for the time being. And my Will further is, That the Funeral Sermon be
preached by my own Household Chaplain, containing some wholesome Discourse
concerning Mortality, the Resurrection of the Dead, and the last Judgment; and
that he shall have for his pains 5 l. upon condition, that he speak nothing at
all concerning my person either good or ill, other than I my self shall direct;
only signifying to the Auditory that it was my express Will to have it so. And
it is my Will, that no costly Monument be erected for my memory, but only a
fair flat Marble stone to be laid over me, with this Inscription in legible
Roman Characters, -- Depositum Roberti Sanderson nuper Lincolniensis Episcopi,
qui obiit Anno Domini MDCLXII* and aetatis suae septuagesimo sexto, Hic
requiescit in spe beatae resurrectionis. This manner of burial, although I
cannot but foresee it will prove unsatisfactory to sundry my nearest Friends
and Relations, and be apt to be censured by others, as an evidence of my too
much parsimony and narrowness of mind, as being altogether unusual, and not
according to the mode of these times; yet it is agreeable to the sense of my
heart, and I do very much desire my Will may be carefully observed herein,
hoping it may become exemplary to some or other: at least howsoever testifying
at my death (what I have so often and earnestly professed in my life time) my
utter dislike of the flatteries commonly used in Funeral Sermons, and of the
vast expenses otherwise laid out in Funeral Solemnities and Entertainments,
with very little benefit to any, which (if bestowed in pious and charitable
works) might redound to the public or private benefit of many Persons. This is
a part of his Will.

I am next to tell, that he died the 29th of January, 1662. and that his Body
was buried in Bugden the third day after his death; and for the manner, that
'twas as far from ostentation as he desired it; and all the rest of his Will
was as punctually performed. And when I have (to his just praise) told this
truth, That he died far from being rich, I shall return back to visit, and give
a further account of him on his last Sickbed.

His last Will (of which I have mentioned a part) was made about three weeks
before his death, about which time, finding his strength to decay by reason of
his constant infirmity and a consumptive cough added to it, he retired to his
Chamber, expressing a desire to enjoy his last thoughts to himself in private,
without disturbance or care, especially, of what might concern this world. --
Thus as his natural Life decayed, his Spiritual Life seemed to be more strong;
and, his faith more confirmed: still laboring to attain that holiness and
purity, without which none shall see God. -- And that not any of his Clergy
(which are more numerous than any other Bishops of this Nation) might suffer by
his retirement, he did by Commission empower his Chaplain, Mr. Pullin, with
Episcopal Power to give Institutions to all Livings or Church-Preferments,
during this his disability to do it himself. In this time of his retirement
which was wholly spent in Devotion he longed for his Dissolution; and when some
that loved him prayed for his recovery, if he at any time found any amendment,
he seemed to be displeased, by saying, His Friends said their Prayers backward
for him: and that 'twas not his desire to live a useless life, and by filling
up a place, keep another out of it, that might do God and his Church more
service. He would often with much joy and thankfulness mention, That during his
being a Housekeeper (which was more than 40 years) there had not been one
buried out of his Family, and that he was now like to be the first. He would
also mention with thankfulness, That till he was threescore years of Age, he
had never spent 5 s. in Law, nor (upon himself) so much in Wine: and rejoiced
much that he had so lived, as never to cause an hours sorrow to his good
Father; and that he hoped that he should die without an Enemy.

He in this retirement had the Church Prayers read in his Chamber twice every
day; and at nine at night some Prayers read to him and a part of his Family out
of the Whole Duty of Man. As he was remarkably punctual and regular in all his
Studies and Actions, so he used himself to be for his Meals: and his Dinner
being appointed to be constantly ready at the ending of Prayers, and he
expecting and calling for it, was answered, It would be ready in a quarter of
an hour. To which his reply was with some earnestness, A quarter of an hour, Is
a quarter of an hour nothing to a man that probably has not many hours to live?
And though he did live many hours after this, yet he lived not many days; for
the day after (which was three days before his death) he was become so weak and
weary either of motion or sitting, that he was content, or forced to keep his
Bed. In which I desire he may rest, till I have given some short account of his
behavior there, and immediately before it.

The day before he took his Bed (which was three days before his death) he,
that he might receive a new assurance for the pardon of his sins past, and be
strengthened in his way to the New Jerusalem, took the Blessed Sacrament of the
Body and Blood of his, and our blessed Jesus, from the hands of his Chaplain
Mr. Pullin, accompanied with his Wife, Children, and a Friend, in as awful,
humble, and ardent a manner, as outward reverence could express. After the
praise and thanksgiving for this blessing was ended, he spoke to this purpose;
I have now to the great joy of my Soul tasted of the All-saving Sacrifice of my
Saviors death and passion: and with it, received a Spiritual assurance that my
sins past are pardoned, and my God at peace with me: and that I shall never
have a Will, or Power to do any thing that may separate my Soul from the love
of my dear Savior. Lord confirm this belief in me; and make me still to
remember that it was thou O God that tookest me out of my Mothers Womb, and
have been the powerful Protector of me to this present moment of my life: thou
have neither forsaken me now I am become grey-headed, nor suffered me to
forsake thee in the late days of temptation, and sacrifice my Conscience for
the preservation of my liberty or estate. 'Twas not of my self but by grace
that I have stood, when others have fallen under my trials: and these mercies I
now remember with joy and thankfulness; and my hope and desire is, that I may
die remembering this, and prasing thee my merciful God. The frequent repitition
of the Psalms of David has been noted to be a great part of the Devotion of
the Primitive Christians: The Psalms having in them, not only Prayers and holy
Instructions, but such Commemorations of God's Mercies, as may preserve,
comfort, and confirm our dependence on the power, and providence, and mercy of
our Creator. And this is mentioned in order to telling, that as the holy
Psalmist said, that his eyes should prevent both Psalm. 119. 147.
the dawning of the day and the night watches, by meditating on God's word: so
'twas Dr. Sanderson's constant practice every morning to entertain his first
waking thoughts with a repition of those very Psalms, that the Church has
appointed to be constantly read in the daily Morning Service; and having at
night laid him in his bed, he as constantly closed his eyes with a repitition
of those appointed for the Service of the Evening; remembering and repeating the
very Psalms appointed for every day; and as the month had formerly ended and
began again, so did this Exercise of his devotion. And if the First Fruits of
his waking thoughts were of the World, or what concerned it; he would arraign
and condemn himself for it. Thus he began that work on Earth which is now the
employment of Dr. Hammond and him in Heaven.

After his taking his Bed, and about a day before his death, he desired his
Chaplain, Mr. Pullin, to give him absolution: And at his performing that
Office, he pulled off his Cap, that Mr. Pullin might lay his hand upon his bare
head. After this desire of his was satisfied, his Body seemed to be at more
ease, and his mind more cheerful; and he said often, Lord, forsake me not now
my strength fails me, but continue thy mercy, and let my mouth be ever filled
with thy praise. He continued the remaining night and day very patient, and
thankful for any of the little Offices that were performed for his ease and
refreshment: and during that time, did often say to himself the 103. Psalm, a
Psalm! that is composed of Praise and Consolations, fitted for a dying Soul,
and say also to himself very often these words, My heart is fixed O God, my
heart is fixed where true joy is to be found. And now his thoughts seemed to be
wholly of death, for which he was so prepared, that that King of Terrors could
not surprise him as a thief in the night; for he had often said, he was
prepared, and longed for it. And as this desire seemed to come from Heaven; so
it left him not, till his Soul ascended to that Region of blessed Spirits,
whose employments are to join in consort with his, and sing Praise and Glory to
that God, who has brought him and them to that place, into which sin and
sorrow cannot enter.

Thus this Pattern of meekness and primitive innocence changed this for a
better Life: -- it is now too late to wish that mine may be like his: (for, I am
in the eighty fifth year of my Age; and, God knows it has not,) but, I most
humbly beseech Almighty God that my death may: and I do as earnestly beg, that
if any Reader shall receive any satisfaction from this very plain, and as true
relation, he will be so Charitable, as to say

Amen.
I. W.

Blessed is that man in whose Spirit there is no guile, Psalm, 32. 2.
Dr. Pierce Dean of Salisbury, his Letter to Mr. Walton.
Good Mr. Walton,
AT my return to this place, I made a yet stricten search after the Letters
long ago sent me from our most excellent Dr. Sanderson: before the happy
Restoration of the King and Church of England to their several Rights; in one
of which Letters more especially, he was pleased to give me a Narrative, both
of the file and the Progress, and reasons also, as well of his younger, as of
his last and ^iper Judgment; touching the famous Points controverted between
the Calvinian and the Arminians, as they are commonly (though unjustly and
unskilfully) mis^alled on either side.

The whole Letter I allude to, does consist of several sheets, where of a good
part has been made public^ long ago by the most learned, most judicious, most
pious Dr. Hammond; (to whom I sent it both for his private, and for the public
satisfaction, if he thought fit), in his excellent Book, entitled [ A Pacifick
Discourse of God's Grace and Decrees, in full accordance with Dr. Sanderson:]
To which discourse I refer you for an account of Dr. Sanderson, and the History
of his Thoughts in his own hand writing; wherein I sent it to West^ood, as I
received it from Boothby Panel. And although the whole Book (printed in the
year 1660. and reprinted since with his other Tracts in Folio) is very worthy
of your perusal; yet for the Work you are about, you shall not have need to
read more at present, than from the 8th. to the 23d page, and as far as the end
of. 33. There you will find in what year the excellent man, whose life you
write, became a Master of Arts. How his first reading of Learned Hooker had
been occasioned by some Puritanical Pamphlets; and how good a preparative he
found it for his reading of Calvin's Institutions, the honor of whose name (at
that time especially) gave such credit to his Errors. How he erred with Mr.
Calvi (whilst he took things upon trust) in the Sublapsarian way. How being
chosen to be a Clerk of the Convocation for the Diocese of Lincoln, 1625. He
reduced the Quinquarticular Controversy into five Schemes or Tables; and
thereupon discerned a necessity of quitting the Sublapsarian way (of which he
had before a better liking) as well as the Supralapsarian, which he could never
fancy. There you will meet with his two weighty Reasons against them both; and
find his happy change of Judgment to have been ever since the year 1625. even
34 years before the world either knew, or (at least) took notice of it. And
more particularly his Reasons for rejecting Dr. Twiss (or the way He walks in)
although his acute, and very learned and ancient Friend.

I now proceed to let you know from Dr. Sir, I pray note, That all that follows
in the Italian Character, are Dr. Sanderson's own Words, excellently worthy,
but no where else extant; and commend him as much as any thing you can say of
him. T. P.
Sanderson's own hand, which was never printed (and which you can hardly know
from any, unless from his Son, or from my self) That when that Parliament was
broken up, and the Convocation therewith dissolved, a Gentleman of his
Acquaintance, by occasion of some Discourse about these Points, told him of a
Book not long before published at Paris (A. D. 1623.) by a Arriba.
Spanish Bishop, who had undertaken to clear the Differences in the great
Controversy De Concordia Gratiae and Liberi Arbitrarij. And because his Friend
perceived he was greedily desirous to see the Book; he sent him one of them
containing the four first Books of twelve which he intended then to publish.
When I had read (says Dr. Sanderson in the following words, of the same Letter)
his Epistle Dedicatory to the Pope (Greg. 15.) he spoke so highly of his own
invention, that I then began rather to suspect him for a Mountebank, than to
hope I should find satisfaction from his performances. I found much confidence,
and great pomp of words, but little matter as to the main Knot of the Business,
other than had been said an hundred times before, to wit, of the co-existence
of all things past, present, and future in mente divina realiter ab aeterno,
which is the subject of his whole third Book; only he interprets the word
realiter so, as to import not only praesentialitatem objectivam (as others held
before him) but propriam and actualem existentiam. Yet confesses it is hard to
make this intelligible. In his fourth Book he endeavors to declare a twofold
manner of God's working ad extra; the one sub ordine Praedestinationis, of
which Eternity is the proper measure; the other sub ordine Gratiae, whereof
Time is the measure. And that God works fortiter in the one (though not
irresistibiliter) as well as suaviter in the other, wherein the Free Will has
his proper working also. From the Result of his whole performance I was
confirmed in this Opinion, That we must acknowledge the work of both (Grace and
Freewill) in the conversion of a sinner. And so likewise in all other events,
the Consistency of the infallibility of God's foreknowledge at least (though
not with any absolute, but conditional Predestination) with the liberty of
man's will, and the contingency of inferior causes and effects. These, I say,
we must acknowledge for the (...): But for the (...), I thought it bootless for
me to think of comprehending it. And so came the two Acta Synodalia Dordrectana
to stand in my Study, only to fill up a room to this day.

And yet see the restless curiosity of man. Not many years after, to wit A. D.
1632. out comes Dr. Twiss his Vindiciae Gratiae; a large Volume purposely writ
against Arminius. And then notwithstanding my former resolution, I must needs
be meddling again. The respect I bore to his person and great learning, and the
long acquaintance I had ^ad with him in Oxford, drew me to the reading of that
whole Book. But from the reading of it (for I read it through to a syllable) I
went away with many and great dissatisfactions. Sundry things in that Book I
took notice of, which brought me into a greater dislike of his Opinion than I
had before. But especially these three: First, that he bottometh very much of
his Discourse upon a very erroneous Principle, which yet he seems to be so
deeply in love with, that he has repeated it (I verily believe) some hundreds
of times in that work: ^^ wit this, [That whatsoever is first in the intention,
is last in execution; and e converso.] Which is an Error of that magnitude,
that I cannot but wonder, how a person of such acuteness and subtilty of wit
could possible be deceived with it. All Logicians know, there is no such
universal. Maxim as he builds upon. The true Maxim, is but this, Finis qui
primus est in Intention, est ultimus in Executione. In the order of final
Causes, and the Means used for that end, the Rule holds perpetually. But in
other things, it holds not at all, or but by chance; or not as a rule, and
necessarily. Secondly, that, foreseeing such Consequences would naturally and
necessarily follow from his Opinion, as would offend the ear of a sober
Christian at the very first sound, he would yet rather choose not only to admit
the said harsh Consequences, but professedly endeavor also to maintain them,
and plead hard for them in large Digressions, than to recede in the least from
that opinion which he had undertaken to defend. Thirdly, that seeing (out of
the sharpness of his wit) a necessity of forsaking the ordinary Sublapsarian
way, and the Supralapsarian too, as it had diversely been declared by all that
had gone before him (for the shunning of those Rocks, which either of those
ways must unavoidably cast him upon) he was forced to seek out an untrodden
Path, and to frame out of his own brain a new way (like a Spider's web wrought
out of her own bowels) hoping by that device to salve all Absurdities could be
objected; to wit, by making the glory of God (as it is indeed the chiefest,) so
the only end of all other his Decrees, and then making all those other Decrees
to be but one entire coordinate Medium conducing to that one end, and so the
whole subordinate to it, but not any one part thereof subordinate to any other
of the same. Dr. Twiss should have done well to have been more sparing in
imputing the studium Paritum to others, wherewith his own eyes (though of
eminent perspicacity) were so strangely blindfolded, that he could not discern,
how this his new Device, and his old dearly beloved Principle (like the Cadmean
Sparti) do mutually destroy the one the other.

This Relation of my passed thoughts having spun out to a far greater length
than I intended, I shall give a shorter account of what they now are concerning
these points.

For which account I refer you to the following parts of Dr. Hammonds Book
aforesaid, where you may find them already printed. And for another account at
large of Bishop Sanderson's last Judgment concerning God's Concurrence or
Non-concurrence with the Actions of Men, and the positive entity of sins of
commission, I refer you to his Letters already printed by his consent, in my
large Appendix to my Impartial inquiry into the Nature of Sin.. 68: p. 193. as
far as p. 200.

Sir, I have rather made it my choice to transcribe all above out of the
Letters of Dr. Sanderson which lie before me, than venture the loss of my
Originals by Post or Carrier, which (though not often, yet) sometimes fail.
Make use of as much, or as little as you please, of what I send you from
himself (because from his own Letters to me) in the penning of his life, as
your own Prudence shall direct you; using my name for your warranty in the
account given of him, as much or as little as you please too. You have a
performance of my promise, and an obedience to your desires from

North-Tidworth, March 5. 1677 / 8 Your affectionate humble Servant, Tho.
Pierce.

THE BISHOP OF LINCOLN'S LETTER.
My Worthy Friend Mr. Walton.
IAm heartily glad, that you have undertaken to write the Life of that
excellent Person, and (both for Learning and Piety) eminent Prelate, Dr.
Sanderson, late Bishop of Lincoln; because I know your ability to know, and
Integrity to write truth: and sure I am, that the life and actions of that
pious and learned Prelate will afford you matter enough for his commendation,
and the imitation of Posterity. In order to the carrying on your intended good
work, you desire my assistance, that I would communicate to you such particular
passages of his Life, as were certainly known to me. I confess I had the
happiness to be particularly known to him for about the space of 20 years, and
(in Oxon) to enjoy his conversation, and his learned and pious instructions
while he was Regius Professor of Divinity there. Afterward, when (in the time
of our late unhappy confusions) he left Oxon, and was retired into the
Country, I had the benefit of his Letters; wherein (with great candor and
kindness) he answered those doubts I proposed, and gave me that satisfaction,
which I neither had, nor expected from some others of greater confidence, but
less judgment and humility. Having in (a Letter) named two or three Books writ
( ex professo) against the being of any original sin; and that Adam (by his
fall) transmitted some calamity only, but no Crime to his Posterity; the good
old man was exceedingly troubled, and bewailed the misery of those licentious
times, and seemed to wonder (save that the times were such) that any should
write, or be permitted to publish any Error so contradictory to truth, and the
Doctrine of the Church of England, established (as he truly said) by clear
evidence of Scripture, and the just and supreme power of this Nation, both
Sacred and Civil. I name not the Books, nor their Authors, which are not
unknown to learned men (and I wish they had never been known) because both the
Doctrine, and the unadvised Abettors of it are (an^ shall be) to me Apocryph^l.

Another little story I must not pass in silence, being an Argument of Dr.
Sanderson's Piety, great Ability and Judgment as a Casuist. Discoursing with an
Rob. Boil, Esquire
honorable Person (whose Piety I value more than his Nobility and Learning,
though* both be great) about a case of Conscience concerning Oaths and Vows,
their Nature and Obligation; (in which for some particular Reasons) he then
desired more fully to be informed; I commended to him Dr. Sanderson's Book De
Iuramento: which having read (with great satisfaction) he asked me, If I
thought the Doctor could be induced to write Cases of Conscience, if he might
have an honorary Pension allowed him, to furnish him with Books for that
purpose? I told him I believe he would: and (in a Letter to the Doctor) told
him what great satisfaction that Honorable Person (and many more) had reaped
by reading his Book De Iuramento; and asked him, whether he would be pleased
(for the benefit of the Church) to write some Tract of Cases of Conscience? He
replied, That he was glad that any had received any benefit by his Books; and
added further, That if any future Tract of his could bring such benefit to any,
as we seemed to say his former had done, he would willingly (though without any
Pension) set about that work. Having received this answer, that honorable
Person (before mentioned) did (by my hands) return 50 l. to the good Doctor
(whose condition then (as most good men's at that time were) was but low) and he
presently revised, finished, and published that excellent Book De Conscientia.
A Book little in bulk; but not so if we consider the benefit an intelligent
Reader may receive by it. For there are so many general Propositions concerning
Conscience, the Nature and Obligation of it explained and proved with such firm
consequence and evidence of Reason, that he who reads, remembers, and can (with
prudence) pertinently apply them Hic and nunc to particular Cases, may (by
their light and help) rationally resolve a thousand particular doubts and
scruples of Conscience. Here you may see the Charity of that honorable Person
in promoting, and the Piety and Industry of the good Doctor in performing that
excellent work,

And here I shall add the Judgment of that learned and pious Prelate concerning
a passage very pertinent to our present purpose. When he was in Oxon, and read
his public Lectures in the Schools as Regius Professor of Divinity, and by the
truth of his Positions, and evidences of his Proofs, gave great content and
satisfaction to all his hearers, especially in his clear Resolutions of all
difficult Cases which occurred in the Explication of the subject matter of his
Lectures; a Person of Quality (yet alive) privately asked him, What course a
young Divine should take in his Studies to enable him to be a good Casuist? His
answer was, That a convenient understanding of the Learned Languages (at least
of Hebrew, Greek and Latin) and a sufficient knowledge of Arts and Sciences
presupposed; There were two things in humane Literature, a comprehension of
which would be of very great use, to enable a man to be a rational and able
Casuist, which otherwise was very difficult, if not impossible, 1. A convenient
knowledge of Moral Philosophy; especially that part of it which treats of the
Nature of Humane Actions: To know, quid sit actus humanus (spontaneus, invitus,
mixtus) unde habent bonitatem and malitiam moralem? an ex genere and objecto,
vel ex circumstantiis? How the variety of circumstances varies the goodness or
evil of humane Actions? How far knowledge and ignorance may aggravate or
excuse, increase or diminish the goodness or evil of our Actions? For every
Case of Conscience being only this -- Is this Action good or bad? May I do it,
or may I not? He who (in these) knows not how and whence humane Actions become
morally good and evil, never can (in Hypothesi) rationally and certainly
determine, whether this or that particular Action be so. 2. The second thing,
which (he said) would be a great help and advantage to a Casuist, was a
convenient knowledge of the Nature and Obligation of Laws in general: To know
what a Law is; what a natural and a Positive Law; what is required to the Latio,
dispensatio, derogatio, vel abrogatio legis; what promulgation is antecedently
required to the Obligation of any Positive Law; what ignorance takes off the
Obligation of a Law, or does excuse, diminish or aggravate the transgression:
For every Case of Conscience being only this -- Is this lawful for me, or is it
not? and the Law the only Rule and Measure, by which I must judge of the
lawfulness or unlawfulness of any Action: It evidently follows, that he, who
(in these) knows not the Nature and Obligation of Laws, never can be a good
Casuist, or rationally assure himself (or others) of the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of Actions in particular. This was the Judgment and good counsel
of that learned and pious Prelate; and having (by long experience) found the
truth and benefit of it, I conceive, I could not without ingratitude to him,
and want of charity to others, conceal it. -- Pray pardon this rude, and (I
fear) impertinent Scrible, which (if nothing else) may signify thus much, that
I am willing to obey your Desires, and am indeed

London May 10. 1678. Your affectionate Friend, Thomas Lincoln.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
HOW these Sermons will be looked upon (if at all looked upon) by the men of
the Times, is no very ^ard matter to conjecture. I confess they are not A-la*
mode, nor fitted to the Palate of those men, who are resolved beforehand
(without tasting or trial) to nauseate, as unsavory and unwholesome,
whatsoever shall be tendered unto them from the hand of an Episcopal Divine.
And therefore the republishing of them in this state of Church Affairs, now the
things so much contended for in some of them, are worn out of date, and thrown
aside, will be deemed at least a very unseasonable Undertaking to as much
purpose (perhaps it will be said) as if a man would this year re-print an
Almanac for the Last. For the latter part of the Objection: at the peril be it
of those, that had the hardiness to adventure upon a new Edition. Mihi istic
nec seritur, nec metitur. All I had to do in the business, was but the drudgery
of reviewing the old Copy to correct the Errata of the former Impressions; and
of looking over the sheets as they were wrought off from the Press, and sent me
down, to note the oversights escaped in the Printing, and to make the Index of
the Scripture-quotations. As to the other part of the Crime, such as it is, to
wit, the unseasonableness of this afterpublication; there need not much be
said. If the Sermons thought not unseasonable in some former times, he now
become (...), as things brought forth into the World again out of due time:
that cannot I help. They are the same they were, when they were first Preached;
and the same they were, when they were last Printed: and so am (...). Greg. Naz.
I. If either they or I, find worse entertainment now, than we did then; and
any blame be due for that; let not us bear it, who are guiltless, but the
Times. For it is They are changed not We. Howsoever, (...): now they are
abroad, they must take their lot as it falls out. Which be it better, be it
worse; this yet we shall gain thereby: that if any shall charge these Papers
with unseasonableness (no very huge crime) he shall ipso facto, by that very
act, and the Verdict of his own conscience, fully discharge, and for ever
acquit them of the guilt of Time-serving; a crime, I trow, of a vaster
magnitude, and wherewith Discourses of this nature were wont to be so
frequently, (that I say not, unjustly) aspersed, whilst the Times looked more
favorably upon them.

. II. But of this enough. I expect to meet with far heavier Censures than
these, from the ungoverned spirits and tongues of the more zealous (that is to
say, if ^ightly interpreted, the more clamorous and less knowing) among them.
Who knows not, that as empty vessels give the loudest sound, and shallow
brooks run with a fiercer current, and make a greater noise, than deeper Rivers
do* so they that are the least able to judge, are ever the most forward to pass
sentence; and when they so do, the most rigid and peremptory therein? But the
heaviest doom, I suppose, will proceed from those men, who being themselves of
late years fallen out grievously, fallen out (for what cause I know not) with
the Ancient Government, Liturgy, and Ceremonies of the Church, are angry with
all those, that retain any good opinion of them. Whereunto yet themselves, when
time was, seemed to be, and if they dissembled not (which we are unwilling to
believe) were indeed, reasonably well affected. For they submitted to the
Government, used the Liturgy, and observed the Ceremonies appointed; according
to Law and Order; and their own professed approbation of the same, as well by
express words from their mouths, as by subscription under their hands, yet
remaining upon record. What has wrought this change in them (Evidence of
Reason, or worldly Interest,) and how far it has wrought upon them (in
reality, or but in compliance; and in what order too, by immediate assault upon
their judgment, or by dealing underhand first with the affections:) themselves
do, or should best know. It highly concerns them, even as much as the peace
of their consciences is worth (and much more than so) to be well assured that
their hearts are upright in this affair. And in order thereunto, not to content
themselves with a slight and overly examination; (There is more wickedness and
deceitfulness in the hearts of all men, than most men are aware of:) but to
make the most diligent, district, and unpartial search possible, into the true
causes and motives of this change. And (for so much as Fears and Hopes have
been ever found the fittest and the readiest Engines to work such feats;) to
enquire particularly what influence or operation, either the Fear of losing
what they had, or the Hope of getting more, might have in this work, toward
the producing of such an effect. It will best become others, to judge as
charitably, as they may; but doubtless it would be safest for them, to be very
jealous over themselves, lest so great a change could not have been wrought in
so short a space without a strong infusion, either of the one, or the other, or
both, into the medicine that wrought it. Especially, since the conjecture of
the time wherein this change happened, may very probably raise some suspicion,
that the fear of the Sword might have; and the visible advantage some have
found thereby since, as probably, that the hope of gain had, some cooperation
at least, with whatsoever was the principal Cause of this so sudden a
Metamorphosis. If nor so, nor so; but that they find themselves clearly
convinced in their judgments of their former Error, and that they are fully
persuaded they are now in a better way than that wherein they formerly walked*
it is happy for them, and I doubt not but they will find matter of rejoicing in
it, if they be not mistaken (a thing not impossible) in the trial of their own
hearts. Of the sincerity whereof, the likeliest way to give satisfaction to the
World, and to add some strengthening withal to their own assurance, is, by
showing compassion to those their Brethren, that cannot yet tell how to recover
themselves out of the snare of the same common Error, from which they are so
happily escaped. At leastwise so far, as not to despise them; nor to pass their
censures upon them, with so much freedom and severity as some have done. If it
be a fault, sure it is a very pardonable one; for a man in the change of times,
to remain unchanged in his mind and opinion, and to hold to his former and (as
he thinks) well-grounded Principles: so long as he can neither apprehend any
Reason of sufficient strength to convince his understanding that he is in the
wrong, or to manifest unto him the necessity of making such a change; nor is
able with the best wit he has, to discern any thing so lovely in the effects
and consequents of such change since it was made, as might win over his
affections to any tolerable liking thereof upon the Post-fact.

. III. To return where I was going, and from whence I have not much digressed;
if any should now ask me, what those heavy Censures are which I said we should
be like to meet withal, I confess I am not able to give him any certain account
thereof; not knowing beforehand what reasons or expressions the Spirits of
particular men will suggest to their tongues or pens. Only by what has been
usually said by one sort of men upon such like occasions heretofore (more
sparingly and in the ear in former times, but of late more frequently, freely,
and on the house tops:) it may be probably guessed what kind of Censures are to
be expected from those of the same party now. Yet for that I am not conscious
to my self to have said any thing in the Papers now, or at any time heretofore
(with my allowance) published, that may give just offense to, or merit the hard
censure of, any sober dispassionate man; and that, if yet I must fall under
some mis-censures, it is not my case alone, but of many others also wrapped with
me in the same common guilt; I shall therefore reduce my discourse herein ab
hypothesi ad thesin; and propose the Objections, with my Answers thereunto
(though with some reflection upon my self in most of the particulars, yet) as
laid against the generality of those men's Sermons, Writings, and other
Discourses, who (according to the new style of late years taken among us) go
under the name of the Prelatical Party or Episcopal Divines.

. IV. The Objections are, 1. That in their ordinary Sermons 1
they take any small occasion; but when they Preach at the Visitations, where
most of the Clergy of the Voisinage are convened, set themselves purposely in
their whole Discourse to let fly at their Godly Brethren, who out of tenderness
of Conscience dare not submit to some things endeavored to be imposed upon
them by the Prelates. The Poor Puritan is sure to be paid home; he must be
brought under the lash, and exposed to contempt and scorn at every public
meeting; the Papists, professed Enemies of our Church and Religion, escaping in
the mean while Scot-free, seldom or never meddled withal in any of their
Sermons. 2. Or if sometimes some little matter be done that way by some 2
of them; it is so little* that it is to as little purpose: rather for fashions
sake, ad faciendum Populum, and to avoid suspicion, than for any ill will they
bear them. Perhaps give them a light touch by the way; a gentle rub as they
pass along, that shall do them no harm; but their Brethren, that profess the
same Protestant Religion with them, they handle with a rougher hand. With
Elder-guns, and Paper-pellits they shoot at those; but against these, they play
with Cannon-bullet. 3. And all this anger but for Ceremonies: Trifles even in
their own 3
esteem, who plead hardest for them. If they be indeed such Indifferent things,
as they confess them to be, and would have the World believe they make no other
account of them; Why do they dote on them so extremely themselves? Why do they
press them upon others with so much importunity? Why do they quarrel with their
brethren eternally about them? 4. The truth is, both We and They judge
otherwise of them, than as 4
Indifferent things. They think them necessary, whatever they pretend; or else
they would not lay so much weight upon them. And we hold them Popish,
Antichristian, and superstitious; or else we would not so stiffly refuse them.
5. It is not therefore without cause, that we 5
suspect the Authors of such Sermons and Treatises, as have come abroad in the
defense of such trash, to be Popishly-affected; or at least to have been set on
by some Popish Bishops or Chancellors ( though perhaps without any such
intention in themselves: on purpose to promote the Papal Interest here, and to
bring back the people of this Nation by degrees, if not into the heart and
within the Walls of Babylon, yet at leastwise into the confines, and within the
view of it. 6. Which, as 6
it appears otherwise, to wit, by their great willingness to allow such
qualifications to sundry Doctrines taught in the Church of Rome, and such
interpretations to sundry taught in our Church, as may bring them to the
nearest agreement; and their great endeavors to find out such Expedients, as
might best bring on a perfect reconciliation between the two Churches. 7. So
particularly, in pressing with so much vehemence 7
the observance of these Popish and Superstitious Ceremonies; for which we
cannot find, nor do they offer to produce, any either Command or Example in
holy Scripture, to warrant to our Consciences the use thereof. 8. Which, what
is it else in effect, than to deny the sufficiency 8
of the Scripture, to be a perfect Rule of Faith and Manners? Which being one
of the main Bulwarks of the Protestant Religion, as it is differenced from the
Roman, is by these men and by this means undermined and betrayed.

'. V. This is the sum and substance of the usual Censures and Objections of
our Anti-Ceremonian Brethren, so far as I have observed from their own speeches
and writings; which I have therefore set down as near, as in so few words I
could, to their sense, and, for the most part, in their own expressions. Much
of which having (as I conceive) received its answer beforehand in some passage
or other of the ensuing Sermons, might supercede me the labor of adding any
more now. Yet for so much as these answers lie dispersedly, and not in one
view: I held it convenient, as I have produced the Objections all together; so
to offer to the Reader an Answer to them all together, and that in the same
order, as I have given them in Begging at his hands but this one (very
reasonable) favor, that he would do both himself and me so much right, as not
to pass his censure too ha^tily and too severely upon any part of what is now
presented to his view, (whether he like it, or dislike it;) till he has had
the patience to read over the whole, and allowed himself the freedom rightly
and without prejudice to consider of it.

. VI. That which is said in the first place of their Godliness and Tenderness
of Conscience, is not much to the purpose, as to the main business. For first,
besides that all Parties pretend to Godliness'; 1
Papists, Anabaptists, and who not (even the late-sprung-up generation of
Levellers, whose Principles are so destructive of all that Order and Justice by
which public societies are supported, do yet style themselves, as by a kind of
peculiarity, The Godly;) And that secondly, it is the easiest thing in the
world, and nothing more 2
common, than for men to pretend Conscience, when they are not minded to obey:
I do not believe thirdly, (though I am well persuaded 3
of the godliness of many of them otherwise,) that the refusal of indifferent
Ceremonies enjoined by Lawful Authority, is any part of their Godliness; or any
good fruit, evidence, or sign thereof. But certain it is fourthly, that the
godliest men are men, and 4
know but in part; and by the power of godliness in their hearts are no more
secured from the possibility of falling into Error through Ignorance, than from
the possibility of falling into Sin through Infirmity. And as for Tenderness of
Conscience fifthly, a most gracious 5
blessed fruit of the holy Spirit of God, where it is really, and not in
pretense only, nor mistaken, (for sure it is no very tender Conscience, though
sometimes called so, that straineth at a Gnat and swalloweth a Camel:) it is
with it, as with other tender things; very subject to receive harm and soon put
out of order. Through the cunning of Satan, it dangerously exposes men to
temptations on the right hand: and through its own aptitude to entertain and to
cherish unnecessary scruples, it strongly disposes them to listen thereunto so
long, till at the last they are overcome thereof. Needful it is therefore, that
in the public teaching, the Errors should be sometimes refuted, and the
Temptations discovered. And this ever to be done; seasonably, soberly,
discreetly and convincingly; and, when we are to deal with men whose
Consciences (are so far as we can discern) truly tender, with the spirit of
Meekness and Compassion. For, tender things must be tenderly dealt withal, or
they are lost. I know it is not always so done; nor can we expect it should.
All Preachers are neither so charitable, nor so prudent, nor so conscientious,
as they should be: And they that are such in a good measure, are men still; and
may be (...). Arist. 1 Elench. 15.
transported now and then through Passion, and Infirmity, beyond the just
bounds of moderation. But then, the fault is not so much in the choice of the
argument they treat of, as in the ill-managing thereof: which ought not to cast
any prejudice upon others who deal in the same Argument, but after another
manner.

. VII. But that which pincheth most in this first particular, is (as I suppose)
this; That upon all public occasions* especially in Visitation-Sermons, they
who agree with us in the substance of the same Reformed Religion, are for the
most part the only mark shot at; whilst the common Enemy, the Papist, has
little or nothing said against him. For Answer hereunto. First, so far as 1
concerns the Sermons here published, the Objection is void, for therein, the
Papist has had his share as well as his fellows, so ost as the Text gave
occasion, or the file of my discourse led me thereunto; as by the Papers
themselves (whereunto reference to be had) will evidently appear. Secondly,
admitting all true that 2
is alleged; either we are excusable, in what they blame us for; or they that
bl^me us inexcusable, who do the very same things. Do not they usually in their
Sermons, fall bitterly upon the Papists and Arminians; but seldom meddle with
the Socinians? scarce ever name the Turks? I have been often told, of their
declamations against the observing of Christmas, that great superstitious
thing; but I remember not to have heard of much spoken against Perjury and
Sacrilege and some other sins, wherewith our times abound. Nay does not their
zeal even against Popery it self ( Popery I mean, truly so called) of late
years, and since most of the Pulpits are in their possession, seem to abate; at
leastwise in comparison of the zeal they show against Episcopacy, and against
the Liturgy, Festivals, and Ceremonies lately in use among us? These they cry
down with all the noise they can, and with all the strength they have; having
first branded them with the name of Popery; and this must now pass for
preaching against Popery. I demand then, Is there not the like reason of
reproving Sins, and refuting Errors? If so; are not Perjury and Sacrilege as
great sins (at least) as keeping Christmas Holy Day? Howsoever, are not the
Errors of the Turks, that deny the whole structure of the Christian Religion;
(foundation and all,) far worse than the Errors of the Papists, who by their
additional super structures have only altered the Fabric, but keep the
Foundation still? And are not the Errors of the Socinians, who deny the
Trinity, Gods Omniscience, the Eternity of the Son, the Divinity of the Holy
Ghost, Original Sin, the calling of Ministers, and far worse than those the
Arminians are charged withal, of Free Will, Universal Redemption, Falling from
Grace, etc? And are not the old rotten Points of Popery ( the Popes Ecumenical
Pastorship and Infallibility, the Scriptures Unsufficiency, Image Worship,
Invocation of Saints, Transubstantiation, Half-Communion, etc.) Errors of as
great a magnitude, as those other Points of Popery (lately and falsely dubbed
such) of Episcopacy, Liturgy, Festivals, and Ceremonies? If they be; Why do our
Brethren preach oftener and inveigh more, against these latter and lesser in
comparison, than against those former and greater Sins and Errors? I doubt
not, but they have some Reasons wherewith to satisfy themselves for their so
doing; else they were much too blame. Be those Reasons what they will; if they
will serve to excuse them, they will serve as well to justify us.

. VIII. It will be said perhaps; First, That the Turks have 1
no Communion with us: They are out of the Church; and our chiefest care should
be for those within, leaving those without for God to judge. Or indeed
Secondly, To what purpose would it be to address 2
our speeches to them some thousands of miles out of hearing? If our voices
were as loud as Stentor's, or that of Mars in Homer, the sound would not reach
them. Besides that, Thirdly, There is little danger in our people of receiving
hurt or infection from them; who have no such Agents here to tamper with the
people in that behalf, no such artifices and plausible pretensions whereby to
work them over to their side, no such advantages as the agreement in some
Common Principles might afford for bringing on the rest; as the Papists have.
Who being within the pale of the visible Catholic Church, and living in the
midst of us, have their instruments ready at hand in every corner, to gain
Proselytes for Rome; the specious pretenses of Antiquity, Universality, Consent
of Councils and Fathers, etc. wherewith to dazzle the eyes of weak and credulous
persons; and some ground also to work upon, in the agreement that is between
them and us in the principal Articles of the Christian Faith.

. IX. These Reasons I confess are satisfactory, as to the Comparison between
Turks and Papists; and may be applied to the other Instance also in their
proportion, so far as the Application will hold truth. And all this is
agreeable, both, To the Apostles 1
discourse, 1 Cor. 5. 9. -- 13. and, To the advices of prudent 2
Statists, who forbear to advance against a potent Enemy abroad, till they have
composed smaller Quarrels and Mutinies at home, and, To the Example also of our
blessed Savior himself: Who, 3
although the Errors of the Sadduces were, in themselves, and in respect of
their matter, much worse than those of the Scribes and Pharisees; yet because
the danger of seducing the People, was greater from these than from those (the
Pharisees by reason of their outside holiness being grown into better Esteem
with the People than the Sadduces were; and the generality of the people also
by their Education prettily well principled, and so fore-armed, against those
more gross and palpable Errors of the Sadduces:) is observed therefore to have
both more frequently and with greater sharpness reproved the Scribes and
Pharisees for their false teaching, than he did the Sadduces; and to have given
the people more Cavears to beware of them and their Leaven, than that of the
Sadduces.

. X. This is the most, I think, they have to say for themselves; and upon
supposal that all the particulars in the aforementioned Instances, were indeed
such Sins and Errors, as they either take or mistake them for; it must be
admitted a very reasonable and sufficient PIea. Only we require (which is but
equal) that they mete unto us back again with the same measure; and allow us
the benefit of the same Plea (mutatis mutandis) so far as our Case is the same
with theirs. Let them but this do, and the Objection will vanish. First, we
nothing doubt but that the Papists 1
(by being baptized into the Faith of Christ) are in a far better condition
otherwise; as we are sure they stand in a nearer relation to us thereby, than
Turks and Pagans do. Yet, as to external Communion in the public Worship; by
refusing to assemble with us (which is not our fault) they are as very
strangers to us, as the very Turks are; and in that respect to be looked upon
as (...), those that are without. And therefore we deemed it more expedient,
and a more brotherly act, to endeavor the reducing of our Brethren that held
Communion with us to their just obedience, by discovering to their faces (being
personally present) those their Errors that obstructed it; than to beat the
Air to little purpose, in declaiming against those that did not hear us, and we
were sure would little regard us. For, Secondly, were it not for the confirming
2
of our Protestant Hearers in their present belief of the Truth, against such
as will attempt to draw them from us, it would be a very impertinent thing to
insist much upon the discovery of Popish Errors in our Churches; whither they
that should reap most benefit by such discovery never come. They live among us
indeed, which the Turks do not: but since they come not where they may hear us;
it is all one to us, in respect of our Sermons, as if they lived as far from us
as the Turks do. But at such times as the Clergy are met together (which is
chiefly done at the Visitations) when most of them who are most concerned, both
for their own sakes, and the peoples that depend upon them, to have a right
judgment concerning the Nature and Use of Indifferent things, are present; it
seems to be very proper, (and by the blessing of God) may conduce very much
to the edification of his people in Truth, Peace, and Godliness; that the just
power of those that have authority in the Church for making Ecclesiastical
Constitutions should be asserted, and the necessity of yielding obedience
thereunto when they are made, by all under such authority should be pressed.
This is the very truth of the whole business. And what is there in all this, to
deserve such outcries? What is there, if men would but soberly consider it,
that is not every way agreeable to the dictates both of Christian Prudence and
Charity? Thirdly, (which is a very important consideration, and comes 3
up to the full of the Objection) we think it more needful, seasonable, and
expedient, upon such opportunities, to clear these points in difference betwixt
us and our Brethren at home, than to handle any of the Controversies in debate
betwixt us and those of Rome. Both because the People are in more danger of
being misled by these, than of being seduced by Papists; and because the
Papists make a great advantage (indeed the greatest, and in a manner the whole
advantage they have against us) of these home-differences, For although the
Emissaries of Rome have long used all the art and diligence possible to advance
the Roman Interest among us; yet the People of England are so generally
prepossessed with a detestation of that Religion (as the people of Spain,
France and Italy are of ours;) that, were it not for the advantage they make of
the excesses of some troublesome spirits among our selves, they could not have
expected to have reaped so plentiful a harvest here, as of late years they have
done. But our Brethren, having by their much Preaching and inveighing against
the Papists, wrought our common people to such a prejudice against her
Doctrines, that many of them know no other Rule whereby to judge of the
soundness of men's Religion, than by the greater or lesser distance it has from
Popery; have thereby withal gained that high esteem of their soundness in
Religion above others in the hearts of many of our people (led as most are, by
opinion more than true judgment;) that it is a very easy matter for them to
draw multitudes after them into a dislike of any thing, whereon they shall
think good to fasten the imputation of being Popish. For preventing whereof, if
we do our best endeavor upon all good occasions to undeceive them first, and
by them the people; by letting them see, (if they will but open their eyes) how
unsound the Principles are they go upon, and how unsafe the Practices those
Principles lead unto: Who can justly blame us for so doing?

. XI. To the substance of the Second Objection (if I may with their leave and
without their offense, pass by that quaint minute piece of wit, of
Paper-pellits, and Cannon-bullets;) I shall need make no further Answer, than
what has already been given to the First. Only I shall, ex abundanti, add two
things; the one, 1
concerning my self; the other, to the Objectors. For my self; if I be not much
mistaken, I have been so far from offending in the kind objected, that I may
seem rather to have offended too much on the other hand. The substance of the
matter both against Papists and others, is I hope all along justifiable. And
then, if some sharper expressions both against them and others have here and
there slipped from my tongue or pen (such as heat and indignation in our greener
years are apt to suggest;) they that are ingenuous, considering how long it is
since those Sermons were Preached, may be pleased to pardon it, upon the old
plea, Dandum aliquod aetati. As for 2
them; that they Preach against Popery, I not at all mislike: Only I could wish
that these two Cautions were better observed, than (as far as I can make
conjecture of the rest, by the proportion of what has come to my knowledge) I
fear they usually are, by the more zealous of that party, Viz. 1. That they do
not through ignorance, prejudice, or precipitancy, call that Popery, which is
not; and then under that name and notion Preach against it. 2. That they would
do it with the less noise and more weight. It is not a business merely of the
Lungs but requires Sinews too. Or (to use their own Metaphor) let them not
think that casting of squibs will do the deed, or charging with powder alone;
that will give a crack indeed, and raise a smoke? but unless they have bullet
as well as powder, it will do little execution.

. XII. To the Third Objection. I say First, that we have indeed 1
no higher or other esteem of Ceremonies, than as of indifferent things; yet do
we not count them Trifles, otherwise than as in comparison with necessary
duties. But let Ceremonies (Secondly) be 2
as very Trifles, as any man can imagine them to be; yet Obedience sure is no
Trifle. They mis-state the Question, when they talk of pressing Ceremonies. It
is Obedience (formally) that is required: Ceremonies not otherwise pressed,
than as the matter wherein that Obedience is to be exercised. If a Master
appoint his Servant to do some small matter that he thinks fit to have done,
though in it self of no great moment; yet he will expect to be obeyed; and it
is great reason he should. If in such case the Servant should refuse to do the
thing appointed, because he has no mind thereunto, and should receive a check
or correction for such refusal; could he either sufficiently excuse his own
fault, or reasonably complain of his Master for dealing hardly with him, by
saying, The thing was but a Trifle? Is it not evident, that the thing which
made the Master angry, and the Servant an offender in that Case, was not (
precisely and formally) the leaving of the thing undone (which had it not been
commanded, might have been left undone without any fault or blame at all,) but
the refusing to do it, when he that had a right to his service commanded him?
Wherefore Thirdly, 3
that which is said of some men's doting so extremely on Ceremonies, might have
been well enough spared. I know no true Son of the Church of England, that
doteth upon any Ceremony, whatsoever opinion he may have of the decency or
expediency of some of them. If any do, let him answer for himself. Among wise
men, he will hardly pass for a wise man, that doteth upon any. Nor will he, I
doubt, prove a much wiser man, that runs into the contrary Extreme, and
abhors all. It is true, Fourthly, that there have been 4
long and unkind quarrels about these things: More is the pity! but where is
the fault? To whom is the beginning, and to whom the continuance of a quarrel
rather imputable? To him, that demands his right? or to him, that
withholds it from him? For this is the plain Case in short, The Bishops
(under the King) require obedience to the Laws Ecclesiastical; these men refuse
to give it. So began the quarrel at first; and upon the same terms it
continued. If the Obedience challenged were indeed due to those Laws, then did
our Brethren both begin the quarrel and hold it on; if it were not, then must
the whole blame lie upon those that claimed it unjustly, and not upon them. So
that upon winding up of the business, the whole Controversy will devolve upon
this point; Whether to the Laws Ecclesiastical Obedience is due or not? For the
right determining whereof (for so much as it is confessed on all hands, that
Obedience is due to Lawful Authority commanding Lawful things) two other points
are to be resolved: the one, concerning the Authority by which the Constituons
were made; the other, concerning the lawfulness of the things therein required.
The Presbyterians of the Kirk flatly and directly deny both: Ours, less forward
to declare their opinion in the former point, have chosen rather to stand upon
the later only. And so the point in issue is briefly this; Whether the things
commanded, (and particularly the Ceremonies) be lawful, yea, or no. Which
brings us to the consideration of.

. XIII. The Fourth Objection. Wherein (besides some ill language, which I love
not to stir into) they declare, First, what they conceive to be our Opinion,
and next what is indeed their own concerning the Ceremonies, etc. in question.
In the former, we desire that candor which in all reason and charity they ought
to afford us; that they would fix nothing upon us as our opinion, which our
selves (who should best know what our opinion is) protest against, as not our
opinion. They have been told a thousand times over, in the Sermons and Writings
of private men, which is also attested and affirmed by the public Declaration
of our Church (the most authentic assurance a question of this nature is
capable of;) That we 1
place no Necessity at all in these things, but hold them to be merely
indifferent. That, when for decency, order, or uniformity's 2
sake, any Constitutions are made concerning them; there is the same necessity
of obeying such Constitutions, as there is of obeying other Laws made for the
good of the Commonwealth concerning any other indifferent things. That such
Necessity, 3
either in the one or the other, arises not properly from the Authority of the
immediate Lawgiver, but from the Ordinance of God, who has commanded us to
obey the Ordinances of men for his sake. That, such necessity of Obedience
notwithstanding, 4
the things remain in the same indifferency as before. Every way in respect of
their Nature; and quoad Rem (it being not in the power of accidental Relations
to change the Natures of things) and even in respect of their Use; and quoad
Nos thus far, that there is a liberty left for men, upon extraordinary and
other just occasions, sometimes to do otherwise than the Constitution
requires, extra casum Scandali and Contemptus. A liberty which we dare not
either take our selves, or allow to others, in things properly and absolutely
necessary. [Upon which very account (I mean the consideration of the
indifferency of the things in themselves) and upon which account alone it is,
that many of the Episcopal (that is to say, the true English Protestant)
Divines; who sadly resent the voting down of the Liturgy, Festivals, and
Cremonies of the Church, by so many former Laws established; heartily desired
heretofore the continuance, and as heartily still wish the restitution, and are
(by Gods help) ready with their Tongues, Pens, and Sufferings, to maintain and
justify the Lawful use of the same; do yet so far yield to the sway of the
Times, and are persuaded they may with a good Conscience so do, as to forbear
the use thereof in the public Worship; till it shall seem good to those that
are in place of Authority either to restore them to their former state (as it
is well hoped, when they shall have duly considered the evil consequents of
that Vote, they will) or at leastwise, and in the mean time to leave them
arbitrary, for men, according to their several different judgments, to use or
not to use, which seems but reasonable, the like favor and liberty in other
kinds having been long allowed to almost all other sorts of men, though of
never so distant persuasions one from another:] Lastly, That all Laws made
concerning Ceremonies 5
or other indifferent things, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, are mutable; and
as they were at first made by Humane Authority, so may they from time to time
be by humane Authority abrogated and repealed. And then and thenceforth they
lose their obligation; whereby the necessity of yielding obedience thereunto
wholly cease and determines; and the things thereby commanded or prohibited,
return to their primitive and natural indifferency, even in their Use also, and
in respect of us. This is clearly our Opinion, and men may easily so understand
us, if they will.

XIV. But their Opinion is, that the things enjoined are Popish and
Superstitious; and consequently unlawful to be used: And this they render as
the reason of their Nonconformity. And the Reason were certainly good, if the
Opinion were true. For the Popishness first; unless we should sue out a Writ de
finibus regendis, Omnia periclitabuntur aliter accipi quam sunt, si aliter quam
sunt cognominantur. Tert. de carn. Christi, cap. 1^.
it will be hard to find out a way how to bring this Controversy to an issue,
much less to an end: the term has been so strangely extended, and the limits
thereof (if yet it have any) so uncertain. If they would be entreated to set
bounds to what they mean by Popish and Popery, by giving us a certain
definition of it; we should the sooner either come to some agreement; or at
least, understand our selves, and one another the better, wherein and how far
we disagreed. In the mean time, it is to me a wonder, that if reason would not
heretofore, yet the sad experience of the ill consequents, so visible of late
time, should not have taught them all this while to consider, what infinite
advantage they give to the Romish party to work upon weak and wavering souls;
by damning so many things under the name of Popery, which may to their
understandings be sufficiently evidenced; Some, to have been used by the
ancient Christians long before Popery was hatched, or but in the Egg; and All
to have nothing of Superstition or Popery in them, unless every thing that is
used in the Church of Rome become thereby Popish and Superstitious. Nor what
great advantage they give to our newer Sectaries, to extend the name yet
farther. Who, by the help of their New-Lights, can discern Popery, not only in
the Ceremonies formerly under debate; but even in the Churches and Pulpits,
wherein they used to Preach against Popery, and the Bells wherewith they used
to call the people together to hear them. These are by some of them cried down
as Popish, with other things very many, which their Presbyterian Brethren do
yet both allow, and practice; though how long they will so do, is uncertain, if
they go on with the Work of Reformation they have begun, with as quick
dispatch, and at the rate they have done these last two seven years. The having
of Godfathers at Baptism, Churching of Women, Prayers at the burial of the
dead, Children asking their Parents blessing, etc. which whilome were held
innocent; are now by very many thrown aside, as rags of Popery. Nay, are not
some gone so far already, as to cast into the same heap, not only, the ancient
hymn Gloria Patri (for the repeating whereof alone some have been deprived of
all their livelihoods) and the Apostles Creed; but even the use of the Lords
Prayer it self? -- And what will ye do in the end thereof? And what would you
have us do in the mean time, when you call hard upon us to leave our Popery,
and yet would never do us the favor to let us know what it is? It were good
therefore, both for your own sakes, that you may not rove in infinitum; and in
compassion to us; that you would give us a perfect boundary of what is Popery
now; with some Prognostication or Ephemerides annexed (if you please) whereby
to calculate what will be Popery seven years hence.

. XV. But to be serious, and not to indulge my self too much merriment in so
sad a business; I believe, all those men will be found much mistaken, who
either measure the Protestant Religion by an opposition to Popery; or account
all Popery, that is taught or practiced in the Church of Rome. Our godly
Forefathers, to whom (under God) we owe the purity of our Religion, and some
of which laid down their lives for the defense of the same, were sure of
another mind; if we may, from what they did, judge what they thought. They had
no purpose (nor had they any warrant) to s^t up a new Religion, but to reform
the Old; by purging it from those Innovations, which in tract of time (some
sooner, some later) had mingled with it, and corrupted it, both in the Doctrine
and Worship. According to this purpose they produced, without constraint or
precipitancy, freely and advisedly, as in peaceable times; and brought their
intentions to a happy end; as by the result thereof contained in the Articles
and Liturgy of our Church, and the Prefaces thereunto, does fully appear. From
hence chiefly, as I conceive, we are to take our best scantling, whereby to
judge what is, and what is not, to be esteemed Popery. All those Doctrines
then, held by the modern Church of Rome, which are either contrary to the
written Word of God, or but super-added thereunto, as necessary Points of
Faith, to be of all Christians believed under pain of damnation; and all those
Superstitions used in the worship of God, which either are unlawful, as being
contrary to the Word; or being not contrary, and therefore arbitrary and
indifferent, are made Essentials, and imposed as necessary parts of Worship:
these are, as I take it, the things whereunto the name of Popery does properly
and peculiarly belong. But as for the Ceremonies used in the Church of Rome,
which the Church of England at the Reformation thought fit to retain; not as
Essential or necessary parts of Gods Service, but only as accidental, and
mutable circumstances attending the same for order, comeliness, and edification
sake; how these should deserve the name of Popish, I so little understand, that
I profess I do not yet see any reason why, if the Church had then thought fit
to have retained some other of those which were then laid aside, she might not
have lawfully so done; or why the things so retained should have been accounted
Popish. The plain truth is this, The Church of England meant to make use of her
liberty, and the lawful power she had (as all the Churches of Christ have, or
ought to have) of ordering Ecclesiastical Affairs here; yet to do it with so
much prudence and moderation, that the World might see, by what was laid aside,
that she acknowledged no subjection to the Sea of Rome; and by what was
retained, that she did not recede from the Church of Rome, out of any spirit of
contradiction, but as necessitated thereunto for the maintenance of her just
liberty. The number of Ceremonies was also then very great, and they thereby
burdensome, and so the number thought fit to be lessened. But for the Choice,
which should be kept, and which not, that was wholly in her power, and at her
discretion. Whereof, though she were not bound so to do, yet has she given a
clear and satisfactory account in one of the Prefaces usually prefixed before
the Book of Common Prayer.

. XVI. Besides this of Popish, they have bestowed also upon the Ceremonies the
Epithet of Superstitious. Which is a word likewise (as the former) of late very
much extended; and stands in need of a Boundary too and a definition as well
as it. But howsoever they do with the words, I must needs set bounds to my
discourse, lest I weary the Reader. The point of Superstition I have had
occasion to touch upon (more than once, as I remember) in some of these
Sermons; and proved that the Superstition lies indeed at their door, not ours.
They forbid the things commanded by the Church under the obligation of Sin, and
that Obligation arising not from their forbidding them, but from the things
themselves, which they judge to be unlawful, and thence impose upon all men a
necessity of not using them; which is Superstition. Whereas the Church requires
obedience indeed to her Commands, and that also under the obligation of Sin;
but that obligation arising not at all from the nature of the things themselves
(always held and declared Indifferent;) but immediately from the Authority of
the Superior commanding the thing, and originally from the Ordinance of God
commanding Obedience to Superiors, as already has been said: and this is not
Superstition. For further satisfaction therefore in this matter, referring the
Reader to the Sermons themselves; I shall only by way of addition represent to
the Objectors St. Paul's demeanor at Athens. Where finding the City (...). Act.
17. 16.
full of Idols (or wholly given to Idolatry) he does not yet fall foul upon
them, nor exclaim against them in any reproachful manner, no nor so much as
call them Idolaters; though they were such, and that in a very high degree; but
tempering his Speeches with all lenity and condescension, he tells them only
of their Superstition; and that in the calmest manner too, -- 22.
(...) (the comparative degree in such kind of speaking, being usually taken
for a diminuent term.) How distant are they from his Example, with whom every
thing they mislike is presently an Idol! Christmas day an Idol, the Surplice an
Idol, the Cross after Baptism a great Idol, the Common Prayer Book an
abominable Idol! When yet, if the worst that can be said against them were
granted, the most it could amount to, is but Superstition; and till that be
granted, which must not be till it be well proved, it is more childish than
manly to cry out Superstition, Superstition!

. XVII. Their next is a Suspicion (rather than Objection) and that upon no very
good ground. But Charity is not easily suspicious; nor without cause. Wherein I
have somewhat to say, in behalf of my self and other my Brethren, and somewhat,
by way of return to them. For my self, I had a desire, I may truly say almost
from my very Childhood, to understand (as much as was possible for me) the
bottom of our Religion; and particularly as it stood in relation both to the
Papists, and (as they were then styled) Puritans; to inform my self rightly;
wherein consisted the true differences between them and the Church of England,
together with the grounds of those differences. For I could even then observe
(which was no hard matter to do) that the most of mankind took up their
Religion upon trust (as (...). Arist. 2. ^thic. 1.
Custom or Education had framed them) rather than choice. It pleased God in his
goodness to afford me some opportunities suitable to that my desire; by means
whereof, and by his good blessing, I attained to understand so much of the
Romish Religion, as not only to dislike it, but to be able to give some
rational account why I so do. And I doubt not but these very Sermons, were
there nothing else to do it, will sufficiently free me from the least suspicion
of driving on any design for Rome. As for those other regular Sons of the
Church of England, that have appeared in this Controversy on her behalf; how
improbable, and so far forth uncharitable, the suspicion is, that they should
be any way instrumental toward the promoting of the Papal Interest, may appear
(amongst other) by these few Considerations following. 1. That those very
persons, who were 1
under God the Instruments of freeing us from the Roman Yoke, by casting Popery
out of the Church, and sundry of them Martyred in the cause; those very
Persons, I say, were great favorers of these (now accounted Popish)
Ceremonies, and the chief Authors or Procurers of the Constitutions made in
that behalf. -- Hae manus Trojam erigent? 2. That in all former 2
times since the beginning of the Reformation, our Archbishops and Bishops with
their Chaplains, and others of the Prelatical Party (many of them such as have
written also in defense of the Church against the Puritans) were the Principal
(I had almost said the only) Champions to maintain the Cause of Religion
against the Papists. 3. That even in these times of 3
so great distraction, and, consequently thereunto, of so great advantage to
the Factors for Rome, none have stepped into the gap more readily, nor appeared
in the face of the Enemy more Bp. Bramhall, Dr. Cosins. etc
openly, nor maintained the Fight with more stoutness and Gallantry, than the
Episcopal Divines have done; as their late learned Writings testify. Yea, and
some of them such, as (beside their other sufferings) have lain as deep under
the suspicion of being Popishly-affected, as any other of their Brethren
whosoever. 4
4. That by the endeavors of these Episcopal Divines, some that were bred
Papists have been gained to our Church, others that began to waver confirmed
and settled in their old Religion, and some that were fallen from us recovered
and reduced, notwithstanding all the disadvantages of these confused times: and
of each of these I am able to produce some instance. But I profess sincerely,
as in the presence of God, and before the World, that I have not known (at
least I cannot call to remembrance) so much as one single Example of any of
this done by any of our Anti-Ceremonian Brethren, whether Presbyterian or
Independent.

. XVIII. But I have somewhat to return upon these our Brethren, who thus
causelessly suspect us, Possible it will not please them: ((...).) But I must
speak it out, both for the truths sake, and theirs. To wit, that themselves are
in truth, though not purposely and intentionally, (whereof in my own thought I
freely acquit them,) yet really and eventually, the great promoters of the
Roman Interest among us: and that more ways than one. These three among the
rest, are evident. First, by putting to their helping hand to the pulling 1
down of Episcopacy. It is very well known to many, what (...). Naz. Orat. 14.
rejoicing that Vote brought to the Romish party. How even in Rome it self they
sang their Io-^aeans upon the tidings thereof, and said triumphantly, Now the
day is ours; Now is the fatal blow given to the Protestant Religion in England.
They, who by conversing much with that Nation, were well acquainted with the
fiery turbulent spirits of the Scottish Presbyterians, knew as well how to make
their advantage thereof; and handled the matter with so much cunning, by
fomenting their discontents, underhand, till they had framed them, and by
their means, some of the same party here, to become the fittest Instruments for
the carrying on of their great design. And this I verily believe was the very
Masterpiece of the whole Plot. They could not but foresee (as the event has
also proved,) that if the old Government, a main Pillar in the Building, were
once dissolved, the whole Fabric would be ^ore shaken, if not presently
shattered in pieces and ruined; things would presently run into confusion;
distractions and divisions would certainly follow: And when the waters should
be sufficiently troubled and muddied, then would be their opportunity to cast
in their Nets for a draught. Some, who have undertaken to discover to Baxter
Arg. p. 46.
the World, the great Plot the Papists had of late years for the introducing of
Popery in the several parts of it, might have done well to have taken some
little notice of this also (I wonder how they could look beside it) being so
visible; and indeed the fundamental part of the Plot. Without which, neither
could the sparks of Errors and Heresies have been blown to that height, nor
that Libertinism (and some other things therewith mentioned) have so soon
overspread the whole face of the Land, as now we find they have done. Secondly,
They promote the Interest of Rome, by opposing it with more violence than
reason. Which ought not to seem any strange thing to us; since we see by daily
experience the like to happen in other matters also. Many a man, when he
thought most to make it sure, has quite marred a good business, by over-doing
it. The most prudent, just, and (in all likelihood) effectual way to win upon
an adversary is, by yielding him as much, as with safety of truth can be
yielded; who, if he shall find himself contradicted in that which he is sure is
true, as well as in that which is indeed false, will (by a kind of
Antiperistasis) be hardened into more obstinacy than before, to defend all (
true and false) with equal fierceness. It has been observed by some (and I
know no reason to question the truth of the observation) that in those Counties
(Lancashire for one) where there are the most and the most rigid Prebyterians,
there are also the most and the most zealous Roman Catholics. Thirdly, they 3
promote the Interest of Rome, and betray the Protestant Cause; partly by
mistaking the Question (a very common fault among them;) but especially through
the necessity of some false Principle or other, which having once imbibed, they
think themselves bound to maintain. Some of them, especially such as betook
themselves to Preaching betimes, and had not the leisure and opportunity to
look much into Controversies, understand very little, (as it is impossible they
should much) of the true state of the Question in many controverted points; and
yet to show their zeal against Popery, (...). Naz. ( Edit. Paris.) p. 338.
are forward enough to be meddling therewithal in the Pulpit. But with so much
weakness and impertinency not seldom, that they leave the Question worse than
they found it; and the Hearer, if he brought any doubts with him, to go from
Sermon more dissatisfied, than he came. The rest of them (that have better
knowledge) are yet so bound up by some false Principle or other they have
received, that they cannot without deserting the same (and that they must not
do, whatsoever betideth them) treat to the satisfaction of a rational and
ingenuous adversary. Among those false Principles, it shall suffice for the
present to have named but this one, That the Church of Rome is no true Church.
The disadvantages of which assertion to our Cause in the dispute about the
visibility of the Church (besides the falseness and uncharitableness of it)
their Zeal, or Prejudice rather, will not suffer them to consider. With what
outcries was Bishop Hall (good man, who little dreamt of any peace with Rome)
pursued by Burton, and other Hot-spurs, for yielding it a Church? Who had made
the same concession over and over again before he was Bishop (as Iunius,
Reynolds, and our best Controversie-Writers generally do) and no notice taken,
no noise made of it. You may perceive by this one instance, where the shoe
wringeth.

. XIX. In their next, that they may not appear so uncharitable as to suspect
their Brethren without cause, they tell us, Upon what grounds they so do: viz.
these two; The endeavors of Reconciliation, in the Sixth; and the pressing of
Ceremonies in the Seventh Objection. As to the former; First, All 1
endeavors of Peace (without loss of Truth) are certainly commendable in the
undertakers; prove the event as it will. (...), Romans 12. is every man's warrant
for that, If any particular private man have made overtures of peace in this
kind upon other terms than he ought, let him answer it as he can? what is that
to us? Admit Secondly (which I fear is 2
too true) that there is little hope, scarce a possibility of reconcilement, if
we well preserve, as we are in Conscience bound, the truth and purity of our
Religion; yet ought not that fear to hinder any man, fitted with abilities and
opportunities for it, from such Endeavors whereof whatsoever the success be
otherwise these two good effects will follow. It will be some comfort to him
within his own bosom, that he has done what was his duty to do, to his utmost
power: And it will appear to the world, where the business stuck, and through
whose default most, the Endeavor proved fruitless. Thirdly, though there be 3
little hope (and, since the Trent Council, less than before) of bringing
things to a perfect agreement; yet methinks it should be thought worth the
while ( Est quadam prodire tenus, si non Horat. 1. Ep. 1.
datur ultra) to bring both sides to as near an agreement, and reduce the
differences to as small a number, and as narrow a point, as may be. That, if we
cannot grow to be of the same belief in every thing, we might at least be
brought to show more Charity either to other, than to damn one another for
every difference; and more Ingenuity than to seek to render the one the other
more odious to the World than we ought, by representing each others opinions
worse than they are.

* XX. The Seventh Objection contains the other ground of their said former
suspicion; to wit the vehement pressing of the Ceremonies. Wherein First, they
do not well, in calling 1
them Popish and Superstitious; but that having already fully ^leared, I shall
not now insist upon. Secondly, by requiring 2
to have some Command or Example of Scripture produced, to warrant to their
Consciences the use of the Ceremonies; They offer occasion to consider of that
point wherein the very Mystery of Puritanism consists: viz. That no man may
with a safe Conscience do any thing, for which there may not be produced,
either Command or Example from the Scripture. Which erroneous Principle, being
the main Foundation, upon which so many false conclusions are built, and the
fountain, from which so many acts of sinful disobedience issue, would well
deserve a full and through examination. But this Preface being already swollen
far beyond the proportion I first intended; and for that I have heretofore,
both Sermon. 4. ad Clerum
in one of the Sermons and Pref. 10. 20. Sermon.
else where, discovered in part the unsoundness thereof: I am the willinger
both for mine own ease and the Readers, to refer him over thither, and to spare
mine own farther labor here. Considering Thirdly, that in the present case we
need not flinch, 3
for fear of any harm that Principle could do us, should it be admitted as
sound, as they would have it: For we have both Commands and Examples in the
Scriptures, to warrant both the prescribing and the using of the Ceremonies.
Though not as specified in their particulars; yet as either comprehended in the
General, or inferred by way of proportion, Which kind of Warranty from
Scripture, themselves are by force of argument driven to allow as sufficient;
or else they would be at a loss for a hundred things by them daily done, upon
no better or other Warrant than that. For Commands then, we have besides that
grand Canon, 1 Cor. 14. 40. [ Let all things be done decently and according to
order,] all those Texts, that either contain the right and liberty we have to
all the Creatures of God to use them for our service without scruple [All
things are lawful, nothing unclean of it self. To the pure all things are pure,
etc.] or require Subjection and Obedience to Superiors [ Let every Soul be
subject to the higher Powers. Submit to every Ordinance of man, etc.] And as
for Example; I think I could readily produce a full Score, and not bate an Ace
of some Ceremonies and circumstantial actions, ordered, used, or done by holy
men even in the Old Testament (who yet were more strictly tied to prescript
forms than Christians are under the Gospel;) for the doing whereof it does not
appear, that they either had any Command from God, or were guided by any former
Precedents, or expected any other Warrant, than the use of their Reason and of
prudential Discourse; what Warrant else had David for his purpose of building a
Temple to God; which yet 2 Samuel 7, 2. 3.
Nathan the Prophet of God approved, yea which 1 King 8. 8.
God himself approved of? Or what, Solomon for keeping 2 Chr. 7. 8. 9.
a Feast of seven days for the Dedication of the Altar? Or what Ezekiah for --
30. 23.
continuing the Feast of unleavened bread seven days longer than the time
appointed by the Law? Or what, Mordecai and Esther for making Esther 9. 20, etc.
an Ordinance for the yearly observation of the Feast of Purim? Or what lastly,
Judas and the Maccabees for ordaining 1 Mac. 4. 9.
the Feast of the Dedication of the Altar to be kept from year to year at a set
season for eight days together; which Solemnity continued even in the days of
Christ, and seems to have been by him approved Joh. 10. 22.
in the Gospel. The building of Synagogues in their Towns, the wearing of
Sackcloth and Ashes in token of humiliation, Zach. 8. 19.
the four Fasts mentioned Zach. 8. whereof one only was commanded; with sundry
other, I omit for brevity's sake, Instances enough, and pregnant enough, to
manifest how very much our Brethren deceive themselves, by resting upon so
unsound a Principle; and that upon a mere mistake; as will appear presently by

. XXI. Their Eighth and last Objection. Wherein they seem to lay an imputation
upon all those that stand for the Ceremonies, as if they consequently denied
the sufficiency of the Scriptures. 1
For answer hereunto, First, it is freely confessed that the acknowledging of
the Holy Scriptures to be a perfect Rule of Faith and Manners, is the main
Article of the Protestant Religion, as opposed to the Romish. But that all that
stand for the Ceremonies should deny the same, is so manifestly untrue, or
indeed that some of the Church of England should deny that, which is so clearly
contained in the Articles of the Church whereunto he has subscribed, so
improbable, that it might well pass for a perfect Calumny, were not the
original occasion of their mistake herein so apparent, if but even from the
manner of their Discourse in the present business. The true state whereof,
Secondly, 2
is this. The things wherein the power of Christianity consists, are of two
sorts, Credenda, and Agenda, which we usually express by Faith and Manners. And
the Scripture we acknowledge to be a perfect Rule of Both; yet not as excluding
the use of Reason, but supposing it. When God gave us the light of his holy
Word; he left us, as he found us; reasonable creatures still: without any
purpose, by the gift of that greater and sublimer Light, to put out the Light
he had formerly given us (that of Reason) or to render it useless and
unserviceable. Of which Light the proper use, and that which God intended it
for, when he gave it us, is, that by the help thereof we might be the better
enabled to discern Truth from Falsehood, that we might embrace the one, and
reject the other; and Good from Evil, that we might do the one, and shun the
other. Our Reason therefore, is doubtless, a good Rule both for things to be
believed, and for things to be done, so far as it reaches; but no perfect Rule
at all, rather a very imperfect one; because it reaches not home. To supply
the defects whereof ( dim as it is even in Natural and Moral things, but dark
as darkness it self in things Supernatural and Divine) it was, that it pleased
the wisdom and goodness of our God to afford us another Light (Viz. that of
supernatural revelation in his holy Word) without which we could never, by the
light of Reason alone, have found out the right way that leads to eternal
Happiness. So that God having first made us reasonable Creatures, and then
vouchsafed us his holy Word, to instruct us what we are to believe and to do,
either as Men or as Christians: We are now furnished with as perfect, absolute
and sufficient a Rule both of Faith and Manners, as our condition in this life
is capable of. And it is our duty accordingly, to resign our selves wholly to
be guided by that Word (yet making use of our Reason withal, in subordination
and with submission thereunto) as a perfect Rule both of Faith and Life. This
being clearly so, and the Scripture by consent of both parties acknowledged to
be the perfect Rule of what we are to believe, as well as of what we are to do;
I earnestly desire our Brethren to consider, what should hinder a Christian man
from doing any thing, that by the mere use, of his Reason alone, he may rightly
judge to be lawful and expedient, though it be not commanded or exampled in the
Scriptures, so as it be not contrary thereunto, more than from believing any
thing that by the like use of his Reason alone he may rightly judge to be true
or credible, though the same be not revealed or contained in the Scripture, nor
is contrary thereunto. I do without scruple believe a Mathematical or
Philosophical truth, or a probable Historical relation, when I read it or hear
it; and I believe an honest man upon his Word in what he affirms or
promises; though none of all these things be contained in the Scripture: and
thus to believe, was never yet by any man (that I know of) though derogatory to
the sufficiency of Scripture, as it is a perfect Rule of Faith. Why I may not
in like manner wear such or such a Garment, use such or such a Gesture, or do
any other indifferent thing (not forbidden in Scripture) as occasions shall
require without scruple; or why thus to do, should be thought derogatory to the
sufficiency of Scripture, as it is a perfect Rule of Manners; I confess I have
not the wit to understand. Since there seems to be the like Reason of both;
let them either condemn both, or acquit both; or else inform us better, by
showing us a clear and satisfactory reason of difference between the one and
the other. (...). This is the main hinge, upon which the whole dispute turns,
and whereunto all other differences are but appendages. The true belief, and
right understanding of this great Article concerning the Scripture's
sufficiency, being (to my apprehension) the most proper Characteristical note
of the right English Protestant, as he stands in the middle between, and
distinguished from, the Papists on the one hand, and the (sometimes styled)
Puritan on the other. I know not how he can be a Papist, that truly believes
it: or he a Puritan, that rightly understands it.

. XXII. Having thus answered the several Objections aforesaid wherewith it may
be some, that stand freer from prejudice than their fellows, will be satisfied:
if any shall yet ask me, why I plead still so hard for Ceremonies, now they are
laid down, and so no use either of them, or of any discourse concerning them; I
have this to say. First, I saw my self somewhat concerned to 1
prevent (if I could) the mis-censuring of these Sermons; in sundry of which
the Questions that concern Ceremonies are either purposely handled, or
occasionally touched upon: which could not be done without vindicating the
Ceremonies themselves, as the subject matter 2
thereof. Secondly, hereby they that were active in throwing them down, may be
brought to take a little more into their consideration, than possibly they have
yet done, upon what grounds they were thereunto moved, and how sound those
grounds were: that, if it shall appear they were then in an Error (and they
consider withal, what disorder, confusion, and libertinism has ensued upon
that change) they may be sensible of it, and amend. But Thirdly, whatsoever
become of the Ceremonies, which 3
are mutable things: the two Doctrines insisted on concerning them, ( the one,
touching the Power that Governors have to enjoin them; the other touching the
Duty that lies upon Inferiors to observe them when they are enjoined;) being
Truths, are therefore always the same, and change not. It is no absurdity, even
at mid-winter, when there is never a flower upon the bough, to say yet Rosa est
flos. Lastly, a time may come, when either the same Ceremonies may be restored,
or other substituted in their rooms: and then there may be use again of such
reasons and answers, as have been pleaded in their defense. For I doubt not,
but those that shall from time to time have the power to order Ecclesiastical
affairs, if disorders or inconveniences shall continue to grow, after the rate
and proportion they have done for some years past, will see a necessity of
reducing things into some better degree of Decency, and Uniformity, than now
they are: which it is not imaginable how it should be done, without some
Constitutions to be made concerning Indifferent things to be used in the
public worship; and some care had withal to see the Constitutions obeyed.
Otherwise, the greatest part of the Nation will be exposed to very great danger
(without the extraordinary mercy of God preventing) of quite losing their
Religion. Look but upon many of our Gentry, what they are already grown to from
what they were, within the compass of a few years: and then, expede Herculem,
by that guess what a few years more may do. Do we not see some, and those not a
few, that have strong natural parts, but little sense of Religion, turned
(little better than professed) Atheists? And other some, nor those a few, that
have good affections, but weak and unsettled judgments, or (which is still but
the same weakness) an overweening opinion of their own understandings, either
quite turned, or upon the point of turning Papists? These be sad things, God
knows, and we all know: not visibly imputable to any thing so much, as to
those distractions, confusions and uncertainties, t -- Semperni Gotis discordia
nostra proderit? Claudian. 2. in Ruffin.
that in point of Religion, have broken in upon us, since the late changes that
have happened among us in Churchaffairs. What it will grow to in the end, God
only knows, I can but guess.

. XXIII. The Reverend Archbishop Whitgift, and the learned Hooker, men of
great judgment, and famous in their times; did long since foresee, and
accordingly declared their fear, that if ever Puritanism should prevail among
us, it would soon draw in Anabaptism after it. At this Cartwright, and other
the Advocates for the Disciplinarian Interest in those days, seemed to take
great offense: as if those fears were rather pretended to derive an odium upon
them, than that there was otherwise any just cause for the same; protesting
ever their utter dislike of Anabaptism, and how free they were from the least
thought of introducing it. But this was only their own mistake; or rather
jealousy. For those Godly Men were neither so unadvised, nor so uncharitable,
as to become Judges of other Men's Thoughts or Intentions, beyond what their
actions spoke them. They only considered, as Prudent Men, that Anabaptism had
its rise, from the same Principles the Puritans held, and its growth, from the
same Courses they took; together with the natural tendency of those Principles
and Practices thitherward; especially of that one Principle, as it was by them
mis-understood, that the Scripture was adaequata agendorum regula, so as
nothing might be lawfully done without express warrant either from some
command, or example therein contained. The clue whereof, if followed on as sar
as it would lead, would certainly in time carry them as far as the Anabaptists
were then gone. But, that it was no vain fear, the unhappy event has proved;
and justified them: since what they feared is now come to pass: and that in a
very high degree. Yet did not they see the thread drawn out to that length, as
we have seen it; (the name of Quakers, Seekers, etc. not then heard of in the
world:) but how much farther it will reach, none can say; for no man yet ever
saw the bottom of the clue. Only I may not dissemble, what my own fears have
long been, and yet are: That if things shall still go on, according as they
have begun, and hitherto proceeded; the application that some have made of that
passage, John 11. 48. Venient Romani, and capient gentem nostram, will prove
but too true a Prophecy; and Popery will overrun all at the last. Whether
there be just cause so to fear, or no; I leave it to wiser men to judge: when
(together with what has been Sect. 18* su^^a.
already said concerning the great scandals and advantages given to the Papists
by our confusions,) they shall have duly considered the probability of what I
shall now farther say. It is a wonder to see, in how short a time our
Anti-ceremonian Brethren are strangely both multiplied, and divided; multiplied
in their number, but divided by their opinions, and subdivided into so many
several tribes and familes; that their power is nothing so much increased by
that multiplication, as it is weakened by these divisions. In as much as many of
those Sects into which they have spread and diffused themselves, are not more
opposite to the Truth (the only property wherein they all agree,) than they are
one to another: in so far that the establishment of any one cannot be, but by
the destruction of all or most of the rest. This experience gives us to see,
How impossible a thing it is, they should long hold together in one entire body
for their own preservation. But whilst they are still crumbling into
fractions* and factions, biting and ready to devour one another; a vigilant
adversary, that is intent upon all advantages and opportunities, may, when he
spieth his time, overmaster them with much ease and little resistance. Whereas
the Papists on the other side; are by the very nature (as I may say) of their
Religion, and the fundamental Principle thereof ( viz. To believe as the Church
believes) tied together in a fast unity among themselves against all opposers
of their Church, or of any point of Faith designed by the Church. So that these
holding altogether as an imbodied Army, and, those dispersed abroad in
scattered troops and many small parties: Who is like to become Master of the
Field, is no hard matter to judge. Neither will the supposed (and I fear, truly
supposed) greater number of Atheists, than either Papists or Sectaries, be any
hinderance to the Papists for finally prevailing. Because it is not for the
interest of the Atheist and his Religion (pardon the boldness of the
Catachresis) to engage either for or against any side farther than a jeer. But
to let them fight it out, keep himself quiet till they have done, and then Ad
rerum momenta cliens, sese daturus Victori. Claud. de bell. Gild.
clap in with him that gets the day. He that is of no Religion, can make a
shift to be of any, rather than suffer. And the Atheist, though he be in truth
and in heart neither Protestant nor Papist, nor any thing else; yet can he be
in face and outward comportment either Protestant or Papist, or any thing else,
( Jew or Turk if need be) as will best serve his present turn. That this is
their mind, some of them, in a Pref. to Hob. of Election.
bravery have given us to understand, plainly enough and in print.

. XXIV. And is it not high time then, trow we, to look about us? Hannibal ad
portas. When the danger is so great; and so near withal, even at the door:
shall we be so wretchlesly wilful, as neither to open our eyes to see it our
selves; nor endure with patience, that any body else should tell us of it? --
(...) -- What I have now said, how it will be taken, I know not: Prophets are
seldom welcome, that prophecy unwelcome things. But truly, at the sad
apprehension of the dangerous condition we now stand in, and in zeal for the
safety and honor of my dear Mother the Church of England, which has nourished
me up to become a Christian and a Protestant (that is to say, a pure pute
Christian without any other addition or Epithete:) my heart waxed hot within
me, and the fire so kindled, that ((...)) I could not forbear but upon the
first opportunity offered, once more to give Vent thereunto, by laying open the
second time my inmost thoughts to the view of the World. Which I have done with
the greatest plainness and freedom, that (avoiding bitterness) was possible for
me to do. I was willing to sharpen my style, I confess that it might enter: as
it was but needful, where the skin was callous. But with the only intention (as
the great Searcher of all hearts knows) by putting the Patient to a little
smart at the first piercing of the Sore, to give future ease to the part
affected: and not at all, by angering the Sore, to make it worse. With which
Protestation I hope the more sober among them will rest satisfied: I mean the
Moderate Presbyterian especially. Of which sort I know many, whom I verily
believe to be godly and conscientious men, (though in error,) and whom I
therefore love and honor. These are the only adversaries in this controversy
whose spirits are in a disposition and capacity to be wrought upon in a
rational way. As for the rest (I mean the rigid, Scotised, through-paced
Presbyterian on the one side, and the giddy Enthusiast on the other) such is
their either obstinacy or madness, that it is vain to think of doing any good
upon them by argument: till it shall please God to make them of more humble and
teachable spirits. I entreat the Reader, if he shall meet with any thing herein
written, that has any bitterness in it? or but sharpness more than one that
would deal plainly cannot avoid: that he would take it as meant against these
last only, and not at all against those of the former rank, whom I never meant
to exasperate. Hear the conclusion of the whole matter; Read without gall or
prejudice, Let not truth fare the worse for the Plainness. Catch not at
Syllables and Phrases. Study and seek the Churches peace. Judge not another
servant, who must stand and fall to his own Master. Keep Faith and a good
Conscience. Bear one another Burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

Consider what has been said, and pray to the Lord to give us all a right
understanding in all things.

Amen. Amen.
Botheby Paynell
July 13. MDCLVII.
Placere singulis volam; sed ut prosim:
Nec displicere metuam; dummodo prosim.
Scazon.
THE SUMMARY, of CONTENTS Of the several ensuing SERMONS.
Sermon I. Ad Clerum* on Romans 14. 3.
Sect. 1. THE Occasion, of the TEXT. 2 -- Scope, of the TEXT. 3 -- Coherence,
of the TEXT. 4 -- and Division* of the TEXT. 5 POINT I. Of not Despising
others: 6 -- Be they never so weak, 7 -- and we never so strong. 8 -- Both for
the Sins sake, to the Despisers: 9 -- and for the Scandals sake in the
Despised. 10-11 POINT II. Of not Judging others, 12 -- with the true meaning
thereof: And four Reasons. 13 viz. 1. The want of Commission -- in Us. 14 -- 2.
The want of Skill -- -- in Us. 15 -- 3. The Uncharitableness, and of the thing
it self. 16 -- 4. The Scandalousness -- of the thing it self. 17 APPLICATION.
To the Case in our Church: showing, 18 1. Wherein it agrees with that of the
Romans in this Chapter; 19-21 2. And how it differs from it, I. in the
matter. 22 -- II. in respect of the Persons. 23 -- III. in the Practice of the
Persons. 24 -- IV. in their mutual respective Carriage. And that 25 1. in the
point of Despising. Where 26 ( The several grievances of our Brethren are
proposed; 27-29 -- and answered.) 30-37 2. in the point of Judging. 38 The
Conclusion.
Ser^on II. Ad (...)
Sect. 1 THE Occasion, of the TEXT. 2 -- Coherence, of the TEXT. 3 -- Division
and of the TEXT. 4 -- Sum -- of the TEXT. 5 OBSERVE. I. Divine Truths to be
cleared from Cavil. 6 -- II. The slander of the Ministers regular Doctrine more
than an ordinary Slander. 7 -- III. The best Truths subject to slander: 8 --
with the Causes thereof; 9 -- and Inferences thence^ O 10 -- 12 -- IV. Every
slander against the Truth, damnable. 13 -- 20 -- V. No Evil to be ^one for any
good that may come thereof. 1^ -- 15 -- 19 -- Of the kinds an^ de^^ees of Evil
(...) by way of Explications 1^-17 -- Of things (Equally (...) Inequally)
^n^ifferent by way of Explications 18 (An useful Digression) 21-23 With some
Reasons of the Point; 24-26 and the Inferences thence. 27 The general
Application thereof: in two Instances. 28-30 -- The Former* 31-33 -- The Latter
34 A more particular Application; in defense of the former Sermon. 35 The
Conclusion.
Sermon III. Ad Clerum, on 1 Cor. 12. 7.
Sect. 1. THE Occasion, of the TEXT. 2 -- Coherence, and of the TEXT. 3 --
Division -- of the TEXT. 4 The Explication of the Words* What is meant 5-7 --
By the Spirit* and what 8 -- by Manifestation. 9-11 POINT I. Spiritual Gifts,
how to be understood, 12-15 -- Four Inferences from the premises. 16 POINT II.
The conveyance of spiritual graces to us, 17 -- by way of Gift* 18 -- Not from
Nature, or Desert. 19 Inferences thence* I. General; 1. Of Thankfulness; 20 --
2. Of Prayer. 21-22 -- 3. joining our faithful Endeavors thereunto. 23-25 --
II. more especial. 1. To those of more eminent gifts. 26 To those of meaner
gifts. 27 POINT III. The End of Spiritual gifts: Not our own only; 28 -- (...)
chiefly the profit of others* 29 -- Reasons hereof. I. in respect of the Giver.
30 -- II. in respect of ^he thing giv^n 31 -- III. in respect of the Receiver
32-34 Three In^erences the thence^ 35 The Conclusion.
Sermon IV. Ad Cl^rum, on Romans 14. 23.
Sect. 1. THE Coherence, and Scope* of the TEXT. 2 The word FAITH diversely
interpreted. 3 INTERPRETATION I* of justifying Faith. 4-5 -- Not Proper he^^
^lthough (in it self) True. 6 INTERPRETATION II* Of the Doctrine of Faith 7 --
utterly re^ec^^d* ^* ^s False in it self; 8-9 -- ^ot^ in the Rigor of it, 10
-- (...) the M^^ig^^ion 11-15 2. as Per^^cious* (...) the Consequents. 16 3. as
having no (...) with ^^^ resent Text. 17 INTERPRETATION III. Of Persuasion of
Judgment asserted. 18 -- Thence sundry Questions resolved, viz. 19 I. What is
the Power of the Conscience, as concerning the Lawfulness or unlawfulness of
humane actions. 20 II. Whether* in every thing we do (...) actual consideration
of the Lawfulness thereof be necessarily requisite? 21 III. What degree of
Persuasion is required for the Warranting of our Actions? 22 IV. Whether or no,
and how f^r forth, a m^n may warrantably act with reluctance of Conscience?
Wher^^n is considered the Case 23-24 -- 1. Of a Resolved Conscience, 25-28 --
2. Of a Doubting Conscience 29-30 (And therein sundry* Objections removed) 33
3. Of a Scrupulous Conscience. 34 The Conclusion.
Sermon I. Ad Magistratum, on Job 29. 14. -- 17.
Sect. 1. THE Occasion, of the TEXT. 2 -- Scope, of the TEXT. 3 -- Sum, and of
the TEXT. 4 -- Division of the TEXT. 5-6 The Magistrates I. DUTY; Zeal to
Justice: 7 -- with some Examples. 8 -- and Four Reasons thereof. 9 DUTY II.
Compassion to the Distressed; 10 -- with the Reasons, 11 -- and Extent thereof.
12-13 DUTY III. Diligence in searching out the Truth: 14 -- with some
Instances; 15 -- and Four Reasons thereof. 16-17 DUTY IV. Courage in Executing
Justice: 18 -- With the Reasons thereof; 1. in respect of the Laws; 19 -- 2. of
the Magistrate himself; 20 -- 3. of the Offenders. 21 Three main Inferences
from the Premises, viz. 22-22 I. of Direction for the Choice of Magistrates.
25 II. of Reproof, for the neglect of the aforesaid Duties. 26 III. of
Exhortation to the Conscionable Performance of the same.
Sermon II. Ad Magistratum, on Exodus 23. 1. -- 3.
Sect. 1. 3. THE necessity of treating on this Argument. 4 -- The fitness of
the Text for that purpose. 5 The Division and thereof. 6 -- Extent thereof. 7
POINT I. The accuser, not to raise a false report. 8-11 -- sundry ways, by
which it may be done. 12 Three Reasons of the point, viz. in respect of 13 --
1. The Sin in the Doer. 14 -- 2. The Wrong to the Sufferer, 15 -- 3. The
Mischiefs to the Commonwealth. 16 Inference. To avoid the fault: for which
purpose 17-21 -- four especial Causes thereof are discovered. 22 POINT II. The
Judge, not to receive a false report. 23 A threefold Care requisite thereunto.
1. In receiving Informations. 24 -- in examining Causes. 25 -- 3. in repressing
Contentious Persons and Suits. 26 -- For which purpose the likeliest Helps are
27 -- 1. To reject Informations tendered without Oath. 28 -- 2. To temper the
rigor of Justice with Equity. 29 -- 3. To punish Partiality and Collusion in
the Informer. 30 -- 4. To allow the wronged party full satisfaction; 31 -- 5.
To restrain abuses in their Servants and Officers. 32 The Conclusion.
Sermon III. Ad Magistratum, on Psalm. 106. 30.
Sect. 1.-2 THe Argument and Matter of the Psalm. 3 The Coherence, Scope, 4 --
and Division of the TEXT. 5-6 The History of Balak and Balaam's Plot against
Israel. 7-8 -- With the Success thereof, both in the Sin and Punishment. 9-10
-- Zimri's Provocation and Execution. 11 The Person of Phineas considered. 12
OBSERVATION I. The Spiritual Power does not include; 13 -- not yet exclude the
Temporal. 14 Phineas his Fact examined; 15 -- and justified. 16-17 How far
forth it may be imitated. 18 OBSERVATION II. The Zeal of Phineas 19 --
Manifested by executing judgment* 20 1. Personally. 21 2. Speedily. 22 3.
Resolutely. 23-25 OBSERVATION III. The plague stayed by executing judgment.
26-28 -- With Aplication to England. 29 An Exhortation to execute judgment: 30
-- With Particular Application; 31 1. To the Accuser; 32 2. To the Witness; 33
3. To the Jurer; 34 4. To the Pleader; 35 5. To the Officer; 36 6. To the
Judge.
Sermon I. Ad Populum, on 1 Kings 21. 29.
Sect. 1. THe Coherence, of the. TEXT. 2 -- Argument, and of the. TEXT. 3 --
Division of the. TEXT. 4-5 From Ahab's Person and Carriage. 6-8 OBSERVATION I.
How far an Hypocrite may go in the performance of holy Duties. 9 Four
Inferences. I. Of Terror to the profane. 10 -- II. Of Exhortation, to abound
in the fruits of godliness. 11 -- III. Of Admonition to forbe^r Judging. 12 --
IV. Of Direction, for the trial of Sincerity. 13 -- by the marks* 1. of
Integrity, and 14 -- 2. of Constancy; 15 -- both joined together. 16-17
OBSERVATION II. Concerning the Power of Gods Word, 18 -- With the Causes
thereof in respect 1. of the Instrument, 19 -- 2. of the Object. 20 -- 3. of
the fit Application of the one to the other. 21 The Inferences thence; against
those that despise the Word. 22-23 From the success of Ahab's Humiliation. 24
OBSERVE. III. Concerning the Reward of Common graces, 25 -- with sundry reasons
thereof; 26 -- and Inferences thence. 27 The main Inference. To comfort the
Godly, I* against temptations from the Prosperity of the wicked; 28 -- II.
against Temporal Afflictions; 29 -- III. against doubtings of their Eternal
Reward.
Sermon II. Ad Populum, on 1 Kings 21. 29.
Sect. 1. A Repetition of the Three Observations in the former Sermons. 2-4
OBSERVATION IV. Concerning Gods forbearig of threatened Judgments. 5 -- Proved
1. from his proneness to Mercy; 6 -- 2. from the end of his Threatenings. 7-8
The Doubt. How this may stand with Gods Truth, 9 -- Resolved: by understanding
in all his Threatenings 10 -- a Clause of Exception; 11-12 -- though not always
expressed. 13-14 Inferences 1. of Comfort to the distressed. 15 -- 2. of
Terror, to the Secure. 16 -- 3. of Instruction, to All. 17 Gods promises, how
to be understood; 18 -- and entertained. 19-20 OBSERVATION V. That though it be
some grief to forknow the evils to come: 21 Yet it is some happiness, not to
live to see them. 22 -- with the Reason; 23-25 -- and sundry Uses thereof. 26
The Conclusion.
Sermon III. Ad Populum, on 1 Kings 21. 29.
Sect. 1-2 THe grand Doubt concerning Justice proposed. 3 CERTAINTY I. All the
ways of God are just. 4-5 -- II. Temporal Evils not to the proper adequate
punishments of sin. 6-7 -- 3. All Evils of Pain, howsoever considered, 8 -- are
for sin: and that 9 -- for the sin of the sufferer himself. 10 How the
punishing of the Fathers sin upon the Children 11 -- can stand with the Justice
of God. 12-16 CONSIDERATION I. That they are punished with temporal punishments
only, not with Spiritual or Eternal. 13-15 (An Objection answered.) 17
CONSIDERATION II. That such Punishments befall them: either 18-21 1. As
continuing in their Fathers sin, Or 22 2. As possessing something from their
Fathers* with Gods curse eleaving thereunto. 23-25 CONSIDERATION III. A
distinction of Impulsive Causes, 26 -- explained by a familiar Example; 27 --
and applied to the present Argument. 28 Seeming Contradictions of Scripture
herein, 29 -- how to be reconciled; 30 -- with an Exemplary Instance thereof.
31-32 The Resolution of the main doubt. 33 Three Duties inferred from the
Premises, I. To live well ( as for our own, so even) for Posterities sake
also. 34 II. To grieve (as for our own, so) for our Forefathers sins also. 35
III. To endeavor to hinder sin in others.
Sermon IV. Ad Populum, on 1 Cor. 7. 24.
Sect. 1. THe Occasion and Scope of the TEXT. 2-3 The Pertinency, and
Importance of the matter to be handled; 4-5 -- viz. of men's Particular
Callings, and what is meant thereby. 6 POINT I. The necessity of living in a
Calling. 7 Reasons hereof. I. in respect of the Ordinance, -- and Gifts of God.
9 -- II. in respect of the Person himself* 10-14 -- III. in respect of others.
15 Inference; for reproof of such as live idly without a Calling; 16-17 as viz.
1. Idle Monks and Friars. 18-20 -- 2. Idle Gallants. 21-22 -- 3. Idle Beggars.
23-24 POINT II. Concerning the Choice of a Calling. 25 That in our proper
Calling, whereunto God calls us; and 26 -- by what Enquiries they may be
known. 27 ENQUIRY I. Concerning the Employment it self: -- 1. Whether it be
honest and lawful, or no? 28 -- Whether it be fit to be made a Calling, or no?
29 -- Whether it tend to common Utility, or no? 30 (The Usurers Calling
examined by these Rules.) 32-33 II. Concerning our fitness for that employment.
34 -- 1. in respect of our Education. 35-36 -- 2. in respect of our Abilities.
37-39 -- 3. in respect of our Inclinations. 40 III. Concerning the Providential
Opportunities we have thereunto. 41-43 Wherein is showed the great importance
of an outward Calling. 44 POINT III. Concerning the Abidings in our Callings.
45-46 -- 1. what is not, meant thereby. 47-49 -- 2. and what is, meant thereby.
50-52 -- 3. The abiding therein with God, what. 53 The Conclusion.
Sermon V. Ad Populum, on 1 Timothy 4. 4.
Sect. 1. THe Coherence, of the TEXT. 2 -- Scope, and of the TEXT. 3 --
Division of the TEXT. 4-6 OBSERVATION I. Concerning the Goodness of the
Creature. 7 Inferences thence. I. God not the Author of Evil. 8 -- II. The
Goodness of God seen in the Glass of the Creatures. 9-10 -- III. The Creatures
not to be blamed. 11-13 OBSERVATION II. Concerning the Liberty and Right we
have to the Creatures. 14 -- 1. By Creation. 15 -- 2. By Redemption. 16 Much
impleaded. 1. By Judaism. 17-19 -- 2. By the Church of Rome. 20-32 The Extent
of this Liberty in Eight Positions. 33 OBSERVATION III. The Creatures to be
received with Thanksgiving. 34-37 The Duty of Thanksgiving, Explained and 38 --
Enforced: 1. as an Act of Justice 39-42 -- as an Act of Religion. 43-44
INFERENCES I. For Conviction of our unthankfulness to God. 45-46 1. for want of
Recognition, with two degrees of each. 47-48 2. for want of Estimation, with
two degrees of each. 50-51 3. for want of Retribution, with two degrees of
each. 52 -- II. Six Motives to Thankfulness, taken from 53 -- 1. The Excellency
of the Duty. 54 -- 2. The Continual Effluence of God's Benefits. 55 -- 3. Our
Future Necessities. 56 -- 4. Our Misery in Wanting. 57 -- 5. Our Importunity in
Asking. 58 -- 6. The Freedom of the Gift. 59 III. To avoid those things that
hinder our Thankfulness; which are chiefly, 60 1. Pride. 61 2. Envy. 62 3.
Riotous living. 63 4. Worldly Cares. 64 5. Procrastination. 65 IV. To be
thankful for Spiritual Blessings.
Sermon VI. Ad Populum, on Genesis 20. 6.
Sect. 1. THE Occasion, of the TEXT. 2. -- Scope, and of the TEXT. 3. --
Division of the TEXT. 4. Of the Nature and Use of Dreams* 5-6 The former Part
of the TEXT explained. 7 OBSERVATION I. The grievousness of the sin of
Adultery; 8-10 -- and of Fornication; Compared. 11-12 OBSERVATION II. How far
Ignorance does, or does not excuse from sin. 13-16 -- instanted in this fact of
Abimelech. 17 Inferences thence. I. Concerning the Salvation of our
Forefathers. 18 - 19 Two doubts removed. 20 -- II. Not to flatter our selves in
our Ignorance. 21 -- III. Of Sins done with Knowledge. 22 - 24 OBSERVATION III.
Moral integrity may be in the heart of an Unbeliever, 25 -- with the Reason
thereof. 26 Inferences thence. I. A shame for Christians to fall short of
Heathens in their Morals. 27 -- II. Particular Actions no certain (...) of
Sincerity. 28 -- III. The acquittal of Conscience no sufficient Justification.
29 The latter part of the TEXT opened. 30 OBSERVATION IV. Concerning God's
Restraint of Sin in Men. 31 -- with the different measure and means thereof. 32
1. That there is such a Restraint. 33 - 34 2. That it is from God. 35 3. That
it is from the mercy of God; and therefore called Grace. 36 Inferences from the
Consideration of God's Restraint. 37 I. As it lies upon others. 1. toobless
God for our Preservation; 38 -- 2. not to trust wicked men too far. 39 -- 3. --
nor to fear them too much. 40 -- 4. to endeavor to restrain others from
Sinning. 41 II. As it lies upon our selves. 1. To be humble under it. 42 -- 2.
to entertain the means of such Restraint with Thankfulness. 43 -- 3. to pray
that God would restrain our Corruptions. 44 -- 4. -- but especially to pray and
labor for sanctifying Grace.
Sermon VII. Ad Populum, on 1 Pet. 2. 16.
Sect. 1 - 2 THE Occasion, Scope, of the TEXT. 3 - 5 -- Coherence, and of the
TEXT. 6 -- Division -- of the TEXT. 7 - 8 OBSERVATION I* Christian Liberty to
be maintained 9 - 12 -- with the Explication, 13 - 17 -- and Five Reasons
thereof. 18 - 20 Inferences I. Not to usurp upon the Liberty of others: 21 - 24
-- II. -- Nor to betray our own. 25 Observation II. Christian Liberty not to be
abused. 26 - 28 -- The words explained; and thence 29 - 31 -- Three Reasons of
the Point. 32 - 34 Four abuses of Christian Liberty, viz. I. by casting off the
Obligation of the moral Law. 35 - 36 -- II. by exceeding the bounds of
Sobriety. 37 -- III. by giving Scandal to others. 38 -- IV. by disobeying
lawful Superiors. 39-40 The Grounds and Objections of the Anti-Ceremonians.
41-46 -- propounded and particularly answered. 47-50 How men's Laws bind the
Conscience. 51-52 OBSERVATION III. We being the Servants of God, Which is of
all other 53-54 1. the most Just, Service; 55 2. the most Necessary, Service;
56-57 3. the most Easy, Service; 58 4. the most Honorable, Service; 59 5. and
the most Profitable, Service; 60 Ought to carry our selves, as his Servants:
with all 61-63 I. Reverence to his Person; in 3 branches. 64-66 II. Obedience
to his Will; both in Doing and Suffering. 67-70 III. Faithfulness in his
Business; in 3 branches. 69 The Conclusion.
AD CLERUM*
The first Sermon.
^
ROMANS (...) ^
_^ Meats, accounting them Clean or Unclean; and of Days, accounting them Holy
or Servile, according as they stood under the Levitical Law. These latter St.
Paul calls Verse 1.
(...), Weak in the Faith: those former then must by the Law of Opposition be
(...). Romans 15. 1.
strong in the Faith.

It would have become both the one sort, and the other (notwithstanding 2
they differed in their private Judgments, yet) to have preserved the common
Peace of the Church, and labored the 2 Cor. 10. 8.
edification, not the ruin one of another; the strong by affording faithful
instruction to the Consciences of the weak; and the weak, by allowing
favorable construction to the actions of the strong. But whilst either
measured other by themselves, neither one nor other did Gal. 2. 14.
(...), as our Apostle elsewhere speaks, Walk uprightly according to the
truth of the Gospel. Faults and offenses there were on all hands. The Strong
faulty, in contemning the Weak; the Weak faulty, in condemning the Strong. The
Strong proudly scorned the weak, as silly and superstitious, for making scruple
at some such things as themselves firmly believed were Lawful: The weak rashly
censured the Strong, as Profane and Irreligious, for adventuring on some such
things as themselves deeply suspected were unlawful. The blessed Apostle,
desirous all things should be done in the Church in love and 1 Cor. 14. 26.
unto edification, Cajeran in locum.
aequa lance, and Bulling. in locum.
eodem Charitatis moderamine, as Interpreters speak, takes upon him to
arbitrate, and to mediate in the business; and like a just Umpire Job 9. 33.
lays his hand upon both parties, unpartially shows them their several
oversights, and begins to draw them to a fair and honorable composition: as
thus, The strong shall remit somewhat of his superciliousness, in disesteeming
and despising the Weak; and the Weak he shall abate something of his edge and
acrimony in judging and condemning the Strong. If the Parties will stand to
this Order, it will prove a blessed agreement; for so shall brotherly Love be
maintained, Scandals shall be removed, the Christian Church shall be edified,
and God's Name shall be glorified. This is the scope of my Text, and of the
whole Chapter.

In the three first Verses whereof, there is (...) and (...). First, 3.
there is (...), in the first Verse; the Proposal of a general Doctrine, as
touching the usage of weak ones; with whom the Church is so to deal, as that it
neither give offense to, nor take offense at the weakness of any. [ Him that is
weak in the Faith receive you, but not to doubtful Disputations.] Next* there
is (...), in the second Verse, a Declaration of the former general Proposal, by
instancing in a particular case, touching the difference of Meats. There is one
man strong in the Faith; he is infallibly resolved* there is no meat Verse 14.
unclean of it self, or (if received with thankfulness and sobriety) 1 Cor. 10.
23.
unlawful; and because he knows he stands upon a sure ground, Verse 2.
(...), he is confident he may eat any thing, and he uses his Liberty
accordingly, eating indifferently 1 Cor. 10. 27.
of all that is set before him, making no question for Conscience sake, [ One
man believes he may eat all things.] There is another man weak in the Faith;
he stands yet unresolved and doubtful, whether some kinds of Meats, as namely
those forbidden in the Law, be clean; or he is rather carried with a strong
suspicion that they are unclean; out of which timorousness of Judgment, he
chooses to forbear those Meats, and contenteth himself with the fruits of the
Earth; [ Another who is weak, eats Herbs.] This is Species facti, this is the
case. Now the question is, In this case what is to be done, for the avoidance
of scandal, and the maintenance of Christian Charity? And this question my
Text resolves in this third Verse: wherein is contained 4
(...), St. Paul's judgment, or his counsel rather and advice, upon the Case,
Let not him that eats, despise, etc. The remainder of the Verse and of the
Chapter being spent in giving reasons of the judgment, in this and another like
case, concerning the difference and observation of days.

I have made choice to entreat at this time of St. Paul's advice, as useful for
this Place and Auditory, and the present Assembly. Which advice as the Parties
and the faults are, is also twofold. The Parties two: He that eats, that is,
the Strong; and he that eats not, that is, the Weak. The Faults likewise two:
The strong man's fault, that is, Literally setting at naught; so it is
translated, Luke 23. 11. and the Latin Translation in Tertullian reads here
fitly to the Greek, Qui manducat, ne nullificet non manducantem. Tert. de
Jejun. adversus Psych. c. 15.
(...), despising of his brothers Infirmity; and the weak man's fault, that is,
(...), judging of his Brothers liberty. Proportionably, the parts of the
advice, accommodated to the Parties and their Faults, are two. The one, for the
Strong, that he despise not, Let not him that eats, despise him that eats
not. The other, for the Weak, that he judge not, Let not him that eats not,
judge him that eats. Of which, when I shall have spoken somewhat in their
general use, I shall by Gods assistance proceed by way of Application, to
inquire how far the differences in our Church, for conforming, and not
conforming, agree with the present case of eating, and not eating; and
consequently how far forth St. Paul's advice in this case of eating, and not
eating, ought to rule us in the cases of conforming, and not conforming in
point of Ceremony. And first, of the former Rule, or Branch of the Advice, Let
not him that eats, despise him that eats not.

The terms whereby the Parties are charactered, He that eats, and he 5.
that eats not, have in the opening of the Case been already so far unfolded,
as that I shall not need any more to remember you, that by him that eats,
must be understood the strong in Faith, and by him that eats not, the weak.
And so reducing the words, ab Hypothesi ad Thesin, this part of the advice [
Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not,] bears sense, as if the
Apostle had said [ Let not the strong in Faith despise the weak,] Weak ones are
easily despised; Strong ones are prone to despise: and yet despising is both a
grievous sin in the despiser, and a dangerous scandal to the despised. In all
which respects, it was but needful the Holy Ghost should lesson us, not to
despise one another weakness. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats
not.

Weakness and Smallness, be it in what kind soever, is the fittest object to 6.
provoke contempt. As we travel by the way, if a fierce Mastiff set upon us, we
think it time to look about and bestir our selves for defense; but we take no
notice of the little Currs that bark at us, but despise them. When Goliath saw
little David make toward him, 1 Samuel 17. the Text says 1 Samuel 17. 42.
He disdained him, for he was but a Youth. And St. Paul charging Timothy so to
behave himself in the Church of God, as that none should 1 Timothy 4. 12.
despise his Youth, implies, that Youth is obvious to contempt, and like
enough to be despised. And though Eccl. 9. 16.
Wisdom is better than Strength, yet Solomon tells us, The poor man's Wisdom is
despised, and his words are not heard, Eccles. 9. Psalm. 119. 141.
I am small and of no reputation, says David, Psalm. 119. And our Saviors
Caveat in the Gospel is especially concerning little ones, as most open to
contempt: Mat. 18. 10.
Take heed that ye despise not any of these little ones. But of all other, that
weakness is most contemptible, which is seen in the faculties of the
understanding Soul: when men are indeed weak in Apprehension, weak in Judgment,
weak in Discretion; or at leastwise are thought so. Far from any real weakness
this way or any other, was our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Col. 2. 3.
In whom were hid all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge; yet because upon
conference with him, he seemed such unto Herod, not answering any of his
questions, nor that expectation which the fame of his Miracles had raised of
him in Herod, Herod took him for some silly simple fellow, and accordingly used
him; for he Luke 23. 11. (...).
set him at naught, and mocked him, and put him in (...). ib.
a white Coat, as if he had been some Fool, and sent him back as he came, Luke
23. And of this nature is the weakness my Text has to do withal, a weakness in
Judgment; or as it is, Verse 1. a weakness in Faith. Where, by Faith, we are
not to understand that justifying Faith, whereby the heart of a true Believer
lays fast hold on the gracious promises of God, and the precious merits of
Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins; nor by weakness in Faith, that (...),
wherewith the Apostles are Matthew 8. 26. 14. 31. and 16. 8.
sometimes charged; when the Faith of a true Believer is sore shaken with
temptations of incredulity and distrust. But by Faith we are to understand an
Fides hic significat persuasionem de usu rerum indifferentium, per Synecdochen
generis. Piscat. Schol in Romans 14. 1.
Historical Faith only, which is nothing else but a firm and secure assent of
the judgment unto Doctrinal Truths in matter of Faith or Life; and by weakness
in such Faith, a doubtfulness and irresolution of Judgment concerning some
divine truths appertaining unto the doctrine of Faith or Life; and namely,
concerning the just extent of Christian Liberty, and the indifferent or not
indifferent nature or use of some things. Which weakness of Judgment in Faith
bewraying it self outwardly in a nice, and scrupulous, and timorous forbearance
of some things, for fear they should be unlawful, which yet in truth are not
so, but indifferent, does thereby expose the Person in whom such weakness is,
to the contempt and despisings of such as are of more confirmed and resolved
judgments, and are stronger in the Faith.

Weakness then is in it self contemptible; yet not more than Strength is 7.
contemptuous. Passive contempt is the unhappiness of the weak; but active, the
fault of the strong. They that find truly, or but overweeningly conceit in
themselves abilities, either of a higher nature, or in a greater measure than
in other men, be it in any kind whatsoever. It is strange to see with what
scornful state they can trample upon their weaker and inferior Brethren, and
look upon them (if yet they will at all vouchsafe a look) from alost, as upon
things below them; which is properly and literally to despise. For so much the
very words (...), among the Greeks, and among the Latins, despicere, do import.
The Pharisee, it is like, cast such a disdainful look upon the poor Publican,
when, in Contempt he called him, Luke 18. 9, 11.
Iste Publicanus! Sure I am, that Parable was spoken of purpose concerning such
as trusted in their own Righteousness, and (...). Luke 18. 9.
despised others, Luke 18. And they are ever the likeliest thus to despise
others, that conceit something in themselves more than others. Wealth, honor,
strength beauty, birth, friends, alliance, authority, power, wit, learning,
eloquence, reputation, any trifle can leaven our thoughts (partial as they are
toward our selves) and swell us, and heave us up above our Brethren; and
because we think we do overtop them, we think we may overlook them too, and
despise them as vulgar and contemptible. Agar could despise Sarah; the
Bond-servant, the Freewoman; the Maid, her Mistress; only for a little
fruitfulness of the Womb beyond her; because Genesis 16. 4, 5.
She saw that she had conceived, and her Mistress was Barren, Genesis 16. All
strength and eminency then, we see, be it in any little sorry thing, is apt to
breed in men a despising of their weaker and meaner Brethren; but none more
than this strength of Knowledge, and of Faith, wherewith we now deal. It should
be quite otherwise, our knowledge should praeserre facem, hold the light before
us, and help us for the better discovery of our ignorance, and so dispose us to
humility, not pride. But Pride and self-love is congenitum malum; it is a
close, and a pleasing, and inseparable corruption, which by sly and serpentine
insinuations conveyeth it self, as into whatsoever else is good and eminent in
us, and poisoneth it; so especially into the endowments of the understanding
part. Sharpness of Wit, quickness of Conceit, faithfulness of Memory, facility
of Discourse, propriety of Elocution, concinnity of Gesture, depth of Judgment,
variety of Knowledge in Arts and Languages, and whatever else of like kind, are
but as wind to fill the Sails of our Pride, and to make us swell above our
Brethren, in whom the like Gifts are not, or not in like eminency. Scientia
inflat, our Apostle might well say, 1 Cor. 8. 1. Quo didicisse, nisi hoc
fermentum, etc. Pers. Satyr. Vid. Casaub. ibid.
Knowledge puffs up; and that it does so readily and unmeasurably, that
unless there be the greater measure both of humility to prevent, and of Charity
to vent it, it will in a short time breed a dangerous spiritual tympany in the
Soul; a Disease from which the strongest constitutions that have been, have not
been altogether so free, but that they have had, if not a spice of it, yet at
leastwise an inclination unto it. Even this our blessed Apostle, who had so
much humility as to account himself 1 Cor. 15. 9.
of Apostles the least, but 1 Timothy 1. 15.
of sinners the chiefest, was in so great danger 2 Cor. 12. 7. (...).
to be exalted above measure through the abundance of Revelations; that it was
needful he should have a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet
him, lest he should be exalted above measure, 2 Cor. 12. No marvel then if
these new Converts, but lately called by God out of the darkness of their
ignorance, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
into his mavelous great light, and not having their understandings well
informed, and their judgments thoroughly settled in the Doctrine and Use, in the
nature and extent of that Evangelical LIberty whereunto they were called: no
marvel, I say, if these, upon so sensible a change, were more than a little
distempered with this swelling above their Brethren, even as far as to despise
them. So hard it is, even for the most exercised Christian, not to take
knowledge of his own knowledge; or doing so, not to despise and neglect the
Infirmities of his less-knowing Brother. It was not then without good need,
that St. Paul should become a Remembrancer to the strong in Faith, not to
despise the weak. And there is as good need the very strongest of us should
remember it, and take heed of despising even the very weakest; this despising
being hurtful both to the strong and weak; to the strong as a grievous sin, and
to the weak as a grievous scandal.

Despising, first, is a sin in the strong. Admit thy weak Brother were of 8.
so shallow understanding and judgment, that he might say in strictness of
truth, what Agar said but in modesty, and that with an Hyperbole too, Prove. 30.
that Prove. 30. 1.
Surely he were more brutish than any man, and that he had not in him the
understanding of a man; yet the community of nature, and the common condition
of humanity, should be sufficient to free him from thy Contempts. His body was
formed out of the same dust, his soul breathed into him by the same God, as
thine were; and he is thy Neighbor. Let his weakness then be what it can be,
even for that relation of Neighborhood, as he is a man, it is sin in thee to
despise him [ Prove. 14. 21.
He that despises his neighbor, sins, Prove. 14.] But that is not all; he is
not only thy Neighbor as a man, but he is thy Brother too, as a Christian man.
He has embraced the Gospel, he believes in the Son of God, he is within the
pale of the Church, as well as thou, though he be not so exquisitely seen in
some higher Mysteries, nor so thoroughly satisfied in some other points, as thou
art. If it has pleased God to endow thee with a larger portion of knowledge;
thou ought to consider, First, that thou art bound to be so much 1.
the more thankful to him that gave it; and then, secondly, that it is
expected, 2.
that thou should do so much the more good with it; and thirdly, again, 3.
that thou stand charged with so much the deeper account for it. If the same
God has dealt these abilities with a more sparing hand to thy Brother, in
despising his weakness, what other thing do thou, than even despise the good
spirit of God, John 3. 8.
that blows where he lists, and 1 Cor. 12. 11.
gives to every one as he lists? For though there be 1 Cor. 12. 4.
diversity of Gifts (both for substance and degree, yet it is the same Spirit,
1 Cor. 12. And the contempt that is cast upon the meanest Christian, reboundeth
upwards again, and in the last resolution reflecteth even upon God himself, and
upon his Christ. [ 1 These. 4. 8.
He that despises, despises not man, but God, who has given unto us his holy
Spirit, 1 These. 4. And 1 Cor. 8. 12.
when ye sin so against the Brethren, and wound their weak Consciences, ye sin
against Christ, 1 Cor. 8.]

Thus you see despising is hurtful to the despiser, as a Sin; it is hurtful
also, as a Scandal to the despised. And therefore our Savior in Mat. 18.
discoursing of Mat. 18. 6, etc.
not offending little ones; anon varieth the word, and speaks of Ibid. 10.
not despising them; as if despising were an especial and principal kind of
offending or scandalizing. And verily so it is, especially to the weak. Nothing
is more grievous to Nature, scarce death it self, than for a man to see himself
despised. Plaut. in Cistel. Act. 4. Scen. 1.
Ego illam anum irridere me ut sinam? Satius est mihi quovis exitio interire,
could he say in the Comedy. It is a thing that pierces far, and sinketh deep,
and strikes cold, and lies heavy upon the heart: Habet enim quendam aculeum
contumelia quem pati prudentes ac boni viri difficillime possunt. Cic. Ver. 5.
flesh and blood will digest any thing with better patience. The great Arist.
lib. 2. Rhet. 2. cap. 2. where he thus defines Anger. (...).
Philosopher, for this reason makes contempt the ground of all Discontent; and
sufficiently proves it in the second of his Rhetoricks; there being never any
thing taken offensively, but sub ratione contemptus; nothing provoking to
Anger, but what is either truly a contempt, or at leastwise so apprehended. We
all know how tenderly every one of us would take it, but to be neglected by
others; to have no reckoning at all made of us; to be so reputed as if we were
not; or not worth the looking after; Vide opus Adag. Mega renses neque tertii,
neque quarti.
(...), as the Oracle said to the Magarenses. And yet this is but the least
degree of Contempt; (...). Ibid.
a private contempt only. How tenderly then may we think a weak Christian would
take it, when to this private he should find added (...). Ari. ubi supra.
a Positive contempt also? when he should see his person and his weakness, not
only not compassionated, but even (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 23. in Genesis
taunted, and flouted, and derided, and made a laughing stock, and a jesting
Theme? when he should see them grieve to speak and do such things in his sight
and hearing, as they know will be offensive to him, of very purpose to vex, and
afflict, and grieve his tender soul? Certainly for a weak Christian newly
converted to the Faith, to be thus despised, it were enough, without God's
singular Have mercy upon us O Lord, have mercy upon us; for we are exceedingly
filled with contempt: Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those
that are at ease, and with the contempt of the proud, Psalm. 123. 3, 4.
mercy and support, to make him repent his late conversion, and revolt from the
Faith, by fearful and desperate Apostasy. And he that by such despising, should
thus offend, though but Mat. 18. 6. etc.
one of the least and weakest of those that believe in Christ, a thousand times
better had it been for him, that he had never been born; yea, ten thousand
times better that a millstone had been hung about his neck, and he cast into
the bottom of the Sea, ere he had done it. Despising is a grievous sin in the
despiser, in the strong; and despising is a grievous scandal to the despised,
to the weak. Let not therefore the strong despise the Weak; Let not him that
eats, despise him that eats not. And thus much for the former branch of St.
Paul's advice: The other follows, Let not him that eats not, judge him that
eats.

Faults seldom go single, but by couples at the least. Sinful men do 10
with sinful provocations, as Ball-players with the Ball: when the Ball is once
up, they labor to keep it up; right so when an offense or provocation is once
given, it is (...). Et mox, (...), Max. Tyrius (...).
tossed to and fro, the receiver ever returning it pat upon the giver, and that
most times with advantage; and so betwixt them they make a shift to preserve a
perpetuity of sinning, and of scandalizing one another. It is hard to say who
begins oftener, the Strong or the Weak; but whether ever begins, he may be
sure the other will follow. If this judge, that will despise; if that despise,
this will judge: either does his endeavor to cry quittance with other, and
thinks himself not to be at all in fault, because the other was first or
more. This Apostle, willing to redress faults in both, begins first with the
Strong, and for very good reason. Not that his fault, simply considered in it
self, is greater; (for I take it a certain truth, That to judge one that is in
the right, is a far greater fault, considered absolutely, without relation to
the abilities of the persons, than to despise one that is in the wrong:) But
because the strong through the ability of his Judgment, ought to yield so much
to the infirmity of his weak Brother, who through the weakness of his Judgment,
is not so well able to discern what is fit for him to do. What in most other
contentions is expected, should be done in this: Not he that is most in fault,
but he that has most wit, should give over first. Indeed in reason, the more
faulty is rather bound to yield; but if he will be unreasonable (as most times
it falls out) and not do it; then in discretion, the more able should do it.
As Genesis 13. 9^ 11.
Abraham in discretion yields the choice to his Nephew Lot upon the
contention of their Herdsmen, which in reason Lot should rather have yielded
unto him. But where both are faulty, as it is not good to stand debating who
began first; so it is not safe to strain courtesy who shall end, and mend
first. In the case of my Text, both were faulty; and therefore our Apostle
would have both mend. He has schooled the Strong, and taught him his Lesson,
not to despise another infirmity; Let not him that eats despise him that
eats not. Now the Weak must take out his Lesson too, not to judge another
Liberty; Let not him that eats not, judge him that eats.

I will not trouble you with other significations of the word; to judge, 11.
as it is here taken, is as much as to Ne condemnato. Beza.
condemn: and so the word (...) is often taken in the worser sense for (...).
Tropically by a Piscator in Schol. ad hunc locum.
Synecdoche generis, say Scholiasts; and they say true. But it is a Trope, for
which both in this, and in Evil manners have been the spoiling of many good
words; as (...), Tyrannus, Sophista, Latro, (...), Venenum, Magus; and in our
English Tongue, Knave, Villain, Churl, etc. See Minshew, Verstegan, etc.
diverse other words, we are not so much beholden to good Arts, as to bad
Manners. Things that are good or indifferent, we commonly turn to ill, by using
them the worst way: whence it grows, that words of good or indifferent
signification, in time degenerate so far as to be commonly taken in the worst
sense. But this by the way. The fault of these weak ones, in the case in hand,
was that measuring other men's actions and consciences, by the model of their
own understandings; in their private Censures they rashly passed their
Judgments upon, and pronounced peremptory Sentence against such as used their
Liberty in some things, concerning the lawfulness whereof themselves were not
satisfied, as if they were loose Christians, carnal Professors, nomine tenus
Christiani, men that would not stick to do any thing, and such as made either
none at all, or else very little conscience of their actions. This Practice my
Text disalloweth and forbids; and the rule hence for us is plain and short;
We must not judge others. The Scriptures are express, Matthew. 7. 1.
Judge not, that ye be not judged, Matthew. 7. 1 Cor. 4. 5.
Judge nothing before the time, etc. 1 Cor. 4. Romans 2. 1.
Thou art inexcusable, O Man, whosoever thou art that judge, Romans 2. And
James 4. 11.
If thou judge, thou art not a doer of the Law, but a Judge, James 4.

Not that it is unlawful to exercise civil Judgment, or to pass condemning 12
sentence upon persons orderly and legally convicted, for such as have 1
Calling or Authority thereunto in Church or Commonwealth, for this Public
Politic Judgment is commanded Exodus 22. 9. 2 Chronicles. 19 6. Romans 13. 4. and
elsewhere.
in the Word of God; and Reason shows it to be of absolute necessity for the
preservation of States and Commonwealths. Nor that it is unlawful, secondly,
to pass even our private censures upon the outward actions of men; when the Law
of 2
God is directly transgressed, and the transgression apparent from the evidence
either of the Fact it self, or of some strong signs and presumptions of it. For
it is Stupidity and not Charity, to be credulous against sense. Charity is 1
Cor. 13. 5. (...).
ingenuous, and will lb. Verse. 7. (...).
believe any thing, though more than Reason: but Charity must not be As Walter
Mapes, sometimes Archdeacon of Oxenford, relating the gross Symony of the Pope,
for confirming the Election of Reginald, Bastard Son to Ioceline, Bishop of
Sarum, into the Sea of Bathe; concludes the Narration thus, Sit tamen domina
materque nostra Roma baculus in ^qua fractus; and absit credere quae videmus.
Mahap. de nugis Curialium* distinct, 1. c. 12.
servile, to believe any thing against Reason: Shall any Charity bind me to
think the Crow is white, or the Blackamoor Beautiful? Nor yet thirdly, that all
sinister suspicions are utterly unlawful, even there where there wants
evidence either of Fact, or of great signs; if our suspicions proceed not from
any corrupt affections, but only from a Cum debemus aliquibus malis adhibere
remedium, sive nostris, sive alienis; expedit ad hoc ut securius remedium
apponatur, quod supponatur id quod est deterius: quia remedium quod est efficax
contra majus malum, multo magis est efficax contra minus* molum. Aquin. 2. 2.
qu. 60. ^rt 4 a^. 3.
charitable Jealousy of those over whom we have special Charge, or in whom we
have special Interest, in such sort as that it may concern us to admonish,
reprove or correct them when they do amiss; so was Job Job 1. 5.
suspicious of his Sons, for sinning, and cursing God in their hearts. But the
judgment here and elsewhere condemned, is either first, when in our private
thoughts or speeches, upon slender presumptions, we rashly pronounce men as
guilty of committing such and such sins, without sufficient evidence either of
fact, or pregnant signs that they have committed them. Or secondly, when upon
some actions Aperta non ita reprehendamus, ut de s^ni^ate desperemus. Glos.
Ordin* in Romans 14. 13. Non q^^^quid reprehendendum, etiam damnandum est. Sen.
1. 6. de Benef. cap. 39.
undoubtedly sinful, as Blasphemy, Adultery, Perjury, etc. we too severely
censure the Persons either for the future, as Reprobates and Cast-aways, and
such as shall be certainly damned; or at leastwise for the present, as
Hypocri^es and unsanctified and profane, and such as are in the state of
Damnation; not considering into what fearful sins it may please God to suffer,
not only his As Paul, Mary, Magdalen, etc.*
chosen ones before Calling, but even his As David, Peter, etc.
holy ones too after Calling, sometimes to fall, for ends most times unknown to
us, but ever just and gracious in him. Or thirdly, when for want either of
Charity o^ Knowledge (as in the present case of this Chapter) we interpret
things for the worst to our Brethren; and condemn them of sin for such actions
as are not directly, and in themselves necessarily sinful; but may (with due
circumstances) be performed with a good conscience, and without sin. Now all
judging and condemning of our Brethren in any of these kinds is sinful and
damnable; and that in very many respects; especially these four; which may
serve as so many weighty reasons, why we ought not to judge one another. The
usurpation, the rashness, the uncharitableness, and the scandal of it. First,
it is an Usurpation. He that is of right to judge, must have a Calling and
Commission for it. Exodus 2. 14.
Quis constituit te? sharply replied upon Moses, Exodus 2. Who made thee a
Judge? and Luke 12. 14.
Quis constituit me? reasonably alleged by our Savior, Luke 12. Who made me a
Judge? Thou take too much upon thee then, thou son of man, whosoever thou art
that judge; thus saucily to thrust thy self into God's seat, and to (...),
etc. Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 42.
invade his Throne. Remember thy self well, and learn to know thine own rank.
Jam. 4. 12.
Quis tu? Who art thou that judge another? James 4. Or, Who art thou that
judge another Servant? in the next following Verse to my Text. As if the
Apostle had said, What art thou? Or what have thou to do to judge him that Romans
14. 4.
stands or falls to his own Master? Thou art his Fellow Servants, not his
Lord. He has another Lord that can and will judge him; who is thy Lord too,
and can and will judge thee: for so he argues anon at Verse 10. Why do thou
judge thy brother? We shall all stand before the Iudgment-Seat of Christ. God
has reserved Mali operis vindictam, B^^i gloriam, utriusque Judicium.
three Prerogatives Royal to himself, Deuteronomy. 32. 35.
Vengeance, Isa. 42. 8. Romans 12. 19.
Glory, and Romans 14. 4. -- 10. Jam. 4. 11, 12.
Judgment. As it is not safe for us then to encroach upon Tres hominum species
maximam Deo faciunt injuriam: Superbi, qui auferunt ei Gloriam; Iracundi, qui
Vindictam; Regidi, qui Judicium.
God's Royalties in either of the other two; Glory, or Vengeance: so neither in
this of Judgment; Dominus judicabit, Heb. 10. 30.
The Lord himself will judge his people, Heb. 10. It is flat Usurpation in us
to judge; and therefore we must not judge.

Secondly, it is rashness in us. A Judge must Et nunc Reges intelligite:
erudimini; qui judicatis terram, Psalm. 2. 10. si judicas, cognosce. Sen. in
Med. Act. 2. (...). Phocylid.
understand the truth, both for matter of Et normam, and Causam: Normam,
secundum quam; and causam, de qua statuendum. Ad Factum hac pertinet, illa ad
jus: ad illam, Peritia opus est; ad hanc, Prudentia.
fact, and for point of Law; and he must be sure he is in the right for both,
before he proceed to sentence; or else he will give rash judgment. How then
dare any of us undertake to sit as Judges upon other men's Consciences,
wherewith we are so little acquainted, that we are indeed but too much
unacquainted with our own? We are not able to search the depth of our own Jer.
17. 9. I know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified, but he that
judges me is the LORD, 1 Cor. 4 4. If our heart condemn us, GOD is greater
than our heart, and knows all things, 1 John 3. 21. Latet me facultas mea,
quae in me est; ut animus meus de viribus suis ipse se interrogans, non facile
sibi credendum existimet, quia and quod inest plerumque occult^m est. Aug. lib.
10. Confess. c. 32.
wicked and deceitful hearts; and to ran* sack thoroughly the many secret
windings and turnings therein: how much less then are we able to fathom the
bottoms of other men's hearts, with any 14.
certainty to pronounce of them either good or evil? We must then leave 2.
the judgments of other men's Spirits, and hearts, and reins, to him that is
Heb. 12. 9.
the Father of Spirits, and alone Psalm. 79. and 26. 2. Jer. 11. 20. and 17. 10.
and 20. 12. Rev. 2. 23.
searches the hearts and reins; before whose eyes all things are Heb. 4. 13.
(...), as the word is most Emphatical, Heb. 4. Wherefore our Apostles precept
elsewhere is good to this purpose, 1 Cor. 4. 1 Cor. 4. 5.
Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come who both will bring to
light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the
hearts. Unless we be able to bring these hidden things to light, and to make
manifest these counsels; it is Temeritas est damnare quod nescias. Sen. Epist.
91. S^nt quaedam facta media, quae ignoramus quo animo fiunt, quia and bono and
malo fieri possunt, de quibus temerarium est judicare. August. l. 2. de Sermon.
Dom. in monte, cap. 18.
rashness in us to judge: and therefore we must not judge.

Thirdly, this judging is uncharitable. Charity is not easily suspicious; 15.
but upon just cause: much less then, censorious and peremptory. Indeed 3.
when we are to judge of In rerum judicio debet aliquis niti ad hoc, ut
interpretetur unumquodque secundum quod est: in judicio autem personarum, ut
interpretetur in melius. Aquin. 2. 0. qu. 60. art. 4. ad 3. and he gives a
substantial reason for it, ib. in resp. id 2.
Things, it is wisdom to judge of them Secundum quod sunt, as near as we can,
to judge of them just as they are, without any sway or partial inclination
either to the right hand or to the left. But when we are to judge of Men, and
their Actions; it is not altogether so: there the rule of charity must take
place, Glossa Ord. in hunc loc. and Theologi passim. Semper quicquid dubium
est, humanitas incli^at in melius, Sen. ep. 81.
dubia in meliorem partem sunt interpretanda. Unless we see manifest cause to
the contrary, we ought ever to interpret what is done by others, with as much
favor as may be. To err thus is better than to hit right the other way,
because this course is Error Charitatis salutaris err^r.
safe, and secureth us, as from Melius est quod aliquis frequenter fallatur,
habens bonam opinionem de malo homine, quam quod rarius fallatur, habens malam
opinionem de bono homine* quia ex hoc sit injuria alicui; non autem ex primo.
Aq. 2. a. qu. 60. Art. 2. ad. 1.
injuring others, so from endangering our selves: whereas in judging ill,
though right, we are still Aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus fuit Sen. in
Med. Act. 2.
unjust, (...), the event only, and not our choice freeing us from wrong
judgment. True Charity is ingenuous; it 1 Cor. 13. 5.
thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13. How far then are they from Charity, that are ever
suspicious, and think nothing well? For us, let it be our care to maintain
Charity, and to avoid, as far as humane frailty will give leave, even sinister
suspicions of our brethrens actions: or if through frailty we cannot that, yet
let us not from light suspicions fall into uncharitable censures: let us at
leastwise suspend our Si suspiciones vitare non possumus, quia homines sumus:
judicia tamen, id est, definitivas firmasque sententias continere debemus.
Glos. Ordin. in 1 Cor. 4.
definitive judgment, and not determine too peremptorily against such as do not
in every respect just as we do, or as we would have them do, or as we think
they should do. It is uncharitable for us to judge, and therefore we must not
judge.

Lastly, There is Scandal in judging. Possibly he that is judged, may have that
strength of Faith and Charity, that though rash and uncharitable censures lie
thick in his way, he can lightly skip over all those stumbling blocks, and
escape a fall. Saint Paul had such a measure of strength; 1 Cor. 4. 3.
with me it is a very small thing, says he, that I should be judged of you, or
of humane judgment, 1 Cor. 4. If our judging light upon such an Object, it is
indeed no scandal to him: but that is no thanks to us. We are to esteem things
by their natures, not events: and therefore we give a scandal, if we judge;
notwithstanding he that is judged take it not as a scandal. For, that judging
is in itself a scandal, is clear from Verse. 13. of this Chapter; Let us not
therefore, says S. Paul, judge one another any more, but judge this rather,
That no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall into his brothers
way. And thus we see four main Reasons against this judging of our brethren. 1.
We have no right to judge; and so our judging is usurpation. 16.
2. We may err in our judgments; and so our judging is rashness. 3. We take
things the worst way when we judge; and so our judging is uncharitable. 4. We
offer occasion of offense by our judging; and so our judging is scandalous. Let
not him therefore that eats not, judge him that eats.

And so I have done with my Text in the general use of it: wherein we 17.
have seen the two faults of despising and of judging our brethren, laid open,
and the ugliness of both discovered. I now descend to make such Application, as
I promised, both of the case and rules, unto some differences, and to some
offenses, given and taken in our Church in point of Ceremony. The Case ruled in
my Text was of eating, and not eating: the Differences which some maintain in
our Church are many in the particulars; (as of kneeling, and not kneeling;
wearing, and not wearing; crossing, and not crossing, etc.) But all these, and
most of the rest of them, may be comprehended in gross under the terms of
Conforming, and not Conforming. Let us first compare the Cases; that having
found wherein they agree, or disagree, we may thereby judge how far S. Paul's
advice in my Text ought to rule us, for not despising, for not judging one
another. There are four special things, wherein if we compare this our Case
with the Apostles, in every of the four we shall find some agreement, and some
disparity also: 1. The nature of the matter: 2. The abilities of the persons:
3. Their several practices about the things: and 4. Their mutual carriage one
toward another. And first, let us consider how the two Cases agree in each of
these.

First, The matter whereabout the eater and the not-eater differed in the 18.
case of the Romans, was in the nature of it indifferent; so it is between 1.
the Conformer and not Conformer in our Case. As there fish, and flesh, and
herbs were merely indifferent; such as might be eaten, or not eaten without
sin; so here, Cap and Surplice, Cross and Ring, and the rest, are things merely
indifferent; such as (in regard of their own nature) may be used or not used
without sin; as being neither expressly commanded, nor expressly forbidden in the
Word of God.

Secondly, The Persons agree. For as there, so here also, some are strong in 2.
Faith, some weak. There are many, whose judgments are upon certain and
infallible grounds assured and resolved, and that certitudine Fidei, that Cap,
and Surplice, and Cross, and the rest, are things lawful, and such as may be
used with a good Conscience. There are some others again, who, through
ignorance, or custom, or prejudice, or otherwise weakened in their judgments,
cannot (or will not) be persuaded that these things are altogether free from
Superstition and Idolatry: nor consequently the use of them from sin.

Thirdly, The practice of the persons are much alike. As there, the 3.
strong did use his liberty according to the assurance of his knowledge,
((...)) and did eat freely without scruple; and the weak did forbear to eat,
because of his doubting and irresolution: So here, most of us in assured
confidence that we may wear, and cross, and kneel, and use other Ceremonies and
Customs of our Church, do willingly, and ex animo, conform our selves
thereunto. Yet some there are, who out of I know not what niceness and
scrupulosity, make dainty of them, and either utterly refuse conformity, or at
leastwise desire respite, till they can better inform themselves.

Lastly, There is some correspondence also in the faulty carriage of the 4.
parties each toward other. For as there the Eater despised the Not-eater; and
the Not-eater judged the Eater: so here, it cannot be denied, but that some
Conformers (although I hope far the lesser, I am sure far the worser sort) do
despise and scandalize the Non-Conformers more than they have reason to do, or
any discreet honest man will allow. But is it not most certain also, that the
Non-Conformers (but too generally, yea, and the better sort of them too, but
too often and much) do pass their censures with mavelous great freedom; and
spend their judgments liberally upon, and against the Conformers? Hitherto the
Cases seem to agree. One would think, mutatis mutandis, the Apostle's rule
would as well fit our Church and Case, as the Roman; and should as well free
the Non-Conformers from our Contempt, as us from their Censures. Let not him
that Conformeth, despise him that Conformeth not: and let not him that
Conformeth not, judge him that Conformeth.

But if you will please to take a second surview of the four several
particulars, 19.
wherein the Cases seemed to agree, you shall find very much 1.
disparity and disproportion betwixt the two Cases in each of the four
respects. In the case of my Text, the matter of difference among them, was not
only indifferent in the nature of it; but it was also left as indifferent for
the use: the Church (perhaps) not having determined any thing positively
therein; at least no public authority having either enjoined, or forbidden the
use of such or such meats. But in the Case of our Church it is far otherwise.
Cap, Surpliice, Cross, Ring, and other Ceremonies, which are the Matter of our
differences; though they be things indifferent for their nature, and in
themselves, yet are not so for their use, and unto us. If the Church had been
silent, if Authority had prescribed nothing herein, these Ceremonies had then
remained for their use, as they are for their nature, indifferent: Lawful and
such as might be used without sin; and yet Arbitrary, and such as might be also
forborne without sin. But men must grant (though they be unwilling, if yet they
will be reasonable) that every particular Church Article 20. agreeable to the
confessions of other Protestant Churches.
has power, for (...). 1 Cor. 14. 20.
decency and orders sake, to ordain and constitute Ceremonies. Which being once
ordained, and by public Authority enjoined, cease to be indifferent for their
use, though they remain still so for their nature: and of indifferent become so
necessary, that neither may a man without sin Constit. and Canon. 30.
refuse them, where Authority requires; nor use them, where Authority
restrains the use. 20.


Neither is this accession of Necessity any impeachment to Christian Liberty;
or Ex 1 Cor. 7. 35.
insnaring of men's consciences, as Lincolnsh. Abridg. p. 34.
some have objected. For then do we ensnare men's consciences by humane
Constitutions, when we thrust them upon men as if they were divine; and bind
men's consciences to them immediately, as if they were immediate parts of Gods
Worship, or of absolute necessity unto salvation. This Tyranny and Usurpation
over men's Consciences, the Mat. 7 8, etc.
Pharisees of old did, and the Church of Rome at this day does exercise, and we
justly hate in her: In Spiritum Sanctum blasphemant, qui sacros Canones
violant. 25 qu. 1. Violatores.
equalling, if not preferring her Constitutions to the Laws of God. But our
Church (God be thanked) is far from any such impious presumption, Constit. etc.
can. 74. a^t. 20. Act for Uniformity; and Treat. of ceremonies prefixed to the
Book of Common Prayer.
and has sufficiently declared her self by solemn protestation, enough to
satisfy any ingenuous impartial judgment, that by requiring obedience to these
ceremonial Constitutions, she has no other purpose, than to reduce all Without
prejudice to the liberty of other Churches. See Pref. to communion Book.
her Children to an orderly uniformity in the outward worship of God; so far is
she from seeking to draw any opinion, either of The Church ought not to enforce
any thing besides the holy Writ, to be believed for necessity of salvation.
Artic. 20.
divine necessity upon the Constitution, or of effectual holiness upon the
Ceremony. And as for the prejudice which seems hereby to be given to
Christian Liberty, it is so slender a conceit, that it seems to bewray in the
Objectors desire, not so much of satisfaction as cavil. For first, the liberty
of a Christian to all indifferent things, is in the Mind and Conscience, and is
then infringed, when the conscience is bound and straightened, by imposing upon it
an opinion of doctrinal necessity. But it is no wrong to the Liberty of a
Christian man's conscience, to bind him to outward observance for Orders sake,
and to impose upon him a necessity of Obedience. Which one distinction of
Doctrinal and Obediential Necessity well weighed, and rightly applied, is of it
self sufficient to clear all doubts in this point. For, to make all restraint
of the outward man in matters indifferent, an impeachment of Christian Liberty,
what were it else, but even to bring flat See Conference at Ham. Court. page
70, 71.
Anabaptism and Anarchy into the Church? and to overthrow all bond of
subjection and obedience to lawful Authority? I beseech you consider, wherein
can the immediate power and Authority of Fathers, Masters, and other Rulers
over their Inferiors consist; or the due obedience of Inferiors be shown
toward them, if not in these In rebus mediis lex posita est obedienti^. Bern.
Epist. 7.
Indifferent and Arbitrary things? For, things De hujusmodi quippe nec
praeceptor expectandus, nec prohibitor auscultandus est. Ber. de prec and
dispensat. See Agel. 2. Noct. Artic. 7. and Ber. Ep. 7.
absolutely necessary, as commanded by God, we are bound to do, whether humane
Authority require them or no; and things absolutely unlawful, as prohibited by
God, we are bound not to do, whether humane Authority forbid them or no. There
are none other things left then, wherein to express properly the Obedience due
to superior Authority, than these Indifferent things. And if a See Sa. Collins
Sermon on 1 Timothy 6. 3. page 44. etc.
Father or Master have power to prescribe to his Child or Servant in
indifferent things, and such restraint be no way prejudicial to Christian
liberty in them, why should any man either deny the like power to
Church Governors; to make Ecclesiastical Constitutions concerning indifferent
things? or interpret that power to the prejudice of Christian Liberty? And
again Secondly, Men must understand, 2.
that it is an error to think Ceremonies and Constitutions to be things merely
indifferent, I mean in the general. For howsoever every particular Ceremony be
indifferent, and every particular Constitution Artic. 34.
arbitrary and alterable; yet that there should be some Ceremonies, it is
necessary, Necessitate absoluta, in as much as no outward work can be performed
without Ceremonial Circumstances, some or other; and that there should be some
Constitutions concerning them, it is also necessary (though not simply and
absolutely, as the former; yet Ex hypothese, and) See Calvin lib. 4. Instir. c.
10. sc^^. 27.
necessitate convenientiae. Otherwise since some Ceremonies must needs be used,
every Parish, nay every Quot capita, tot Schismata. Hieronym.
Man would have his own fashion by himself, as his humor led him: wherefore
what other could be the issue, but infinite distraction, and unorderly
confusion in the Church? And again thirdly, 3.
To return their weapon upon themselves; if every restraint in indifferent
things be injurious to Christian Liberty, then themselves are injurious no less
by their negative restraint from some Ceremonies, Like that Col. 2. 21. Touch
not, taste not, handle not.
Wear not, Cross not, Kneel not, etc. than they would have the World believe
our Church is by her positive restraint unto the Ceremonies of wearing and
crossing, and kneeling, etc. Let indifferent men judge, nay let themselves that
are parties judge, Whether is more injurious to Christian Liberty, public
Authority by mature advice commanding what might be forborne, or private
spirits, through humorous dislikes, forbidding what may be used: the whole
Church imposing the use, or a few Brethren requiring the forbearance of such
things, as are otherwise and in themselves equally indifferent for use, or for
forbearance.

But they say, Our Church makes greater matters of Ceremonies than 21.
thus, and prefers them even before the most necessary duties of Preaching
and administering the Sacraments; in as much as they are imposed upon Ministers
under pain of Suspension and Deprivation from their Ministerial Functions and
Charges. First, for actual Deprivation; I take it, 1.
unconforming Ministers have no great cause to complain. Our Church, it is well
known, has not always used that rigor she might have done. Where she has been
forced to proceed as far as Deprivation, she has ordinarily by her fair, and
slow, and compassionate proceedings therein, sufficiently manifested her
unwillingness thereto, and declared her self a Mother every way indulgent
enough to such ill-nurtured Children, as will not be ruled by her. Secondly,
Those that are suspended or deprived, 2.
suffer it but justly for their obstinacy and contempt. For howsoever they
would bear the World in hand, that they are the only persecuted ones, and that
they suffered for their Consciences, yet in truth, they do but abuse the
credulity of the simple therein, and herein (as in many other things) jump with
the Papists, whom they would seem above all others most abhorrent from. For, as
Seminary Priests and Jesuits give it out, they are martyred for their Pro
inficiatione pontificatus foeminei. Aquipont. in resp. ad Sohn de Antichristo
These. 15. speaking of the Priests executed in the Reign of Qu. Elizabeth.
Religion, when the very truth is, they are See Donnes Pseudo-Martyr per totum:
especially c. 5. etc.
justly executed for their prodigious Treasons, and felonious or treacherous
Practices against lawful Princes and Estates: So the Brethren pretend they are
persecuted for their Consciences, when indeed they are but justly censured for
their obstinate and pertinacious contempt of lawful Authority. For it is not
the refusal of these Ceremonies they are deprived for, otherwise than as the
matter wherein they show their contempt: it is the The practice of our Church
sufficiently confirms this: which censureth no man for the bare omission of
some kind of Rites and Ceremonies now and then; where it may be presumed, by
the parties cheerful and general conformity otherwise, that such omission
proceeds not either from an opinionative dislike of the Ceremony imposed, or
from a timorous and obsequious humouring of such as dislike it. Whosoever
willingly and purposely does openly break, etc. Artic. 34.
Contempt it self, which formerly and properly subjecteth them to just
Ecclesiastical censure of Suspension or Deprivation. And contempt of Authority,
though in the In minimis quoque mandatis culpam facit non minimam: and
convertit in crimen gravis rebellionis naevum satis levem simplicis
transgressionis. Bern. de prec. and dispens.
smallest matter, deserves no small punishment: all Authority having been ever
solicitous (as it has good reason) above all things, to vindicate and preserve
it self from contempt, by inflicting sharp punishments upon contemptuous
persons in the smallest matters, above all other sorts of offenders in any
degree whatsoever. Thus have we showed and cleared the first and main
difference betwixt the case of my Text, and the case of our Church, in regard
of the matter: the things whereabout they differed being every way indifferent;
ours not so.

And as the Matter, so there is secondly much odds in the condition of 22.
the Persons. The refusers in the Case of my Text, being truly weak in the
Faith, as being but lately converted to the Christian Faith, and not
sufficiently instructed by the Church in the Doctrine and Use of Christian
Liberty in things indifferent: whereas with our refusers it is much otherwise.
First, They are not new Proselytes, but Men born, and bred, and brought 1.
up in the bosom of the Church; yea many, and the chiefest of them, such as
have taken upon them the calling of the Ministry, and the charge of Souls, and
the office of teaching and instructing others. And such men should not be
weaklings. Secondly, Ours are such as take themselves to 2.
have far more knowledge, and understanding, and insight in the Scriptures, and
all divine Learning, than other men: such as between pity and scorn seem most
to wonder at the ignorance and simplicity of the vulgar, and to lament (which
is, God knows, lamentable enough, though not comparable to what it was within
not many years since:) the want of knowledge, and the unsufficiency of some of
the Clergy in the Land. And with what reason should these men expect the
privilege of Weak ones? Thirdly, Our Church has sufficiently declared and
published the innocence 3.
of her purpose and meaning in enjoining the Ceremonies: nor so only, but has
been content to hear, and receive, and admit the Objections and Reasons of the
Refusers; and have taken pains to answer and satisfy to the full all that ever
yet could be said in that behalf. And therefore it is vanity for these men (or
their Friends in their behalf) to allege weakness, where all good means have
been plentifully used for full information in the points in doubt. Lastly, Upon
the premises it does appear, that the 4.
weakness of our Brethren, pretended by those that are willing to speak
favorably of them, proceeds for the most part not so much out of simple
ignorance, arising from the defect either of understanding or means, as out of
an ignorance, at the best in some degree of wilfulness and affectation, in not
seeking, or not admitting such ingenuous satisfaction, as they might have by
Reason: if not out of the poison of corrupt and carnal affections, (as they
give us sometimes but too much cause to suspect) of pride, of singularity, of
envy, of contention, of factious admiring some men's persons. By which, and
other like partial affections, men's judgments become oftentimes so blinded,
that of unwilling at the first, they become at length unable to discern things
with that freedom and ingenuity they should. And so the Cases differ in regard
of the Persons.

They differ, thirdly, in the Practice of the Persons. There the strong 23.
did eat, because he was well assured he might do it, (...), in the Verse
before my Text; and the weak did no more but forbear eating; as indeed he might
do, no Authority interposing to the contrary. But here, we conform, not only
because we know we may lawfully do it, but for that we know we must of (...).
Romans 13. 5.
necessity do it, as bound thereunto in obedience to lawful Authority, and in
the Not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. Ibid.
conscience we ought to make of such obedience. And the refusers do not only de
facto, not conform, to the contempt of Authority, and the scandal of others;
but they stand in it too, and trouble the peace of the Church by their restless
Petitions, and Supplications, and Admonitions, and other publications of the
reasons and grounds of their such refusal. And verily, this Country and the
County has been not the least busy in these factious and tumultuous courses;
both in troubling our most gracious, judicious, and religious Sovereign with
their Meditations on the Lord's Prayer. page 12. in the Margent.
Petitions; and also in publishing their Reasons, in a Book called The
Abridgment, Printed 1605. to their own shame, and the shame of their Country.
He who (as I have been informed) was thought to have had a chief hand in the
collecting of those Reasons, and Printing of that Book; was for his obstinate
refusal of Conformity, justly deprived from his Benefice in this Diocese, and
thereupon relinquished his Ministry for a time, betaking himself to another
Calling: so depriving the Church and People of God of the fruit and benefit of
those excellent gifts which were in him. But since that time he has, upon
better and more advised judgment, Subscribed and Conformed; and the Church like
an indulgent Mother has not only received him into her bosom again, but has
restored him too, though not to the same, yet to a Benefice elsewhere of far
greater value.

Lastly, There is difference in the faulty carriage of the persons: and 24.
that on both parts, especially on ours. For though our Nonconforming Brethren
condemn us with much liberty of speech and spirit, having yet less reason for
it than the weak Romans had (for the strong among them might have forborne some
things for the weak's sake; and it would have well become them for the avoiding
of scandal so to have done; which we cannot do without greater scandal in the
open contempt of lawful Authority:) yet we do not despise them, (I mean with
allowance from the Church; if particular men do more than they should, it is
their private fault, and ought not to be imputed to us, or to our Church) but
use all good means we can to draw them to moderate courses, and just obedience:
although they better deserve to be despised than the weak Romans did: they
being truly Weak, ours Obstinate; they Timorons, ours also Contemptuous.

Now these differences are opened betwixt the Case in my Text, and 25.
the Case of the Church: we may the better judge how far forth Saint Paul's
advice here given to the Romans in their case of eating, and noteating, ought
to rule us in our case of conforming, and not-conforming in point of Ceremony.
And first, of not despising; then, of not judging. The ground of the Apostles
precept for not despising him that ate not, was his Weakness. So far then as
this ground holds in our case, this precept is to be extended, and no
further. And we are hereby bound not to despise our Nonconforming Brethren, so
far forth as it may probably appear to us they are weak, and not wilful. But so
far forth, as by their courses and proceedings it may be reasonably thought
their refusal proceeds from corrupt or partial affections, or is apparently
maintained with Obstinacy and Contempt: I take it we may, notwithstanding the
Apostles admonition in my Text, in some sort even despise them.

But because they think they are not so well and fairly dealt withal as 26.
they should be: Let us consider their particular grievances, wherein they take
themselves despised; and examine how just they are. They say, first, they are
despised in being scoffed and flouted, and derided by loose companions, and by
profane or Popishly affected persons; in being styled Puritans, and Brethren,
and Precisians, and having many jests and fooleries fastened upon them, whereof
they are not guilty. They are secondly, despised, All benefit of Law being
denied them, and they debarred of other means by conference or writing for
their defense. Def. of Ministers reasons, part 1. pref. to the Reader, We do
accuse the Reverend Bishops in the sight of God and Man, for their hard and
extreme dealing toward us. Removal of Imputations, p. 40.
they say, in that when they are convented before the Bishops and others in
Authority, they cannot have the favor of an indifferent Hearing; but are
proceeded against as far as Suspension, and sometimes Deprivation, without
taking their Answers to what is objected, or giving Answers to what they
object. Thirdly, in that many honest and religious men, of excellent and useful
gifts, cannot be permitted the liberty of their Consciences, and the free
exercise of their Ministry; only for standing out in these things, which our
selves cannot but confess to be indifferent.

To their first grievance we answer, That we have nothing to do with those that
are Popishly affected. If they wrong them, as it is like enough they will (for
they will not stick to wrong their Betters;) we are not to be charged with
that; let them answer for themselves. But by the way, let our Brethren
consider, whether their stiff and unreasonable opposing against those lawful
Ceremonies we retain, may not be one principal means to confirm, but so much
the more in their darkness and superstition, those that are wavering, and might
possibly by more ingenuous and seasonable insinuations be won over to embrace
the truth which we 17.
profess. And as for loose persons and profane ones, that make it their sport
upon their Ale-benches, to rail and scoff at Puritans; as if it were warrant
enough for them to drink drunk, talk bawdy, swear and stare, or do any thing
without control, because, forsooth, they are no Puritans: As we could wish,
our Brethren and their Lay followers, by their uncouth and sometimes ridiculous
behavior, had not given profane persons too much advantage to play upon them,
and through their sides to wound even Religion it self: so we could wish also
that some men by unreasonable and unjust, other some by unseasonable and
indiscreet scoffing at them, had not given them advantage to triumph in their
own innocence, and persist in their affected obstinacy. It cannot but be some
confirmation to men in error, to see men of dissolute and loose behavior,
with much eagerness, and petulancy, and virulence, to speak against them. We
all know how much scandal and prejudice it is to a right good cause, to be
either followed by persons open to just exception, or maintained with slender
and unsufficient reasons, or prosecuted with unseasonable and undiscreet
violence. And I am verily persuaded, that Many by their factious behavior were
driven to be Papists. The King's Ma. in Confer. at Hamp. p. 68.
as the increase of Papists in some parts of the Land, has occasionally sprung
(by a kind of Antiperistasis) from the intemperate courses of their Neighbor
Puritans; so the increase of Puritans, in many parts of the Land, owes not so
much to any sufficiency themselves conceive in their own grounds, as to the
disadvantage of some profane, or scandalous, or idle, or ignorant, or
indiscreet opposers. But setting these aside, I see not but that otherwise the
Name of Puritan, and the rest, are justly given them. For appropriating to
themselves the Names of Brethren, Professors, Good men, and other like; as
differences betwixt them and those they call Formalists: Would they not have it
thought that they have a Brotherhood and Profession of their own, freer and
purer from Superstition and Idolatry, than others have, that are not of the
same stamp? and doing so, why may they not be called Puritans? The Name, I
know, is sometimes fastened upon those that deserve it not; Rascal people will
call any man that bears but the face of honesty, a Puritan; but why should
that hinder others from placing it where it is rightly due.

''To their second Grievance I answer: Public means by Conferences, 28
Disputations, and otherwise, have been often used: and private men not seldom
afforded the favor of respite and liberty to bring in their Allegations. And I
think it can be hardly, or but rarely instanced, that ever Deprivation has
been used, but where fatherly Admonitions have first been used, and time given
to the Delinquents to consider of it, and inform themselves better. This course
usually has been taken; though every private particular man has no reason to
expect it. The Reverend Fathers of our Church, we may well think, amid so much
other employment, cannot be so unthrifty of their good hours, as to lavish them
out in hearing contentious persons eandem cantilenam, sing the same note an
hundred times over, and require farther satisfaction, after so many public and
unanswerable satisfactions already given. Yet have the Witness the learned
Books of diverse reverend Prelates: John Whitgift, John Buckeridge, Tho. Morton,
etc.
Bishops and other Church Governors out of their religious Zeal for the peace
of Gods Church, been so far from despising our Brethren herein; that they have
dispensed sometimes with their other weighty occasions, and taken pains to
answer their Reasons, and confute their Exceptions, satisfy all their Doubts,
and discover the weakness of all their grounds in the points questioned.

And as to their third Grievance: First, for my own part, I make no 29.
doubt, neither dare I be so uncharitable as to think, but that many of them
have honest, and upright, and sincere hearts to Godward, and are unfeignedly
zealous of Gods Truth and for Religion. They that are such, no doubt feel the
comfort of it in their own souls: and we see the fruits of it in their
conversation, and rejoice at it. But yet I cannot be so ignorant on the other
side, as not to know, that the most sanctified and zealous men are men, and
subject to carnal and corrupt affections; and may be so far swayed by them in
their judgments, as not to be able to discern, without prejudice and
partiality, truth from error. Good men, and Gods dear children may continue in
some Sancti stante charitate possunt errare etiam contra Catholicam veritatem.
Occh. Dial. part 1. ^. 2. c. 4.
error in Judgment, and consequently in a sinful practice arising thence, and
live and die in it (as some of these have done in disobedience to lawful
Authority) and that unrepented of otherwise, than as in the lump of their
unknown sins. It is not Honesty, nor Sincerity, that can privilege men from
either erring or sinning. Neither ought the unreproved conversation of men
countenance out their opinions, or their practices, against light of Divine
Scripture, and right reason: As we read Cyprian's error in old time; and we
see in our days not only the suspected Tenants of So Pelagius, from whose root
Popery (in that Branch) sprouted, was a man as strict for life as most
Catholics: yet a most dangerous and pestilent Heretic. Pelagii, viri, ut
audio, Sanct, and non parvo profectu Christiani. Aug. 3. de pec. merit. and
rem. 1. Istum, sicut eum qui noverunt loquuntur, bonum ac praedicandum virum^
Ib. c. 3.
Arminius, but even the bold Heresies of Faustus Socinus have spread much the
more for the reverend opinion men had of their personal endowments and
sanctity. Secondly, though comparisons are ever harsh, and most times odious;
yet since honesty and piety is alleged (without disparagement* be it spoken to
the best of them) there are as good, and honest, and religious, and zealous men
every way, of them that willingly and cheerfully conform, as of them that do
not. In the times of Popish persecution how many godly Bishops and conformable
Ministers laid down their lives for the testimony of Gods Truth: and for the
maintenance of his Gospel? And if it should please God in his just judgment (as
our sins, and amongst others our Schisms and Distractions most worthily
deserve) to put us once again to a fiery trial (which the same God for his
goodness and mercy defend): I make no question but many thousands of Conformers
would (by the grace of God) resist unto Blood, embrace the Faggot, and burn at
a Stake, in detestation of all Popish, Antichristian Idolatry, as readily and
cheerfully, and constantly, as the hottest, and precisest, and most scrupulous
Non-conformer. But Thirdly, Let men's honesty, and piety, and gifts be what they
can: must not men of honesty, and piety, and gifts, live under laws? And what
reason these, or any other respects, should Non enim in cujusquam persona
praetermittendum est, quod institutis generalibus continetur: Leo. Did. 61.
Miramur.
exempt any man from the just censure of the Church, in case he will not obey
her Laws, and conform to her Ceremonies? especially, since such men's impunity
would but encourage others to presume upon the like favor: and experience
teaches us, that no men's errors are so exemplary and pernicious as theirs, who
for their eminency of gifts, or sanctity of life, are most followed with
popular applause, and personal admiration.

We see their Grievances against us, how unjust they are, in the matter of 30.
Despising. I would they did no more despise the Churches Authority, than we do
their infirmities! But in matter of judging, see if we have not a just
grievance against them. As might be declared at large in many instances, out of
their Printed Books, and private Letters, and common Discourses. I will but
give you a I refer the Reader for more particular satisfaction to Fr. Mason's
Sermon. on 1 Cor. 14. 40. page 30. Sam. Collins Sermon. on 1 Timothy 6. 3. pa. 21, 22
and others: but especially to their own Writings.
taste, because I know I grow tedious, and I long to be at an end.

First, They judge our Church as half Popish and Antichristian, for retaining
some Ceremonies used in Popery; though we have purged them from their
Superstitions, and restored them to their Primitive use. Their great admired
Brightman in Apoc. cap. 3.
Opener of the Revelation, makes our Church the Linsey-Woolsey Laodicean
Church, neither hot nor cold. And some of them have 31.
slovenly compared our late gracious Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, of most Blessed
Memory, to a This Simile was first used by a very Reverend, grave and worthy
Dean (who has many ways deserved well of our whole Church) Alexander Noel,
Dean of Paul's, in a Sermon before Queen Elizabeth: and modestly and moderately
urged, not at all against the Ceremonies (which by his practice he did allow),
but for the further restraint of Popish Priests and Jesuits, who lay thick in
Ireland, and the Western Coasts of England and Wales, as heaps of dust and dirt
behind the doors. Yet I here ascribed it to the Puritans, who (though they
father it upon that good Man) must own it as their own Brat, because by mis
applying it to the Ceremonies, they have made it their own. -- Male dum
recitas, incipit esse t^un.
Sluttish Housewife; that having swept the House, yet left the dust and dirt
behind the doors; meaning thereby the Ceremonies. If our Church were but half
so ill as these men would make it, I think every honest religious man should
hold himself bound to separate from it, as his most excellent Majesty
Meditations on the Lords Prayer, page 21, etc. primae edit 1619. See Hooker's
Preface, Sect. 8.
has observed the Brownists have done upon their very grounds; accounting them
as Lukewarm for not quite separating, as they do us for no further reforming.

Secondly, They judge our Bishops, and other Church Governors, as Limbs 32.
of Antichrist, Locusts of the bottomless pit, domineering Lords over Gods
heritage, Usurpers of temporal Jurisdiction, Spiritual Tyrants over men's
Consciences, etc. Seeking by all means to make the name of Lord-Bishop odious
to the Gentry and Commons. Witness their Mar-prelate, and other infamous and
scandalous Libels in that kind. Having power in their hands, if the Bishops
should use more rigorous courses toward them than they have done, could ye
blame them?

Thirdly, They judge those that subscribe and conform, Machiavellian
Timeservers, 33.
formal Gospellers, State- Divines: men that know no conscience, but Law, nor
Religion, but the Kings: and such as would be as forward for the Mass, as the
Communion, if the State should alter.

Fourthly, All such Ministers as are not endowed with gifts for the Pulpit, 34.
they damn, as hirelings, and not shepherds: calling them Idol-Shepherds,
betrayers of Christ's flock, intruders into the Ministry without a Calling,
dumb Dogs, and I know not how many Names besides. Yea, although they be such as
are diligent, according to their measure of Gifts, to perform such duties as
the Church requires: to present the prayers of the people to God; to declare
(by reading the holy Bible, and good Homilies for that purpose appointed) the
will of God to the people; to instruct the younger sort in the points of
Catechism; to visit and comfort the sick and afflicted; and to administer
reverently and orderly the holy Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper.

Fifthly, They judge all such as interpose for the Churches peace, and oppose
35.
their Novelties, as enemies to all goodness, men of profane minds; haters of
Religion, despisers of the Word; persecutors of the Brethren; Imps of Satan,
instruments of Hell, and such as utterly abhor all godly and Christian courses.

Sixthly, and lastly (for I irk to rake longer in this Sink), they bewray 36.
themselves to be manifest Judges of all that are not of their stamp; by
singling out unto themselves, and those that favor them, certain proper
Appellations, of Brethren, and Good men, and Professors: as if none had
Brotherhood in Christ, none had interest in goodness, none made profession of
the Gospel but themselves. Whereas others have received the sign of their
Profession in their foreheads after Baptism, which perhaps they did not:
whereas others daily stand up in the Congregation to make profession of their
Christian Belief, which it may be they do not: or (if those things be not
material) whereas others by the grace of God are as steadfastly resolved in
their hearts, if need should be, to seal the truth of their profession with
their blood, as any of them can be.

But they will say, These peremptory Censures are but the faults of some 37.
few: all are not so hot and fiery. There be others that are more temperate in
their speeches, and moderate in their courses; and desire only they may be
spared for their own particular: but they Preach not against any of these
things, nor intermeddle to make more stirs in the Church.

I answer first, It were lamentable, if this were not so: If all were of 1.
that hot temper, or distemper rather, that many are; they would quickly tire
out themselves without spurring. Far be it from us to judge men's hearts; or to
condemn men for what we know not by them. Yet of some that carry themselves
with tolerable moderation outwardly, we have some cause to suspect, that they
do inwardly, and in their hearts judge as deeply as the hottest spirited
Railers. And we gather it from their forwardness at every turn, and upon every
slender occasion, obliquely to gird, and indirectly to glance at our Church,
and the Discipline, and the Ceremonies thereof, as far as they well dare. And
if such men meddle no further, we may reasonably think, Eadem velle eos
cognosces: da posse, quantum volunt. Sen. Ep. 42.
it is not for want of good will to do it, but because they dare not.

Secondly, Though they preach not against these things in the public 2.
Congregations; yet in their private Conventicles it is not unknown some do.
Though their Pulpits do not ring with it, yet their Houses do: though their
ordinary Sermons ad Populum be more modest; yet their set Conferences are
sometimes but too free, especially when they are required their Opinions by
those that invite them. And what themselves (for fear of Censure) thus Preach
but Matthew. 10. 27.
in the ear; their Lay-disciples openly preach on the house top.

Thirdly, Although both their Pulpits and Tables should be silent: yet 3.
their Practice sufficiently preaches their dislike, And who knows not that
a Real and Exemplary seducement makes the Author guilty, as well as a Verbal
and Oratory? Saint Peter did not Preach Judaism; but only, for offending the
Jews, forbear to eat with the Gentiles: yet Saint Paul reproves him for it to
his face, and interprets that fact of his, as an effectual and almost
compulsive seducement; Cogis judaizare, Gal. 2. Gal. 2. 14. utique
conversationis fuit vitium, non praedicationis. Tert. de praescript. cap. 23.
Non imperio, sed facto. Lyra. Non docentis imperio, sed conversationis exemplo.
Gloss. Ord. ibid.
Why compellest thou the Gentiles to Iudaize?

Lastly, It is to be considered, whether it may be enough for a Pastor, not to
meddle with these things: and whether he be not in conscience bound, especially
in case he live among a people distracted in Opinions, to declare himself
expressly either for them or against them. If they be utterly unlawful, and he
know it so; how is he not bound in conscience to reprove those that use them,
or require them? Otherwise he betrayeth the Otherwise what else do we but deny
and betray the truth? Def. of Min. Reas part 1. Pref. to the Reader.
truth of God by his silence, and suffers men to go on in their superstition
without rebuke. But if he be sufficiently resolved of their lawfulness, how is
he not bound in conscience to reprove those that refuse them, or oppose 4.
them? Otherwise he betrayeth the peace of the Church by his silence, and
suffers men to go on in their disobedience without rebuke. Nay more, every
Minister that has received Pastoral Charge, has twice or thrice (if not
oftener) witnessed his allowance of all and singular the 39. Articles of the
Church of England. Once at his Ordination before the Bishop; then at his
Institution into his Benefice, before his Ordinary; and both these by
Subscription under his Hand; and then after upon his Induction before his own
Flock; and that by verbal Approbation. By which Subscription and Approbation,
he has not only acknowledged Artic. 20.
in the Church the power of ordaining Rites and Ceremonies, Artic. 20. but he
has after a sort also bound himself Artic. 34.
openly to rebuke such as willingly and purposely break the Traditions and
Ceremonies of the Church, as offenders against the common Orders of the Church,
and wounders of the consciences of the weak Brethren, Artic. 34. He then that,
for any respect whatsoever, is mealmouth'd in these things, wherein he is bound
both in Conscience, and by virtue of his own voluntary Act to speak freely,
neither is constant to his own hand and tongue, nor is Heb. 3. 2.
faithful in Gods House, as was Moses, in discharging a good Conscience, and
revealing unto his people Acts 20. 27.
the whole Counsel of God.

Thus have I endeavored, having the opportunity of this place (as I 38.
held my self both in Conscience, and in regard of my Subscription, bound) to
deliver my Opinion freely, so far as my Text gave occasion, concerning the
Ceremonial Constitutions of our Church; and therein labored to free, not only
the Conformer from all unjust censures; but even the Non-conformer also, so far
as he has reason to expect it, from all scandalous despisings. I beseech you
pardon my length, if I have been troublesome, I had much to say, and the matter
was weighty; and I desired to give some satisfaction in it to those that are
contrary-minded; and I have no purpose (for any thing I know) at all to trouble
this place any more hereafter. Let us all now humbly beseech Almighty God to
grant a blessing to what has been presently taught and heard, that it may work
in the hearts of us all charitable affections one toward another, due
obedience to lawful Authority, and a conscionable care to walk in our several
Callings faithfully, painfully, and peaceably, to the comfort of our own Souls,
the edification of God's Church, and the glory of the ever blessed Trinity, the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Three Persons and One God: To whom be ascribed by
us and the whole Church, as is most due, the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory,
for ever and ever.

Amen.
AD CLERUM.
The Second Sermon.
At a Visitation at Boston, Lincoln, 24th. April, 1621.
ROMANS III. 8. And not rather (as we be slanderously reported, and as some
affirm that we say) Let us do evil that good may come: whose damnation is just.
A Little before, at the fourth Verse, St. Paul had delivered 1.
a Conclusion sound and comfortable and strengthened it from David's both
experience and testimony in That thou might be justified in thy sayings, and
might overcome when thou art judged, Psalm. 51. 4.
Psalm. 51. A place pregnant and full of sinews to enforce it. The Conclusion in
effect was, That Nothing in Man can annul the Covenant of God. Neither the
original unworthiness of God's Children, through the universal corruption of
Nature; nor their actual unfaithfulness bewrayed (through frailty) in
particular trials, can alienate the free love of God from them, or cut them off
from the Covenant of Grace; but that still God will be glorified in the truth
and faithfulness of his promises, notwithstanding any unrighteousness or
unfaithfulness in Man.

But never yet was any Truth so happily innocent, as to maintain it self 2.
free from Calumny and Abuse. Malice on the one hand, and Fleshliness on the
other, though with different aims, yet do the same Work. They both pervert the
Truth, by drawing pestilent Corollaries from sound Conclusions; as the Spider
sucketh poison from medicinable Herbs. But with this difference; Malice
slandereth the Truth, to discountenance it; but Fleshliness abuses the Truth,
to countenance it self by it. The cavilling Sophister, he would fain bring the
Apostles gracious Doctrine into Discredit: The carnal Libertine, he would as
fain bring his own ungracious behavior into credit. Both, by making false (yet
colorable) Inferences from the former Conclusion. There are Triplex
inconveniens, Lyranus hic.
three of those Inferences; but never a good. The First: If so, then cannot God
in reason and justice take vengeance of our unrighteousness. The Color: for
why 1.
should he punish us for that, which so much magnifieth and commends his
righteousness? [ Verse 5.
But if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God, what shall we
say? Is God unrighteous that takes vengeance?] The Second Inference: If so,
then it is unjust either in God or Man to condemn 2.
us as sinners, for breaking the Law. The Color: for why should that action be
censured of sin, which so abundantly redoundeth to the glory of God? [ Verse 7.
For if the truth of God has more* abounded through my lie unto his glory, why
yet am I also judged as a sinner?] The Third, and 3.
last, and worst Inference: If so, then it is a good and wise resolution, Let
us sin freely, and boldly commit evil. The Color: for why should we fear to do
that, from which so much good may come? In this Verse of my Text [ And not
rather, let us do evil that good may come.]

This last cavilling Inference, the Apostle in this Verse both brings in, and
casts out again: brings in as an objection, and casts out by his answer.
An answer which at once cutteth off both it, and the former Inferences. And the
Answer is double; Ad rem, ad hominem. That concerns the force and matter of
the Objection; this the state, and danger of the Objectors. Ad rem, in the
former part of the Verse [ And not rather (as we be slanderously reported, and
us some affirm that we say) Let us do evil that good may come:] Ad hominem, in
the latter end [ Whose damnation is just.] In the former part there is an
Objection, and the Rejection of it. The Objection. And not rather, Let us do
evil that good may come. The Rejection thereof with a Non sequitur; implying
not only the bare inconsequence of it upon the Apostles conclusion, but withal,
and especially the falsness and unsoundness of it taken by it self; As we be
slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say, Let us do evil, etc.

My aim at this present is to insist especially upon a Principle of practick 4.
Divinity; which by joint consent of Writers old and new, Orthodox and Popish,
resulteth from the very body of this Verse, and is of right good use to direct
us in sundry difficulties, which daily arise in vita communi, in point of
Conscience. The Principle is this, We must not do any evil, that any good may
come of it. Yet there are besides this, in the Text diverse other inferior
Observations not to be neglected. With which I think it will not be amiss to
begin, and to dispatch them first briefly; that so I may fall the sooner, and
stay the longer upon that which I mainly intend.

Observe first the Apostle's Method, and substantial manner of proceeding:
Observe. I.
how he clears all as he goes; how diligent he is and careful, 7.
betimes to remove such cavils (though he Propter hos arguendos fecit Paulus
hic quasi digressionem tractando haec. Cajetan.
stepped a little out of his way for it) as might bring scandal to the Truth he
had delivered. When we Preach and instruct others, we should not think it
enough to deliver positive Truths: but we should also take good care, as near
as we can, to leave them clear; and by prevention to stop the mouths of such as
love to pick quarrels at the truth, and to bark against the light. It were good
we would (so far as our leisure and gifts will permit) wisely forecast, and
prevent all Offense that might be taken at any part of God's Truth; and be
careful as not to broach any thing that is false, through rashness, error or
intemperance; so not to betray any truth by ignorant handling, or by
superficial, slight, and unsatisfying answers. But then especially concerns
it us to be most careful herein; when we have to speak before such, as we have
some cause before hand to suspect to be, through ignorance, or weakness, or
custom, or education, or prejudice, or partial affections, or otherwise
contrary minded unto, or at leastwise not well persuaded of, those Truths we
are to teach. If the ways be rough and knotty, and the passengers be feeble
joynted and dark-sighted, it is but needful the Guides should remove as many
blocks and stones out of the way, as may be. When we have gone as warily as we
can to Work, Cavillers (if they list) will take exceptions: it is our part to
see we give them no advantage; lest we help to justify the Principals, by
making our selves Accessories. Those men are ill advised, however zealous for
the Truth, that stir in controverted points, and leave them worse than they
found them. Aut animo demos, aut viribus addas. Dictum Archidami ad filium,
apud Plutarch. in Laconicis.
A Stomach will not bear out a matter without strength: and to encounter an
adversary are required As Zuinglius said of Carolostadius whom he judged too
weak to undertake the defense of the truth against Luther in the point of
consubstantiation. Non satis humerorum habet. Sleiden.
Shoulders as well as Gall. A good cause is never betrayed more, than when it
is prosecuted with much eagerness, but little sufficiency. This from the Method.

Observe secondly, the Apostles manner of speech, (...), Translators render it,
As we are wrongfully blamed. As we are slandered. As 6.
we are slanderously reported. And the word indeed from the (...).
Original Observe. II.
imports no more; and so Writers both profane and sacred use it. But yet in
Scriptures by a specialty it most times signifies the highest degree of
Slander; when we open our mouths against God, and speak ill, or amiss, or
unworthily of God; that is, (...), and properly, the sin we call Blasphemy. And
yet that very word of Blasphemy, which for the most part refers immediately
to God, the Apostle here uses, when he speaks of himself and other Christian
Ministers, (...), as we are slandered, nay, as we are blasphemed. A slander or
other wrong, or contempt done to a Minister, qua talis, is a sin of an higher
strain than the same done to a Common Christian. Not at all for his persons
sake; for so he is no more God's good creature than the other; no more free
(...). Acts 14. 15. and Jam. 5. 17.
from sins, and infirmities, and passions, than the other. But for his
Calling's sake; for so he is Gods 2 Cor. 5. 20.
Ambassador, which the other is not: and for his works sake; for that is Gods
1 These. 2. 13.
Message, which the others is not. Personal Slanders and Contempts are to a
Minister, but as to another man; because his person is but as another man's
person. But slanders and contempts done to him as a Minister, that is, with
reference either to his Calling or Doctrine, are much greater than to another
man: as reaching unto God himself, whose person the Minister represents in
his Calling; and whose errand the Minister delivers in his Doctrine. For
Contempt S. Paul: is express elsewhere; 1 These. 4. 8.
He that despises, despises not man, but God. And as for Slanders, the very
choice of the word in my Text infers as much. The dignity of our Calling
inhaunceth the sin; and every slander against our regular Doctrines, is more
than a bare Calumny; if no more, at least, petty We have heard him speak
blasphemous words against Moses and against God.
blasphemy, (...), as we are slandered, as we are blasphemed. That from the
word.

Observe Thirdly, the wrong done to the Apostle and to his Doctrine. He Acts 6.
11.
was slanderously reported to have taught that which he never so much as 7.
Observe. III.
thought: and his Doctrine had many scandalous imputations fastened upon it,
whereof neither he nor it were guilty [ As we are slanderously reported, and as
some affirm that we say.] The best Truths are subject to mis-interpretation:
and there is not that Doctrine, how firmly soever grounded, how warily soever
delivered, whereon Calumny will not fasten, and stick slanderous imputations.
Neither Matthew. 11. 17, 19.
John's Mourning, nor Christ's piping can pass the Pikes: but the one has a
Devil, the other is a Glutton and a Wine-bibber. Though Matthew. 5. 17.
Christ come to fulfill the Law, yet there he will accuse him as a destroyer of
the Law, Matthew. 5. And though he decide the question plainly for Caesar, and
that in the case of Tribute, Matthew. 22. [ Matthew. 22. 21.
Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's] yet there be that charge him,
as if he John 19. 12.
spoke against Caesar, John 19. and that in the very case of Tribute, as if he
Luke 23. 2.
forbad to give Tribute to Caesar, Luke 23. Now if they Matthew. 10. 25.
called the Master of the House Beelzebub, how much more them of his Household?
If Christ's did not, think we the Doctrine of his Ministers and his Servants
could escape the stroke of men's tongues, and be free from calumny and cavil?
How the Apostles were slandered as Seducers and Sectaries, and vain Bablers,
and Heretics, and Broachers of new and false and pestilent Doctrines, their
Epistles, and the Book of their Acts witness abundantly to us. And for
succeeding times, read but the Apologies of Athenagoras, and Tertullian, and
others: and it will amaze you to see what Blasphemous, and Seditious, and
Odious, and Horrible Impieties were fathered upon the Ancient Christian
Doctors, and upon their Profession. But our own experience goes beyond all.
Sundry of the Doctors of our Church teach truly, and agreeably to Scripture the
Acts 17. 28. and Esaias 16. 12.
effectual concurrence of God's Will and Power, with subordinate Agents in
every, and therefore even in sinful actions; God's Romans 9. 11. 15. 18, etc.
free Election of those whom he purposes to save of his own grace, without any
motives in, or from themselves; the immutability of God's Joh. 13. 1. Romans 11.
29. and 5. 9, 10. and 8. 35, 38, 39.
Love and Grace toward the Saints Elect, and their certain perseverance
therein unto Salvation; the Romans 3. 28.
Justification of sinners by the imputed righteousness of Christ, apprehended
and applied unto them by a lively faith, without the works of the Law. These
are sound, and true, and (if rightly understood) comfortable, and right
profitable Doctrines. And yet they of the Church of Rome have the forehead (I
will not say to slander, my Text allows more) to blaspheme God and his Truth,
and the Ministers thereof for teaching them. Bellarmine, Gretser, Maldonat, and
the Jesuits; but none more than our own English Fugitives, Bristow, Stapleton,
Parsons, Kellison, and all the Rabble of that Crew, freely spend their mouths
in barking against us, as if we made God the author of sin: as if we would have
men sin and be damned by a Stoical fatal necessity; sin whether they will or
no, and be damned whether they deserve it or no; as if we opened a gap to all
licentiousness and profaneness; let them believe, it is no matter how they
live, Heaven is their own cock-sure: as if we cried down good works, and
condemned charity. Slanders loud and false, yet easily blown away with one
single word, (...). These imputations upon us and our Doctrine are unjust; but
(...), let them that thus mis-report us, know, that without repentance, their
damnation will be just.

It would be time not ill spent, to discover the grounds of this observation, 8.
and to press the uses of it something fully. But because my aim lies another
way; I can but point at them, and pass. If seldom Truth escape unslandered,
marvel not: the reasons are evident. On God's part, on Man's part, on the
Devil's part. God suffers, Man raises, and the Devil furthereth these
slanders against the Truth. To begin ordine retrogrado, and to take them
backwards. First, on the Devil's part; a I.
kind of Contrariety and Antipathy betwixt him and it. He being the Joh. 8. 44.
Father of Lies, and Ephesians. 6. 12.
Prince of darkness, cannot away with the Truth, and with the Light: and
therefore casts up slanders, as Fogs and Mists against the Truth to belly it,
and against the Light to darken it. Secondly, II.
on Man's part: And that partly in the understanding; when the judgment, 1.
either of it self weak, or else weakened through precipitancy, prejudice, or
otherwise, is deceived with fallacies instead of substance, and mistaketh 2.
seeming inferences for necessary and natural deductions. Partly in the Will:
when men of corrupt minds set themselves purposely against the known truth, and
out of malicious wilfulness (against the strong testimony of their own hearts)
slander it, that so they may disgrace it, and them 3.
that profess it. Partly in the Affections; when men, overcome by carnal
affections, are content to cheat their own souls, by giving such constructions
to God's Truth, as will, for requital, give largest allowance to their
practices; and so rather choose to crooken the Rule to their own bent, than to
level themselves and their affections and lives according to the Rule. Thirdly,
on God's part; who suffers his own truth to be slandered and Observe. III.
mistaken. Partly in his Justice, as a fearful judgment 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10, 11, 12.
upon wicked ones, 1.
whereby their hard hearts become yet more hardened, and their most just
condemnation yet more just. Partly in his goodness, as a powerful 2.
fiery trial of true Doctors, whose constancy and sincerity is the more 1 Cor.
11. 19.
approved with him, and the more eminent with men, if they John 10. 12.
flee not when the Wolf comes, but keep their standing, and stoutly maintain
God's Truth, when it is deepliest slandered and hotly opposed. And partly, 3.
in his Wisdom, as a rich occasion for those whom he has gifted for it, 2 Timothy
1. 6.
(...), to awaken their zeal, to quicken up their industry, to muster up their
abilities, to scour up their spiritual armor, (which else through dis-use
might gather rust) for the defense and for the rescue of that 1 Timothy 6. 20. and
2 Timothy 1. 14.
(...), that precious truth whereof they are depositaries, and wherewith he
has entrusted them.

These are the Grounds. The Uses, for instruction, briefly are, to teach 9.
and admonish every one of us; that we be not either; first, so wickedly 1.
malicious, as without apparent cause to raise any slander; or secondly, so 2.
foolishly credulous, as without severe examination, to believe any slander; or
thirdly, so basely timorous, as to flinch from any part of 3.
God's truth for any slander. But I must not insist. This from the slander.

Observe fourthly, how peremptory the Apostle is in his censure against 10.
the slanderers or abusers of holy truths: Whose damnation is just. Observe. IV.


Ambrosius, Lyra, Piscator, Pareus, etc.
Some understand it with reference to the slanderers; As we be slander, ously
reported, and as some affirm that we say: whose damnation is just: that is,
their damnation is just, who thus unjustly slander us.

Chrysostomus, Cajetanus, Erasmus, etc.
Others understand it with reference to that ungodly resolution: Let us do
evil, that good may come: whose damnation is just: that is, their damnation is
just for the evil they do, who adventure to do any evil, under whatsoever
pretense of good to come of it. Both expositions are good; and I rather embrace
both, than prefer either. I ever held it a kind of honest spiritual thirst;
where there are two senses given of one place, both agreeable to the Analogy of
Faith and Manners, both so indifferently appliable to the words and scope of
the place, as that it is hard to say, which was rather intended; though there
was but one intended, yet to make use of both. And so will we. Take it the
first way: and the slanderer may read his doom in it. Here is his wages and his
portion, and the meed and reward of his slander; Damnation. And it is a just
reward. He condemns God's truth unjustly: God condemns him justly for it, [
whose damnation is just.] If we be countable (and we are countable at the day
of Judgment) for Mat. 12. 36.
every idle word we speak; though neither in it self false, nor yet hurtful and
prejudicial unto others: what less than damnation can they expect, that with
much falsehood for the thing it self, and infinite prejudice in respect of
others, blaspheme God and his holy Truth?

But if it be done on purpose, and in malice to despite the Truth, and 11.
the professors thereof: I scarce know whether there be a greater sin or no.
Maliciously to oppose the known Truth, is by most Divines accounted a principal
branch of that great unpardonable sin, the sin against the holy Ghost: by some,
the very sin it self. I dare not say it is so; nor yet that it is unpardonable,
or has final impenitency necessarily attending it: I would be loath to
interclude the hope of Repentance from any sinner; or to confine God's Mercy
within any bounds. Yet thus much I think I may safely say; it comes shrewdly
near the sin against the holy Ghost, and is a fair (or rather a foul) step
toward it, and leaves very little hope of pardon. That great sin against the
Holy Ghost, the Holy Ghost it self in the Scriptures chooses, rather than by
any other, to express by this name of Matthew. 12. 31, 32.
Blasphemy, Matthew. 12. And whereas our Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. says, That though he
were a Blasphemer, yet 1 Timothy 1. 13.
he obtained mercy, because he did it ignorantly in unbelief: he leaves it
questionable, but withal suspicious, whether there may be any hope of Mercy for
such as blaspheme maliciously, and against knowledge. If any man's be, certainly
such a man's damnation is most just.

But not all Slanderers of God's Truth are of that deep dye: not all 12.
Slanderers sinners in that high degree. God forbid they should. There, are
respects which much qualify and lessen the sin. But yet allow it any in the
least degree, and with the most favorable circumstances, still the Apostles
sentence stands good: Without Repentance their damnation is just. Admit the
Truth be dark and difficult, and so easily to be mistaken: admit withal the man
be weak and ignorant, and so apt to mistake; his understanding being neither
distinct through incapacity to apprehend and sort things aright, nor yet
constant to it self through unsettledness and levity of judgment. Certainly his
misprision of the Truth is so much Involuntarium minuit de ratione peccati.
lesser, than the others wilful Calumny; as it proceeds less from the
irregularity of the Will to the judgment. And of such a man there is good hope,
that both in time he may see his error, and repent expressly and particularly
for it; and that in the mean time he does repent for it implicit, and
inclusively in his general contrition for, and confession of, the massy lump
of his hidden and Psalm. 19. 12.
secret and unknown sins. This Charity binds us both to hope for the future,
and to think for the present: and S. Paul's example and words in the 1 Timothy 1.
13.
place but now alleged, are very comfortable to this purpose. But yet still
thus much is certain: He that through ignorance, or for want of apprehension or
judgment, or by reason of whatsoever other defect or motive, brings a slander
upon any divine Truth, though never so perplexed with difficulties, or open to
cavil: unless he repent for it, either in the particular, (and that he must do
if ever God open his eyes, and let him see his fault) or at leastwise in the
general; it is still a damnable sin in him; His damnation is just. We have the
very case almost in terminis laid down, and thus resolved in 2 Pet. 3. 2 Pet.
3. 18.
In which are some things hard to be understood, (observe the condition of the
things; hard to be understood) which they that are unlearned and unstable,
(observe also the condition of the persons, unlearned and unstable) wrest, as
they do also the other Scriptures, to their own destruction. Where we have the
matter of great difficulty, hard to be understood; the persons of small
sufficiency, unlearned and unstable: and yet if men, even of that weakness
wrest and preve^t truths, though of that hardness, they do it (...), to their
own destruction, says S. Peter there (...) their own just damnation, says S.
Paul in my Text. This from the Censure in the first sense.

Take it in the other sense, with reference to this ungodly resolution, 13.
Let us do evil, that good may come: it teaches us that no pretension of doing
it ( in ordine ad Deum, for God's glory,) to a good end, or any other color
whatsoever, can excuse those that presume to do evil; but that still the evil
they do is damnable, and it is but just with God to render damnation to them
for it. [ Whose damnation is just.] And thus understood* it opens us away to
the consideration of that main Principle whereof I spoke, and whereon by your
patience I desire to spend the remainder of my time; namely this: We must not
for any good, do any evil. For the farther opening, and better understanding
whereof, (since the rule is of infinite use in the whole practice of our
lives;) that we may the better know* when, and where, and how far to apply it
aright for the direction of our Consciences and Actions; we must of necessity
unfold the extent of this word evil, and consider the several kinds and degrees
of it distinctly and a part. We must not do evil, that good may come.

First, evil is of two sorts. The evil of fault, and the evil of punishment. 14.
Malum delicti, and Malum supplicii; as Tertul. l. 2. adv. Marcion. cap. 14.
Tertullian calls them: or, as the more received terms are, Malum Culpae, and
Malum Poenae. The evil we commit against God, and the evil God inflicteth upon
us. The evil we do, unjustly, but yet willingly: and the evil we suffer,
unwillingly, but yet justly. In a word, the evil of sin, and the evil of pain.
Touching evils of pain; if the Case be put, When two such evils are propounded,
and both cannot be avoided, whether we may not make choice of the one, to avoid
the other. The resolution is Inter ha^ datur electio: and minus damnum facere
licet, ut evitetur majus. Pareus hic.
common and good from the old Maxim, E malis minimum, we may incur the less, to
prevent the greater evil. As we may deliver our purse to a Thief, rather than
fight upon unequal terms to save it: and in a tempest cast our wares into the
Sea, to lighten the ship that it wreck not: and endure the lancing and
searching of an old sore, to keep it from festering and spreading. And this
Principle in my Text is not a rule for that Case: that being propounded
concerning evils of pain; whereas my Text is intended only of the evils of sin.
We are here hence resolved, that we are not to do any evil, that good may come
of it. for all which yet we may suffer some evil, that good may come of it.
Although (to note that by the way) the common answer e malis minimum, even in
the evils of pain, is to be understood (as most other practical conclusions
are) not as simply and universally, but as commonly and ordinarily true. For
(as Slater on this place.
one says well) perhaps there are Cases, wherein two evils of Pain being at
once propounded, it may not be safe for us to be our own carvers.

But I must let pass the Questions concerning the evils of Pain, as
impertinencies. The evils of sin are of two sorts. Some are evil formally,
simply, and per se; such as are directly against the scope and purpose of some
of Gods Commandments: as Polytheism against the first, Idolatry against the
second, and so against the rest, Blasphemy, Profaneness, Disloyalty, Cruelty,
Adultery, Injustice, Calumny, Avarice, and the like; all which are evil in
their own nature, and can never ( positis quibuscunque circumstantiis) be done
well. Othersome are evil only respectively, and by accident: but otherwise in
their own nature indifferent, and such as may be, and are done sometimes well,
sometimes ill. To know the nature of which things the better, since they are of
singular use for the resolution of many Cases of Conscience: we must yet more
distinctly inquire into the different kinds (or rather degrees) of indifferent
things; and into the different means, whereby things otherwise in nature
indifferent, become accidentally evil for their use.

Indifferent things are either equally, or unequally such. We may call 16.
them for distinctions sake (and I think not altogether unfitly) (...).
indifferentia ad utrumlibet; and (...).
indifferentia ad unum. Indifferentia ad utrumlibet, or equally indifferent
things, are such, as (barely considered) are arbitrary either way, and hang in
aequilibrio, between good and evil, without turning the Scale either one way or
other, as not having any notable inclination or propension unto either rather
than other: as to drink fasting, to walk into the fields, or to lift up ones
hands unto his head, etc. Now concerning such things as these, if any man
should be so scrupulons, as to make a matter of conscience of them, and should
desire to be resolved in point of Conscience whether they were good or evil; as
namely, whether he should do well or ill, to walk abroad into the field a mile
or two with his friend, the thing it self is so equally indifferent, that it
were resolution enough to leave it in medio, and to answer him, there were
neither good nor hurt in it: the Action of walking, barely considered, being
not considerably either morally good, or morally evil. I say [ morally;] for in
matter of health, or civility, or otherwise, it may be good, or evil: but not
Quia eorum objectum non includit aliquid pertinens ad ordinem rationis. Aquin.
1. 2 qu. 18. art. 8. in corp.
morally, and spiritually, and in matter of Conscience. And I say withal [
barely considered] for there may be circumstances, which may make it
accidentally evil. As to walk abroad in the fields, when a man should be at
Divine service in the Church, is by accident morally evil, through the
circumstance of Time: as, on the contrary, not to walk, if we have promised to
meet a friend at such a time, and in such a place, who stands in need of our
present help, is by accident morally evil, through the obligation of that
former promise. But yet still, these and other circumstances set aside, barely
to walk, or barely not to walk, and the like, are Indifferentia ad utrumlibet,
things in their own nature (and that equally) indifferent.

Things unequally indifferent are such, as though they be neither universally
17.
good, nor absolutely evil; yet even barely considered, sway more or less
rather the one way than the other. And that either unto good, or unto evil. Of
the former sort are such outward actions, as being in Moral Precepts
indefinitely commanded, are yet sometimes sinfully and ill done: as giving an
Alms, hearing a Sermon, reproving an Offender, and the like. Which are in
themselves good; and so to be accounted, rather than evil, though some unhappy
circumstance or other may make them ill. Of the latter sort are such outward
actions, as being in Moral Precepts indefinitely prohibited, are yet in some
cases lawful, and may be well done: as, swearing an oath, traveling on the
Sabbath day, playing for Money, and the like. Which are in themselves rather
evil than good, because they are ever evil, unless all circumstances concur to
make them good. Now of these actions, though the former sort carry the face of
good, the latter of evil; yet in very truth both sorts are indifferent.
Understand me aright: I do not mean indifferent indifferentia contradictionis,
such as may be indifferently either done, or not done; but indifferent only
indifferentia contrarietatis, such as (suppose the doing) may be indifferently
either good or evil: because, so they may be done, as to be good; and so they
may be done also, as to be evil. But yet with this difference, that those
former, though indifferent, and in some cases evil, are yet of themselves
notably and eminently inclined unto good rather than evil; and these latter
proportionably unto evil rather than good. From which difference it comes to
pass, that to the Question barely proposed concerning the former actions,
whether they be good or evil; the answer is just and warrantable, to say
indefinitely they are good: and contrarily concerning the latter actions, to
say indefinitely they are evil.

Which difference well weighed (to note that by the way) would serve 18.
to justify a common practice of most of us in the exercise of our Ministry
against such as distaste our doctrine for it, or unjustly otherwise take
offense at it. Ordinarily in our Sermons we indefinitely condemn as evil,
swearing, and gaming for money, and dancing, and recreations upon the Sabbath
day, and going to Law, and retaliation of injuries, and Monopolies, and raising
of Rents, and taking forfeiture of bonds, etc. and in our own coat
Non-residency and Pluralities. Most of which yet, and many other of like
nature, most of us do, or should, know to be in some cases lawful; and
therefore in the number of those indifferent things which we call Indifferentia
ad unum. You that are our hearers should bring so much charitable discretion
with you, when you hear us in the Pulpits condemn things of this nature, as to
understand us no otherwise, than we either do or should mean, and that is thus:
that such and such things are evil, as now a days, through the corruptions of
the times, most men use them, and such as therefore should not be adventured
upon without mature and unpartial disquisition of the uprightness of our
affections therein, and a severe trial of all circumstances whether they carry
weight enough with them to give our consciences Let every man be fully
persuaded ((...)) in his own mind, ver. 5.
sufficient security, not only of their lawfulness in themselves, and at large,
but of their particular lawfulness too unto us, and them. But this by the way.

Now to proceed. There are diverse means whereby things not simply 19.
evil, but in themselves (either equally or unequally) indifferent, may yet
become accidentally evil. Any defect or obliquity, any unhappy intervening
circumstance is enough to poison a right good action, and to make it stark
naught. I may as well hope to grasp the Sea, as to comprehend all those means.
I make choice therefore to remember but a few of the chiefest; such as happen
often, and are very considerable. Things not simply evil, may accidentally become
such; as by sundry other means, so especially by one of these three:
Conscience, Scandal, and Comparison. First. Conscience, in regard of the Agent.
Though the thing be good, 1.
yet if the Agent do it with a condemning, or but a doubting Conscience, the
Action becomes evil. [ Romans 14. 14.
To him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean; and Ibid.
v. 23.
he that doubts, is damned if he eat, because he eats not of faith, chap.
14. of this Epistle.] Secondly, Scandal; 2.
in regard of other men. Though the thing be good, yet if a brother Ibid. ver.
21.
stumble, or be offended, or be made weak by it, the action becomes evil. [
Ibid. ver. 20.
All things are pure; but it is evil for that man who eats with offense, ver.
20. there.] Thirdly, Comparison in regard of other actions. 3.
Though the thing be good, yet if we prefer it before better things, and
neglect or omit them for it, the action becomes evil, [ Matthew. 9. 13.
Go, and learn what that is, I will have mercy and not sacrifice: Matthew. 9.]

The stuff thus prepared, by differencing out those things, which
undistinguished, 20.
might breed confusion; our next business must be, to lay the rule, and to
apply it to the several kinds of evil, as they have been differenced. I foresaw
we should not have time to go through all that was intended: and therefore we
will content our selves for this time, with the consideration of this Rule,
applied to things simply evil. In them the Rule holds perpetually, and
without exception: that which is simply evil, may not for any good be done. We
know not any greater good (for there is not any greater good) than the Glory of
God: we scarce know a lesser sin (if any sin may be accounted little) than a
harmless officious lie. Yet may not Vide fuse Augustinum in lib. de Mendacio,
and contra Mendacium, and alibi.
this be done; no not for that. Will you speak wickedly for God, and talk
deceitfully for him? Job 13. 7. If not for the glory of God; then certainly not
for any other inferior end: not for the saving of a life, not for the Ad
sempiternam salutem nullus ducendus est, opitulante mendacio. Aug. de Mend. ca.
19.
conversion of a Soul, not for the peace of a Church, and (if even that were
possible too) not for the redemption of a world. No Ea quae constat esse
peccata, nullo bonae causae obtentu, nullo quasi bono fine, nulla velut bona
intention facienda sunt. Aug. contra Mendac. c. 7.
intention of any end can warrant the choice of sinful means to compass it.

The Reasons are strong. One is; because sin in its own nature, is Suapte
natura repugnat peccato quod sit eligibile: and propterea, nec propter aliud
bonum, est eligibile, Cajet. in hunc locum.
de numero ineligibilium: and therefore as not eligible propter se, for its own
sake, (there is neither form nor beauty in it, that we should desire it;) so
neither propter aliud, with reference to any farther end. Actus peccati non est
ordinabilis in bonum finem; is the common resolution of the Schools. In civil
and popular elections, if men make choice of such a person, to bear any office
or place among them, as by the local Charters, Ordinances, Statutes, or other
Customs which should rule them in their choice, is altogether ineligible, the
election is de jure nulla, naught and void; the incapacity of the person
elected making a nullity in the act of election. No less is it in 21.
moral actions and elections, if for any intended end we make choice of such
means, as by the Law of God (which is our rule, and must guide us) are
ineligible; and such is every sin.

Another reason is grounded upon that Principle, Aquin. 1. secundae, qu. 18.
art. 4. ad 3. and qu. 19. art. 6. ad 1, ex Dionysio c. 4. de Divin. nomin.
Bonum ex causa integra, Malum ex partiali. Any partial or particular defect,
in Object, End, Manner, or other Circumstance, is enough to make the whole
action bad; but to make it good, there must be an universal non est actio bona
simpliciter, nisi omnes bonit^tes concurrant: sed. quilibet defectus singularis
causat malum. Aquin. 1. 2. qu. 18. art. 4. ad 3.
concurrence of 22.
all requisite conditions in every of these respects: As a disfigured eye, or
nose, or lip, makes the face deformed; but to make it comely there is required
the due proportion of every part. And any one short Clause or Proviso, not
legal, is sufficient to abate the whole Writ or Instrument, though in every
other part absolute and without exception. The intention then, be it granted
never so good, is unsufficient to warrant an Action good, so long as it fails
either in the object, or manner, or any requisite circumstance whatsoever. 1 Samuel 15. 20, etc.
Saul pretended a good end, inspring the fat things of Amaleck, that he might
therewith do sacrifice to the Lord: but God rejected both it and him, 1 Samuel
15. We can think no other, but that 2 Samuel 6. 6.
Uzzah intended the safety of Gods Ark, when it tottered in the Cart, and he
stretched out his hand to stay it from falling: but God interpreted it a
presumption, and punished it, 2 Samuel 6. Doubtless Matthew. 16. 22, 23.
Peter meant no hurt to Christ, but rather good; when he took him aside, and
advised him to be good to himself, and to keep him out of danger: yet Christ
rebuked him for it, and sent him packing in the Devils name, Get thee behind me
Satan, Matthew. 16.

But what will we say (and let that stand for a third reason) if our pretended
good intention prove indeed no good intention? And certainly, be it as fair and
glorious, as we could be content to imagine it; such it will prove to be, if it
set us upon any sinful or unwarranted means: indeed no good intention, but a
bad. For, granted it must be, that the Intention of any end does virtually
include the means: as in a Syllogism, the premises do the Conclusion. No more
then can the choice of ill means proceed from a good intention, than can a
false Conclusion be inferred from true Premises: and that is impossible. From
which ground it is, that the Greg. lib. 28. Moral. cap. 13. Eusebius. Emiss. hom.
26. and others.
Fathers, and other Divines do oftentimes argue from the Intention to the
Action, and from the goodness of the one, to the goodness of both: to that
purpose applying those speeches of our Savior, in the twelfth, and in the
Sixth of Matthew, Matthew. 12. 33.
Either make the tree good, and his fruit good, or else make the tree corrupt,
and his fruit corrupt; And, Matthew. 6. 22.
If thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light: but if thine
eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. The light of the body is
the eye; and of the work the intention. No marvel, when the eye is evil, if the
whole body be dark; and when the intention is evil, if the whole work be
naught. That which deceives most men in judging of good or bad intentions, is,
that they take the end and the intention for one and the same thing: betwixt
which two there is a spacious difference. For the end, is the thing propter
quid, for which we work, that whereat we aim in working, and so has rationem
causae finalis: but the intention is the cause a qua, from which we work, that
which sets us on working; and so has rationem causae efficientis. Now
between these two kinds of causes, the final and the efficient, there is not
only a great difference, but even a repugnancy; in such sort, as that it is
impossible they should at any time coincidere, which some other kinds of causes
may do. It is therefore an error to think, that if the end be good, the
intention of that end must needs be good: for there may as well be Sed videte
ne forte non sit vere oculus simplex qui fallatur. Bern. de praecept. and
dispensat.
a bad intention of a good end, as a bad desire of a good object. Whatsoever
the end be we intend, it is certain, that intention cannot be good, which
puts us upon the choice of evil means.

Methinks the Church of Rome should blush, (if her forehead dyed red 22.
with the blood of God's Saints, were capable of any tincture of shame) at the
discovery of her manifold impostures, in counterfeiting of Relics, in coining
of Miracles, in compiling of Legends, in gelding of good Authors by expurgatory
indexes, in juggling with Magistrates by lewd equivocations, etc. Practices
warrantable by no pretense. Yet in their account but Sancta Hyp^-crisis was
Dominicus his word.
piae frauds; for so they term them, no less ridiculously than falsely: for the
one word contradicts the other. But what do I speak of these, but petty
things, in comparison of those her louder Impieties? breaking covenants of
truce and peace; dissolving of lawful, and dispensing for unlawful marriages;
assoyling Subjects from their Oaths and Allegiance; plotting Treasons, and
practicing Rebellions; excommunicating and dethroning Kings; arbitrary
disposing of Kingdoms; stabbing and murdering of Princes; warranting unjust
invasions; and blowing up Parliament houses. For all which, and diverse other
foul attempts, their Catholic defense is the advancement (forsooth) of the
Catholic Cause: Like his in the Poet, Horat. lib. 1. Epist. 1.
Quocunque modorem, is their Resolution: by right, or wrong, Gaudeo sive per
veritatem, sive per occasionem, Romanae Ecclesiae dignitatem extolli. Joseph.
Stephanus de Osc. pe. in Epist. ad lect.
the State of the Papacy must be upheld. That is their unum necessarium: and if
heaven favor not, rather than fail, help must be had from hell, to keep
Antichrist in his throne.

But to let them pass, and touch nearer home. There are (God knows) many
Ignorants abroad in the world: some of them so unreasonable, as to think they
have non* plus'd any reprover; if being admonished of something ill done, they
have but returned this poor reply, Is it not better to do so, than to do worse?
but also, what necessity of doing either so 25.
or worse; when Gods law binds thee from both; He that said, ^ James 2. 10,
11.
Do not commit adultery; said also, Do not kill: and he that said, Do not
steal; said also, Do not lie. If then thou lie, or kill, or do any other sin;
though thou think thereby to avoid stealth, or adultery, orsome other sin:
yet thou art become a transgressor of the Law, and by offending in one point of
it, guilty of all. It is but a poor choice, when a man is desperately resolved
to cast himself away; whether he should rather hang, or drown, or stab, or pine
himself to death: there may be more horror, more pain, more lingering in one
than another; but they all come to one period, and determine in the same point;
death is the issue of them all. And it can be but a slender comfort for a man,
that will needs thrust himself into the mouth of hell by sinning wilfully, that
he is damned rather for lying, than for stealing, or whoring, or killing, or
some greater crime: Damnation is the wages of them all. Murder can but hang a
man; and (without favor) Petty Larceny will hang a man too. The greatest sins
can but damn a man; and (without Gods mercy) the smallest will damn a man too.
But what? will some reply: In case two sins be propounded, may I not do the
lesser, to avoid the greater; otherwise must I not of necessity do the greater?
The answer is short and easy: If two sins be propounded, do neither. E malis
minimum, holds as you heard (and yet not always neither) in evils of pain:
But that is no Rule for evils of sin. Here the safer Rule is, E malis nullum.
And the reason is sound, from the Principle we have in hand. If we may not do
any evil, to procure a positive good; certainly Eadem doctrina qua horremus
facere mala ut eveniant bona, horrere debemus facere mala ut evitemus pejora.
Evitare enim pejora, mul^ o minus bonum est, quam evenire bonum. Cajetan. hic.
much less may we do one evil, to avoid or prevent another.

But what if both cannot be avoided, but that one must needs be done? 26.
In such a strait may I not choose the lesser? To thee, I say again as before,
Choose neither. To the Case, I answer, It is no Case: because, as it is put, it
is a case impossible. For, Nemo angustiatur ad peccandum: the Case cannot be
supposed, wherein a man should be straightened, as he could not come off fairly
without sinning. A man by rashness, or fear, or frailty, may foully entangle
himself; and through the powerful engagements of sin drive himself into very
narrow straits, or be so driven by the fault or injury of others: yet there
cannot be any such straits, as should enforce a necessity of sinning; but that
still there is one path or other out of them without sin. The perplexity that
seems to be in the things, is rather in the Non enim datur perplexio ex part
rer um: sea contingere potest ex part hom inis nescient is evadere, nec
videntis aditum evadendi absque aliquo peccato. Cajet hic. See the Gloss on
did. 13. item adversus, where he proves against Gratian that there can be
noperplexity.
men who puzzle and lose themselves in the Labyrinths of sin, because they care
not to heed the clue that would lead them out, if it were followed. Say, a
wicked man through heat of blood make a wicked vow to kill his brother: here he
has by his own rashness brought himself into a seeming strait, that either he
must commit a murder or break a vow; either of which seems to be a great
sin, the one aga, inst the fifth, the other against the third Commandment. But
here is in very deed no strait or perplexity at all: Here is a fair open course
for him without sin. He may break his vow, and there is an end. Neither is this
the choice of the lesser sin; but only the Non docet eligere minus peccatum,
sed solutionem minoris nexus. Cajetanus hic, speaking of the Council of Toledo.
See c. 29 q. 4 per to^.
loosening of the lesser bond: the bond of charity being greater than the bond
of a promise; and there being good reason that (in terms of inconsistency, when
both cannot stand) the lesser bond should yield to the greater. But is it not a
sin for a man to break a vow? Yes, where it may be helped salvis charitate and
justitia, there the breach is a sin: but in the case proposed, it is no sin. As
Christ says in the point of swearing, so it may be said in the point of breach
of vow Matthew. 5. 37.
(...). Never was any breach of vow, but it was peccatum, or ex peocato: the
breaking is either it self for^ally a sin; or it argues at least a former sin,
in the making. So as the sin, in the case alleged, was before, in making such
an unlawful vow; and for that sin the party must repent; but the breaking of it
now it is made, is no new sin; (Rather it is a necessary duty; and a branch of
that repentance which is due for the former rashness in making it) because an
hurtful vow is, (and that virtute praecepti) rather to be broken than kept. The
Exodus 1. 16, etc.
Egyptian Midwives, not by their own fault, but by Pharaoh's tyrannous
command, are driven into a narrow strait, enforcing a seeming necessity of sin:
for either they must destroy the Hebrew Children, and so sin by Murder; or
else they must devise some handsome shift to carry it clean from the King's
knowledge, and so sin by lying. And so they did; they chose rather to lie than
to kill, as indeed in the compatison it is by much the lesser sin. But the very
truth is, they should have done neither: they should flatly have refused the
King's Commandment, though with hazard of their lives; and have resolved rather
to suffer any evil, than to do any. And so See August. contra mendac. cap. 19.
Lot should have done: he should rather have adventured his own life, and
theirs too, in protecting the chastity of his Daughters, and the safety of his
Guests; than have Genesis 19. 8. Perturbatio animi fuit, non consilium. Hist.
Scholast. in Genesis cap. 52
offered the exposal of his Daughters to the Iusts of the beastly Sodomites;
though it were to redeem his guests from the abuse of ^ouler and more
abominable filthiness. Absolutely, there cannot be a Case imagined, wherein it
should be impossible to avoid one sin, unless by the committing of another. The
Case which of all other comes nearest to a Perplexity, is that of an erroneous
Conscience. Because of a double bond; the bond of God's Law, which to Sin is
the transgression of the Law, 1 John 3. 4.
transgress is a sin: and the bond of particular Conscience, which also to
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14. 28. Omne quod fit contra
conscientiam aedi^icat ad gehennam. c. 28. q. 1 Omnes sec. Ex his.
transgress is a sin. Whereupon there seems to follow, an inevitable
necessity of sinning; when God's Law requires one thing, and particular
conscience dictateth the flat contrary: for in such a case, a man must either
obey God's Law, and so sin against his own conscience; or obey his own
conscience, and so sin against God's Law. But neither in this case is there any
perplexity at all in the things themselves: that which there is, is through the
default of the man only, whose judgment being erroneous mis-leadeth his
conscience, and so casts him upon a necessity of sinning. But yet the
necessity is no simple and absolute, and unavoidable, and perpetual necessity:
for it is only a necessity, ex hypothesi, and for a time, and continues but
stante tali errore. And still there is a way out betwixt those sins, and that
without a third: and that way is deponere erroneam conscientiam. He must
rectify his judgment, and reform the error of his Conscience, and then all is
well. There is no perplexity, no necessity, no obligation, no expediency, which
should either enforce, or persuade us to any sin. The resolution is damnable,
Let us do evil that good may come.

I must take leave, before I pass from this point, to make two Instances: 28.
and to measure out from the Rule of my Text an answer to them both. They are
such, as I would desire you of this place to take due and special consideration
of. I desire to deal plainly, and I hope it shall be (by God's blessing upon
it) effectually for your good, and the Churches peace. One instance shall be in
a sin of Commission, and the other in a sin of Omission.

The sin of Commission, wherein I would instance, is indeed a sin beyond 29.
Commission: it is the usurping of the Magistrates Office without a Commission.
The Question is, Whether the zealous intention of a good end may not warrant it
good, or at least excuse it from being evil, and a sin? I need not frame a Case
for the illustration of this instance: the inconsiderate forwardness of some
has made it to my hand. You may read it in the disfigured windows and walls of
this Church: Pictures, and Statua's, and Images; and for their sakes the
windows and walls wherein they stood, have been heretofore, and of late pulled
down, and broken in pieces and defaced, without the Command, or so much as
leave, of those who have power to reform things amiss in that kind. Charity
binds us to think the best of those that have done it: that is, they did it
out of a forward (though misgoverned) zeal; intending therein Gods glory, in
the farther suppression of Idolatry, by taking away these (as they supposed)
likely occasions of it. Now in such a case as this, the question is, Whether
the intention of such an end can justify such a deed? And the fact of Numb.
25. 7, 8.
Phineas, Numb. 25. (who for a much like end, for the staying of the people
from Idolatry, executed vengeance upon Zimri and Cosbi, being but a private
man, and no Magistrate;) seems to make for it.

But my Text rules it otherwise. If it be evil, it is not to be done, no 29.
not for the preventing of Idolatry. I pass by some considerations otherwise of
good moment: as namely, first, whether Statua's and Pictures may 1.
not be permitted in Christian Churches, for the adorning of God's House, and
for civil and historical uses, not only lawfully and decently, but even
profitably? I must confess, I never heard substantial reason given, why they
might not; at the least, so long as there is no apparent danger of
superstition. And, secondly, whether things either in their first erection, 2.
or by succeeding abuse superstitious, may not be profitably continued, if the
Superstition be abolished? Otherwise, not Pictures only, and Crosses, and
Images; but most of our Hospitals, and Schools, and Colleges, and Churches too
must down: and so the hatred of Idolatry should but usher in licentious
Sacrilege, contrary to that passage of our Apostle in the next Chapter before
this, Romans 2. 22.
Thou that abhorrest Idols, committest thou Sacrilege? And, thirdly, whether
these forward ones have not bewrayed somewhat their own self-guiltiness in this
act, at least for the manner of it, in doing it secretly and in the dark? A man
should not dare to do that, which he would not willingly either be seen, when
it is doing; or own being done. To pass by these; consider no more but this one
thing only, into what dangerous and unsufferable absurdities a man might run,
if he should but follow these men's grounds. Erranti nullus terminus: Error
knows no stay; and a false Principle once received, multiplieth into a (...).
thousand absurd conclusions. It is good for men to go upon sure grounds, else
they may run and wander in insinitum. A little error at the first, if there be
way given to it, will increase beyond belief. As a small spark may fire a large
City, and a 2 Kings 18. 44, 45.
cloud no bigger than a man's hand, in short space overspread the face of the
whole Heavens. For grant, for the suppression of Idolatry, in case the
Magistrate will not do his office, that it is lawful for a private man to take
upon him to reform what he thinks amiss, and to do the part and office of a
Magistrate (which must needs have been their ground, if they had any, for this
action;) there can be no sufficient cause given, why, by the same reason, and
upon the same grounds, a private man may not take upon him to establish Laws,
raise Powers, administer Justice, execute Malefactors, or do any other thing
the Magistrate should do; in case the Magistrate slack to do his duty in any of
the premises. Which if it were once granted, (as granted it must be, if these
men's fact be justifiable) every wise man sees, the end could be no other but
vast Anarchy and confusion both in Church and Commonwealth: whereupon must
unavoidably follow the speedy subversion both of Religion and State. If things
be amiss, and the Magistrate help it not; private men may lament it, and, as
occasion serves, and their condition and calling permits, soberly and
discreetly put the Magistrate in mind of it: But they not make themselves
Magistrates to reform it.

And as to the act of Phinehas: though I rather think he did; yet what 30.
if he did not well in so doing? It is a thing we are not certain of: and we 1.
must have certainer grounds for what we do, than uncertain examples. Secondly,
what if Phinehas had the Magistrates Authority to enable him 2.
to that attempt? It is not altogether improbable (to my apprehension) from the
fifth Verse of the Chapter, where the story is laid down, Numb. 25. 5.
especially paralleled with another story of much like circumstances, Exodus 32.
27. that as there the Levites, so here Phinehas drew the Sword in execution of
the express command of Moses the supreme Magistrate. If neither thus, nor so:
yet Thirdly, (which cutteth off all plea, and is the most 3.
common answer ordinarily given by Divines to this and the like instances drawn
from some singular actions of God's worthies;) Men of Heroical spirits and
gifts, such as were David, Sampson, Ehud, Moses, Elias, and some others,
especially at such times as they were employed in some special service for the
good of God's Church, were exempt from the common rules of life: and did many
things (as we are to presume) not without the Nec Samson aliter excusatur, quod
seipsum cum hostibus ruina domus oppressit, nisi quod latenter spiritus hoc
jusserat, qui per illum miracula faciebat. Aug. lib. 1. de Civ. Dei. cap. 21.
Si defenditur non fuisse peccatum, privatum habuisse concilium indubitanter
credendus est. Bern. de prec. and dispensat.
secret motion and direction of God's holy and powerful Spirit, which were
therefore good in them (that secret direction being to them loco specialis
mandati, like that to Genesis 22. 2.
Abraham for sacrificing his Son) but not safe or lawful for us to imitate.
Opera liberi spiritus, Chytr. in Genesis 1. and in Exodus 32.
say Divines, non sunt exigenda ad regulas communes nec trahenda in exemplum
vitae. The extraordinary Heroical Acts of God's Worthies are not to be measured
by the common rules of life, nor to become exemplary unto others. Of which
nature was 1 Samuel 17.
David's single combat with Goliath: and Judge. 10. 30.
Sampson's pulling down the house upon himself and the Philistines; And Exodus
2. 12.
Moses slaying the Egyptian; and Judge. 3. 5, etc.
Ehud's stabbing of King Eglon; and 2 Kings 1. 10, 12.
Eliah's calling down for fire from Heaven upon the Captains and their fifties,
and diverse others recorded in the Scripture. Of which last fact we have our
blessed Savior's judgment in Luke 9. that it was done by the extraordinary and
peculiar instinct of God's spirit, but it is not to be imitated by others,
without Imitando ab aliis exprimi nec possunt, nec debent, nisi eadem (...).
Spiritus excitentur. Chytr. in Exodus 2.
particular certain assurance of the like instinct. Where when the Disciples
would have called down for fire from Heaven upon the Samaritans, and alleged
Elias for their precedent; Luke 9. 52.
Lord, will thou that we command fire to come down from Heaven and consume
them, as Elias did? His answer was with a kind of indignation (as both his
(...).
gesture and speeches show) Nescitis cujus spiritus estis; You know not what
manner of spirits you are of. Elias was endued with an extraordinary spirit, in
the freedom whereof he did what he then did: but it is not for you or others to
propose his example, unless you can demonstrate his spirit. And if Phinehas's
Act also was (as most De Phinees, autem dicendum est, quod ex inspiratione
divina, zelo Dei commotus, hoc fecit. Aqui. 2* 2. qu. 6^. art. 6. ad 2. and
Theologi passim.
think it was) such as these: it can no more justify the usurpation of
Magistracy; than David's act can bloody Duels, or Sampson's self-murder, or
Moses's secret slaughter, or Ehud's King-killing, or Eliah's private revenge. I
have stood the longer upon the discovery of this sin, that men might take right
judgment of it; and not think it either warrantable or excuseable by any
pretension of zeal, or of whatsoever other good: and that both such as have
gone too far this way in their practice already for the time past, may
acknowledge their own oversight, and be sorry for it; and others seeing their
error may for the time to come forbear such outrages, and keep themselves
within the due bounds of Christian sobriety, and their particular Callings. And
thus much of the former instance, in a matter of Commission. I am to give you
another in a matter of Omission.

Every Omission of a necessary duty is simply evil, as a sin. But affirmative
31.
duties are but sometimes necessary; because they do not obligare ad semper:
as, being many, it is impossible they should. And many times duties otherwise
necessary, in case of Superior reason and duties, cease to be necessary pro hic
and nunc: and then to omit them, is not to do evil. Among other necessary
duties this is one, for a Minister furnished with gifts and abilities for it,
to acquaint God's people with all material needful truths, as he can have
convenient occasion thereunto. And (such convenience supposed) not to do this,
is Sacerdos debtor est, ut veritatem quam audivit a Deo libere praedicet. 11.
qu. 3. noli timere Ex Chrysostom.
simply evil. Now then, to make the Case and the Question. The Case thus: A
Minister has just opportunity to preach in a Congregation, not his own: where
he sees, or generally hears some error in judgment, or outrageous sin in
practice, to be continued in with too public allowance: He has liberty to
make choice of his Text and Theme, and leisure to provide in some measure for
it; and his conscience tells him, he cannot pro hic and nunc direct his
speech with greater service to God's Church, than against those errors or sins.
He sees on the other side some withdrawments: his discretion may perhaps be
called in question, for meddling where he needed not; he shall possibly lose the
good opinion of some, with whom he has held fair correspondence hitherto; he
shall preserve his own peace the better, if he turn his speech another way.
This is the Case. The Question is, Whether these latter considerations, and the
good that may come thereby, be sufficient to warrant unto him the omission of
that necessary duty?

The rule of my Text resolves negatively: they are not sufficient. The 32.
duty being necessary, pro hic and nunc, it is simply evil to omit it; and
therefore it may not be omitted for any other good. I deny not, but a Minister
may with good discretion conceal many truths from his flock; at least the
opening and amplifying of them: if they be not such as are needful for them to
know, either for the establishment of Faith, or practice of Life; as not only
many nice School-points and Conclusions are, but also many Genealogies, and
Levitical Rites, and other things even in the Scriptures themselves. Nay, more:
a Minister not only in discretion may, but is even in Conscience bound, at
least in the public exercise of his Ministry, to conceal some particular
truths from his Auditory; yea, though they be such as are needful for the
practice of life, and for the settling of men's Consciences: if they be such
withal, as are not fit to be publicly spoken of; as are many Resolutions of
Cases appertaining to the seventh Commandment. ( Thou shall not commit
Adultery;) and some also appertaining to the eighth (Thou shall not steal.) Our
men Moulin. Buckler of Faith, part 2. sect. 4. and not only ours, but some of
their own too. See Esppenceus ad Tit. cap. 1.
justly condemn the Popish Casuists, for their too much liberty in this kind in
their Writings: whereby they reduce Vices into an Art, under color of
reproving them; and convey into the minds of In quibus plus proficit vitiorum
ignoratio, quam cognitio virtutis. Justin. lib. 2. Hist. cap. 2.
corrupt men, Notions of such prodigious filthiness, and artificial Legier*
du-main, as perhaps otherwise they would never have dreamed on, or thirsted
after. The loose writings of the unchaste Quis veterum Poetarum plus
obscoenitatis, impuritatis, flagitiorum, professus est, quam docet
poenitentiale Burchardi? Quot sunt qui ignorarent multa quae ibi leguntur, nisi
ex ipso didi^issent. I. R. in con^ut. fab. Burdon p. 305. Qui Principum
sacerdotum, negotia^orum, ac pracipue mulierum vitia in concionibus suis
insectentur: quae saepius ita depingunt, ut obscoeniratem doceant. Erasm. in
Adag. (...).
Poets are but dull Tutors of Lust, compared with the authorized Tomes of our
severe Romish Votaries. There be enormous sins of this rank, which a modest man
would be ashamed so much as to name especially in public. Now of these, only
the generalities would be touched in the public; the specialities not
unfolded, but in the private exercise of our ministry: nor yet that
promiscuously to every one that should out of curiosity desire satisfaction in
them; but only to such men; (and that but only so far) as they may concern in
point of Conscience, and of practice. Besides these, there are other Cases
many, in which it may be more convenient to conceal, than to teach some divine
truths at some times, and in some places.

But yet in the Case here proposed, if it be a truth questioned, about 33.
which God's people are much distracted in their opinions; much mistaken by
some through error in judgment; much abused by sinful, especially public
practice, occasioning Scandals and offenses among brethren; likely to be
overwhelmed with custom, or multitude of those that think or do against it; and
be otherwise of material importance: I take it, the Omission of it upon
seasonable opportunity, is a grievous sin, and not colorable by any pretense.
Beloved, the Minister is not to come into the Pulpit, as a Fencer upon the
Stage, to play his prize, and to make a fair (...). 1 Cor. 9. 26.
flourish against sin. (Here he could have it, and there he could have it, but
has it no where) but rather as a Captain into the Field, to bend his forces
specially against the strongest Troops of the Enemy; and to squander and break
through the thickest ranks; and to drive at the Fight neither with small nor
great, save only with the King of Israel, 2 King. 22. 31.
fairest. It is not enough for a Prophet Esaias 58. 1.
to cry aloud, and to lift up his voice like a trumpet, and to tell Judah and
Israel of sins, and of transgressions at large: but if he would whet them up to
the battle, he must give a more If the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who
shall prepare himself to the battle?
certain sound; he must tell Judah of her sins, and Israel of her
transgressions. If 1 Cor. 14. 8.
there be in Damascus, or Moab, or Ammon, or Tyrus, or Judah, or Israel, Amos 1
and 2.
three transgressions, or four more eminent than the rest: it is fit, they that
are sent to Damascus, and Moab, and Ammon, and Tyrus, and Judah, and Israel,
should make them hear of three or four, more than all the rest. Sins and
Errors, when they begin to get head and heart, must be handled roughly. Silence
in such a case is a kind of flattery: and it is Pene idem est fidem nolle
asserere and negare. Fulg. l. 1. ad Thrasim. c. 1. Sicut incauta locutio in
errorem pertrahit, ita indiscretum silentium in errore relinquit. Greg. in Mor.
almost all one when sin grows outrageous, to hold our peace at them; and to
cry Peace, Peace unto them. Our Apostle in Act. 20. would not have held himself
sufficiently discharged from the guilt of other men's blood, if he had shunned
(as occasion was offered) to have declared unto them Acts 20. 26, 27.
(...), even the whole counsel of God.

In my Application of this Instance and Case, blame me not, if I do it 34.
with some reference to my self. Being heretofore by appointment, as now again
I was, to provide my self for this place against such a meeting as this is; as
in my conscience I then thought it needful for me, I delivered my mind, (and I
dare say, the Truth too, for substance) something freely, touching the
Ceremonies and Constitutions of our Church. And I have now also with like
freedom, showed the unlawfulness of the late disorderly attempts in this Town;
and that from the ground of my present Text. I was then blamed for that; I
think unjustly; (for I do not yet see what I should retract of that I then
delivered:) and it is not unlikely, I shall be blamed again for this, unless I
prevent it. You have heard now already, both heretofore, that to judge any
man's heart, and at this time* that to slander any Truth, are (without
repentance) sins justly damnable: (...), they that offend either in the one, or
the other, their damnation is just. To preserve therefore both you from the
sin, and my self from the blame, consider I pray you with reason and charity,
what I shall say.

You that are our hearers, know not with what hearts we speak unto you: that is
only known to our own hearts; (and to 1 John 3. 20.
God who is greater than our hearts, and knows all things. That which you are
to look at, and to regard, is, with what (...).
truth we speak unto you. So long as what we preach is true, and agreeable to
God's Word, and right reason: you are not Acts 17. 11. Non requiritur quis, vel
qualis praedicet; sed quid praedicet. Distinct. 19. Secundum. (...). Plat. in
Charmide.
upon I know not what light surmises, or suspicions, to judge with what spirits
or with what dispositions of heart we preach. Whether we Phil. 1. 15, 16, 17,
18.
preach Christ of envy, and strife, or of good will; whether sincerely, or of
Contention; whether in pretense, or in truth; it is our own good or hurt, we
must answer for that; and at our peril be it, if we do not look to that. But
what is that to you? Notwithstanding every way, so long as it is Christ, and
his truth which are preached, it is your part therein to rejoice. If an Gal. 1.
8, 9.
Angel from Heaven should preach any untruth unto you, (...), Let him be
accursed: but if the very Devil of Hell should preach the truth, he must be
heard, and believed, and obeyed. So long as Matthew. 23. 23.
Scribes and Pharisees hold them to Moses's Text and Doctrine, let them be as
damned We unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, Matthew. 23. 13, 14, etc.
Hypocrites, as Scribes and Pharisees can be: yet all whatsoever they bid you
observe, that you are to observe and do.

Let me then demand: Did I deliver any untruth? It had been well done then to
have shown it, that I might have acknowledged, and retracted it. Did I speak
nothing but the truth? with what conscience then could any that heard me, say,
as yet I heard some did; that I preached factiously, That I came to cast bones
among them, That I might have chosen a fitter Text, That I might have had as
much thanks to have kept away? For Faction, I hate it: my desire and aim, next
after the good of your souls, 1.
was, above all, the Peace of the Church, and the Unity of Brethren. For
casting bones (if that must needs be the phrase) they were cast in these parts
2.
long before my coming, by that great enemy to peace and unity, and busy sower
of discord, the Devil: otherwise I should not have found at my first coming
such snarling about them, and such Gal. 5. 15.
biting and devouring one another, as I did. My endeavor was rather to have
gathered up the bones, and to have taken away the matter of difference, (I
mean, the error in judgment about, and inconformity in practice unto the
lawful ceremonies of the Church) that so, if it had been possible, all might
have been quiet, without despising or judging one another for these things: For
thanks, I hold not that 3.
worth the answering: alas, it is a poor aim for God's Minister, to preach for
thanks,

For the choice of my Text and Argument, both then and now: how 4.
is it not unequal, that men, who plead (so as none more) for liberty and
plainness in reproving sin, should not allow those that come amongst them, that
liberty and plainness against themselves and their own sins; I dare appeal to
your selves. Have you never been taught, that it is the Ministers duty, as to
oppose against all errors and sins in the general, so to bend himself (as near
as he can) especially against the apparent errors and sins of his present
auditory? And do you not believe it is so? Why then might I not; nay, how ought
I not, bend my speech, both then against a common error of sundry in these
parts in point of Ceremony, and now against the late petulancy, (or at least
oversight) of some misguided ones: The noise of these things abroad, and the
scandal taken thereat by such as hear of them, and the ill ^ruits of them at
home in breeding jealousies, and cherishing contentions among Neighbors,
cannot but stir us up, if we be sensible (as every good member should be) of
the damage and loss the Church acquireth by them, to put you in mind and
admonish^ you (as opportunities invite us) both privately and publicly. Is it
not time, trow ye, to thrust in the sickle, when the fields look white unto the
harvest? Is it not time our Pulpit should a little echo of these things, when
all the Country far and near ringeth of them?

For my own part; however others censure me, I am sure, my own heart tells
me, I could not have discharged my conscience; if, being called to this place,
I should have balked what either then or now I have delivered. My Conscience
prompting me, all circumstances considered, that these things were pro hic and
nunc necessary to be delivered, rather than any other: If for any outward
inferior respect I should have passed them over with silence; I think I should
have much swerved from the Rule of my Text, and have done a great evil, that
some small good might come of it. But many thousand times better were it for
me, that all the world should censure me for speaking what they think I should
not; than that my own heart should condemn me for not speaking what it tells
me I should. And thus much of things simply evil.

I should proceed to apply this Rule, We must not do evil, that good may 35.
come; unto evils, not simply, but accidentally such: and that both in the
general, and also in some few specials of greatest use; namely, unto evils
which become such through Conscience, Scandal or Comparison. In my choice of
the Scripture, I aimed at all this: and had gathered much of my provision for
it. But the Cases being many and weighty, I foresaw I could not go onward with
my first project, without much wronging one or both: either the things
themselves, if I should contract my speech to the scanting of time; or you, if
I should lengthen it to the weight of the matter. And therefore I resolved here
to make an end, and to give place (as fit it is) to the business whereabout we
meet. The Total of what I have said, and should say, is in effect but this: No
pretension of a good end, of a good meaning, of a good event, of any good
whatsoever; either can sufficiently warrant any sinful action to be done, or
justify it being done, or sufficiently excuse the Omission of any necessary
duty, when it is necessary. Consider what I say, and the Lord give you
understanding in all things. Now to God the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, etc.

AD CLERUM.
The Third Sermon.
At a Visitation at Boston, Lincoln, March 13th 1620.
1 COR. XII. 7. But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to
profit withal.
IN the First Verse of this Chapter S. Paul proposes to 1.
himself an Argument, which he prosecuteth the whole Chapter through, and
(after a profitable digression into the praise of Charity in the next Chapter)
resumeth again at the fourteenth Chapter, spending also that whole Chapter
therein: and it is concerning spiritual gifts, Verse 1.
(Now concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not have you ignorant,
etc.) These gracious gifts of the holy Spirit of God, bestowed on them for the
edification of the Church; the Corinthians, (by making them the (...).
fuel* either of their pride, in despising those that were inferior to
themselves; or of their envy, in malicing those that excelled therein) abused
to the maintenance of Schism, and Faction, and Emulation in the Church. For the
remedying of which evils, the Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. hom. 29.
Apostle enters upon the Argument: discoursing fully of the variety of these
spiritual gifts, and who is the Author of them, and for what end they were
given, and in what manner they should be employed; omitting nothing that was
needful to be spoken anent this subject.

In this part of the Chapter, entreating both before and after this verse of 2.
the wondrous great, yet sweet and useful variety of these spiritual gifts, he
shows, That howsoever manifold they are, either for kind or degree, so as
they may differ in the material and formal; yet they do all agree both in the
same efficient, and the same final cause. In the same efficient cause, which is
God the Lord by his Spirit, ver. 6. [ Now there are diversities of gifts, but
the same Spirit; and there are differences of administrations, but the same
Lord; and there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God which
works all in all.] And in the same final cause; which is the advancement of
Gods glory, in the propagation of his Gospel, and the edification of his
Church; in this verse. [ But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every
man to profit withal.]

By occasion of which words, we may inquire into the nature, conveyance, 3.
and use of these gifts. First, their nature in themselves, and in their 1.
original; what they are, and whence: they are the works of Gods Spirit in us;
[ the manifestation of the Spirit.] Secondly, their conveyance 2.
unto us; how we come to have them, and to have prope^ty in them: it is 3.
by gift; [ it is given to every man.] Thirdly, their use and end; why they
were given us, and what we are to do with them; they must be employed to the
good of our Brethren and of the Church; it is given to every man [ to profit
withal.] Of these briefly, and in their order; and with special reference ever
to us that are of the Clergy.

By manifestation of the Spirit here our Apostle understands none other 4.
thing, than he does by the adjective word (...) in the first, and by the
substantive word (...) in the last verse of the Chapter. Both which put
together, do signify those spiritual gifts and graces whereby God enableth men
(and specially Churchmen) to the duties of their particular Callings for the
general good. Such as are those particulars, which are named in the next
following verses, Ver. 10.
the word of Wisdom, the word Knowledge, Faith, the gifts of healing, working
of miracles, prophecy, discerning of spirits, diverse kinds of tongues,
interpretation of tongues. All which, and all other of like nature and use,
because they are wrought by that one and self-same Verse 11.
Spirit, which divides to every one severally as he will: are therefore called
Verse 1.
(...), Spiritual gifts; and here (...), the manifestation of the Spirit.

The word [ Spirit] though in Scripture it have many other significations, 5.
yet in this place I conceive it to be understood directly of the Holy Ghost,
the third Person in the ever-blessed Trinity. For First, in ver. 3. that 1.
which is called the Spirit of God in the former part, is in the latter part
called the Holy Ghost: [(f) I give you to understand, that no man speaking erse
1.
by the spirit of God, calls Jesus accursed; and that no man can say that
Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.] Again that variety of gifts, 2.
which in ver. 4. is said to proceed from the Verse 4. 6.
same Spirit, is said likewise in ver. 5. to proceed from the same Lord, and in
ver. 6. to proceed from the same God: and therefore such a Spirit is meant, as
is also Lord and 3.
God; and that is only the Holy Ghost. And again, in those words, in ver. 11. [
Verse 11.
All these works that one and the self-same Spirit, dividing to every man
severally as he will;] The Apostle ascribes to this Spirit the collation and
distribution of such gifts according to the free power of his own will and
pleasure: which free power belongs to none but God alone, Verse 38.
Who has set the members every one in the body, as it has pleased him.

Which yet ought not to be so understood of the Person of the Spirit; 6.
as if the Father, and the Son, had no part or fellowship in this business. For
all the Actions and operations of the Divine Persons, (those only excepted
which are of intrinsecal and mutual relation) are the joint and undivided works
of the whole three Persons: according to the common known Maxim, constantly and
uniformly received in the Catholic Church, Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt
indivisa. And as to this particular, concerning gifts the Scriptures are clear.
Wherein, as they are ascribed to God the Holy Ghost in this Chapter; so they
are elsewhere ascribed unto God the Father, Jam. 1. 17*
[ Every good gift and every perfect giving is from above, from the Father of
Lights, Jam. 1.] and elsewhere to God the Son, Ephesians. 4. 7.
[ Unto every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of
Christ: Ephesians. 4.] Yea, and it may be, that for this very reason in the three
verses next before my Text, these three words are used; Spirit in ver. 4. Lord
in ver. 5. and God in ver. 6. to give us intimation, that Ne gratia and donum*
divisum sit per personas Patris, and Filii, and Sp. Sancti: ^sed indiscretae
unitatis and naturae trium unum opus intelliga. tur.
these spiritual gifts proceed equally and undividedly from the whole three
persons; from God the Father, and from his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, and from
the eternal Spirit of them both, the Holy Ghost, as from one entire,
indivisible, and coessential Agent.

But for that we are gross of understanding, and unable to conceive Ambros. in
1 Cor. 7. c. 61.
the distinct Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Godhead, otherwise 7.
than by apprehending some distinction of their operations and offices to us
ward: it has pleased the Wisdom of God in the holy Scriptures, (which being
written for our sakes, were to be fitted to our capacities) so far to
condescend to our weakness and dullness, as to attribute some of those great and
common works to one person, and some to another, after a more special manner
than unto the rest; although indeed and in truth none of the three persons had
more or less to do than other in any of those great and common works. This
manner of speaking Divines use to call V. Aquin. 1. qu. 39. 7.
Appropriation. By which appropriation, as power is ascribed to the Father, and
Wisdom to the Son; so is Goodness to the Holy Ghost. And therefore, as the work
of Creation wherein is specially seen the mighty power of God, is appropiated
to the Father; and the work of Redemption, wherein is specially seen the wisdom
of God, to the Son: and so the works of sanctification, and the infusion of
habitual graces, whereby the good things of God are communicated unto us, is
appropriated unto the Holy Ghost. And for this cause, the gifts thus
communicated unto us from God, are called (...), spiritual gifts, and (...),
the manifestation of the Spirit.

We see now, why spirit? but then; why manifestation? The word, 8.
as most other verbals of that form, may be understood either in the active or
passive signification. And it is not material, whether of the two ways we take
it in this place, both being true, and neither improper. For these spiritual
gifts are the manifestation of the spirit actively: because by these the Spirit
manifests the will of God unto the Church; these being the Instruments and
means of conveying the knowledge of salvation unto the people of God. And they
are the manifestation of the spirit Passively too: because where any of these
gifts, especially in any eminent sort, appeared in any person, it was a
manifest evidence that the Spirit of God wrought in him. As we read it Acts 10.
that they of the Circumcision were astonished Acts. 10. 45, 46. ^
when they saw, that on the Gentiles also was poured out the gifts of the Holy
Ghost. If it be demanded, But how did that appear? it follows in the next
verse, [ For they heard them speak with tongues, etc.] The spiritual Gift then
is a Id est, donum spiritus quo dono spiritus suam in homine praesentiam
declarat. Metonymia effecti. Piscat, in schol. hic.
manifestation of the Spirit, as every other sensible effect is a manifestation
of its proper cause.

We are now yet further to know that the Gifts and graces wrought in us by the
holy Holy Spirit of God, are of two sorts. The Scriptures sometimes distinguish
them by the different terms of (...) and (...): 9.
although those words are sometimes again used indifferently and promiscuously,
either for other. They are commonly known in the Schools, and differenced by
the names of Aquin. 1. 2. 111.
Gratiae gratum facientes, and Gratiae gratis datae. Which terms though they be
not very proper, (for the one of them may be affirmed of the other; whereas the
members of every good distinction ought to be opposite:) yet because they have
been long received, (and change of terms, though happily for the better, has by
experience been found for the most part unhappy in the event, in multiplying
unnecessary book-quarrels;) we may retain them profitably, and without
prejudice. Those former, which they call Gratum facientes, are the Graces of
Sanctification; whereby the person that has them, is enabled to do acceptable
service to God, in the duties of his General Calling: these latter, which they
call Gratis datas, are the Graces of Edification; whereby the person that has
them is enabled to do profitable service to the Church of God in the duties of
his particular Calling. Those are given Nobis, and Nobis; both to us, and for
us, that is Duplex estoperatio Sancti spiritus, operatur enim in nobis aliud
propter nos, aliud propter proximos. Bern. in parvis Ser. 55.
chiefly for our own good; these Nobis, sed Nostris; to us indeed, but for
others; that is, chiefly for the good of our Brethren. Those are given us
Gemin^ operationis experimentum* Unius, qua nos prima intus virtutibus solidat,
ad salutem: alterius, qua foris quoque muneribus ornat, ad lucrum. Illas nobis,
has nostris accepimus. Bernard. in Cant. Ser. 18.
ad salutem, for the saving of our Souls: these ad lucrum, for the winning of
other men's Souls. Those proceed from the special love of God to the person; and
may therefore be called personal, or special: these proceed from the General
love of God to his Church, (or yet more general to humane societies:) and may
therefore rather be called Ecclesiastical or General Gifts or Graces.

Of the first sort are Faith, Hope, Charity, Repentance, Patience, Humility, 10.
and all those other holy graces Gal. 5. 22.
fruits of the Spirit, which accompany Salvation: Wrought by the blessed and
powerful operation of the holy Spirit of God, after a most effectual, but
unconceivable manner, regenerating, and renewing, and seasoning, and
sanctifying the hearts of his Chosen. But yet these are not the Gifts so much
spoken of in this chapter; and namely in my Text: Every branch whereof
excludes them. Of those graces of sanctification first; we may have indeed
probable inducements to 1.
persuade us, that they are, or are not, in this or that man: But hypocrisy
may make such a semblance, that we may think we see spirit in a man, in whom
yet there is nothing but flesh: and infirmities may cast such a fogg, that we
can discern nothing but flesh in a man, in whom yet there is spirit. But the
gifts here spoken of do incurr into the senses, and give us evident and
infallible assurance of the spirit that wrought them: here is (...), a
manifestation of the Spirit. Again, Secondly, those Graces of sanctification
are 2.
not communicated by distribution, 1 Cor. 7. 7.
Alius sic, alius vero sic;) Faith to one, Charity to another, Repentance to
another: but where they are given, they are given all at once and together, as
it were strung upon one thread, and linked into one chain. But the Gifts here
spoken of are distributed as it were by doal, and divided severally as it
pleased God, shared out into several portions, and given to every man some, to
none all; for Verse 8.
to one is given by the Spirit the Word of Wisdom, to another the Word, of
Knowledge, etc. Thirdly, those Graces of sanctification, though they may 3.
and ought to be exercised to the benefit of others, who by the Matthew. 5. 16.
shining of our light, and the sight of our good works, may be provoked to
glorify God by walking in the same paths: yet that is but utilitas emergens,
and not finis proprius; a good use made of them upon the bye, but not the main
proper and direct end of them, for which they were chiefly given. But the Gifts
here spoken of, were given directly for this end, and so intended by the giver,
to be employed for the benefit of others, and for the edifying of the Church;
they were given to profit withal.

It then remains, to understand this Text and Chapter of that other 11.
and later kind of spiritual Gifts: Those Graces of Edification, (or Gratiae
gratis datae) whereby men are euabled in their several Callings according to
the quality and measure of the graces they have received, to be profitable
members of the public body, either in Church or Commonwealth. Under which
appellation, (the very first natural powers and faculties of the Soul only
excepted, which flowing a principiis speciei, are in all men the same and
like;) I comprehend all other secondary endowments, and abilities whatsoever of
the reasonable Soul, which are capable of the degrees of more and less, and of
better and worse; together with all subsidiary helps any way conducing to the
exercise of any of them. Whether they be First, supernatural graces, given by
immediate and extraordinary infusion 1.
from God: such as were the gifts of tongues and of miracles, and of healings,
and of prophesy properly so called, and many other like; which were frequent in
the infancy of the Church, and when this Epistle was written, according as the
necessity of those primitive times considered God saw it expedient for his
Church. Or whether they be, Secondly, 2.
such as Philosophers call Natural dispositions: such as are promptness of Wit,
quickness of Conceit, fastness of Memory, clearness of Understanding, soundness
of Judgment, readiness of Speech, and other like; which flow immediately a
principiis Individui, from the individual condition, constitution, and
temperature of particular persons. Or, whether they be, Thirdly, such as
Philosophers call intellectual habits: which is, when 3.
those natural dispositions are so improved, and perfected by Education, Art,
Industry, Observation, or Experience, that men become thereby skilful
Linguists, subtle Disputers, copious Orators, profound Divines, powerful
Preachers, expert Lawyers, Physicians, Historians, Statesmen, Commanders,
Artisans, or excellent in any Science, Profession, or Faculty whatsoever. To
which we may add, in the Fourth place, all outward 4,
subservient helps whatsoever, which may any way further or facilitate the
exercise of any of the former graces, dispositions, or habits, such as are
health, strength, beauty, and all those other Bona corporis; as also Bona
Fortunae, Honor, Wealth, Nobility, Reputation, and the rest. All of these,
even those among them which seem most of all to have their foundation in
Nature, or perfection from Ar^, may in some sort be called (...), spiritual
gifts: in as much as the spirit of God is the first and principal worker of
them. Nature, Art, Industry, and all other subsidiary furtherances, being but
second Agents under him; and as means ordained or as Instruments used by him,
for the accomplishing of those ends he has appointed.

And now we have found out the just latitude of the spiritual gifts 12.
spoken of in this Chapter, and of the manifestation of the Spirit in my Text:
From whence not to pass without some observable Inferences for our Edification:
We may here first behold, and admire, and magnify the singular love, and care,
and providence, of God for and over his Church. For the building up whereof, he
has not only furnished it with fit materials, men endowed with the faculties
of understanding, reason, will, memory, affections, not only lent them tools
out of his own rich storehouse, his holy Word, and sacred Ordinances: but, as
sometimes he filled Exodus 35. 30, etc.
Bezaleel and Aholiab with skill and wisdom for the building of the material
Tabernacle; so he has also from time to time raised up serviceable Men, and
enabled them with a large measure of all needful gifts and graces, to set
forward the building, and to give it both strength and beauty. A Body, if it
had not difference and variety of members, were rather a lump, than a Body; or
if having such members, there were yet no vital spirits within to enable them
to their proper offices, it were rather a Corpse than a Body; but the vigor
that is in every part to do its office, is a certain evidence and manifestation
of a Spirit of life within, and that makes it a living Organical body. So
those active gifts, and graces, and abilities, which are to be found in the
members of the mystical body of Christ, (I know not whether of greater variety
or use) are a strong manifestation, that there is a powerful Spirit of God
within, that knitteth the whole body together, and works all in all, and all
in every part of the body.

Secondly, though we have just cause to lay it to heart, when men 13.
of eminent gifts and place in the Church are taken from us, and to lament in
theirs, our own, and the Churches loss: yet we should possess our Souls in
patience, and sustain our selves with this comfort, that it is the same God
that still has care over his Church; and it is the same Head Jesus Christ,
that still has influence into his members; and it is the same blessed Spirit
of God, and of Christ, that still actuateth, and animateth this great mystical
Body. And therefore we may not doubt, but this Spirit, as he has hitherto done
from the beginning, so will still manifest himself from time to time, unto the
end of the world; in raising up instruments for the service of his Church, and
furnishing them with gifts in some good measure meet for the same; more or less
according as he shall see it expedient for her, in her several different
estates and conditions: giving Ephesians. 4. 11, 13.
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all meet in the unity of the Faith,
and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ. He has promised long since, who was
never yet touched with breach of promise, that he would Matthew. 28. 20.
be with his Apostles (and their successors) always unto the end of the World.

Thirdly, where the Spirit of God has manifested it self to any man by 14.
the distribution of gifts, it is but reason, that man should manifest the
Spirit that is in him, by exercising those gifts in some lawful Calling. And so
this manifestation of the Spirit in my Text, imposes upon every man the
Necessity of a Calling. Our Apostle in the seventh of this Epistle, joineth
these two together, a Gift, and a Calling; as things that may not be severed: 1
Cor. 7. 17.
As God has dictributed to every man, as the Lord has called every one. Where
the end of a thing is the use, there the difference cannot be great, whether we
abuse it, or but conceal it. The Matthew 25. 30.
unprofitable Servant, that wrapped up his Masters Talent in a napkin, could
not have received a much heavier doom, had he misspent it. O then up and be
doing: Matthew. 20. 6.
Why stand ye all the day Idle? Do not say, because you heard no voice, that
therefore no man has called you: those very gifts you have received, are a
Real Call, pursuing you with continual restless importunity, till you have
disposed your selves in some honest course of life or other, wherein you may be
profitable to humane society, by the exercising of some or other of those
gifts. All the members of the body have their proper and distinct offices,
according as they have their proper and distinct faculties; and from those
offices they have also their proper and distinct names. As then in the body,
that is indeed no member, which cannot call it self by any other name, than by
the common name of a member: so in the Church, he that cannot style himself by
any other name than a Christian, does indeed but usurp that too. If thou
say, thou art of the body: I demand then, What is thy office in the Body? If
thou have no office in the Body, then thou art at the best but Tumor praeter
naturam (as Physicians call them) a Scab, or Botch, or Wenne, or some other
monstrous and unnatural excres^ency upon the body; but certainly thou art no
true part and member of the body. And if thou art no part of the body, how
dare thou make challenge to the head, by mis-calling thy self Christian? If
thou have a Gift get a Calling.

Fourthly, We of the Clergy, though we may not ingross the Spirit unto 15.
our selves, as if none were spiritual persons but our selves: yet the voice of
the World has long given us the Name of Spiritualty after a peculiar sort; as
if we were spiritual persons in some different singular respect from other men.
And that not altogether without ground, both for the name, and thing. The very
name seems to be thus used by S. Paul in the 14. Chapter following, where at
ver. 37. he makes a Prophet and a Spiritual man all one, (and by Prophesying,
in that whole Chapter he most what means Preaching:) 1 Cor. 1. 37.
If any man think himself to be a Prophet, either spiritual, let him
acknowledge, etc. But howsoever it be for the Title, the thing it self has
very sufficient ground from that form of speech which was used by our blessed
Savior, when he conferred the ministerial power upon his Disciples; and is
still used in our Church at the collation of Holy Orders, Joh. 20. 22.
Accipite Spiritum Sanctum, Receive the holy Ghost. Since then at our admission
into holy Orders we receive a spiritual power by the imposition of hands, which
others have not; we may thenceforth be justly styled Spiritual persons. The
thing for which I note it, is, that we should therefore endeavor our selves 2 Timothy 1. 6.
(...), so to stir up those spiritual gifts that are in us; as that by the
eminency thereof above that which is in ordinary temporal men, we may show our
selves to be in deed, what we are in name, Spiritual persons. If we be of the
Spiritualty, there should be in us anothergates manifestation of the Spirit,
than is ordinarily to be found in the Temporalty. God forbid, I should censure
all them for intruders into the Ministry, that are not gifted for the Pulpit.
The severest censurers of Non-preaching Ministers, if they had livd in the
beginning of the Reformation, must have been content, as the times then stood,
to have admitted of some thousands of Non-preaching Ministers, or else have
denied many Parishes and Congregations in England the benefit of so much as
bare reading. And I take this to be a safe Rule: Whatsoever thing the help of
any circumstances can make lawful at any time, that thing may not be condemned
as universally, and de toto genere, unlawful. I judge no man's conscience then,
or calling, who is in the Ministry; be his gifts never so slender; I dare not
deny him the benefit of his Clergy, if he can but read: if his own heart
condemn him not, neither do I. But yet this I say; As the times now are,
wherein learning abounds even unto wantonness; and wherein the world is full
of questions, and controversies, and novelties, and niceties in Religion; and
wherein most of our Gentry, very Women and all (by the advantage of long Peace,
and the customs of modern Education, together with the help of a multitude of
English Books and translations) are able to look through the ignorance of a
Clergyman, and censure it, if he be tripping in any point of History,
Cosmography, Moral or Natural Philosophy, Divinity, or the Arts; yea, and to
chastise his very method and phrase, if he speak loosly, or impertinently, or
but improperly, and if every thing be not point-vise: I say, as these times
are, I would not have a Clergyman content himself with every mediocrity of
gifts; but by his prayers, care and industry improve those he has, so as he
may be able upon good occasion to Com. 1. 11.
impart a spiritual gift to the people of God whereby they may be established;
and to speak with such understanding, and sufficiency, and pertinency
(especially when he has just warning, and a convenient time to prepare
himself,) in some good measure of proportion to the quickness and ripeness of
these present times, as they that love not his Coat, may yet approve his
labors* and not find any thing therein, whereat justly to quarrel: Tit. 2. 7,
8.
showing in his Doctrine (as our Apostle writes to Titus) uncurruptness,
gravity, sincerity, sound speech that cannot be condemned, that he that is of
the contrary part may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of him. They that
are called spiritual persons, should strive to answer that name by a more than
ordinary manifestation of spiritual gifts. And thus much shall suffice us to
have spoken concerning the name and nature of these spiritual gifts, by
occasion of the title here given them, The manifestation of the Spirit.

Consider we next, and in the second place, the conveyance of these gifts 16.
over unto us; how we come to have a property in them, and by what right we can
call them ours. The Conveyance is by deed of gifts; the manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every man. Understand it not to be so much intended here,
that every particular man has the manifestation of the Spirit, (though that
may also be true in some sense;) as that every man that has the manifestation
of the Spirit, has it given him, and given him withal to this end, that he may
do good with it. Like as when we say, Every man learneth to read before he
learn to write; it is no part of our meaning to signify each particular person
so to do, (for there be many that learn neither of both;) but we may only
intend to show the received order of the things to be such, as that every man
that learneth both, learneth thut first. As we conceive his meaning, who
directing us the way, to such or such a place, should tell us, Every man rides
this way; and as we conceive of that speech of the Ruler of the Feast in the
Gospel, Every man at the beginning sets forth good Wine, and then after,
John 2. 12.
that which is worse; though there be many thousand men in the world that never
rode that way, or had occasion to set forth any Wine at all, either better or
worse: very so, ought we to conceive the meaning of the universal particle,
Every man, both in this, and in many other like speeches in the Scriptures;
with (...) restringendum est ad praesentem hypothesin. Piscat. Schol. in Luc.
20. 38. Instances, see John 11. 7. Romans 5. 18, etc.
due limitations, according to the tenor and purpose of the thing spoken of.
It mattereth not then, as to the intent of this present speech (be it true, be
it false otherwise,) whether every man have received a spiritual gift, or no:
only thus much is directly intended that Unicuique datur] intellige, Unicuique
cui datur. Piscat. in schol. hic.
every man who has received such a gift, has received it by way of gift. All
spiritual graces, all those dispositions, habits, and abilities of the
understanding part, from which the Church of God may receive edification in any
kind, together with all the secondary and inferior helps that any way may
conduce thereunto; they are all the good gifts of God. The manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every man.

The variety both of the gifts meet for several Offices, and of the Offices 17.
wherein to imply those gifts, is wonderful; and no less wonderful the
distribution of both gifts and offices. But all that (...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor.
hom 29.
variety is derived from one and the same fountain, the holy Spirit of God: and
all those distributions pass unto us by one and the same way, of most free and
liberal donation. Have all the Word of Wisdom? Have all the Word of Knowledge?
Have all Faith? Have all Prophecy? or other spiritual grace? No; they had not:
but 1 Cor. 12. 8, etc.
to one the Word of Wisdom, the Word of Knowledge to another, and to others
other gifts. There is both variety you see, and distribution of these graces.
But yet there is the same Author of them, and the same manner of communicating
them: For to one Ibid.
is given by the Spirit the Word of Wisdom; to another the Word of Knowledge by
the same Spirit, and to others, other graces; but they are all from the same
Spirit, and they are all given. And as the gifts, so the offices too. To that
question in ver. 29. Verse 29.
Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are all Teachers? Answer may be made, as
before, negatively, No; they are not: but some Apostles, and some Prophets, and
some. Teachers. There is the like variety, and distribution, as before: but
withal, the same Donor, and the same donation, as before. For Ephesians. 4. 11.
he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Pastors and Teachers: Ephesians.
4. And 1 Cor. 13. 28.
God has set some in the Church; first, Apostles; secondarily, Prophets;
thirdly, Teachers, etc. beneath at ver 28. Both gifts and offices, as they are
a Deo, for the Author: so they are ex dono, for the manner, from God, and by
way of gift. If we had no other, the very names they carry, like the
superscription upon Caesar's penny, were a sufficient proof, from whom we first
had them. When we call them (...), Gratias gratis datas, gifts and graces, and
manifestations of the Spirit; do we not by the use of those very names confess
the receipt? For what more free than gift? and what less of debt or desert than
grace? Heathen men indeed called the best of their perfections, (...), Habits:
But Saint James has taught us Christians a fitter name for ours, Jam. 1. 17.
(...), gifts. They say they had them, and looked no farther: but we must know,
as that we have them, so as well how we came by them. And therefore this
Apostle above, at Chap. 4. joyneth the having and the receipt together; as if
he would have us behold them uno intuitu, and at once. [ 1 Cor. 4. 7.
Quid habes quod non accepisti? What have thou, that thou have not received?

Possibly thou will allege thy excellent natural parts; these were not 18.
given, but thou broughtest them into the world with thee: or thou will vouch
what thou have attained to by Art and Industry; and these were not given thee,
but thou have won them proprio Mart, and therefore well deservest to wear
them. Deceive not thy self, it is neither so, nor so. Our Apostle in the place
now last mentioned, cutteth off all such challenges. [ 1 Cor. 4. 7.
Quis te discrevit? who made thee to differ from another?] Say there were (as
there is not) such a difference in and from Nature as thou conceivest; yet
still in the last resolution there must be a receipt acknowledged: for even --
Cum illius sit gratie, quod creatus es. Hieron. Epist. 139. Attendamus gratiam
Dei non solum qua fecit nos -- Aug. in Psalm. 144.
Nature it self in the last resolution is of Grace; for God gave thee that. Or,
say, there were (as there is not) such a difference of desert, as thou
pretendest: yet still, that were to be acknowledged as a gift too: for God gave
thee that Deuteronomy. 8. 18. (...) dictum Agamemnonis ad Achillem apud Homer. Iliad.
(...).
power whatsoever it was, whereby thou have attained to whatsoever thou have.
But the truth is, the difference that is in men in regard of these gifts and
abilities, arises neither from the power of Nature, nor from the merit of
labor; otherwise than as God is pleased to use these as second causes under
him: but it comes merely from the good will and pleasure of that free spirit,
which blows where, and when, and how he lists; 1 Cor. 12. 11.
dividing his graces severally to every man as he will, (at the eleventh) and
'' Ibid. 18.
as it has pleased him, (at verse 18. of this Chapter.) Nature is a necessary
Agent, and, if not either hindered by some inferior impediment, or overruled by
some higher power, works always alike, and produces the same effects in all
individuals of the same kind: and how is it possible she should make a
difference, that knows none? And as for Desert; there is indeed no such
thing: and therefore it can work nothing. For can God be a debtor to any man?
or has any man Romans 11. 35.
given to him first, that it might be recompensed him again? As a lump of Esaias
64. 8.
Clay lies before the Potter; so is all mankind in the hand of God. The Potter
at his pleasure out of that Romans 9. 21.
lump frames vessels of all sorts, of different shape, proportion, strength,
fineness, capacity, as he thinks good, unto the several uses for which he
intends them. So God, after the good pleasure of his own will, out of
mankind, as out of an untoward lump of Clay, (all of the same piece, equal in
nature and desert) makes up Vessels for the use of his Sanctuary: by fitting
several men with several gifts, more or less, greater or meaner, better or
worse, according to the difference of those offices and employments for which
he intended them. It is not the Clay, but the Potter, that makes the
difference there: neither is it any thing in man, but the Spirit of God, that
makes the difference here. Whatsoever spiritual abilities we have, we have
them of gift and by grace. The manifestation of the spirit is given to every
man.

A point of very fruitful consideration for men of all sorts; whether they 19.
be of greater, or of meaner gifts. And first, all of us generally may hence
take two profitable directions: the one, if we have any useful gifts, whom to
thank for them; the other, if we want any needful gifts, where to seek for
them. Whatsoever manifestation of the Spirit thou have, it is given thee: and
to whom can thy thanks for it be due, but to the giver? Sacrifice not to thine
own Hab. 1. 16.
nets, either of Nature or Endeavor; as if these Abilities were the
manifestation of thine own spirit: but enlarge thy heart to magnify the
goodness and bounty of him who is Heb. 12. 9.
Pater spirituum, the Father of the spirits of all flesh, and has wrought
those graces in thee by communicating his spirit unto thee. If thou shinest as
a star in the firmament of the Church, whether of a greater or lesser
magnitude, (as 1 Cor. 15. 41.
one star differs from another in glory;) remember thou shinest but by a
borrowed light from him who is Jam. 1. 17.
Pater luminum, the Father and Fountain of all lights, as the Sun in the
firmament, from whom descends every good gift, and every perfect giving.
Whatsoever Grace thou have, it is given thee: therefore be thankful to the
giver.

But if thou want any grace, or measure of grace, which seems needful 22.
for thee in that station and calling, wherein God has set thee: herein is a
second direction for thee, where to seek it, even from his hands, who alone can
give it. James 1. 5.
If any man lack wisdom (says S. James) let him ask of God, that gives to all
men liberally; and it shall be given him. A large and liberal promise; but yet
a promise most certain, and full of comfortable assurance; provided, it be
understood aright, viz, with these two necessary Limitations: if God shall see
it expedient; and, if he pray for it as he ought. Thou may pray with an
humble and upright affection, and put to thy best endeavors withal; and yet
not obtain the gift thou prayest for: because, being a common Grace, and not of
absolute Necessity for salvation, it may be in the wisdom of God (who best
knows what is best and when) not expedient for thee, or not for his Church,
at that time, and in that manner, or measure. Necessary Graces, such as are
those of sanctification, pray for them absolutely, and thou shall absolutely
receive them, there needs no conditional clause of Expediency in thy prayers
for them; because they can never be inexpedient. But these may: and therefore
as thou ought not to pray for them, but with all subjection of thy desires
to his most holy and most wise appointments; so thou ought to take a denial
from him, not only contentedly, but even thankfully, as a gracious fruit of his
love unto thee, and a certain sign of the inexpediency of the thing desired.

But if it be expedient; it will not yet come for asking, unless it be asked 23.
aright. Jam. 1. 6, 7.
But let him pray in Faith, says St. James: Whosoever does not, let not that man
think to receive any good from the Lord. Now that man only prays in Faith,
who looks to receive the thing he prays for, upon such terms, as God has
promised to give it: for Faith ever looks to the promise. And God has not
made us any promise of the end other than conditional; viz. upon our
conscionable use of the appointed means. And the means which he has ordained
both for the obtaining, and the improving of spiritual gifts; are study, and
industry, and diligent meditation. We must not now look, as in the infancy of
the Church, to have the teats put into our mouths, and to receive spiritual
graces by immediate infusion: That manna, as Hoskins Sermon. on Luke 12. 48.
one says, was for the Wilderness. But now the Church is possessed of the
Land, and grown to years of better strength; we must plow, and sow, and eat of
the fruit of the Land, in the sweat of our faces: and now he that 2 Thessalonians. 3.
10.
will not labor, he may thank himself if he have not to eat. He prays but
with an overly desire, and not from the deep of his heart, that will not bend
his endeavors withal to obtain what he desires: or rather indeed he prays
not at all. You may call it wishing and woulding (and we have Proverbs against
wishers and woulders;) rather than Praying. Solomon accounts the idle man's
prayer no better, and ^t thriveth accordingly with him: Prove. 13. 4.
The soul of the sluggard lusts, and has nothing, Prove. 13.

To make all sure then, here is your course. Wrestle with God by your 22.
fervent prayers; and wrestle with him too by your faithful endeavors; and he
will not for his goodness sake, and for his promise sake he cannot, dismiss you
without a Blessing. But omit either, and the other is lost labor. Prayer
without study, is presumption; and study without prayer, Atheism: the one
bootless, the other fruitless. You take your books in vain into your hand, if
you turn them over, and never look higher; and you take God's Name in vain
within your lips, if you cry, Da Domine, and never stir farther. The Ship is
then like to be steered with best certainty and success; when there is Oculus
ad coelum, manus ad clavum: when the Pilot is careful of both, to have his eye
upon the compass, and his hand at the stern. Remember, these abilities you pray
or study for, are the gifts of God: and as not to be had ordinarily with
labor, (for God is a God of Order, and works not ordinarily, but by ordinary
means;) so not to be had merely for the labor; for then should it not be so
much a gift, as a purchase. It was Simon Magus his error, to think that Acts 8.
20.
the gift of God might be purchased with Money: and it has a spice of his sin,
and so may go for a kind of Simony, for a man to think these spiritual gifts of
God may be purchased with labor. You may rise up early, and go to bed late,
and study hard, and read much, and devour the fat and the marrow of the best
Authors; and when you have done all, unless God give a blessing unto your
endeavors, be as thin and meagre in regard of true and useful learning, as
Pharaoh's Genesis 41. 21.
lean kine were after they had eaten the fat ones. It is God 2 Cor. 9. 10.
that both ministers seed to the sower, and multiplieth the seed sown: the
Principal, and the Increase, are both his. If then we expect any gift, or the
increase of any gift from him; neither of which we can have without him: let us
not be behind, either with our best endeavors to use the means he has
appointed, or with our faithful prayers to crave his blessing upon those means.
These instructions are general, and concern us all, whatsoever our gifts be.

I must now turn my speech more particularly to you to whom God has 23.
vouchsafed the manifestation of his Spirit in a larger proportion than unto
many of your brethren: giving unto you, as unto his first. born, a Deuteronomy. 21. 17.
double Portion of his Spirit, as 4 Kings 2. 9.
Elisha had of Elijah's; or perhaps dealing with you yet more liberally, as
Joseph did with Benjamin, whose mess (though he were the youngest) he appointed
to be Genesis 43. 34.
five times as much as any of his brethrens. It is needful that you of all
others, should be eft* soons put in remembrance, that those eminent
manifestations of the Spirit you have, were given you First, it will be a good
help to take down that Scientia inflat. 1 Cor. 8. 1.
swelling, which, as an Aposteme in the body through rankness of blood, is so
apt to engender in the soul through abundance of knowledge; and to let out some
of the corruption. It is Magna and rara virtus profecto est, ut magna licet
operantem, magnum te nescias. Bern. in Cant. Ser. 13.
a very hard thing Multum sapere, and not altum sapere; to know much, and not
to know it too much; to excel others in gifts, and not perk above them in
self-conceit. S. Paul, who Phil. 4. 12.
in all other things was sufficiently instructed, as well to abound, as to
suffer need, was yet put very hard to it, when he was to try the mastery with
this temptation, which arose from the 2 Cor. 12. 7.
abundance of revelations. If you find an aptness then in your selves, (and
there is in your selves, as of your selves, such an aptness, as to no one thing
more) to be exalted above measure in your own conceits; boastingly to make
ostentation of your own sufficiencies; with a kind of unbecoming compassion to
cast scorn upon your meaner brethren; and upon every light provocation to fly
out into those terms of defiance [ Hic ver. 21.
I have no need of thee; and, I have no need of thee:] to dispel this windy
humor I know not a more sovereign remedy, than to chew upon this meditation;
that all the Abilities and perfections you have, were given you, by one who was
no way so bound to you, but he might have given them as well to the meanest of
your Brethren as to you, and that without any wrong to you, if it had so
pleased him. You may take the Receipt from him, who himself had had some
experience of the Infirmity; even Saint Paul in the fourth of this Epistle, [ 1
Cor. 4. 7.
What have thou, that thou have not received? and if thou have received it, why
do thou boast as if thou had not received it?

Secondly, Every wise and conscionable man should advisedly weigh his 24.
own Gifts, and make them his Rule to work by: not thinking he does enough, if
he do what Law compels him to do, or if he do as much as other Neighbors
do. Indeed, where Laws bound us by Negative Precepts [ Hitherto thou may go,
but further thou shall not] we must obey, and we may not exceed those bounds.
But where the Laws do barely enjoin us to do somewhat, lest, having no Law to
compel us, we should do just nothing; it can be no transgression of the Law to
do more. Whosoever therefore of you have received more or greater gifts than
many others have; you must know your selves bound to do so much more good with
them, and to stand chargeable with so much the deeper account for them Gregor.
Crescunt dona, crescunt rations. When you shall come to make up your
accounts, your receipts will be looked into: and if you have received ten
talents, or five, for your meaner brothers one; when but one shall be required
from him, you shall be answerable for ten or five For it is an equitable
course, that Luke 12. 48.
to whom much is given, of him much should be required. And at that great day,
if you cannot make your accounts straight with your receipts, you shall
certainly find that most true in this sense, which Solomon spoke in another,
Eccles. 1. 18.
Qui apponit scientiam, apponit dolorem: the more and greater your gifts are,
unless your thankfulness for them, and your diligence with them rise to some
good like proportion thereunto; the greater shall be your condemnation, the
more your stripes.

But thirdly: Though your Graces must be so to your selves, yet beware 25.
you do not make them Rules to others. A thing I the rather note, because the
fault is so frequent in practice, and yet very rarely observed, and more rarely
reprehended. God has endowed a man with good abilities and parts in some kind
or other: I instance but in one gift only for examples sake, viz. an ability to
enlarge himself in prayer readily, and with fit expressions upon any present
occasion. Being in the Ministry, or other Calling, he is careful to exercise
his gifts by praying with his family, praying with the sick, praying with other
company upon such other occasions as may fall out. He thinks (and he thinks
well) that if he should do otherwise or less than he does, he should not be
able to discharge himself from the guilt of unfaithfulness, in not employing
the talent he has received to the best advantage, when the exercise of it
might redound to the glory of the giver. Hitherto he is in the right: so long
as he makes his gift a Rule but to himself. But now, if this man shall stretch
out this Rule unto all his brethren in the same Calling, by imposing upon them
a necessity of doing the like; if he shall expect or exact from them, that they
also should be able to commend unto God the necessities of their families, or
the state of a sick person, or the like, by extemporary prayer; but especially
if he shall judge or censure them, that dare not adventure so to do, of
intrusion into, or of unfaithfulness in their Callings; he commits a great
fault, and well deserving a sharp reprehension. For what is this else, but to
lay heavier burdens upon men's shoulders, than they can stand under? to make our
selves judges of other men's consciences, and our Abilities Rules of their
Actions: yea, and even to lay an imputation upon our Master, with that
ungracious servant in the Gospel, as if he were Matt. 25. 24.
an hard man, reaping where he has not sown, and gathering where he has not
strewed, and requiring much where he has given little, and like Pharaoh's
Taskmasters, exacting the Exodus 5. 18.
full tale of Bricks without sufficient allowance of materials? Shall he that
has a thousand a year, count him that has but an hundred a Churl if he do not
spend as much in his house weekly, keep as plentiful a table, and bear as much
in every common charge, as himself? No less unreasonable is he that would bind
his brother of inferior gifts to the same frequency and method in preaching,
to the same readiness and copiousness in praying, to the same necessity and
measure in the performance of other duties; whereunto, according to those gifts
he finds in himself, he finds himself bound. The manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every man: let no man be so severe to his brother, as to
look he should manifest more of the Spirit than he has received.

Now as for you to whom God has dealt these spiritual gifts, with a 26.
more sparing hand; the freedom of God's distribution may be a fruitful
meditation for you also. First, thou have no reason, whosoever thou art, 1.
to grudge at the scantness of thy gifts, or to repine at the Giver. How little
soever God has given thee, it is more than he (...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. hom.
29.
owed thee. If the distribution of the Spirit were a matter of justice or of
debt, God, we know, is no Acts 10. 31.
accepter of persons, and he would have given to thee as to another. But being,
as it is, a matter of gift, not of debt, nor of justice, but of grace: take
that is thine thankfully, and be content withal; Matt. 20. 3. 15.
He has done thee no wrong: may he not do as he will with his own? Secondly,
since the manifestation 2.
of the Spirit is a matter of free gift; thou have no cause to envy thy
brother, whose portion is greater. Why should Matt. 20. 15.
thy eye be therefore evil against him, because God has been so good unto him?
Shall the foot envy the hand, or the ear the eye; because the foot cannot work,
nor the ear see; If the Hic Verse 17, 19.
whole body were hand, where were the going? and if the whole were eye, where
were the hearing? or if the whole were any One member, where were the body? If
the hand can work, which the foot cannot; yet the foot can go, which the hand
cannot: and if the eye can see, which the ear cannot; yet the ear can hearken,
which the eye cannot. And, if thy brother have some Abilities, which thou have
not; thou art not so bare but thou have other some again, which he has not.
Say, thine be meaner; yet the meanest member, as it has his Hic Verse 22, 23.
necessary office, so it is not destitute of his proper comeliness in the Body.
Thirdly, if thy gifts be mean, thou have this comfort withal, that thy accounts
will be so much the easier. Merchants 3.
that have the greatest dealings, are not ever the safest men. And how happy a
thing had it been for many men in the world, if they had had less of other men's
goods in their hands! The less thou have received, the less thou have to answer
for. If God has given thee but one single talent, he will not require five;
nor if five, ten. Fourthly, in the meanness of thy gifts thou may read thy
self a daily Lecture of humility: and humility alone is a thing of more value,
than all the perfections that are in the world besides, without it. This think:
That God, who disposes Romans 8. 28.
all things for the best to those that are his, would have given thee other and
greater gifts, if he had seen it so expedient for thee. That therefore he has
holden his hand, and withheld those things from thee: conceive it done,
either for thy former unworthiness, and that should make thee humble; or for
thy future good, and that should make thee also thankful. Lastly, remember what
the Preacher says in Eccles. 10. [ Eccl. 10. 10. Maximum mediocris ingenii
subsidium diligentia. Sen. in Controv.
If the Iron be blunt, then he must put to the more strength.] Many men that
are well left by their friends, and full of money; because they think they
shall never see the bottom of it, take no care by any employment to increase
it, but spend on upon the stock, without either fear or wit, they care not
what, or how, till they be sunk to nothing before they be aware: whereas on the
contrary, industrious men that have but little to begin withal, yet by their
care and providence, and pains-taking, get up wonderfully. It is almost
incredible, what industry, and diligence, and exercise, and holy (...). Ver.
31. hic.
emulation (which our Apostle commends in the last Verse of this Chapter) are
able to effect, for the bettering and increasing of our spiritual gifts:
provided ever we join with these, hearty prayer unto, and faithful dependence
upon God, for his blessing thereupon. I know no so lawful (...). Matthew. 25. 27.
usury, as of those spiritual talents; nor do I know any so profitable usury,
or that multiplieth so fast as this does; your use upon use, that doubleth the
principal in seven years is nothing to it. Oh then Luke 19. 23.
cast in thy talent into the bank; make thy returns as speedy, and as many as
thou can, lose not a market, or a tide, if it be possible: 2 Timothy 4. 2.
be instant in season, and out of season; omit no opportunity to take in, and
put off all thou can get: so, though thy beginnings be but small, thy latter
end shall wonderfully increase. By this means, thou shall not only profit thy
self, in the increase of thy gifts unto thy self: but (which no other usury
does besides) thou shall also profit others, by communicating of thy gifts unto
them. Which is the proper end for which they were bestowed; and of which we are
next to speak. The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal.

To profit whom? it may be, Himself. It is true; Prove. 9. 12.
If thou art wise, thou 27.
shall be wise for thy self, said Solomon; and Solomon knew what belonged to
wisdom as well as another. For Syrac. 14. 5.
Qui sibi nequam, cui bonus? He that is not good to himself, it is but a chance
that he is good to any body else. When we seem to pity a man by saying, he is
no man's foe but his own, or he is worst to himself; we do indeed but flout him,
and in effect call him a fool, and a prodigal. Such a fool is every one, that
guiding the feet of others into the way of peace, himself treads the paths
that lead unto destruction; and that 1 Cor. 9. 27.
preaching repentance unto others, himself becomes a Castaway. He that has a
gift then, he should do well to look to his own, as well as to the profit of
others: and as unto doctrine, so as well and first to 1 Timothy 4. 16.
take heed unto himself: that so doing he may save himself, as well as those
that hear him.

This then is to be done: but this is not all that is to be done. In Sunt qui
scire volunt, ut aedificent, and charitas est: sunt qui scire volunt ut
aedificentur, and prudentia est. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 26.
Wisdom we cannot do less; but in Charity we are bound to do more than thus
with our gifts. If our own profit only had been intended, (...), would have
served the turn as well: but the word here is (...), which imports such a
kind of profit as redoundeth to Utilitatem sc. Ecclesiae. Pisc. in Schol. hic.
community, such as before in the 10th Chapter he professes himself to have
sought after [ 1 Cor. 10. 33.
Not seeking mine own profit, (he means, not only his own) but the profit of
many, that they may be saved.] We noted it already as the main and essential
difference between those graces of sanctification, and these graces of
edification: that those, though they would be made profitable unto others also,
yet were principally intended for the proper good of the Owner; but these,
though they would be used for the owners good also, yet were principally
intended for the profit of others. You see then what a strong Obligation lies
upon every man that has received the Spirit, confer aliquid in publicum, to
cast his gifts into the common treasury of the Church, to employ his good parts
and spiritual graces so, as they may some way or other be profitable to his
brethren and fellow servants in Church and Commonwealth. It is an old received
Canon, Beneficium propter officium. No man sets a Steward over his house,
only to receive his rents, and then to keep the moneys in his hand, and make no
provision out of it for Hines and Servants: but it is the Luke 12. 42.
office of a good and wise Steward to give every of the household his appointed
portion at the appointed seasons. And whosoever receives a spiritual gift, ipso
facto takes upon him the office, and is bound to the duties of a Steward; 1
Pet. 4. 10.
As every man has received the gift, even administer the same one unto
another, as good stewards of the manifold graces of God, 1 Pet. 4. It was not
only for Orders sake, and for the beautifying of his Church, (though that also)
that God gave Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers: but also, and especially, for more necessary and profitable uses; for
the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. The members of the body are not every one
for it self, but every one for other, and all for the whole. The stomach
eats, not to fill it self, but to nourish the body; the eye sees, not to
please it self, but to espy for the body; the foot moves, not to exercise it
self, but to carry the body; the hand works, not to help it self, but to
maintain the body; every Ephesians. 4. 16.
joint supplieth something according to the effectual working in the measure of
every part, for the fit joining together and compacting, and increasing of the
body to the edifying of it self in love. Hic Ver. 27.
Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.

Now this necessity of employing spiritual gifts to the good and profit of 29.
others, arises first from the will and the intent of the Giver: my Text
shows plainly what that intent was; The manifestation of the Spirit was
therefore given to every man, that he might profit withal. Certainly, as Deus
and Natura nihil faciunt frustra.
Nature does not, so much less does the God of Nature, make any thing to no
purpose, or barely for show; but for use: and the use, for which all these
things were made and given, is 1 Cor. 14. 26.
edification. He that has an estate made over to him in trust, and for uses,
has in equity therein no estate at all, if he turn the commodities of the
thing some other way, and not to those special uses for which he was so estated
in it. So he that employeth not his spiritual gift to the use for which it was
given, to the In communem utilitatem collatum est. Erasm. in paraphr. hic.
profit of the Church; he has de jure forfeited to the giver. And we have
sometimes known him de facto to take the forfeiture; as from the unprofitable
servant in the Gospel, [ Matt. 25. 28. See Hieron. in Agg. 2. 9.
Take the talent from him.] We have sometimes seen the experiment of it. Men of
excellent parts, by slacking their zeal, to have lost their very Gifts; and by
neglecting the use, to have lost the principal; finding a sensible decay in
those powers, which they were slothful to bring into act. It is a just thing
with the Jam. 1. 15.
Father of Lights, when he has lighted any man a candle, by bestowing
spiritual Gifts upon him; and lent him a candlestick too whereon to set it, by
providing him a stay in the Church; if that man shall then Matthew. 5. 15.
hide his candle under a bushel, and envy the light and comfort of it to them
that are in the house; either to remove his candlestick, or to put out his
candle in obscurity.

As the intent of the Giver, so secondly, the nature and quality of the gift
calls upon us for employment. It is not with these spiritual gifts, as with
most other things, which when they are imparted, are impaired, and lessened by
communicating. Here is no place for that allegation of 30.
the Virgins, Matthew. 25. 9.
Ne non sufficiat: Lest there be not enough for you and for us. These Graces
are of the number of those things that communicate themselves by
Multiplication, not Division; and by diffusion, without waste. As the seal
makes impression in the wax, and as fire conveyeth heat into Iron, and as one
candle tindeth a thousand: all without loss of figure, heat, or light. Had ever
any man less knowledge, or wit, or learning, by teaching of others? had he not
rather more? Eccl. 12. 9.
The more wise the Preacher was, the more he taught the people knowledge, says
Solomon, Eccles. 12. and certainly the more he taught them knowledge, the more
his own wisdom increased. As the 1 Kings 4. 4.
Widow's oil increased, not in the Vessel, but by pouring out: and as the John
6. 11.
barley bread in the Gospel multiplied, not in the whole loaf, but by breaking
and distributing; and as the 2 Cor. 9. 10.
Grain brings increase, not when it lies on a heap in the garner, but by
scattering upon the land: so are these spiritual Graces best improved, not by
Absconsione minuitur, and communicatione multiplicatur. Cassiod. in Epist.
keeping them together, but by distributing them abroad. Tutius in credito quam
in sudario: the talent gathers nothing in the napkin, unless it be rust and
canker; but traveling in the bank, besides the good it does as it passes to
and fro, it ever Quo in plures diffunditur eo redundantior manet (forte leg.
manat) and in suum fontem recurrit. In se enim refluit ubert as prudentiae; and
quo pluribus fluxerit, e^ exercitius ^^ omne quod remanet. Ambr. 2. Offic. 15.
returns home with increase.

Thirdly, our own unsufficiency to all offices, and the need we have of other
31.
men's Gifts, must enforce us to lend them the help and comfort of ours. God
has so distributed the variety of his gifts with singular wisdom, that there
is no man so mean, but his service may be useful to the greatest: nor any man
so eminent, but he may sometimes stand in need of the meanest of his brethren:
of purpose, that whilst each has need of other, each should help, none should
despise other. As in a Societas nostra lapid^m fornicationi simillima est: que
casura, nisi inv^cem obstarent, h^c un^ sust in^tur. Senec. Epist. 95.
building, the stones help one another, every lower stone supporting the higher
from falling to the ground, and every higher stone saving the lower from taking
wet; and as in the body, every member Ephesians. 4. 6.
lends some supply to the rest, and again receives supply from them: so in
the spiritual building, and mystical body of the Church, God has so tempered
the parts, each having his use, and each his defects: Hic v. 24. 25.
that there should be no Schism in the body, but that the members should have
the same care one for another. Such a consent there should be in the parts, as
was between the Anthol. 1. 4.
blind and lame man in the Epigram: mutually covenanting the Blind to carry the
Lame, and the Lame to direct the Blind; that so the Blind might find his way by
the others Eyes, and the Lame walk therein upon the other's Legs. When a man is
once come to that all sufficiency in himself, as he may truly say to the rest
of his brethren, Hic Ver. 21.
I stand in no need of you: let him then keep his gifts to himself: but let him
in the mean time remember, he must employ them to the advantage of his master,
and to the benefit of his brother [The manifestation of the spirit is given to
every man to profit withal.]

Surely then those men, first of all, run a course strangely exorbitant; 32.
who instead of employing them to the profit, bend those gifts they have
received, (whether spiritual or temporal) to the ruin and destruction of their
brethren. Instead of winning souls to Heaven; with busy and cursed diligence
Matthew. 23. 15.
compassing Sea and Land, to draw Proselytes to the Devil: and instead of
raising up seed to their elder brother Christ, seeking to make their brethren
(if it were possible) ten times more the children of Hell than themselves.
Abusing their power to oppression, their wealth to luxury, their strength to
drunkenness, their wit to scoffing, Atheism, Profaneness; their learning to
the maintenance of Heresy, Idolatry, Schism, Novelty. If there be a fearful
woe due to those that Matthew. 25. 30. Intelligatur poena interversoris ex poena
pigri. Aug. in Psalm 69.
use not their gifts profitably; what woes may we think shall overtake them,
that so ungraciously abuse them?

But to leave these wretches: be persuaded in the second place, all you, 33.
whom God has made Stewards over his household, and blessed your basket and
your store, to Matthew. 13. 52.
bring forth of your treasures things both new and old; manifest the Spirit God
has given you, so as may be most for the profit of your brethren. The Spirit
of God when he gave you wisdom, and knowledge, intended not so much the wisdom
and the knowledge themselves, as the manifestation of them, or as it is in the
next verse Hic ver. 8.
the Word of Wisdom and the Word of Knowledge: as Christ also promised his
Apostles, to give them Luke 21. 15.
Os and sapientiam, a mouth and wisdom. Alas, what is wisdom without a mouth?
but as a pot of treasure hid in the ground, which no man is the better for:
Syrac. 20. 35.
Wisdom that is hid, and a treasure that is not seen, what profit is in them
both? O then, do not knit up your Masters talent in a Luc. 19. 20.
Napkin, smother not his light under a Matthew. 5. 15.
bushel; pinch not his servants of their due Luc. 12. 42 -- 46.
provision; put not up the Exodus 16. 20.
Manna you have gathered till it stink, and the worms consume it: but above
all, squander not away your rich portions by riotous living. Let not either
sloth, or envy, or pride, or pretended modesty, or any other thing hinder you,
from laboring to discharge faithfully that trust and duty which God expects,
which the necessity of the Church challenges, which the measure of your gifts
promises, which the condition of your calling exacteth from you. Remember the
manifestation of the Spirit was given you to profit withal.

Thirdly, since the end of all gifts is to profit: aim most at those gifts that
34.
will profit most; and endeavor so to frame those you have in the exercise of
them, as they may be likeliest to bring profit to those that shall partake of
them. Hic ver. 31
Covet earnestly the best gifts, says my Apostle at the last verse of this
Chapter: and you have his Comment upon that Text in the first verse of the
fourteenth Chapter, 1 Cor. 14. 1.
Covet spiritual Gifts, (...), but rather that ye may prophecy. And by
prophesying, he means Prophetas interpretes dicit Scripturarum. Amor. in 1
Cor. c. 63. Prophetia i. e. donum interpretandi Scripturas. Piscat. schol. in 1
Cor. 1. 22. Mysticum sensum ad salutem auditorum explanantes. Eras. in paraphr.
ad 1 Cor. 14.
the instruction of the Church, and people of God in the needful doctrines of
Faith toward God, Repentance from dead works, and new and holy Obedience. It
is one stratagem of the Arch enemy of mankind, (and when we know his wiles, we
may the better be able to defeat him,) by busying men of great and useful parts
in by matters, and things of lesser consequence, to divert them from following
that unum necessarium, that which should be the main in all our endeavors, the
beating down of sin, the planting of Faith and the reformation of manners.
Controversies, I confess, are necessary, the tongues necessary, Histories
necessary, Philosophy and the Arts necessary, other Knowledge of all sorts
necessary in the Church: for Truth must be maintained, Scripture-phrases
opened, Heresy confuted, the mouths of Adversaries stopped, Schisms and
Novelties suppressed. But when all is done, Positive and Practick Divinity is
it must bring us to Heaven: that is it must poise our judgments, settle our
consciences, direct our lives, mortify our corruptions, increase our graces,
strengthen our comforts, save our souls. Hoc opus, hoc studium: there is no
study to this, none so well worth the labor as this, none that can bring so
much profit to others, nor therefore so much glory to God, nor therefore so
much comfort to our own hearts, as this. Tim. 3. 8.
This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm constantly
(says S. Paul to Titus) that they which have believed in God might be careful
to maintain good works: these things are good and profitable unto men. You
cannot do more good unto the Church of God, you cannot more profit the people
of God, by your gifts; than by pressing effectually these two great points,
Faith, and good Works. These are good and profitable unto men.

I might here add other Inferences from this point, as namely, since the 35.
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every one of us, chiefly for this end,
that we may profit the people with it, that therefore fourthly, in our
preaching we should rather seek to profit our hearers, though perhaps with
sharp and unwelcome reproofs, than to please them by flattering them in evil:
and that Fifthly, we should more desire to bring profit unto them, than to gain
applause unto our selves: and sundry other more besides these. But I will
neither add any more, nor prosecute these any farther at this time, but give
place to other business. God the Father of Lights, and of Spirits, endow every
one of us, in our Places, and Callings, with a competent measure of such
Graces, as in his wisdom and goodness he shall see needful and expedient for
us, and so direct our hearts, and tongues, and endeavors in the exercise and
manifestation thereof, that by his good blessing upon our labors we may be
enabled to advance his Glory, propagate his Truth, benefit his Church,
discharge a good Conscience in the mean time, and at the last make our account
with comfort at the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom, etc.

AD CLERUM.
The Fourth Sermon.
At a Metropolitical Visitation at Grantham, Lincoln, August 22d. 1634.
ROMANS XIV. 23. -- For, whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin..
ONE remarkable difference (among many other) between 1.
Good and Evil, is this: That there must be a concurrence of all requisite
conditions to make a thing good; whereas to make a thing evil, a single defect
in any one condition alone will suffice. Aquin. 1. secundae, qu. 18. art. 4. ad
3. and qu. 19. art. 6. ad 1. ex Dionysio c. 4. de Divin. nomin.
Bonum ex causa integra, Malum ex partiali. If we propose not to our selves a
right end, or if we pitch not upon proper and convenient means for the
attaining of that end, or if we pursue not these means in a due manner, or if
we observe not exactly every material circumstance in the whole pursuit; if we
fail but in any one point, the action, though it should be in every other
respect such as it ought to be, by that one defect becomes wholly sinful. Nay
more, not only a true and real, but even, a supposed and imaginary defect, the
bare opinion of unlawfulness, is able to vitiate the most justifiable act, and
to turn it into sin. [ I know there is nothing unclean of it self: but to him
that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean, at the 14. verse
of this Chapter] Nay yet more, not only a settled opinion that the thing we do
is unlawful, but the very suspension of our judgment, and the doubtfulness of
our minds, whether we may lawfully do it or no, makes it sometimes unlawful to
be done (of us,) and if we do it, sinful. [ He that but doubts, is damned, if
he eat; Because he eats not of faith:] in the former part of this verse. The
ground whereof, the Apostle delivers in a short and full Aphorism; and
concludes the whole Chapter with it in the words of the Text, [ For whatsoever
is not of Faith, is sin.]

Many excellent Instructions there are, scattered throughout the whole 2.
Chapter, most of them concerning the right use of that Liberty we have unto
things of indifferent nature well worthy our Christian Consideration, if we had
time and leisure for them. But this last Rule alone will find us work enough:
and therefore omitting the rest, we will (by Gods assistance with your
patience) presently fall in hand with this, and intend it wholly; in the
Explication first, and then in the Application of it. For by how much it is of
more profitable and universal use for the regulating of the common offices of
life: by so much is the mischief greater if it be, and accordingly our care
ought to be so much the greater that it be not, either misunderstood, or
misapplyed. Quod non ex fide peccatum: that is the rule. Whatsoever is not of
faith, is sin. In the Explication of which words, there would be little
difficulty, had not the ambiguity of the word Faith occasioned difference of
interpretations, and so left a way open to some misapprehensions Faith is
verbum (...), as most other words are. There be that have Marlorat* in Enchirid.
reckoned up more than twenty several significations of it in the Scriptures.
But I find three especially looked at by those, who either purposely or
occasionally have had to do with this Text: each of which we shall examine in
their Order.

First and most usually, especially in the Apostolical writings, the word 3.
Faith is used to signify that Theological virtue, or gracious habit, whereby
we embrace with our minds and affections the Lord Jesus Christ, as the only
begotten Son of God, and alone Savior of the World, casting our selves wholly
upon the mercy of God through his merits, for remission and everlasting
Salvation. It is that which is commonly called a lively or justifying Faith:
whereunto are ascribed in holy Writ those many gracious effects, of Acts. 15. 9.
purifying the heart, Joh. 1. 12. and Galat. 4. 26.
adoption, Romans 3. 28. and 5. 1.
justification, Hab. 2. 4. and Gal. 2. 20.
life, Romans 15. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 8.
joy, Romans 5. 1.
peace, Acts 16. 34. Ephesians. 1. 8.
salvation, etc. Not as to their proper and primary cause; but as to the
instrument, whereby we apprehend and apply Christ, whose merits and spirit are
the true causes of all those blessed effects. And in this notion many of our
later Divines seem to understand it in our present Text: whilst they allege it
for the confirmation of this Position, that All the works (even the best works)
of Unbelievers are sins.

A position condemned indeed by the Si quis dixerit, opera omnia quae ante
justificationem, fiunt, vere esse peccata, Anathema sit. Con. Trident. Sess. 6.
Can. 7.
Trent Council, and that under a 4.
curse; taking it (as I suppose) in a wrong construction; but not worthy of so
heavy a censure, if it be rightly understood; according to the doctrine of our
Church in the thirteenth Article of her Confession, and according to the tenor
of those Scriptures whereon that doctrine is grounded, viz. Matthew. 12. 33. Romans
8. 8. Tit. 1. 15. Heb. 11. 6, etc. Howbeit I take it (with subjection of
judgment) that that Conclusion, what truth soever it may have in it self, has
yet no direct foundation in this Text. The Verb (...) to believe, and the Noun
(...), faith or belief, are both of them found sundry times in this Chapter:
yet seem not to signify in any place thereof, either the Verb the Act, or the
Noun the habit, of this saving or justifying Faith, of which we now speak. But
being opposed every where, and namely in this last verse unto doubtfulness of
judgment concerning the lawfulness of some indifferent things; must therefore
needs be understood of such a persuasion of judgment concerning such lawfulness
as is opposite to such doubting. Which kind of Faith may be found in a mere
heathen man: who never having heard the least syllable of the mystery of
Salvation by Christ, may yet be assured out of clear evidence of reason, that
many of the things he does are such as he may and ought to do. And as it may be
found in a mere heathen man, so it may be wanting in a true believer: who
steadfastly resting upon the blood of Christ for his eternal redemption, may yet
through the strength of temptation, sway of passion, or other distemper or
subreption incident to humane frailty, do some particular act or acts, of the
lawfulness whereof he is not sufficiently persuaded. The Apostle then here
speaking of such a Faith as may be both found in an unbeliever, and also
wanting in a true believer, it appears that by Faith he means not that
justifying Faith, which makes a true believer to differ from an unbeleiver;
but the word must be understood in some other notion.

Yet thus much I may add withal in the behalf of those worthy men 5.
that have alleged this Scripture for the purpose aforesaid, to excuse them
from the imputation of having (at least wilfully) handled the Word of God
deceitfully. First, that thing it self being true, and the words also 1.
sounding so much that way, might easily enduce them to conceive that 2.
to be the very meaning. And common equity will not that men should be
presently condemned, if they should sometimes confirm a point from a place of
Scripture not altogether pertinent, if yet they think it to be so: especially
so long as the substance of what they write is according to the analogy of
Faith and Godliness. Secondly, that albeit these words in their most proper and
immediate sense will not necessarily enforce that Conclusion: yet it may seem
deducible therefrom with the help of some topical arguments, and by more
remote inferences; as some learned men have endeavored to show, not altogether
improbable. And Thirdly, that they who interpret this Text as aforesaid, are
neither singular nor novel therein; but walk in the same path, which some of
the ancient Fathers have trod before them. The Though S. August. sometimes
applies it also to prove, that all the actions of infidels (meaning, etc) be
sin. Rhem. annot. in Loc.
Rhemists themselves confess it of S. Augustine: to whom they might have added
also Et omne quod non est ex fide peccatum est: ut sc. intelligat justitiam
infidelium non esse justitiam: quia sordet natura sine gratia. Prosper in
Epist. ad Rufin. Vid. etiam eundem contra Collat.
S. Prosper, and (whose authority alone is enough to stop their mouths for
ever) Extra Ecclesiam Catholicam nihil est integrum, nihil castum, dicente
Apostolo, Omne quod non, etc. Leo sermon. 2. de jejun. Penitent.
Leo Bishop of Rome, who have all cited these words for the self same purpose.

But we are content, for the reasons already shown, to let it pass as a
collection impertinent: and that I suppose is the worst that can be made of it.
There is a second acception of the word Faith: put either for the whole system
of that truth which God has been pleased to reveal to his Church in the
Scriptures of the old and new Testament, or some part thereof: or else ((...))
for the assent of the mind thereunto. In which signification some conceiving
the words of this Text to be meant do hence infer a false and dangerous
conclusion; which yet they would obtrude upon the Christian Church as an
undoubted principle of truth, 6.
That T. C. l. 1. p. 59, etc. apud. Hooker lib. 2.
men are bound for every particular action they do, to have direction and
warrant from the written word of God, or else they sin in the doing of it. For
(say they) faith must be grounded upon the word of God Romans 10. 17.
( Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, Romans 10.) Where
there is T. C. l. p. 27. apud. Hooker lib. 2. Sect. 4.
no Word then, there can be no Faith: and then, by the Apostles doctrine, that
which is done without the Word to warrant it, must needs be sin, for whatsoever
is not of Faith is sin. This is their opinion, and thus they would infer it.

I know not any piece of counterfeit Doctrine, that has passed so currently 7.
in the world, with so little suspicion of falsehood, and so little open
contradiction, as this has done. One chief cause whereof I conjecture to be,
for that it seems to make very much for the honor and perfection of Gods
sacred Law: the fullness and sufficiency whereof none in the Christian Church
but Papists or Atheists, will deny. In which respect, the very questioning of
it now, will perhaps seem a strange novelty to many, and occasion their
mis-censures. But as God himself, so the Holy Word of God is so full of all
requisite perfection, that it needs not to beg honor from an untruth. ( Job
13. 7.
Will you speak wickedly for God? Or talk deceitfully for him?) I hold it very
needful therefoe, both for the vindicating of my Text from a common abuse, and
for the arming of all my brethren, as well of the Clergy as Laity, against a
common and plausible error, that neither they teach it, nor these receive it;
briefly and clearly to show, that the aforesaid opinion, in such sort as some
have proposed it, and many have understood it, (for it is capable of a good
interpretation, wherein it may be allowed;) First, is utterly devoid of Truth;
and Secondly, draws after it many dangerous consequents and evil effects; and
thirdly, has no good warrant from my present Text.

The Opinion is, that to do any thing at all without direction from the 8.
Scripture, is unlawful and sinful. Which if they would understand only of the
substantials of Gods worship, and of the exercises of spiritual and
supernatural graces, the assertion were true and sound: but as they extend it
to I say, that the Word of God contains whatsoever things can fall into any
part of man's life. T. C. lib. 1. p. 20. apud Hooker lib. 2.. 1.
all the actions of common life whatsoever, whether natural or civil, even so
far as to the taking up of a straw: so it is altogether false and indefensible.
I marvel what warrant they that so teach have from the Scripture for that very
doctrine: or where they are commanded so to believe or teach. One of their
chiefest refuges is the Text we now have in hand: but I shall anon drive them
from this shelter. The other places usually alleged speak only, either of
Divine and Supernatural truths to be believed, or else of works of grace or
worship to be performed, as of necessity unto Salvation: which is not to the
point in issue. For it is freely confessed, that in things of such nature the
holy Scripture is, and so we are to account it, a most absolute and sufficient
direction. Upon which ground we heartily reject all humane Traditions, devised
and intended as supplements to the Doctrine of Faith contained in the Bible,
and annexed as Codicils to the Holy Testament of Christ, for to supply the
defects thereof. The question is wholly about things in their nature
indifferent, such as are the use of our food, raiment, and the like; about
which the common actions of life are chiefly conversant: Whether in the choice
and use of such things we may not be sometimes sufficiently guided by the light
of reason and the common rules of discretion: but that we must be able, (and
are so bound to do, or else we sin) for every thing we do in such matters, to
deduce our warrant from some places or other of Scripture.

Before the Scriptures were written, it pleased God by visions, and dreams, 9.
and other like revelations, immediately to make known his good pleasure to the
Patriarchs and Prophets, and by them unto the people: which kind of Revelations
served them to all the same intents and purposes, whereto the sacred Scriptures
now do us, viz. to instruct them what they should believe and do for his better
service, and the furtherance of their own Salvations. Now as it were
unreasonable for any man to think, that they either had or did expect an
immediate revelation from God every time they eat, or drank, or bought, or
sold, or did any other of the common actions of life, for the warranting of
each of those particular actions to their consciences: no less unreasonable it
is to think, that we should now expect the like warrant from the Scriptures,
for the doing of the like actons. Without all doubt, the Law of Nature, and the
light of reason, was the rule whereby they were guided for the most part in
such matters: which the wisdom of God would never have left in them or us, as a
principal relick of his decayed image in us, if he had not meant that we should
make use of it, for the direction of our lives and actions thereby. Certainly,
God never infused any power into any creature, whereof he intended not some
use. Else what shall we say of the Indies and other barbarous Nations, to whom
God never vouchsafed the lively Oracles of his written word? Must we think that
they were left a lawless people, without any Rule at all whereby to order their
actions? How then come they to be guilty of transgression? for where there is
Romans 4. 15.
no Law, there can be no transgression. Or how comes it about that their
consciences should at any time or in any case either Romans 2. 15.
accuse them, or excuse them, if they had no guide nor rule to walk by; But if
we must grant they had a Rule, (and there is no way, you see, but grant it we
must) then we must also of necessity grant that there is some other Rule for
humane actions besides the written word: for that we presupposed these nations
to have wanted. Which Rule what other could it be, than the Law of Nature and
of right Reason, imprinted Romans 2. 15.
in their hearts? Which is as truly the Law and Word of God, as is that which
is printed in our Bibles. So long as our actions are warranted either by the
one or the other, we cannot be said to want the warrant of Gods word: Tertul.
de coron. milit. cap. 4.
Nec differt, Scriptura an ratione consistat, says Tertullian; it mattereth
not much from whether of both we have our direction, so long as we have it from
either.

You see then those men are in a great error, who make the holy Scripture 10.
the sole rule of all humane actions whatsoever. For the maintenance whereof,
there was never yet produced any piece of an argument, either from Reason, or
from authority of holy Writ, or from the testimony either of the ancient
Fathers or of other classical Divines of latter times; which may not be clearly
and abundantly answered, to the satisfaction of any rational man not extremely
fore-possessed with prejudice. They who think to salve the matter by this
mitigation; That at leastwise our actions ought to be framed according to those
General rules of the Law of nature, which are here and there in the Scriptures
dispensedly contained; (as viz. That we should do as we would be done to; That
all things be done decently, and orderly, and unto edification; That nothing be
done against conscience, and the like:) speak somewhat indeed to the truth, but
little to the purpose. For they consider not, First, that these general rules
are 1.
but occasionally and incidentally mentioned in Scripture; rather to manifest
unto us a former, than to lay upon us a new obligation. Secondly, 2.
that those Rules had been of force for the ordering of men's actions though the
Scripture had never expressed them: and were of such force, before those
Scriptures were written, wherein they are now expressed. For they bind not
originally qua scripta, but qua justa; because they are righteous, not because
they are written. Thirdly, that an action comformable to 3.
these general rules might not be condemned as sinful, although the doer
thereof should look at those rules merely as they are the dictates of the law
of nature; and should not be able to vouch his warrant for it from any place of
Scripture, neither should have at the time of the doing thereof any present
thought or consideration of any such place. The contrary whereunto, I permit to
any man's reasonable judgment, if it be not desperately rash and uncharitable to
affirm. Lastly, that if men's actions done agreeable to those rules are said to
be of faith, precisely for this reason, because those rules are contained in
the word: then it will follow, that before those particular Scriptures were
written wherein any of those rules are first delivered, every action done
according to those rules had been done without faith, (there being as yet no
Scripture for it;) and consequently had been a sin. So that by this doctrine it
had been a sin (before the writing of Matthew. 7. 12.
S. Matthew's Gospel) for any man to have done to others as he would they
should do to him; and it had been a sin (before the writing of the former 1
Cor. 14. 40.
Epistle to the Corinthians) for any man to have done any thing decently and
orderly; supposing these two rules to be in those two places first mentioned:
because (this supposed) there could then have been no warrant brought from the
Scriptures for so doing.

Well then, we see the former Opinion will by no means hold, neither II.
in the rigor of it, nor yet in the mitigation. We are therefore to beware of
it; and that so much the more heedfully, because of the evil consequents and
effects that issue from it: to wit, a world of superstitions, uncharitable
censures, bitter contentions, contempt of superiors, perplexities of
conscience. First, it fills men's heads with many superstitious conceits,
making them to cast impurity upon sundry things, which yet are lawful to as
many as use them lawfully. For the taking away of the indifferency of any thing
that is indifferent, is in truth Superstition: whether either of the two ways
it be done, either by requiring it as necessary, or by forbidding it as
unlawful. He that condemns a thing as utterly unlawful, which yet indeed is
indifferent, and so lawful, is guilty of superstition, as well as he that
enjoineth a thing as absolutely necessary, which yet indeed is but indifferent,
and so arbitrary. They of the Church of Rome, and some in our Church, as they
go upon quite contrary grounds, yet both false; so they run into quite contrary
errors, and both superstitious. They decline too much on the left hand, denying
to the holy Scripture that perfection which of right it ought to have; of
containing all things appertaining to that supernatural doctrine of faith and
holiness which God has revealed to his Church, for the attainment of
everlasting salvation: whereupon they would impose upon Christian people, and
that with an opinion of necessity, many things which the Scriptures require
not: and that is a Superstition. These wry too much on the right hand,
ascribing to the holy Scripture such a kind of perfection as it cannot have; of
being the sole director of all humane actions, whatsoever: whereupon they
forbid unto Christian people, and that under the name of sin, sundry things
which the holy Scripture condemns not: and that is a superstition too.

From which Superstition proceeds in the second place uncharitable 12.
censuring: as evermore they that are the most superstitious, are the most
supercilious. No such severe censures of our blessed Saviors person and
actions, as the Superstitious Scribes and Pharisees were. In this Chapter, the
special fault, which the Apostle blames in the weak ones (who were somewhat
superstitiously affected,) was their rash and uncharitable Ver. 4, 10, and 13.
judging of their brethren. And common and daily experience among our selves
shows how freely some men spend their censures upon so many of their
brethren, as without scruple do any of those things, which they upon false
grounds have superstitiously condemned as utterly unlawful.

And then thirdly, as unjust censurers are commonly entertained with 13.
scorn and contumely; they that so liberally condemn their brethren of
profaneness, are by them again as freely flouted for their preciseness: and so
whiles both parties please themselves in their own ways, they cease not
mutually to provoke and scandalize and exasperate the one the other, pursuing
their private spleens so far, till they break out into open contentions and
oppositions. Thus it stood in the Roman Church, when this Epistle was written.
They verse 3.
judged one another, and despised one another, to the great disturbance of the
Churches Peace: which gave occasion to our Apostle's whole discourse in this
Chapter. And how far the like censurings and despisings have imbittered the
spirits, and whetted both the tongues and pens of learned men one against
another in our own Church; the stirs that have been long since raised, and are
still upheld by the factious Opposers against 14.
our Ecclesiastical Constitutions, Government, and Ceremonies, will not suffer
us to be ignorant. Most of which stirs, I verily persuade my self, had been
long ere this either wholly buried in silence, or at leastwise prettily well
quieted, if the weakness and danger of the error whereof we now speak, had been
more timely discovered, and It is indeed fully handled by M Hooker in his
second book of Eccles. Policy: but few men of that party will read his works,
though written with singular learning, wisdom, godliness and moderation.
more fully and frequently made known to the world, than it has been.

Fourthly, let that doctrine be once admitted, and all humane authority will
soon be despised. The command of Parents, Masters and Princes, which many times
require both secrecy and expedition, shall be taken into slow deliberation: and
the Equity of them sifted by those that are bound to obey, though they know no
cause why, so long as they know no cause to the contrary. Pet. Blesens. Epist.
131.
Delicata est obedientia, quae transit in causae genus deliberativum. It is a
nice obedience in Delicata satis, imo nimis molesta est ista obedientia, etc.
Bern. de praecept. and dispens.
S. Bernard's judgment; yea, rather troublesome and odious, that is
overcurious in Infirmae prorsus voluntatis indicium est, statuta seniorum
studiosius discutere; haerere ad singulae quae injunguntur; exigere de
quibusque rationem; and male suspicari de omni praecepto cujus causa latuerit;
nec unquam libenter ordire, nisi, etc, Bern. Ibid.
discussing the commands of superiors, boggling at every thing that is
enjoined, requiring a why for every wherefore, and unwilling to stir until the
unlawfulness and expediency of the thing commanded shall be demonstrated by
some manifest reason, or undoubted authority from the Scriptures.

Lastly, the admitting of this doctrine would cast such a snare upon men of
weak judgments, but tender consciences, as they should never be able to 15.
unwind themselves thereout again. Men's daily occasions for themselves or
friends, and the necessities of common life, require the doing of a thousand
things within the compass of a few days; for which it would puzzle the best
Textman that lives, readily to bethink himself of a sentence in the Bible,
clear enough to satisfy a scrupulous conscience of the lawfulness and
expediency of what he is about to do: for which, by hearkening to the rules of
reason and discretion, he might receive easy and speedy resolution. In which
cases, if he should be bound to suspend his resolution, and delay to do that
which his own reason would tell him were presently needful to be done, until he
could happily call to mind some Precept or Example of Scripture for his warrant:
what stops would it make in the course of his whole life? what languishings in
the duties of his calling? how would it fill him with doubts and irresolutions,
lead him into a maze of uncertainties, entangle him in a world of woeful
perplexities, and (without the great mercy of God, and better instruction)
plunge him irrecoverably into the gulf of despair? Since the chief end of the
publication of the Gospel, is to Esaias 40. 1, 2.
comfort the hearts, and to revive and refresh the spirits of God's people with
Esaias 61. 1, 3.
the glad tidings of liberty from the spirit of Romans 8. 15.
bondage and 1 Timothy 1. 7.
fear, and of gracious acceptance with their God; to anoint them with Psalm. 45.
7.
the oil of gladness, giving them beauty for ashes, and instead of Psalm. 30. 11.
sackcloth, girding them with joy: we may well suspect that doctrine not to be
Evangelical, which thus sets the consciences of men upon the rack, tortureth
them with continual fears and perplexities, and prepares them thereby unto
hellish despair.

These are the grievous effects and pernicious consequents that will follow 16.
upon their Opinion, who hold, That we must have warrant from the Scripture for
every thing whatsoever we do; not only in spiritual things, (wherein alone it
is absolutely true) nor yet only in other matters of weight, though they be not
spiritual (for which perhaps there might be some color) but also in the common
affairs of life, even in the most slight and trivial things. Yet for that the
Patrons of this Opinion build themselves as much upon the authority of this
present Text, as upon any other passage of Scripture whatsoever (which is the
reason why we have stood thus long upon the examination of it:) we are
therefore in the next place to clear the Text from that their
mis-interpretation. The force of their collection stands thus (as you heard
already:) that faith is ever grounded upon the word of God; and that therefore
whatsoever action is not grounded upon the word, being it is not of faith, by
the Apostles rules here, must needs be a sin. Which collection could not be
denied, if the word Faith were here taken in that sense which they imagine, and
wherein it is very usually taken in the Scriptures; viz. for the doctrine of
supernatural and divine revelation, or for the belief thereof: which Doctrine
we See Articles of the Church of England, Artic. 6.
willingly acknowledge to be completely contained in the holy Scriptures alone,
and therefore dare not admit into our belief, as a branch of divine
supernatural truth, any thing not therein contained. But there is a third
signification of the word Faith, nothing so frequently found in the Scriptures
as the two former; which yet appears both by the course of this whole
Chapter, and by the consent of the best and most approved Interpreters, as well
ancient as modern, to have been properly intended by our Apostle in this place:
namely, that wherein it is put for a certain persuasion of mind, that what we
do may lawfully be done. So that whatsoever action is done by us, with
reasonable assurance and persuasion of the lawfulness thereof in our own
consciences, is in our Apostle's purpose so far forth an action of Faith:
without any inquiring into the means whereby that persuasion was wrought in us;
whether it were the light of our own reason, or the authority of some credible
person, or the declaration of God's revealed will in his written Word. And on
the other side, whatsoever action is done, either directly contrary to the
judgment and verdict of our own consciences, or at leastwise doubtingly, and
before we are in some competent measure assured that we may lawfully do it:
that is it which S. Paul here denies to be of faith, and of which he
pronounces so peremptorily that it is (and that eo nomine) a sin.

About which use and signification of the word Faith we need not to 17.
trouble our selves to fetch it from a trope, either of Himing. in Romans 14. 1.
a Metonymy or Piscat. Ibid.
Synecdoche, as some do. For though (as I say) it do not so often occur in
Scripture; yet it is indeed the primary and native signification of the word
(...) Faith, derived from the root* (...) to persuade. Because all kinds of
Faith whatsoever, consist in a kind of persuasion. You shall therefore find the
words, (...), which signifies properly to believe, and (...), which signifies
properly not to be persuaded, to be opposed as contrary either to other in Joh.
3. 36. and Acts 14. 1, 2.
John 3. and Acts 14. and other places. To omit the frequent use of the words
(...) and Fides, in Greek and Latin Authors in this signification: observe but
the passages of this very Chapter, and you will be satisfied in it. At the
second verse, Hic Verse 2.
(...), one believes that he may eat all things: that is, he is verily
persuaded in his Conscience that he may as lawfully eat flesh as herbs, any one
kind of meat as any other, he 2.
makes no doubt of it. Again at the fourteenth verse, Verse 14.
(...), I know and am persuaded that there is nothing unclean of it self. That
is, I steadfastly believe it as a most certain and undoubted truth. Again at the
3.
two and twentieth verse, Verse 22.
(...); Have thou faith? have it to thy self before God: thatis, Art thou in
thy Conscience persuaded that thou may lawfully partake any of the good
creatures of God? Let that persuasion suffice thee for the approving of thine
own heart in the sight of God: but trouble not the Church, nor offend the
weaker brother, by a needless and unseasonable ostentation of that thy
knowledge. Lastly, in this three and 4.
twentieth verse, Verse 23.
(...), He that doubts is damned if he eat, because he eats not of faith:
that is, he that is not yet fully persuaded in his own mind, that it is lawful
for him to eat some kinds of meats, (as namely, swines flesh, or blo^dings) and
yet is drawn against his own judgment to eat thereof, because he sees others
so to do, or because he would be loath to undergo the taunts and jeers of
scorners, or out of any other poor-respect: such a man is cast and condemned by
the judgment of his own heart, as a transgressor, because he adventureth to do
that which he does not believe to be lawful. And then the Apostle proceeding ab
hypothesi ad thesin, immediately reduces that particular case into a general
rule in these words, For whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. By the process of
which his discourse, it may appear, that by Faith no other thing is here meant,
than such a persuasion of the mind and conscience as we have now declared, and
that the true purport and intent of these words is but thus much in effect:
Whosoever shall enterprise the doing of any thing, which he verily believes to
be unlawful, or at leastwise is not reasonably well persuaded of the lawfulness
of it; let the thing be otherwise, and in it self, what it can be, lawful or
unlawful, indifferent or necessary, convenient or inconvenient, it mattereth
not: to him it is a sin howsoever.

Which being the plain evident and undeniable purpose of these words, 18.
I shall not need to spend any more breath either in the farther refutation of
such conclusions as are mis-inferred hence, which fall of themselves; or in the
farther Explication of the meaning of the Text, which already appears: but
address my self rather to the application of it. Wherein, because upon this
great Principle may depend the resolution of very many Cases of Conscience,
which may trouble us in our Christian and holy walking: it will not be
unprofitable to proceed by resolving some of the most material doubts and
questions, among those which have occured unto my Thoughts, by occasion of this
Text in my Meditations thereon.

First, It may be demanded, What power the Conscience has to make 19.
a thing, otherwise good and lawful, to become unlawful and sinful? and whence
it has that power? I answer, first, that it is not in the power of 1.
any man's Judgment or Conscience to alter the natural condition of any thing
whatsoever, either in respect of quality or degree: but that still every thing
that was good remains good, and every thing that was evil remains evil; and
that in the very same degree of good or evil, as it was before, neither better
nor worse, any man's particular judgment or opinion thereof notwithstanding.
For the differences between good and evil, and the several degrees of both,
spring from such conditions as are intrinsecal to the things themselves: which
no Respectus non mutant naturam.
Outward respects, (and much less then men's opinions) can vary. He that
esteems any creature unclean, may defile himself, but he cannot bring
impurity upon that creature, by such his estimation. Secondly, that Opinio
nostra nobis legem facit. Ambr. de Paradis.
men's judgments may make that which 2.
is good in its own nature, (the natural goodness still remaining) become evil
to them in the use: essentially good, and quoad rem; but quoad hominem, and
accidentally evil. It is our Apostle's own distinction in the fourteenth verse
of this Chapter: Nothing unclean of it self: but to him that esteems any
thing to be unclean, unclean to him, But then we must know withal, that it
holds not the other way, Men's judgments or opinions, although they may make
that which is good in it self, to become evil to them; yet they cannot make
that which is evil in it self, to become good either in it self, or to them. If
a man were verily persuaded, that it were evil to ask his Father blessing, that
mis-perswasion would make it become evil to him: But if the same man should be
as verily persuaded that it were good to curse his Father, or to deny him
relief, being an unbeliever; that mis-perswasion could not make either of them
become good to him. Some that persecuted the Apostles were persuaded they Joh.
16. 2.
did God good service in it. It was Saint Paul's case before his conversion,
who Acts 26. 9.
verily thought in himself, that he ought to do many things contrary to the
name of Jesus. But those their persuasions would not serve to justify those
their actions. Saint Paul confesses himself to have been 1 Timothy 1. 13.
a persecutor, and blasphemer, and injurious for so doing, although he followed
the guidance of his own Conscience therein: and to have stood in need of mercy
for the remission of those wicked acts, though he did them ignorantly, and Acts
23. 3, 4. and Phil. 3. 6.
out of Zeal to the Law. The reason of which difference is, that which I
touched in the beginning, even because any one defect is enough to render an
action evil; and consequently a defect in the agent may do it, though the
substance of the action remain still (as it was) good: but all conditions must
concur to make an action good; and consequently a right intention in the Agent
will not suffice thereunto, so long as the substance of the action remains
still (as it was) evil. Thirdly, that the Conscience has this power over men's
wills 3.
and actions by virtue of that unchangeable Law of God, which he establishes
by an Ordinance of Nature in our first Creation: that the will of every man
(which is the fountain whence all our actions immediately flow) should conform
it self to the judgment of the practick understanding or Conscience, as to its
proper and immediate rule, and yield it self to be guided thereby. So that if
the understanding through Error point out a wrong way, and the will follow it:
the fault is chiefly in the understanding for mis-guiding the will. But if the
understanding show the right way, and the will take a wrong: then the fault is
merely in the will, for not following the guide which God has set over it.

It may be demanded secondly, Whether or no in every particular thing 20.
we do, an actual consideration of the lawfulness and expediency thereof be so
requisite, as that for want thereof we should sin in doing it? The reason of
the doubt is, because otherwise how should it appear to be of Faith? and,
Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. I answer, First: that in 1.
matters of weight, and worthy of consultation, it is very necessary that the
lawfulness and expediency of them be first diligently examined, before they be
enterprized. And secondly, that even in smaller matters the like 2.
examination is needful when there is any apparent cause of doubting. But
thirdly, that in such small and trivial matters, as it much skilleth not
whether 3.
we do them or no, or whether we do this rather than that, and wherein Ubi est
suspicio, ibi discussi^ necessaria. Bernard. Ep. 7.
no doubt arises to trouble us; an actual consideration of their lawfulness or
expediency is so far from being requisite, that it would rather be troublesome
and incommodious. True it is, that all voluntary actions are done with some
deliberation, more or less: because it is the nature of the will to consult
with the understanding in every act; else it should be irrational and brutish.
Yet there are many things which we daily do, wherein Ratio in rebus manifestis
non inquirit, sed statim judicat. Aquin. 1, 2. qu. 14. 4. ad 2.
the sentence of the understanding is so quick and present, because there is no
difficulty in them; that they seem to be, (and are therefore sometimes so
termed) actus indeliberati: (...) etc. Arist. 1. Mag. Moral. 18.
such as are to sit down and to rise up, to pluck a flower as we walk in a
Garden, to ask the time of the day, or the name of the next Town as we travel
by the way, or whether we eat of this or that dish at the Table, (...). Arist.
2. Eth. 5.
and the like, For the doing of every of which, it were a ridiculous servility
to be imposed upon men, if they should be tied to district examination of the
lawfulness and expediency thereof. There is not in them dignus vindice nodus:
and a man's time ought to be more precious unto him, than to be trifled away in
such needless and minute enquiries. It is even as if we should tie a great
learned man that is ready in his Latin tongue, to bethink himself first of some
Grammar Rule or Example for the declining and parsing of every word he were to
speak, before he should adventure to utter a Latin sentence. But, as such a man
is sufficiently assured out of the habit of his learning, that he speaks
congruously and with good propriety, though he have no present actual reference
to his Grammar Rules: so here an habitual knowledge of the nature and use of
indifferent things is sufficient to warrant to the Conscience the lawfulness of
these common actions of life; so as they may be said to be of Faith, though
there be no farther actual or particular disquisition used about them. A very
needful thing it is the whilst, for Christian men to endeavor to have a right
judgment concerning indifferent things: without which it can scarcely be
avoided, but that both their Consciences will be full of distracting scruples
within themselves, and their conversations full of unbrotherly carriage toward
others.

It may be demanded thirdly, Since Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin; 21.
What measure of Faith, or what degree of Persuasion is necessary for the
warranting of our actions, so as less than that will not serve? I answer, that
what is here demanded cannot positively be defined by any peremptory and
immovable rules. There is most an end a Latitude in such things as these are:
which may be straightened or extended more or less, according to the exigence of
present occasions, and as the different state or quality of particular business
shall require. There is a (...), a fullness of persuasion, arising from evident
infallible and demonstrative proofs, which is attainable for the performance of
sundry duties both of civil Justice and of Religion. And where it may be
attained, it is to be endeavored after, (though it be not of absolute
necessity:) for we cannot make our assurances too strong. The Apostle uses
that word at the fifth Verse ( Verse 5. hic plene certus sit. Heming.
Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind) (...): it is a metaphorical
word, and seems to be borrowed from a Ship under Quasi plenis velis feratur.
Piscat. in Schol. ad Romans 14. 5.
full sail, that has both wind and tide with it, to carry it with a straight
and speedy course to the desired point, and nothing to hinder it. But as men,
when they are to purchase Lands, will desire and propose to have as good
assurance as by Learned Council can be devised; but yet must be content to take
such assurance as the sellers can make, or else they shall make but a few
markets: so although we may desire ( ex abundanti) a full assurance of faith in
every weighty action we shall enterprise; yet ordinarily and in most things we
must content our selves to take up with a conjectural, probable, and moral
certainty, or else we shall find very few things left for us to do. Fides
Logica is not to be expected in all cases: in some, and those the most, Fides
Ethica must serve the turn. Nay I say yet further, and I beseech you (brethren)
to take notice of it as a matter of special use both for the directing and
quieting of your Consciences: that ordinarily and in most things we need no
other warrant for what we do than this only, that there is not (to our
knowledge) any Law either of Nature or Scripture against them. As the Lawyers
use to say of men's persons, Quisque praesumitur esse bonus, etc. The Law takes
every man for a good man and true, till his truth and honesty be legally
disproved; and as our Savior sometimes said, Luke 9. 50.
He that is not against us, is for us: so in these matters we are to believe
all things to be lawful for us to do, which cannot be shown by good evidence
either of Scripture or Reason to be unlawful. Those men therefore go quite the
wrong way to work, to the fearful puzling of their own and other men's
Consciences, who use to argue on this manner. [This I have no warrant to do;
for where is it commanded?] Whereas they ought rather to argue thus, [This I
have good warrant to do; for where is it forbidden?] Apply this now a little to
those Ceremonies, that for orders sake, and to add the greater solemnity to
sacred actions, are appointed in the Church; Wearing the Surplice, bowing at
the Name of the Lord Jesus, kneeling at the Holy Communion, and the rest.
Though I might say, and that truly, that these also are commanded even by
divine authority in genere: that is to say, as they fall within the compass of
decent Ceremonies, by virtue of that Grand Ecclesiastical Canon ( 1 Cor. 14. 40.
Let all things be done honestly and in order;) and that even in specie too
they are commanded by the authority of those Governors whom God has set over
us, and to whom we are bound in Conscience, and by virtue of God's commandment,
to yield obedience: Yet I wave all this for the present, because it is not so
direct to the point in hand. Only I ask, Where are any of these things
forbidden? if they be, let it be shown: and that not by weak collections and
remote consequences, which are good for nothing but to engender strifes, and to
multiply disputes without end; but by direct and full evidence either of
Scripture text or Reason, which (for any thing I know) was never yet done,
neither (as I verily believe) will ever be done. But if it cannot be shown that
these things are forbidden; without any more ado, the use of them is by that
sufficiently warranted. He that will not allow of this doctrine, besides that
he cherishes an error which will hardly suffer him to have a quiet conscience:
I yet see not how he can reconcile his Opinion with those sundry passages of
our Apostle, [ 1 Timothy 4. 4.
Every creature of God is good, Tit. 1. 15.
To the pure all things are pure, Romans 14. 14.
I know nothing is of it self unclean, 1 Cor. 6. 12.
All things are lawful, etc. From which passages we may with much safety
conclude, that it is lawful for us to do all those things, concerning which
there can be nothing brought of moment to prove them unlawful. Upon which
ground alone if we do them, we do them upon such a persuasion of Faith as is
sufficient. Provided, that we have not neglected to inform our judgments the
best we could for the time past; and that we are ever ready withal to yield our
selves to better information, whenever it shall be tendered unto us, for the
time to come.

It may be demanded fourthly, Suppose a man would fain do something, 22.
of the lawfulness whereof he is not in his Conscience sufficiently resolved;
whether he may in any case do it, notwithstanding the reluctance of his
Conscience, yea or no? As they write of Herodot, in Clio; Senec. 3. De Ira 21.
Cyrus that to make a passage for his Army, he cut the great River Gyndes into
many smaller Channels, which in one entire stream was not passable: so to make
a clear and distinct answer to this great question, I must divide it into some
lesser ones. For there are sundry things considerable in it; whether we respect
the Conscience, or the Person of the doer, or the Action to be done. As namely
and especially, in respect of the Conscience, whether the reluctance thereof
proceed from a settled and steadfast resolution, or from some doubtfulness only,
or but from some scruple? And in respect of the person, whether he be sui
juris, his own Master, and have power to dispose of himself at his own choice
in the things questioned; or he be under the command, and at the appointment of
another? And in respect of the Action, or thing to be done, whether it be a
necessary thing, or an unlawful thing, or a thing indifferent and arbitrary?
Any of which circumstances may quite alter the case, and so beget new
questions. But I shall reduce all to three questions: whereof the first shall
concern a resolved Conscience, the second a doubtful Conscience, and the third
a scrupulous Conscience.

The First question then is, if the Conscience be firmly resolved, that the 23.
thing proposed to be done is unlawful; whether it may then be done or no?
Whereunto I answer in these two Conclusions. The first Conclusion: If the
Conscience be firmly so resolved, and that upon a true ground (that is to say,
if the thing be indeed unlawful, and judged so to be) it may not in any case,
or for any respect in the world, be done. There cannot be imagined a higher Qui
agit contra conscientiam qua credit Deum aliquid prohibuisse, licet erret,
contemnit Deum. Bonavent. 2. sent. did. 39.
contempt of God, than for a man to despise the power of his own Conscience:
which is the highest sovereignty under Heaven, as being God's most immediate
deputy for the ordering of his life and ways. Menand.
(...), a heathen man could say. Woeful is the state of those men (unless they
repent) who for filthy lucre, or vain pleasure, or spiteful malice, or
tottering honor, or lazy ease; or any other reigning lust, dare lie, or swear,
or cheat, or oppress, or commit filthiness, or steal, or kill, or slander, or
flatter, or betray, or do any thing that may advance their base ends: nothing
at all regarding the secret whisperings, or murmurings, no nor yet the loud
roarings, and bellowings of their own Consciences there against. Pres. Satyr. 5.
Stat contra ratio, and secretam gannit in aurem. It does so; but yet they turn
a deaf ear to it, and despise it. Wonder not, if when they out of the terrors
of their troubled Consciences shall howl and roar in the ears of the Almighty
for mercy, or for some mitigation at least of their torment; he then turn a
deaf ear against them, and despise them. Jam. 4. 17.
To him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin, James 4.
Sin not to be excused by any plea or color: But how much more inexcusably then
is it sin to him, that knows the evil he should not do, and yet will do it?
There is not a proner way to Quod sit contra conscientiam aedificat ad
gehennam. c. 28. qu. 1. Omnes Sect. ex his
Hell, than to sin against Conscience. Romans 14. 22.
Happy is he which condemns not himself in that which he allows: but most
wretched is he that allows himself to the practice of that, which in his
judgment he cannot but condemn. Neither makes it any difference at all here,
whether a man be otherwise sui juris or no. For although there be a great
respect due to the higher powers in doubtful cases, (as I shall touch anon) yet
where the thing required is simply unlawful, and understood so to be,
Inferiors must absolutely resolve to disobey, whatsoever come of it. God's
faithful servants have ever been most resolute in such exigents. Dan. 3. 16, 18.
We are not careful to answer thee in this matter; (belike in a matter of
another nature they would have taken care to have given the King a more
satisfactory, at least a more respective answer: but in this matter) be it
known to thee, O King, that we will not serve thy gods. c. 11. qu. 3. Qui
resistet, ex Augustino.
Da veniam Imperator, etc, You know whose answers they were. If we be sure God
has forbidden it, we sin against our own consciences, if we do it at the
command of any mortal man whosoever, or upon any worldly inducement whatsoever.
That is the first Conclusion.

The second is this. If a man be in his conscience fully persuaded that 24.
a thing is evil and unlawful, which yet in truth is not so, but lawful; the
thing by him so judged unlawful, cannot by him be done without sin. Even an
erroneous conscience binds thus far, that a man cannot go against it, and be
guiltless: because his practice should then run cross to his judgment; and so
the thing done could not be of Faith. For if his reason judge it to be evil,
and yet he will do it, it argues manifestly that he has a will to do evil,
and so becomes a transgressor of that General Law, which binds all men to
eschew all evil. Yet in this case we must admit of some difference, according
to the different nature of the things, and the different condition of the
persons. For if the things so judged unlawful, be in their own Nature not
necessary, but indifferent, so as they may either be done or left undone
without sin; and the Person withal be sui juris in respect of such things, no
superior power having determined his liberty therein: then, although he may
not do any of these things, by reason of the contrary persuasion of his
conscience, without sin; yet he may without sin leave them undone. As for
example: Say a man should hold it utterly unlawful (as some erroneously do) to
play at cards or dice, or to lay a wager, or to cast lots in trivial matters:
if it be in truth lawful to do every of these things, (as I make no question
but it is, so they be done with sobriety and with due circumstances,) yet he
that is otherwise persuaded of them, cannot by reason of that persuasion do any
of them without sin. Yet, for so much as they are things no way necessary, but
indifferent; both in their nature, and for their use also, no superior power
having enjoined any man to use them; therefore he that judges them unlawful,
may abstain from them without sin, and so indeed he is in conscience bound to
do, so long as he continues to be of that opinion. But now on the other side,
if the things so mis-judged to be unlawful, be any way necessary; either in
respect of their own nature, or by the injunction of authority: then the person
is by that his error brought into such a strait between two sins, as he can by
no possible means avoid both, so long as he persisteth in that his error. For,
both if he do the thing, he goes against the persuasion of his Conscience, and
that is a great sin: and if he do it not, either he omitteth a necessary duty,
or else disobeyeth lawful Authority; and to do either of both is a sin too. Out
of which snare since there is no way of escape but one, which is to rectify
his Judgment, and to quit his pernicious Error: it concerns every man
therefore that unfeignedly desires to do his duty in the fear of God, and to
keep a good Conscience, not to be too stiff in his present apprehensions, but
to examine well the Principles and Grounds of his opinions, strongly suspecting
that wind that drives him upon such rocks, to be but a blast of his own fancy,
rather than a breathing of the holy Spirit of truth. Once this is most certain,
that whosoever shall adventure to do any thing repugnant to the Judgment of his
own Conscience, (be that Judgment true, or be it false,) shall commit a
grievous sin in so doing: (...), because it cannot be of Faith; and whatsoever
is not of Faith, is sin.

That is now where the Conscience apparently inclines the one way. 25.
But say the scales hang even, so as a man cannot well resolve whether way he
should rather take! now he is animo nunc huc, nunc fluctuat illuc. Virg.
Aeneid. 10.
in one mind, by and by in another; but constant in neither; right S. James his
(...), Jam. 1. 8.
a double minded man. This is it we call a doubting conscience: concerning
which, the second question is, what a man ought to do in case of doubtfulness.
Perfect directions here, (as in most deliberatives) would require a large
discourse: because there are so many considerable circumstances that may vary
the case; especially in respect of the cause from which that doubtfulness of
mind may spring. Many times it arises from mere fickleness of mind, or
weakness 1.
of judgment; as the lightest things are soonest driven out of their place by
the wind: Even as S. James says, Ibid.
a double minded man is wavering in all his ways: and S. Paul speaks of some
that were like Ephesians. 4. 14.
children, off and on, soon wherried about with every blast of doctrine.
Sometimes it proceeds from tenderness of Conscience, which is indeed a 2.
very blessed and gracious thing: but yet (as tender things may soon miscarry,
if they be not the more choicely handled,) very abnoxious through Satan's
diligence and subtilty to be wrought upon to dangerous inconveniences.
Sometimes it may proceed from the probability of those reasons 3.
that seem to stand on either side, betwixt which it is not easy to judge
which are strongest: or from the differing judgments and opinions of learned
and godly men thereabout, and from many other causes: But for 4.
some general resolution of the Question, (what is to be done where the
conscience is doubtful?) I answer.

First, that if the doubtfulness be not concerning the lawfulness of any 26.
of the things to be done, considered simply and in themselves, but of the
expediency of them as they are compared one with another; (as when of two
things proposed at once, whereof one must, and but one can be done, I am
sufficiently persuaded of the lawfulness of either, but am doubtful whether of
the two rather to pitch upon:) in such a case the party 1.
ought first to weigh the conveniences and inconveniences of both, as 2.
well and advisedly as he can, by himself alone: and to do that which then
shall appear to him to be subject to the fewer and lesser inconveniences. Or if
the reasons seem so equally strong on both sides, that he cannot of himself
decide the doubt; then secondly, if the (...). Arist. 3. Ethic. 4.
matter be of weight, and worth the while, he should do well to make his doubts
known to some prudent and pious man: (especially to his own spiritual Pastor,
if he be a man meetly qualified for it,) resolving to rest upon his judgment,
and to follow his direction. Or if the matter be of small moment, he may 3.
then thirdly do whether of both he has best liking to; (as the Apostle says
in one particular case, and it may be applied to many more, 1 Cor. 7. 36.
Let him do what he will, he sins not:) resting his conscience upon this
persuasion, that so long as he is unfeignedly desirous to do for the best, and
has not been negligent to use all Non tibi imputabitur ad culpam, quod invitus
ignoras. Aug. de not. and great.
requisite diligence to inform himself aright; God will accept of his good
intention therein, and pardon his error, if he shall be mistaken in his
choice. But secondly, if the question be concerning the very lawfulness of the
27.
thing it self, whether it may be lawfully done or no, and the conscience stand
in doubt, because reasons seem to be probable both pro and contra, and there
are learned men as well of the one opinion, as of the other, etc. as we see it
is (for instance) in the question of Usury and of second marriage after
divorce, and in sundry other doubtful cases in moral divinity; in such a case
the person (if he be sui juris) is certainly bound to Nil faciendum, de quo
dubites, sit necne recte factum, Cic l. 1. de offic.
forbear the doing of that thing of the lawfulness whereof he so doubts: and
if he forbear it not, he sins. It is the very point the Apostle in this
verse intends to teach; and for the confirming whereof he voucheth this Rule
of the Text: He that doubts, says he, is damned if he eat; he is (...),
condemned of his own conscience: because he does that willingly whereof he
doubts, when he has free liberty to let it alone, no necessity urging him
thereunto. And the reason why he ought rather to forbear than to adventure the
doing of that whereof he doubts, is; because in doubtful cases Wisdom would
that the safer part should be chosen. And that part is safer, which if we
choose, we are sure we shall do well; than that, which if we choose, we know not
but we may do ill. As for example, in the instances now proposed. If I doubt of
the lawfulness of Usury, or of Marrying after divorce, I am sure that if I
Marry not, nor let out my money, I shall not sin in so abstaining: but if I
shall do either of both doubtingly, I cannot be without some fear lest I should
sin in so doing; and so those actions of mine being not done in Faith, must
needs be sin, even by the Rule of the Text, (...), For whatsoever is not of
Faith, is sin.

But then thirdly, if the liberty of the agent be determined by the command 28.
of some superior power to whom he owes obedience; so as he is not now sui
juris ad hoc, to do or not to do at his own choice, but to do what he is
commanded: this one circumstance quite alters the whole case, and now he is
bound in conscience to do the thing commanded, his doubtfulness of mind whether
that thing be lawful or no, notwithstanding. To do that whereof he doubts,
where he has free liberty to leave it undone, brings upon him (as we have
already shown) the guilt of wilful transgression: but not so where he is not
left at his own liberty. And where lawful authority prescribes in alterutram
partem, there the liberty ad utramque partem contradictionis is taken away,
from so many as are under that authority. If they that are over them have
determined it oneway, it is not thenceforth any more at their choice, whether
they will take that way, or the contrary: but they must go the way that is
appointed them without gainsaying or grudging. And if in the deed done at the
command of one that is endued with lawful authority there be a sin, it must go
on his score that requires it wrongfully, not on his that does but his duty in
obeying. A Prince commands his Subjects to serve in his Wars: it may be the
quarrel is unjust; it may be, there may appear to the understanding of the
subject great likelihoods of such injustice; yet may the Subject for all that
fight in the quarrel; yea he is bound in conscience so to do: nay he is deep in
disloyalty and treason, if he refuse the service, whatsoever pretensions he may
make of conscience, for such refusal. Neither need that fear trouble him, lest
he should bring upon himself the guilt of innocent blood; for Is damnum dat qui
jubet dare: ejus ver us nulla culpa est, cui parere necesse sit. L. 169. F. de
div. Reg. jur.
the blood that is unrighteously shed in that quarrel, he must answer for, that
set him on work, not he that spilt it. And truly, it is a great wonder to me,
that any man endued with understanding, and that is able in any measure to
weigh the force of those precepts and reasons which bind inferiors to yield
obedience to their superiors, should be otherwise minded in cases of like
nature. Whatsoever is commanded us by those whom God has set over us, either
in Church, Commonwealth, or Family, ( Bernard. ^e praecept. and dis-pens.
quod tamen non sit certum displicere Deo, says S. Bern.) which is not
evidently contrary to the Law and will of God, ought to be of us received and
obeyed no otherwise, than as if God himself had commanded it, because God
himself has commanded us to Romans 13. 1.
obey the higher Powers, and to 1 Pe^. 2. 13.
submit our selves to their ordinances. Say it be not well done of them to
command it! Sed enim quid hoc re^ert tua? says he; What is that to thee? Let
them look to that whom it concerns: Toll quod tuum est, and vade. Do thou
what is thine own part faithfully, and never trouble thy self further. Ipsum
quem pro Deo habemus, tanquam Deum, in his quae aperte non sunt contra Deum,
audire debemus; Ernard still. Gods Vicegerents must be heard and obeyed in all
things that are not manifestly contrary to the revealed will of God.

But the thing required is against my conscience, may some say; and I 29.
may not go against my conscience, for any man's pleasure. Judge I pray you what
perverseness is this, when the blessed Apostle commands thee Romans 15. 6.
to obey for conscience sake, that thou should disobey, and that for
conscience sake too: He charge thee upon thy conscience to be subject; and
thou pretendest thy conscience to free thee from subjection. This by the way;
now to the point. Thou say, it is against thy conscience: I say again, that
(in the case whereof we now speak, the case of doubtfulness) it is not against
thy conscience. For doubting properly is Isidor.
motus indifferens in utramque partem contradictionis; when the mind is held
Dubious incertus quasi duarum viarum. Isid. 10. Etym. (...).
in suspense between two ways; uncertain whether of both to take to. When the
scales hang even (as I said before) and in aequilibrio, without any notable
propension and inclination to the one side more than to the other. And surely
where things hang thus even, if the weight of authority will not cast the scale
either way: we may well suppose, that either the authority is made very light,
or else there is a great fault in the beam. Known (brethren) the gainsaying
conscience is one thing, and the doubting conscience another. That which is
done repugnante conscientia, the conscience of the doer flatly gainsaying it,
that is indeed against a man's conscience, (the conscience having already passed
a definitive sentence the one way:) and no respect or circumstance whatsoever
can free it from sin. But that which is done dubitante conscientia, the
conscience of the doer only doubting of it and no more; that is in truth no
more against a man's conscience than with it, (the conscience as yet not having
passed a definitive sentence either way:) and such an action may either be a
sin, or no sin; according to those qualifications which it may receive from
other respects and circumstances. If the conscience have already passed a
judgment upon a thing, and condemned it as simply unlawful; in that case it is
true that a man ought not by any means to do that thing, no not at the command
of any Magistrate, no nor although his conscience have pronounced a wrong
sentence, and erred in that judgment: for then he should do it, repugnante
conscientia, he should go directly against his own conscience, which he ought
not to do whatsoever come of it. In such a case certainly he may not obey the
Magistrate: yet let him know thus much withal, that he sins too in
disobeying the Magistrate; from which sin the following of the judgment of his
own conscience cannot acquit him. And this is that fearful per plexity whereof
I spoke, whereinto many a man casts himself by his own error and obstinacy,
that he can neither go with his conscience, nor against it, but he shall sin.
And who can help it, if a man will needs cherish an error, and persist in it?
But now if the conscience be only doubtful whether a thing be lawful or no, but
have not as yet passed a peremtory judgment against it, (yea although it rather
incline to think it Plus est standum praecepto praelati, quam conscientiae.
unlawful:) in that case if the Magistrate shall command it to be done, the
Subject with a good conscience may do it, nay he cannot with a good conscience
refuse to do it, though it be dubitante Bonav. 2. ^sen. distinct. 39.
conscientia.

But you will yet say, that in doubtful cases the safer part is to be chosen.
30.
So say I too; and am content that rule should decide this question: only let
it be rightly applied. Thou think it safer, where thou doubtest of the
unlawfulness, to forbear, than to do: as for example, if thou doubtest whether
it be lawful to kneel at the Communion, it is safest in thy opinion therefore
for thee not to kneel. So should I think too, if thou were left merely to thine
own liberty. But thou do not consider how thou art caught in thine own net,
and how the edge of thine own weapon may be turned upon thee point blank not to
be avoided, thus. If authority command thee to kneel, which whether it be
lawful for thee to do, or not, thou doubtest; it cannot choose but thou must
needs doubt also, whether thou may lawfully disobey or not. Now then here
apply thine own Rule, In dubiis pars tutior, and see what will come of it.
Judge, since thou can not but doubt in both cases, whether it be not the
safer of the two, to obey doubtingly, than to disobey doubtingly. Gregor.
Tene certum, demitte incertum, is S. Gregory his rule: where there is a
certainty, and an uncertainty, let the uncertainty go, and hold to that which
is certain. Now the general is certain, that thou art to obey the Magistrate in
all thing not contrary to the will of God; but the particular is uncertain,
whether the thing now commanded thee by the Magistrate be contrary to the will
of God: (I say uncertain to thee, because thou doubtest of it.) Deal safely
therefore, and hold thee to that which is certain, and obey.

But thou will yet allege, that the Apostle here condemns the doing 31.
of any thing, not only with a gainsaying, but even with a doubting conscience,
because doubting also is contrary to faith; and he that doubts is even for
that condemned, if he eat. Oh beware of misapplying Scripture! it is a thing
easily done, but not so easily answered. I know not any one gap that has let
in more and more dangerous errors into the Church, than this: that men take the
words of the sa^red Text fitted to particular occasions, and to the condition
of the times wherein they were written; and then apply them to themselves and
others as they find them, without due respect had to the differences that be
between those times and cases and the present. Sundry things spoken in
Scripture agreeably to that infancy of the Church, would sort very ill with the
Church in her fullness of strength and stature: and sundry directions very
expedient in times of persecution, and when believers lived mingled with
Infidels, would be very unseasonably urged where the Church is in a peaceable
and flourishing estate, enjoying the favor and living under the protection of
gracious and religious Princes. Thus the Constitutions that the Apostles made
concerning Deacons and Widows in those primitive times, are with much
importunity, but very importunely withal, urged by the Disciplinarians: And
sundry other like things I might instance in of this kind, worthy the
discovery, but that I fear to grow tedious. Briefly then, the Apostles whole
discourse in this Chapter, and wheresoever else he touches upon the point of
Scandals, is to be understood only in that case where men are left to their own
liberty in the use of indifferent things: the Romans, Corinthians, and others
to whom S. Paul wrote about these matters, being not limited any way in the
exercise of their liberty therein by any overruling authority. But where the
Magistrates have interposed, and thought good upon mature advice to impose Laws
upon those that are under them, whereby their liberty is (not infringed, as
some unjustly complain, in the inward judgment, but only) limited in the
outward exercise of it: there the Apostolical directions will not hold in the
same absolute manner, as they were delivered to those whom they then concerned;
but only in the equity of them, so far forth as the cases are alike, and with
such meet qualifications and mitigations, as the difference of the cases
otherwise does require. So that a man ought not out of private fancy, or merely
because he would not be observed for not doing as others do, or for any the
like weak respects, to do that thing, of the lawfulness whereof he is not
competently persuaded, where it is free for him to do otherwise: which was the
case of these weak ones among the Romans, for whose sakes principally the
Apostle gave these directions. But the authority of the Magistrate intervening
so alters the case, that such a forbearance as to them was necessary, is to as
many of us as are commanded to do this or that, altogether unlawful, in regard
they were free, and we are bound: for the reasons already shown, which now I
rehearse not.

But you will yet say, (for in point of obedience men are very loath to 32.
yield so long as they can find any thing to plead,) those that lay these
burdens upon us, at leastwise should do well to satisfy our doubts, and to
inform our consciences concerning the lawfulness of what they enjoin; that so
we might render them obedience with better cheerfulness. How willing are we
sinful men to leave the blame of our miscarriages any where rather than upon
our selves! But how is it not incongruous the while, that those men should
prescribe rules to their governors, who can scarcely brook their Governors
should prescribe Laws to them? (...), Solon apud Stob. Sermon. 3.
It were good we would first learn how to obey, ere we take upon us to teach
our betters how to govern. However, what governors are bound to do, or what is
^it for them to do, in the point of information; that is not now the question.
If they fail in any part of their bounden duty, they shall be sure to reckon
for it one day: but their failing cannot in the mean time excuse thy
disobedience. Although I think it would prove a hard task, for whosoever should
undertake it, to show that Superiors are always bound to inform the
consciences of their inferiors concerning the lawfulness of every thing they
shall command. If sometimes they do it, where they see it expedient or needful;
sometimes again (and that perhaps oftener,) it may be thought more expedient for
them, and more conducible for the public peace and safety, only to make known
to the people what their pleasures are, reserving to themselves the reasons
thereof. I am sure, in the point of Ecclesiastical Ceremonies and
Constitutions, (in which case the aforesaid allegations are usually most stood
upon,) this has been abundantly done in our Church, not only in the learned
writings of sundry private men, but by the public declaration also of
Authority, as is to be seen at large in the Preface commonly Printed before the
Book of Common Prayer, concerning that argument: enough to satisfy those that
are peaceable, and not disposed to stretch their wits to cavil at things
established. And thus much of the second Question, touching a doubting
Conscience: whereon I have insisted the longer, because it is a point both so
proper to the Text, and whereat so many have stumbled.

There remains but one other Question, and that of far smaller difficulty; 33.
What is to be done, when the conscience is scrupulous? I call that a scruple,
when a man is reasonably well persuaded of the lawfulness of a thing, yet has
withal some jealousies and fears, lest perhaps it should prove unlawful. Such
scruples are more incident to men of melancholy dispositions, or of timorous
spirits; especially if they be tender conscienced withal: and they are much
increased by the false suggestions of Satan; by reading the Books, or hearing
the Sermons, or frequenting the company of men more strict, precise, and
austere in sundry points, than they need or ought to be; and by sundry other
means which I now mention not. Of which scruples it behooves every man, first,
to be wary that he do 1.
not at all admit them, if he can choose: or, if he cannot wholly avoid them,
that secondly, he endeavor so far as may be to eject them speedily 2.
out of his thoughts, as Satan's snares, and things that may breed him worser
inconveniences: or if he cannot be so rid of them, that then thirdly, 3.
he resolve to go on according to the more probable persuasion of his mind, and
despise those scruples. And this he may do with a good conscience, not only in
things commanded him by lawful authority, but even in things indifferent and
arbitrary, and wherein he is let to his own liberty.

Much more might have been added for the farther both declaration and 34.
confirmation of these points. But you see I have been forced to wrap things
together that deserve a more full and distinct handling, that I might hold some
proportion with the time. I had a purpose briefly to have comprised the sum of
what I have delivered, concerning a gainsaying, a doubting, and a scrupulous
conscience, in some few conclusions for your better remembrance, and to have
added also something by way of direction, what course might be the most
probably taken for the correcting of an erroneous conscience, for the settling
of a doubtful conscience, and for the quieting of a scrupulous conscience. But
it is more than time that I should give place to other business: and the most,
and most material of those directions, have been here and there occasionally
touched in that which has been delivered already: In which respect I may the
better spare that labor. Beseech we God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
so to endue us all with the grace of his holy Spirit, that in our whole
conversations we may unfeignedly endeavor to preserve a good conscience, and
to yield all due obedience to him first, and then to every Ordinance of man for
his sake.

Now to this Father, Son, and blessed Spirit, three persons, and one eternal
God, be ascribed all the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory both now and for
evermore.

Amen.
AD CLERUM.
The fifth Sermon.
At a Visitation holden at Grantham, Lincoln, October. 8. 1641.
MATTHEW. XV. 9. But in vain they do worship me, teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of men.
OUR Savior sometimes forewarneth his Disciples to beware of the leaven of
Pharisees, Which leaven, as he expounds himself, (and he best knew his own
meaning) was of two sorts: the leaven of Hypocrisy, Luke Luke 12. 1:
12. and the leaven of corrupt and superstitious doctrine, Matthew. 16. We read,
1 Cor. 5. of a third sort, and that Matthew. 16. 12.
is the leaven of maliciousness; which also usually accompanies 1 Cor. 5. 8.
the other two. Where any of the three are in abundance, but especially where
they all meet and abound, (as in these Pharisees) it is impossible by any care
or cunning so to keep them hidden, as not to bewray themselves upon occasion to
an observing eye. As you know it is the nature of leaven, though it be hidden
never so deep in a heap of Meal, to work up to the top, so that a Man may
certainly know by the effects, and be able to say, that there it is. In the
story of this present Chapter, the Pharisees discover all the three; Malice,
Hypocrisy, and Superstition. Their Malice against Christ, although it appeared
sufficiently in this, that their quarrelling his Disciples for eating with
unwashen hands was with the intent to bring an odium upon him for not
instructing them better: yet he passes it by, without taking any special
notice thereof. It may be, for that his own person was chiefly concerned in it.
But then the other two, their Hypocrisy and Superstition, in rejecting the
Commandments of God for the setting up of their own Traditions; because they
trencht so near and deep upon the honor of God his heavenly Father, he neither
would nor could dissemble. But themselves having given him the occa^ion by
asking him the first question, [ Why do thy Disciples transgress the tradition
of the Elders?] he turns Percu^it illos atrociore recriminatione. Eras. in
Paraph.
the point of their own weapon full upon them again as it were by way of
recrimination, not without some sharpness, Do you blame them for that? But why
then do you your selves also transgress the Commandment (...), Chrysostom. Hom. 15.
(...). Chrysostom. ibid. Isa. 29. 13.
of God by your Tradition? which is a far greater matter.

2. That is their Charge, verse 3, Which having made good by one instance taken
from the fi^th Commandment, (more he might have brought: but it needed not;
this one being so notorious and so convincing) he thenceforth doubts not to
call them Hypocrites to their faces, and to apply to them a passage out of the
Prophet Isaias, very pat to his purpose. Wherein the Prophet charged the People
of those times with the very same crimes both of them, whereof these Pharisees
are presently appealed: to wit, Hypocrisy, and Superstition: Hypocrisy in
their Worship, and Superstition in the Doctrine. The Leaven whereof, by how
much more it swelled them in their own and the common Opinion, making them to
be highly esteemed among Men, for their outward preciseness (...). Act. 26. 5.
Luke 16. 15.
and semblances of Holiness; by so much the more it sowred them toward
Almighty God, rendering the whole Lump of their so strict Religion abominable in
his sight. So true is that of our Savior, Luke 16. That which is highly
esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of God. Their Hypocrisy he
puts home to them in the Verses before the Text; Ye Hypocrites, well did
Isaias prophecy of you, saying, This people draws nigh unto me with their
mouth, and honors me with their lips; but their heart is far from me. That
done, he forgets not to remember them of their Superstition too; continuing
his allegation out of the Prophet still, in the words of my Text, But in vain
they do worship me, teaching for Doctrines the commandments of men.

3. This later verse I have chosen to entreat of alone at this time: for (...).
1 Timothy 4. 2.
although Hypocrisy and corrupt teaching do often go together, as in those
Jews whom the Prophet long before reproved, and in these Pharisees whom our
Savior here reproves: yet have I purposely severed this Verse from the former
in the handling, moved thereunto out of a double consideration. First, because
Hypocrisy lurking more within, we are not able to pronounce of it with such
certainty; neither (if we were) have we indeed any good Warrant so to do: as we
may of unsound Doctrines which lie more open to the view, and are allowed to 1
These. 5. 21. 1 John 4. 1.
our examination. Secondly, and especially, because hundreds of those my
Brethren, whom I cannot in reason excuse from symbolizing with the Pharisees in
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men (which is the fault reproved in
this verse;) I cannot yet in charity and in my own thoughts, but acquit from
partaking with them in (the measure at least of) that their foul Hypocrisy,
wherewith they stand charged in the former verses.

The words themselves being one entire proposition; to stand upon the curious
dividing of them would be a matter of more ostentation than use: and the truth
thereof also, when the meaning is once laid open, will be so evident, that I
shall presume of your assent, without spending much time in the proof. The main
of our business then upon the Text at this time must be Explication,
Application, and Use. First the Explication of the Words, then the Application
of the Matter; and lastly, some Corollaries inferred therefrom for our Use.
Which for your better understanding and remembrance I shall endeavor to do as
plainly and orderly as I can.

4. As for the Words first. There are three things in them that desire
Explication: First, what is meant by the commandments of men: Secondly, what it
is to teach such commandments for doctrines: Thirdly, how and in what respect
they that teach such doctrines may be said to worship God in vain. For the
first; (...) or (...), a Commandment, properly and strictly taken, is an
affirmative precept requiring something to be done: the contrary whereof is a
Prohibition, or negative precept, forbidding the doing of something. But in the
Holy Scriptures, (as in our common speech also) the word is usually so extended
as to comprehend both, ( Prohibitions also, as well as Commandments properly so
called.) The reason whereof is, because Affirmatives, and Negatives do for the
most part mutually include and infer the one the other: as in the present Case,
it is all one, whether the Pharisees should command Men to wash before meat, or
forbid them to eat before they had washed. We call the whole Decalogue the ten
commandments, though there (...), etc. Mark 10. 19.
be Negative precepts there as well as Affirmative, yea, more Negative than
Affirmative. And those Negatives [ Touch not, taste not, handle not] are called
the Commandments of men, Col. 2. 12. Which place I Luke 18. 10.
note the rather, because the appellation here used, and cited out of Isa. 29.
according to the Septuagint [(...)] are not found any where else in the whole
Testament besides in the relation of this story, save in that one place only.
By the analogy of which places, inasmuch as there is mention made in them all
as well of Doctrines, as of Commandments, and that in some of them with the
Conjunction Copulative between them; we are warranted to bring within the
extent of this word, according to the general intention, and scope of our
Savior in this place, Doctrinals as well as Morals: that is to say, as well
those that prescribe unto our Judgments, what we are bound to believe or not to
believe in matter of Opinion; as those that prescribe unto our Consciences,
what we are bound to do, or not to do, in matter of Practice. Although the
special occasion whereupon our Savior fell into this discourse against the
Pharisees, and the special instance whereby he convinces them, do withal show,
that the Morals do more principally, properly, and directly fall under his
particular intention and scope therein. In the full extent of the word then,
all those prescriptions are to be taken for the Commandments of men, wherein
any thing is by humane Authority either enjoined or forbidden to be believed or
done, (especially to be done) which God in his Holy Word has not so enjoined
or forbidden. Jer. 45. 6.
Ionadab's command to the Rechabites, that they should not drink Wine, they nor
their Sons for ever: and the Pharisees tradition here that none should eat with
unwashen hands; were both the commandments of men.

5. This is clear enough, yea, and good enough hitherto, if there were no more
in it but so: For you must observe, (or else you quite mistake the Text, and
the whole drift of it) that it is no part of our Saviors meaning, absolutely
and wholly to condemn all the Commandments of men. For that were to cut the
sinews of all Government and Order, and to overturn Churches, Kingdoms,
Corporations, Families, and all other both greater and lesser Societies of men,
none of all which can be upheld without some positive Laws and Sanctions of
man's devising. We do not therefore find, that either Ionadab was blamed for
commanding the Rechabites not to drink Wine; or that they were blamed for
observing his commandments therein. But rather on the contrary that God well
approved both of him and them, yea, and rewarded them for their obedience unto
that command; though it were a command but of man's devising, and had Jer. 35.
18, 19. Abridgm. Linc. p. 44.
no more than a bare humane Authority to warrant it. And therefore those Men
are very wide, that vouch this Text against the Ecclesiastical Constitutions or
Ceremonies, with such confidence, as if they were able with this one Engine to
take them all off at a blow: not considering, that it is not barely the
Commandments of men, either materially or formally taken, (that is to say,
neither the things commanded by men, nor yet men's commanding of them;) but it
is the teaching of such Commandments for Doctrines, that our Savior here
condemns the Pharisees for. What that is therefore, we are next to enquire,
(...), teaching for Doctrines the commandments of men.

6. In the 29. of Isa. the substantives have a Conjunction Copulative between
them in the Septuagint; and they are read in the very same manner and order
[(...)] by St. Paul, alluding thereunto in Col. 2. But in the Greek Text in all
Copies extant both here and in Mark 7. where the same History is related, they
are put without the Conjunction, by Apposition, as the Grammarians call it. The
meaning Per appositionem, Eras. Bez.
is the same in both readings; only this latter way it appears better, and it
is in effect this: Whosoever shall endeavor to impose upon the judgments of
Men, in credendis, or in point of faith, any thing to be believed as a part of
Gods holy truth; or shall endeavor to impose upon the Consciences of men, in
agendis, or in point of manners, any thing to be observed as a part of Gods
holy will, which cannot be sufficiently evidenced so or so to be, either by
express Testimony of the written Word of God, rightly understood and applied,
or by clear natural and necessary deduction therefrom according to the Laws of
true Logical discourse, is guilty, more or less, of that Superstition our
Savior here condemns in the Pharisees, of teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men.

7. And a fault it is of a large comprehension. It takes in all additions
whatsoever, that are made to that absolute and all-sufficient Rule of Faith and
manners, which God has left unto his Church in his written Word. In what kind
soever they are, whether in Opinion, Worship, Ordinance, Injunction,
Prohibition, Promise, or otherwise. From what cause soever they proceed,
whether from Credulity, Ignorance, Education, Partiality, Hypocrisy,
Mis-govern'd Zeal, Time-serving, or any other. For what end soever they may be
done; whether those ends be in truth intended, or but in show pretended: say it
be the glory of God, the reformation of abuses, the preventing of mischiefs or
inconveniences, the avoiding of scandals, the maintenance of Christian liberty,
the furtherance of Piety, or whatever else can be imagined. If they have not a
sufficient foundation in the sacred Text, and yet shall be offered to be
pressed upon our Judgments or Consciences, in the name of God, and as his Word:
they are to be held as chaff, fitter to be scattered before the Wind, or cast
out to the dunghill, than to be hoarded up in the garners among the Wheat;
(alas, what is the chaff to the wheat?) or as Hay, Wood, or Jer. 23. 28. 1 Cor.
3. 12, 15.
Stubble, meeter to become fuel for the Oven, or Hearth, than to be coffered
up in the Treasures among Gold, and Silver, and precious Stones. And he that
brings any such Doctrine with him, let his Piety or parts be otherwise what
they can be; should he in either of both, or even in both, Gal. 1. 8.
match not only the Holy Apostles of Christ, but the ever blessed Angels in
Heaven: yet should we rather defy him as a Traitor, for setting Gods stamp
upon his own Bullion, than receive him as his faithful Ambassador, and salute
him with an Anathema sooner, than bid him God speed. Especially 2 John 10.
if the Doctrine be apparently either false or ungrounded, and yet positively
and peremptorily delivered, as if it were the undoubted word and will of God.

8. I may not now descend to particulars. But thus much it will concern us all
to know in the General, that whosoever teaches any thing either to be
absolutely unlawful, which God has not forbidden in his Word; or to be
absolutely necessary, which God has not required in his Word, he teaches for
doctrines the commandments of men, and so far forth plays the Pharisees part
in burthening the Consciences of Gods people with the superstitious fancies of
his own brain. But otherwise, the enjoining of something for a time which God
has not forbidden, or the forbidding of something for a time which God has
not required, by those that are endued with lawful Authority in any
Ecclesiastical, Political, or Domestical Society; so as the same be not done
for Conscience sake toward God, or with any Opinion of worship, merit, or
operative holiness, but merely out of prudential considerations, and for the
reasons of order, decency, expedience, or other like respects of convenience
and accommodation; is a thing no ways justly chargeable with Pharisaism,
superstition, or to be cried down and condemned under the name of Will Worship;
nor does it come within the compass of our Saviors reproof in this place. If
Ionadab had laid an obligation upon the Consciences of the Rechabites, not to
drink wine, by telling them that for Conscience sake toward God they ought to
abstain therefrom; or if the Jewish Elders and Governors, leaving the
Consciences of the People free, had only made a Law under some penalty for
decency and cleanliness sake, that no Man should sit down to Meat in public
with unwashen hands: to my seeming had he then been guilty of this Pharisaical
superstition, and they free. In brief then to conclude this Enquiry, To lay an
obligation either upon the judgments or consciences of Men in point of opinion
or practice, which God has not laid; that, and nothing but that, is to teach
for doctrines the commandments of men.

9. We have yet a third thing to be enquired of, for the Explication of the
words: namely, how, and in what respect they that teach such Doctrines may be
said to worship God in vain. The Ambiguity of our English word Worship, has
occasioned many Errors among Divines, and mis-understandings of one another
words and writings, whereby the disputes and controversies about Worship are
become of all other the most intricate and perplexed. The Hebrews, and the
Greeks too have sundry words, and those of distinct notions, and
significations: which we in English, for want of fitter expressions, are fain
to translate promiscuously by this one word Worship. The Greek words (...) and
(...), (which is the word here used) are all indifferently rendered,
worshipping. Here, according to the notion of the Greek word, it properly
signifies the performance of some Religious or devout act, with an intention
to honor God thereby. Whereby it appears, that these Pharisees placed a
great part of their Religion in the observation of these Traditions of men's
divising; and flattered themselves with this conceit, That they did God a great
deal of honor in so doing, and that therefore he could not choose but be
mavelous well pleased with them for so doing. By long accustoming themselves
to which like outward observances, they had almost lost the vigor and soul of
true Religion, (which consists in the inward Reverence and Devotion of the
heart:) and had little other left than the bare carcass, or empty outside
thereof; and that also patcht and pieced up for the most part with the devices
and inventions of men.

10. And this our Savior now tells them is Worship in vain. He says so
indeed: but has he any Text for it? The place he cites is in Isa. 29. 13.
where the words, according to the Original, run but thus [ Their fear toward
me is taught by the precept of men:] but that it is vain, the Prophet does not
there say. He does not say it (...), in those very words, according to the
Hebrew: but the scope of the place imports all that and more. For God there
threatens to punish the People for such worship: which he would not have done,
if he had been either pleased with it, or honored by it. But the very word and
all is so found, even as our Savior cites it [(...)] in the Septuagint there:
which being the most common and received Translation in those days, was
therefore for the most part followed by Christ and his Apostles in their
quotations, especially where it swerved not very much in sense from the
Original. Now a thing is said to be done in vain, when it has not that wished
effect, which the doer intended and expected. Those Pharisees then, intending
by those superstitious Will-worships to honor God, and hopeing to please him
therewithal; when their expectations should be so far frustrated, that God
should all on the contrary profess himself dishonored and displeased thereby;
it must needs be acknowledged that this their Will Worship was all in vain.
Certainly God will reject, what himself has forbidden: and he has forbidden,
and that both frequently, and with the severest interminations, all manner of
Will Worship (of this kind, and properly so called) and all additions of Men
unto his holy Word.

11. In the several parts of the Text thus opened, we may see the full meaning
of the whole. God will not approve of, nor accept any Witworship, or
Will Worship, forged or devised by Man, with an Opinion, as if it were a
necessary part of Gods service; nor allow of any Doctrine, that tends to bind
the Judgments or Consciences of his people further than he has thought fit
himself to bind them by the expresses of his Word. He will, when time serves,
root out every plant which is not of his own planting. And when the day is
come, which shall declare (by a Mat. 15. 12. 1 Cor. 3. 12. 15.
fiery Trial) every man's work of what sort it is: the Gold and Silver and
precious Stones shall abide the fire, and the Workman that built with such good
stuff shall receive a blessed reward. But he that builds Wood, or Hay, or
Stubble; though by the great mercy of God he himself may pass through the fire,
and be saved (with some difficulty) so long as he holds fast the foundation,
which is Christ and his merits: yet he shall suffer loss in his work however.
That shall be sure to burn and perish; whatsoever becomes of him. All that
fear of God is but superstitious and vain, that is taught by the Precepts and
Commandments of men.

12. From the Explication of the Text hitherto, I come now to the Application
of it. Wherein I doubt not by Gods help, but to make clear to the judgment of
any Man, that is not either incapable through ignorance, or fore-possessed with
prejudice, these three things. First, that the Papists are guilty of the
Pharisaical Superstition and Will Worship here condemned. Secondly, that the
Church of England, and her regular and Obedient Children are not guilty of the
same. Thirdly, that those Divines and others in the Church of England, that so
undutifully charge her therewithal, are in truth themselves inexcusably guilty
of that very Crime, whereof they unjustly accuse her.

13. First, for the Papists. That they are the right children and successors of
the Pharisees, no Man, that rightly understands the Tenets of the Romish
Church, but will easily grant; if he shall duly consider what a mass of humane
Traditions both in point of belief and worship are imposed upon the judgments
and consciences of all that may be suffered to live in the visible Communion of
that Church, and that with opinion of necessity, and under pain of Damnation.
The Popes Supremacy, Worshipping of Images, Invocation of Saints and Angels,
the Propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass, Purgatory, the seven Sacraments,
Transubstantiation, Adoration of the Host, Communion under one kind, Private
Masses, forbidding Priests Marriage, Monastical Vows, Prayer in an unknown
Tongue, Auricular Confession. All these, and I know not how many more, are
such, as even by the confession of their own learned Writers, depend upon
unwritten Traditions more than upon the Scriptures. True it is, that Andradus
Multo maxima pars Evangelii pervenit ad nos traditione; perexigua literis est
mandata. Hos. Confess. c. 92. Egenum elementum. Hosius. Plumbea regula. Pighius,
etc.
for most of these they pretend to Scripture also: but with so little color at
the best, and with so little confidence at the last; that when they are hard
put to it, they are forced to fly from that hold, and to shelter themselves
under their great Diana, Tradition. Take away that, it is confessed that many
of the chief Articles of their Faith nature and vacillare videbuntur, will seem
even to totter and reel, and have much ado to keep up. For what else could we
imagine should make them strive so much to debase the Scripture all they can,
denying it to be a Rule of Faith, and charging it with imperfection, obscurity,
uncertainty, and many other defects; and on the other side to magnify
Traditions as every way more absolute: but merely their consciousness, that
sundry of their Doctrines, if they should be examined to the bottom, would
appear to have no sound foundation in the Written Word. And then must we needs
conclude from what has been already delivered, that they ought to be received,
(or rather not to be received but rejected) as the Doctrines and Commandments
of men.

14. Nor will their flying to Tradition help them in this Case, or free them
from Pharisaism; but rather make the more against them. For to omit that it
has been the usual course of false teachers, when their Doctrines were found
not to be Scripture Proof, to V. Chamier, Tom. 1 Panstrat. Lib. 9. c. 16.
Jewels defense 2. c. 9.
fly to Tradition: do but enquire a little into the Original and growth of
Pharisaical Traditions, and you shall find that Non male comparari Pharisaeos
Catholicis. Serarius apud Hal. Seron Mat. 5. 30.
one Egg is not more like another, than the Papists and the Pharisees are alike
in this matter. When Sadoc Sadoc discipulus Antiqui Sochaei, author sectae
Sadducaeorum secundum Rabbinos. V. El. Tisb. in (...) Schindler in Lexic.
Pentagl. Sed hoc ut Commentum Rabbinicum exigit Montacutius: qui Sadducaeorum
originem ad Dositheum quendam refert, ex authoritate Epiphanii and aliorum;
eosque Sadducaeos dictos confirmat a (...) Iustitia, ob mores austeros, and in
judiciis severitatem. V. Montacut. Appar. 7. sect. 49.
(or whosoever else was the first Author of the Sect of the Sadduces) and his
followers began to vent their pestilent and Atheistical Doctrines against the
immortality of the Soul, the resurrection of the Body, and other like: the best
learned among the Jews, (the Pharisees especially) opposed against them by
arguments and collections drawn from the Scriptures. The Sadduces finding
themselves unable to hold argument with them (as having two shrewd
disadvantages; but a little Learning, and a bad cause;) had no other means to
avoid the force of all their arguments, than to hold them precisely to the
letter of the Text, without admitting any Exposition thereof, or Collection
therefrom. Unless they could bring clear Text, that should affirm totidem
verbis what they denied; they would not yield. The Pharisees on the contrary
refused (as they had good cause) to be tied to such unreasonable conditions:
but stood upon the meaning of the Scriptures, as the Sadduces did upon the
letter; confirming the truth of their interpretations partly from Reason, and
partly from Tradition. Not meaning by Tradition (as yet) any Doctrine other
than what was already sufficiently contained in the Scriptures; but merely the
Doctrine which had been in all ages constantly taught and received with an
Universal consent among the People of God, as consonant to the holy Scriptures
and grounded thereon. By this means, though they could not satisfy the
Sadduces (...) -- etc. Ios. 13. Antiq. 18.
(as Heretics and Sectaries commonly are obstinate) yet so far they satisfied
the generality of the People, that they grew into very great esteem with them:
and within a while carried all before them: the detestation of the Sadduces and
of their loose Errors also conducing not a little thereunto. And who now but
the Pharisees: and what now but Tradition? In every Man's eye and mouth. Things
being at this pass, any Wise Man may Judge, how easy a matter it was for Men
so reverenced as the Pharisees were, to abuse the Credulity of the People and
the interest they had in their good Opinion, to their own advantage: to make
themselves Lords of the Peoples Faith, and by little and little to bring into
the Worship whatsoever Doctrines and observances they pleased; and all under
the acceptable name of the Traditions of the Elders. And so they did, winning
continually upon the People by their cunning and shows of Religion, and
proceeding still more and more, till the Jewish Worship by their means was
grown to that height of superstition and formality, as we see it was in our
Saviors days. Such was the beginning and such the rise, of these Pharisaical
Traditions.

15. Popish Traditions also both came in and grew up just after the same
manner. The Orthodox Bishops and Doctors in the ancient Church, being (...).
Epiph. in Ptol. Justin. Nuell. 146. and alii. (...) Chrysostom. Hom 51. in Mat.
to maintain the Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, the Consubstantiality of
the Son with the Father, the Hypostatical union of the two Natures in the
Person of Christ, the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, and other like Articles of
the Catholic Religion against the Arrians, Eunomians, Macedonians, and other
Heretics: for that the words Trinity, Homoiision, Hypostasis, Procession, etc.
(which for the better expressing of the Catholic sense they were forced to
use) were not expressly to be found in the holy Scriptures; had recourse
therefore very often, in their writings against the Heretics of their times,
to the Tradition of the Church. Whereby they meant not (as the Papists would
now wrest their words) any unwritten Doctrine not contained in the Scriptures,
but the very Doctrine of the Scriptures themselves as they had been constantly
understood and believed by all faithful Christians in the Catholic Church down
from the Apostles times till the several present Ages wherein they lived. This
course of theirs, of so serviceable and necessary use in those times, gave the
first occasion, and after-rise to that heap of Errors and Superstitions which
in process of time (by the Power and Policy of the Bishop of Rome especially)
Mox subsecuta est corruptela, Calvin in loc.
were introduced into the Christian Church under the specious name and color
of Catholic Traditions. Thus have they trodden in the steps of their
Forefathers the Pharisees; and stand guilty even as they of the Superstition
here condemned by our Savior, in teaching for Doctrines men's Precepts.

16. But if the Church of Rome be cast, how shall the Church of England be
quit? That symbolizeth so much with her in many of her Ceremonies, and
otherwise? What are all our crossings, and kneelings, and duckings? What
Surplice, and Ring, and all those other Rites and Accoutrements that are used
in or about the Public Worship; but so many Commandments of men? For it cannot
be made appear (nor truly do I think was it ever endeavored) that God has any
where commanded them. Indeed these things have been objected heretofore, with
clamor enough; and the cry is of late revived again with more noise and malice
than ever, in a world of base and unworthy Pamphlets, that like the Frogs of
Egypt Exodus 8. 14.
croak in every corner of the Land: And I pray God the suffering of them to
multiply into such heaps do not cause the whole Land so to stink in his
Nostrils, that he grow weary of it and forsake us. But I undertook to justifle
the Church of England and her regular and obedient Children in this behalf: and
it will be expected I should do it. If any of the Children of this Church in
their too much have have overrun their Mother, that is, have busied themselves
and troubled others with putting forward new Rites and Ceremonies, with
scandal, and without Law; or by using her name without her leave for the
serving of their own purposes, have causlessly brought an evil suspicion upon
her (as some are blamed) let them answer it as well as they can: it is not my
business now to plead for them, but to vindicate the Church of England against
another sort of men, who have accused her of Superstition unjustly.

17. Set both these aside, and her defense is made in a word, if we do but
remember what has been already delivered in the Explication of the Text: to
wit, that it is not the commandments of men, either Materially or Formally
taken; but the Opinion that we have of them, and the teaching of them for
Doctrines, wherein Superstition properly consists. Materially first. There is
no Superstition either in wearing, or in not wearing a Surplice; in kneeling,
or in not kneeling at the Communion; in crossing, or in not crossing an Infant
newly Baptized: even as there is no Superstition in washing or in not washing
the hands before Meat. So long as neither the one is done with an Opinion of
necessity, nor the other forborne out of the Opinion of unlawfulness. For so
long the Conscience stands free. 1 Cor. 8. 8.
The Apostle has so resolved in the very like case: that neither he that
eats is the worse for it, nor he that eats not the better for it. A Man may
eat, and do it with a good Conscience too. As in the present case, at this time
it is certain Christ's Disciples did eat and washed not: it cannot be doubted
but at some time or other they washed before they eat. Not for Conscience sake
toward God either; but even as they saw it fit, and as the present occasion
required: and they might do both without supersition. But if any man shall
wear, or kneel, or cross, with an Opinion of necessity and for Conscience sake
toward God, as if those parts of Gods Service wherein those Ceremonies are
used in our Church could not be rightly performed without them; yea, althought
the Church had not appointed them, doubtless the use of those Ceremonies by
reason of such his Opinion should be Superstition to him. Because a man cannot
be of that Opinion, but he must believe it to be true Doctrine, that such and
such Ceremonies are of themselves necessary parts of Gods worship. As on the
contrary, if any body should refuse to wear, or kneel, or cross, out of an
Opinion of their unlawfulness; as if those Ceremonies did vitiate the whole act
of that Worship whereunto they are applied: I cannot see, but upon the same
ground, and by reason of such his Opinion, the refusal of those Ceremonies
should be to him also Superstition. Because a man cannot be of that Opinion,
but he must believe this to be true Doctrine, that such and such Ceremonies are
of themselves unlawful to be used in the Worship of God. But the obedient
Children of the Church of England, having no such Opinion either of the
necessity or unlawfulness of the said Ceremonies; but holding them to be (as
indeed they are) things in their own nature indifferent, are even therefore
free from Superstition in both the kinds aforesaid. So then in the things
commanded taken materially, that is to say, considered in themselves without
respect to the Churches command, there is no Superstition; because there is
nothing concerning them Doctrinally taught either the one way, or the other.

18. Now if we can as well clear these things taken also formally, that is to
say, considered not in themselves, but as they stand commanded by public
authority of the Church: the whole business is done, as to this point. Nor is
there in truth any great difficulty in it, if we will but apprehend things
aright. For although the very commanding them do seem to bring with it a kind
of necessity, and to lay a tie upon the Conscience, (as that of St. Paul
implies both, you must needs be subject, and that for Conscience sake:) yet is
not that any tie brought upon the Conscience de Romans 13. 5.
novo by such command of the Church, only that tie that lay upon the Conscience
before by virtue of that general Commandment of God of obeying the higher
Powers in all their lawful commands, is by that Commandment of the Church
applied to that particular matter. Even as it is in all Civil Constitutions,
and humane positive Laws whatsoever. And the necessity also is but an
obediential, not a doctrinal necessity. But the Text requires a doctrinal
necessity, to make the thing done a vain and superstitious Worship [ Teaching
for doctrines the commandments of men.] Which the Church of England in
prescribing the aforesaid Ceremonies has not done; nor by her own grounds
could do. For look as the case stands with private men for doing, or
refusing; even so stands the case with public Governors for commanding or
forbidding. As therefore with private men, it is not the bare doing or refusing
of a thing, as in discretion they shall see cause; but the doing of it with an
Opinion of necessity or the refusing of it with the Opinion of unlawfulness,
that makes the action superstitious, as has been already showed; so with
public Governors, it is not the commanding or forbidding of a mutable
Ceremony, as for the present they shall deem it fit, for order, decency or
uniformities sake, or such other like respects: but the commanding of it with
an opinion as if it were of perpetual necessity, or the forbidding it with the
like opinion, as if it were simply unlawful, that makes the Constitution
superstitious.

19. Now I appeal to any man, that has not run on madly with the cry for
company, but endeavored with the Spirit of Charity and Sobriety 20. Every
particular or National Church has authority to ordain, change, and abolish
Ceremonies, etc. Art. 34.
to satisfy his understanding herein; if the Church of England, both in the
The Ceremonies that remain are retained for Discipline and Order, which upon
just causes may be altered and changed, and therefore are not to be esteemed
equal with Gods law, Pref. of Cerem.
Preface before the Book of Common Prayer, and in the The Church has power to
decree Rites and Ceremonies, but it ought not besides the Scripture to enforce
any thing to be believed for necessity of salvation, Art.
Articles of her Confession, and in sundry passages in the Homilies
occasionally (and these Books are acknowledged her most Authentic Writings,
the two former especially, and the just standard whereby to measure her whole
Doctrine:) if, I say, she have not in them all, and that in as plain and
express terms as can be desired, disclaimed all humane Traditions, that (...).
Chrysostom. Orat. 2. contr. Judaeos.
are imposed upon the Consciences of Gods People either in point of Faith or
Manners; and declared to the world, that she challenged no power to her self to
order any thing by her own Authority but only in things indifferent, and such
as are not repugnant to the word of God; and that her Constitutions are but for
order, comeliness and uniformity sake, and not for Conscience sake toward God;
and that therefore any of those her Orders and Constitutions may be retained,
abolished or altered from time to time, and at all times, as the Governors for
the time being shall judge to serve best unto Edification. What should I say
more? If men list to be contentious, and will not be satisfied, who can help
it? yet thus much I dare say more. Let any Papist or Precisian in the world
give instance but in any one single thing, doctrinally maintained by the Church
of England, which he can with any color of truth except against as a
Commandment of men: if we do not either show good warrant for it from the
written word of God, (which we doubt not but to be able to do, and is most ad
rem;) or else (which is enough ad hominem) for every single instance they shall
bring, return them ten of their own teaching, every whit as liable to the same
exception as that: we will yield the Bucklers, and confess her guilty.

20. But now, what will you say, if after all this clamouring against English.
Popish Ceremonies, (as of late they have blazoned them) they that keep all this
ado, prove in the end the guilty persons themselves? I am much deceived if it
do not clearly prove so, if we either compare her Doctrine and theirs together,
or take a view of some of theirs by themselves. First, compare them a little,
(...). Chrysostom. Orat. 2. contr. Jndaeos.
which will also add some confirmation to the former point for the farther
justifying of the Church of England in this behalf. And for example and
perspicuity sake, let the instance be kneeling at the Communion; there being
the like reason of all the rest. I pray you consider well the evidence; weigh
the grounds and observe the course held on both sides, and then give sentence
accordingly. If, as God has given those our Church Governors power to
determine of indifferent mutable circumstances, and they using the liberty of
the power given them, have appointed kneeling rather than sitting, or standing,
as judging it a gesture of greater reverence and well becoming our
unworthiness, but without any Opinion either of the necessity of that gesture,
or of the unlawfulness of the other two; so God had given the like Power to
these our Brethren, and they using the liberty of that power had appointed
sitting or standing, rather than kneeling, as judging either of them a more
proper Table gesture than it, yet without any Opinion of their necessity, or of
the unlawfulness of kneeling; the case had then been alike of both. These had
been as free as they; neither of them had been guilty of Superstition, in
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men: because there was no doctrinal
necessity, whereby to bind the Consciences of Gods People on either side.
Again, if as these say to their Proselytes peremptorily in effect thus [ you
are bound in Conscience not to kneel; it is an unlawful gesture, a
superstitious relic of Popery, and carries with it a shrewd appearance of
their idolatrous Bread-worship; and therefore we charge you upon your
Consciences not to kneel:] so our Church Governors should say to the People
peremptorily in effect thus, [ you are bound in Conscience to kneel, or else
you profane the holy Sacrament, not discerning the Lords Body; and therefore
we charge you upon your Consciences to kneel:] the case of both had here also
been alike. Both alike guilty of Superstition, in teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men: because by that doctrinal necessity, as well the one sort
as the other had laid a perpetual obligation upon the Consciences of men, in a
matter which God having not any where either commanded or forbidden has
therefore left free and indifferent. But now taking the case as de facto it is,
without Ifs and Ands, set the one against the other, and make the comparison
right: and here it is. Our Brethren having no public authority given them to
order what shall be done or not done in matters of external government, do yet
bind the Consciences of Gods people, by teaching that which they thus forbid to
be simply and in it self unlawful. Our Governors on the contrary, though having
public authority to prescribe in such matters, do yet leave the Consciences of
men at liberty, without teaching that which they appoint, to be of absolute
necessity in it self. This being species facti, as the Civilians speak, the
even true state of the case: say now I beseech you in good sooth, and be not
partial, Quid Iuris? at whose door lies the Superstition? The one side
teaching no such doctrine, but having authority, do by virtue of that authority
appoint the People to kneel; The other side having no such authority, but
teaching a doctrine, do by virtue of that doctrine charge the people not to
kneel: Whether of both sides may rightlier be said to teach for doctrines the
Commandments of men;

Tu quum sis quod ego, and fortassis nequior -- 21. Their guilt herein will yet
farther appear, if leaving comparisons, we take a view of some of their
doctrines by themselves. I say, but some of them: for how many hours would
serve to reckon them all? or who indeed (even of themselves) knows them all?
There are so many Covies of new doctrines sprung up ever and anon, especially
in these late times of connivance and licentiousness; which by that they are
well hatched, presently fly abroad the Country, and are entertained by some or
other for as good Divinity, as if they were the undoubted Oracles of the Holy
Ghost. I dare not affirm it, because I will not put my self to the trouble to
prove it, and because I heartily desire and wish I be deceived in it: yet I
cannot dissemble my fear that it is but too true, (by the proportion of what we
almost daily hear or see) that within little more than this one twelvemonth
last past there have been more false and superstitious doctrines vented in the
Pulpits and Presses in England, than have been (in so open and daring a manner)
in the whole space of almost fourscore years before, I mean since the first of
Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory. And to make good the former charge, omitting
sundry other their unwarrantable positions, partly concerning
Church Government, Orders, and Ceremonies, established by Law, partly
concerning sundry received customs in matters wholly or in part Ecclesiastical,
partly concerning the use of sundry pastimes and recreations, partly concerning
sundry usages and customs in vita communi, in things merely Civil, and not
sacred or Ecclefiastical: the particulars whereof would amount to many scores,
if not hundreds: I shall present unto your view a dozen only, which I have
selected from the rest of those that I have observed to have been most urged of
late in Sermons and Pamphlets; by which you may in part judge of the rest. And
they are these.

22. 1. That the appointing of a set form of Prayer or Liturgy, to be used in
the Service of God, is unlawful or Antichristian; or that it is a straitning or
limiting of the Holy Spirit of God.

2. That it is not in the power of the Church to ordain any Rites or Ceremonies
in the Service of God, which the People are bound to observe, other than such
as God has commanded in his Word.

3. That Rites and Usages, devised or abused either by Heathens or Idolaters,
That the observation of annual Festivals in memory of Christ or his Apostles,
as Christimas, Easter, etc. is Antichristian, superstitions, and unlawful.
may not be lawfully used by Christians in the Service of God.

4. That it is unlawful or superstitious to kneel at the Holy Communion, in the
act of receiving the Sacrament.

5. That Instrumental Music may not be used in the Service of God, as well as
Vocal.

6. That Episcopacy is Antichristian, or repugnant to the word of God.

7. That the Presbyterian Discipline is the very Scepter of Christ's Kingdom, or
the order appointed by Christ himself for the perpetual Government of his
Church, which ought of all particular Congregations to be inviolably observed
unto the worlds end.

8. That it is simply unlawful for a Minister to be possessed of two Benefices.

9. That Ecclesiastical persons may not meddle in secular affairs, nor can with
a good Conscience exercise any Civil office or Jurisdiction, although by humane
Authority, Law or custom allowed them.

10. That it is not lawful in preaching Gods word, to recite sentences out of
the Fathers; much less from the writings of Heathen Writers.

11. That the Election or consent of the people is of necessity required,
either to the ordaining of the Ministers, or to the appointing of them to their
particular charges.

12. Lastly, (which though I find not positively delivered in terminis, nor is
the danger thereof so generally observed, as of sundry of the former; yet for
that I find it often touched upon in these late Treatises, and conceive it to
be an error of no less dangerous consequence than many of the former, I thought
meet not to omit it:) That the examples of Christ and of his Apostles ought to
be observed of all Christians, as a perpetual Rule binding them to Conformity,
even as their Precepts do unto obedience.

23. Concerning which Positions, I do here in the face of this Congregation
take God to witness, who shall judge us all at the last day, that I do verily
believe, and in my conscience am persuaded, That all and every of them are the
vain and superstitious inventions of men, wholly destitute of all sound warrant
from the written word of God, rightly understood and applied: and (till they
shall be better proved) ought to be so esteemed of every man that desires to
make Gods Holy Word the rule of his opinions and actions. Many and great are
the mischiefs otherwise, that come to the Church and People of God, by the
teaching of these and other like groundless Positions: As amongst others, these
three following. First, great scandal is hereby given to Atheists, Papists,
Separatists, and other the enemies of our Religion; especially to the Papists:
who will not only take occasion thence to speak evil of us and of the way of
truth and holiness which we profess, but will be themselves also the more
confirmed in their own wicked errors, by objecting to us, that since we left
them, we cannot tell where to stay. Secondly, many sober and godly men, both
Ministers and other who cheerfully submit to the established Laws and
Government (as they take themselves by the Law of God bound to do, in things
which they believe not to be repugnant to his word) are by this means
unworthily exposed to contempt and mis-censure, as if they were time-servers,
or inclined to Popery or Superstition at the least. But if they shall farther
endeavor in their Sermons or otherwise, to show their just dislike, and to
hinder the growth of these unlawful impositions, and to hold the people in
their good belief by instructing them better; they shall be sure to be
forthwith branded as opposers of the Gospel. As if there were such a spirit of
infallibility annexed to some men's Pulpits, as some have said there is to the
Pope's Chair, that whatsoever they shall deliver thence must needs be Gospel.
Thirdly, hereby many an honesthearted and well meaning Christian is wonderfully
abused; by being misled into Error, Superstition, and disobedience, by having
his Conscience brought into bondage in those things, whereunto it was the good
pleasure of God to leave him free; and by being disposed to much
uncharitableness in judging evil of his Brother, that has given him no just
cause so to do.

24. Besides these and sundry other mischiefs of dangerous consequence, too
long now to repeat: the thing that I am presently to affirm, concerning all and
every of the positions aforesaid, and other like them, pertinently to the Text
and business in hand, is this, That whosoever shall doctrinally and positively
teach any of the same, does ipso facto become guilty of the Superstition here
condemned by our Savior, and so far forth symbolizeth with the Pharisees in
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. And I doubt not, but there are
in the Church of England sundry learned, judicious, and Orthodox Divines, no
way suspected of favoring Popery or Popish Innovations that by Gods help and
the advantage of Truth will be ready to maintain what I now affirm, in a fair,
Christian and Scholar-like trial, against whosoever are otherwise minded,
whenever by Authority they shall be thereunto required.

25. I have now finished what I had to say from this Scripture by way of
Application. From the whole premises would arise sundry Inferences, as
Corollaries and by way of Use. In the prosecution whereof, had we time for it,
I should have occasion to fall upon some things that might be of right good use
for the settling of men's Judgments and Consciences in a way of Truth and Peace.
And truly my aim lay chiefly here, when my thoughts fixed upon this Text. But
having enlarged my self so far beyond my first purpose already, I shall only
give you a short touch of each of them: and it may be hereafter (as I shall see
cause, and as God shall dispose) I may take some other occasion, here or
elsewhere to enlarge them further.

26. The first should be an earnest request to such of my Brethren, as through
inconsideratian, zeal against Popery, or profaneness, or any other cause, have
been a little too forward and faulty this way. That they would in the fear of
God review their own dictates, and (all partiality and self-seeking laid aside)
bestow a little pains to examine thoroughly the soundness of those principles
from which they draw their Conclusions: whether they be the very true word of
God indeed, or but the fancies and devices of the wit of man. I know how lothly
men are induced to suspect themselves to be in an Error: and that it is with
our Brethren herein as with other men, may sufficiently appear in this, that
few of them will so much as bestow the reading of those Books, that might give
them satisfaction. But (beloved) better try your own work your selves, and if
it prove but Hay or Stubble burn it your selves, by acknowledging your error
and retracting it; that you may build better: then let it lie on still, till a
sorer fire catch it. Better for any of us all, whether in respect of our
errors or sins, to prevent the Lords judging of us, by timely judging 1 Cor.
11. 32.
our selves, than to slack the time till his judgment overtake us.

27. The Second Use should be an Admonition to all my Brethren of the Ministry
for the time to come, and that in the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 3. 10. Let every
man take heed what he builds. St. Paul himself 1 Cor. 11. 23. and 15. 3. Quod
accepisti, non quod excogitasti. Vinc. Lir. cap. 27. Numb. 22. 18.
was very careful this way, not to deliver any thing to the People, but what he
had received from the Lord. The Prophets of the Lord still delivered their
Messages with this Preface, Haec dicit Dominus. Yea, that wretched Balaam,
though a false Prophet, and covetous enough, professed yet that if Balak would
give him his house full of* Silver and Gold, he neither durst nor would go
beyond the word of the Lord to do less or more. There is a great proneness in
us all to Idolize our own inventions: Besides much Ignorance, Hypocrisy, and
Partiality; any of which may bias us awry. Our Educations may lay such early
anticipations upon our judgments; or our Teachers, or the Books we read, or the
Society we converse withal, may leave such impressions therein, as may fill
them with prejudice, not easily to be removed. The golden mean is a hard thing
to hit upon almost in any thing, without some warping toward one of the
extremes, either on the right hand or on the left: and without a great deal of
wisdom and care seldom shall we seek to shun one extreme, and not run a little
too far toward the other, if not quite into it. In all which, and sundry other
respects, we may soon fall into gross mistakes and errors, if we do not take
the more heed; whilst we suspect no such thing by our selves, but verily
believe that all we do is out of pure zeal for Gods Glory, and the love of his
truth. We had need of all the piety, and learning, and discretion, and pains,
and prayers we have: and all little enough without Gods blessing too, (yea, and
our own greater care too) to keep us from running into Errors, and from
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.

28. The Third Use should be for Admonition also, to all the people of God that
they be not hasty to believe every Spirit; but to try the Spirits 1 John 4. 1.
(especially when they see the spirits to disagree and clash one with another,
or find otherwise just cause of suspicion;) and that, as the Beraeans did, by
the Scriptures. Using withal all good subsidiary helps for the Acts 17. 11.
better understanding thereof; especially those two as the principal; the Rule
of Right Reason, and the known constant judgment and practice of the Universal
Church. That so they may fan away the Chaff from the 1 These. 5. 21. Jude 16.
Gal. 1. 8. (...) Chrysostom. Hom. 13. in 2 Cor.
Wheat: and letting go the refuse, hold fast that which is good. To this end
every man should especially beware, that he do not suffer himself to be carried
away with names; nor to have any man's person either in hatred or admiration:
but embrace what is consonant to truth and reason, though Judas himself should
preach it; and reject what even an Angel from Heaven should teach, if he have
no other reason to induce him to believe it, than that he teaches it.

29. The Fourth Use should be for Exhortation to the learneder sort of my
Brethren, to show their faithfulness, duty, and true hearty affection to God
and his Truth and Church, by maintaining the simplicity of the Christian Faith,
and asserting the Doctrine of Christian Liberty, against all corrupt mixtures
of men's inventions, and against all unlawful impositions of men's Commandments,
in any kind whatsoever. If other men be zealous to set up their own errors,
shall we be remiss to hold up Gods Truth? God having deposited it with us, and
committed it to our special trust: how shall we be able to answer it to God and
the World, if we suffer it to be stolen out of the hearts of our people by our
silence or neglect? Like enough you shall incurr blame and censure enough for
so doing; as if you sought but your selves in it by seeking to please those
that are in authority in hope to get preferment thereby. But let none of these
things discourage you, if you shall not be able by the grace of God in some
measure to despise the censures of rash and uncharitable men, so long as you
can approve your hearts and actions in the sight of God, and to break through
(if need be) far greater trials and discouragements than these; you are not
worthy to be called the servants of Christ.

30. The last Use should be an humble Supplication to those that have in their
hands the ordering of the great affairs of Church and State: that they would in
their goodness and wisdoms make some speedy and effectual provision, to repress
the exorbitant licenciousness of these times, in Printing and Preaching every
man what he list to the great dishonor of God, scandal of the Reformed
Religion, fomenting of Superstition and Error, and disturbance of the peace
both of Church and Commonwealth. Lest if way be still given thereunto, those
evil Spirits that this late connivence has raised, grow so fierce within a
while, that it will trouble all the power and wisdom of the Kingdom to conjure
them handsomely down again. But certainly, since we find by late experience,
what wildness in some of the Lay People, what petulancy in some of the inferior
Clergy, what insolency in some both of the Laity and Clergy, our Land is grown
into, since the reins of the Ecclesiastical Government have lain a little
slack: we cannot but see, what need we have to desire and pray, that the
Ecclesiastical Government and Power may be timely settled in some such moderate
and effectual way; as that it may not be either too much abused by them that
are to exercise it, nor too much despised by those that must live under it. In
the mean time, so long as things hang thus loose and unsettled, I know not
better how to represent unto you the present face of the times in some
respects, than in the words of the Prophet Jeremy, [The Prophets prophecy
lies, and the Priests get power into their Jer. 5. 31.
hands by their means, and my people love to have it so: And what will you do
in the end thereof?

31. What the end of these insolences will be, God alone knows. The increase
of Profaneness, Riot, Oppression, and all manner of wickedness on the one side;
and the growth of Error, Novelty, and Superstition on the other side: are no
good signs onward. The Lord of his great mercy grant a better end thereunto,
than either these beginnings or proceedings hitherto portend, or our sins
deserve. And the same Lord of his infinite goodness vouchsafe to dispel from us
by the light of his Holy Spirit, all blindness and hardness of heart; to purge
out of us by the fire of his Holy Spirit all dross of pride and Hypocrisy; to
increase in us by the grace of his Holy Spirit the love of Truth and Godliness;
to support us by the comforts of his Holy Spirit amidst all our distresses and
fears; and to lead us by the guidance of his Holy Spirit along the paths of
holiness unto the ports of happiness. And all this for the alone merits sake of
his blessed Son and our alone Savior Jesus Christ. To which blessed Father,
Son and Holy Spirit, be ascribed by us and the whole Christian Church, all the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, from this time forth for evermore.

Amen. Amen.
LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell. 1686.

AD MAGISTRATUM.
The First Sermon.
At a Public Sessions at Grantham, Lincoln, June the 11th. 1623.
JOB. XXIX. ver. 14, 15, 16, 17. 14. I put on righteousness, and it clothed
me: my judgment was a Robe and Diadem. 15. I was eyes to the blind, and feet
was I to the lame. 16. I was a Father to the poor; and the cause which I knew
not, I searched out. 17. And I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the
spoil out of his teeth.
WHere silence against foul and false imputations may be interpreted 1.
a Si, cum mihi furta, largitiones -- objiciuntur, ego respondere soleo meis --
non tam sum existimandus de rebus gestis gloriari, quam de objectis non
confiteri. Cic. pro domo sua.
Confession; there the Protestation of a man's own innocence as ever just, and
sometimes Mihi de memetipso tam multa dicendi necessitas quaedam imposita est
ab illo. Cic. pro Syll.
necessary. When others do us open wrong, it is not now Vanity, but Charity, to
do our selves open right: and whatsoever appearance of folly or vain boasting
there is in so doing; they are chargeable with all that compel us thereunto,
and not we. (I am become a fool in glorying; but ye have compelled me, 2 Cor.
12. 11.) It was neither pride nor passion in Job, but such a compulsion as
this, that made him so often in this Book proclaim his own righteousness.
Amongst whose many and grievous afflictions, as it is hard to say which was the
greatest; so we are sure this was not the least, that he was to wrestle with
the unjust and bitter upbraidings of unreasonable and incompassionate men. They
came to visit him as friends; and as friends they should have comforted him.
But sorry friends they were, and Job 16. 2.
miserable comforters: indeed not comforters, but tormenters; and accusers
rather than friends. Seeing Gods hand heavy upon him; for want of better or
other proof, they charge him with Hypocrisy. And because they would not seem
to deal all in generalities (for against this general accusation of hypocrisy,
it was sufficient for him as generally to plead the truth and uprightness of
his heart;) they therefore go on more particularly, (but as falsely) and as it
were by way of instance, to charge him with Oppression. Thus Eliphaz by name
taxes him: Chap. 22. 6, etc. Thou have taken a pledge from thy Brother for
naught; and have stripped the naked of their clothing. Thou have not given
water to the weary to drink, and thou have witholden bread from the hungry. But
as for the mighty man, he had the Earth; and the honorable man dwelt in it.
Thou have sent Widows away empty, and the Arms of the Fatherless have thou
broken.

Being thus shamefully, indeed shamelessly, upbraided to his face, without 2.
any desert of his, by those men, Etsi ego dignus hac contumelia, at tu
indignus qui faceres tamen. Teren.
who (if he had deserved it) should least of all have done it, his Psalm. 55
12** 14.
neighbors and familiar friends; can you blame the good man, if to remove such
false aspersions, he do with more than ordinary freedom insist upon his own
integrity in this behalf? And that he does in this Chapter something largely;
wherein he declares how he demeaned himself in the time of his prosperity in
the administration of his Magistracy, far otherwise than was laid to his
charge. [ When the Ear heard me, then it blessed me; and when the eye saw me,
it gave witness to me. Because I delivered the poor that cried, and the
Fatherless, and him that had none to help him. The blessing of him that was
ready to perish came upon me, and I caused the widows heart to sing for joy.]
in the next immediate verses before these. And then he goes on in the words of
my Text, I put on righteousness, etc.

It seems Job was a good man, as well as a great: and being good, he 3.
was by so much the better, by how much he was the greater. Nor was he any
Bonus vir, a good man; and yet if but so, his friends had done him much wrong
to make him an Hypocrite: but he was Bonus Civis too, a good Commonwealths
man; and therefore his friends did him yet more wrong to make him an Oppressor.
Indeed he was neither the one, nor the other. But it is not so useful for us to
know what manner of man Job was, as to learn from him what manner of men we
should be. The grieved Spirit of Job indeed at first, uttered these words for
his own Justification: but the blessed Spirit of God has since written them
for our instruction. To teach us from Job's example how to use that measure of
greatness and power which he has given us, be it more, be it less, to his
glory, and the common good. So that in these words we have to consider, as laid
down unto us under the person, and from the example of Job, some of the main
and principal duties which concern all those that live in any degree of
Eminency or Authority, either in Church or Commonwealth; and more especially
those that are in the Magistracy, or in any office appertaining to Justice.

And those Duties are four. One, and the first, as a more transcendent 4.
and fundamental duty: the other three, as accessory helps thereto, or
subordinate parts thereof. The first is, a Care and Love, and Zeal of Justice.
1.
A good Magistrate should so make account of the administration of Justice, as
of his chiefest business; making it his greatest glory and delight, Ver. 14. [
I put on righteousness, and it clothed me: my judgment was a robe and a
diadem.] The second is a forwardness unto the works of Mercy, and Charity, 2.
and Compassion. A good Magistrate should have compassion of those that stand
in need of his help, and be helpful unto them, ver. 15. and part of 16. [ I was
eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame, I was a father to the poor.] The
third is Diligence in Examination. A good Magistrate 3.
should not be hasty to credit the first tale, or be carried away with light
Informations: but he should hear, and examine, and scan and sift matters as
narrowly as may be for the finding out of the truth, in the remainder of ver.
16. [ And the cause which I knew not, I searched out.] The 4.
Fourth is Courage and Resolution in executing. A good Magistrate, when he
goes upon sure grounds, should not fear the faces of men, be they never so
mighty or many; but without respect of persons execute that which is equal and
right even upon the greatest Offender, Ver. 17. [ And I brake the jaws of the
wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his teeth:] Of these four in their order:
of the first first; in these words, I put on righteousness, etc.

This Metaphor of clothing is much used in the Scriptures in this notion 5.
as it is applied to the soul, and things appertaining to the soul. In Psalm
109. David uses this imprecation against his enemies; [ Psalm. 109. 29.
Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame, and let them cover themselves
with their own confusion as with a Cloak.] And the Prophet Esaias speaking of
Christ and his Kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, Chap. 11. thus
describes it, [ Esaias 11. 5.
Righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of
his reins.] Likewise in the New Testament, Saint Paul in one place bids us
Romans 13. 14.
put on the Lord Jesus Christ: in another exhorts women to 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10.
adorn themselves, instead of broidered hair, and gold, and pearls, and costly
array, with shamefacedness and sobriety, and (as becoming women professing
godliness) with good works: in a third, furnishes the spiritual Soldier with
Ephesians. 6. 14, etc.
Shoes, Girdle, Breastplate, Helmet, and all necessary accoutrements from top
to toe. In all which, and other places where the like Metaphor is used; it is
ever to be understood with allusion to one of the three special ends and uses
of Apparel. For we cloth our selves, either 1.
first, for necessity, and common decency, to cover our nakedness; or secondly,
2.
for security, and defense against enemies; or thirdly, for state and
solemnity, 3.
and for distinction of Offices and Degrees. Our Cloaks, and Coats, and
ordinary suits, we all wear to cover our nakedness: and these are Indumenta,
known by no other, but by the general name of Clothing or Apparel. Soldiers
in the wars wear Morions, and Cuiraces, and Targets, and other habiliments for
defense: and these are called Arma, Arms or Armor. Kings and Princes wear
Crowns and Diadems; inferior Nobles, and Judges, and Magistrates, and
Officers, their Robes, and Furrs, and Hoods, and other Ornaments fitting to
their several Degrees and Offices, for solemnity of state, and as ensigns or
marks of those places and stations wherein God has set them: and these are
Infulae, Ornaments or Robes. It is true; Justice, and Judgment, and every other
good virtue and grace is all this unto the soul; serving her both for covert,
and for protection, and for ornament: and so stand both for the garments, and
for the Armor, and for the Robes of the soul. But here I take it, Job alludeth
especially to the third use. The propriety of the very words themselves give it
so: for he says he put righteousness and judgment upon him as a Robe and a
Diadem; and such things as there are worn, not for necessity, but state. Job
was certainly a Magistrate, a Judge at the least; It is evident from the
seventh Verse, and to me it seems not improbable that he was a Non dubito
quin Job fuerit Rex. Didac. Stan* in Job. 2. 3.
King; though not like such as the Kings of the earth now are (whose dominions
are wider, and power more absolute,) yet possible such as in those ancient
times, and in those Eastern parts of the World were called Kings, viz. a kind
of petty Monarch, and supreme Governor within his own Territories, though
perhaps but of one single City with the Suburbs, and some few neighboring
Villages. In the first Chapter it is said that he was Job 1. 3.
the greatest man of all the East: and in this Chapter he says of himself,
that Job 29. 9.
When he came in presence, the Princes and the Nobles held their tongues: and
that Ibid. ver. 25.
He sat as chief, and dwelt as a King in the Army, and in this verse he
speaks as one that wore a Diadem, or Ornament (...), Suid. in (...).
proper to Kings. Now Kings, we know, and other Magistrates, place much of
their outward glory and state in their Diadems, and Robes, and peculiar
Vestments: these things striking a kind of Cultus magnificus addit hominibus
authoritatem. Quintil. 8. Inst. (...). Hom. (...). Odyss.
reverence into the Subjects toward their Superior; and adding in the
estimation of the people, both glory and honor, and Majesty to the person, and
withal pomp and state, and solemnity to the actions of the wearer. By this
speech then of putting on Justice and Judgment as a Robe and Diadem, Job
shows that the glory and pride which Kings and Potentates are wont to take in
their Crowns, and Scepters, and Royal Vestments, is not more, than the glory
and honor which he 19. Hoc Priami gestamen erat, cum jura vocatis More dabat
populis. Virgil. Aen. 7. See Franc. Pollet. 3. Hist. fori. Romans 6.
placed in doing justice and judgment. He thought that was true honor, not
which reflected from these empty marks and ensigns of Dignity, but which sprang
from those virtues, whereof these are but dumb remembrances. If we desire yet
more light into the Metaphor, we may borrow some from David, Psalm. 109. 16, 17.
Psalm. 109. where speaking of the wicked, he says ver. 17. that he clothed
himself with cursing like a garment: and by that he means no other than what
he had spoken in the next verse before, plainly and without a Metaphor, His
delight was in Cursing. By the Analogy of which place we may not unfitly
understand these words of Job, as intimating the great love he had unto
Justice, and the great pleasure and It is joy to the just to do judgment, Prove.
21. 15.
delight he took therein. Join this to the former; and they give us a full
meaning. Never ambitious usurper took more pride in his new gotten Crown or
Scepter, never proud Minion took more pleasure in her new and gorgeous Apparel,
than Job did true Iuris and aequitatis quae virum principem ornant,
studiosissimus eram. Vatabl. hic.
glory and delight in doing Justice and Judgment. He put on Righteousness, and
it clothed him; and Judgment was to him what to others a Robe and a Diadem is:
honorable and delightful.

Here then the Magistrate and every Officer of Justice may learn his first 6.
principle, and (if I may so speak) his Master-Duty, (and let that be the first
Observation:) namely, to do Justice and Judgment with delight, and zeal, and
cheerfulness. I call it his Master-duty; because where this is once rightly and
soundly rooted in the Conscience, the rest will come on easily and of
themselves. This must be his primum, and his ultimum; the foremost of his
desires, and the utmost of his endeavors, to do Justice and Judgment. He must
make it his chiefest business; and yet count it his lightsom Recreation: and
make it the first and lowest step of his care; and yet withal count it the last
and highest rise of his honor. The first thing we do in the morning before we
either eat or drink, or buckle about any worldly business, is to put our
clothes about us: we say, we are not ready till we have done that. Even thus
should every good Magistrate do: before his private, he should think of the
public Affairs; and not count himself ready to go about his own profits, his
shop, his ship, his lands, his reckonings, much less about his vain Pleasures,
his jades, his currs, his kites, his any thing else, till first with Job, he
had put on righteousness as a garment, and clothed himself with judgment as
with a Robe and a Diadem.

Nor let any man think his affection to justice to have been singular in 7.
Job: much less impute it to simplicity in him. For behold another like
affectioned; and he a greater, and I may say too a wiser than Job, for God
himself has witnessed of him, that for 3 Kings 3. 12.
wisdom there was never his like before him, nor should come after him, Solomon
the King. Who so much manifested his love and affection to justice and
judgment, that when God put him to his choice to ask what he would, and he
should have it; he asked 3 Kings 3. 5-11.
not long life, or riches, or victory, or any other thing, but only Wisdom; and
that in this kind, Prudentiam regitivam, Wisdom Ibid. ver. 9. to discern
judgment, ver. 11.
to discern between good and bad, that he might go in and out before the people
with skill, and rule them prudently with all his might in righteousness and
equity: And the Text says, Ibid ver* 10.
The speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing. Magistrates
should subscribe to Solomon's judgment, who is wiser than the wisest of them:
and yet for farther conviction, behold a wiser than Solomon is here, even Jesus
Christ the righteous, the God of Solomon, and the Savior of Solomon, Col. 2. 3.
in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Of whom David
having said in Psalm. 45. that the Scepter of his kingdom is a righteous
Scepter, he proceeds immediately to show, wherein especially consisted the
righteousness of the Scepter of his Kingdom: Not so much in doing
righteousness, and punishing iniquity, (though that also,) as in loving
righteousness, and hating iniquity. [ Psalm. 45. 6, 7.
The Scepter of thy Kingdom is a righteous Scepter: thou have loved
righteousness, and hated iniquity; therefore God, etc.] and you heard already
out of the Eleventh of Esaias, that Esaias 11. 5.
righteousness was the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his
reins. Magistrates from the examples of Job, of Solomon, of Jesus Christ
himself, should learn to make justice and judgment their greatest both glory
and delight.

To bad things Examples will draw us on fast enough; without, yea, 8.
many times against Reason: but in good things, it is well if Examples, and
Reasons together, can any thing at all prevail with us. And here if Reason may
rule us; surely good Reason there is we should be thus affectioned to justice,
as has been said: whether we respect the thing it self, or God, or our selves
or others. The thing it self, Justice both in the common 1.
consideration of it, as it is a virtue, is, as every other virtue is,
honorable and lovely, and to be desired for its own sake: and in the special
nature of it, as it is Justice, is a virtue so necessary and profitable to
humane society, and withal so (...). Aristot. Et^. Nicom. 3. ex Theogn.
comprehensive of all other virtues, as that those men who labor to pervert it
do yet honor it, and even those men (...). Philop. in Prior. Arist.
who themselves will not use it, cannot yet but love it, at leastwise commend
it in others. Judgment, Mercy and Faithfulness our Savior Christ reckons as
the Matt. 23. 23.
weightiest matters of the Law, Matt. 23. And Prove. 24. 26.
every man (says Solomon, Prove. 24.) will kiss his lips that gives a right
answer: that is, Every man will love and honor him that loves and honors
Justice. Ought you to delight in any thing more than Virtue; or in any Virtue
more than the best? and such is Justice. Again, by due administration of
Justice and judgment God is much glorified. Glorified in the encouragement of 2.
his servants; when for well-doing they are rewarded: glorified in the
destruction of the wicked, when for offending they are punished: glorified in
the increase, and in the Peace and Prosperity of his Kingdom, which hereby is
both preserved and enlarged: glorified in the expression and imitation of his
infinite perfections, when they who are his Ministers and Deputies for this
very thing, for the execution of Justice, do labor to resemble him, whose
Ministers and Deputies they are, in this very thing, in being just, even as he
is just. Ought you not to count it your greatest glory to seek His? And can you
do that more readily and effectually, than 3.
by doing justice and judgment? And as for our selves; What Quid est suavius
quam been rem gerere beno publico? Plaut. in Capt. 3. 2.
comfort will it be to our Souls, when they can witness with us that we have
even set our selves to do good, in those Callings wherein God has set us?
Every man that has a Calling, must Romans 12. 7.
wait thereon, and do the duties belonging thereto, at his peril: and it will
be much for his ease to be lightsom and cheerful therein. So shall he make of a
Faxis ut libea^ quod est necesse.
Necessity a Virtue; and do that with pleasure, which he must do howsoever, or
answer for the neglect: Auson. in Sent. Periand.
whereas otherwise, his Calling will be a continual burden and weariness unto
him, and make his whole life no better nor other than a long and lasting
affliction. And besides, we much deceive our selves, if we think our own
private good to be severed from the public; and so neglect the public
Employments to follow our own private affairs. For the private is not
distinguished from the public; but (...). Xenoph. de venatione, apud Stobaeum.
included in it: and no man knows what mischiefs unaware^ he prepares for
his private estate in the end; whilst thinking to provide well enough for
himself, he cherishes in the mean time, or suffers abuses in the public.
Ought we not by making justice and judgment our glory and delight, to reap the
comfort of it in our Consciences, to Quapropter edulcorare convenit vitam. Cn.
Marius in Mimiambis. apud A. Gell. 15. 25.
sweeten the miseries and travails of our Lives and Callings, and to secure our
private in the common safety: rather than by or not doing justice, or doing it
heavily and heartlesly, wound our own Consciences, make the Afflictions of this
life yet more afflictive, and in the decay of the public, insensibly promote
the ruin of our private state and prosperity? And lastly, if we respect
others; what can be more glorious for us, than by our zeal and forwardness,
first to shame, and then to quicken up the backwardness of others; that with
joynt-hearts and hands they and we together may aim at the 4.
peace and prosperity, and good of the Commonwealth? It is not easy to say
what manifold benefits redound to the Commonwealth from the due execution of
Justice: or from the slacking thereof, what a world of mischiefs! How
honorable are we and glorious, if by our zeal we have been the happy
instruments of those so many, so great benefits? How inglorious and vile, if by
our negligence we have made our selves guilty of these so many, so great
mischiefs! if we neglect justice, we countenance disorders, which by Justice
are repressed; we disarm innocence, which by Justice is protected; we banish
Peace, which by Justice is maintained; we are Traitors to the King and his
Throne, which by Justice are Prove. 16. 12.
Established; we pull upon us Gods Plagues and Judgments, which by Justice are
averted. Ought we not much rather by our forwardness in doing Justice to
repress disorders, protect innocence, maintain peace, secure the King and
State, and turn away Gods judgments from our selves and others? See now if we
have not reason to love Justice and Judgment, and to make it our delight; to
put Righteousness upon us, and to cloth us with judgment as with a Robe and a
Diadem: being a thing in it self so excellent; and being from it there
redoundeth so much glory to God, to our selves so much comfort, and so much
benefit unto others. The Inferences of use from this first Duty, as also from
the rest, I omit for the present: reserving them all to the latter end: partly,
because I would handle them all together; partly also, and especially, for that
I desire to leave them fresh in your memory, when you depart the Congregation.
And therefore without farther ado, I proceed forth with to the next duty,
contained in these words, [ I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the
lame; I was a father to the poor.]

Wherein Job declares his own readiness in his Place and Calling to be 9.
helpful to those that were any way distressed, or stood in need of him, by
affording them such supply to his power, as their several necessities required.
And like him should every Magistrate be in this also; which I propose as the
second Duty of the good Magistrate: he must be forward to (...). Sophocl.
succor those that are distressed and oppressed; and to help and relieve them
to his power. Men's necessities are many, and of great variety: but most of them
spring from one of these two defects, ignorance, or want of skill; and
impotence, or want of power: here signified by Blindness, and Lameness. The
blind man perhaps has his limbs and strength to walk in the way, if he could
see it: but because he wants his Eyes, he can neither find the right way, nor
spy the rubs that are in it; and therefore he must either sit still, or put
himself upon the necessity of a double hazard, of stumbling, and of going
wrong. The lame man perhaps has his Eyes and sight perfect, and knows which
way he should go, and sees it well enough; but because he wants his limbs,
he is not able to stir a foot forward; and therefore he must have patience
perforce, and be content to sit still, because he cannot go withal. Both the
one and the other may perish, unless some good body help them: and become a
Guide to the blind, a Staff to the lame; leading the one, and supporting the
other. Abroad in the World there are many; in every Society, Corporation, and
Congregation, there are some of both sorts: some Blind, some Lame. Some that
stand in need of Counsel, and Advice, and Direction; as the Blind: others that
stand in need of Help, and assistance, and support; as the Lame. If there be
any other besides these, whose case deserves pity, in what kind soever it be;
the word Poor comprehends him, and makes him a fit object for the care and
compassion of the Magistrate. To each of these the Magistrate must be a
succourer to his power. He must be, as here Job was, an Eye to the blind,
Lyran. hic.
ignorantem dirigendo; by giving sound and honest counsel the best he can to
them that are simple, or might without his help be easily overseen. And he must
be, as here Job was, feet to the lame, impotentem adjuvando; by giving
countenance and assistance in just and honest Causes the best he can to them
that are of meaner ability or might without his help be easily overborn. If
there be either of these, or any other defect, which stands in need of a
supply in any other man; he must be, as here Job was, a See Syrac. 4. 10.
Father to the poor, indigentem sublevando; 10.
by giving convenient safety and protection the best he can to them that are
destitute of help, and fly unto him as to a Sanctuary for shelter and for
refuge in any misery, grievance, or distress. Upon these he must both have
compassion inwardly, and he must show it too outwardly; Affectu, and Effectu;
pitying them in his heart, and helping them with his hand. It is not enough for
him to see the Blind, and the Lame, and the Poor, and to be sorry for them: but
his compassion must be real. He must lend his Eyes to the Blind to direct them;
and he must lend his feet to the Lame to support them; and he must pity the
Poor as a father does his children, so pity them, that he do something for them.

Princes, and Judges, and Magistrates were not Non mihi sed populo. Ae.
Adrianus Imp. -- (...). Arist. in Epist. ad Alex.
ordained altogether, nor yet so much for their own sakes, that they might have
over whom to bear rule and to Ita magnae vires gloriae decorique sunt, si illis
salutaris potentia est. Nam pestifera vis est, valere ad noc^ndum. Seneca 1. de
clem. 3.
domineer at pleasure; as for the peoples sakes, that the people might have to
whom to resort, and upon whom to depend for help and succor, and relief in
their necessities. And they ought to remember, that for this end God has
endued them with that power which others want; that they might by their power
help them to right, who have not power to right themselves. [ Senec. in Medea,
2. 2.
Hoc reges habent magnificum and ingens, etc. Prodesse miseris, supplices fido
lare protegere, etc.] This is the very thing wherein the Pre-eminence of
Princes, and Magistrates, and great ones, above the ordinary sort singularly
consists, and wherein specially they have the advantage, and whereby they
hold the title of Psalm. 82. 6. Hoc tecum commune Deis, quod utrique rogati
Supplicicibus vestris far soletis opem. Ovid. 2. de Ponto. 9.
Gods, that they are able to do good, and to help the distressed, more than
others are. For which ability how they have used it, they stand accountable to
him from whom they have received it: and woe unto them if the Accounts they
bring in be not in some reasonable proportion answerable to the Receipts, Wisd.
6. 6.
Potentes* potenter: into whose hand Luke 12. 48.
much has been given, from their hands much will be required; and the mighty
ones, if they have not done a mighty deal of good withal, shall be mightily
tormented. And as they have received power from God; so they do receive
honors, and service, and tributes from their people for the maintenance of
that power: and these as wages by Gods righteous Ordinance for their care and
pains for the peoples good. God has imprinted in the natural Conscience of
every man notions of fear, and honor, and reverence, and obedience, and
subjection, and contribution, and other Duties to be performed toward Kings
and Magistrate, and other Superiors, Romans 13. 5.
not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake: and all this for the
maintenance of that power in them, by the right use whereof themselves are
again maintained. Now the same Conscience which binds us who are under
Authority, to the performance; binds you who are in Authority to the
requital, of these Duties: I say, the same Conscience, though not the same
Wrath: for here is the difference: Both Wrath and Conscience bind us to our
duties; so that if we withdraw our subjection, we both wound our own
Consciences, and incur your just Wrath: but only Conscience binds you to
yours, and not Wrath: so that if ye withdraw your help, we may not use wrath,
but must suffer it with patience, and permit all to the judgments of your own
Consciences, and of God the Judge of all men's Consciences. But yet still in
Conscience the obligation lies equally upon you and us: As we are bound to
give you honor, so are you to give us safety; as we to fear you, so you to
help us; as we to fight for you, so you to care for us; as we to pay you
tribute, so you to do us right. For, Romans 13. 6.
For this cause pay we tribute and other duties, unto you who are Gods
Ministers; even because you ought to be attending continually upon this very
thing, to approve your selves as Romans 13. 4 (...). Luke 22. 25.
the Ministers of God to us for good. Oh that we could all, superiors and
inferiors, both one and other, remember what we owed to each other; and by
mutual striving to pay it to the utmost, so endeavor our selves to Romans 13. 8.
fulfill the Law of God? But in the mean time, we are still injurious* if either
we withdraw our subjection, or you your help; if either we cast off the duty of
Children, or you the care of Fathers. Time was, when Judges, and Nobles, and
Princes delighted to be called by the name of Fathers. The Philistines called
their King by a peculiar appellative, Genesis 2^. 2. and 26. ^. and Psalm. 34. in
titulo.
Abimelech; as who say, The King my Father. In -- sed Roma parentem, Roma
patrem patriae Ciceronem libera dixit. Juven. Satyr. 8. -- patrem patriae
appellavimus, ut s^iret da^am sibi potestatem patriam; quae est,
temperatissima, liberis consulens, suaque post illos ponens. Senec. 1. de Clem.
14.
Rome the Senators were of old time called Patres, Fathers: and it was
afterward accounted among the Romans the greatest title of honor that could
be bestowed upon their Consuls, Generals, Emperors, or whosoever had deserved
best of the Commonwealth, to have this addition to the rest of his style, Pater
Patriae, a Father to his Country. Naaman's servants in 4 King. 5. 13. call him
Father, 4 King. 5. 13.
My Father, if the Prophet had commanded thee, etc. And on the other side,
David the King speaks unto his Subjects, as a Father to his Children in Psalm.
34. Psalm. 34. 11.
Come ye children, etc. and Solomon in the Proverbs every where, My Son: even
as Job here accounts himself a Father to the poor. Certainly to show that
some of these had, and that all good Kings and Governors should have, a Ut eos
quasi filios cerneret per amorem, quibus pater pr^erat per protectionem. Gloss.
interlin. hic (...), etc. Philo, de creat. Principis.
fatherly care over, and bear a fatherly affection unto those that are under
them.

All which yet, seeing it is intended to be done in bonum universitatis, must
be so understood as that it may stand cum bono universitatis, with equity and
justice, and with the common good. For Prove. 3. 3. Matthew 23. 23. Non auferat
veritas misericordiam, nec misericordia impediat veritatem. August. sent. 110.
apud Prosperum.
Mercy and Justice must go together, and help to temper the one the other. The
Magistrate and Governor must be a Father to the poor, to protect him from
injuries, II.
and to relieve his necessities; but not to maintain him in idleness. All that
the Father owes to the Child is not love and maintenance: he owes him too
Education; and he owes him Correction. A Father may love his Child too fondly,
and make him a Wanton; he may maintain him too highly, and make him a Prodigal:
but he must give him nurture too, as well as maintenance: lest he be better fed
than taught; and correct him too, as well as love him; lest he bring him most
grief when he should reap most comfort from him. Such a fatherly care ought the
civil Magistrate to have over the poor. He must carefully defend them from
wrongs and oppressions: he must providently take order for their convenient
relief and maintenance: But that is not all; he must as well make provision to
set them on work, and see that they follow it; and he must give them sharp
Correction when they grow idle, stubborn, dissolute, or any way out of order.
This he should do, and not leave the other undone. There is not any speech more
frequent in the mouths of Beggars and Wanderers, wherewith the Country now
swarmeth, than that men would be good to the poor: and yet scarce any thing so
much mistaken as that speech in both the terms of it: most men neither
understanding aright who are the poor, nor yet what it is to be good to them.
Not he only is good to the poor that delivers him when he is oppressed: nor
is he only good to the poor, that relieveth him when he is distressed: but he
also is good to the poor, that punishes him when he is idle. He is good to the
poor, that helps him when he wants: and he is no less good to the poor,
that whippeth him when he deserves. This is indeed to be good to the poor; to
give him that Alms first which he wants most; if he be hungry, it is Alms to
feed him; but if he be idle and untoward, it is Non solum qu^ dat esurienti
cibum, sitienti potum -- verum etiam and qui emendat verbere in quem potestas
datur, vel coercet aliqua disciplina in eo quod corripit, and aliqua
emendatoria poena plectit, eleemosynam dat, quia misericordiam praestat. Aug.
in Euchir. c. 72.
Alms to whip him. This is to be good to the poor: But who then are the poor we
should be good to, as they interpret goodness? Saint Paul would have 1 Timothy ^.
3.
Widows honored; but yet those that are Widows indeed: so it is meet the poor
should be relieved, but yet those that are poor indeed. Not every one that begs
is poor; not every one that wants is poor, not every one that is poor is poor
indeed. They are the poor, whom we private men in Charity, and you that are
Magistrates in Justice stand bound to relieve, who are old, or impotent, or
unable to work; or in these hard and depopulating times are willing, but cannot
be set on work; or have a greater charge upon them than can be maintained by
their work. These, and such as these, are the poor indeed: let us all be good
to such as these. Be we that are private men as brethren to these poor ones,
and show them mercy: be you that are Magistrates as Fathers to these poor ones,
and do them justice: But as for those idle stubborn professed wanderers, that
can and may, and will not work, and under the name and habit of poverty rob the
poor indeed of our Alms and their Maintenance: let us harden our hearts against
them, and not give them; do you execute the severity of the Law upon them, and
not spare them. It is Saint Paul's Order; nay, it is the Ordinance of the Holy
Ghost, and we should all put to our helping hands to see it kept, 2 These. 3. 10.
He that will not labor, let him not eat. These Ulcers and Drones of the
Commonwealth are ill worthy of any honest man's Alms, of any good Magistrates
protection. Hitherto of the Magistrates second Duty, with the reasons and
extent thereof, I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame: I was a
Father to the poor. Follows next the third Duty, in these words, The cause
which I knew not, I searched out. 12.


Of which words some frame the Coherence with the former, as if Job had meant
to clear his Mercy to the poor from suspicion of partiality and injustice: and
as if he had said, I was a Father indeed to the poor; pitiful and merciful to
him; and ready to show him any lawful favor: but yet not so, as Ne crederetur
quod faveret eis nimis in praejudicium justitiae; subditur (and causam) Lyran.
hic.
in pity to him, to forget or pervert justice. I was ever careful before I
would either speak or do for him, to be first assured his cause was right and
good: for that purpose, if it were doubtful, Ne forte motu pietatis indiscretae
condescenderem ei in praejudicium justitiae. Lyran. hic.
I searched it out, and examined it, before I would countenance either him or
it. Certainly, thus to do is agreeable to the rule of Justice; yea and of Mercy
too: for it is one Rule in showing Mercy, that it be ever done salvis pietate
and justitia, without prejudice done to piety and justice. And as to this
particular, the commandment of God is express for it in Exodus 23. Exodus 23. 3.
Thou shall not countenance no not a poor man in his cause. Now if we should
thus understand the coherence of the words; the special duty which Magistrates
should hence learn, would be indifferency: in the administration of Justice not
to make difference of rich or poor, far or near, friend or foe, one or other;
but to consider only and barely the equity and right of the cause, without any
respect of persons, or partial inclination this way or that way. 13.


This is a very necessary duty indeed in a Magistrate of Justice; and I deny
not but it may be gathered without any violence from these very words of my
Text: though to my apprehension not so much by way of immediate observation
from the necessity of any such coherence; as by way of consequence from the
words themselves otherwise. For what need all that care, and pains, and
diligence in searching out the cause, if the condition of the person might
overruled the cause after all that search; and were not the judgment to be
given merely according to the goodness or badness of the cause, without respect
had to the person? But the special duty, which these words seem most naturally
and immediately to impose upon the Magistrate, (and let that be the third
Observation) is diligence, and patience, and care to hear, and examine, and
enquire into the truth of things; and into the equity of men's causes. As the
Physician, before he prescribe receipt or diet to his patient, will first feel
the pulse, and view the urine, and observe the temper and changes in the body,
and be inquisitive how the disease began, and when, and what sits it has, and
where and in what manner it holds him, and inform himself every other way as
fully as he can in the true state of his body, that so he may proportion the
remedies accordingly without error: so ought every Magistrate, in causes of
Justice, before he pronounce sentence, or give his determination, whether in
matters Omnia judicia aut distrahendarum controversiarum, aut puniendorum
maleficiorum causa reperta sunt. Cic. pro Cecin.
judicial or criminal, to hear both parties with equal patience, to examine
witnesses and other evidences advisedly and thoroughly, to consider and wisely
lay together all Allegations and Circumstances, to put in quaeries and doubts
upon the by, and use all possible expedient means for the boulting out of the
truth; that so he may do that which is equal and right without error.

A duty not without both Precept and President in holy Scripture. Moses 14.
prescribes it in Deuteronomy. 17. in the case of Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 17. 2, etc. See
also Deuteronomy. 13. 14.
If there be found among you one that has done thus or thus, etc. And it be
told thee, and thou have heard of it, and inquired diligently, and behold it to
be true, and the thing certain that such abomination is wrought in Israel, Then
thou shall bring forth that man, etc. The offender must be stoned to death, and
no eye pity him: but it must be done orderly, and in a legal course; not upon a
bare hearsay, but upon diligent examination and inquisition, and upon such
full evidence given in, as may render the fact certain, so far as such cases
ordinarily are capable of -- (...). Arist. 2. Ethic. 1.
certainty. And the like is again ordered in Deuteronomy. 19. in the case of false
witness, Deuteronomy. 19. 17, etc.
Both the men, between whom the controversy is, shall stand before the Judges,
and the Judges shall make diligent inquisition, etc. And in Judge. 19. 30.
Judge. 19. in the wronged Levites case, whose Concubine was abused to death at
Gibeah; the Tribes of Israel stirred up one another to do justice upon the
inhabitants thereof; and the method they proposed was this, first to consider
and consult of it, and then to give their opinions. But the most famous example
in this kind is that of King Solomon in 3 Kings 3. in the difficult case of the
3 Kings 3. 16. *28.
two Mothers: Either of them challenged the living Child with a like eagerness;
either of them accused other of the same wrong, and with the same allegations:
neither was there witness or other evidence on either part to give light unto
the matter: yet Solomon by that wisdom which he had obtained from God found a
means to search out the truth in this difficulty, by making as if he would cut
the child into halfs, and give either of them one half; at the mentioning
whereof the compassion of the right mother betrayed the falsehood of her
clamorous competitor. And we read in the Apocryphal Story of Susanna, how
Daniel by ( x) examining u Dan. 13. 16.
the two Elders, severally and apart, found them to differ in one circumstance
of their relation, and thereby discovered the whole accusation to be false.
Judges for this reason were anciently called Cognitores, and in approved
Authors Si judicas, cognosce. Sen. in Med. 2.
Cognoscere is as much as to do the office of a Judge: to teach Judges, that
one chief point of there care should be to know the Truth. For if of private
men, and in things of ordinary discourse, that of Solomon be true, Prove. 18.
13. See Syrac. 11. 7, 8.
He that answers a matter before he hears it, it is folly and shame unto
him; certainly much more is it true of public Magistrates, and in matters of
Justice and Judgment: by how much both the men are of better note, and the
things of greater moment. But in difficult and intricate businesses, covered
with darkness and obscurity, and perplexed with many windings and turnings, and
cunning and crafty conveyances, to find a fair issue out, and to spy light at a
narrow hole, and by wisdom and diligence to rip up a foul matter, and search a
cause to the bottom, and make a discovery of all: is a thing worthy the labor,
and a thing that will add to the honor, I say not only of inferior
governors, but even of the Supreme Magistrate, the King. Prove. 25. 2.
It is the glory of God to conceal a thing; but the honor of Kings, is to
search out the matter. 15.


To understand the necessity of this duty; consider, First, that as sometimes 1.
Democritus said, the truth lies Cic. 1. Acad. quaest. in fine. Involuta
veritas in alto latet. en. 7. de benefic. 1.
in profundo, and in abdito, dark and deep as in the bottom of a pit; and it
will ask some time, yea and cunning too, to find it out and to bring it to
light. Secondly, that through favor, faction, envy, greediness, ambition, and
otherwise, innocence it self is often laden with false accusations: You may
observe in the Scriptures how 3 Kings 21. 13.
Naboth, 2.
Jer. 37. 13.
Jeremy, Acts 24. 5. and 25. 7.
S. Paul, and others; and you may see by too much experience in these wretched
times, how many men of fair and honest conversation have been accused and
troubled without cause: which if the Magistrate by diligent inquisition do not
either prevent or help to the utmost of his endeavor, he may soon unawares
wrap himself in the guilt of innocent 3.
blood. Thirdly, that informations are for the most part partial, every man
making the best of his own tale: and he cannot but often (...). Menand. apnd
Stob. Ser. 44.
err in judgment, that is easily carried away with the first tale, and does
not suspend till he have heard both parties alike. Herein 2 Samuel 16. 34.
David failed, when upon Ziba's false information he passed a hasty and
injurious decree against Mephibosheth. Solomon says, Prove. 18. 17.
He that is first in his own tale seems righteous; but then his neighbor
comes and searches him out, Prove. 18. as we say commonly, One tale is good,
till another be told. Fourthly, that if in all other things hastiness and
precipitancy be hurtful, then especially 4.
matters of justice would not be huddled up hand over head, but handled with
mature Take head what you do, 2 Chr. 19. 5.
deliberation, and just diligent disquisition. Senec. lib. 2. de ira, cap. 23.
Cunctari judicantem decet; imo oportet, says Seneca: he that is to judge, it
is fit he should, nay it is necessary he should proceed with convenient
leisure. Who judges otherwise, and without this due search, he does not judge,
but guess. The good Magistrate had need of patience to hear, and of diligence
to search, and of prudence to search out, whatsoever may make for the discovery
of the truth in an intricate and difficult cause. The cause which I knew not, I
searched out. That is the Magistrates third duty. There yet remains a fourth
in these words, I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of
his teeth.

Wherein Job alludeth to ravenous and savage beasts; beasts of prey, that 16.
lie in wait for the smaller Cattle, and when they once catch them in their
paws, fasten their teeth upon them, and tear them in pieces and devour them.
Such* Lions, and Wolfs, and Bears, and Tygres, are the greedy Quipote plus
urget: pisces ut saepe minutos magnus come, ut aves enecat accipeter. Varro
in Margopoli. -- factus praeda majori minor. Sen. in Hippol. act. 2.
great ones of this world, who are ever ravening after the estates and the
livelihoods of their meaner neighbors, snatching, and biting, and devouring,
and at length eating them up and consuming them. Job here speaks of Dentes
and Molares; Teeth and Iaws: and he means the same thing by both, Power
abused to oppression. But if any will be so curiously subtle, as to distinguish
them, thus he may do it. Dentes, they are the long (...) of (...) acuere.
sharp teeth, the fore teeth; Psalm. 37. 4. (...). Arist. 2. Phys. tex. 76.
Dentes eorum arma and sagittae, says David, Their teeth are spears and
arrows. Molares a molendo; so called from grinding; they are the great double
teeth, the jaw-teeth. Those are the Biters, these the Grinders: these and those
together Oppressors of all sorts, Usurers, and prouling Officers, and sly
Merchants, and errant Informers, and such kind of Extortioners as sell time,
and truck for expedition, and snatch and catch at petty advantages; these use
their teeth most, these are Biters. The first, I know not whether or no the
worst sort of them, in the holy Hebrew tongue has his name from biting. (...)
Naschack, that is to bite; and (...) Nescheck, that is Usury. Besides these
Biters they are Grinders too; men whose teeth are Lapides Molares, as the over
and neither millstone: depopulators, and racking Landlords, and such great
ones, as by heavy pressures and burdens, and sore bargains break the backs of
those they deal withal. Those first by little and little Esaias 3. 15.
grind the faces of the poor, as small as dust and powder; and when they have
done, at length Psalm. 14. 4.
eat them up one after another, as it were bread: as the Holy Ghost has
painted them out under those very phrases. Now how the Magistrate should deal
with those grinders and biters, Job here teaches him: he should break their
jaws, and pluck the spoil out of their teeth: that is, quell and crush the
mighty Oppressor, and Eripite nos ex fancibus eorum, quoram crudelit as, etc.
Cra^^. apud. Cic. 1. de O. ratore.
deliver the oppressed from his injuries. For, to break the jaw, or the cheek
bone, or the teeth, is in Scripture phrase as much as to abate the pride, and
suppress the power, and curb the insolency of those that use their might to
overbear right. So David says in the third Psalm, that God had saved him by
Psalm. 3. 7.
smiting his enemies upon the cheek bone, and breaking the teeth of the
ungodly. And in Psalm 58. he desires God to Psalm. 58. 6. See also Prove. 30.
14. and Joel 1. 6.
break the teeth of the wicked in their mouths, and to break out the great
teeth of those young Lions. In which place it is observable, that, as Job here,
he speaks both of Dentes and Molares, teeth and great teeth: and those wicked
great ones, according as Job also here alludeth, he expressly compares unto
young Lions; lusty and strong and greedy after the prey.

Now to the doing of this, to the breaking of the jaws of the wicked, and 17.
plucking the spoil out of his teeth; there is required a stout heart, and an
undaunted See Syrac. 4. 9.
Courage, not fearing the faces of men, should their faces be as the faces of
Lions and their visages never so terrible. And this is the good Magistrate's
last Duty in my Text; without fear to execute justice boldly upon the stoutest
offender, and so to curb the power of great and wicked men, that the poor may
live in peace, and keep their own by them. It was one part of Iethro's
Character of a good Magistrate in Exodus 18. that he should be Exodus 18. 21.
a man of courage. And it was not for nothing that every 3 King. 10. 20.
step up Solomon's Throne for judgment was supported with Lions: to teach Kings
and all Magistrates, that a Lion like courage and resolution is necessary for
all those that sit upon the Throne or Bench for Justice and for Judgment. When
1 Samuel 17. 34, etc.
David kept his Fathers sheep, and there came a Lion and a Bear, and took a
Lamb out of the flock; he went out after the Lion and smote him, and took the
Lamb out of his Mouth, and when the Lion rose against him, he took him by the
beard, and smote him again, and slew him: and so he did with the Bear also.
Every Magistrate is a kind of Esaias 44. 28. (...), saepe apud Homer.
shepherd: and the people they are his flock. He must do that then in the
behalf of his flock, that David did. Those that begin to make a spoil; though
but of the poorest Lamb of the flock, be they as terrible as the Lion and the
Bear, he must after them, and smite them, and pluck the spoil out of their
teeth: and though they show their spleen, and turn again at it, yet he must not
shrink for that; but rather take fresh courage, and to them again, and take
them by the beard, and shake them, and never leave them till he have brought
them under, and broken their jaws, and in spite of their teeth made them past
biting or grinding again in have. He is a bare John 10. 12.
hireling, and not worthy the name of a Shepherd, who when he sees the Wolf
coming, thrusts his head in abush, and leaves the poor cattle to the spoil.
The good Magistrate must put on his resolution, to go on in this course, and
without fear of one or other to do justice upon whosoever dares do injustice,
and to suppress oppression even in the greatest.

A resolution necessary; whether we consider the Law, the Magistrate, 18.
or the offender. Necessary, First, inrespect of the Laws: which, as all
experience shows, are far better unmade, than unkept. Horat. 3. Od. 24.
Quid vanae sine moribus leges proficiunt? The life of the Law is the
Execution; without which the Law is but a dead letter: of less use and regard
than scar-crows are in the cornfieldsd; whereof the birds are a little afraid
at the first, but anon after a little use they grow so bold with them, as to
sit upon their heads and defile them. We see the experience hereof but too
much, in the too much suffered insolency of two sorts of people, [than against
whom never were Laws either better made, or worse executed] Rogues and
Recusants. Now we know the Laws are general in their intents, and include as
well the great as the small. The Magistrate therefore who is (...). Arist. 5.
Ethic. 7.
Lex loquens, and whose duty it is to see the Laws executed, must proceed as
generally, and punish transgressors of the Laws, the great as well as the
small. It is an old complaint, yet grows out of date but slowly; that, Laws
are like Anach arsi, apud Plutarch. in Solone: nonn u^i Zaleuco tribuunt.
Cobwebs, wherein the smaller flies are caught, but great ones break through.
Surely, Laws should not be such; good Laws are; not such of themselves; they do
or should intend an Inde latae leges, ne fortior omnia posset. Ovid. 3. Fast.
universal reformation: it is the abuse of bad men, together with the baseness
or cowardice of sordid or sluggish Magistrates, that makes them such. And I
verily persuade my self, there is no one thing that makes good Laws so much
contemned, even by mean ones too at the last, as the not executing them upon
the great ones in the mean time. Let a Magistrate but take to himself that
courage which he should do, and now and then make a great man an example of
Justice; he shall find that a few such examples will breath more life into the
Laws, and strike more awe into the people, than the punishment of an hundred
underlings and inferior persons.

Again, in respect of the Magistrate himself, this courage and resolution 19.
is necessary; for the maintenance of that dignity and respect which is due to
him in his place and calling. Which he cannot more shamefully betray, than by
fearing the faces of men. Imagine you saw a goodly tall fellow, tricked up with
fe^thers and ribbands, and a glittering sword in his hand, enter the lists like
a Champion, and challenge all comers: by and by steppeth in another man perhaps
much of his own size, but without either sword or staff, and does but show his
teeth and stare upon him: whereat my gay Champion first trembles, and anon for
very fear lets his sword fall, and shrinketh himself into the crowd. Think
what a ridiculous sight this would be: and just such another thing as this, is
a fearful Magistrate. He is adorned with Considera qualia de te praestes, qui
tanta authoritate subveheris. Cassiod. 6. Epist. 15.
Robes, the marks and ensigns of his power. God has armed him with a Romans 13.
4.
sword; indeed as well to put courage into his heart, as awe into the people.
And thus adorned and armed, he stands in the eye of the World, and as it were
upon the stage; and raises an expectation of himself, as if sure this man
would do something: his very appearance threatens destruction to whosoever
dares come within his reach. Now if after all this braving, he should be
out-dared with big looks and bug words of those that could do him no harm: how
justly should he draw upon himself scorn and contempt, Horat. de art Poet.
parturiunt montes! Prove. 17. 16.
Wherefore is there a price, says Solomon of the sluggard, in the hands of a
fool to buy Wisdom, and he has no heart? So, wherefore is there a Sword, may
we say of the fearful Magistrate, in the hands of a Coward to do justice, and
he has no heart? You that are Magistrates, remember the promise God has made
you, and the Title he has given you. You have an honorable promise; [ 2*
Chro. 19. 6.
GOD will be with you in the cause and in the judgment, 2 Chronicles 19.] If
God be with you, what need you fear who shall be against you? You have an
honorable Tittle too [ Psalm. 82. 6.
I have said, ye are Gods, Psalm 82.] If you be Gods, why should you fear the
faces of men? This is Gods fashion: he 1 Pet. 5. 5.
gives grace to the humble, but he resists the proud; he Luke 1. 52.
exalts the meek and lowly, but he puts the Mighty out of their seats. If
you will deal answerably to that high name he has put upon you, and be indeed
as Gods; follow the example of God: lift up the poor oppressed out of the mire,
and tumble down the confidence of the mighty and proud oppressor; when you
Psalm. 75. 2. 4.
receive the Congregation, judge uprightly, and fear not to say to the wicked,
be they never so great, Lift not up your horn. So shall you vindicate your
selves from contempt; so shall you preserve your persons and places from being
baffled and blurted by every lewd companion.

Courage in the Magistrate, against these great Ones especially, is thirdly 20.
necessary in respect of the Offenders. These wicked ones of whom Job speaks,
the longer teeth they have, the deeper they bite; and the stronger jaws they
have, the sorer they grind; and the greater power they have, the more mischief
they do. And therefore these great ones of all other would be well hampered;
and have their teeth filed, their jaws broken, their power curbed. I say not,
the poor and the small should be spared when they offend: good reason they
should be punished with severity. But you must remember I now speak of Courage;
and a little Courage will serve to bring those under that are under already. So
that if mean men escape unpunished when they transgress, it is oftener for want
of care or conscience in the Magistrate, than of Courage. But here is the true
trial of your Courage, when you are to deal with these great Ones: men not
inferior to your selves, perhaps your equals; yea, and it may be too, your
Magistracy set aside, men much greater than your selves: men great in place,
great in wealth, in great favor, that have great friends; but withal that do
great harm. Let it be your honor, that you dare be just, when these dare be
unjust; and when they dare smite others Esaias 58. 4.
with the fist of violence, that you dare smite them with Romans 13. 4.
the sword of Justice; and that you dare use your power, when they dare abuse
theirs. All Transgressors should be looked unto; but more, the greater, and
the greatest, most: as a Shepherd should watch his Sheep even from Flies and
Maukes; but much more from Foxes; most of all from Wolves. Sure, he is a sorry
Shepherd, that is busy to kill Flies and Maukes in his Sheep, but lets the
Wolf worry at pleasure: Why, one Wolf will do more mischief in a night, than a
thousand of them in a twelvemonth. And as sure, he is a sorry Magistrate, that
stocketh, and whippeth, and hangs poor Sneaks when they offend (though that
is to be done too) but lets the great Thieves do what they list, and dares
not meddle with them: like Saul, who, when God commanded him to kill all the
Amalekites both man and beast, slew indeed the rascality of both, but spared
the Sam. 15. 3 -- 9.
greatest of the men, and the fattest of the Cattle, and slew them not. The
good Magistrate should rather with Job here, break the jaws of the wicked, and
in the spite of his heart, pluck the spoil out of his teeth.

Thus have you heard the four duties or properties of a good Magistrate 21.
contained in this Scripture, with the grounds and reasons of most of them,
opened. They are, 1. A Love and Zeal to justice. 2. Compassion to the poor and
distressed. 3. Pains and Patience in examination of causes. 4. Stoutness and
Courage in execution of justice. The Uses and Inferences of all these yet
remain to be handled now in the last place, and altogether. All which for order
and brevities sake, we will reduce unto three heads: accordingly as from each
of the four mentioned Duties, or Properties, or Rules (call them which you
will) there arise Inferences of three sorts. First, 1.
of Direction; for the choice and appointment of Magistrates according to these
four properties. Secondly, of Reproof, for a just rebuke of such 2.
Magistrates as fail in any of these four Duties. Thirdly, of Exhortation, 3.
to those that are, or shall be Magistrates, to carry themselves therein
according to these four Rules. Wherein what I shall speak of Magistrates, ought
also to be extended and applied (the due proportion ever observed) to all kinds
of Offices whatsoever, any way appertaining unto Justice. And first for
directions.

S. Paul says, Romans 13. 1.
The powers that are, are ordained of God: and yet S. Peter, 22.
calls the Magistracy an 1 Pet. 2. 13.
humane ordinance. Certainly the holy Spirit of God, which speaks in these
two great Apostles, is not contrary to it self. The truth is, the substance of
the power of every Magistrate is the Ordinance of God; and that is S. Paul's
meaning: but the Specification of the circumstances thereto belonging; as in
regard of places, persons, titles, continuance, jurisdiction, subordination and
the rest, is (as S. Peter terms it) an humane ordinance, introduced by
Custom, or positive* Law. And therefore some kinds of Magistracy are higher,
some lower, some annual or for a set time, some during life; some after one
manner, some after another, according to the several Laws or Customs whereon
they are grounded. As in other circumstances, so in this concerning the
deputation of the Magistrates person, there is great difference: some having
their power by Succession, others by Nomination, and other some by Election. As
amongst us, the Supreme Magistrate, the King, has his power by Succession;
some inferior Magistrates theirs, by Nomination, or special appointment,
either immediately, or mediately from the King; as most of our Judges and
Justices: some again by the elections and voices of the multitude; as most
Officers and Governors in our Cities, Corporations, or Colleges. The
Directions which I would infer from my Text, cannot reach the first kind;
because such Magistrates are born to us, not chosen by us. They do concern, in
some sort, the second; but most nearly the third kind, viz. Those that are
chosen by suffrages and voices: and therefore unto this third kind only I will
apply them. We may not think, because our voices are our own, that therefore we
may bestow them as we list: neither must we suffer our selves in a matter of
this nature to be carried by favor, faction, spite, hope, fear, importunity,
or any other corrupt and partial respect, from those rules which ought to level
our choice. But we must confer our voices, and our best furtherance otherwise,
upon those whom, all things duly considered, we conceive to be the fittest: and
the greater the place is, and the more the power is we give unto them, and from
our selves; the greater ought our care in voycing to be. It is true indeed when
we have used all our best care, and proceeded with the greatest caution we can;
we may be deceived, and make an unworthy choice. For we cannot judge of men's
fitness by any demonstrative certainty: all we can do is to go upon
probabilities, which can yield at the most but a conjectural certainty, full of
uncertainty. Men ^fere maxima pars morem hunc homines habent: quod sibi volunt,
Dum id impetrant, boni sant; sed id ubi jam penes sese habent, ex bonis pessimi
and fraudulent issimi sant. Plant. in Capt. 2. 1. Omnes candidatos, bon^s ^iros
dicimus. Senec. Epist. 3.
ambitious* and in appetite, till they have obtained their desires, use to
dissemble those vices which might make a stop in their preferments; which,
having once gotten what they fished for, they bewray with greater freedom: and
they use likewise to make a show of that zeal and forwardness in them to do
good, which afterward comes to just nothing. Absalom to steal away the hearts
of the people (though he were even then most unnaturally unjust in his
purposes, against a farther and such a farther; yet he) made show of much
compassion to the injured, and of a great desire to do justice. 2 Samuel 15. 4.
O, says he, that I were made a Judge in the Land, that every man that has
either suit or cause might come unto me, and I would do him Justice. And yet I
doubt not, but if things had so come to pass, he would have been as bad as the
worst. When the Roman Soldiers had in a tumult proclaimed Galba Emperor, they
thought they had done a good days work; every man promised himself so much good
of the new Emperor: But when he was in, he proved no better than those that had
been before him. One gives this censure of him, Tacit. lib. 1. Histor.
Omnium consensu capax imperii, nisi imperasset: he had been a man in every
man's judgment worthy to have been Emperor, if he had not been Emperor, and so
showed himself unworthy. (...). dictum Biantis apud Arist. 5. Ethic.
Magistratus indicat virum, is a common saying, and a true. We may guess upon
likelihoods what they will be when we choose them: but the thing it self after
they are chosen (...). Plutarch. in Cicerone.
shows the certainty what they are. But this uncertainty should be so far
from making us careless in our choice; that it should rather add so much the
more to our care, to put things so hazardous as near as we can out of hazard.

Now those very Rules, that must direct them to Govern, must direct us also to
choose. And namely an eye would be had to the four Properties specified in my
Text. The first, a zeal of justice, and a delight therein. See thou a man
careless of the common good; one that palpably prefers his own before the
public weal; one that loves his -- Nec vulgi cura tyranni, Dum sua sit modo
tuta salus. Valor. Flacc. 5. Argonaut.
ease so well, that he cares not which way things go, backward or forward, so
he may sit 22.
still and not be troubled; one that would divide honorem ab onere, be 1.
proud of the honor and Title, and yet loath to undergo the envy and burden
that attends him; set him aside. Never think that man's robes will do well
upon him. A Iusticeship, or other Office would sit upon such a man's back as
handsomely as 1 Samuel 17. 39.
Readiness armor did upon David's: unweildly, and sagging about his shoulders; so
as he could not tell how to stir and turn himself under it. He is a fit man to
make a Magistrate of, that will put on righteousness as a garment, and cloth
himself with Judgment as with a Robe and a Diadem. The second property is,
Compassion on the poor. See thou 2.
a man distitute of counsel and understanding; a man of forlorn hopes or
estate, and in whom there is no help; or one that having either counsel or help
in him, is yet a Churl of either; but especially one that is sore in his
bargains, cruel in his dealings, hard to his Tenants, or an Oppressor in any
kind? Take none of him. Sooner commit a flock of Sheep to a O pr^clarum
custodem ovium, ut ait, lupum! custosne urbis, an direptor and vexator esset
Antonius? Cic. Philip. 3.
Wolf, than a Magistracy or Office of justice to an (...). Iamblich. apud Stob.
Sermon. 14.
Oppressor. Such a man is more likely to put out the eyes of him that sees,
than to be eyes to the blind; and to break the bones of the strong, than to be
legs to the lame; and to turn the fatherless a begging* than to be a Father to
the poor. The third property is Diligence to search out the truth. See thou a
man hasty, and rash, and heady in his own business; a man impatient of delay or
pains; one that cannot Prove. 29. 11.
conceal what is meet till it be seasonable to utter it, but pours out all
his heart at once, and before the time; one that is easily possessed with what is
first told him, or being once possessed, will not with any reason be persuaded to
the contrary; one that lends ear so much to some particular friend or
follower, as to believe any information from him, not any but from him; one
that, to be counted a man of dispatch, loves 3.
to make an end of a business before it be ripe; suspect him. He will scarce
have the Conscience* or if that, yet not the wit, or not the patience, to
search out the cause which he knows not. The last Property is, Courage to 4.
execute. See thou a man first, of a Degeneres animos timor arguit. Virgil^
3. Aeneid.
timorous nature, and cowardly disposition? or secondly, of a wavering and
fickle mind: as we say of children; won with an apple, and lost with a nut? or
thirdly, that is apt to be wrought upon, or molded into any form, with fair
words, friendly invitations, or complemental glozes? or fourthly, that
depends upon some great man, whose vassal or creature he is? or fifthly, a
taker, and one that may be dealt withal (for that is now the periphrasis of
bribery?) or sixthly, guilty of the same transgressions he should punish, or of
other as foul? Never a man of these is for the turn: not one of these will
venture to break the jaws or tusks of an oppressing Tygre or Boar, and to pluck
the spoil out of his teeth. The timorous man is afraid of every shadow, and if
he do but hear of teeth, he thinks it is good sleeping in a whole skin, and
so keeps a loof-off, for fear of biting. James 1. 8.
The double minded man, as S. James says, is unstable in all his ways: he
begins to do something in a sudden heat, when the fit takes him; but before
one jaw can be halfbroken, he is not the man he was, he is sorry for what is
done; and instead of breaking the rest, falls a binding up that which he has
broken; and so seeks to salve up the matter as well as he can, and no hurt
done. The vain man, that will be flattered, so he get fair words himself, he
cares not who gets foul blows: and so the beast will but now and then give
him a lick with the tongue, he lets him use his teeth upon others at his
pleasure. The depending creature is charmed with a letter or message from his
Lord, or his honorable friend; which to him is as good as a Supersedeas or
Prohibition. The taker has his fingers so oyled, that his hand slippeth off,
when he should pluck away the spoil, and so he leaves it undone. The guilty
man by no means likes this breaking of jaws: he thinks it may be his own
case another day.

You see, when you are to choose Magistrates, here is refuse enough, to 24.
be cast by. But by that all these be discarded, and thrown out of the bunch;
possibly the whole lump will be near spent, and there will be little or no
choice left. Indeed if we should look for absolute perfection, there would be
absolutely no choice at all: Psalm. 14. 3.
There is none* that does good, no not one. We must not be so dainty in our
choice then, as to find one in every respect such as has been charactered. We
live not -- dicit enim tanquam in Platonis (...), non tanquam in Romuli face,
sententiam, de Catone, Cic 2. ad Artic. 1.
in Republica Platonis, but in faece seculi; and it is well, if we can find one
in some good mediocrity so qualified. Amid the common corruptions of mankind,
he is to be accounted a tolerably good man, that it not intolerably bad: and
among so many infirmities and defects, as I have now reckoned, we may well
voice him for a Magistrate, not that is free from them all, but that has the
Vitiis nemo sine nascitur, optimus ille est, qui minimis urgetur. Hor. 1 Sermon.
Sat. 3.
fewest and least. And we make a happy choice, if from among those we have to
choose of, we take such a one as is likely to prove in some reasonable
mediocrity zealous of Justice, sensible of the wrongs of poor men, careful to
search out the truth of causes, and resolute to execute what he knows is just.

That for Direction. I am next to infer from the four duties in my Text, a 25.
just reproof, and withal a complaint of the common iniquity of these times;
wherein men in the Magistracy and in Offices of Justice, are generally so
faulty and delinquent in some, or all of these duties. And first, as for zeal
to justice: alas that there were not too much cause to complain. It is grief to
speak it (and yet we all see it and know it) there is grown among us of this
Land, within the space of not many years, a general and sensible declination in
our zeal both to Religion and justice; the two main Pillars and Supporters of
Church and State. And it seems to be with us in these regards, as with
decaying Merchants almost become desperate; who when Creditors call fast upon
them, being hopeless of paying all, grow careless of all, and pay none: so
abuses and disorders increase so fast among us; that hopeless to reform all,
our Magistrates begin to neglect all, and in a manner reform nothing. How few
are there of them that sit in the seat of Justice, whose Consciences can prompt
them a comfortable answer to that Question of David, Psalm. 58. Psalm. 58. 1.
Are your minds set on rightousness, O ye congregation? Rather are they not
almost all of Gallio's temper, Acts 18. who, though there were a foul outrage
committed even under his nose, and in the sight of the Bench, yet the Text
says, Acts 18. 17.
he cared for none of those things? as if they had their names given them by an
Antiphrasis: like Diogenes his man; manes a manendo, because he would be now
and then running away; so these Justices a justitia, because they neither do
nor care to do Justice. Peradventure here and there one or two in a whole side
of a Country to be found, that make a Conscience of their duty more than the
rest, and are forward to do the best good they can: Gods blessing rest upon
their heads for it. But what comes of it? The rest, glad of their forwardness,
make only this use of it to themselves; even to slip their own necks out of the
yoke, and leave all the burden upon them: and so at length even tire out them
too, by making common pack horses of them. A little it may be is done by the
rest, for fashion, but to little purpose; sometimes more to show their
Iusticeship, than to do Justice: and a little more may be is wrung from them by
importunity; as the poor Luke 18. 4, ^.
widow in the parable by her clamorousness wrung a piece of Justice with much
ado from the Judge that neither feared God, nor regarded man. Alas, Beloved, if
all were right within, if there were generally that zeal that should be in
Magistrates, good Laws would not thus languish as they do for want of
execution; there would not be that insolency of Popish rescuants, that license
of Rogues and Wanderers, that prouling of Officers, that inhancing of sees,
that delay of suits, that countenancing of abuses, those carcases of
depopulated Towns, infinite other mischiefs; which are ( the sins shall I say,
or the Plagues? it is hard to say whether more, they are indeed both) the sins
and the Plagues of this Land. And as for Compassion to the distressed; is there
not now just 2.
cause, if ever, to complain? If in these hard times, wherein nothing abounds
but poverty and sin; when the greater ones of the earth should most of all
enlarge their bowels, and reach out the hand to relieve the extreme necessity
of thousands that are ready to starve: if (I say) in these times, great men,
yea and men of Justice, are as throng* as ever in pulling down houses, and
setting up hedges; in unpeopleing Towns and creating beggars; in racking the
backs, and grinding the faces of the poor; how dwells the love of God, how
dwells the spirit of compassion in these men? Are these eyes to the blind,
feet to the lame, and fathers to the poor, as Job was? I know your hearts
cannot but rise in detestation of these things, at the very mentioning of them.
But what would you say, if as it was said to Ezekiel, so I should bid you Ezekiel.
8. 6 13, 1^
turn again, and behold yet greater, and yet greater abominations; of the
lamentable oppressions of the poor by them and their instruments, who stand
bound in all conscience, and in regard of their places, to protect them from
the injuries and oppressions of others? But I forbear to do that; and choose
rather out of one passage in the Prophet Amos, to give you some short
intimation both of the faults, and of the reason of my forbearance. It is in
Amos* 5. v. 12, 13. I know your manifold transgressions, and your Amos 5. 12,
13.
mighty sins: they afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside the
poor in the gate from their fortia peccata vulg. ibid.
right: Therefore the prudent shall keep silence in that time; for it is an
evil time. And as for searching out the truth in men's causes which is the third
3.
Duty: First, those Sycophants deserve a rebuke, who by false accusations, and
cunningly devised tales, ( Pindar Olymp. 1.
(...)) of purpose involve the truth of things to set a fair color upon a bad
matter, or to take away the righteousness of the innocent from him. And yet how
many are there such as these in most of our Courts of justice? informing, and
promoting, and pettifogging make-bates. Now it were a lamentable thing if these
men should be known, and yet suffered, but what if countenanced, and
encouraged, and under hand maintained by the Magistrates of those Courts, of
purpose to bring Moulter to their own Mills? Secondly, since Magistrates must
be content (for they are but men, and cannot be every where at once) in many
things to see with other men's eyes, and to hear with other men's ears, and to
proceed upon information: those men deserve a rebuke, who being by their office
to ripen causes for judgment, and to facilitate the Magistrates care and pains
for inquisition; do yet either for fear, or favor, or negligence, or a fee,
keep back true and necessary informations, or else for spite or gain, clog the
Courts with false or trifling ones. But most of all the Magistrates themselves
deserve a rebuke, if either they be hasty to acquit a man upon his own bare
denial or protestation (for, si inficiari sufficient, ecquis erit nocens? as the
Delphidius Orator contra Numerium; apud Ammian. Marcell. l. 18.
Orator pleaded before Julian the Emperor; if a denial may serve the turn,
none shall be guilty,) or if hasty to condemn a man upon another bare
accusation (for, si accusasse sufficient, ecquis erit innocens? as the Emperor
excellently replied upon that Orator; if an accusation may serve the turn, none
shall be innocent;) or if they suffer themselves to be possessed with prejudice
and not keep one ear open (as they write of Alexander the great) for the
contrary party that they may stand indifferent till the truth be thoroughly
canvassed; or if to keep causes long in their hands, they either delay to
search the truth out, that they may know it, or to decide the cause according
to the truth, when they have found it. And as for Courage to 4.
execute Justice, which is the last Duty: what need we trouble our selves to
seek out the causes, when we see the effects so daily and plainly before our
eyes? whether it be through his own cowardice or inconstancy, that he keeps
off; or that a fair word whistleth him off; or that a greater man's letter
staveth him off; or that his own guilty conscience doggeth him off; or that his
hands are manacled with a bribe, that he cannot fasten; or whatsoever other
matter there is in it; sure we are, the Magistrate too often lets the wicked
carry away the spoil, without breaking a jaw of him, or so much as offering to
pick his teeth. It was not well in David's time, (and yet David a Godly King)
when complaining he asked the Question, Psalm. 94. 16.
Who will stand up with me against the evil doers? It was not well in Solomon's
time, (and yet Solomon a peaceable King) when, Eccles. 4. 1.
considering the Oppressions that were done under the Sun, he saw that on the
side of the oppressors there was power; but as for the oppressed, they had no
comforter. We live under the happy government of a godly and peaceable King;
Gods holy name be blessed for it: and yet God knows, and we all know, it is
not much better now; nay, God grant, it be not generally even much worse.

Receive now in the last place, and as the third and last inference, a word 26.
of Exhortation; and it shall be but a word. You whom God has called to any
honor, or office appertaining to justice; as you tender the glory of God, and
the good of the Commonwealth; as you tender the honor of the King, and the
prosperity of the Kingdom; as you tender the peace and tranquillity of your
selves and neighbors; as you tender the comfort of your own consciences, and
the salvation of your own souls: set your selves thoroughly, and cheerfully and
constantly, and conscionably, to discharge with faithfulness all those duties
which belong unto you in your several stations and callings, and to advance to
the utmost of your power 1.
the due administration and execution of justice. Do not decline those burdens
which cleave to the honors you sustain. Do not post off those businesses from
your selves to others, which you should rather do than they, or at least may as
well do as they. Stand up with the zeal of Psalm. 106. 30.
Phinees, and by executing judgment, help to turn away those heavy plagues,
which God has already begun to bring upon us; and to prevent those yet heavier
ones, which having so rightly deserved, we have all just cause to fear. Breathe
fresh life into the languishing laws by mature, and severe, and discreet
execution: Put on righteousness as a Garment, and cloth your selves with
Judgment, as with a Robe and Diadem. Among so many Oppressions, 2.
as in these evil days are done under the Sun; to whom should the fatherless,
and the Widow, and the wronged complain but to you? whence seek for relief but
from you? Be not you wanting to their necessities. Let your eyes be open unto
their miseries, and your ears open unto their cries, and your hands open unto
their wants. Give friendly Counsel to those that stand 3.
need of your Direction: afford convenient help to those that stand need of
your assistance: carry a Fatherly affection to all those that stand in need of
any comfort, protection, or relief from you. Be eyes to the Blind, and feet to
the lame: and be you instead of Fathers to the poor. But yet do not
countenance, no not Exodus 23. 3.
a poor man in his cause, farther than he has equity on his side. Remember one
point of (...). Nervus est sapientiae, non cito credere. dictum Epicharmi, apud
Cic. 1. ad Artic. 16. (...). Eurip. in Hell. The simple believe every word.
Prove. 14. 15.
wisdom, not to be too credulous of every suggestion and information. But do
your best to spy out the chinks, and starting holes, and secret conveyances
and packings of cunning and crafty companions: and when you have found them
out, bring them to light, and do exemplary justice upon them. Sell not your
ears to your servants: nor tie your selves to the informations of some one, or
a few, or of him that comes first; but let every party have a fair and an
equal hearing. Examine proofs: Consider circumstances: be content to hear
simple men (...). Arist. 2. Elench. 10.
tell their tales in such language as they have: think no pains, no patience
too much to sift out the truth. Neither by inconsiderate haste, prejudice any
man's right: nor weary him out of it by torturing delays. The cause which you
know not, use all diligence, and covenient both care and speed, to search it
out. But ever withal remember your standing is slippery; and you shall have
many and sore assault^, and very shrewd temptations: so that unless you arm
your selves with invincible resolution, you are gone. The wicked ones of this
world will conjure you by your old friendship and acquaintance, and by all the
bonds of Neighborhood and kindness; bribe your Wives, and Children, and
Servants, to corrupt you; procure great men's Letters, or Favorites, as engines
to move you; 4.
convey a bribe into your own bosoms, but under a handsomer name, and in some
other shape, so cunningly and secretly sometimes, that your selves shall not
know it to be a bribe when you receive it. Harden your faces, and strengthen
your resolution with a holy obstinacy, against these and all other like
temptations. Count him an enemy, that will allege friendship to pervert
justice. When you sit in the place of justice, think you are not now Qui induit
personam judicis, exuit amici, Cicer.
Husbands, or Parents, or Neighbors; but Judges. Contemn the frowns, and the
favors, and the Letters of great ones: in comparison of that trust, which
greater ones than they, the King and State, and a yet Greater than they, the
great God of heaven and earth, has reposed in you, and expects from you.
Chastise him with severe Rejecit alto dona nocentium vultu. Horat. 4. Od. 9.
indignation, if he begin: and if he continue, spit defiance in his face, who
ere he be, that shall think you so base as to sell your Libertatem arguendi
amittit, qui ab e^ accipit qui ideo dat ne corrigatur. Ambr. in 1 Cor. c. 19.
freedom for a bribe. Gird your sword, upon your thigh; and (keeping your
selves ever within the compass of your Commissions and Callings, as the Sun in
the Zodiac) go through stitch, right on in the course of Justice, as the Sun
in the firmament, with unresisted violence; and as a Giant that rejoices to
run his race, and who can stop him? Bear not the Romans 13. 4.
sword in vain: but let your right hand teach you terrible things. Defend the
poor and fatherless* and deliver the oppressed from them that are mightier than
he: Smite through the loins of those that rise up to do wrong; that they* rise
not again: Break the jaws of the wicked, and pluck the spoil out of his teeth.
Thus if you do, the wicked shall fear you, the good shall bless you, the poor
shall pray for you, posterity shall praise you, your own hearts shall ^hear
you, and the great God of Heaven shall reward you. This that you may do in some
good measure, the same God of Heaven enable you: and give you and every of us
grace in our several places and callings, to seek his glory, and to endeavor
the discharge of a good conscience. To which God, blessed for ever, Fathers,
Son, and Holy Ghost, three Persons, and one eternal, invisible, and only wise
God, be ascribed all the Kingdom, Power, and Glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
AD MAGISTRATUM.
The Second Sermon.
At the Assizes at Lincoln, 7 March, 1624. at the request of William Lister,
Esquire, then high Sheriff of the County.
EXODUS XXIII. ver. 1, 2, 3. 1. Thou shall not raise a false report* ^ut not
thine hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness. 2. Thou shall not
follow a multitude to do evil: neither shall thou speak in a cause, to decline
after many to wrest judgment. 3. Neither shall thou countenance a poor man in
his cause.
THere is no one thing, ( Religion ever excepted) that I.
more secureth and adorneth the State, than Justice does. It is both Columna,
and Corona Reipublicae: as a Prop to make it subsist firm in it self; and as a
Crown, to render it glorious in the eyes of others. As the Cement in a
building, that Ius and aqu^t^s vincula civita^um. Ci^. Parad. 4.
holds all together, so is justice to the public Body: as whereunto it owes
a great part both of its strength, (for by it the Prove. 16. 12.
throne is established, in the sixteenth) and of its height too; for it Prove.
14. 34.
exalts a Nation, in the 14th of the Proverbs. As then in a Building, when
for want of good looking to, the Mortar getting wet dissolveth, and the walls
Ventrosi paietes. P. Bles. Ep. 85.
belly out; the house cannot but settle apace, and without speedy repairs fall
to the ground: so there is not a more certain symptom of a declining, and
decaying, and tottering State, than is the general (...). Soph. in Ajac. Ubi
non est pudor, nec cura juris, Sanctitas, P^etas, Fides, Instabile regnum est.
Sen. in Thyest. Act. 2.
dissolution of manners for want of the due execution and administration of
Justice.

The more cause have we, that are Gods Ministers, by frequent exhortations,
admonitions, obsecrations, expostulations, even out of season sometimes, but
especially upon such seasonable opportunities as this, to be instant with all
them that have any thing to do in matters of Justice, but especially with you,
who are Romans 13. 4.
Gods Ministers too (though in another kind) you who are in commission to sit
upon the Bench of Judicature, either for Sentence or Assistance, to do your God
and King service, to do your Country and Calling honor, to do your selves and
others right, by advancing to the utmost of your powers the due course of
Justice. Wherein as I verily think none dare Trasci mihi nemo poterit, nisi qui
ante de se voluerit confiteri. Cic* pro lege Ma^il. Frequenter culpa populi
redundat in principem, quasi de majorum negligentia obve^iant errata minorum.
Pet. Bles. Ep. 95.
but the guilty, so I am well assured none can justly mislike in us the choice
either of our Argument that we beat upon 2.
these things; or of our Method, that we begin first with you. For, as we
cannot be persuaded on the one side, but that we are bound for the discharge of
our duties, to put you in mind of yours: so we cannot be persuaded on the other
side, but that if there were generally in the greater ones that care and
conscience and zeal there ought to be of the common good, a thousand
corruptions rife among inferiors, would be, if not wholly reformed, as
leastwise practiced with less connivence from you, confidence in them,
grievance to others,

But right and reason will, that Gal. 6. 5.
every man bear his own burden. And therefore as we may not make you innocent,
if you be faulty, by transferring your faults upon others: so far be it from us
to impute their faults to you, otherwise than as by not doing your best to Qui
non vetat peccare cum potest, jubet. Senec. in Troad. In cujus manu est ut
prohibeat, jubet agi, si non prohibet admitti. Salvian. 7. de provid.
hinder them, you 3.
make them yours. For Justice we know is an Engine, that turns upon many
hinges. And to the exercise of judicature, besides the Sentence, which is
properly yours, there are diverse other things required; Informations, and
Testimonies, and Arguings, and Inquests, and sundry Formalites, which I am
neither able to name, nor yet covetous to learn: wherein you are to rest much
upon the faithfulness of other men. In any of whom if there be, as sometimes
there will be, foul and unfaithful dealing, such as you either cannot spy, or
cannot help; wrong sentence may proceed from out your lips, (...). Arist. 8.
Top. 111.
without your fault. As in a curious Watch or Clock that moves upon many
wheels, the finger may point a wrong hour, though the wheel that next moves it
be most exactly true: if but some little pinn, or notch or spring be out of
order in or about any of the baser and inferior wheels. What he said of old,
(...). apud Stob. Ser. 44.
Non fieri potest, quin Principes etiam valde boni iniqua faciant; was then and
ever since, and yet is, and ever will be, most true. For say a Judge be never
so honestly minded, never so zealous of the truth, never so careful to do
right: yet if there be a spiteful Accuser that will suggest any thing, or an
audacious witness that will swear any thing, or a crafty Pleader that will
maintain any thing, or a tame Jury that will swallow any thing, or a craving
Clark or Officer that for a bribe will foist in any thing; the Judge who is
tied (as it is meet he should) to proceed secundum allegata and probata, cannot
Ipsos justitiarios, quos vulgariter Errantes, vel Itinerantes dicimus, dum
errata hominum diligenter explorant, frequenter errare contingit. Excessus
namque hominum absconduntur, etc. Pet. Bles. Epist. 25.
with his best care and wisdom prevent it, but that sometimes justice shall be
perverted, innocence oppressed, and guilty ones justified.

Out of which consideration, I the rather desired for this Assise-Assembly, 4.
to choose a Text as near as I could of equal latitude with the
Assise-Business. For which purpose I could not readily think of any other
portion of Scripture, so proper and full to meet with all sorts of persons and
all sorts of abuses, as these three verses are. Is there either Calumny in the
Accuser, or Perjury in the Witness, Supinity in the Iurer, or Sophistry in the
Pleader, or Partiality in any Officer; or any close corruption any where
lurking amid those many passages and conveyances that belong to a Judicial
proceeding? my Text searches it out, and indicteth ^^e offender at the
tribunal of that impartial Judge that keeps a privy Sessions in each man's
breast.

The words are laid down so distinctly in five Rules or Precepts, or rather 5.
(being all negative) in so many Prohibitions, that I may spare the labor of
making other division of them. All that I shall need to do about them, will be
to set out the several portions in such sort as that every man, who has any
part or fellowship in this business, may have his due share in them. Art thou
first an Accuser in any kind: either as a party in a Judicial controversy; 1.
or bound over to prosecute for the King in a criminal Cause, or as a voluntary
Informer upon some penal statute? here is something for thee; Thou shall not
raise a false report. Art thou secondly a Witness: either 2.
fetched in by Process to give public testimony upon oath; or come of good or
ill will, privately to speak a good word for, or to cast out a shrewd word
against any person; here is something for thee too; Put not thine hand with the
wicked to be an unrighteous witness. Art thou thirdly returned 3.
to serve as a sworn man, in a matter of grand or petty inquest? here is
something for thee too; Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil. Come
thou hither fourthly to advocate the cause of thy Client, who flies to thy 4.
learning, experience, and authority for succor against his adversary, and
commends his state and suit to thy care and trust? here is something for thee
too; Neither shall thou speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest
Judgment. Art thou lastly in any Office of trust, or place of service 5.
in or about the Courts, so as it may sometimes fall within thy power or
opportunity to do a suitor a favor, or a spite: here is something for thee
too; Thou shall not countenance (no not) a poor man in his cause. The two first
in the first, the two next in the second, this last in the third verse.

In which distribution of the Offices of Justice in my Text, let none imagine,
because I have shared out all among them that are below the Bench, 6.
that therefore there is nothing left for them that sit upon it. Rather as in
dividing the land of Canaan, Levi, who had Number 18 20, 21.
no distinct plot by himself, having yet (by reason of the Deuteronomy. 33. 10.
universal use of his office) in every Tribe Deuteronomy. 18. 1, etc.
something, had in the whole, all things considered, a See Numb. 25. 2. 38. and
Jos. 21. 1, etc.
far greater proportion, than any other Tribe had: So in this Scripture, the
Judge has by so much a larger portion than any of the rest, by how much it is
more diffused. Not concluded within the narrow bounds of any one; but, as the
blood in the body, temperately spread throughout all the parts and members
thereof. Which comes to pass not so much from the immediate construction of
the words (though there have not wanted Lyran. hic.
Expositors to fit the words to such construction:) as from that general
inspection, and (if I may so speak) superintendency, which the Judge or
Magistrate ought to have over the carriage of all those other inferior ones. A
great part of whose duty it is, to observe how the rest do theirs: and to find
them out, and check and punish them as they deserve, when they transgress. So
that with your patience (Honorable, Worshipful, and dearly Beloved) I have
allowance from my Text (if the time would as well allow it) to speak unto you
of five things. Whereof the first concerns the Accuser; the second, the
Witness; the third, the Iurer; the fourth, the Lawyer; the fifth, the Officer:
and every one of them the Magistrate, Judge, and Iusticer. But having no
purpose to exceed the hour, (as I must needs do if I should speak to all these
to any purpose:) whilst I speak to the first only, I shall desire the rest to
make application to themselves, so far as it may concern them, of every
material passage: which they may easily do, and with very little change for the
most part* only if they be willing.

To our first Rule then, which concerns the Accuser and the Judge; in 7.
the first words of the Text, Thou shall not raise a false report. The Original
(...)
verb signifies to take up; as if we should read it H. A. hic.
Thou shall not take up a false report. And it is a word of larger
comprehension, than most Translators have expressed. The full meaning is, Old
English translation hic.
Thou shall not have to do with any false report, neither by Consentiendo vel
loquendo, Gloss. interlin. hic. Ne falsi rumoris author, vel adjutor esto. Jun.
in Annot.
raising it, as the Author, nor by spreading it, as the Reporter, nor by
receiving it, as an Approver. But the first fault is in the Raiser: and
therefore our translations have done well to retain that rather in the Text;
yet allowing the Receiver a place in the Margent. Now false reports may be
raised of our brethren by unjust slanders, detractions, back-bitings,
whisperings, as well out of the course of judgment, as in it. And the equity of
this Rule reaches even to those extrajudicial Calumnies also. But for that I
am not now to speak of extrajudicial Calumny so much, as of that quae versatur
in foro and in judiciis, those false suggestions and informations which are
give into the Courts, as more proper both to the scope of my Text, and the
occasion of this present meeting: Conceive the words for the present as spoken
especially, or at leastwise as not improperly appliable to the Accuser. But the
Accuser taken Accusatorem pro omni actore and petitore appello. Cic. in partit.
orat.
at large, for any person that impleadeth another in jure publico vel privato,
in causes either civil or criminal; and these again either capital or penal. No
not the Accused or Defendant excepted: who although he cannot be called in
strict propriety of speech an Accuser; yet if when he is justly accused, he
seek to defend himself by false, unjust, or impertinent allegations, he is in
our present intendment to be taken as an Accuser, or as the Raiser and Taker up
of a false report.

But when is a Report false? or what is it to raise such a report? and how 8.
is it done? As we may conceive of falsehood in a threefold notion; namely, as
it is opposed, not only unto Truth first, but secondly also unto Ingenuity, and
thirdly unto Equity also: accordingly false reports may be raised three ways.
The first and grossest way is, when we -- struunt de proprio calumnias
innocentiae. Bern. lib. 1. de Confid. prope finem.
feign and devise something of our own heads to lay against our brother,
without any foundation at all, or ground of truth: creating (as it were) a tale
ex nihilo. As it is in the Psalm, Psalm. 35. 11.
They laid to my charge things that I never did: and as Nehemiah sent word to
Sanballat, Nehem* 6. 8.
There are no such things as thou say, but thou feignest them of thine own
heart. Cic. act. 2. in Ver. lib. 3.
Crimen domesticum, and vernaculum; a mere device: such as was that of
Iezebel's instruments against 3 Reg. 21. 10.
Naboth, which cost him his life; and that of Zibah against 2 Samuel 16. 3.
Mephibosheth, which had almost cost him all he had. This first kind of Report
is false; as devoid of Truth.

The second way (which was so frequently used among the Roman Accusers that Non
utar ista accusatoria consuetudine, etc Cic. Act. 2. in Ver. lib. 5.
Custom had made it not only excusable, but -- quae quoniam accusatorio more
and jure sunt facta reprehendere non possumus. Cic. pro Flacco.
allowable; and is at this day of too frequent use both in private and public
calumniations) is, when upon some small ground of truth, we run descant at
pleasure in our 9.
own informations, interweaving many untruths among; or preverting the speeches
and actions of our adversaries, to make their matters ill, when they are not;
or otherwise aggravating them to make them seem worse than they are. As tidings
came to David, when Ammon only was slain, that 2 Samuel 13. 30
Absalom had killed all the Kings sons. It is an easy and a common thing, by
misconstruction to They daily wrest my words. Psalm. 56. 5. -- Nihil est Quin
male narrando possit depravarier. Terent. in Phorm.
deprave whatsoever is most innocently done or spoken. The Ammonitish Courtiers
dealt so with David, when he sent 2 Samuel 10. 2.
Ambassadors to Hanun in kindness, they informed the King as if he had sent
spies to discover the strength of the City and Land. And the Neh. 6. 6, 7. and
Ezra 4. 12.
Jews enemies dealt so with those that of devotion repaired the Temple and the
Wall of Jerusalem, advertising the State, as if their purpose had been to
fortify themselves for a Rebellion. Yea and the malicious Jews dealt so with
Christ himself; taking hold of some words of his, about the destroying and
building of the Temple, which he understood of the Joh. 2. 10. 21.
Temple of his body, and so Matthew. 26. 61.
wresting them to the fabric of the Material Temple, as to make them serve to
give color to one of the strongest accusations they had against him. This
second kind of Report is false, as devoid of ingenuity.

The third way is, when taking advantage of the Law, we prosecute the 10.
extremity thereof against our brother, who perhaps has done something
contrary to the letter of the Law, but not violated the intent of the Law
giver, or offended either against common Equity, which ought to be the (...).
Epictet. apud Stob. Sermon. 143. Nos legem bonam a mala nulla alia nisi naturali
norma dividere possumus. Cic. lib. 1. de legib. Quod fit injuste nec jure fieri
potest. Non enim jura dicenda sunt, vel putanda, iniqua hominum constituta.
Aug. l. 9. de Civ. 21.
measure of just Laws, or against the common good, which is in some sort the
Atque ipsa utilitas justi prope matter and aequi. Horat. 1. sermon. 3. -- ex aequo
and bono jus constat, quod ad veritatem and utilitatem communem videtur
pertinere. Cic. ad Herenn. lib. 2.
measure of Equity. In that multitude of Laws, which for the repressing of
disorders, and for the maintenance of peace and tranquillity among men must
needs be in every well-governed Commonwealth; it cannot be avoided, but that
honest men, especially if they have much dealings in the world, may have
sometimes just and necessary cause to do that, which in regard of the thing
done may bring them within the compass of some Statute or branch of a statute;
yet such as, circumstances duly considered, no wise and indifferent man but
would well approve of. Now, if in such cases always rigor should be used, Laws
intended for the benefit, should by such hard construction become the bane of
humane society. As Solomon says, Prove. 30. 33.
Qui torquet nasum, elicit sanguinem; He that wringeth the nose too hard
forces blood. Guilty this way are not only those contentious spirits, whereof
are too many in the world; with whom there is no more ado, but a Word and an
Action, a Trespass and a Process: But most of our common Informers withal,
Sycophants you may call them (for that was their old name) like Verres his
Canes venatici. Cic. in Verri nis. saepe
blood hounds in Tully, that lie in the wind for game, and if they can but trip
any man upon any breach of a penal statute, there they fasten their teeth, and
tugg him into the Courts without help; unless he will dare offam Cerbero, (for
that is it they look for) give them a Sop, and then they are charmed for that
time, Zacheus, besides that he was a Publican, was it seems such a kind of
Informer; Luke 19. 8. Si quid cui per calumniam eripui. Apud Tert* 4. cont.
Marc. 37.
(...), is the word Luke 19. If I have played the Sycophant with any man, If I
have wronged any man by forged cavilation, or wrung any thing from him by false
accusation. A report of this third kind is false, as devoid of equity.

But it may be thought I injure these men, in making them raisers of false
reports; and am my self a false accuser of them, whilst I seek to make them
false accusers of others: when as they dare appeal to the world, they report
not any thing but what is most true, and what they shall be well able to 11.
prove so to be. At once to answer them, and clear my self, know that in Gods
estimation, and to common intendment in the language of Scripture, it is all
one to speak an untruth, and to speak a truth, in undue time, and place, and
manner, and with undue circumstances. One instance shall make all this most
clear. Dog the Edomoite, one of the 1 Samuel 21. 7.
servants of the house of Saul, saw when David went into the house of Ahimelech
the Priest, and how Ahimelech there entertained him, and what kindness he did
for him: of all which he 1 Samuel 22. 9, etc.
afterward gave Saul particular information, in every point according to what
he had seen. Wherein, though he spoke no more than what was true, and what he
had seen with his own eyes: yet because he did it with an intent to bring
mischief upon Ahimelech, who had done nothing but what well became an honest
man to do, David charge him with telling of lies* and tells him he had a
false tongue of his own for it, Psalm. 52. [ Psalm. 52. 2. 4.
Thy tongue imagines wickedness, and with lies thou cuttest like a sharp
rasor: Thou have loved unrighteousness more than goodness, and to talk of lies
more than righteousness: Thou have loved all words that may do hurt, O thou
false tongue.] Conclude hence; he that tells the truth where it may do hurt,
but especially if he tell it with that purpose, and to that end that it may do
hurt, he has a false tongue, and he tells a false lie, and he must pardon us
if we take him for no better than the raiser of a false report.

We see what it is to raise a false report: let us now see what a fault it is:
12.
The first Accuser that ever was in the world, was a false Accuser: and that
was the Devil. Who as he began betimes, for he was a Joh. 8. 44.
liar from the beginning: so he began aloft; for, the first false report he
raised, was of the most High. Unjustly accusing God himself unto our mother Eve
in a Genesis 3. 1, 4, 5.
few words, of no fewer than three great crimes at once, Falsehood, Tyranny, and
Envy. He was then a slanderous accuser of his Maker; and he has continued ever
since a malicious accuser of his Apoc. 19. 6, 10.
Brethren: Satan, (...), etc. he has his name from it is most languages.
Slanderers, and Backbiters, and false Accusers may here hence learn to take
knowledge of the rock whence they were hewn: here they may behold the top of
their Pedigree. We may not deny them the ancienty of their descent; though they
have small cause to boast of it; semen serpentis, the spawn of the old Serpent;
John 8. 44.
children of their father the Devil. And they do not shame the store they come
of; for the works of their Father they readily do. That Hellish Aphorism they
so faithfully practice, is one of his Principles: it was he first instilled it
into them, Calumniare fortiter, aliquid adhaerebit, Jer. 18. 18.
Smite with the tongue, and be sure to smite home; and then be sure either the
grief, or the blemish of the stroke will stick by it.

A Devilish practice, hateful both to God and man. And that most justly; 13.
whether we consider the sin, or the injury, or the mischief of it: the Sin in
the Doer, the injury to the Sufferer, the mischief to the Commonwealth. Every
false report raised in judgment, besides that it is a lie; and every lie is a
sin against the truth, Wisd. 1. 11.
slaying the soul of him that makes it, and Apoc. 22. 15,
excluding him from heaven, and binding him over unto Apoc. 22. 8.
the second death: it is also a pernicious lie, and that is the worst sort of
lies; and so a sin both against Charity and Justice. Which whosoever commits,
let him never look to Psalm. 15. 1, 3.
dwell in the Tabernacle of God, or to rest upon his holy Mountain: God having
threatened, Psalm. 50. to take special knowledge of this sin; and though he seem
for a time to dissemble, yet at least to reprove the bold offender to his face,
[ Psalm. 50. 19. - 21.
Thou satest and speak against thy brother: yea and have slandered thine own
mrothers Son. These things have thou done, and I held my tongue, and thou
thoughtest wickedly, that I was even such an one as thy self; but I will
reprove thee, and set before thee the things that thou have done.]

And as for the Injury done hereby to the grieved party, it is incomparable. 14.
If a man have his house broken, or his purse taken from him by the high way,
or sustain any wrong or loss in his person, goods, or state otherwise, by
fraud, or violence, or casualty: he may possibly either by good fortune hear of
his own again, and recover it, or he may have restitution and satisfaction made
him by those that wronged him, or by his good industry and providence he may
live to see that loss repaired, and be in as good state as before. But he that
has his Name, and Credit, and Reputation causelessly called into question,
sustaineth a loss by so much greater than any Theft, by how much Prove. 21. 1.
a good Name is better than great Riches. A man may out-wear other Injuries, or
outlive them: but a defamed person no Acquittal from the Judge, no satisfaction
from the Accuser, no following Endeavors in himself can so restore in
integrum, but that when the Wound is healed, he shall yet carry the marks and
the scars of it to his dying day.

Great also are the mischiefs that hence redound to the Commonwealth. 15.
When no innocence can protect an honest quiet man, but every busy base fellow
that owes him a spite, shall be able to fetch him into the Courts, draw him
from the necessary charge of his family and duties of his calling, to an
unnecessary expense of money and time, torture him with endless delays, and
expose him to the pillage of every hungry Officer. It is one of the grievances
God had against Jerusalem, and, as he calls them, Abominations, for which he
threatens to judge her, Viri detractores in te. Ezekiel. 22. 5.
In thee are men that carry tales to shed blood.

Beware then all you whose business or lot it is at this Assizes, or hereafter
16.
may be, to be Plaintiffs, Accusers, Informers, or any way Parties in any Court
of Justice, this or other, Civil or Ecclesiastical: that you suffer not the
guilt of this Prohibition to cleave unto your Consciences. If you shall
hereafter be raisers of false Reports, the words you have heard this day shall
make you inexcusable another: You are by what has been presently spoken,
disabled everlastingly from pleading any Ignorance either Facti or Iuris; as
having been instructed both what it is, and how great a Fault it is to raise a
false Report. Resolve therefore, if you be free, never to enter into any Action
or Suit, wherein you cannot proceed with Comfort, nor come off without
Injustice: or, if already engaged, to make as good and speedy an end as you can
of a bad matter, and to desist from farther prosecution. Let that Golden Rule,
(commended by the wisest (...), apud Stob. Sermon. 2. Idque per praeconem, cum
aliquem emendaret, dici jubebat, Quod tibi fieri non vis* alteri ne feceris.
Quam sententiam usque adeo dilexit, ut and in palatio, and in publicis operib.
praescribi juberet. de Alex. Severo Lamprid, in Alex.
Heathens as a fundamental Principle of Moral and Civil Justice; yea and
proposed by our blessed Savior himself as a full abridgment of the Matthew. 7.
12*
Law and Prophets,) be ever in your eye, and ever before your thoughts, to
measure out all your Actions, and Accusations, and Proceedings thereby: even to
do so to other men, and no otherwise, than as you could be content, or in right
reason should be content, they should do to you and yours, if their case were
yours. Could any of you take it well at your Neighbors hand, should he seek
your life or livelihood by suggesting against you things which you never had so
much as the thought to do? or bring you into a peck of Troubles, by wresting
your Words and Actions, wherein you meant nothing but well, to a dangerous
construction; or follow the Law upon you, as if he would not leave you worth a
groat, for every petty Trespass, scarce worth half the money? or fetch you over
the hip upon a branch of some blind, uncouth and pretermitted Statute? He that
should deal thus with you and yours, I know not what would be said and thought;
Griper, Knave, Villain, Devil incarnate; all this and much more would be too
little for him. Well, I say no more but this, Quod tibi fieri non vis, etc. Do
as you would be done to. There is your general rule.

But for more particular direction, if any man desire it; since in every evil
17.
one good step to soundness is to have discovered the right Cause thereof: ^
know not what better course to prescribe for the preventing of this sin of
Sycophancy and false accusation, than for every man carefully to avoid the
inducing Causes thereof, and the Occasions of those Causes. There are (God
knows) in this present wicked World, to every kind of evil, inducements but
too too many. To this of false Accusation therefore it is not unlikely, but
there may be more: yet we may observe that there are four things, which are the
most ordinary and frequent Causes thereof; viz. Malice, Obsequiousness,
Coverture, and Covetousness.

The first is Malice. Which in some men (if I may be allowed to call 18.
them men, being indeed rather Monsters) is universal. They love no body: glad
when they can do any man any mischief in any matter: never at so good quiet, as
when they are most unquiet. It seemed* David met with some such; men that were
Psalm. 120. 6, 7.
Enemies to peace: when he spoke to them of peace, they made themselves ready
to battle. Take one of these men, it is meat and drink to him, which to a
well-minded Christian is as Gall and Wormwood, to be in continual suits. Virg.
Eclog. 3.
Et si non aliqua nocuisset, mortuus esset: he could not have kept himself in
breath but by keeping Terms; nor have lived to this hour, if he had not been in
Law. Such cankered dispositions as these, without the more than ordinary mercy
of God, there is little hope to reclaim: unless very want, when they have spent
and undone themselves with wrangling (for that is commonly their end, and the
reward of all their toil) make them hold off, and give over. But there are
besides these, others also; in whom, although this malice reigns not so
universally, yet are they so far carried with private spleen and hatred against
some particular men for some personal respect or other, as to seek their
undoing by all means they can. Out of which hatred and envy they raise false
reports of them: that being in their judgments (as it is indeed) the most
speedy, and the most speeding way, to Quare solent inimici mentiri? ut
petentiamcujusque minuant de quo mentiuntur, Aug. Psalm. 65.
do mischief with safety. This made the Presidents and Princes of Persia to
Dan. 6. 3, 5.
seek an Accusation against Daniel; whom they envied because the King had
preferred him above them. And in all Ages of the World, wicked and profane men
have been busy to suggest the worst they could, against those that have been
faithful in their Callings; especially in the callings of the Magistracy or
Ministry; that very faithfulness of theirs being to the other a sufficient
ground of malice. To remedy this, take the Apostles rule, Heb. 12. Heb. 12. 15.
Look diligently lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and
thereby many be defiled. Submit your selves to the Word and Will of God in the
Ministry; submit your selves to the Power and Ordinance of God in the
Magistracy; submit your selves to the good pleasure and Providence of God in
disposing of yours and other men's Estates: and you shall have no cause by the
grace of God, out of Malice or Envy to any of your brethren, to raise false
Reports of them.

The second Inducement is Obsequiousness. When either out of a base 19.
fear of displeasing some that have power to do us a displeasure, or out of a
baser Ambition to scrue our selves into the service or favor of those that may
advance us; we are content, though we owe them no private grudge otherwise, yet
to become officious Accusers of those they hate, but would not be seen so to
do: so making our selves as it were bawds unto their lust, and open instruments
of their secret malice. Out of that base fear, the 3 Kings 21. 11.
Elders of Iezreel, upon the Queens Letter, whom they durst not displease,
caused an Accusation to be framed against innocent Naboth. And out of this base
Ambition, 2 Samuel 22. 9.
Doeg to pick a thank with his Master, and to endear himself farther into his
good opinion, told tales of David and Abimelech. To remedy this, remember, the
Service and Offices you owe to the greatest Masters upon Earth, have their
bounds set them which they may not pass. (...). Pericles apud Agel 1. Noct. 3.
Usque ad aras: the Altar-stone that is the Meere-stone; and Justice has her
Altars too, as well as Religion hers. Go as far then as you can in Offices of
love and service to your friends and betters, salvis pietate and justitia: but
not a step farther for a world. If you seek to Gal. 1. 10.
please men beyond this, you cannot be the servants of God.

Coverture is the third Inducement. And that is, when either to make our 20.
own cause the better, we seek to bring envy and prejudice upon our
adversaries, by making his seem worse: or, when being our selves guilty, we
think to Scelere velandum est scelus. Sen, in Hippol. Act. 2.
cover our own crimes, and to prevent the Accusations of others by getting the
start of them, and accusing them first. As Genesis 39. 17.
Potiphar's Wife accused Joseph, and the Dan. 13.
Elders Susannah, of such crimes, as they were innocent of, and themselves
guilty. An old trick, by which C. Verres, like a cunning Colt, often holp
himself at a pinch, when he was Praetor of Sicily; as Cic. in Verr. passim.
Cicero declares against him by many instances, and at large. For sithence the
Laws in most cases rather favor the Plaintiff, because it is presumed men
should not complain without grievance: we may think perhaps to get this
advantage to our selves, and so rather choose to be Plaintiffs than Defendants,
because (as Solomon says) Prove. 18. 7.
He that is first in his own tale seems righteous. To remedy this; Do nothing
but what is just, and justifiable: be sure, your matters be good and right:
they will then bear out themselves well enough, without standing need to such
damned shifts for support.

But the fourth thing is that, which causes more mischief in this kind, than
all the rest. That which the Apostle calls 1 Timothy 6. 10. -- scelerum matrem.
Claud. 2. de laud. Stillic. Inde fere scelerum causae -- Juv. Sat. 14.
the root of all evil; and which were it not, there could not be the hundredth
part of those suits, and troubles, and wrongs, which now there are, done under
the Sun: Even the greedy worm of Covetousness, and the thirst after filthy
lucre. For though men be wicked enough, and prone to mischief of themselves but
too much: yet are there even in corrupt nature such impressions of the common
principles of justice and equity, that men would not often do great wrongs
Maximam partem ad injuriam faciendam aggrediuntur n^nnulli*, ut adipiscantur ea
quae concupiverunt: In quo vitio latissime ^atet avaritia. Cic. li. 1. de offic
Sic vita hominum est, ut ad maleficiumnemo conetur sine spe atque emolumento
accedere. Cic. pro Sex* Roscio. Pars vilissima rerum Certamen novistis opes.
Bucan. lib. 3. (...). Diphilus apud Stob. Sermon. 8.
gratis, and for nothing. If Zibah slander his Master falsely and treacherously;
it is in hope of getting the living from him. And it was Naboth's Vineyard, not
blasphemy, that made him guilty. Those sinners that conspired against the
innocent, Prove. 1. [ Pro 1. 12, 13.
Come let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without a
cause: Let us swallow them up, etc.] They had their end in it: and what that
was the next following words discover, We shall find all precious substance, we
shall fill our houses with spoil. And most of our prouling Informers, like
those Old Sycophants in Athens, or the Quadruplatores in Rome; do they aim
think you so much at the execution of good Laws, the punishment of Offenders,
and the reformation of Abuses, as at the prey, and the booty, and to get a
piece of money to themselves? For let the Offense be what it will, deal but
with them; and then no more speech of Laws or Abuses, but all is hushed up in a
calm silence* and no harm done. To remedy this; as John Baptist said to the
Soldiers in Luke 3. Luke 3. 14.
Accuse no man falsely ((...), is the word there too) and be content with your
wages: so if you would be sure not to accuse your Neighbor falsely, content
your selves with your own Estates, and covet not Exodus 20. 17.
his Ox or his Ass, his land or his money, or any thing that is his. Reckon
nothing your own, that is not yours by fair and just means: nor think that can
prosper with you and yours, that was wrung from another by Cavil or Calumny.

I have now done with you that are Accusers: whose care must be, according 22.
to the Text reading, not to raise a false Report. But the Margent remembers
me, there are others whom this prohibition concerns besides you, or rather
above you; whose care it must be, not to receive a false report. A thing so
weighty, and withal so pertinent to the general argument of this Scripture,
that some (...) Septuag. Non suscipies vocem mendacii. Vulg. edit. Thou shall
not receive a false report. Genev. -- hunc sensum sequitur Chaldaeus, Vatabl.
Translations have passed it in the Text. And the Original word comprehends
it. For albeit the Raiser indeed be the first taker up; yet the Receiver takes
it up too, at the second hand. As it is commonly said of stolen goods, There
would be no Thieves, if there were no Receivers; and therefore some Laws have
made the Receiver (...). Phocyl.
equal Thief with the Stealer, (...): so certainly there would be fewer false
reports raised in judgment, if they were more sparingly received. And therefore
in this case also the Receiver must go pari passu with the Raiser: who, if he
give way or countenance to a false Report when he may refuse or hinder it, by
being an Accessory makes himself a Party; and becomes Non solum ille reus est
qui falsum de aliquo profert; sed and is qui cito aurem criminibus praebet.
Is^d. l. 3. de summo bono.
guilty of the same sins, the same wrongs, the same mischiefs, with the first
Offender, the false Accuser. David as he envieth against Doeg in the Psalm. 52.
Psalm for telling, so he 1 Samuel 24. 9.
elsewhere expostulateth with Saul for hearing unjust Reports of him. The
Raiser and Receiver are both possessed with the same evil spirit: they have the
same (...). Thucyd. apud Stob. Ser. 40.
Devil, the same Familiar; only here is the difference, the Raiser has his
Familiar in his Tongue, the Receiver in his Ear. Whosoever then sits in the
place of Magistracy and public judicature in foro externo, or is by virtue of
his Calling otherwise invested with any jurisdiction or power to hear and
examine the Accusations of others: I know not how he shall be able to discharge
himself in foro interno from a kind of Champerty (if my ignorance make me not
abuse the Word) or at leastwise from misprision of Calumny and unjust
Accusations; if he be not reasonably careful of three things.

First, let him beware how he takes private informations. Men are partial, and
will not tell their own Tales but with favor, and unto advantage. 23.
And it is so with most men; the Prove. 18. 17. Est vitium, cujus si te immunem
sentis, inter omnes quos novi, ex his qui Cathedras ascendunt, sedebis me
judice solitarius. Facilitas credulitatis haec est: cujus callidissime
vulpeculae Magnorum neminem compe^i satis cavisse versutias. Bern. 3. de
confid. in fine.
first Tale possesses them so, as they hear the next with prejudice: than
which there is not a -- inde eis ipsis pro nihilo ira multa, inde innocentium
frequens addictio, inde praejudicia in absentes. Bernard. Ibid.
sorer enemy to right and indifferent judgment. A point so material, that some
Expositors make it a thing principally intended in this first branch of my
Text, Lyr. hic.
Ut non audiatur una pars sine alia, says Lyra. Suitors will be impudent, to
forestal the public hearing by private informations: even to the Judge himself,
if the access be easy; or at leastwise (which indeed makes less noise, but is
nothing less pernicious) to his Servant or Favorite that has his ear, if he
have any such noted Servant or Favorite. He therefore that would resolve not to
receive a false report, and be sure to hold his Resolution, let him resolve (so
far as he can avoid it) to receive no Report in private; (for a thousand to one
that is a false one) or, where he cannot well avoid it, to be ready to receive
the Information of the adverse part withal; either (...). Demosth. de Cor.
both or neither, but indeed rather neither, to keep himself by all means equal
and entire for a public hearing. Thus much he may assure himself; there is no
man offers to possess him with a Cause beforehand, be it right, be it wrong;
who does not either think him unjust, or would have him so.

Secondly, let him have the conscience first, and then the patience too (and 24.
yet if he have the (s) conscience, certainly he will have the patience) to
make f The righteous considers the cause of the poor* but the wicked
regards not to know it. Prove. 29. 7.
search into the truth of things: and not be dainty of his pains herein, though
matters be intricate, and the labor like to be long and irksom, to find out if
it be possible the bottom of a business; and where indeed the fault lies first
or most. It was a great oversight in a good King, for 2 Samuel 16. 4.
David to give away Mephibosheth's living from him to his Accuser, and that
upon the bare credit of his accusation. It had been more for his honor to have
done Job 29. 16.
as Job did before him, to have searched out the cause he knew not; and as his
son 3 King. 3. 23.
Solomon did after him in the cause of the two mothers. Solomon well knew, what
he has also taught us, Prove. 25. that it was Prove. 25. 2.
the honor of Kings to search out a matter. God as he has vouchsafed Princes
and Magistrates Quo exemplo moniti, ne ad proferendam sententiam -- aut temere
indiligenterque indiscussa quaeque quoquo modo judicemus: sed exemplo Domini
descendamus, videamus, and justo examine criminosos diligenter perscr^ temur.
Council. Trid. c. 22.
his own Psalm. 82. 6.
name; so he has vouchsafed them his own example in this point. An example in
the story of the Law, Genesis 18. where he did not presently give judgment against
Genesis 18. 20, 21.
Sodom upon the cry of their sins, that was come up before him: but he would go
down first and see whether they had done altogether according to that cry; and
if not, that he might know it. An example also in the Gospel story, Luke 16.
under the Parable of the rich man: whose first work, when his Steward was
accused to him for embezeling his good, was not to turn him out of doors, but
to Luke 16. ^.
examine his accounts. What through Malice, Obsequiousness, Coverture, and
Covetousness, counterfeit reports are daily raised: and there is much cunning
used by those that raise them, much odd shuffling, and packing, and combining,
to give them the color and face of perfect truth. As then a plain Countryman,
that, would not willingly be cosened in his pay, to take a slip for a current
piece, or brass for silver, leisurely turns over every piece he receives;
and if 25.
he suspect any one more than the rest, vieweth it, and ringeth it, and
smells to it, and bends it, and rubbeth it, so making up of all his senses
as it were one natural touch stone, whereby to try it: such jealousy should
the Magistrate use, and such industry, especially, where there appears cause
of suspicion, by all means to sift and to bolt out the truth, if he would not
be cheated with a false report instead of a true.

Thirdly, let him take heed he do not give countenance or encouragement, more
than right and reason requires, to contentious persons, known Sycophants, and
common informers. If there should be no Accusers, to make complaints, Offenders
would be no offenders, for want of due Correction; and Laws would be no Laws,
for want of due Execution. Informers then are Accusatores multos esse in
civitate utile est, ut metu contineatur audacia: veruntamen hoc ita est vtile,
ut non plane illudamur ab accusatoribus. Ibid.
necessary in a Commonwealth, as Dogs are about your houses and yards. If any
man mislike the comparison, let him know it it Nihil mali est, Canes ibi
quamplurimos esse, ubi permulti observandi, multaque servanda sunt. Cic. pro
Sex. Roscio.
Cicero's simile, and not mine. It is not amiss, says that great and wise
Orator, there should be some store of Dogs about the house, where many goods
are laid up to be kept safe, and many false knaves haunt to do mischief; to
guard those, and to watch these the better. But if those Canes aluntur in
Capitolio, ut significent si fures venerint. Quod si luce quoque canes latrent,
cum Deos salutatum aliqui venerint: opinor iis crura suffringantur, Ibid. etc.
Dogs should make at the throat of every man that comes near the house, at
honest men's hours, and upon honest men's business: it is but needful they of the
house should sometimes rate them off, and if that will not serve the turn, well
favouredly beat them off, yea, and if (after all that they still continue
mankeen) knock out their teeth, or break their legs, to prevent a worse
mischief. Magistrates are petty Gods, God has lent them his name. Psalm. 82. 6.
Dixi Dii, I have said ye are Gods, Psa. 82. and false Accusers are petty
Devils; the Devil has borrowed their Apoc. 12. 9* 10.
name, Satan, (...), the Accuser of his brethren. For a Ruler then or De ipso
eliam nomine Diaboli delatorem. de anima, c. 35
Magistrate, to countenance a Sycophant, what is it else, but as it were to
pervert the course of nature, and to make God take the Devils part? And then
besides, where such things are done; what is the common cry? People as they are
suspicious, will be talking parlously, and after their manner: Sure, say they,
the Magistrates are sharers with these fellows in the adventure; these are but
their setters, to bring them in gain, their Instruments and Emissaries to toll
grist to their mills for the increasing of their moulter. He then that in the
place of magistracy would decline both the fault and suspicion of such unworthy
Collusion; it stands him upon, with all his best endeavors, by chaining and
muzling these beasts to prevent them from biting where they should not; and, if
they have fastened already* then by delivering the oppressed (with Job) Job 29.
17.
To pluck the prey from between their teeth, and by exercising just severity
upon them to break their jaws for doing farther harm.

I am not able to prescribe (nor is it meet I should to my Betters) by what
means all this might best be done. For I know not how far the subordinate
Magistrates power, which must be bounded by his Commission, and by the Laws,
may extend this way. Yet some few things there are, which I cannot 26.
but propose, as likely good Helps in all reason and in themselves, for the
discountenancing of false accusers, and the lessening both of their number and
insolency. Let every good Magistrate take it into his proper consideration;
whether his Commission and the Laws give him power to use them all, or no, and
how far.

And first; for the avoiding of Malicious suits, and that men should not be
brought into trouble upon slight informations, I find that among the Cael. ad
Cicer. 8. Fam. Epist. 8. vide l. 7. and l. 13. Sect. qui damni ff. de damno
infect. In omnibus causis, sive-sancimus non aliter -- Nisi prius qui eas
exposcunt, juramentum de calumnia praestiterint, quod non, etc. l. Unic. Cod.
de jurejurando proptercalum.
Romans, the Accuser in most cases might not be admitted to put in his libel,
until he had first taken his corporal oath before the praetor, that we was free
27.
from all malicious and Calumnious intent. Certain it is, as daily experience
shows, that many men who make no conscience of a lie, do yet take some Nam
sacramenti timore contentiosa litigantium instantia compescitur. Ibidem. (...).
Sophocl.
bog at an Oath. And it cannot but open a wide gap to the raising and receiving
of false reports, and to many other abuses of very noisome consequence in the
common weal; if the Magistrate when he may help it, to enrich himself or his
Officers, or for any other indirect end, shall suffer men to be impleaded and
brought into trouble upon Bills and Presentiments tendered without Oath.

Secondly, since Laws cannot be so conceived, but that through the infinite
variety of humane occurrences, they may sometimes fall heavy upon particular
men: and yet for the preventing of more general inconveniences it is necessary
there should be Laws [for better a mischief sometimes, than 28.
always an Inconvenience:) there has been left, for any thing I find to the
contrary, in all well governed Policies, a kind of latitude more or less, and
power in the Magistrates, even in those Courts that were strictissimi juris,
upon fit occasion to qualify and to Solio audire in potestate esse judicis
mollire sententiam, and mitius vindicare quam jubeant leges. Aug. Ep. 158.
mitigate something the rigor of the Laws by the Rules of Equity. For I know
not any extremity of Summum jus summa injuria. Ib. (...). Arist. 5. Eth. 10.
wrong beyond the extremity of Right: when Laws intended for fences, are made
snares, and are calumniously wrested to oppress that innocence which they
should protect. And this is most properly Existunt et iam saepe injuriae
calumnia quadam, and nimis ^alida sed malit iosa interpretatione. Cic. l. 1. de
offic. Scriptum sequi calu^^iatoris esse: boni judicis, voluntatem scriptoris
authoritatemque defendere. Id. pro A. Cecin.
Calumny in the prime notion of the word, for a man upon a mere trick or
quillet from the Aucupia verborum, and literarum tendicula. Cic. pro. A. Cecin.
letters and syllables of the Law, or other writing, or evidence pressed with
advantage, to bring his Action, or lay his Accusation against another man; who
yet bona fide, and in Equity and Conscience, has done nothing worthy to bring
him into such trouble. Now if the Magistrate of Justice shall use his full
power, by interpreting the Law in rigor where he should not, to second the
boldness of a calumnious Accuser: or if he shall not use his full power, by
affording his lawful favor in due time and place, to succor the innocence of
the so accused; he shall thereby but give encouragement to the Raisers, and he
must look to answer for it one day, as the Receiver of a false report.

Thirdly, since that Justice which especially supporteth the Commonweal, 29.
consists in nothing more than in the right distribution of rewards and
punishments: many Lawgivers have been careful, by proposing rewards, to
encourage men to give in true and needful Informations, and on the contrary, to
suppress those that are false or idle, by proposing punishments For, the
Informers Office, though it be (as we heard) a necessary, yet it is in truth a
very thankless office; and men would be loath, without special grievance, to
undergo the hatred and envy, which commonly attends such as are officious
that way; unless there were some profit mixed withal to sweeten that hatred, and
to countervail that envy. For which cause, in most penal Statutes, a moiety, or
a third, or Quartam accusatoribus secundum necessitudinem legi^ Tacit. lib. 4.
Annal.
fourth (which was the usual proportion in Rome, whence the name of
Quadruplatores, accusatores, seu delatores criminum publicorum sub poena
quadrupli, sive quod ipsi ex damnatorum bonis quos accusaverant, quartam partem
consequebantur. Ascon. in Ver. See Fest. in Quadruplatore, Turneb. 3. Adver. 9.
Lips. in lib. 4. Ann. Taciti Bisciol. 14. subses. 15.
quadruplatores came) or some other greater or lesser part of the fine,
penalty, or forfeiture expressed in the Law, is by the said Law allowed to the
Informer, by way of recompense for the service he has done the State by his
information. And if he be faithful and conscionable in his Office good reason
he should have it. For he that has an office in any lawful Calling (and the
Informers calling is such, howsoever through the iniquity of those that have
usually exercised it, it has long labored of an Quadruplator, ut breviter
describam, capitalis est. Est enim improbus and pestifer civis. Cic. lib. 2. ad
Heren.
ill name:) but he that has such an office, as it is meet he should attend it,
so it is meet it should maintain him; for, 1 Cor. 9. 7.
Who goes to warfare at any time of his own cost? But if such an Informer
shall indict one man for an offense, pretending it to be done to the great hurt
of the Commonweal, yet for favor, fear, or fee, balk Aequitas in paribus
causis paria jura desiderat. Cic. in Top. Quis hoc statuit, quod aequum sit in
Quintium, id iniquum esse in Nevium? Id. pro Quin.
another man, whom he knows to have committed the same offense, or a greater;
or, if having entered his complaint in the open Court, he shall afterward let
the suit fall, and take up the matter in a private Chamber, this is
Praevaricatio est accusatoris corruptela ab reo. Cic. in partit. orat. --
Praevaricatorem eum esse ostendimus, qui colludit cum reo, and translatitie
munere accusandi defungitur. Mar. in lib. 1. ff. ad Senatusc. Turpil.
Collusion; and so far forth a false report, as every thing may be called false
when it is partial, and should be entire. And the Magistrate, if he have power
to chastise such an Informer, some semblance whereof there was in that V. Plin.
3. Epist. 9. lib. 1. ff. ad Senatusc. Turpil. Rosi^. 9. Antiq. Romans 25.
Iudicium Praevaricationis in Rome, he shall do the Commonweal good service,
and himself much honor, now and then to use it.

Fourthly, since nothing is so powerful to repress audacious Accusers, as 30.
severe punishment is; it is observable, what care and caution was used among
the Romans whilst that state flourished, to deter men from unjust
Calumniations. In private and civil Controversies, for trial of right between
party and party, they had their V. Ascon^ in Vertin. 3.
Sponsiones; which was a Sum of Money in some proportionable rate to the value
of the thing in Question; which the Plaintiff entered Bond to pay to the
Defendant in case he should not be able to prove his Action; the Defendant also
making the like Sponsion, and entering the like Bond, in case he should be cast.
But in public and criminal matters, whether Capital or Penal, if, for want of
due proof on the Accusers part, the party accused were quit in judgment; there
went a Trial upon the Accuser, at the suit of the accused, which they called
Iudicium Calumniae, wherein they examined the original ground and foundation of
the accusation; V. lib. 1. Sect. 2. etc. ss* ad Senatusc. Turpil. Rosin. 9.
Antiq. Romans 25.
which if it appeared to have proceeded from some just error or mistake
bonafide, it excused him; but if it should appear, the Accusation to have
proceeded from some left handed respect, as Malice, Envy, Gain, etc. he was
then condemned of Calumny. And his ordinary punishment then, was, whereunto he
had virtually bound himself by suscribing his Libel, Poena talionis, the same
kind of punishment, whatsoever it was, which by the Laws had been due to the
party accused, if the libel had been proved against him. Yea, and for his
farther shame it was provided by Lege Rommia v. l 1. sec. 2. ff. ad Senatusc.
Turpil and Gothif^ed. in annot. ibid. Rosin. 8. Antiqu. Romans part. 2. cap. 22.
-- literam illam i ta vehementer ad caput affigent, etc. Cic. pro Sext. Ros.
one Law, that he should be burnt in the forehead with the Letter K. to
proclaim him a Calumniator to the world; that in old Orthography, being the
first letter of the word Kalumnia. The same letter would serve the turn very
well with us also, though we use it to signify another thing; and yet not so
much another thing* as a thing more general, but comprehending this as one
species of it. But, as I said, I may not prescribe, especially beyond Law. The
thing for which I mention all this, is this; If all that care and severity in
them could not prevent it, but that still unjust actions would be brought, and
false accusations raised, what a world of unconscionable Suits and wrongful
Informations may we think there would be, if contenticus Plantiffs, and
calumnious Sycophants, when they have failed their proof, should yet get off
easily, and escape out of the Courts without Censure or Punishment, or at the
most but with some light check; and the poor injured innocent the while be held
in as in a prison, till he have paid the utmost farthing? I say not of what is
due, but of what shall be demanded by every man that has but a piece of an
Office about the Courts. It is a strong heartning to Accusers, and multiplieth
false reports beyond belief when they that are wrongfully accused, though the
cause go with them, shall yet have the worst of the day, and shall have cause
to answer the congratulations of their friends, as (...). Plutarch. i^ Pyrrho.
Pyrrhus did his, after he had gotten two famous victories over the Romans,
that if they should get a few more such victories, it would be to their utter
undoing. If the Magistrate had power to make the wronged party full
restitution, allowing him all costs and damages to a 31.
half penny; nay, if he had power to allow him double or treble out of his
unjust adversaries estate, it were all little enough and but too little.
Zacheus took himself bound to do more, when for this very sin of false
accusation, he imposed upon himself, as a kind of satisfactory penance, Luke
19. 8.
a fourfold restitution, Luke 19. Here was a right Quadruplator indeed, and in
the best sense; you shall not lightly read of such another.

Lastly, men have not Lucian in Hermot.
fenestrata pectora, that we can see them thoroughly and within, yet there want
not means of probable discovery. Of ordinary private men we make conjecture by
their gestures, by their speeches, by their companions; but Magistrates, and
great ones, who live more in the eye of the world, and are ever, as it were,
upon the stage, and so do personati incedere, walk under a continual disguise,
in respect of their outward deportment, are not so well discoverable by those
means. They are best known by their Syrac. 10. 2.
servants and retinue, by their Favorites and Officers, by those they keep
about them, or employ under them. If these be plain and downright, if these be
just and upright, if these be free and conscionable, Sycophants will pluck in
their horns, and be out of heart and hope to find the Masters of such servants
facile to give way to their false Calumniations. But if these be insolent and
hungry companions, if these be impudent and shameless exactors, it is presently
(...). Iso^r. apud Stob. Ser. 44. Si innocents existimari volumus non s^lum
nos abstinentes, sed etiam nostros comites praestare debemus. Cic. 2. in Ver. 2.
thought they are then but brokers for the Masters; and there is no question
then made, but that false reports will be received as fast as they can be
raised, and entertained with both arms. We have learned from Prove. 29. 12.
Solomon, Prove. 29. that if a ruler hearken to lies, then all his servants are
wicked. They durst not be so openly wicked, if they were not first sure of him.
It was but a Nemo unquam tam reus, tam nocens adducitur, qui ista defensione
non possit uti. Cic. 2. in Verr. 2.
sorry one, when it was at best, but is now withal grown a stale excuse; for
great ones to impute their own wilful oversights to the faults or negligence of
their Servants. Caius Verres (whom I cannot but now and then mention, because
there is scarce to be found such another complete Exemplar of a wicked
Magistrate;) would usually Aiunt eum queri solere nonnunquam, se miserum, quod
non suis, sed suorum comitum peccatis and criminibus prematur. Cic. ibid.
complain, that he was unjustly oppressed, not with his own, but with the
crimes of his followers. But why then did he keep such a kennel of Sharks about
him? why did he not either speedily reform them, or utterly discard them? It
were indeed an unrighteous thing to condemn the Master for the Servants fault,
and an uncharitable inference, because the Servant is naught, to conclude
straight the Master is little better. For a just Master may have an
unconscionable Servant; and if he have a In tanta felicitate nemo potest esse
in magna familia, qui neminem neque servum, neque libertum, improbum habeat.
Cic. pro Sex. Roscio.
numerous family, and keep many, it is a rare thing if he have not some bad; as
in a great herd there will be some rascal Deer. But then it is but one or a
few, and they play their prises closely, without their Masters privity; and
they are not a little sollicitous to carry matters so fairly outward, that
their Master shall be the Dedecus ille domus sciet ultimus. Juvenal. Satyr. 10.
last man shall hear of their false dealing; and when he hears of it, shall
scarce believe it for the good opinion he has of them. But when in the
generality they are such, when they are openly and impudently such; when every
body sees, and says, the Master cannot choose but know they are such: it
cannot be thought, but the Master is well enough content they should be such.
Neh. 5. 15.
Even their Servants bear rule over the people, says good Nehemiah of the
Governors that were before him; but so did not I, because of the fear of God,
Neh. 5. What? did not Nehemiah bear rule over the people? yes, that he did;
there is nothing surer. His meaning then must be, ( so did not I) that is, I
did not suffer my Servants so to do, as they did theirs: implying, that when
the Servants of the former Governors oppressed the people, it was their
Masters doing, at leastwise their Masters suffering: [Even their Servants bare
rule over the people; but so did not I, because of the fear of God.] The
Magistrate therefore that would speedily smoke away these Gnats that swarm
about the Courts of Justice, and will be offering at his ear, to buz false
reports thereinto: he shall do well to begin his reformation at home; and if he
have a Servant that hears not well deservedly, to pack him away out of hand,
and to get an honester in his room. Say he be of never so serviceable
qualities, and useful abilities otherwise, so as the Master might almost as
well spare his right eye, or his right hand, as forgo his service; yet in this
case he must not spare him. Our Saviors speech is peremptory Matthew. 29. 30.
Erue, abscinde, projice; if either eye or hand cause or tempt thee to offend,
pull out that eye, cut off that hand, cast them both from thee with
indignation, rather want both, than suffer corruption in either. David's
resolution was excellent in Psalm. 101. and worthy thy imitation: Psalm. 101. 5.
etc.
Whosoever privily slandereth his Neighbor, him will I destroy: whosoever has a proud
look, and high stomach, I will not suffer him. Mine eyes look to such as be
faithful in the land, that they may dwell with me: whosoever leads a godly life,
he shall be my Servant. There shall no deceitful person dwell in my house: he
that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight. He that will thus resolve, and
thus do, it may be presumed, he will not knowingly give either way to a false
report, or countenance to the reporter. And so much for our first Rule, Thou
shall not raise a false Report.

My first purpose, I confess, was to have spoken also to the Witness, and to 32.
the Iuror, and to the Pleader, and to the Officer, from the other four Rules
in my Text, as punctually and particularly as to the Accuser, from this first:
for I therefore made choice of a Text that takes them all in, that I might
speak to them all alike. But if I should enlarge my self upon the rest, as I
have done in this, my Meditations would swell to the proportion rather of a
Treatise than a Sermon; and what patience were able to sit them out? therefore
I must not do it. And indeed, if what I have spoken to this first point were
duly considered, and conscionably practiced, I should the less need to do it.
For it is the Accuser that lays the first stone, the rest do but build upon
his Foundation. And if there were no false reports raised or received, there
would be the less use of, and the less work for false and suborned Witnesses,
ignorant or packed Iuries, crafty and sly Pleaders, cogging and extorting
Officers: but unto these I have no more to say at this time, but only to desire
each of them to lay that portion of my Text to their hearts, which in the first
division was allotted them as their proper share; and withal, to make
application ( mutatis mutandis) unto themselves, of whatsoever has been
presently spoken to the Accuser, and to the Magistrate, from this first Rule^.
Whereof, (for the better furtherance of their Application, and relief of our
memories) the sum in brief is thus. First, concerning the Accuser, (and that
is every party in a Cause or Trial) he must take heed he do not raise a false
report; which is done, first, by forging a mere untruth; and secondly, by
perverting or aggravating a truth; and thirdly, by taking advantage of strict
Law against Equity: any of which whoever does, he first commits a heinous
sin himself, and secondly grievously wrongeth his neighbor, and thirdly,
brings a great deal of mischief to the Commonwealth. All which evils are best
avoided, first, by considering how we would others should deal with us, and
resolving so to deal with them; and secondly, by avoiding, as all other
inducements and occasions, so especially those four things, which ordinarily
engage men in unjust quarrels, Malice, Obsequiousness, Coverture and
Greediness. Next concerning the Judge or Magistrate; he must take heed he do
not receive a false report: which he shall hardly avoid, unless he beware,
first, of taking private informations; secondly, of passing over Causes
slightly without mature disquisition; and thirdly, of countenancing accusers
more than is meet. For whose discountenancing and deterring, he may consider,
whether or no these five may not be good helps; so far as it lies in his
power, and the Laws will permit; first, to reject informations tendered without
Oath; secondly, to give such Interpretations as may stand with Equity as well
as Law; thirdly, to chastise Informers that use partiality or collusion;
fourthly, to allow the wronged party a liberal Satisfaction from his Adversary;
fifthly, to carry a sharp Eye, and a strait Hand over his own Servants,
Followers, and Officers. Now what remains, but that the several Premises be
earnestly recommended to the godly consideration, and conscionable practice of
every one of you whom they may concern; and all your persons and affairs both
in the present weighty businesses, and ever hereafter to the good guidance and
providence of Almighty God: we should humbly beseech him of his gracious
goodness to give a Blessing to that which has been spoken agreeably to his
Word, that it may bring forth in us the fruits of Godliness, Charity, and
Justice, to the Glory of his Grace, the Good of our Brethren, and the Comfort
of our own Souls; even for his blessed Son's sake, our blessed Savior Jesus
Christ: To whom with, etc.

AD MAGISTRATUM.
The Third Sermon.
At the Assizes at Lincoln, August 4th. 1625. at the Request of the
High Sheriff aforesaid, William Lister, Esquire.
Psalm. CVI. 30. Then stood up Phinees, and executed Judgment: and the Plague
was stayed.
THE Abridgment is short, which some have made 1.
of the whole Book of Psalms, but into two words, The Argument,
Cited out of Guevara.
Hosannah, and Hallelujah: most of the Psalms spending themselves as, in their
proper Arguments, either in Supplication, praying unto God for his Blessings,
and that is Hosannah; or in Thanksgiving, blessing God for his goodness, and
that is Hallelujah. This Psalm is of the latter sort. The word Hallelujah, both
prefixed in the Title, and repeated in the close of it, sufficiently gives it
to be a Psalm of Thanksgiving, as are also the three next before it, and the
next after it. All which five Psalms together, as they agree in the same
general Argument, the magnifying of God's holy Name, so they differ one from
another in choice of those special and topical Arguments, whereby the Praises
of God are set forth therein. In the rest, the Psalmist draws his Argument
from other Considerations; in this, from the Consideration of God's merciful
removal of those Judgments he had in his just wrath brought upon his own People
Israel for their Sins, upon their Repentance.

For this purpose there are sundry instances given in the Psalm, taken out 2.
of the Histories of former times; out of which there is framed, as it were,
and matter of this Psalm.
a Catalogue, though not of all, yet of sundry the most famous rebellions of
that people against their God, and of Gods both Justice and Mercy abundantly
manifested in his proceedings with them thereupon. In all which we may observe
the passages betwixt God and them, in the ordinary course of things, ever to
have stood in this order. First, he preventeth them with undeserved favors;
they, unmindful of his benefits, provoke him by their rebellions: he in his
just wrath chastises them with heavy Plagues; they, humbled under the rod,
seek to him for ease: he, upon their submission, withdraws his judgments from
them. The Psalmist has wrapped all these five together in Verse. 43, 44. Many
times did he deliver them, but they provoked him with their Counsels, and were
brought low for their iniquity: the three first. Nevertheless he regarded their
affliction when he heard their cry: the other two.

The particular rebellions of the people in this Psalm instanced in, are 3.
many; some before, and some after the verse of my Text. For brevity sake, The
Coherence, Scope,
those that are in the following verses I wholly omit, and but name the 1.
rest: which are, their wretched Infidelity and Cowardice upon the first
approach of danger at the Red Sea, verse. 7. Their tempting of God in the
desert, 2.
when, loathing Manna, they lusted for flesh, verse. 13. Their seditious 3.
conspiracy under Corah and his confederates against Moses, verse. 16. Their 4.
gross Idolatry at Horeb, in making and worshipping the golden Calf, ver. 19. 5.
Their distrustful murmuring at their portion, in thinking scorn of the
promised 6.
pleasant land, ver. 24. Their fornicating both bodily with the daughters, and
spiritually with the Idols of Moab and of Midian, ver. 28. To the prosecution
of which last mentioned story, the words of my Text do appertain. The original
story it self, whereto this part of the Psalm refers, is written at full by
Moses in Numb. 25. and here by David but Breviter totum dixit, quia non hic
nescientes docet, sed commemorat scientes. Aug. hic.
briefly touched, as the present purpose and occasion led him: yet so, as that
the most observable passages of the History are here remembered, in three verses
three special things, the Sin, the Plague, the Deliverance. The Sin, with the
Agravation thereof, ver. 28. [ They joined themselves also unto Baal-peor, and
ate the sacrifices of the dead.] The Plague, with the efficient cause thereof,
both Impulsive and Principal, verse. 29. [ Thus they provoked him to anger with
their inventions, and the Plague brake in upon them.] The Deliverance, with the
special means and Instrument thereof is this 30th. verse. [Then stood up
Phinees and executed judgment, and the Plague was stayed.]

In which words are three things especially considerable. The Person; 4.
the Action of that Person; and the Success of that Action. The Person,
Phinees: and division of the Text.
His action twofold: the one preparatory, he stood up; the other completory,
he executed judgment: The Success, and Issue of both, the Plague was stayed.
The Person holy, the Action zealous, the Success happy. Of each of these I
shall endeavor to speak something applyable to the present condition of these
heavy times, and the present occasion of this frequent Assembly. But because
the argument of the whole verse is a Deliverance, and that Deliverance
supposes a Plague, and every Plague supposes a Sin, I must take leave before
I enter upon the particulars now proposed from the Text, first a little to
unfold the original story, that so we may have some more distinct knowledge
both what Israel's sin was, and how they were plagued, and upon what occasion,
and by* what means Phinees wrought their Deliverance.

When Israel, traveling from the land of Bondage to the land of Promise 5.
Balak*s Plot;
through the wilderness, were now come as far as Number. 22. 1.
the plains of Moab, and there encamped: Balak the then King of Moab, not Ibid.
2. 3.
daring to encounter with that people, before whom Sihon King of the Amorites,
and Og King of Basan. Number. 21.
two of his greatest neighbor Princes had lately fallen, Ascitos sentores
Madiani, qui proximi regno ejus erant, and amici; consuluit, quid facto opus
esset. Hist. Scholast. in Number. c. 32.
consulted with the Midianites, his neighbors and allies, and after some
advice, resolved upon this conclusion, to hire Number. 22. 5....7.
Balaam a famous Sorcerer in those times and quarters, to lend them his
assistance; plotting with all their might, and his art, by all possible means
to withdraw God's protection from them; wherein they thought (and they thought
right) the strength and safety of that people lay. But there is no Counsel
against the Lord, nor Number. 23. 23.
enchantment against his people. Where he will bless, (and he will bless where
he is faithfully obeyed and depended upon;) neither power nor policy can
prevail for a Curse. Balaam the wicked wretch, though he 2 Pet. 2. 15.
loved the ways of unrighteousness with his heart; yet God not suffering him,
he could not pronounce a Curse with his lips against Israel, but instead of
cursing them, Number 23. 11. and 24 10.
bles^ed them altogether.

But angry at Israel, whom, when fain he would, he could not curse; yea, and
angry at God himself, who, by restraining his tongue, had voided his hopes, and
Number. 14. 11.
withheld him from pay and honor: the wretched covetous Hypocrite, as if he
would at once be avenged both of him and them, imagines 6.
a mischievous device against them, full of cursed villainy. He gives and
Balaam's policy against Israel;
the Moabites and the Midianites Number. 13. 16. Revel. 2. 14. See also Joseph. 4.
Antiq. Jud. 5.
counsel to smothe^ their hatred with pretensions of peace, and by sending the
fairest of their daughters* among them to inveigle them with their beauty, and
to entice them first to corporal, and after, by that, to spiritual, whoredom;
that so Israel shrinking from the Love, and Fear, and Obedience of their God,
might forfeit the interest they had in his Protection, and by sin bring
themselves under that wrath and curse of God, which neither those great Princes
by their power, nor their wisest Counselors by their Policy, nor Balaam
himself by his Sorcery, 7.
could bring upon them. with the success thereof, both in their sin,


This damned counsel was followed but too soon, and prospered but too well. The
daughters of Moab come into the Tents of Israel, and by their blandishments put
out the eyes, and steal away the hearts of God's people; whom, besotted once
with lust, it was then no hard matter to lead whither they listed, and by
wanton insinuations to draw them to sit with them in the Temples, and to
accompany them at the Number. 25.
feasts, and to eat with them of the Sacrifices, yea, and to bow the knees with
them to the honor of their Idols: Insomuch as Israel Psalm. 106. 28.
joined themselves to Baal-peor, and ate the Sacrifices of that dead and
abominable Idol at the least (for all Idols are such) if not, as most have
thought, a Quem Oracia Priapum dixit Hist. Scholast. in Number. 34. and alii
secuti Hieronym. in c. 9. Osee; and 1. cont. Io. 12. See Vatabl. in Number. 25. 3.
Seldom* Synt. 1. de DIS S^r. c. 5. Lael. Bisciol. 3. hor. subces. 20.
beastly and obscene Idol withal: That was their Sin.

And now may Balak save his Money, and Balaam spare his pains; there is no need
of hiring, or being hired to curse Whoremongers and Idolaters. These are two
plaguey sins, and such as will bring a curse upon a people without the help of a
Conjurer. When that God, who is a Exodus 20. 5.
jealous God, and 8.
jealous of nothing more than his Esa. 42. 8.
honor, shall see that people, whom he and punishment.
had made Deuteronomy. 7. 6.
choice of from among all the nations of the earth to be his own peculiar
people, and betrothed to himself by an everlasting Ezekiel. 16. 8.
covenant, to Ibid. 38.
break the Covenant of Wedlock with him, and to strumpet it with the daughters
and Idols of Moab: what can be expected other, than that his jealousy should
be turned into fury, and that his fierce wrath should Psalm. 106. 29.
break in upon them as a deluge, and overwhelm them with a sudden destruction?
His patience so far tempted, and with such an unworthy provocation, can suffer
no longer; but at his command Number. 25. 4, 5.
Moses strikes the Rulers; and at Moses his command, the under-rulers must
strike each in their several regiments those that had offended, and he himself
also strikes with his own hand, by a Plague, destroying of them in one day 1
Cor. 10. 8, 9. the other thousand ( Number. 25. 9.) it seems, were those that
were hanged up by Moses, and slain by the Rulers.
three and twenty thousand.

If that Plague had lasted many days, Israel had not lasted many days: but the
People, by their plague, made sensible of their sin, humbled themselves (as it
should seem the very first day of the Plague) in a solemn and Number. 25. 6.
general Assembly, weeping and mourning both for Sin and Plague, before the
door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation. And they were now in the heat of
their holy sorrow and devotions; when lo, Ibid. 14.
Zimri, a prince of 9.
Zimri's provocation,
a chief house in one of their Tribes, in the heat of his pride and lust,
comes openly in the Ibid. 6.
face of Moses and all the Congregation, and brings his Minion with him,
Cosbi the daughter of one of the Compare Number. 25. 15. with Number. 31. ^.
five Kings of Midian, into his Tent, there to commit filthiness with her.

Doubtless, Moses the Captain, and Eleazar the Priest, and all Israel, that saw
this shameless prank of that lewd couple, saw it with grief enough. But Phinees
enraged with a pious indignation to see such a foul affront given to God, and
the Magistrate, and the Congregation, at such a heavy time, 10.
and his execution.
and in such open manner, and for that very sin, for which they then lay under
Gods hand, thought there was something more to be done than bare weeping; and
therefore his blood warmed with an holy zeal, he Number. 25. 7, 8.
starteth up forthwith, makes to the Tent where these two great Personages
were, and as they were in the act of their filthiness, speedeth them both at
once, and naileth them to the place with his Javelin. And the next thing we
hear, is, God well-pleased with the Ibid. 11.
zeal of his Servant, and the Execution of those Malefactors, is appeased
toward all his people, and withdraws his hand and his plague from them. And
of that deliverance my Text speaks, ( Then stood up Phinees and executed
judgment, and so the Plague was stayed.)

The Person, the instrument to work this deliverance for Israel, was Phinees.
11.
He was the Son of Eleazar, who was then High Priest in immediate The person of
Phinees considered.
succession to his father Aaron, not long before deceased; and did himself
afterward succeed in the High Priesthood unto Eleazar his Father. A wise, a
godly, and a zealous man, employed afterward by the State of Israel in the
greatest affairs, both of Number. 31. 6.
War and Josh. 23. 13, 31, 32.
Embassy. But it was this Heroical Act of his, in doing execution upon those
two great audacious Offenders, which got him the first, and the greatest, and
the lastingest Renown. Of which Act more anon, when we come to it. In his
Person, we will consider only what his Calling and Condition was; and what
congruity there might be between what he was, and what he did. He was of the
Tribe of Levi; and that whole Tribe was set apart for the Number. 1. 19, etc.
service of the Tabernacle. And he was of the Sons of Aaron, and so (...), of
the Family and Lineage of the Highpriests: and the Priests Office was to offer
Sacrifices, and to burn Incense, and to pray, and make atonement for the
People. Neither Levite nor Priest had to intermeddle with matters of
Judicature, unless in some few causes, and those for the most part concerning
matters either merely, or mixtly Ecclesiastical; but neither to give sentence,
nor to do execution in matters and causes merely Civil, as by any right or
virtue of his Levitical or Priestly Office.

The more unreasonable is the High Priest of Rome, to challenge to himself 12.
any temporal or Civil Jurisdiction, as virtually annexed to his spiritual The
Spiritual power does not include the Temporal.
power, or necessarily derived thence, Templum and Praetorium, the Chair and
the Throne, the Altar and the Bench, the Sheephook and the Scepter, the Keys
and the Sword; though they may sometimes concur upon the same person, yet the
Powers remain perpetually distinct and independent* and such as do not of
necessity infer the one the other. Our Saviors Luke 21. 26.
Vos autem non sic, has fully decided the controversy; and for ever cut off
all claim of temporal Jurisdiction, as by any virtue annexed to the Keys. If
the Bishops of Rome could have contented themselves to have enjoyed those
Temporalities, wherewith the bounty of Christian Emperors had endowed that See
(whether well or ill, whether too much or no, I now inquire not,) but if they
could have been content to have holden them upon the same terms they first had
them, without seeking to change the old tenure; and to have acknowledged them,
as many of their fellow-Bishops do, to have issued not at all by necessary
derivations from their spiritual Power, but merely and altogether from the Nec
in quenquam presbyterum, Episcopum, sive Papam convenit coactivam in hoc seculo
jurisdictionem sibi habere, nisi eadem sibi per humanum legislatorem concessa
fuerit, in cujus potestate est han^ ab ipsis semper revocare. Marsil. Patav. 2.
defens. Pacis. 5.
free and voluntary indult of temporal Princes: the Christian Church had not
had so just cause of complaint against the unsufferable tyrannies and
usurpations of the Papacy; nor had the Christian world been embroyled in so
many unchristian and bloody quarrels, as these and former ages have brought
forth. Yet the Canonists, and they of the Congregation of the O^^tory, like
downright flatterers, give the Pope the Temporal Monarchy of the world,
absolutely and Papa jure divino est direct dominus orbis. Pesant. de immunit.
Eccles p. 45. idem defendunt Baronius, Bossii duo, Zecchus, Carerius, alii.
directly, as adhereing inseparably to his See, and as a branch of that Charter
which Christ gave to Peter, when he made him Head of the Church, for himself
and his successors for ever. The Jesuits more subtle than they, not daring to
deny the Pope any part of that Power, which any other profession of men have
dared to give him, and yet unable to assert such a vast power from those
inconveniences which follow upon the Canonists opinion; have found out a means
to put into the Popes hands the exercise of as much temporal power as they
bluntly and grossly give him, and that to all effects and purposes as full, and
in as ample manner as they: yet by a more learned and refined flattery, as
resulting from his spiritual Power, not directly and per se, but See Bellarm.
5. de Romans Pontif. 6.
obliquely and indirectly and in ordine ad spiritualia. The man himself, though
he pretend to be supreme infallible judge of all Controversies, yet hears
both parties, and takes advantage of what either give him, as best sorteth
with his present occasions, and suffers them to fall foul each upon other,
these accounting them gross flatterers, and they again these Adversus impios
Politicos. Cater. de potest. in titulo libri.
wicked Politicians, but dares not for his life determine whether side is in
the right; lest, if he should be put to make good his determination by
sufficient proof, both should appear to be in the wrong, and he lose all;
which, whilst they quarrel, he still holds. It is a certain thing; The
spiritual Power conferred 13.
in Holy Orders, does not include the Power of Temporal jurisdiction. nor yet
exclude it.
If Phinees here execute judgment upon a Prince of Isarel; it is indeed a good
fruit of his zeal, but no proper act of his Priesthood.

Let it go for a non sequitur then, as it is no better; because Phinees, a
Priest, or Priests son, executes judgment, that therefore the Priestly
includes a Iudicatory Power. Yet from such an act, done by such a Person, at
least thus much will follow, that the Priesthood does not exclude the exercise
of Judicature; and that there is no such repugnancy and inconsistency between
the Temporal and Spiritual Powers, but that they may without incongruity concur
and reside both together in the same Person. When I find anciently, that not
only among the i. e. Regis quidem haec munia esse jussit, primum, ut sacrorum
and sacrificiorum principatum haberet* Dionys. Halicar. lib. 2. See also Cic.
1. de divin. (...), de Aegyptiis Plutarch. lib. de. Is. and Osi.
Heathens, but even among Gods own people, the same man might be a King and a
Priest, Virg. 3. Aeneid.
( Rex idem hominum Phoebique Sacerdos,) as Melchisedec was both a Genesis 14. 17.
Priest of the most high God, and King of Salem: When I see it consented by all
that so long as the Church was Patriarchal, the Priestly and the Iudicatory
Power were both settled upon one and the same Person, the Person of the
Sacerdotium fuit annexum primogeniturae usque ad legem datam per Mosen. Lyran.
in Genesis 14. 18. See also Lyr. in Number. 3. 12. and 8. 16. etc.
first born: when I read of Eli the Priest, of the sons of Aaron 1 Samuel 4. 18.
judging Israel 40 years, and of Samuel, Aug. 17. de clvit. 4. and in Psalm. 98.
Sulpit. Sever. lib. 1. Hist. sacra.
certainly a Levite (though not as some have thought, Lev. Samuel, non
Sacerdos, non Pontifex fuit. Hier. lib. cont. Jovin. v. Drus. not. ad Sulpit.
Hist. p. 154.
a Priest) both going circuit, as a 1 Samuel 7. 16.
Judge itinerant in Israel, and doing execution too with his own hands upon 1 Samuel 15. 33.
Agag; and of 1 Chro. 26. 29, 32.
Chenaniah and his sons, Izharites, and Hashabiah and his brethren Hebronites,
and others of the families of Levi, appointed by King David to be Judges and
Officers, not only in all the business of the Lord, but also for In omni
negotio divino and humano. Vatab. in 1. Parab. 26.
outward business over Israel, and in things that concerned the service of the
King: when I observe in the Church-stories of all ages, ever since the world
had Christian Princes, how Ecclesiastical persons have been employed by their
Sovereigns in their weightiest consultations and affairs of State; I cannot but
wonder at the inconsiderate rashness of some forward ones in these days, who
yet think themselves (and would be thought by others) to be of the wisest men,
that suffer their tongues to run riot against the Prelacy of our Church, and
have studied to approve themselves eloquent in no other argument so much, as in
inveighing against the Courts, and the Power, and the Jurisdiction, and the
Temporalities of Bishops and other Ecclesiastical persons. I speak it not to
justify the abuses of men, but to maintain the lawfulness of the thing. If
therefore any Ecclesiastical person seek any Temporal office or power by
indirect, ambitious, and preposterous courses: if he exercises it otherwise
than well; insolently, cruelly, corruptly, partially; if he claim it by any
other than the right title, the free bounty and grace of the Supreme
Magistrate; let him bear his own burden: I know not any honest Minister that
will plead for him. But since there is no incapacity in a Clergyman, by reason
of his spiritual Calling, but he may exercise temporal Power, if he be called
to it by his Prince, as well as he may enjoy temporal land if he be heir to it
from his Father: I see not but it behooves us all, if we be good Subjects, and
sober Christians, to pray that such as have the power of Judicature more or
less in any kind or degree committed unto them, may exercise that power
wherewith they are entrusted, with zeal, and prudence and equity, rather than
out of envy at the preferment of a Churchman take upon us little less than to
quarrel the discretion of our Sovereign. Phinees though he could not challenge
to execute judgment by virtue of his Priesthood; yet his Priesthood disabled
him not from executing judgment.

That for the person. Follows his Action: and that twofold: He stood, 14.
up, he executed judgment. Of the former first; which though I call it an
Phinees his fact examined;
Action, yet is indeed a Gesture properly, and not an Action. But, being no
necessity to bind me to strict propriety of speech, be it Action, or Gesture,
or what else you will call it; the cicumstance and phrase, it seems to import
some material thing, may not be passed over without some consideration, [ Then
stood up Phinees.] Which clause may denote unto us either that extraordinary
spirit whereby Phinees was moved to do judgment upon those shameless offenders;
or that forwardness of zeal, in the heat whereof he did it; or both. Phinees
was indeed the Highpriests son, as we heard; but yet a private man and no
ordinary Magistrate: and what had any private man to do, to draw the sword of
justice, or but to sentence a malefactor to die? Or, say he had been a
Magistrate; he ought yet to have proceeded in a legal and judicial course, to
have convented the parties, and when they had been convicted in a fair trial
and by sufficient witness, then to have adjudged them according to the Law; and
not to have come suddenly upon them (...), as they were acting their villainy,
and thrust them through uncondemned. I have Sermon. 2. ad Cler. Sect. 30.
elsewhere delivered it as a collection not altogether improbable from the
circumstances of the original story, that Phinees had warrant for this
execution from the express command of Moses the supreme Magistrate, and namely
by virtue of that Proclamation, whereby he authorized the Number. 25. 5.
Under-Rulers to slay every one his man that were joined unto Baal-Peor, Number.
25. 5. And I since find that conjecture confirmed by the judgment of some
learned men: insomuch as an eminent Writer in our Church says, that Hall 7.
Contempl 4.
by virtue of that Commission every Israelite was made a Magistrate for this
execution. But looking more nearly into the Text, and considering that the
Commission Moses there gave, was first only to the Rulers, and so could be no
warrant for Phinees, unless he were such a Ruler, which appears not; and
secondly, concerned only those men that were under their several governments,
and so was too short to reach Zimri, who being himself a Prince, and that of
another Tribe too, the Tribe of Number. 25. 5.
Simeon, could not be under the government of Phinees, who was of the Tribe of
Levi: how probable soever that other collection may be, yet I hold it the safer
resolution which is commonly given by Divines for the justification of this fact
of Phinees, that he had an extraordinary motion, and a peculiar secret instinct
of the spirit of God, powerfully working in him and prompting him to this
Heroical Act.

Certainly, God will not approve that work which himself has not 15.
wrought. But to this action of Phinees God has given large approbation, and
justified;
both by staying the plague thereupon, and by rewarding Phinees with an Number.
25. 12, 13.
everlasting Priesthood therefore, and by giving express testimony of his zeal
and righteousness therein: as it is said in the next verse after my Text, [
Psalm. 106. 31.
And it was accounted to him for righteousness] Which words in the judgment of
learned Expositors, are not to be understood barely of the righteousness of
Faith, as it is said of Abraham, that Genesis 15. 6. applied by St. Paul Romans 4. 3.
he believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness (as if the zeal
of Phinees in this act had been a good evidence of that faith in Gods promises,
whereby he was justified, and his Person accepted with God;) though that also:
but they do withal import the justification of the Action, at least thus far,
that howsoever measured by the common rules of life it might seem an unjust
action; and a rash attempt at the least, if not an heinous murder, as being
done by a private man without the Warrant of authority; yet was it indeed not
only in regard of the intent a zealous action, as done for the honor of God,
but also, for the ground and warrant of it, as done by the special secret
direction of Gods holy Spirit, a just and a righteous action. Possibly, this
very word of standing up, imports that extraordinary spirit. For of those
Worthies, whom God at several times endowed with Heroical spirits, to attempt
some special work for the delivery of his Church, the Scriptures use to speak
in words and phrases much like this. It is often said in the book of Judges,
that God Jud. 3. 9, 15. etc. and 2. 16, 18.
raised up such and such to judge Israel, and that Deborah, and Iair, and
others Jud. 5. 7. and 10. 1, 2, etc.
rose up to defend Israel: that is, Jud. 3. 10.
The spirit of God came upon them, as is said of Othoniel Judge. 3. and by a
secret, but powerful instinct, put them upon those brave and noble attempts,
they undertook and effected for the good of his Church. Raised by the impulsion
of that powerful Spirit, which Nescit tarda molimina Spiritus Sancti gratia.
Ambr. 2. in. Luc. 3.
admits no slow debatements, Phinees stands up, and feeling himself called
not to deliberate, but act; without casting of scruples, or fore-casting of
dangers, or expecting Commission from men when he had his warrant sealed
within, he takes his weapon, dispatching his errand, and leaves the event to
the providence of God.

Let no man now, unless he be able to demonstrate Phinees spirit, presume 16.
to imitate his fact. Those Opera liberi spiritus, as Divines call them, yet
not to be imitated,
as they proceed from an extraordinary spirit, so they were done for special
purposes: but were never intended, either by God that inspired them, or by
those Worthies that did them, for ordinary or general examples. The error is
dangerous, from the privileged examples of some few exempted ones to take
liberty to transgress the common rules of Life and of Laws. It is most true
indeed, the Spirit of God is a free spirit, and not tied to strictness of rule,
nor limited by any bounds of Laws. But yet that free spirit has astricted thee
to a regular course of life* and bounded thee with Laws: which if thou shall
trangress, no pretension of the Spirit can either excuse thee from sin, or
exempt thee from punishment. It is not now every way, as it was before the
coming of Christ, and the sealing up of the Scripture Canon: God having now
settled a perpetual form of government in his Church, and given us a perfect
and constant rule, whereby to walk, even his holy word. And we are not
therefore now vainly to expect, nor boastingly to pretend a private spirit, to
lead us against, or beyond, or but beside the common rule: nay we are commanded
to try all pretensions of private spirits, by that common rule, Esaias 8. 20.
Adlegem and ad testimonium, To the Law and to the Testimony: at this Test,
examine and 1 John 4. 1.
Try the spirits whether they are of God, or no. If any thing within us, if any
thing without us, exalt it self against the obedience of this Rule; it is no
sweet impulsion of the holy Spirit of God, but a strong delusion of the lying
spirit of Satan.

But is not all that is written, written for our Example? or why else is 17.
but with limitation
Phinees act recorded and commended, if it may not be followed? First indeed
Saint Paul says Romans 15. 4.
All that is written, is written for our learning: 1.
but Learning is one thing, and Example is another: and we may learn something
from that which we may not follow. Besides, there are examples 2.
for 1 Cor. 10. 11.
Admonition, as well as for Imitation. Malefactors at the place of execution,
when they wish the bystanders to take example by them, bequeath them not the
Imitation of their courses, what to do; but Admonition from their punishments,
what to shun: yea thirdly, even the commended actions of good men are not ever
exemplary in the very substance 3.
of the action it self; but in some virtuous and gracious affections, that give
life and luster thereunto. And so this act of Phinees is imitable: Not that
either any private man should dare by his example to usurp the Magistrates
office, and to do justice upon Malefactors without a Calling: or that any
Magistrate should dare by his Example, to cut off graceless offenders without a
due judicial course: but that every man who is by virtue of his Calling endued
with lawful authority to execute justice upon transgressors, should set himself
to it with that stoutness and courage and zeal, which was in Phinees. 18.


If you will needs then imitate Phinees, imitate him in that for which 18.
unto his zeal.
he is commended and rewarded by God, and for which he is renowned amongst men:
and that is not barely the action, the thing done; but the affection, the zeal
wherewith it was done. For that zeal God commends him, Numb. 25. verse. 11.
Number. 25. 11.
Phinees the son of Eleazer, the son of Aaron the Priest, has turned away my
wrath from the children of Israel, whilst he was zealous for my sake among
them. And for that zeal God rewards him, Ibid. 13. Ibid. 13.
He shall have, and his seed after him, the Covenant of an everlasting
Pristhood, because he was zealous for his God. And for that zeal did Posterity
praise him: the wise Syrac. 45. 23.
son of Syrac, Eccl. 45. and good old 1 Macc. 2. 54.
Matthias upon his death bed, 1 Macc. 2. And may not this phrase of speech, he
stood up, and executed judgment, very well imply that forwardness and heat of
zeal? To my seeming, it may. For whereas Moses and all the congregation sat
weeping (a As Neh. 1. 4. Job 2. 13. Psalm. 137. 1. Esaias 47. 1, 8.
gesture often accompanying sorrow,) or perhaps, yet more to express their
sorrow lay grovelling upon the earth, mourning and sorrowing for their sin, and
for the Plague: it could not be but the bold lewdness of Zimri in bringing his
strumpet with such impudence before their noses, must needs add much to the
grief, and bring fresh vexation to the souls of all that were righteous among
them. But the rest continued, though with double grief, yet in the same course
of humiliation, and in the same posture of body, as before. Only Phinees,
burning with an holy indignation, thought it was now no time to sit still, and
weep: but rowzing up himself and his spirits with zeal as hot as fire Verbum
ipsum soliditatem mentis ostendit. Cassiodorus. Constanter. Lyranus. Constantia
mentis and audacia operis. Ludolfus hic. He had zeal in the fear of the Lord,
and stood up with good courage of heart. Syrac. 45. 23.
he stood up from the place where he was, and made haste to execute judgment.

Here is a rich example for all you to imitate, whom it does concern: I speak
not only nor indeed so much, to you the Honorable and Reverend Judge of this
Circuit; of whose zeal to do justice and judgment, I am by so much the better
persuaded, by how much the eminency of your place, and the weight of your
charge, and the expectation of the people does with greater importunity Majora
populus semper a summo exigit. Senec. in Octav. Act. 2.
exact it at your hands: But I speak withal, and most especially to all you,
that are in Commission of the peace, and whose daily and continual care it
should be, to see the wholesome laws of the Realm duly and seasonably executed.
Yea, and to all you also that have any office appertaining to justice, or any
business about these Courts, so as it may lie in you to give any kind of
furtherance to the speeding either of Justice in Civil, or of judgment in
Criminal causes. Look upon the zeal of 19.
manifested by executing Judgment;
Phinees: observe what approbation it had from God; what a blessing it procured
to his seed after him; what glorious renown it has won him with all
after-ages; what ease it did, and what good it wrought for the present State:
and think if it be not worthy your imitation. Gal. 4. 18.
It is good, says the Apostle, to be zealously affected always in a good
thing. And is it not a good thing to do justice, and to execute judgment? nay,
Religion excepted (and then care of that is a branch of justice too) do you
know any better thing? any thing you can do, more acceptable to God, more
serviceable to the State, more comfortable to your own souls? If you be called
to the Magistracy; it is 3 King. 9.
your own business, as the proper work of your Calling; and men account him no
wiser than he should be, that sluggeth in his own business, or goes heartlesly
about it. It is the Kings business, who has entrusted you with it: and he is
scarce a good subject that slacketh the Kings business, or does it to the
halves. Nay, it is 2 Chro. 19. 6.
the Lords business; for [ Ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with
you in the cause and in the judgment:] and Jer. 48. 10.
Cursed is he that does the Lords business negligently. That you may therefore
do (all under one) your own business, and the Kings business, and the Lords
business, with that zeal and forwardness which becomes you in so weighty an
affair; lay this pattern before your eyes and hearts! See what Phinees did: and
thereby both examine what hitherto you have done, and learn what henceforth you
should do.

First, Phinees does not post off the matter to others: the fervency of 20.
his zeal made him willing to be himself the Actor. He harbored no 1.
Personally;
such cool thoughts as too many Magistrates do. [Here is a shameful crime
committed, by a shameless person, and in a shameless manner: pity such an
audacious offender should go unpunished. My heart rises against him; and much
ado I have to refrain from being my self his executioner, rather than he should
carry it away thus. But why should I derive the envy of the fact upon my self,
and but gain the imputation of a busy officious fellow, in being more forward
than others? A thousand more saw it as well as I; whom it concerns as nearly
as it does me: and if none of them will stir in it, why should I? Doubtless my
Uncle Moses, and my father Eleazer, and they that are in place of Authority,
will not let it pass so; but will call him to an account for it, and give him
condign punishment. If I should do it, it would be thought but the attempt of a
rash young fellow. It will be better discretion therefore to forbear, and to
give my betters leave to go before me.] Such pretensions as these would have
kept off Phinees from this noble Exploit, if he had been of the temper of some
of ours: who owe it to nothing so much as their lukewarmness, that they have at
least some reputation of being moderate and discreet men. But true zeal is more
forward than mannerly: and will not lose the opportunity of doing what it
ought, for waiting till others begin. Alas, if every man should be so squeamish
as many are; nothing at all would be done. And therefore the good Magistrate
must consider, not what others do, but what both he and they are in conscience
bound to do: and though there should be many more joined with him in the same
common care, and with equal power, yet he must resolve to take that common
affair no otherwise into his special care, than if he were left alone therein,
and the whole burden lay upon his shoulders. As when sundry persons are so
bound in one common bond for the payment of one entire sum conjunctim and
divisim, every one per se in toto and in solidum, that every particular person
by himself is as well liable to the payment of the whole, as they all together
are. Admit loose or idle people (for who can hold their tongues?) shall for thy
diligence say, thou art an hard and austere man, or busiest thy self more than
thou have thank for thy labor. First, that man never cared to do well, 1.
that is afraid to hear ill, Eccles. 11. 4.
He that observes the wind, says Solomon shall not sow; and the words
(especially of idle people) are no better. Secondly, 2.
He makes an ill purchase, that fore-goeth the least part of his duty, to gain
a little popularity: the breath of the people being but a sorry plaster for a
wounded conscience. Thirdly, what a man by strict and severe execution 3.
of Justice loses in the breadth, he commonly gains it all and more in the
weight, and in the length of his Credit. A kind quiet man; that carries it for
the present, and in the voice of the multitude: but it is more solid, and the
more lasting praise, to be reputed, in the opinion of the better and the wiser
sort, a Just man, and a good Patriot, or Commonwealthsman. Fourthly, if all
should condemn thee for that wherein thou have done 4.
but Regium est, cum recte feceris audire male.
well, thy comfort is, thine own conscience shall bestead thee more than a
thousand witnesses, and stand for thee against ten thousand tongues, at that
last day, when 1 Cor. 4. 5.
the hearts of all men shall be made manifest, and every man that has deserved
well, shall have praise of God, and not of man.

Secondly, Phinees as he did not post off this execution to other men, so 21.
he did not put it off to another day. Phinees might have thought thus, 2
Speedily;
[We are now in a religious work, humbling our selves in a public, solemn, and
frequent assembly, before the face of God, to appease his just wrath against us
for our sins: Virgil. Eclog. 9.
Et quod nunc instat agamus. It would be unseasonable leaving this work now;
another time may serve as well to inflict deserved punishment upon that wicked
miscreant. But zeal will admit no Qui tarde fecit, diu noluit. Senec. 1. de
benes. 1.
put offs; it is all upon the spur, till it be doing what it conceives fit to
be done. There are no passions of the mind so impetuous, and so impatient of
delay as Odit verus amor, nec patitur moras. Senec. in Herc. fur. Act. 2.
Love and Dum poen^^ odio per vim festinat inulte. Horat. 1. Ep. 2.
Anger, and Nunc ira amorque causam junxere; quid sequetur? Senec. in Med. act.
4.
these two are the prime ingredients of true zeal. If any man should have
interposed for Zimri, and taken upon him to have mediated with Phinees for his
reprival: I verily think, in that heat he might sooner have provoked his own,
than have prorogued Zimri's execution. Delays in any thing that is good, are
ill: and in the best things worst. As Wax when it is chafed, and Iron when it
is hot, will take impressions: but if the Seal or Stamp be not speedily put to,
the hear abateth, and they return to their former hardness: so the best
affections of the best men, if they be not taken in the heat, abate, and
lessen, and die. In the administration then of Justice, and the execution of
Judgment, where there is Zeal, there will be Expedition: and the best way to
preserve Zeal where it is, is to use Expedition. I am not able to say where the
want is, or where specially: but certainly a great want there is generally in
this Kingdom of Zeal to Justice, in some that should have it, if that complaint
be as just, as it is common among men that have had suits in the Courts, that
they have been Saepe causa^ tantum differunt, quod litigantibus plu^ quam totum
auferunt; quia major est expensarum sumptus quam sententiae fructus. Innocent.
wronged with far less damage than they have been righted: there have been so
many Bern. lib. 1. de consid.
frustratoriae and venatoriae dilationes (as St. Bernard in his time called
them) so many lingering and costly delays used. And for Executing Judgment upon
Malefactors; if Phinees had suffered Zimri to have lived but a day longer, for
any thing we know the plague might have lasted also a day longer: and why might
not to morrow have been as yesterday with them, and lessened the peoples number
twenty three thousand more? especially their former crying sins having received
a new accession of a double guilt, the guilt of Zimri's fact, and the guilt of
their connivance. No rack should make me confess that man to be truly zealous
of judgment, who when he has power to cut him short, shall but so much as
reprieve a foul and notorious Malefactor; or grant him any respite or liberty
to make his friends, and to sue a pardon. Solomon has told us, and we find it
but too true, Eccl. 8. 11.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the
heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.

Third; Phinees was nothing retarded in his resolution by fore-casting 22.
what ill will he might purchase, or into what dangers he might cast 3
Resolutely
himself, by executing judgment upon two such great Personages. The times were
such, as wherein sin had gotten head, and was countenanced both with might and
multitude: Zimri was a mighty man, a Number. 25. 14.
Prince of a chief house; and he that should dare to touch him, should be like
to pull upon himself the enmity of the whole Tribe of Simeon. It seems he was
confident that his might and popularity in his own Tribe, would privilege him
from the enquiry of the Magistrate; how durst he else have so braved Moses, and
the whole Congregation; And the woman also was the daughter of one of the Number.
25. 15. compared with Number. 31. 8.
Five Kings of Midian: And could Phinees think that the death of two such great
persons could go unrevenged? All this either Phinees either fore-casteth not,
or regards not. His eye was so fixed upon the glory of God, that it did not
so much as reflect upon his own safety: and his thoughts strongly possessed
with zeal of the common good, had not any leisure to think of private dangers.
Zeal is Amor timere neminem verus potest. Seneca in Med. Act. 3. (...)
ever courageous; and therefore Iethro thought none worthy to be Magistrates,
but such as were viros virtutis. Exodus 8. 21. Iustum esse facile est cui vacat
pectus metu. Senec. in Oct. Act. 2.
Men of courage: And he has neither Courage nor Zeal in him besitting a
Magistrate, that is afraid to do justice upon a great offender. Prove. 22. 14.
and 26. 13.
The sluggard says, there is a Lion in the way: and then he steppeth backward
and keeps aloof off. But the worthy Magistrate would meet with such a Lion to
choose; that he might win awe to Gods ordinances, and make the way passable for
others, by tearing such a beast in pieces: and would no more fear to make a
Worshipful thief, or a Right Worshipful murderer (if such a one should come in
his Circuit) an example of Justice, than to twitch up a poor sheep-stealer.
Great ones will soon presume of impunity, and mean ones too by their example in
time learn to kick at authority, if Magistrates be not forward to maintain the
dignity of their places by executing good Laws without favor or fear. Hitherto
of the spirit and zeal of Phinees; by occasion of this his former Action or
gesture of standing up: There yet remain to be considered the other Action, and
the success of it; He executed judgment, and the plague was stayed. Both which,
because I would not be long, I will join together in the handling; when I shall
have first a little cleared the translation.

The Hebrew (...) here used, is a word that has three different
significations: 23.
Executing of Judgment
to Judge, to Pray, to Appease. And Interpreters have taken liberty to make
choice of any of the three in translating this place. The Greek renders it
[(...)] and the vulgar Latin, which for the most part follows the
Septuagint, [Placavit:] as if we should read it thus, Then stood up Phinees and
made an atonement, or appeased God. And the thing is true, God himself
testifying of Phinees, Number. 25. that Number. 25. 11.
By being zealous for God he had turned away his wrath, and Ibid. 13.
Made atonement for the Children of Israel. The Chaldee interprets it by
Vetsalle; and the ordinary English translation of the Psalms usually read in
our Churches, accordingly [ Then stood up Phinees, and prayed.] But Hierom, and
Vatablus, and the best translators render it, according to the most proper
signification of the word, and most fully to the story it self, ( Dijudicavit,
he executed judgment.) Verily, prayer is a special means to appease Gods wrath,
and to remove his Plagues; and prayer is as the salt of the Sacrifice,
sanctifying and seasoning every action we undertake: and I doubt not but
Phinees; when he lift up his hand to execute judgment upon Zimri and Cosbi, did
withal lift up his heart to God, to bless that action, and to turn it to good.
In which respects, (especially if the word withal will bear it, as it seems
it will,) some men should have done well not to have shown so much willingness
to quarrel at the Church translations in our Service Book, by being clamorous
against this very place as a gross corruption, and sufficient to justify their
refusal of subscription to the book. But I will not now trouble either you or
my self, with farther curiosity in examining Translations: because howsoever
other Translations, that render it, praying, or appeasing, may be allowed
either as tolerably good or at least, excusably ill; yet this that renders it
by Executing Judgment, is certainly the best, whether we consider the course of
the Story it self, or the propriety of the word in the Original, or the intent
of the Holy Ghost in this Scripture. And this Action of Phinees in doing
judgment upon such a pair of great and bold offenders was so well pleasing unto
God, that his wrath was turned away from Israel, and the plague which had
broken in upon them in a sudden* and fearful manner, was immediately stayed
thereupon.

Oh how acceptable a sacrifice to God, above the blood of Bulls and of 24.
Goa^^^ the death of a Malefactor slaughtered by the hand of Justice! When the
Magistrate, who is (...) the ^^ath often God; a Romans 13* 4.
(...), the Minister and Priest of God for thi^ very thinge^ puts his knife
to the throat of the beast, and with the ^ire of ^^^ holy zeal for GOD, and
against sin, offers him up in Holoca^stum, for a Whole burnt Offering, and
for a Peace Offering, unto the Lord. Samuel says, that 1 Samuel 15. 22.
to obey is better than Sacrifice: and Solomon; that Prove. 21. 3.
to do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice.
Obedience, that is the prime, and the best sacrifice: and the second best is
the punishment of Disobedience. There is no readier way to appease Gods wrath
against sin, than is the rooting out of sinners: nor can his deputies by any
other course turn away his just judgments so effectually, as by faithful
executing of Justice and Judgment themselves.

When Phinees did this act, the public body of Israel was in a weak state, 25.
and stayed the Plague.
and stood in need of a present and sharp remedy. In some former distempers of
the State, it may be they had found some ease by diet, in Psalm. 35. 13.
humbling their souls by fasting; or by an issue at the Tongue or Eye, in an
humble confession of their sins, and in weeping and mourning for them with
tears of repentance. And they did well now to make trial of those Remedies
again, wherein they had found so much help in former times: especially the
Remedies being proper for the Malady, and such as often may do good, but never
can do harm. But alas, fasting, and weeping, and mourning, before the door of
the Tabernacle of the Congregation, had not strength enough against those more
prevalent Corruptions, wherewith the State of Israel was then pestered. This
Phinees saw; who well perceived, that (as in a dangerous Pleurisy the party
cannot live unless he bleed; so) if there were any good to be done upon Israel
in this their little less than desperate estate, a Vein must be opened, and
some of the rank Blood let out for the preservation of the rest of the Body.
This course therefore he tries: and languishing Israel finds present ease in
it. As soon as the Blood ran, instantly the Grief ceased: he executed Judgment,
and the Plague was stayed.

As God brought upon that people for their sins a fearful destruction; so 26.
he has in his just wrath sent his destroying Angel against us for ours. The
England's Plague
sins that brought that Plague upon them were, Whoredom and Idolatry. I cannot
say the very same sins have caused ours. For although the execution of good
Laws against both Incontinent and Idolatrous persons, has been of late years,
and yet is (we all know) to say no more, slack enough: yet, (God's holy Name be
blessed for it) neither Idolatry nor Whoredom are at that height of shameless
impudency and impunity among us, that they dare brave our Moseses, and outface
whole Congregations, as it was in Israel. But still this is sure no Plague but
for sin: nor National Plagues but for National sins. So that albeit none of us
may dare to take upon us to be so far of God's Counsel, as to say for what very
sins most this plague is sent amongst us: yet none of us can be ignorant, but
that, besides those secret personal Corruptions which are in every one of us,
and whereunto every man's own heart is privy, there are many public and
National sins, whereof the people of this Land are generally guilty, abundantly
sufficient to justify GOD in his dealings toward us, and to Psalm. 51. 4.
clear him when he is judged. Our wretched unthankfulness unto GOD for the long
continuance of his Gospel, and our Peace: our Carnal Confidence and security in
the strength of our wooden and watery Walls: our Riot and Excess (the noted
proper sin of this Nation) and much intemperate Abuse of the good Creatures of
GOD in our Meats, and Drinks, and Disports, and other provisions and comforts
of this life: our incompassion to our brethren miserably wasted with War and
Famine in other parts of the World: our heavy Oppression of our Brethren at
home, in racking the rents, and cracking the backs, and Esaias 3. 15.
Grinding the faces of the poor: our cheap and irreverent regard unto Gods holy
Ordinances of his Word, and Sacraments, and Sabbaths, and Ministers: our
Wantonness, and Toyishness of understanding, in corrupting the simplicity of
our Christian Faith, and troubling the peace of the Church with a thousand
niceties, and novelties, and unnecessary wranglings in matters of Religion: and
(to reckon no more) that universal Corruption which is in those which (because
they should be such) we call the Courts of Justice, by sale of Offices,
enhaunoing of Fees, devising new subtilties both for Delay and Evasion,
trucking for Expedition, making Traps of petty poenal Statutes, and but Cobwebs
of the most weighty and material Laws. I doubt not but by the mercy of God,
many of his servants in this Land are free from some, and some from all of
these common Crimes in some good measure: but, I fear me, not the best of us
all, not a man of us all, but are guilty of all, or some of them, at least thus
far, that we have not mourned for the Corruptions of the Times so feelingly,
nor endeavored the reformation of them to our power so faithfully, as we might
and ought to have done.

By these and other sins we have provoked God's heavy judgment against 27.
to be stayed by adding to our humiliations.
us, and the Plague is grievously broken in upon us: and now it would be good
for us to know, by what means we might best appease his wrath, and stay this
Plague. Public Humiliations have ever been thought, and so they are, Proper
Remedies against Public Judgments: Joel 2. 12, 15, etc. and Number. 25. 6.
To turn unto the Lord our God with all our heart, and with Fasting, and with
Weeping, and with Mourning, to sanctify a Fast, and call a solemn Assembly,
and gather the People and Elders together; and weep before the door of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation; and to let the Priests the Ministers of the
Lord weep between the Porch and the Altar, and to pray the Lord to spare his
people, and not be angry with them for ever. Never did people thus humble
themselves with true, lowly and obedient hearts, who found not Comfort by it in
the mean time, and in the end benefit. And blessed be God who has put it into
the heart of our Moses, with the consent of the Elders of our Israel, by his
Royal Example first, and then by his Proclamation for a weekly fast, with a
form of divine Service, and other directions; published 1625.
Royal Command, to lay upon us a double necessity of this so religious and
profitable a course.

But as our Savior told the young man in the Gospel, who said, he had kept the
whole Law, Mark 10. 21.
Unum tibi deest, One thing is wanting: so when 28.
we have done our best and utmost, fasted, and wept, and prayed as constantly,
and frequently, and fervently, as we can; unless you the Magistrates and
Officers of Justice be good unto us, one thing will be wanting still; One main
Ingredient of singular Virtue, without which the whole Receipt besides, as
precious and sovereign as it is, may be taken, and yet fail the Cure. And that
is, the severe and fearless, and impartial Execution of Judgment. Till we see a
care in the Gods on Earth faithfully to Execute theirs; our hopes can be but
faint, that the God of Heaven will in mercy remove his judgments. If God send a
2 Samuel 21. 1, etc.
Famine into the Land; let holy David do what he can otherwise, it will
continue year after year: so long as judgment is not done upon the bloody house
of Saul, for his cruelty in slaying the Gibeonites, God will not be Ibid. ver.
14.
entreated for the land. One known Achan, that has got a wedge of gold by
sacrilege or injustice, if suffered, is able to Josh. 7. 25, 26.
trouble a whole Israel: and the Lord will I will not be with you any more,
except you destroy the accursed from among you, v. 12.
not turn from the fierceness of his Anger, till he have deserved judgment done
upon him. If Number. 25. 3, 4.
Israel have joined himself unto Baal-Peor, so as the Anger of the Lord be
kindled against them; he will not be appeased by any means, until Moses take
the heads of the people, and hang them up before the Lord against the Sun. If
the Land be defiled with blood, it is in vain to think of any other course,
when God himself has pronounced it impossible that the Land should be Number. 35.
33.
purged from the blood that is shed in it, otherwise than by the blood of him
that shed it.

Up then with the zeal of Phinees, up for the love of God and of his 29.
people, all you that are in place of authority. Gird your Swords upon your
thigh, and with your Iavelins in your hand, pursue the Idolater, and the
Adulterer, and the Murderer, and the Oppressor, and every known Offender into
his Tent, and nail him to the Earth, that he never rise again to do more
mischief. Let it appear what (...). Lypsias apud Stob. Sermon. 44.
love you bear to the State, by your hatred to them: and show your pity to us,
by showing none to them. The destroying Angel of God attends upon you for his
dispatch: if you would but set in stoutly, he would soon be gone. Why should
either sloth or fear, or any partial or corrupt respect whatsoever, make you
cruel to the good in sparing the bad? or why should you suffer your selves, for
want of courage and zeal to execute Judgment, to lose either the Opportunity,
or the Glory, of being the instruments to appease Gods wrath, and to stay his
plagues?

But, for that matters appertaining to Justice and Judgment, must pass 30.
with particular applications to
through many hands before they come to yours, and there may be so much
juggling used in conveying them from hand to hand, that they may be represented
unto you many times in much different forms from what they were in truth and at
the first: That your care and zeal to execute Justice and Judgment faithfully
according to your knowledge, may not through the fault and miscarriage of other
men, fail of the blessed end and success that Phinees found; I desire that
every of them also, as well as you would receive the word of Exhortation, each
in his place and office to set himself uprightly and unpartially, as in the
sight of God, to advance to the utmost of his power the due course and
administration of Justice. And for this purpose, by occasion of this Scripture,
which points us to the End of these Assemblies; I shall crave leave to
reflect upon another, which gives us sundry particular directions conducing to
that End. And it is that Scripture whereinto we made some entrance the last
Assizes, and would have now proceeded farther, had not the heavy hand of God
upon us in this his grievous Visitation led me rather to make choice of this
Text, as the more seasonable. That other is written in Exodus 23. the Three
first Verses. [ Thou shall not raise a false report: put not thine hand with
the wicked to be an unrighteous witness. Thou shall not follow a multitude to
do evil: neither shall thou speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest
judgment. Neither shall thou countenance a poor man in his cause.] Wherein were
noted five special Rules, shared out among five sorts of persons; the Accuser,
the Witness, the Iurer, the Pleader, the Officer. I will but give each of them
some brief intimation of their duty, from their several proper rules; and
conclude.

If thou come hither then as a Plaintiff, or other Party in a civil cause, 31.
or to give voluntary Information upon a Statute, or to prosecute against a the
Accuser;
Malefactor, or any way in the nature of an Accuser: Let neither the hope of
Gain, or of any other advantage to thy self: not secret malice or envy against
thine adversary, nor thy desire to give satisfaction to any third party, sway
thee beyond the bounds of Truth and Equity, no not a little, either to devise
an untruth against thy neighbor of thine own head, or by an hard construction
to deprave the harmless actions or speeches of others, or to make them worse
than they are by unjust aggravations; or to take advantage of letters and
syllables to entrap innocence without a fault. When thou art to open thy mouth
against thy brother, set the first Rule of that Text as a watch before the door
of thy lips, Thou shall not raise a false report.

If thou come hither, secondly, to be used as a Witness; perhaps See Cic. pro
Flac. although Turneb. 13. ad v. 14. interprets the Proverb otherwise; Graecd
fide, id est optima.
Graeca 32.
the Witness;
fide, like a downright Knight of the Post, that makes of an -- quibus
jusjurandum jocus est, testimonium ludus; laus merces, gratia gratulatio
proposita est -- Cic. pro Flac.
Oath a jest, and a pastime of a Deposition; or dealt withal by a bribe, or
suborned by thy Landlord, or great Neighbor, or egged on with thine own spleen
or malice, to swear and forswear as they shall prompt thee; or to ( s)
enterchange deposition with thy friend, as they use to do in Greece, Hodie
mihi, cras tibi, (Swear thou for me to day, I Will swear for thee to morrow;) or
tempted with any corrupt respect whatsoever, by thy Word or Oath to strengthen
a false and unrighteous report. When thou come to lay thy hand upon the book,
lay the second Rule in that Text to thy heart, Put not thy hand with the wicked
to be an unrighteous witness. Though hand join in Prove. 19. 5. and 9.
hand, The false witness shall not be unpunished.

If thou come hither, thirdly, to serve for the King upon the Grand Inquest,
f (...). dictum solenne Graecorum.
or between party and party, in any cause whatsoever (like those -- deinde
Pratores urbani qui jurati debent optimum quemque in selectos judices refer.
Cic. pro Cluent. Unum ex selectis judicibus objiciebat. Horat. 1. Sermon. sat. 4.
selecti judices among the Romans, whom the Praetor for the year being, was to
nominate, and that upon Oath, out of the most able and serviceable men in his
judgment, both for Estate, Understanding and Integrity;) or to serve upon the
Tales, perhaps at thine own suit to get something toward 33.
bearing charges for thy journey; or yoked with a crafty or a wilful foreman
the Iurer;
that is made beforehand, and a mess of tame after*men withal that dare not
think of being wiser than their Leader; or unwilling to stickle against a Major
part, whether they go right or wrong; or resolved already upon the Verdict, no
matter what the Evidence be: Consider what is the weight and religion of an
Oath. Remember that he sins not less that sins with company. Whatsoever
the rest do, resolve thou to do no otherwise than as God shall put into thy
heart, and as the Evidence shall lead thee. The third Rule in that Text must be
thy rule, Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil. They are silly, that in
point either of Religion or Justice, would teach us to measure either Truth, or
Right by multitudes.

If thou come hither, fourthly, as to thine Harvest, to reap some fruit 34.
of thy long and expenceful study in the Laws, to assist thy Client and his the
Pleader;
Cause with thy Counsel, Learning and Eloquence: think not, because thou
speak for thy Fee, that therefore thy tongue is not thine own, but thou must
speak what thy Client will have thee speak, be it true or false; neither think,
because thou have the liberty of the Court, and perhaps the favor of the Judge,
that therefore thy tongue is thine own, and thou may speak thy pleasure to
the prejudice of the Adversaries, person or cause: Seek not preposterously to
win the name of a Good Lawyer, by wresting and perverting good Laws: or the
opinion of the best Counselor, by giving the worst and the shrewdest Counsel.
Count it not as Protagoras did, the glory of thy profession, by subtilty of
wit, and volubility of tongue to (...) A. Gel. 5. Noct. At. 5.
make the worse cause the better: but like a Vir bonus dicendi peritus. Cicero.
Good Man, as well as Good Orator, use the power of thy tongue and wit to shame
impudence, and protect innocence, to crush oppressors, and succor the
afflicted, to advance Justice and Equity, and to help them to right that suffer
wrong. Let it be as a Ruled case to thee in all thy pleadings, not to speak in
any cause to wrest judgment.

If lastly, thou art in any place or office of service, or trust, or command,
35.
or attendance about the Courts: rejoice not as if it were now in thy the
Officer,
power to do a friend a courtesy, or a foe a spite. Do not show a cast of thy
Office, for the promise or hope of a reward, in helping a great Offender out of
the Briars. Compel not men that have been long weather-beaten in the Main, and
are now arrived at the Haven of their business, to weather for their Passports,
until they have offered some sacrifice to that great Diana, Expedition. Let no
fear, or hope, or bribe, or letter, or envy or favor, no not charity it self
and compassion to the poverty or distressedness of any, make you partial for
the person, to disregard the Cause. If you would be charitable to the poor,
give them from your own; but do not carve them from another's Trencher. To
relieve a poor man in his wants, is the proper Office of Charity; but Justice
must have no eyes to see, nor bowels to yern at the wants of any man. Be he
rich or poor that brings his cause hither; Currat Lex, Let him find such as
he brings; Let him have as his cause deserves. The last of those Rules must
be thine. Thou shall not countenance, no not a poor man in his cause.

If any of these to whom I have now spoken, Accusers, Witnesses, Iurers, 36.
Pleaders, Officers, shall transgress these Rules, to the perverting of
Justice: and the Judge.
our refuge must be next under God to you that are the Magistrates of Justice,
and sit upon the Bench of Judicature. At your gravity and authority we must
take sanctuary, against them that pursue us wrongfully, as at the horns of the
Altar. It is your Duty, (or if it be, as to most men it is, a more pleasing
thing, to be remembered of their Power than of their Duty) it is in your power,
if not to reform all the abuses and corruptions of these persons; yet to curb
their open insolences, and to contain them at least within modest bounds. Nay;
since I have begun to magnify your power; let me speak it with all the due
reverence to God and the King, there is no power so great, over which (in a
qualified sense) you have not a greater power. It is in your power to Psalm. 75.
2, 3.
bear up the pillars of the State when the land is even dissolved, and the
pillars thereof grown weak: for that is done by judging the Congregation
according to right, Psalm. 75. In yours; to make this yet flourishing Country
and Kingdom glorious or despicable: for Prove. 14. 34.
Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to any people, Prove.
14. In yours; to settle the Throne upon the King, and to entail it by a kind of
perpetuity unto the right heir for many succeeding generations: for Prove. 16.
12.
The Throne is established by justice, Prove. 16. In yours; to discharge Gods
punishing Angel, who now destroys us with a grievous destruction, and by
unsheathing your Sword to make him sheath his: as here in my Text, Phinees
stood up, and executed judgment, and the plague ceased. In yours; though you be
but Gods on Earth, and in these Courts, mortal, and petty Gods, yet to send
prohibitions into the Court of Heaven, and there to stop the judgments of the
great and Eternal God before they come forth; yea, and when the Decree is gone
forth, to stay Execution. In a word, as it was said to Jeremy, but in another
sense, you are Jer. 1. 10.
Set over Nations, and over Kingdoms, to root out, and to destroy, to build and
to plant. Only then be entreated to use that power God has given you, unto
edification, and not unto destruction. And now I have done my message. God
grant unto all of us, that by our hearty sorrow and repentance for our sins
past, by our steadfast resolutions of future amendment, and by setting our
selves faithfully and uprightly in our several places and callings to do God
and the King, and our Country service, in beating down sin, and rooting out
sinners; we may by his good grace and mercy obtain pardon of our sins, and
deliverance from his wrath, and be preserved by his power through faith unto
salvation. Now to God the Father, the Son, etc.

AD POPULUM.
The First Sermon.
At Grantham Linc. October. 3. 1620.
3 KINGS 21. 29. See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me? because he
humbles himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days: but in his
sons days will I bring the evil upon his house.
THE History of this whole Chapter affords matter of 1.
The Coherence.
much Variety and Use: but no passage in it so much either of Wonder or
Comfort, as this in the close of the whole both Story and Chapter: That there
should be Mighty ones sick, with longing after their meaner Neighbors
Vineyards; That there should be crafty heads to contrive for Greedy Great Ones
what they unjustly desire; That there should be officious instruments to do a
piece of legal injustice, upon a great man's letter; That there should be
Knights of the Post to depose any thing though never so false, in any cause
though never so bad, against any man though never so innocent; That an honest
man cannot be secure of his life, so long as he has any thing else Sic reus
ille fere est, de quo victoria lucro Esse potest -- Ovid. de nuce.
worth the losing: There is instance in the forepart of the Chapter, of all
this, in Ver. 4. hic.
Ahab sickning, and Ver. 11.
Iezebel plotting, and the Ver. 13.
Elders obeying, and the Ver. 13.
Witnesses accusing, and poor Ver. 13.
Naboth suffering. But what is there in all this, singularly either Strange or
Comfortable? All is but Oppression: Active in the rest; Passive in Naboth. And
what wonder in either of these? Juven. Satyr. 13.
-- stupet haec, qui jam post terga reliquit Sexaginta annos? himself may pass
for a wonder, if he be of any standing, or experience in the world, that takes
either of these for a wonder. And as for matter of Comfort: there is matter
indeed, but of Detestation in the one, of Pity in the other, in neither of
Comfort.

To pass by the other Occurrents also in the latter part of the Chapter, as 2.
That a great Oppressor should hug himself in the cleanly carriage and
fortunate Argument,
success of his damned Plots and witty Villainies; That a weak Prophet should
have heart and face enough to proclaim judgment against an Oppressing King in
the prime of his Jollity; That a bloody Tyrant should tremble at the voice of a
poor Prophet; and the rest (some of which we shall have occasion to take in
incidentally in our passage along:) mark we well but this close of the Chapter
in the words of my Text; And it will be hard to say, whether it can contain
matter more Strange, or more Comfortable.

Comfortable: in that Gods mercy is so exceedingly magnified, and such strong
assurance given to the truly penitent, of finding gracious Acceptance at the
hands of their God, when they find him so apprehensive of but an outward
enforced semblance of Contrition from the hands of an Hypocrite. Strange: in
that Gods mercy is here magnified, even to the hazard of other his divine
perfections; his Holiness, his Truth, his Justice. For each of these is made in
some sort questionable, that so his Mercy might stand clear and unquestioned. 1.
A rotten hearted Hypocrite humbles himself outwardly, but repents not
truly: and God accepts him, and rewards him. Here is Gods mercy; in giving
respect to one that ill deserved it: but where is his Holiness the while,
(being Hab. 1. 13.
a God of pure Eyes, that requires Psalm. 51. 6.
Truth in the inward parts, and will not behold iniquity:) thus to grace sin,
and countenance Hypocrisy? A fearful judgment is denounced against Ahab's 2.
house for his Oppression; but upon his humiliation, the sentence, (at least,
part of it) is reversed. Here is Mercy still, in revoking a sentence of
destruction: and if somewhat may be said for his Holiness too, because it was
but a temporal and temporary favor; yet where is his Truth the while, (being a
Tit. 1. 2.
God that cannot lie, and James 1. 17.
With whom is no variableness, neither so much as the bare shadow of turning)
thus to say and unsay, and to alter the thing that 3.
is gone out of his lips? A Judgment is deserved by the Father: upon his
humiliation, the execution is suspended during his life, and lights upon the
Son. Here is yet more mercy; in not striking the Guilty: and if somewhat may be
said for Gods Truth too, because what was threatened (though not presently) is
yet 4 Kin. 10. 10.
at last performed; yet, Where is his Justice the while, (being a 1 Pet. 1. 17.
God that without respect of persons renders to every man according to his own
works, and will Exodus 34. 7.
Not acquit the guilty, neither condemn the innocent;) thus to sever the Guilt
and the Punishment, and to lay the Judgment which he spares from the Father
upon the Son, from the more wicked Father upon the less wicked Son.

Thus God, to magnify the riches of his Mercy, is content to put his Holiness,
and his Truth, and his Justice to a kind of venture. That so his 3.
and Division of the Text.
afflicted ones might know, on what Object especially to fasten the Eyes of
their souls, not on his Holiness, not on his Truth, not on his Justice: not
only, nor chiefly on these, but on his Mercy. He seeks more general glory in,
and would have us take more special knowledge of, and affords us more
singular comfort from his Mercy, than any of the rest: as if he desired we
should esteem him unholy, or untrue, or unjust, or any thing, rather than
unmerciful. Yet is he neither unholy, nor untrue, nor unjust, in any of his
proceedings with the sons of men; but Psalm. 145. 17.
righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works, and true in all his
words. And in this particular of his proceedings with King Ahab at this time, I
hope by his blessed assistance, so to acquit his Holiness, and Truth, and
Justice, from all sinister imputations, as that he may be, not only magnified
in his mercy, but justified also in the rest, and Psalm. 51. 4.
clear when he is judged; as we shall be thereunto occasioned now, and
hereafter in the handling of this Scripture, wherein are three main things
considerable. First, the Ground, or rather 1.
the Occasion of God's dealing so favorably with Ahab, namely, Ahab's
humiliation; [Seest thou how Ahab humbles himself before me? because he
humbles himself before me, I will not, etc.] Secondly, the great Favor 2.
showed to Ahab thereupon, namely, the suspension of a Judgment denounced; [ I
will not bring the evil in his days.] Thirdly, the Limitation 3.
of that Favor, it is but a Suspension for a time, no utter removal of the
Judgment; [ But in his Son's days will I bring the evil upon his house.]
Wherein we shall be occasioned to enquire how the first of these may stand with
God's Holiness; the second, with his Truth; the third, with his Justice. And
first, of Ahab's Humiliation* See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me?

This Ahab was King of Israel, that is, King over those ten Tribes which 4.
revolted from Rehoboam the Son of Solomon, and clave to Jeroboam the Ahab's
person considered,
Son of Nebat. Search the whole sacred story in the books of Kings and
Chronicles; and (unless we will be so very charitable, as notwithstanding many
strong presumptions of his See 4 King. 10. 31.
Hypocrisy, to exempt Iehu the Son of Nimshi, and that is but one of twenty)*
we shall not find in the whole List and Catalogue of the Kings of Israel one
good one, that clave unto the Lord with an upright heart. Twenty Kings of
Israel, and not one, (or but one) good: and yet than this Ahab, of the twenty,
scarce one worse. It is said in the sixteenth Chapter of this Book, that 3
King. 16. 30.
Ahab the son of Omri did evil in the sight of the Lord, above all that were
before him; at verse 30. and at verse 33. that Ibid. 33.
he did more to provoke the Lord God of Israel to anger, than all the Kings of
Israel that were before him: and at verse 25. of this Chapter, Ver. 25. hic.
That there was none like unto Ahab, which did sell himself to work wickedness
in the sight of the Lord. An Oppressor he was, and a Murderer, and an
Idolater, and a Persecutor of that holy Truth, which God had plentifully
revealed by his Prophets, and powerfully confirmed by Miracles, and mercifully
declared by many gracious deliverances (even to him) in such manner, as that he
could not but know it to be the Truth; and therefore an Hypocrite, and in all
likelihood, an obstinate Sinner against the Holy Ghost, and a Castaway.

This is Ahab: this the man: but what is his carriage? what does he? 5.
he humbles himself before the Lord. [ See thou how Ahab humbles himself
and his carriage: with the Observations thence.
before me?] The manner and occasion of his humbling, is set down a little
before, at verse 27. And it came to pass when Ahab heard those words, (the
words of Ver. 20, 24. hic.
Elijah the Prophet, dealing plainly and roundly with him for his hateful
Oppression and Murder) that he rent his clothes, and put Sackcloth upon his
flesh, and fasted, and lay in Sackcloth, and went softly. And that is the
humbling here spoken and allowed of; and for which God here promises, that he
will not bring the evil in his days. Lay all this together; the man and his ill
conditions, and his present carriage, with the occasion and success of it: and
it offers three notable things to our consideration. See first, how far an
Hypocrite, a Castaway, may go in the 1.
outward performance of holy duties, and particularly in the Practice of
Repentance: here is Ahab humbled: such a man, and yet so penitent. See again,
secondly, how deep God's Word, though in the mouth but of 2.
weak Instruments, when he is pleased to give strength unto it, pierces into
the Consciences of obstinate sinners, and brings the proudest of them upon
their knees in despite of their hearts; here is Ahab quelled by Elijah; such a
great one, by such a weak one. See yet again, thirdly, how prone 3.
God is to mercy, and how ready to apprehend any advantage (as it were) and
occasion to show compassion: here is Ahab humbled, and his Judgment adjourned;
such a real substantial favor, and yet upon such an empty shadow of
Repentance. Of these three at this time in their order; and of the first,
first. 6.


An Hypocrite may go very far in the outward performances of holy duties.
Observat. 1.
For the right conceiving of which assertion; Note, first, that I speak not How
far an Hypocrite may go in the performance of holy duties;
now of the common Graces of Illumination and Edification, and good dexterity
for the practicing of some particular Calling; which Gifts, with sundry other
like, are oftentimes found even in such apparently wicked and profane men, as
have not so much as 2 Timothy 3. 5.
the form (much less the power) 1.
of Godliness: but I speak even of those Graces, which de tota specie (if they
be true and sincere) are the undoubted blessed fruits of God's holy renewing
Spirit of Sanctification; such as are, Repentance, Faith, Hope, Joy, Humility,
Patience, Temperance, Meekness, Zeal, Reformation, etc. in such as these
Hypocrites may go very far, as to the outward semblance and performance. Note,
secondly, that I speak not of the inward power and reality 2.
of these Graces; for Cast-aways and Hypocrites, not having union with God by a
lively Faith in his Son, nor communion with him by the effectual working of his
Spirit, have no part nor fellowship in these things, which are proper to the
chosen and called of God, and peculiar to those that are his Tit. 2. 14.
peculiar people; but I speak only of the outward performances, and exercises
of such actions, as may seem to flow from such spiritual Graces habitually
rooted in the heart; when as yet they may spring also (and when they are found
in unregenerate men, do so spring) from Nature, perhaps moralized, or otherwise
restrained, but yet unrenewed by saving and sanctifying Grace. Note, thirdly,
that when I say an Hypocrite may go 3.
very far in such outward performances; by the Hypocrite is meant not only the
gross or formal Hypocrite, but every natural and unregenerate man, (including
also the Elect of God before their effectual calling and conversion) as also
Reprobates and Cast-aways, for the whole time of their lives: all of which may
have such fair semblances of the forenamed Graces, and of other like them, as
not only others (who are to judge the best by the Law of Charity) but
themselves also, through the wretched deceitfulness of their own wicked and
corrupt hearts, may mistake for those very Graces they resemble.

The Parable of the seed sown in the stony ground, may serve for a full 7.
with the Application.
both declaration and proof hereof, which seed is said to have sprouted forth
immediately, Matthew. 13. 5.
springing up forthwith after it was sown, but yet never came to good, but
speedily withered away; because for want of deepness of earth it had not Luke
8. 6.
moisture enough to feed it to any perfection of growth and ripeness. And that
branch of the Parable our blessed Savior himself in his Exposition applies to
such hearers; as Matthew. 13. 20.
when they hear the Word, immediately receive it with gladness; and who so
forward as they, to Mark 4. 16.
repent, and believe, and reform their lives? but yet all that forwardness
comes to nothing, they endure but for a short time, Matthew. 13. 21. and Mark 4.
17.
because they have no root in themselves, but want the sap and moisture of
Grace to give life and lasting to those beginnings and imperfect offers and
essays of goodness they made show of. Here are good*affections (to see to) unto
the good word of God, they receive it with joy; it works not only upon their
judgments, but it seems also to rejoice, yea, after a sort, to ravish their
hearts, so as they feel a kind of tickling Pleasure and Delight in it; which
the Apostle calls Heb. 6. 4, 5.
tasting of the heavenly gift, and the good Word of God, and the powers of the
World to come, Heb. 6. And as they receive the seed joyfully, so it appears
quickly, it springe^h up anon in the likeness of Repentance, and Faith, and
Obedience, and newness of life. They may be touched with a deep feeling of
their sins, and with heavy hearts, and many tears, confess and bewail them; and
not only promise, but also purpose amendment. They may be superficially
affected with, and find some overly comfort and refreshing, from the
contemplation of those gracious promises of mercy, and reconciliation, and
salvation, which are contained in the glorious Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ;
and have some degrees of persuasion that those promises are true, and some
flashes of confidence withal, of their own personal interest therein. They may
reform themselves in the general course of their lives in sundry particulars,
refraining from some gross disorders, and avoiding the occasions of them,
wherein they have formerly lived and delighted, and practicing many outward
Duties of Piety and Charity, conformable to the letter of the Laws of both
Tables, and misliking and opposing against the common errors or corruptions of
the times and places wherein they live; and all this to their own and others
thinking, with as great zeal unto godliness, and as thorough indignation
against sin, as any others. All this they may do, and yet all the while be
rotten at the Heart; wholly carnal and unrenewed; quite empty of sound Faith,
and Repentance, and Obedience, and every good Grace, full of damnable Pride,
and Hypocrisy; and in the present state of Damnation, and in the purpose of
God, Reprobates and Cast-aways. 8.


Examples hereof we have in 1 Samuel 8. 9.
Readiness care for the destroying of Witches, and proof thereof.
in 4 Kin. 10. 16, 28.
Iehu's zeal in killing Baal's Priests, in Mar. 6. 10.
Herod's hearing of John Baptist gladly, and doing many things thereafter; and,
to omit others, in this wicked King Ahab's present fit of Repentance and
Humiliation. At all which, and sundry other like effects, we shall the less
need to marvel, if we shall seriously consider the Causes and Reasons thereof.
I will name but a few of many, and but name them neither. First, Great is the
force of Natural Conscience, even in the 1.
most wicked men; especially when it is awakened by the hand of God in any
heavy Affliction, or by the voice of God threatening it with vengeance.

It pursues the guilty soul with continual and restless clamours, and he sees
that something he must needs do, if he knew what, to stop the mouth of
Conscience, and so he falls a repenting and reforming, and resolving of a new
Course, which though it be not sincere, and so cannot work a perfect Cure upon
a wounded Conscience, but that still it rankleth inward; yet it gives some
present ease, and allayeth the anguish of it for the time. Secondly, God will
have the Power of his 2.
own Ordinance sometimes manifested, even upon those that hate it; as he got
himself Exodus 14. 4.
honor upon Pharaoh and the Egyptians, that his own faithful ones may see and
admire the Power of that holy Seed, whereby they are begotten again from the
dead, not doubting but that the Gospel will prove Romans 1. 16.
the power of God unto Salvation to all that believe, when they behold in it
the power of conviction upon many that believe not. Thirdly, God in his most
wise and unsearchable providence so orders 3.
and disposes not only outward things, but even the Hearts, and Wills, and
Thoughts, and Actions of Men, permitting his children to to fall backwards into
sins, and bringing on his Enemies toward goodness so far as he thinks good:
as for other purposes, so for this end also among the rest, that man might not
be able, See Eccl. 9. 1.
from those things he sees happen unto other men, or done by them, to judge
infallibly of the state of his brothers soul. God reserving this Royalty unto
himself, to be the only Jer. 11. 20. and 17. 10.
Searcher of the hearts and reins of others. For these and sundry other
Reasons, it comes to pass that Hypocrites, and Castaways do oftentimes go so
far as they do in the outward performances of holy duties. Now if men may go
thus far, and yet be in the state of Damnation, 9.
what hope then ( first) of Heaven, for such profane ungodly wretches,
Inferences thence, 1. Of Terror against Profaneness.
as are so far from having 2 Timothy 3. 5.
the power, as that they have not so much as the least show of godliness? what
will become of those that Psalm. 1. 1.
sit them down in the chair of Scorners, and despise the good Word of God, and
make a Scoff of those men that desire to square their lives by that rule; when
some of them that Mar. 6. 20.
hear it gladly, and Matthew. 13. 20.
receive it with joy, and are content to be ordered by it in many things, shall
yet go to Hell? Certainly, Ahab and Herod, and such cursed miscreants, shall
rise up in judgment against these men, and condemn them; and they shall have
Matthew. 24. 51.
their portion with Hypocrites, shall I say? Alas, woeful is their case, if
their portion fall but there! let them take heed lest their portion be not so
good as the Hypocrites, and that it be not ten times easier for Ahab and Herod,
and the whole crew of such Hypocrites, at the day of Judgment, than for them.

Secondly, what a stark shame would it be for us, who have received the 10.
Romans 8. 13.
first fruits of the spirit, not to bring forth the Gal..5. 22.
fruits of the spirit in 2. Of Exhortation to abound in the fruits of godliness.
some good abundance, in the frequent, and comfortable, and actual exercises of
those habitual graces that are in us, of Faith, Repentance, Love, Reformation,
Zeal, and the rest: seeing the counterfeits of these Graces are oftentimes so
eminent, even in Hypocrites and Cast-aways? Shall a piece of rotten wood, or a
Glowworm shine so bright in the dark, and our holy Lamps, fed with Oil from
Heaven, burn so dim? Nay, Matthew. 5. 16.
let our lights also, as well as theirs, shine before men; yea, and outshine
theirs too, that men may see our truly good works, as well as their seeming
ones, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven. Although all be not Gold that
glistereth, yet pity it is that true Gold should gather rust, and lose the
luster for want of using; when Brass and Copper, and baser metals are kept
bright with scowring. Let not blear-eyed Leah have cause to rejoice against
beautiful Rachel, or to insult over her barrenness; neither let us who profess
our selves to be Matthew. ^ 1. 19.
Wisdom's Children, suffer our selves to be out-stript by Nature's Brats, in
justifying our Mother; rather let their splendida peccata provoke us to a godly
jealousy and emulation, and spur us up to the quickening of those Graces God
has given us, that the power of godliness in us, may be at least as fruitful
in all outward performances, as the show of it is in them. 11.


Thirdly, This should teach us caution in our judging of other men's Estates. 3.
Of Admonition to forbear judging.
We are apt to offend both ways: If we see a man overtaken with some gross
scandalous sin, as Drunkenness, Adultery, Oppression, or Perjury; but
especially if he live long therein, by and by he is a Reprobate with us; or at
least he is not yet in the state of Grace. Thus we speak, thus we judge, but we
consider not the whilst, how far, and how long, God, in his holy wisdom, may
suffer foul temptations to prevail against his chosen ones. On the other side,
if we see a man forward in the Duties of Religion, charitably affected to the
Poor, just and upright in his dealings with men, stoutly opposing against
common corruptions, suffering for the Profession of the Truth; by and by he is
a Saint with us; and we stick not sometimes in our Folly, to wish that our
Souls might speed as that man's Soul, at a venture. But we consider not the
whilst, how far the force of natural Conscience, and common moral Grace (if you
will allow me to speak so improperly) may lead a man on-ward unto all outward
performances, who was yet never effectually called, nor truly sanctified: And
yet, busy Fools that we are, we cannot keep our selves in our own bounds, but
we must be meddling with God's Prerogative, and thrusting our selves in his
Chair, and be judging of our Brethren, whose hearts we are so far from knowing,
as that we are scarce well acquainted with our own. But what have we to do
either with one or other? what lawful Commission have we at all to judge? or
what certain Evidence have we whereby to judge? Infallible Signs we cannot have
from any outward things, either of the want, or of the having of Grace, in
other men; yet of the two, far more pregnant probabilities of the want, than of
the having of Grace; because there may be such an open course held in evil
things, as we may justly doubt whether such a course can stand with Grace, or
no: whereas there cannot be any course held in good things, outwardly, but such
as may stand with Hypocrisy. What are we then to do? even this, to use the
Judgment of Probability, hoping with cheerfulness, that there is Grace, where
we see comfortable signs of it; and to use the Judgment of Charity, still 1
Cor. 13. 7.
hoping the best (though not without some Jude 23.
fear) that there may be Grace, where we see fearful signs of the want of it.
But for the Judgment of Infallibility either pro or con, what sinful man dares
challenge that unto himself, unless it be that 2 These. 2. 3.
man of sin, who has nestled himself higher than into Peter's Chair, into the
Throne of God, sitting in the Temple of God, and there determining as God, and
with his breath Damning and Sainting whom he lists? But let him go, and let
this be our direction in this point: Think we comfortably, where we see no
reason to the contrary; hope we charitably, even where we do see some reason to
the contrary: but judge we neither way peremptorily and definitively,
whatsoever Probabilities we see either way, since we know not how far a
sanctified believer may fall into the snares of sin, nor how far a graceless
Hypocrite may go in the show of Godliness. That is the third Use.

The last and main Inference is for Self-trial. For if a man may go thus 12.
far, and yet be an Hypocrite, be a Castaway; it will concern every one 4. Of
Direction for the trial of sincerity.
of us, as we desire to have comfortable, both assurance of present Grace, that
we are not Hypocrites, and hope of future Glory, that we are not Cast-aways; so
to be district in making Trial, whether those Graces that seem to be in us, be
true, or but counterfeit; and whether the Acts thereof be fruits of sincerity,
or but of Hypocrisy. Let us not therefore flatter our selves, or be too jolly
upon it, if we find in our selves some shows of Godliness, but let us rather
labor to find out, whether there be in us the power and life of godliness, or
no. For there is a kind of righteousness, such as it is, outward formal
righteousness in Scribes, and Pharisees, and Hypocrites; but that will not
serve the turn, Matthew. 5. 20.
unless our Righteousness exceed theirs, we shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Beloved, Hypocrisy is spun of a fine thread, and is not
easily discernable, without very diligent examination. And things are not to be
measured by the outward show, or by the lump and bulk, but by an exacter rule,
whether they be true, or no. Do thou hear the Word of God with Joy? do thou
bewail thy sins with tears? do thou avoid gross sins with care? do thou
oppose against common corruptions with zeal? These are indeed comfortable
signs,-but no infallible Evidences of Grace; for what is there in all this,
which Ahab, and Saul, and Herod, and Judas, and other Hypocrites, either have
not, or might not have done? But, if not by these fruits, by what other means
then may a man come to know the sanctification of his heart, and the sincerity
of these affections? Divines in their Treatises and Writings have set down
sundry notes and marks whereby to make this trial; but I would especially
commend to your observation two only out of all that variety, which two are
indeed as good as a thousand, namely, Integrity and Constancy; for these two
are never in the Hypocrite.

First, for Integrity. The Hypocrite (we heard) might go far in hearing, 13.
by the Marks, 1. of integrity.
in believing, in sorrowing, in reforming, in suffering; but his affections
herein, (for so much as they spring not from true Faith, and the Conscience of
that Obedience he owes to God, but from other respects) are partial in all
those Duties, and carry him so far only as those false grounds, which first
gave motion to those affections, lead him, and no farther. He receives the
Word with joy, so far as it tickleth the ear with choiceness of Phrase, and
variety of Elocution; so far as it fitteth with his humor, and keeps fair
and far off from meddling with his bosom sin; but he is not equally delighted
with every part, and with every point of God's Word and truth. If the right
string be touched, if his sweet darling Sin be stirred, that is harsh to him,
he finds no music in that; rub him where he is galled, and he kicketh at it:
Mark 6. 20. 17. 27.
Herod heard John Baptist gladly, and did many things willingly, but when his
incestuous marriage was meddled withal, then the Luke 13. 32.
Fox was uncased, and the Hyppocrite appeared in his own colors, and the
Baptist lost first his liberty, and then after his head for his labor. And the
young man, when Christ told him what he must do to inherit eternal life in the
genera^l, [ Matthew. 19. 17, 20.
Keep the Commandments, etc.] was no doubt, a jolly jocund man [ All these have
I kept from my youth up:] but when Christ hitteth him home, and presses upon
his particular Corruption, [ Ibid. ver. 21.
one thing is wanting, etc.] this nipped him in the head, and struck cold to
his heart; and (the Text says) Ibid. 22.
he went away sorrowful. And ever mark it, in some thing or other the Hypocrite
bewrays himself what he is; if not to the observation of others, yet at least
sufficiently for the conviction of his own heart, if he would not be wanting to
himself in the due search and trial of his heart. A man's blood rises when he
hears a stranger swear an Oath, but if the same man can hear his Prentice
lie, equivocate and cozen, and never move at it, let him not be too brag of his
zeal; his coldness here discovers the other to have been but a false fire,
and a fruit not of true zeal, but of Hypocrisy. A Jesuit makes scruple of
disclosing an intended treason, revealed to him in Confession; but he makes no
bones of laying a Powder Plot, or contriving the Murder of an anointed King. A
Pharisee is very precise in Matthew. 23. 23.
tything Mint, and Cummin, but balketh Justice and Mercy. One straineth at a
Ibid. 24.
Gnat, and swalloweth a Camel; making conscience of some petty sins, neglecting
greater: Another casts out a beam, but feels not a mote; makes conscience
of some greater sins, neglects smaller. Shame of the world, and the cry of
people makes him forbear some sins; an eye had to his own private and secret
ends, other some; fear of temporal punishment, or (it may be) eternal, other
some; hope of some advantage another way, as in his credit, profit, etc. other
some; the terrors of an affrighted Conscience, other some: but if in the mean
time there be no care, nor scruple, nor forbearance of other sins, where there
appears no hindrance from these, or the like respects, all is naught, all is
but counterfeit and damnable Hypocrisy. The rule never fails, Op. imperfect.
in Matthew. hom. 45.
Quicquid propter Deum fit, aequaliter fit, True obedience, as it disputes not
the command, but obeys cheerfully; so neither does it divide the command, but
obeys equally. David had wanted one main assurance of the uprightness of his
heart, if he had not had an equal and universal Psalm. 119. 6.
respect to all God's Commandments. That is the first note of Sincerity,
Integrity.

The other is Constancy, continuance, or lasting. The seeming Graces of 14.
Hypocrites may be as forward, and impetuous for the time, as the true 2. Of
Constancy.
Graces of the sincere Believer, nay, more forward oftentimes; as in the Matt.
13. 5, 6.
stony ground, the seed sprang up so much the sooner, by how much it had the
less depth of earth. But the very same cause that made it put up so soon, made
it wither again as soon, even because it wanted deepness of earth. So the
Hypocrite, when the fit takes him, he is all on the spur; there is no way with
him, but a new man he will become out of hand, yea that he will; Persius.
Momento turbinis. But he sets on too violently to hold out long: this
reformation ripeneth too fast to be right spiritual fruit. As an Horse that is
good at hand, but naught at length, so is the Hypocrite; free and fiery for a
spurt, but he jadeth and tireth in a journey: but true Grace all to the
contrary; as it ripeneth for the most part by leisure, so it ever Qualitatis
verae tenor permanet, falsa non durant. Senec. Epist. 120.
lasts longer: as Philosophers say of Habits, that as they are gotten hardly,
so they are not lost easily. We heard but now, that the Faith, Repentance,
Reformation, Obedience, Joy Sorrow, Zeal, and other the graces and affections
of Hypocrites, had their first motion and issue from false and erroneous
grounds; as Shame, Fear, Hope, and such respects. And it thence comes to pass,
that where these respects cease, which gave them motion, the graces themselves
can no more stand, than a House can stand, when the foundation is taken from
under it. The Boy that goes to his Book, no longer than his Master holds the
rod over him; the Masters back once turned, away goes the Book, and he to
play: and right so is it with the Hypocrite. Take away the rod from Pharaoh,
and he will be old Pharaoh still. And Ahab, here in this Chapter, thus humbled
before God at the voice of his Prophet; this fit once past, we see in the next
Chapter regards neither God nor Prophet, but through unbelief, 3 King. 22. 27.
disobeyeth God, and imprisoneth the Prophet. Now then, here is a wide
difference between the Hypocrite and the godly man: The one does all by fits,
and by starts, and by sudden motions and flashes; whereas the other goes on
fairly and soberly in a settled constant regular course of humiliation and
obedience. In Catog. c. de qualit.
Aristotle has excellently taught us to distinguish between Colors that arise
from passion and complexion: The one, he says, is scarce worth the name of a
Quality or Color, because it scarce gives denomination to the subject wherein
it is. If Socrates be of a pale, or of an high-colored complexion, to the
question, [ Qualis est Socrates? What a like man is Socrates?] it may be fitly
answered (says Aristotle) that he is a pale man, or that he is a high-colored
man. But when a man of another Complexion is yet pale for fear, or anger, or
red with blushing; we do not use to say, neither can we say properly, that he
is a pale man, or a high-colored man. Accordingly we are to pronounce of those
good things that sometimes appear in Hypocrites. We call them indeed Graces,
and we do well, (because they seem to be such, and because we, in Charity, are
to hope that they be such as they seem*) but they are in true Judgment nothing
less than true Graces; neither should they indeed (if we were able to discern
the falseness of them give denomination to those Hypocrites in whom they are
found. For why should a man from a sudden and short fit of Repentance, or Zeal,
or Charity, or Religion, be called a Penitent, or a Zealous, or a Charitable,
or a Religious Man, more than a man for once or twice blushing, an
high-colored man? Then are Graces true, when they are habitual and constant,
and equal to themselves. That is the second Note; Constancy.

I will not trouble you with other Notes, besides these. Do but lay 15.
Both joined together for Trial.
these two together, and they will make a perfect good Rule for us to judge our
own hearts by, and to make trial of the sincerity of those good things that
seem to be in us. Measure them not by the present heat, (for that may be as
much, perhaps more, in an Hypocrite, than in a true Believer;) but by their
Integrity and Constancy. A man of a cold Complexion has as much heat in a
sharp fit of an Ague, as he that is of a hot Constitution, and in health, and
more too; his Blood is more enflamed, and he burns more. But whether do you
think is the more kindly heat, that which comes from the violence of a Fever,
or that which arises from the condition of a man's Temper? No man makes doubt
of it, but this is the more kindly, though that may be more sensible and
intense. Well then, a man finds himself hot in his Body, and fain he would
know, whether it be calor praeter naturam, or no; whether a kindly and natural
heat, or else the Forerunner or Symptom of some Disease. There is no better
way to come to that knowledge, than by these two Notes; Universality, and
Constancy. First for Universality; Physicians say of Heat and Sweat, and such
like things, Universalia salutaria, partialia ex morbo. If a man be hot in one
part, and, cold in another, as if the Palms of his Hands burn, and the Soles of
his Feet be cold, then all is not right; but if he be of an indifferent equal
heat all over, that is held a good sign of Health. Then for Constancy and
Lasting; if the Heat come by fits and starts, and Paroxysms, leaping eftsoons
and suddenly out of one extreme into another, so as the party one while gloweth
as hot as fire, another while is chill and cold as Ice, and keeps not at any
certain stay, that is an ill sign too; and it is to be feared there is an Ague
either bred, or in breeding; but if he continue at some reasonable certainty,
and within a good mediocrity of Heat and Cold, it is thought a good sign of
Health. As men judge of the state of their Bodies, by the like rule judge thou
of the state of thy Soul. First, for Integrity and Universality; is thy
Repentance, thy Obedience, thy Zeal, thy Hatred of sin, other Graces in thee
Universal? equally bent upon all good, equally set against all evil things? it
is a good sign of Grace and Sanctification in the heart: But if thou repentest
of one sin, and persistest in another; if thou obeyest one Commandment, and
breakest another; if thou art zealous in one Point, and cool in another; if
thou hate, one Vice, and love another; flatter not thy self too much; thou
have reason to suspect all is not sound within. Then for Continuance and
Lasting: I deny not, but in case of prevailing Temptations, the Godly may have
sometimes uncomfortable and fearful Intermissions in the practice of godliness;
which yet make him not altogether Graceless: as a man may have sometimes little
distempers in his body, through mis-dyet or otherwise, and yet not be
heart-sick; or greater distempers too sometimes to make him sick, and yet be
heart whole. But yet, if for the most part, and in the ordinary constant course
of thy life, thou have the practice of repentance and obedience, other fruits
of grace in some good and comfortable measure; it is a good sign of grace and
sanctification in the heart. But if thou have these things only by fits and
starts, and sudden moods: and art sometimes violently hot upon them, and other
sometimes again, and oftener key cold; presume not too much upon shows, but
suspect thy self still of hypocrisy and insincerity; and never cease by
repentance and prayer, and the constant exercises of other good graces, to
physic and diet thy soul, till thou have by Gods goodness put thy self into
some reasonable assurance that thou art the true child of God; a sincere
believer, and not an hypocrite; as Ahab here, notwithstanding all this his
solemn humiliation, was. Here is Ahab an Hypocrite; and yet humbled before the
Lord.

But yet now this humiliation, such as it was, what should work it in 16
him? That we find declared at verse. 27. [ And it came to pass, that when The
opening of the second Observation.
Ahab heard these words, etc.] There came to him a message from God, by the
hand of Eliah; and that was it that humbled him. Alas, what was Eliah to Ahab?
a silly plain Prophet to a mighty King? that he durst thus presume to rush
boldly and unsent-for into the presence of such a potent Monarch, who had no
less power, and withal more color, to take away his life, than Naboth's? and
that when he was in the top of his jollity, solacing himself in the new-taken
possession of his new-gotten Vineyard; and there to his face charge him
plainly with, and shake him up roundly for, and denounce Gods judgments
powerfully against his bloody abominable oppressions? We would think, a Monarch
nusled up in Idolatry, and accustomed to blood, and hardened in Sin and
Obstinacy, should not have brooked that insolency from such a one as Eliah was,
but have made his life a ransom for his sawciness. And yet behold, the words of
this underling in comparison, how they fall like thunder upon the great guilty
Offender, and strike palsy into his knees, and trembling into his joints, and
tumble him from the height of his jollity, and roll him in sackcloth and ashes,
and cast him into a strong fit of legal humiliation. See thou how Ahab is
humbled before me?

And here now comes in our second Observation: even, the power of Gods 17.
Observat. II. the power of Gods word.
Word over the Consciences of obstinate sinners; powerful to 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.
Cast down strong holds, and every high thought that exalts it self against
God. That which in Heb. 4. (if I mistake not the true understanding of that
place) is spoken of the Essential word of God, the second person in the ever
blessed Trinity; is also in an analogy true of the revealed Word of God, the
Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles; that it is Heb. 4. 12.
Quick and powerful, and (...).
more cutting than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder
of the soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow. Jer. 23. 29.
Is not my word like as a fire, says the Lord? and like a hammer, that
breaks the rock in pieces? Jer. 23. Like a soft fire; to dissolve and melt
the hearts of relenting sinners, and true Converts: but like a strong hammer;
to batter and break in pieces the rocky and flinty consciences of obstinate and
hardened offenders. Examples hereof if you require, behold, in the stories of
the Kings 1 Samuel 15. 24.
Saul whining when Samuel reproves him; in the books of the Prophets, Jon. 3.
5.
Ninevites drooping, when Jonas threatens them; in the Acts of the Acts 24. 25.
Apostles, Felix trembling, when Paul discourses before him; in the
Martyrologies of the Church Tyrants and bloody Persecutors maskered at the bold
consessions of the poor suffering Christians; in this Chapter, proud Ahab
mourning when Eliah tells him his sin, and foretells him his punishment. 18.


Effects, which might justly seem strange to us; if the Causes were not with
the causes thereof, 1. in the Instrument;
apparent. One cause, and the Principal is in the instrument, the Word: not
from any such strength in it self, for so it is but a dead letter; but because
of Gods Ordinance in it. For in his hand are the hearts and the tongues and the
ears both of Kings and Prophets: and he can easily, when he sees it good, put
the spirit of Zeal and of Power into the heart of the poorest Prophet, and as
easily the spirit of fear and of terror into the heart of the greatest King.
He chooses weak Instruments (as here Eliah) and yet furnishes them with
power, to effect great matters: that so the glory might not rest upon the
instrument, but redound wholly to him, as to the chief agent that imployeth it,
2 Cor. 4. 7.
We have this treasure in earthen Veslels, says St. Paul, that the excellency
of the power may be of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4. We say, words are but
wind; and indeed the words of the best Minister are no better, as they are
breathed out and uttered by sinful mortal man, whose breath is in his nostrils:
but yet this wind, as it is breathed in, and inspired by the powerful eternal
Spirit of God, is strong enough (by his effectual working with it) not only to
shake the top branches, but to rend up the very bottom-root of the tallest
Cedar in Lebanon. Psalm. 29. 4, 5.
Vox Domini confringens Cedros, Psalm. 29. [ The voice of the Lord is mighty in
operation; the voice of the Lord is a glorious voice: The voice of the Lord
breaks the Cedars; yea the Lord breaks the Cedars of Lebanon.]

Another Cause is in the Object; and that is the force of Natural Conscience:
19.
which the most presumptuous sinner can never so stifle, though he endeavor 2.
in the Object;
all he can to do it, but that it will be sometimes snubbing, and stinging, and
lashing, and vexing him with ugly representations of his past sins, and
terrible suggestions of future vengeance. And then of all other times is the
force of it most lively, when the voice of God in his Word awakeneth it after a
long dead sleep. Then it rises, and Sampson-like rouseth up it self, and
bestirreth it self lustily, as a Giant refreshed with Wine: and it puts the
disquieted patient to such unsufferable pain, that he runs up and down like
a distracted man, and does he knows not what, and seeks for ease he knows
not where. Then he would give all Dives his wealth for Luke 16. 24.
A drop of Water to cool the heat he feels; and with Genesis 25. 30, 31.
Esau part with his birthright for any thing, though it were never so little
mean that would give him but the least present refreshing, and preserve him
from fainting. Then sackcloth and ashes, and fasting, and weeping, and
mourning, and renting the garments, and tearing the hair, and knocking the
breast, and outcries to heaven, and all those other things, which he could not
abide to hear of in the time of his former security, whilst his conscience lay
fast asleep, and at rest, are now in all haste greedily entertained, and all
too little: if by any means they can possibly give any ease or asswagement to
the present torment he feels in his soul.

A third Cause is oftentimes in the Application of the Instrument to the
Object. 20.
3. in the fit application of the one to the other.
For although Gods Word in the general be Powerful, and the Conscience of it
self be of a stirring Nature: yet then ordinarily does the word of God work
most powerfully upon the Consciences of obstinate sinners, when it is thoroughly
and closely applied to some special corruption, whereunto the party cannot
plead Not guilty; when the sin and the judgment are both so driven home, that
the guilty offender can neither avoid the evidence of the one, nor the fear of
the other. A plain instance whereof we have in this present history of King
Ahab. When Eliah first came to him in the Vineyard, he was pert enough, [ Ver.
20. hic*
Have thou fond me O mine Enemy?] But by that the Prophet had done with him;
told him of the sin, which was notorious, [ Verse. 19.
Have thou killed and taken possession?] foretold him of the judgment, which
was heavy, [ Verse. 21, etc.
I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy Posterity, etc.] the man
was not the man: Eliah left him in far other tune than he found him in. The
Prophets words wrought sore upon him, and his Conscience wrought sore within
him; both together, wrought him to the humiliation we now speak of: [ It came
to pass when he heard these words, that he rent his clothes, etc.] If you
desire another Instance, turn to Acts 24. 25. where there is a right good one,
and full to this purpose. There we read that Felix the Roman Deputy in Jury
Acts 24. 25*
trembled, when Paul reasoned of justice and of temperance, and of the judgment
to come. What was that thing may we think in St. Paul's reasoning which
especially made Felix to tremble? It is commonly taken to be the Doctrine of
the last judgment: which is indeed a terrible doctrine, and able (if it be
thoroughly apprehended) to make the stoutest of the sons of men to tremble. But
I take it, that is not all. The very thing that made Felix tremble, seems
rather to be, that Paul's discourse fell upon those special vices, wherein he
was notably faulty, and then clapped in close with judgment upon them. For Felix
was noted of much cruelty and injustice in the administration of the affairs of
Jury (howsoever Tertullus, like a smooth Orator, to curry favor with him, and
to do Paul a displeasure, did flatteringly Acts 24. ^, etc.
commend his government:) and he was noted also of incontinency, both
otherwise, and especially in marrying Drusilla, who was another man's wife.
Tacitus speaking of him in the fifth of his History painteth him out thus.
Taeit. hist. lib.
Per omnem and libidinem, jus regium servili ingenio exercuit. And for such a
man as governed with cruelty and rapine, and lived in unchaste wedlock, to hear
one reason powerfully of Justice, and of Chastity, (for so much the word (...)
there used, properly imports) and of Judgment: it is no wonder if it make him
tremble.

Do thou consider this, and tremble, whosoever thou art, that in thy 21
thoughts despisest the holy word of God; accounting of it but as of some An
inference against those that despise the word
humane invention to keep fools in awe withal: and thou also, whosoever thou
art that undervaluest this precious treasure, for the meanness or other
infirmities of the 2 Cor. 4. 7.
earthen vessel wherein it is conveyed. Tell me, do thou not herein struggle
against the testimony and evidence of thine own heart? Does not thine own
Conscience and Experience tell thee, that this Ephesians. 6. 17.
Sword of the Spirit has a keen edge, and biteth and pierces where it goes?
Has it not sometimes galled and rubbed, and lanced, end cut thee to the very
bone; and entered even to the dividing asunder of the joints, and of the marrow?
Has it not sometimes (as it were) by subtle and serpentine insinuations
strangly wound it self through those many crooked and Labyrinthian turnings
that are in thine heart, into the very inmost corner and center thereof; and
there ripped up thy bowels and thy reins, and raked out the filth and
corruption that lurked within thee, and set thy secretest thoughts in order
before thy face, in such sort as that thou have been stricken with astonishment
and horror at the discovery? Though perhaps it have not yet softened and melted
thy stony and obdurate heart; yet did thou never perceive it hammering about
it with sore strokes and knocks, as if it would break and shiver it into a
thousand pieces? Doubtless thou have; and if thou would deny it, thy
conscience is able to give thy tongue the lie, and to convince thee to thy
face. And if thou have, why then do thou not readily acknowledge the voice of
God in it; having felt in it that lively power and efficacy, which it is not
possible any device of the wit of man should have? Take heed then how thou do
traduce, or despise, or but undervalue that, upon any seeming pretense
whatsoever, for which thou have such a strong witness in thine own heart, from
the experience of the unresisted power of it, that it is indeed the word of
God, and not the breath of sinful man. Felix trembled at it, Ahab was humbled
by it; the one an Atheist, the other an Hypocrite: thou art worse than either
Atheist or Hypocrite, if it work not at least as much upon thee. See thou how
Ahab humbles himself at the voice of the Prophet?

From Ahab's Humiliation, and the Occasion thereof; pass we now to consider, 22.
in the last place, the Success of it. Ahab is humbled at the Prophets The
success of Ahab's humiliation,
denouncing of judgment against him; and God hence takes occasion to be so
gracious to Ahab, as (though not wholly to remove, yet) to suspend and adjourn
the judgment for a time. ( See thou how Ahab is humbled before me? because he
humbles himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days, etc.) And
here must Gods Holiness be brought unto a trial before the Bar of carnal
reason, if by any means it can justify it self. God hates the works of
Hypocrites; he loatheth even Osee 6. 6.
sacrifices without mercy; his Esa. 19. 16.
soul cannot away with the Oblations and new Moons, and solemn Feasts of men
that have their hands full of blood; no not though they make many Prayers, and
tender them with behavior of greatest devotion, stretching out their hands
toward heaven, and Psalm. 35. 13.
afflicting their souls with fasting, and hanging down their Esa. 58. 5.
heads as Bulrushes, with pensiveness: but even their best sacrifices, and
confessions, and Prayers, and humiliations are an Prove. 15. 8.
abomination unto him; so far from appeasing his wrath against other sins, as
that they provoke his yet farther displeasure against themselves. Such is the
Holiness of our God; and such the purity of his nature; with which holiness and
purity how can it stand to accept and reward (as here he seems to do) the
counterfeit humiliation of such a wretched Hypocrite as now we suppose Ahab to
be.

For the clearing of this difficulty; First, let it be granted (which I take 23.
to be a certain truth, and for any thing I know never gainsaid by any) and
how it may consist with the holiness of God.
that Ahab, not only before, and after, but even in the act and at the instant
of this humiliation, was an hypocrite. Let it be granted secondly, (which 1.
is the thing urged in the doubt) that this humiliation of his, being performed
2.
but in hypocrisy, was not acceptable to God, as a good work, but abominable
before him as a foul sin. But yet withal it must be granted thirdly, that,
although Ahab did not well in not being humbled with an 3.
upright heart: yet he had done much worse, if he had not been humbled at all.
And that therefore there was, though no true spiritual goodness, yet some
outward moral goodness in Ahab's humiliation; at least so far forth, as a thing
less evil may in comparison of a worse thing be termed good. And then are we to
know fourthly, that it may stand with Gods holiness, 4.
as it does with his goodness and justice, to reward outward good things with
outward good things; and moral and temporary graces with worldly and temporal
blessings: as here he rewards Ahab's temporary and external humiliation, with
an outward temporal favor, viz. the adjourning 24.
of an outward temporal judgment. Observat. III. Concerning the reward of
common graces;


That which hence we would observe, is, That God rewards sometimes common
graces with common favors, temporary obedience with temporal beneficence. This
is proved unto us first, from the general course 1.
of Gods justice; and his promise grounded upon that justice, to reward every
man according to his works. To which justice of his, and to which promise of
his it is agreeable, as to recompense Spiritual good things, with Eternal, so
to recompense Quibus non erat Deus daturus vitam aeternam, si neque hanc eis
terrenam gloriam concederet, non redderetur merces bonis artibus eorum, id est,
virtutibus, quibus -- Aug. 5. de Civ. 15.
Moral good thing with Temporal rewards. 2. From special express warrant of
Scripture. In Matthew. 6. Christ says of Hypocrites more than once, that Mat. 6.
2, 5, 10.
they have their reward. As in the doing of their seeming good works, they aim
especially at the vain praise and commendation of men: so they have the full
reward of those works in the vain praise and commendation of men. Though they
have no right unto, nor reason to look for a reward hereafter in heaven: yet
they have their reward (such as it is, and all they are like to have) here upon
earth. 3. From particular examples of such as have been temporally rewarded for
temporal graces. To omit Intelligimus etiam Ethnicos, si quid boni fecerint,
non absque mercede Dei judicio praeteriri. Hieron. in Ezekiel. 29. God even among
the Heathens, has often rewarded moral honesty with outward happiness. W. Ral.
hist. of the world, lib. 2. c. 8. sect. 3.
Heathens, as Aristides, Cyrus, etc. 2.
for Justice; Bias, Diogenes, etc. for contempt of the world; Codrus, Regulus,
etc. for love of their Country, and zeal to the common good; and sundry others,
for other good things: whose moral virtues are herein amply 3.
rewarded, (if there were nothing else but this) that their names and memories
have been preserved in Histories, and renowned throughout the world in all
succeeding generations. I say, to omit these Heathens, we have examples in
Scripture; of Ahab here, 4 Kings 10, 30. Quid ei profuit, quod pro non. nulla
obedi^ntia, quam de domo Achab omnino delenda cupiditate suae dominationis
exhibuit, aliquantam mercedem transitoribus regni temporalis accepit? Aug.
contra mend. c. 2.
Iehu of the Jon. 3. 10.
Ninevites, of others elsewhere: who for their temporary obedience, zeal,
repentance, and the like, were rewarded: partly by temporal blessings upon
themselves and their posterity, partly by the removal or adjournal of temporal
punishments, which otherwise had speedily overtaken them. Fourthly, from the
greater to the less. God sometimes temporally rewards the services of such
men, as are but bruta instrumenta, brute instruments of his will and
providence: such as are employed by him for the bringing about of his most holy
and secret purposes, Citra rationem finis, aut eorum quae ad finem, in the
doing of such things as they do without the least mixture (in their own purpose
and intent) of any respect at all to God or his ends, but merely for the
satisfying of their own corrupt lusts, and the atchieving of their own private
ends. A notable example whereof we have, in Gods dealing with Nebuchadnezzar in
Ezekiel. 29, where the word of the Lord comes to Ezekiel, saying, Ezekiel. 29. 18,
19, 20.
Son of man, Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon caused his Army to serve a great
service against Tyrus: every head was made bald, and every shoulder was peeled:
yet had he no wages, nor his Army for Tyrus, for the service that he had served
against it; Therefore thus says the Lord God; behold, I will give the land of
Egypt to Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon: and he shall take her multitude, and
it shall be wages for his Army. I have given him the land of Egypt, for his
labor wherewith he served against Tyrus; beccause they wrought for me, says
the Lord God. In which place we see Egypt is given to Nebuchadnezzar, as a
reward for the service he did against Tyrus; because therein (though he neither
intended any such thing, nor so much as knew it) yet he was the instrument to
work Gods purpose upon, and against 4.
Tyrus. And then how much more will God reward temporally the service and
obedience of such, as purposely and knowingly endeavor an outward conformity
unto the holy will and pleasure of God, though with strong and predominant
mixture of their own corrupt appetites and ends therewith?

Now the Reasons, why God should thus outwardly reward the outward works of
Hypocrites, are: First, the manifestation of his own Goodness, that 25.
With sundry reasons thereof*
we might know how willing he is to cherish the least spark of any goodness in
any man; be it natural or moral, or whatever other goodness it be: 1.
that he might thereby encourage us, so to labor the improvement of those good
things in us, as to make our selves capable of greater rewards. Secondly, his
Justice and equity, in measuring unto sinners and hypocrites exactly according
to the measure they mete unto him. They serve him with 2.
graces, which are not true graces indeed; he rewards them with blessings,
which are not indeed true blessings. Somewhat they must do to God; and
therefore they afford him a little temporary obedience, and there is all the
service he shall have from them: Somewhat God will do for them, and in requital
allows them a little temporary favor, and there is all the reward they must
look for from him. Here is Quid pro Quo. They give God the outward work, but
without any hearty affection to him. God gives them the outward benefit, but
without any hearty affection to them. For want of which hearty affection on
both sides, it comes to pass, that neither is the outward work truly
acceptable to him, nor the outward benefit truly profitable to them. A third
reason of Gods thus graciously dealing even with 3.
Hypocrites, may be assigned, with reference to his own dear Children and
chosen; for whose good especially (next under his own glory) all the passages
of his divine providence both upon them and others are disposed in such sort as
they are: as for whose comfort this manner of proceeding makes very much and
sundry ways; as I shall by and by touch in the Inferences from this
Observation; whereunto I now come, because it is time I should draw toward a
Conclusion.

And first; by what has been already said, a way is opened for the 26.
and inferences thence,
clearing of God holiness in these his proceedings. If sometimes he temporally
reward Hypocrites; is it not either for their own, or for their works sake 1.
as if he either accepted their Persons, or approved their Obedience. No, it is
but Lex talionis: he deals with them, as they deal with him. They do him but
eye service, and he gives them but eye wages. Indeed, God can neither be
deceived nor deceive: yet as they would deceive God in their service with such
obedience as falls short of true obedience: so they are deceived in their pay
from him, with such blessings as fall short of true blessings. And all this may
well stand with Gods both Justice and Holiness. 2.
Secondly, it appears from the premises, that Gods thus dealing with wicked
and unsanctified men, in thus rewarding their outward good things, gives no
warrant nor strength at all, either to that Popish corrupt doctrine of Meritum
congrui, in deserving the first grace by the right use of Naturals; or to that
rotten principle and foundation of the whole frame of Pelagianism, [ Facienti
quod in se est, Deus non potest, non debet, deuegare gratiam.] We know, God
rewards his own true and spiritual graces, in us, which increase of those
graces here, and with glory hereafter: we see God rewards even false, and
outward, and seeming graces, natural and moral good things, with outward and
temporal favors. And all this is most agreeable to his infinite both Justice
and Mercy; and may stand with the infinite Purity and Holiness of his nature.
But this were rather to make God an unjust and unholy God; to bind him to
reward the outward and sinful works of Hypocrites, (for the best natural or
moral works without grace, are but such) with true saving Grace, and inward
sanctification. Other Inferences and uses more might be added: as viz. Thirdly,
for 3.
our Imitation; by God example to take knowledge of; and to commend, and to
cherish, even in wicked men, those natural or moral parts that are eminent in
them, and whatsoever good things they do in outward actual conformity to the
revealed will andlaw of God. And Fourthly, for Exhortation 4.
to such, as do not yet find any comfortable assurance that their obedience and
good works are true sincere; and yet to go on and not to grow weary of
well-doing: knowing that their labor is not altogether in vain; in as much as
their works (though perhaps done in Hypocrisy,) shall procure them temporal
blessings here; and some abatement withal (I add that by the way) of stripes
and everlasting punishment hereafter.

But I pass by all these and the like Uses; and commend but one more 27.
unto you: and that is it which I named before as one Reason of the point
especially for comfort to the Godly 1. against the prosperity of the wicked;
observed, viz. the Comfort of Gods dear Children and Servants; and that sundry
ways. First, here is comfort for them, against a Temptation which often
assaulteth them; and that with much violence and danger: arising from the sense
and observation of the prosperity and flourishing estate of the wicked in this
world. We may see in the Psalms, and elsewhere; how frequently and strongly
Psalm. 37. and 73.
David, (z) Job, and Jer. 12. 1, etc.
Jeremy, and other Godly ones were assailed with this temptation. For thy
instruction then, and to arm x Job 21. 7, etc.
thee against this so common and universal a temptation: if thou shall see
fools on horseback; ungodly ones laden with wealth, with honor, with ease;
Hypocrites blessed with the fat of the earth, and the dew of heaven, and
abundance of all the comforts of this life: yet be not thou discomforted at it,
or disquieted with it, Psalm. 37. 1.
Do not fret thy self because of the ungodly, neither be thou envious at evil
doers. Thou expectest for thine inward obedience an unproportionable reward in
the life to come: do not therefore grudge their outward obedience a
proportionable reward in this life. Some good things or other thou may think
there are in them, for which God bestows those outward blessings upon them.
But consider withal that as they have their reward here, so they have all their
reward here; and whatsoever their present prosperity be, yet the time will
come, and that ere long be, when Job 8. 13.
The hope of the hypocrite shall wither, Psalm. 37. 38.
The end of the Wicked shall be cut off.

Again, here is a second Comfort for the godly against temporal afflictions: 28.
and it arises thus. As Gods love and favor goes not always with 2. Against
temporal afflictions;
those temporal benefits he bestows: so on the other side, Gods wrath and
displeasure goes not always with those temporal afflictions he inflicteth. For
as he rewards those few good things that are in evil men, with these temporal
benefits, for whom yet (in his Justice) he reserveth eternal damnation, as the
due wages (by that Justice) of their graceless impenitency: so he punishes
those remnants of sin that are in Godly men, with these temporal afflictions;
for whom yet (in his mercy) he reserveth Eternal salvation, as the due wages
(yet by that mercy only) of their Faith, and Repentance, and holy Obedience. As
Abraham said to the rich glutton in the Parable, Luke 19. (e) Son remember that
thou in thy lifetime receivedst c Luke 16. 25.
thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted and
thou art tormented. As if he had said; If thou had any thing good in thee,
remember thou have had thy reward in earth already; and now there remains for
thee nothing, but the full punishment of thine ungodliness there in Hell: But
as for Lazarus he has had the chastisement of his infirmities on earth
already; and now remains for him nothing, but the full reward of his
godliness here in Heaven. Thus the meditation of this Doctrine yields good
Comfort against temporal afflictions.

Here is yet a third Comfort, and that of the three the greatest, unto 29.
the godly, in the firm assurance of their Eternal reward. It is one of the
Reasons 3. Against doubtings of their eternal reward.
why God temporally rewards the unsound obedience of natural, carnal, and
unregenerate men, even to give his faithful servants undoubted assurance, that
he will in no wise forget their true and sound, and sincere obedience. Does God
reward Ahab's temporary Humiliation? and will he not much more reward thy
hearty and unfeigned repentance? Have the Hypocrites Quid dabit eis quos
praedestinavit ad vitam, qui haec dedit etiam eis, quos praedestinavit ad
mortem. Aug. 22. de Civit. 24.
their reward? and can thou doubt of thine? This was the very ground of all
that comfort, wherewith the Prodigal son sustained his heart and hope; when he
thus discoursed to his own soul: Luke 15. 17.
If all the hired servants which are in my Fathers house have bread enough and
to spare; surely, my Father will never be so unmindful of me, who am his Son,
though too too unworthy of that name, as to let me perish for hunger. Every
temporal blessing bestowed upon the wicked, ought to be of the child of God
entertained as a fresh assurance given him of his everlasting reward hereafter,
Genesis 25. 5, 6.
Abraham gave gifts to the Sons of his Concubines; and sent them away: but his
only son Isaac he kept with him, and gave him all that he had. Right so, God
gives temporal gifts to Hypocrites and Cast-aways, who are bastards, and not
sons; (and not sons of the Gal. 4. 28, 31.
freewoman, not sons of promise, not born after the spirit:) and that is their
portion; when they have gotten that, they have gotten all they are like to
have: there is no more to be looked for at his hands. But as for the
Inheritance; he reserveth that for his dear Children, the godly, who are Gal.
4. 29.
Born after the Spirit, and Gal. 3. 29.
Heirs according to promise: on these he bestows all that ever he has, ( 1
Cor. 3. 21.
all things are theirs;) for on them he bestows Heb. 1. 2.
his Son the heir of all things, in whom are hid all the treasures of all good
things, and together Romans 8. 32.
with whom all other things are conveyed and made over unto them, as
accessories and appurtenances of him; and on them he bestows Himself, which
is 1 Cor. 15. 28.
All in all, Psalm. 16. 11.
in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. To which joy unspeakable and glorious, O thou the
Father of mercies, who have promised it unto us, bring us in the end, for thy
dear Son's sake Jesus Christ, who has purchased it for us, and given into our
hearts the earnest of his and thy holy Spirit to seal it unto us. To which
blessed Son, and holy Spirit, together with thee, O Father, three persons and
one only wise, gracious, Almighty, and eternal Lord God, be ascribed by us and
all thy faithful people throughout the world, the whole kingdom, power and
glory, for ever and ever.

Amen, Amen.
AD POPULUM.
The Second Sermon.
At Grantham Linc. Feb. 27. 1620.
3 KINGS 21. 29. -- because he humbles himself before me, I will not bring the
evil in his days. --
I Will not so far either distrust your Memories, or straiten 1.
my self of Time for the delivery of what I am now purposed to speak; as to
make any large Repetition of the Particulars which were observed the last time
from the consideration of Ahab's Person and Condition, (who was but an
Hypocrite) taken jointly with his present Carriage, together with the Occasion
and Success thereof. He was humbled: It was the Voice of God by his Prophet
that humbled him. Upon his humbling God adjourneth his Punishment. From all
which was noted, first, That there might be even in Hypocrites an Outward
formal Humiliation; secondly, the Power and Efficacy of the Word of God able to
humble an Oppressing Ahab; thirdly, the boundless Mercy of God, in not
suffering the Outward formal Humiliation of an ungodly Hypocrite to pass
altogether unrewarded. All this the last time; by occasion of those first
Clauses in the Verse, [ See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me? because
he humbles himself before me, I will not -- ] We are now next to consider of
the Great Favor, which it pleased God to show to Ahab upon his humiliation;
what it was, and wherein it consisted. It was the Removal, (at least for a
time; that is, the suspension) of an heavy judgment denounced against Ahab and
his house most deservedly for his bloody and execrable oppression; [ Because he
humbles himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days.]

The Evil which God now promises he will not bring [ I will not bring 2.
the evil in his days,] is that which in verse. 21. he had threatened he would
bring upon Ahab and upon his house, [ Verse. 21, etc. hic.
Behold, I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy posterity, and
will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut
up and left in Israel; and will make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the
Son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the Son of Abijah, for the
provocation wherewith thou have provoked me to anger, and made Israel to sin.]
A great Judgment and an heavy: But the greater the Judgment is, when it is
deserved and threatened; the greater the mercy is, if it be afterward forborne;
as some of this was. But whatsoever becomes of the Judgment, here we see is
Mercy good store. God who is Ephesians. 2. 4.
rich in mercy, and delights to be styled Deus miserationum. Neh. 9. 31.
the God of mercies, and the 2 Cor. 1. 3.
Father of mercies, abundantly manifests his mercy, in dealing thus
graciously with one that deserved it so little. Here is mercy, in but
threatening the punishment, when he might have inflicted it; and more mercy in
not inflicting the punishment when he had threatened it. Here is mercy first in
suspending the punishment, [ I will not bring the evil:] and mercy again, in
suspending it for so long a time: [I will not bring the evil in his days.] Of
these two points we shall entreat at this time: and first and principally, of
the former.

[ I will not bring the evil.] It is no new thing to them, that have read 3.
the sacred Stories with Observation, to see God, when men are humbled at his
threatenings, to revoke them, Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 25. and alibi s^pe.
(...), says Chrysostom more than once: this is ever Gods manner, when men
change their deeds, to change his doom; when they renounce their sins, to recall
his sentence: when they repent of the evil they have done against him, to Jon.
3. 10.
Repent of the evil he had said he would do against them. Search the
Scriptures, and say if things run not thus, as in the most ordinary course: God
commands, and Man disobeyeth: Man disobeyeth, and God threatens: God
threatens, and man repents: Man repents, and God forbeareth. Genesis 20. 3.
Abimelech, thou art but a dead man, because of the woman which thou have
taken! but Abimelech restores the Prophet his Wife untouched, and God spares
him, and he dies not. Hezekiah, make thy Will, and Esa. 38. 1. 5.
Put thine house in order, for thou shall die and not live!* but Hezekiah
turns to the Wall, and prays, and weepeth, and God adds to his days
fifteen years. Nineveh, prepare for desolation; for now but Jor. 3. 4, 10.
forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed: but Nineveh fasted, and prayed, and
repented; and Nineveh stood after more than forty years twice told. Generally,
God never yet threatened any punishment upon person or place: but if they
repented, he either withheld it, or deferred it, or abated it, or sweetened it
to them: for the most part proportionably to the truth and measure of their
repentance, but howsoever always so far forth as in his infinite wisdom he has
thought good: some way or other, he ever remitted somewhat of that severity and
rigor, wherein he threatened it.

A course which God has in some sort bound himself unto, and which he often
and openly professes he will hold. Two remarkable testimonies (among sundry
other) shall suffice us to have proposed at this time, for the clear and full
evidencing hereof. The one in Ier. 18. 7, 8. [ At what instant I shall speak
concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and pull down, and
to destroy; If that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their
evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them.] The other in
Ezekiel. 33. 13, 14. [ When I say to the wicked* Thou shall surely die, if he turn
from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right; If the wicked restore the
pledge, give again that he has robbed, walk in the statutes of life without
committing iniquity; he shall surely live, he shall not die.] And every where
in the Prophets, after Denunciations of Judgment follow Exhortations to
repentance: which were bootless, if Repentance should not either prevent them
or adjourn them, or lessen them.

You see God both practices and professes this course: neither of 5.
which can seem strange to us, if we duly consider, either his readiness to
show mercy, or the true End of his Threatenings. We have partly already touched
at the greatness of his mercy. To show compassion, and to forgive, that is the
thing wherein he most of all delights; and therefore he does arripere ansam,
take all advantage as it were, and lay hold on every occasion to do that: but
to punish, and take vengeance, is Esaias 28. 21.
opu^ alienum, as some expound that in Esaias 28. his strange work, his strange
act, a thing he takes no pleasure in. Ezekiel. 33. 11.
Vivo nolo -- in Ezekiel. 33. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in
the death of the wicked, etc. As the Be labors busily all the day long, and
seeks to every flower, and to every weed for Honey; but stingeth not once,
unless she be ill provoked: so God bestirreth himself, and his bowels yern
within him, to show compassion, Hos. 6. 4.
[ Oh Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, how shall I entreat thee?
Ezekiel. 18. 31. and 33. 11.
Why will ye die, O ye house of Israel? Jer. 5. 1.
Run to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and seek if you can find a
man, but a man, that I may pardon it.] But vengeance comes on heavily and
unwillingly, and draws a sigh from him; [ Esaias 1. 24.
He^ consolabor! Ah I must, I see there is no remedy, I must ease me of mine
adversaries, and be avenged of mine enemies; Matt. 23. 27.
Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the Prophets -- how often would I, etc.
Osee 11. 8.
How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? -- my heart is turned within me; my
repentings are kindled together.] So is our God Psalm. 103. 8.
slow to anger, and loath to strike [ Ovid. 1. de Pont. 3.
Quique dolet quoties cogitur esse ferox:] but plenteous in mercy, as David
describes him in Psalm. 103. Never was a man truly and inwardly humbled, but
God in the riches of his special mercy, truly pardoned him: never was man so
much as but outwardly humbled, as Ahab here, but God in his common and general
mercy, more or less forbear him.

Secondly, the end of Gods Threatenings also confirms this point. For, does he
threaten evil, think ye, because he is resolved to inflict it? Nothing less:
rather, to the contrary, he therefore threatens it, that we by our repentance
may prevent it, and so he may not inflict it? Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 25. (...).
Nazianz. Non praedixit, ut veniat, sed ne veniat. Hieron. in Ezekiel. 33.
(...), says S. Chrysostom: he foretells what he will bring upon us, for
this very purpose, that he may not bring it upon us; and warns before he
strikes, to make us careful to avoid the stroke. In the ancient Roman State
and Discipline, the manner was, before they made war upon any people, first to
send See Dionys. Halicarn. lib. 2. Antiq. Live. 1. Dec. 1* Cic. 1* de Offic.
Heralds to proclaim it, ( Bellum indicere ne inferrent) to the end, that if
they would make their peace by submission, they might prevent the war, nor so
only, but be written also in albo amicorum, enrolled as their friends and
Confederates, So God sends his Heralds the Prophets, to threaten vengeance
against sinners: not thereby to drive them from hope of Mercy, but to draw them
to repentance and humiliation; whereby they may not only turn away the
vengeance threatened, but also (if they perform them unfeignedly, and with
upright hearts) interest themselves farther in his favor and love. Nor is it
to be accounted among the least of Gods Mercies, when he might in his just
displeasure overwhelm us in the very Act of our sins, as Number. 25. 8.
Zimri and Cosbi were run through in the very Act of filthiness; and as 2 Samuel
6. 7.
Uzzah, and Acts 5. 5, 10.
Ananias and Sapphira, and some few others whom God picked out to show
exemplary judgment upon, were stricken dead upon the sudden for their
transgressions: When God might in justice deal with the same rigor against us
all; I say, it is not the least of his Mercies, that he forbeareth and
forewarneth, and foretells and threatens us before he punish; that (...)
Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 25.
if we will take any warning, he may do better to us than he has said, and not
bring upon us what he has threatened.

A Point very useful and comfortable: if it be not derogatory to God's Truth.
Let us therefore first clear that, and then proceed to the Uses. If God thus
revoke his Threatenings, it seems he either before meant not what he spoke,
when he threatened; or else after when he revoketh, repents of what he meant;
either of which to imagine, far be it from every Christian heart; since the one
makes God a dissembler, the other a changling; the one charge him with
falsehood, the other with lightness. And yet the 7.
Scriptures sometimes speak of God, as if he Genesis 6. 6. Psalm. 95. 10.
grieved for what he did, or Genesis 6. 6. 1 Samuel 15. 11. Jer. 18. 8. Amos 7. 3,
6. Jon. 3. 10.
repented of what he spoke, or altered what he had purposed: and for the most
part, such like affections are given him in such places, as endeavor to set
forth to the most life his great mercy and kindness to sinful mankind. We all
know, we cannot indeed give God any greater glory than the glory of his Mercy:
yet must know withal, that God is not so needy of means to work out his own
glory, as that he should be forced to redeem the glory of his Mercy, with the
forfeiture either of his Truth or Steadfastness. We are therefore to lay this
as a firm ground and infallible, that our God is both truly Unchangeable, and
unchangeably True, Number. 23. 19. 1 Samuel 15. 29.
The strength of Israel is not as man, that he should lie; nor as the son of
man, that he should repent: his words are not 2 Cor. 1. 19, 20.
Yea and Nay, neither does he use lightness. But his words are, Yea and Amen;
and himself Heb. 13. 8.
yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever: Mat. 24. 35.
Heaven and Earth may pass away, yea, shall pass away; but not the least (...).
Mat. 5. 18.
tittle of God's Words shall pass away unfulfilled. Psalm. 102. 26, 27.
They may wax old as a Garment, and as a Vesture he shall change them, and they
shall be changed; but he is the same, and his years fail not: neither do his
Purposes fail, nor his Promises fail, nor his Threatenings fail, nor any of his
Words fail. Let Heaven, and Earth, and Hell, and Angel, and Man, and Devil, and
all change: still Mal. 3. 6.
Ego Deus, and non mutor; God he is the Lord of all, and he changes not.

As for those Phrases then of Repenting, Grieving, etc. which are spoken 8.
of God in the Scriptures; that (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 3. So also Ibid.
hom. 15, and 26, and 60. and in Psalm 6. and passim.
(...), whereof St. Chrysostom so often speaks, salveth them. God speaks to
us; and therefore speaks as we use to speak, and frames his language to our
Pro captu nostro, non pro suo statu. Bernard. l. 5. de Confid. ad Eugen.
dullness, and teaches us by (...). Chrysostom. in Psalm 8.
our own phrases what he would have us learn: as Nurses talk half syllables,
and (...)
lipse out broken language to young children. But what is so spoken (...), of
God, after the manner of men; must yet be understood (...), so as befitteth the
Majesty and perfection of his Divine Nature. When he repents, then we are not
so to conceive it, as if God Nunquam primi consilii Deos poenitet. Senec. 6. de
benef. 23.
changed his mind, or altered any thing of his everlasting purpose and counsel,
either in substance or circumstances: it only Quod dicit (Poenitentiam again)
intelligitur metaphorice dictum; nam homines, quando non implent quid comminati
sunt, poenitere videntur. Aquin. 1. quaest. 19. 7. ad 2.
imports, that he now does not that; which, so far as we could reasonably
conjecture by his words, or works, or our deserts, or otherwise, seemed to us
to have been his purpose to have done.

This for the Phrases: but yet the main doubt for the Thing it *9
self stands uncleared. Abimelech and Hezekiah shall die, and yet Abimelech
and Hezekiah shall not die; Nineveh shall be destroyed, and yet Nineveh shall
not be destroyed; I will bring evil upon Ahab's house, and yet I will not bring
it: is not this Yea and Nay? is not this a plain Contradiction? How is there
not here a plain change of Gods will? If not for substance; because the things
were at length performed, yet at least in circumstance; because they were not
performed at those times, and in that manner, as they were threatened and
foretold. That wretched Miscreant Vorstius, instead of untying this knot,
cutteth it: who, to maintain Pelagian Conclusions from blasphemous Principles,
trembles not to affirm, Vorst de Deo.
In part aliqua divini decreti sieri aliquam mutationem; that there may be
some change made in some part of Gods decree. An assertion unbeseeming an
ingenuous Pagan; and to be for ever abhorred and held accursed by every soul
that professes it self Christian. Admit this once: and let Man, yea and the
Devil too, be true, and only God a liar. Leave we him therefore to the judgment
of that great God, whom he has blasphemed; and seek we better satisfaction.
That of Aquinas and the Schoolmen, is true, but subtle: that God does sometimes
Aquin. 1. qu. 19. 17.
Velle mutationem, though he does never Mutare voluntatem; that though he never
changes his will, yet he sometimes wills a change. That of Cum exterius
mutari videtur sententia consilium non mutatur; quia de unaquaque re
immutabiliter intus constituitur, quicquid foris mutabiliter agitur. Gregor. in
Moral. 10.
Gregory is plainer, and no less true, Mutat Deus sententiam, non consilium;
God sometimes changes the sentence which he has denounced, but never the
Counsel which he has decreed. Others, otherwise: diversmen conceiving the same
answer for substance, in diverse and different terms.

That which is plainest, and gives fullest satisfaction, and whereinto the
answers of Gregory and Aquinas, and the rest, (as many as have spoken with any
truth and pertinency to the point) in the last resolution fall; is briefly
this. In the whole course of Scripture, Gods Threatenings (and so his Promises
too,) have ever a Condition annexed unto them in 10.
Gods Purpose: which though it be not ever, (indeed but seldom) expressed; yet
is it ever included, and so to be understood. All Gods Promises, how absolutely
soever expressed, are made sub condition Obedientiae: and all his Threatenings
(how absolutely soever expressed) sub condition Impoenitentiae. And these
Conditions, viz. of continuing in Obedience in all Promises; and of continuing
in Impenitency, in all Threatenings, are to be understood of course; whether
they be expressed, or not. This is plain from those two famous places before
cited, Ier. 18. and Ezekiel. 33. Jer. 18. 7, 8. See Chrysostom. hom. 5. ad pop.
Antioch. fuse and pulchre.
When I say to the wicked* Thou shall surely die; if the wicked turn from his
sin, etc. he shall surely live, he shall not die. Where Almighty God plainly
teaches us, that we ought so to conceive of all his Threatenings, be they never
so peremptorily set down, (as what more peremptory than this, Thou shall surely
die?) as that he may reserve to himself a power of Revocation in case the
Parties threatened repent. The Examples make it plain. Abimelech shall die for
taking Sarah: understand it; unless he restore her. Forty days, and Nineveh
shall be destroyed: understand it with this Reservation; unless they repent.
And so of all the rest.

But why is not that Clause expressed then? may some demand. I answer: 11.
first, it needs not; secondly, it booteth not. First, it needs not. For
God having in Ierem. 18. and Ezekiel. 33. and elsewhere, instructed us in the
general, that all his Threatenings are to be understood with such clauses and
conditions, and reservations; it is needless to repeat them in every
particular: As amongst Christian men, who acknowledge God's Providence to rule
in all things, and to dispose of all Actions and Events; it is needless in
every speech de futuro contingenti to express this clause [ if God will;] we
will go to such or such a place, or do such or such a thing, if God will:
because we readily conceive it, as a clause, which either is, or should be
understood in every such speech, as Saint Jam. 4. 15.
James requires. And so in many Promises amongst men, this clause though not
expressed, is yet allowed of course, and to common intendment understood, [
Rebus sic stantibus; things standing and continuing as now they are*] so as if
a man make a Promise absolutely, without expressing that or any other like
clause of Limitation or Exception, if in the interim some such unexpected
Accident befall, as makes that either he cannot or may not do what he had
promised; we may not in right reason charge such a man with breach of Promise,
if he perform not all he promised: because the foresaid Clause, though not
expressed, is yet presumed to have been intended by the promiser. And that
God's Threatenings, as de jure they ought to be by us when we hear them, so de
facto they were understood by him when he made them, with a secret clause of
reservation and exception in case of Repentance; appears by the usual
practice of many upon such threatenings, and the use they made of them. The
Ninevites when Jonah preached destruction within forty days, without any
express clause of Repentance; yet understood it so: else had it been in vain
for them to have repented at all, out of an hope of preventing the judgment by
their repentance; as their speeches show they did. Jonah 3. 9.
For who can tell, say they, if God will turn and repent, and turn away from
his fierce anger, that we perish not! The like may be said of Abimelech,
Hezekiah, and others: and of Ahab in this place.

Again as it is sometimes needless, so it is always bootless, to express this
12.
Clause of Repentance in the Threatenings of God. The expressing of it can do
little good; secure ones will repent never the sooner for it: But it may do
much harm; secure ones may thereby put themselves in fairer hope of
forbearance, and so linger their repentance till it be too late. Beloved, it is
admirable to observe (...), God's gracious courses, which he uses for the
calling of men to repentance. In this particularity whereof we now speak, see
how his Psalm. 85. 10.
Mercy and Truth are met together and do most lovingly embrace each other.
Where he spares in the end, it is most certain he ever meant to spare Deus
perseveravit in proposito suo, misereri volens ab initio. Hieron. in Jon. 3.
from the beginning: but that his everlasting purpose is part of his secret
counsel, and unrevealed will; which as we cannot learn; so we may not seek to
know, till the event declare it. Now to bring this his secret purpose about, he
must work those men to repentance, whom he has thus everlastingly purposed to
spare: else his Justice should become unquestionable, in finally sparing the
impenitent. Amongst other means to work men to Repentance, this is one, to
(...). Chrysostom. hom. 5. ad pop. Antioch.
threaten them with such Judgments, as their sins have deserved: which
threatening the more terrible it is, the more likely it is to be effectual; and
the more peremptory* it is, the more terrible it is. So then God, to bring
those men to Repentance whom he means to spare, in his Word and by his
Messengers denounces against them such Judgments as their sins have deserved,
and as his Justice, without their Repentance, would bring upon them; denounces
them I say absolutely and in a peremptory form, without any express Clause of
Reservation or Exception, the more to terrify and affright them, and to cast
them down to the deeper acknowledgment of his Justice and their own
unworthiness: which are yet to be understood conditionally; and interpreted
with reservation and exception of Repentance.

You have heard Evidence enough to acquit God's Truth; and do by 13.
this time, I doubt not, perceive how, as in all other things, so in the
revoking of his Threatenings, God's Mercy and his Truth go hand in hand
together. Let us now see what profitable inferences may be raised hence for our
use. The sum of all we have said, is but this. God's Threatenings are terrible,
but yet conditional: and if he spare to execute them, when we are humbled by
them; it is a glorious illustration of his Mercy, but without the least
impeachment of his Truth. Here is something for the Distressed, something for
the Secure, something for All to learn.

First, for the Distressed, Consider this, and take comfort; all you that 14.
Esa. 61. 3.
mourn in Sion, and groan under the weight of God's heavy displeasure, and the
fearful expectation of those bitter Curses and Judgments, which he has
threatened against sin. Why do you spend your strength and spirit, in gazing
with broad eyes altogether on Gods Justice or Truth? take them off a little,
and refresh them, by fastening them another while upon his Mercy. Consider not
only what he threatens: but consider withal why he threatens; it is, that you
may repent: and withal how he threatens; it is, unless you repent. He
threatens to cast down indeed: but into Humiliation, not into Despair. He
shoots out his Arrows, even bitter words: but as 1 Samuel 20. 21.
Ionathan's Arrows, for warning, not for destruction. Think not he aims so
much at thy punishment when he threatens: alas, if that were the thing he
sought, he could lay on load enough (...). Chrysostom, in Genesis hom. 25. Nemo
punire desiderans, quod facturus est comminatur. Hier. in Jon. 3.
without words: No, it is thy amendment he aims at, and seeks therein: and
therefore holds not his tongue, that if thou will take it for a warning, he
may hold his hand. If the Father do but threaten the Child, when the Rod lies
by him; it is very likely he means not to correct him for that time, but only
to make him the more careful to obey, and the more fearful to offend, for the
time to come. Can thou gather hope from the chiding of thy Earthly Father,
and will thou find no comfort in the chidings and threatenings of thy Heavenly
Father? whose bowels of tender compassion to usward are so much larger, than
any Earthly Parents can be; by how much himself the Heb. 12. 9.
Father of spirits is greater than those fathers of our flesh. Yea, but who am
I, will some disconsolate soul say, that I should make Gods Threatenings void?
or what my Repentance, that it should cancel the Oracles of Truth, or reverse
the Sentence of the eternal Judge? Poor distressed soul, that thus disputest
against thine own peace, but see not the while the unfathomed depth of Gods
Mercy, and the wonderful dispensations of his Truth. Know that his Threatenings
are not made void, or of none effect, when thou by thy Repentance stayest the
execution of them; yea rather then are they of all other times most effectual:
for then do they most of all accomplish their proper End, and the thing for
which they were intended, in thy Amendment. Neither let his Truth make thee
despair; but remember that the tenor of all his most peremptory threatenings,
runs with an implicit reservation and Conditional Exception of Repentance:
which condition if thou on thy part faithfully perform, the Judgment shall be
turned away, and yet God's Truth no whit impaired. This for the Distressed.

Now for the Secure. Moses in Deuteronomy. 29. speaks of a certain Deuteronomy. 29. 18, 19.
Root 15.
that bears Gall and Wormwood; that blesses it self when God curses; and
stands unmoved when God threatens. Here is an Axe for that Root; to hew it
in pieces: and unless Matthew. 7. 19.
it bring forth better fruit, to cleave it out for the fire. If therebe any
sprigs or spurns of that Root here; let them also consider what has been said,
and tremble. Consider this I say and tremble, all you that make a mock at God,
and at his Word, and imagine that all his Threatenings are but Bruta fulmina,
empty cracks, and Powder without shot; because sundry of them have fallen to
the ground, and not done the hurt they made show of. But know whosoever thou
art that thus abusest the Mercy, and despisest the Truth of God; that as his
Mercy never did, so his Truth shall never fail. Thou say some of his
Threatenings have done no harm: I say as much too; and his mercy be blessed for
it: but what is that to secure thee? If any where God's Threatenings did no
harm, and wrought no destruction; it was there only where they did good, and
wrought Repentance. If they have turned thee from thy sins, as they have done
some others; there is hope thou may turn them away from thee, as some others
have done. But if they have done no good upon thee in working thy Repentance;
certainly they hang over thee to do thee harm, and to work thy destruction.
Gods Threatenings are in this respect as all his other words are, sure and
steadfast; and such as Esa. 52. 11.
Shall never return void, but accomplish that for which they were sent: if not
the one way, then without all doubt the other. If they do not humble thee, they
must overwhelm thee; if they work not thy Conversion, they will thy Ruin. As
some strong Physic, that either mendeth or ends the Patient; so are these.
And therefore when judgments are denounced; resolve quickly, off or on: Here is
all the choice that is left thee; either Repent, or Suffer. There is a
generation of men, that (as Moses complains) Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
When they hear the words of Gods curse, bless themselves in their hearts, and
say they shall have peace, though they walk in the imagination of their own
hearts; that (as Saint Paul complains) Romans 2* 4.
Despise the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long suffering, not
taking knowledge that the goodness of God would lead them to repentance; that
(as Saint Peter complains) 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4.
Walk after their own lusts, and scoffingly just at Gods judgments, saying;
Where is the promise of his coming? But let such secure and carnal scoffers be
assured, that howsoever others speed, they shall never go unpunished:
Whatsoever becomes of God's Threatenings against others, certainly they shall
fall heavy upon them. They that have taught us their conditions, Moses, and
Paul, and Peter, have taught us also their punishments. Moses tells such a
one, however others are dealt with, that yet Deuteronomy. 29. 20.
the Lord will not spare him; but the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall
smoke against that man, and all the Curses that are written in God's Book,
shall light upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his Name from under heaven.
St. Paul tells such men* That by despising the riches of his goodness and
forbearance, they do but Romans 2. 5.
treasure up unto themselves wrath against the great day of wrath, and of the
revelation of the righteous judgment of God. Saint Peter tells them*
howsoever (o) 2 Pet. 2. 3.
they not only sleep, but snort in deep security, That yet ( p) their judgment
of long time sleeps not, and their damnation (...), not so much as slumbreth.
Do thou then take heed, whoever thou art, and whatsoever thou do, that thou
abuse not the Mercy of God; and to divorce it from his Truth, is to abuse it.
If when God threatens, thou layest aside his Truth, and presumest on his bare
Mercy; when he punishes, take heed he do not cry quittance with thee, by
laying aside his Mercy, and manifesting his bare Truth. God is Psalm. 145.8
patient and merciful. Patience will bear much, Mercy forbear much; but being
scorned, provoked, and dared, Furor fit laesa saepius patientia.
Patience it self turns furious, and Mercy it self cruel. It is Mercy that
threatens, it is Justice that punishes. Mercy has the first turn, and if by
Faith and Repentance we lay timely hold of it, we may keep it for ever, and
(revenging) Justice shall have nothing to do with us. But if, careless and
secure, we slip the opportunity, and neglect the time of Mercy; the next turn
belongs to Justice, which will render Judgment without Mercy, to them that
forgot God, and despised his Mercy. That, for the Secure.

Now, thirdly, and generally, for All. What God has joined together, 16.
let no man put asunder. God has purposely in his threats joined and tempered
Mercy and Truth together, that we might take them together, and profit by them
together. Auson. Epig. 10.
Dividat haec si quis, faciunt discreta venenum; Antidotum sumet, qui sociata
bibet: as he spoke of the two poisons. Either of these single, though not
through any malignant quality in themselves, (God forbid we should think so)
yet through the corrupt temperature of our Souls, becomes rank and deadly
Poison to us. Take Mercy without Truth, as a cold Poison it benummeth us, and
makes us stupid with careless security. Take Truth without Mercy, as a hot
Poison it scaldeth us, and scorcheth us in the flames of restless Despair. Take
both together, and mix them well, as hot and cold Poisons, fitly tempered by
the skill of the Apothecary, become medicinable, so are God's Mercy and Truth
restorative to the Soul. The consideration of his Truth humbles us; without
it, we would be fearless: the consideration of his Mercy supporteth us; without
it, we would be hopeless. Truth begets Fear and Repentance; Mercy, Faith and
Hope: and these two, Faith and Repentance, keep the soul even, and upright, and
steady, as the ballast and sail do the ship, that for all the rough waves and
weather that encountereth her in the troublesome sea of this World, she
miscarrieth not, but arriveth safe and joyful in the Haven where she would be.
Faith without Repentance, is not Faith, but Presumption; like a Ship all Sail,
and no ballast, that tippeth over with every blast; and Repentance without
Faith, is not Repentance, but Despair; like a Ship all ballast, and no Sail,
which sinketh with her own weight. What is it then we are to do, to turn away
God's Wrath from us, and to escape the Judgments he threatens against us? even
this. As in his Comminations he joyneth Mercy and Truth together, so are we in
our Humiliations to join Faith and Repentance together. His threatenings are
true, let us not presume of forbearance; but fear, since he has threatened,
that unless we repent, he will strike us. Yet his threatenings are but
conditional, let us not despair of forbearance; but hope, although he has
threatened, that yet if we repent he will spare us. That is the course which
the godly, guided by the direction of his holy Spirit, have ever truly and
sincerely held, and found it ever comfortable to assure them of sound peace,
and reconciliation with God. That is the course which the very Hypocrites, from
the suggestion of natural Conscience, have sometimes offered at, as far as
Nature ( enlightened, but unrenewed) could lead them; and found it effectual to
procure them, at the least, some forbearance of threatened Judgments, or
abatement of temporal evils, from God.

Thus have you heard three Uses made of God's mercy in revoking, 17.
joined with his truth in performing what he threatens. One, to cheer up the
distressed, that he despair not when God threatens: another, to shake up the
secure, that he despise not, when God threatens: a third, to quicken up all,
that they believe and repent, when God threatens. There is yet another general
Use to be made hereof; which, though it be not directly proper to the present
Argument, yet I cannot willingly pass without a little touching at it; and that
is, to instruct us for the understanding of God's Promises. For contraries (as
Promises and Threatenings are) being of the like kind and reason either with
other, do mutually give and take light either to and from other. God's
Threatenings are true, and steadfast, his Promises are so too, [ Tit. 1. 2.
promisit qui non mentitur Deus; which God that cannot lie, has promised,
says the Apostle in one place; and in another, 2 Cor. 1. 20.
All the Promises of God are Yea and Amen:] and where in a third place he
speaks of Heb. 6. 18.
two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie; his Promise
is one of those two. The Promises then of God are true, as his Threatenings are.
Now look on those Threatenings again, which we have already found to be true,
but withal, conditional, and such as must be ever understood with a clause of
reservation or exception. It is so also in the Promises of God; they are true,
but yet conditional, and so they must ever be understood with a conditional
clause. The exception there to be understood, is Repentance; and the Condition
here, Obedience. What God threatens to do unto us, absolutely in words, the
meaning is, he will do it, unless we repent and amend: and what he promises to
do for us, absolutely in words, the meaning is, he will do it, if we believe
and obey. And for so much as this Clause is to be understood of course in all
God's Promises, we may not charge him with breach of Promise, though after he
do not really perform that to us, which the letter of his Promise did import,
if we break the condition, and obey not.

Would thou know then, how thou art to entertain God's Promises, 18.
and with what assurance to expect them? I answer, With a confident and
obedient heart. Confident, because he is true, that has promised; Obedient,
because that is the condition under which he has promised. Here is a curb then
for those men's Presumption, who living in sin, and continuing in disobedience,
dare yet lay claim to the good Promises of God. If such men ever had any
seeming interest in Gods Promises; the interest they had, they had but by
Contract and Covenant; and that Covenant, whether either of the two it was, Law
or Gospel, it was conditional. The Covenant of the Law wholly, and a priori,
conditional; Luke 10. 28.
Hoc fac and vives, Do this and live: and the Covenant of the Gospel too, after
a sort, and a posteriori, Conditional; Creed and vives, believe and live. If
then they have broken the Conditions of both Covenants, and do neither Believe,
nor Do what is required; they have, by their Unbelief and Disobedience,
forfeited all that seeming interest they had in those Promises. God's Promises
then, though they be the very main supporters of our Christian Faith and Hope,
to as many of us, as whose Consciences can witness unto us a sincere desire and
endeavor of performing that Obedience we have covenanted; yet are they to be
embraced even by such of us, with a reverend fear and trembling at our own
unworthiness. But as for the unclean, and filthy, and polluted; those Matthew. 6.
6.
Swine and Dogs, that delight in sin and disobedience, and every abomination;
they may set their hearts at rest for these matters, they have neither part nor
fellowship in any of the sweet Promises of God. Let dirty 2 Pet. 2. 22.
Swine wallow in their own filth, these rich Matthew. 6. 6.
Pearls are not for them, they are too precious: let hungry 2 Pet. 2. 22.
Dogs glut themselves with their own vomit, the Matthew. 15. 26.
Childrens bread is not for them, it is too delicious. Let him that will be
filthy Rev. 22. 11.
be filthy still: the Promises of God are holy things, and belong to none but
those that are holy, and desire to be holy still. For our selves, in a word;
let us hope that a Promise being left us, if with Faith, and Obedience, and
Patience, we wait for it, we shall in due time receive it: but withal, Heb. 4.
1.
let us fear, (as the Apostle exhorts, Heb. 4.) lest a Promise being left us,
through disobedience or unbelief, any of us should seem to come short of it.

Thus much of the former thing proposed; the magnifying of God's 19.
Mercy, and the clearing of his Truth in the revocation and suspension of
threatened Judgments, by occasion of these words [ I will not bring the evil.]
There is yet a Circumstance remaining of this general part of my Text, which
would not be forgotten; it is the extent of time, for the suspending of the
Judgment [ I will not bring the evil in his days.] Something I would speak of
it too, by your patience; it shall not be much, because the season is sharp,
and I have not much sand to spend; I will not bring the evil in his days. The
Judgment denounced against Ahab's house, was in the end executed upon it, as
appears in the sequel of the story, and especially from those words of Iehu
(who was himself the Instrument raised up by the Lord, and used for that
Execution) in 4 King. 10. [ 4 King. 10. 10.
Know that there shall fall to the earth nothing of the word of the Lord, which
the Lord spoke concerning the house of Ahab; for the Lord has done that which
he spoke by his servant Elijah;] which were enough, (if there were nothing else
to be said) to justify God's truth in this one particular. That which Ahab
gained by his humiliation, was only the deferring of it for this time; I will
not bring the evil in his days. As if God had said, This wretched King has
provoked me, and pulled down a Curse from me upon his house, which it were but
just to bring upon him and it without farther delay; yet because he made not a
scoff at my Prophet, but took my words something to heart, and was humbled by
them, he shall not say, but I will deal mercifully with him, and beyond his
merit; as ill as he deserves it, I will do him this favor, I will not bring
the Evil that is determined against his house, in his days.

The thing I would observe hence, is, That when God has determined 20.
a Judgment upon any People, Family, or Place, it is his great mercy to us, if
he do not let us live to see it. It cannot but be a great grief (I say not now
to a religious, but even to any soul) that has not quite cast off all natural
affection, to fore-think, and foreknow the future Calamities of his Country
and Kindred Herodot. in Polyth. Valor. Max. 9. 13.
Xerxes could not forbear weeping, beholding his huge Army that followed him,
only to think, that within some few scores of years so many thousands of proper
men would be all dead and rotten; and yet that a thing that must needs have
happened by the necessity of Nature, if no sad Accident, or common Calamity
should hasten the Accomplishment of it. The Declination of a Commonwealth, and
the Funeral of a Kingdom, foreseen in the general corruption of manners, and
Decay of Discipline, (the most certain Symptoms of a tottering State) have
fetched Tears from the Eyes, and Blood from the Hearts of heathen Men zealously
affected to their Country: How much more grief then must it needs be to them
that acknowledge the true God, not only to foreknow the extraordinary Plagues,
and Miseries, and Calamities which shall befall their Posterity? but also to
fore-read in them God's fierce wrath, and heavy displeasure, and bitter
vengeance, against their own sins, and the sins of their Posterity? Our blessed
Savior, though himself without Sin, and so no way accessory to the procuring
of the evils that should ensue, could not yet but Luke 19. 41.
weep over the City of Jerusalem, when he beheld the present security, and the
future ruin thereof.

A Grief it is then to know these things shall happen; but some Happiness 21.
withal, and to be acknowledged as a great Favor from God, to be assured that
we shall never see them. It is no small Mercy in him, it is no small Comfort to
us, if either he take us away before his Judgments come, or keep his Judgments
away till we be gone. When God had told Abraham, in Genesis 15. that his Genesis 15.
13, 15.
Seed should be a Stranger in a Land that was not theirs, meaning Egypt, where
they should be kept under, and afflicted 400 years, lest the good Patriarch
should have been swallowed up with grief at it, he comfort him, as with a
Promise of a glorious deliverance at the last, so with a Promise also of
Prosperity to his own person, and for his own time, [ But thou shall go to thy
Fathers in peace, and shall be buried in a good old age, verse. 15.] In Esaias.
39. when Hezekiah heard from the mouth of the Prophet Isaiah, that all the
Esaias. 39. 6, 8.
treasures in the Lord's house should be carried into Babylon, and that his
Sons, whom he should beget, should be taken away, and made Eunuchs in the
Palace of the King of Babylon; he submitted himself (as it became him to do) to
the sentence of God, and comforted himself with this, that yet there should be
Peace and Truth in his days, verse. 8. In 4 Kings 22. when Huldah had prophesied
of the 4 Kings 22. 16, 20.
evil that God would bring upon the City of Jerusalem, and the whole Land of
Judah; in the Name of the Lord she pronounces this as a Courtesy from the
Lord unto good King Josiah, [Because they Heart was tender, and thou have
humbled thy self -- Behold therefore I will gather thee unto thy Fathers, and
thou shall be gathered unto thy Grave in Peace, and thine eyes shall not see
all the evil, which I will bring upon this place,] verse last.

Indeed every man should have, and every good man has an honest care 22.
of Posterity, would rejoice to see things settled well for them, would grieve
to see things likely to go ill with them. That common speech which was so
frequent with Dio. lib. 57.
Tiberius, was monstrous, and not Illa vox scelerata atque inhumana. Cic. 3. de
finib. Vox magna and detestabilis. Senec. 2. de Clement. 2.
savouring of common humanity, Everso juvat orb mori. Dictum Ruffini apud
Claudian.
(...), When I am gone, let Heaven and Earth be jumbled again into their old
Chaos; but he that mended it, with Nero apud Sueton. in Nerone, cap. 38.
(...), yea, (says he) whilst I live; seems to have renounced all that was
man in him. Aristotle has taught us better what reason taught him, that Arist.
1. Ethic. 11.
res posterorum pertinent ad defunctos, the good or evil of those that come
after us, does more than nothing concern us, when we are dead and gone. This is
true: but yet Terent. Andr. 4. 1.
proximus egomet mi, though it were the speech of a Shark in the Comedy, will
bear a good Construction. Every man is (...)
nearest to himself, and that Charity which looks abroad, and seeks not
only her own, yet begins at home, and seeks first her own. Whence it is,
that a godly man, as he has just cause to grieve for Posterities sake, if they
must feel God's Judgments, so he has good cause to rejoice for his own sake,
if he shall escape them; and he is no less to take knowledge of God's Mercy in
sparing him, than of his Justice in striking them.

This Point is useful many ways: I will touch but some of them, and 23.
that very briefly. First, here is one Comfort, among many other, against the
bitterness of temporal Death. If God cut thee off in the midst of thy days, and
best of thy strength; if Death turn thee pale, before Age have turned thee
gray; if the flower be plucked off, before it begin to wither; grudge not at
thy Lot therein, but meet God's Messenger cheerfully, and embrace him
thankfully; it may be, God has some great work in hand, from which he means
to save thee. It may be, he sends death to thee, as he sent his Genesis 19. 16,
17.
Angel to Lot, to pluck thee out of the midst of a froward and crooked
generation, and so to snatch thee away, left a worse thing than death should
happen unto thee. Cast not therefore a lodning eye back upon Sodom, neither
desire to linger in the plain, (it is but a valley of tears, and misery,) but
upto the mountain from whence comes thy salvation, lest some evil overtake
thee. Possibly, that which thou think an untimely death, may be to thee a
double advantage; a great advantage in ushering thee so early into God's
glorious presence, and some advantage too, in plucking thee so seasonably from
God's imminent Judgments. It is a favor to be Non mehercule quenquam audio hoc
anno ereptum, qui mihi non a Diis immortalibus ereptus ex his miseriis, and ex
iniquissima condition vitae videretur. Cic. 5. Epist. 16. Fuit hoc luctuosum
suis, acerbum patriae, grave ^onis omnibus; sed ii tamen Rempubl. casus secuti
sunt, ut mihi non erepta L. Crasso a Diis immortalibus, vita, sed donata mors
esse videretur. Non vidit flagrantem, etc. Id. 3. de Orat. Fortunatus illius [
Hortensii] exitus, qui ea non vidit cum fierent, quae praevidit futura -- sed
illum videtur felicitas ipsius qua semper *est usus, ab iis miseriis quae
consecutae sunt, morte vindicasse, Id. in Bruto.
taken away betimes, when evil is determined upon those that are left.

Secondly, here is a Warning for us, to take Consideration of the 24.
loss of good or useful Men; and to fear, when they are going from us, that
some evil is coming toward us. The Prophet complains of the too great and
general neglect hereof in histime; [ Esaias. 57. 1.
The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; and merciful men are
taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to
come, Esa. 57.] When God sends his Genesis 19, 16.
Angel to pluck out his righteous Lots, what may Sodom expect but fire and
brimstone to be rained down upon them? When he plucketh up the fairest and
choicest flowers in his garden, and croppeth off the tops of the goodliest
Poppies; who can think other, than that he means to lay his Garden waste, and
to turn it into a wild Wilderness? when he undermineth the main Pillars of the
House, takes away the very Props and Butteresses of Church and Commonweal;
sweepeth away religious Princes, wise Senators, zealous Magistrates, painful
Ministers, men of eminent Ranks, Gifts, or Example: Who can be secure, that
either Church or Commonweal shall Periturae ^rbis, aut malorum imminentium,
vel futurae labis, hoc primum indicium est, si decidant very consultores --
Ambros. de Cain and Abel, c. 3.
stand up long, and not totter at least, if not fall? God in Mercy takes such
away from the evil to come: we in wisdom should look for evil to come, when God
takes such away.

Thirdly, here is Instruction for Worldlings, to make much of those 25.
few godly ones that live among them; for they are the very Pawns of their
Peace, and the Pledges of their security. Think not, ye filthy Sodomites, it is
for your own sakes, that ye have been spared so long; know to whom you are
beholden: This Fellow Genesis 19. 9.
that came in to sojourn among you, this Stranger, this Lot, whom you so hate,
and malign, and disquiet, he it is that has bailed you hitherto, and given you
Protection. Despise not God's Patience and Long*suffering, ye profane ones;
neither bless your selves in your ungodly ways, neither say, We prosper, though
we walk in the Lusts of our Hearts: This and thus we have done, and nothing
have been done to us, God holds his hand, and holds his Tongue at us;
surely Psalm. 50. 21.
he is such a one as our selves. Learn; O ye Despisers, that if God thus
forbear you, it is not at all for your own sakes, or because he cares not to
punish evil doers; no, he has a little remnant, a little Luke 12. 13.
flock, a little handful of his own among you; a Rev. 3. 4.
few names that have given themselves unto him, and call upon him daily for
mercy upon the Land, and that Ezekiel. 9. 4.
weep and mourn in secret, and upon their beds, for your Abominations, whom you
hate, and despise, and persecute, and defame, and account as the very Scum of
the People, and the refuse and offscouring of all things, to whom yet you owe
your Preservation. Surely if it were not for some godly Iehoshaphat or other,
whose 4 King. 3. 14.
Presence God regards among you; if it were not for some zealous Moses or
other, that Psalm. 106. 23.
stands in the gap for you, God's wrath had entered in upon you long ere this,
as a mighty breach of water, and as an overflowing deluge overwhelmed you; and
you had been swept away as with the Esaias. 14. 23.
Besom of Destruction, and devoured as stubble before the fire. It is Job 22.
30.
the innocent that delivers the Land, and reprieveth it from Destruction,
when the Sentence of Desolation is pronounced against it; and it is delivered
by the pureness of his hands. O the goodness of our God! that would have spared
the five Cities of the Salt-Sea, if among so many thousands of beastly and
filthy Persons there had been found but Genesis 18. 32.
Ten righteous ones, and that was for each City, but two Persons; nay, that
would have pardoned Jerusalem, if in all the J^r. 5. 1.
Streets and broad places thereof, replenished with a World of Idolaters, and
Swearers, and Adulterers, and Oppressors, there had been found but one single
man, that executed Judgment, and sought the truth from his heart. But, Oh the
madness of the men of this foolish World withal! who seek to do them most
Mischief of all others, who of all others seek to do them most good; thirsting
most after their Destruction, who are the chiefest Instruments of their
preservation. O foolish and mad World! if thou have but wit enough, yet, yet,
to hug and to make much of that little flock, the hostages of thy Peace, and
the earnest of thy tranquillity if thou would but Luke 19. 42.
know, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy
peace! Thou art yet happy, that God has a remnant in thee; and if thou knew
how to make use of this happiness, at least in this thy day, by honoring their
persons, by procuring their safety and welfare, by following their examples, by
praying for their continuance, thou might be still, and more, and ever
happy. But if these things, that belong unto thy peace, be now hidden from
thine eyes; if these men, that prolong thy peace, and prorogue thy destruction,
be now despised in thy heart, in this day of thy peace, God is just, thou
know not how soon they may be taken from thee; and though he do not bring
the evil upon thee in their days, when they are gone, thou know not how soon
Vengeance may overtake thee, and Psalm. 50. 22.
then shall he tear thee in pieces, and there shall be none left to deliver
thee.

I have now done. Beseech we God the Father of mercies, for his dear 26.
Son Jesus Christ his sake, to shed his Holy Spirit into our hearts, that by
his good Blessing upon us, that which has been presently delivered agreeably
to his holy Truth and Word, may take root downwards in our hearts, and bring
forth fruit upwards in our lives and conversations; and so to assist us ever
with his Grace, that we may with humble confidence lay hold on his Mercies,
with cheerful reverence tremble at his Judgments, by unfeigned Repentance turn
from us what he has threatened, and by unwearied Obedience assure unto us what
he has promised. To which Holy Father, Son, and Spirit, three Persons* and,
etc.

AD POPULUM.
The Third Sermon.
At Grantham Linc. Iun. 19. 1621.
3 KINGS 21. 29. -- I will not bring the evil in his days: but in his sons days
will I bring the evil upon his house.
I Come now this third time to entreat of this Scripture, 1.
and (by God's help) to finish it. Of the Three parts whereof, heretofore
propounded, viz. 1. Ahab's Humiliation; 2. The suspension of his judgment for
his time; 3. And the Devolution of ^t upon Iehoram: the two former having been
already handled; the last only now remains to be considered of. In the
prosecution whereof; as heretofore we have cleared GOD's Holiness and Truth: so
we shall be now occasioned to clear his Justice from such imputations, as might
seem to lie upon it from this Act. And that in three respects* accordingly as
Iehoram, who stands here punishable for Ahab's sin, may be considered in a
threefold reference to Ahab: that is to say, either relate, as the son of Ahab;
or disparate, as another man from Ahab; or compara^^, 4* Kin. 3. 2.
as a man not altogether so bad as Ahab. Now what Quisquam est hominum, qui
fuisse illum ( Jovem) De^m credat, tam injustum, tam impium, nec mortalium
saltem constituta servantem; apud quis ne^^^ haberetur m^^^^n, alterum pro
altero pl^^ti, and aliena delicta aliorum cervi^ibu^ vindi^^^^? Ar^ob. co^^^.
Gene. ^^^. 7.
Justice first to punish the Son for the Father? or indeed secondly, any one
man for another? but most of all thirdly, the less Offender for the greater?

It is not a matter of so much difficulty, as at the first appearance it
seems, 2.
to clear these doubts; if all things thereto appertaining be duly and
distinctly considered. The greatest trouble will be, (the things being of more
variety than hardness) to sort them in such manner as that we may therein
proceed orderly and without confusion. Evermore, we know, Certainties must rule
Uncertainties; and clear truths doubtful; it will be therefore expedient for
us, for the better guiding of our Judgments, first, to lay down some
Certainties, and then afterward by them to measure out fit Resolutions to the
Doubts; and then lastly from the premises to raise some few instructions for
our use.

The first Certainty then; and a main one, is this. Howsoever things 3.
appear to us, yet God neither is, nor can be unjust; as not in any other
thing, so neither in his punishments. Romans 3. 5, 6.
Is God unrighteous, that takes vengeance: God forbid: for then how shall God
judge the world? Genesis 18. 25.
shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? Indeed the Reasons of his
Justice oftentimes may be, oftentimes are unknown to us: but they never are,
they never can be unrighteous in him. If in a deep point of Law, a learned
discreet Judge should upon sufficient grounds give sentence, flat contrary to
what an ordinary by stander would think reason (as many times it falls out;)
it is not for the grieved party to complain of injustice done him: he should
rather impute what is done, to want of skill in himself, than of Conscience in
the Judge. Right so, if in many things Gods Proceedings hold not proportion
with those characters of Justice and Equity, which our weak and carnal reason
would express; we must thence infer our own ignorance, not his injustice. And
that so much the rather; because those matters of Law are such as fall within
the comprehension of ordinary Reason; whereas the ways of God are far removed
out of our sight, and advanced above our reach; and besides, an Earthly Judge
is subject to misprison, misinformation, partiality, corruption, and sundry
infirmities that may vitiate his Proceedings; whereas no such thing can
possibly fall upon the Divine Nature. David has taught us in the Psalm, that
Psalm. 36. 6.
The righteousness of God is as the great Mountains, and his judgments as the
great Deep. A great Mountain is easy to be seen; a man that will but open his
Eyes cannot overlook it: but who can see into the bottom of the Sea, or find
out what is done in the depths thereof? Whatsoever we do then; let us beware we
measure not Esaias 55. 8, 9.
his ways by our ways; nor his works by our works: howsoever they seem to
swerve from the Rules of our ways and works; yet still Psalm. 14. 5.
The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. Though we
cannot fathom the deeps of his judgments, (for Joh. 4. 11.
The Well is deep, and we have not wherewithal to draw;) yet let the assurance
of the righteousness of all his proceedings stand firm and manifest as the
mountains, which can neither be removed nor hid, but stand fast rooted for
evermore. This we must rest upon as a certain Truth; howsoever, whomsoever,
whenever, God punishes, he is never unjust.

The second Certainty. To speak of Punishments properly; No temporal 4.
Evil is simply, and de toto genere a punishment. By temporal Evils, I
understand all the poenal Evils of this life, that do or may befall us from our
bodily Conception, to our bodily Deaths inclusive; hunger, cold, nakedness,
sicknesses, infirmities, discontents, reproaches, poverty, imprisonments,
losses, crosses, distresses, death, and the rest; in a word, all that Eccles.
1. 13.
Sore travel, which God has given to the sons of man, to be exercised
therewith, and that Syrac. 40. ^.
Heavy Yoke which is upon the Sons of Adam, from the day that they go out of
their Mothers Womb, till the day that they return to the Mother of all things.
I say none of all these are properly and de toto genere to be accounted
punishments. For to make a thing simply and properly, and formally, a
punishment, there are required these Three Conditions: 1. That it be painful,
and grievous to suffer. 2. That it be inflicted for some fault. 3. That it be
involuntary, and against the sufferers will. That which has but the first of
these three conditions, may be called after a sort (and truly too) Malum
poenae, a kind of punishment. But (...), and properly, that Evil only is a
punishment, wherein the whole three conditions concur. Now these Temporal
Evils, though they have the two first conditions: all of them being grievous to
suffer; all of them being inflicted for sin: yet in the third condition they
fail, because they are not involuntary simply, and perpetually, and de suo
genere involuntary; (to omit also a kind of failing in the second condition;
not but that they are ever inflicted for some sin deserving them; but for that,
there are withal other Ends, and Reasons, for which they are inflicted, and
whereunto they are intended, besides and above the punishment of the Offense.)
It may not be gainsaid indeed, but these things are involuntary sometimes in
the particular, and especially to some men, even the least of them: but simply
and universally such they are not; since by other some men, the greatest of
them are willingly and cheerfully, not only suffered, but desired. Not but that
they are grievous to the best. (It must needs be some grief, as to the
Merchant, to see his rich lading cast overboard, and to the Patient to have an
old festered sore searched and singed; so to the Christian, to have Gods
correcting hand lie heavy upon him in some Temporal Affliction: The Apostle
tells us plainly, Heb. 12. 11.
No Affliction for the present is joyous, but grievous.) But involuntary it is
no more in him, than those other things are in them. As therefore the Merchant,
though it pity his heart to see so much wealth irrecoverably lost, yet gets
the best help, and uses the best speed he can to empty the Vessel of them, for
the saving of his life; and as the Patient, though Est plane quasi saevitia
medicina de scalpelli. Non tamen secari id^irco malum, quia dolores utiles
affert -- u^ulans ille, and gemens and mugiens inter manus medici postmodum
easdem mercede cumulabit. Tert. in Scorp. cap. 5.
he smart when the wound is dressed, yet thanketh and feeth the Surgeon for his
pains, in hope of future ease: so the Christian, though these temporal evils
somewhat trouble him, yet he is willing to them, and he is cheerful under them,
and he acknowledges Gods goodness in them, and returns him thanks for them;
because he knows they are sent for his future good, and that they will at the
last Heb. 12. 11.
yield him the peaceable fruit of Righteousness, when he shall have been
sufficiently exercised thereby. See Acts 5. 41.
Peter and John rejoicing, when they suffered for the Name of Jesus, and S.
Paul so far from fearing, that he Phil. 1. 23.
longed after his dissolution; and the blessed Martyrs running to a faggot as
to a feast. Verily Gods children see great good in these things, which others
account evils: and therefore they take them not as bare punishments sent to
afflict them; but as glorious trials to exercise them, as gracious corrections
to humble them, as precious receipts to purge and recover, and restore, and
strengthen them.

So that it is not any of the temporal evils of this life; but much rather 5.
the everlasting pains of Hell, wherein the just reward and punishment of sin
properly and especially consists. Romans 6. 23.
The wages of sin is death: the proper wages of sin, eternal death. For so the
Antithesis in that place gives it to be understood, viz. of such a Death as is
opposed to Eternal Life, and that is Eternal Death; [The wages of sin is death:
but the gift of God is Eternal Life,] Romans 6. By the distribution of those
Eternal Punishments then, we are rather to judge of Gods Righteousness, in
recompensing sinners; than by the dispensation of these temporal evils. It was
a stumbling block to the (...). Marnioreo tumulo Licinus jacet; at Cato parvo:
Pompeius nullo. Credimus esse Deos? Varro. See Plat. de leg. Cic. 3. de Not.
deor. Senec. de provid. Aug. 3. de lib. arb. 2. Menand. apud Stob. Sermon. 104.
Heathen, to see good men oppressed, and Vice prosper: it made them doubt;
some, whether there were a God, or no? others nothing better, whether a
Providence or no? But what marvel if they stumbled, who had no right knowledge
either of God, or of his Providence; when Job, and David, and other the dear
Children of God have been much puzzled with it? David confesses in Psalm. 73.
that Psalm. 73. 23.
His feet had well nigh slipped, when he saw the prosperity of the wicked: and
certainly down he had been, had he not happily stepped Ibid. 17.
into the Sanctuary of God, and there understood the end of these men. Temporal
evils, though they be sometimes punishments of sin; yet they are not ever sent
as punishments, (because sometimes they have other Ends and Uses, and are
ordinabilia in melius;) and secondly, they are never the only punishments of
sins; because there are greater and more lasting punishments reserved for
sinners after this life, of which there is no other use or end but to punish,
since they are not ordinabilia in melius. If we will make these temporal evils
the measure, whereby to judge of the justice of God, we cannot secure ourselves
from erring dangerously: Gods purposes in the dispensation of these unto
particular men being unsearchable. But those everlasting punishments are they,
wherein Gods Justice shall be manifested to every eye, in due time, at that
last day, which is therefore called by Saint Paul, Romans 2. Romans 2. 5.
The day of wrath, and of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God.
Implying, that howsoever God is just in all his Judgments and acts of
providence, even upon earth; yet the Counsels and Purposes of God in these
things, are often secret, and past finding out: but at the last great day, when
Ibid. 6.
He shall render to every man according to his works his everlasting
recompense; then his vengeance shall manifest his wrath, and the righteousness
of his judgment shall be revealed to every eye in the condign punishment of
unreconciled sinners. This is the Second Certainty; Temporal evils are not
always, nor simply, nor properly the punishments for sin.

If any man shall be yet unsatisfied, and desire to have Gods justice somewhat
6.
farther cleared, even in the disposing of these temporal things: although it
be neither safe, nor possible for us, to search far into particulars, yet some
general satisfaction we may have from a third Certainty; and that is this.
Every evil of pain, whatsoever it be, or howsoever considered, which is brought
upon any man, is brought upon him evermore for sin; yea, and that also for his
own personal sin. Every branch of this assertion would be well marked. I say
first, [ Every evil of pain, whatsoever it be,] whether natural defects and
infirmities in soul or body, or outward afflictions in goods, friends, or good
name; whether inward distresses of an afflicted, or terrors of an affrighted
Conscience; whether temporal or eternal Death; whether evils of this life, or
after it: or whatsoever other evil it be, that is any way grievous to any man;
every such evil is for sin.

I say, secondly, every evil of pain, howsoever considered: whether formally, 7.
and sub ratione poenae, as the proper effect of Gods vengeance and wrath
against 1.
sin; or as a fatherly correction and chastisement, to nurture us from some 2.
past sin; or as a medicinal preservative, to strengthen us against some future
sin; 3.
or as a clogging chain to keep under and disable us from some outward work 4.
of sin; or as a fit matter and object whereon to exercise our Christian graces
5.
of faith, charity, patience, humility, and the rest; or as an occasion given
and 6.
taken by Almighty God, for the greater manifestation of the glory of his
Wisdom, and Power, and Goodness in the removal of it: or as an act of Exemplary
Justice, for the Admonition and Terror of others; or for whatsoever other end,
purpose, or respect it be inflicted.

I say thirdly, Every such evil of pain, is brought upon us for sin. There 8.
may be other Ends, there may be other Occasions, there may be other Uses of
such Evils: but still the Original Cause of them all, is sin, [ Psalm. 39. 11.
When thou with rebukes do chasten man for sin.] It was not for any John 9.
2, 3.
extraordinary notorious sins, either of the blind man himself, or of his
Parents, above other men, that he was born blind. Our Savious Christ acquitteth
them of that, John 9. in answer to his Disciples, who were but too forward (as
God knows most men are) to judge the worst. Our Savior's Answer there, never
intended other, but that still the true Cause deserving that blindness was his,
and his parents sin: but his purpose was to instruct his Disciples, that that
infirmity was not laid upon him rather than upon another man, merely for that
reason, because he (or his Parents) had deserved it more than other men; but
for some farther Ends, which God had in it in his secret and everlasting
purpose; and namely this among the rest, That the works of God might be
manifest in him, and the Godhead of the Son made glorious in his miraculous
Cure. As in Nature, the intention of the Sea Arist. 2. phys. c. 8, and 9.
End does not overthrow, but rather suppose the Necessity of the Matter: so is
it in the works of God, and the dispensations of his wonderful Providence. It
is from Gods Mercy, ordering them to those Ends he has purposed; that his
punishments are good: but it is withal from our sins, deserving them as the
Cause, that they are just. Even as the Rain that falls upon the Earth,
whether it moisten it kindly, and make it fruitful, or whether it choke and
slocken and drown it, yet still had its beginning from the Vapors, which the
Earth it self sent up. All those Evils, which fall so daily and thick upon us
from Heaven (whether to warn us, or to plague us) are but Arrows which our
selves first shot up against Heaven, and now drop down again with doubled force
upon our heads. Omnis poena propter culpam: all evils of pain, are for the
evils of sin.

I say fourthly, All such evils are for our own sins. The Scriptures are 9.
plain. 1 Pet. 1. 17.
God judges every man according to his own works, Gal. 6. 5.
Every man shall bear his own burden, etc. God has enjoined it as a Law for
Magistrates, (wherein they have also his Example to lead them; that not Deuteronomy.
24. 16.
the fathers for the children, nor the children for the fathers, but every man
should be put to death for his own sin, Deuteronomy. 24. If Israel take up a Proverb
of their own heads, [ Ezekiel. 18. 2, etc.
The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge;]
they do it without Jer. 31. 29.
cause, and they are checked for it. The soul that sins, it shall die: and
if any man eat sour grapes, his own teeth (and not another for him) shall be
set on edge thereby. For indeed, how can it be otherwise? or who can reasonably
think, that our most gracious God, who is so ready to take from us the guilt of
our own, should yet lay upon us the guilt of other men's sins? The only
exception to be made in this kind, is that alone satisfactory Punishment of our
blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: not at all for his own sins, (far be the
impiety from us so to imagine; for 1 Pet. 2. 22.
He did no sin, neither was there any guilt found in his mouth:) but for ours.
Psalm. 69. 4. Non rapui and exsolvebam: non peccavi and poenas d^bam. Aug. Ibid.
He paid that which he never took; it was for our transgressions that he was
wounded, and the chastisement of our Peace was laid upon him. Yet even those
meritorious sufferings of his may be said (in a qualified sense) to have been
for his own sins: (although in my judgment, it be far better to abstain from
such like speeches, as are of ill and suspicious sound, though they may be in
some sort defended.) But how for his own sins? his own by Commission! by no
means: (God forbid any man should teach: any man should conceive so; the least
thought of this were Blasphemy:) but his own by Esaias. 53. 5.
Imputation. Not that he had sinned, and so deserved punishment: but that he
had Delictorum susceptor, non commissor. Aug. in Psalm 68.
taken upon him our sins, which deserved that punishment. As he that
undertaketh for another man's debt, makes it his own, and stands Chargeable
with it, as if it were his own personal debt: so Christ, becoming surety for
our sins, made them Delicta nostra sua delicta fecit, ut justitiam suam nostram
justitiam faceret. Aug. exp. 2. in Psalm 21.
his own, and so was punishable for them, as if they had been his own personal
sins; 1 Pet. 2. 24.
Who his own self bare our sins in his own body upon the tree, 1 Pet. 2. That
he was punished for us, who himself deserved no punishment; it was, because 2
Cor. 5. 21.
He was made sin for us, who himself knew no sin. So that I say, in some sense
the assertion may be defended universally, and without exception, but yet I
desire rather it might be thus; Christ's only excepted, all the Pains and Evils
of men are brought upon them for their own sins.

These three Points then are certain: and it is needful they should be 10.
well understood and remembered; because nothing can be objected against Gods
Justice, in the punishing of sin, which may not easily be removed, if we have
recourse to some one or other of these Three Certainties, and rightly apply
them. All the Three Doubts proposed in the beginning, have one and the same
Resolution: answer one; and answer all. Ahab here sins by Oppression: and
yet the evil must light, though not all of it (for some part of it fell, and
was performed upon Ahab himself,) yet the main of it upon his Son Iehoram. [I
will not bring the evil in his days. But in his Sons days will I bring the evil
upon his house.] It is not Iehoram's case alone: it is a thing that often has,
and daily does befall many others. In Genesis 9. when Noah's ungracious Son Ham had
discovered his Fathers nakedness: the old man (no doubt, by Gods special
inspiration) lays the Curse, not upon Ham himself, but upon his son Canaan.
Genesis 9. 25.
[ Cursed be Canaan, etc.] And God ratified the Curse, by rooting out the
posterity of Canaan, first out of the pleasant Land, wherein they were seated;
and then afterward from the face of the whole Earth. Ieroboam's 3 Kings 15.
29, 30.
Idolatry cut off his Posterity from the Kingdom; and the 1 Samuel 2. 33-36.
wickedness of Eli his Sons, theirs, from the Priesthood of Israel. Gehazi with
the bribe he took, purchased a 4 Kings 5. 27.
Leprosy in Fee simple to him and his heirs for ever. The Jews, for stoning
the Prophets of God, but most of all for Crucifying the Son of God, brought
blood-guiltiness, not only upon themselves, but upon their Children also, [
Matthew. 27. 25.
His Blood be upon us, and upon our Children.] The wrath of God therefore
coming upon them 1 These. 2. 16.
to the utmost, and the curse of God abiding upon their Posterity even unto
this day: wherein they still remain, (and God knows how long they shall) a
base and despised people, scattered almost every where, and every where hated.
Instances might be endless, both in private Persons and Families, and in whole
Kingdoms and Countries. But it is a needless labor to multiply instances in so
confessed a point: especially God Almighty having thus far declared himself and
his pleasure herein in the Second Commandment of the Law; that he will not
spare in his Exodus 20. 5.
Jealousy sometimes to visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children, unto
the third and fourth Generation.

There is no question then de facto, but so it is; the sins of the Fathers 11.
are visited upon the Children: but de jure, with what right and equity it is
so, it is (as Saint Chrysostom speaks) Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 28.
(...), a question famous, and much debated. The Considerations, which I find
given in for the resolution of this question, by those that have purposely
handled it, are very many. But multitude breeds confusion: and and therefore
I August. qu. 42. in Deutr. Theophylact. in Joh. 9. Perer. 14. in Genesis Disp. 4.
Aquin. 1, 2. qu. 87. 8. Sasb. quodlib. 3.
propose no more but two only, unto which so many of the rest as are material
may be reduced; and those two grounded upon the certainties already declared.
The former concerns the Nature of those Punishments which are inflicted upon
the Children for the Fathers sins; the latter, the Condition of those Children,
upon whom such punishments are inflicted:

As to the first, The punishments which God brings usually upon the 12.
Children for the Fathers sins, are only temporal and outward punishments. Some
have been plagued with infectious diseases, as 4 Kin. 5. 27.
Gehazi's posterity; and 2 Samuel 3. 29.
Ioab's also, if that curse which David pronounced against him took effect, as
it is like it did. Some have come to untimely and uncomfortable ends: as
David's children, 2 Samuel 13. 29.
Ammon, and 2 Samuel 18. 15.
Absalom; and the Number. 16. 27, 33.
little ones of David, and Abiram, and others. Some have had losses, and
reproaches, and manifold other distresses and afflictions in sundry kinds, too
long to rehearse. And all these temporal judgments, their fathers sins might
bring upon them: even as the Faith, and Virtues, and other graces of the
Fathers, do sometimes convey temporal blessings to their posterity. So
Jerusalem was saved in the Siege by Senacherib, for Esa. 37. 35.
David's sake, many years after his death, Esaias 37. 35. And the succession of
the Crown of Israel continued in the line of 4 Kin. 10. 30.
Iehu for four descents; for the zeal that he showed against the worshippers of
Baal, and the house of Ahab. So then men may fare the better, and so they may
fare the worse too; for the Virtues, or Vices of their Ancestors. Outwardly,
and Temporally they may: but Spiritually and Eternally they cannot. For as
never yet any man went to Heaven for his Fathers goodness; so neither to Hell
for his Fathers wickedness.

If it be objected; that for any people or person to suffer a Amos 8. 11.
famine 13.
of the Word of God, to be deprived of the use and benefit of the sacred and
saving Ordinances of God, to be left in utter darkness without the least
glimpse of the glorious light of the Gospel of God, without which (ordinarily)
there can be no knowledge of Christ, nor means of Faith, nor possibility of
Salvation; to be thus visited, is more than a temporal punishment: and yet this
kind of Spiritual judgment does sometimes light upon a Nation or People, for
the Unbelief, and Unthankfulness, and Impenitency, and Contempt of their
Progenitors, whilst they had the light: and that therefore the Children for
their Parents, and Posterity for their Ancestry are punished not only with
Temporal, but even with Spiritual judgments also. If any shall thus object, one
of these Two Answers may satisfy them, First, if it should be granted, the
want of the Gospel to be properly a Spiritual Judgment; yet it would not follow
that one man were punished spiritually for the fault of another. For betwixt
private persons, and public societies there is this difference: that in
private persons, every succession makes a change; so that when the Father
dies, and the Son comes after him, there is not now the same person that was
before, but another: but in Cities, and Countries, and Kingdoms, and all
public societies, succession makes no change; so that when Eccles. 1. 4. Vide
responsionem Alfeni J. C. l. 76. ff. de Judiciis.
One generation passes, and another comes after it, there is not another
City, or Nation, or People than there was before, but the same. If then the
people of the same land should in this generation, be visited with any such
spiritual judgment, as is the removal of their Candlestick, and the want of the
Gospel, for the sins and impieties of their Ancestors in some former
generations: yet this ought no more to be accounted the punishment of one for
another; than it ought to be accounted the punishing of one for another, to
punish a man in his Old Age, for the sins of his Youth. For as the body of a
man, though the primitive moisture be continually spending and wasting therein,
and that decay be still repaired by a daily supply of new and alimental
moisture, is yet truly the same body; and as a River fed with a living Spring,
though the water that is in the channel be continually running out, and other
water freshly succeeding in the place and room thereof, is truly the same
River: so a Nation or People, though one generation is ever passing away, and
another coming on, is yet truly the same Nation or People, after an hundred, or
a thousand years, which it was before.

Again secondly; The want of the Gospel, is not properly a spiritual but 14.
rather a temporal punishment. We call it indeed sometimes a spiritual
Judgment, as we do the free use of it a spiritual blessing: because the Gospel
was written for, and revealed unto the Church, by the Spirit of God; and also
because it is the Holy Ordinance of God, and the proper instrument whereby
(ordinarily) the spiritual life of Faith and of Grace is conveyed into our
souls. But yet properly and primarily, those only are Ephesians. 1. 3.
Spiritual Blessings, which are immediately wrought in the soul by the Spirit
of God, and by the same Spirit cherished and preserved in the heart of the
receiver for his good, and are proper and peculiar to those that are born again
of the Spirit: and all those, on the contrary, which may be subject to decay,
or are common to the reprobate with the Elect, or may turn to the hurt of the
receiver, are to be esteemed temporal blessings, and not spiritual. And such a
blessing is the outward partaking of the Word and Ordinances of God: the want
thereof therefore consequently is to be esteemed a temporal judgment, rather
than spiritual. So that, notwithstanding this instance, still the former
consideration holds good: that God sometimes visits the sins of the fathers
upon the children with outward and temporal, but never with spiritual and
eternal punishments.

Now, if there could no more be said to this doubt, but only this; it 15.
were sufficient to clear God's Justice: since we have been already instructed,
that these temporal judgments are not always properly and formally the
punishments of sin. For as outward blessings are indeed no true blessings
properly; because wicked men have their portion in them as well as the godly,
and they may turn (and often do) to the greater hurt of the soul, and so become
rather Punishments than Blessings: so to the contrary, outward punishments are
no true punishments properly; because the Godly have their share in them as
deep as the Wicked, and they may turn (and often do) to the greater good of the
soul, and so become rather Blessings than Punishments.

If it be yet said; But why then does God threaten them as Punishments, 16.
if they be not so? I answer, First; because they seem to be punishments, 1.
and are by most men so accounted for their grievousness, though they be not
properly such in themselves. Secondly, for the common event; because 2.
ut plurimum, and for the most part they prove punishments to the sufferer, in
case he be not bettered, as well as grieved by them. Thirdly; 3.
because they are indeed a kind of punishment, though not then deserved, but
formerly. Fourthly, and most to the present purpose; because 4.
not seldom the (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 20. Filii bona valetudo, felicitas;
patrimonium, pertinent ad patreni felicior futurus, si salvum habuerit, filium
infelic ior si amiserit. Sen. 5. de Benef. 19. Nihil interest in se quis
veritus fuerit, an in liberis, cum pro affectu parents magis in liberis
terreantur. lib. 8. sect. haec quae ff. 4. 2. Quod metus causa.
Father himself is punished in them, who through tenderness of affection takes
very much to heart, the Evils that happen to his Child, sometimes more than if
they had happened to himself. See David 2 Samuel 18. 33.
weeping and pulling for his traitorous Son Absalom, when he was gone, more 2 Samuel 19. 5, 6.
affectionately than we find he did for the hazards of his own person, and of
the whole State of Israel, whilst he lived. For if it be a punishment to a man
to sustain losses in his Cattle, or Goods, or Lands, or Friends, or any other
thing he has; how much more* then in his Children, of whom he makes more
account than of all the rest, (as being not only an Image, but even a Natura
pater and filius eadem esse personae pene intelligitur. lib. ult. Cod. 626. de
Impub. Pars quodammodo corporis ejus, l. 22. Cod. 11. 47. de Agaric. and Cens.
part of himself; and for whose sakes especially it is, that he makes so much
account of the rest?) The Egyptians were plagued, not only in the blasting of
their Corn, the murrain of their Cattle, the unwholesomness of their Waters,
the annoyance of Vermin, and such like; but also and much* more in the death
of their Exodus 11. 5, 6.
firstborn, that was their last and greatest Plague. The news of his children
slain with the fall of an house, did put Job (though not quite out of Patience,
yet) more Then Job arose, etc.
to the trial of his patience, than the loss of all his substance besides;
though of many thousands of Oxen, and Asses, and Sheep, and Camels. Now if no
man charge God with Injustice, if when a man sins, he punish him in his
body, or goods, or good name, or in other things; why should it be suspected of
Injustice, when he sins, to punish him in his Children? at least there,
where the evil of the children seen or foreseen redoundeth to the grief and
affliction of the Father? And so was David's Murder and Adultery justly
punished in the loss of his incestuous Son Amnon, and of his murtherous Son
Absalom. Upon which ground, some think that clause [ Exodus 20. 5.
unto the third and fourth generation] to have been added in the Second
Commandment, respectively to the ordinary ages of Men, who oftentimes live to
see their Children to the third, and sometimes to the fourth Generation, but
very seldom farther; implying, as they think, that God usually punishes the
sins of the Fathers upon the Children within such a compass of time, as they
may in likelihood see it, and grieve at it; and then whatever evil it be, it is
rather inflicted as a punishment to them, than to their Children. This in part
satisfies the doubt, That the Punishments which God lays upon the Children
for the Fathers sins, are only temporal punishments, and consequently by our
second ground, not properly punishments.

But yet for so much as these temporal evils (be it properly, be it improperly)
are still a kind of Punishment; and we have been already taught from the third
ground, that all evils of punishment, whether proper, or improper, are brought
upon men evermore, and only for their own personal Sins: the doubt is not yet
wholly removed, unless we admit of a second Consideration; and that concerns
the Condition of those Children, upon 17.
whom such punishments are inflicted for their fathers Sins.

And first; It is considerable, that Children most times tread in their Fathers
18.
steps, and continue in their sins, and so draw upon themselves their
punishments. And this they do especially by a threefold Conveyance of sin from
their Parents; viz. Nature, Example, and Education. First, Nature; and this is
seen especially in those sins that are more sensual than other, and do, after a
sort, symbolize with the predominant humor in the body. It is plain from
experience, that some sins (especially the Proneness and Inclination unto them)
do follow some Complexions and Constitutions of body, more than others; and
arise from them. As Ambition, Rage, Rashness, and turbulent intermedling in
other men's affairs from Choler; Wantonness, and licentious mirth, from Blood;
Drunkenness and Laziness, from Phlegm; Envy, Sullenness, and implacable thirst
of Revenge, from Melancholy. And these kind of sins (to note that by the way)
do oftentimes prove our master sins, such as Divines usually call our bosom,
and darling, and beloved sins ( peccatum in deliciis) because (...).
Theophrast. Charact. 19.
naturally we have a stronger proneness and inclination to these than to other
sins. And therefore we ought to pray against, and to strive against these sins,
and to avoid the occasions of them, especially and above all other sins. And if
it shall please God so to strengthen us with his grace, and enable us by his
Spirit, as to have in some good measure subdued these sins in us, and denied
our selves in them: it is to be comfortably hoped, that we have wrought the
main and the Masterpiece of our Mortification. But to return where I was; as
Color, and Favor, and Proportion of hair, and face, and lineament, and as
diseases and infirmities of the Body, so commonly the habilities, and
dispositions, and tempers of the mind and affections become hereditary, and (as
we say) (...), (...). Eurip. apud Stob. Ser. 88.
run in a blood. Naturae sequitur semina quisque suae. An evil bird hatcheth an
evil egg; and one (...) Egdor. Ibid.
Viper will breed a generation of Vipers.

Secondly, we are (God knows) but too apish, apt to be led much by 19.
examples, more by the worst, most by the nearest. -- Juvenal. Satyr. 14.
Velocius and citius nos corrumpunt vitiorum exempla domestica. Young ones will
do, as they see the old ones do before them; and they will on, non qua eundum,
sed qua itur; not as their father bids them, but as he leads them. Juven.
ibid.
Si nociva senem juvat alea. -- If -- probum patrem esse opportet, qui gnatum
suum probiorem, quam ipsus fuit, postulat. Plaut. in Pseud.
the father be given to swearing, or gaming, or scoffing, or whoring, or riot,
or contention, or excess in drink, or any thing else that naught is, let him
counsel and advise his son as often and as earnestly as he can, he shall find
one cursed example (without the singular mercy and grace of God) to do more
hurt upon him, than a thousand wholesome admonitions will do good. Juvenal. ubi
supra.
Fugienda patrum vestigia duount, Et monstrata diu veteris trahit orbita culpae.

A third means of conveying vices from parents to children, is Education: 20.
when Parents train and bring up their Children in those sinful Courses wherein
themselves have lived and delighted: So covetous worldlings are ever destilling
into the ears of their Children precepts of parsimony and good Husbandry,
reading them lectures of thrift, and inculcating principles of getting and
saving. Juvenal. Sat. 14.
Sunt quaedam vitiorum elementa; his protinus illos imbuet, and coget minimas
ediscere sordes. Idle wandering Beggars train up their Children in a Trade of
begging, and lying, and oursing, and filching, and all idleness and abominable
filthiness. And idolatrous Parents, how 21.
careful they are to nuzzle up their Posterity in Superstition and Idolatry; I
would our professed Popelings, and half-baked Protestants, did not let us see but
too often. Wretched and accursed is our supine carelessness, if these men's
wicked diligence, (whose first care for the fruit of their bodies, is to poison
their souls, by sacrificing their sons and daughters to Idols) shall rise up in
judgment against us, and condemn our foul neglect, in not seasoning the tender
years of our Children with such religious, godly, and virtuous Ephesians. 6. 4.
Informations, as they are capable of.

However it be, whether by Nature, Example, or Education, one, or more, or all
of these; certain it is, that most times sins -- reddit ad aut hores genus,
stirpemque primam degener sanguis refert. Senec. in Hippol. Act. 3.
pass along from the father to the son, and so downward by a kind of lineal
descent from predecessors to posterity; and that for the most part with (...),
(...). Hom. Odys. ^. -- and qui omnia deterius tuaper vestigia peccet. Juven.
Satyr. 14.
advantage and increase: whole families being tainted with the special vices of
their stock. John Baptist speaks of Matthew. 3. 7.
a generation of vipers; and if we should but observe the conditions of some
families in a long line of succession, might we not epsy here and there, even
whole generations of Drunkards, and generations of Swearers, and generations of
Idolaters, and generations of Worldlings, and generations of seditious, and of
envious, and of riotous, and of haughty, and of unclean Persons, and of Sinners
in other kinds? This ungodly King Ahab; see how all that come of him, taste of
him, and have some spice and relish of his evil manners. Of his son Ahaziah,
that next succeeded him in the Kingdom of Israel, the Text says in the next
Chapter, that 3 King. 22. 25.*
He walked in the way of his father, and in the way of his mother. And another
Ahaziah King of Judah, the Grandchild of Iehosaphat, by the fathers side, and
of Ahab by the mothers, drew infection from the mother, and so trod in the
steps rather of this his wicked Grandfather Ahab, than of his good Grandfather
Iehosaphat; and of him therefore the Scripture says remarkably in 4 Kings 8. 4
King. 8. 27.
He walked in the way of the house of Ahab, and did evil in the sight of the
Lord, as did the house of Ahab, for he was the Son-in-law of the house of Ahab.
Little does any man think, what hurt he may do unto, and what plague he may
bring upon his Posterity, by joining himself or them in too strict a bond of
nearness, with an ill, or an Idolatrous House or Stock. Here, we see, is Ahab's
House taxed, and not his person only; even the whole Family, and Brood, and Kin
of them, branch and root. And that Iehoram also, who is the son here spoken of,
and meant in my Text, did 4 King. 3. 2.
patrissare too as well as the rest of the kindred, and take after the father,
(though not in that height of impiety, and Idolatry, as his father) is plain
from the sequel of the Story. And so doing, and partaking of the evils of Sin
with his father; why might not he also in justice partake of the Evils of
Punishment with his Father?

Secondly, the sins of the fathers are visited upon the children sometimes, 22.
as possessors of something which their Fathers left them, with God's curse
cleaving unto it. As in the Law, not only he that had an See Levit. 15. 2.-11.
issue of uncleanness, made them unclean that touched him, but even the Saddle
or Stool he sat upon, the Clothes he wore, the Bed whereon he lay, any Vessel
of earth or wood that he did but touch, was enough to bring legal pollution and
uncleanness upon any other person that should but touch them: So not only our
Fathers Sins, if we touch them by imitation, but even their (...). Euripid.
Lands, and Goods, and Houses, and other things that were theirs, are
sufficient to derive God's Curse upon us, if we do but hold them in possession.
What is gotten by any evil, and unjust, and unwarrantable means, is in God's
sight and estimation no better than stolen. Now stolen Goods, we know, though
they have passed through never so many hands before, (...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor.
hom. 15.
that man is answerable, in whose Hands they are found, and in whose Custody
and Possession they are. God hates not Sin only, but the very Monuments of Sin
too: and his Curse fasteneth, not only upon the Agent, but upon the brute and
dead Materials too. And where theft, or oppression, or Perjury, or Sacrilege,
have laid the foundation, and reared the house, there the Zach. 5. 4.
Curse of God creeps in between the walls and ceilings, and lurketh close
within the stones and the timber, and as a fretting moth or canker, insensibly
gnaweth asunder the pins and the joints of the building, till it have unframed
it, and resolved it into a ruinous heap: for which mischief there is no remedy,
no preservation from it, but one; and that is, free and speedy restitution: For
any thing we know, what Ahab the Father got without justice, Iehoram the Son
held without scruple. We do not find that ever he made restitution of Naboth's
vineyard to the right heir, and it is like enough he did not; and then between
him and his Father there was but this difference; the Father was the theif, and
he the receiver; which two the Law severeth not either in guilt or punishment,
but wrappeth them equally in the same guilt, and in the same punishment --
(...). Phocylid.
(...)* And who knows whether the very holding of that vineyard might not
bring upon him the curse of his father's oppression? It is plain that 4 King.
6. 25, 26.
vineyard was the place where the heaviest part of that Curse overtook him.

But that which is the upshot of all, and untieth all the knots both of this
and of all other doubts that can be made against God's justice, in punishing 23.
one for another, arises from a third consideration; which is this: That the
children are punished for the fathers sins, or indefinitely any one man for the
sins of any other man; it ought to be imputed to those sins of the Fathers or
others, not as to the causes properly deserving them, but only as occasioning
those punishments. It pleases God to take occasion from the sins of the
fathers, or of some others, to bring upon their children, or those that
otherwise belong unto them in some kind of relation, those evils which by their
own corruptions and sins they have justly deserved. This distinction of the
Cause and Occasion, if well heeded, both fully acquitteth God's justice, and
abundantly reconcileth the seeming Contradictions of Scripture, in this
Argument; and therefore it will be worth the while a little to open it.

There is a kind of Cause de numero efficientium, which the learned, for 24.
distinctions sake, call the Impulsive Cause; and it is such a cause as Quae
principalem efficientem impellit ad efficiendum. Kekerm. 1. Syst. Log. 10.
moves and induces the principal Agent to do that which it does. For example;
a Schoolmaster corrects a Boy with a rod for neglecting his Book: Of this
correction here are three dictinct causes, all in the rank of Efficients; viz.
the Master, the Rod, and the Boys neglect; but each has its proper causality
in a different kind and manner from other. The Master is the Cause, as the
principal Agent that does it; the Rod is the Cause, as the Instrument wherewith
he does it; and the Boy's neglect, the impulsive Cause for which he does it.
Semblably, in this judgment which befell Iehoram, the principal efficient Cause
and Agent, was God, (as he is in all other punishments and judgments; Amos 3. 6.
Shall there be evil in the city, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3.) and
here he takes it to himself, [ I will bring the evil upon his house.] The
Instrumental Cause under God, was 4 King. 9.
Iehu, whom God raised up, and endued with zeal and power for the execution of
that vengeance which he had determined against Ahab and against his house, as
appears in 4 Kings 9. and 10. But now, what the true proper Impulsive Cause
should be, for which he was so punished, and which moved God at that time, and
in that sort to punish him; that is the point wherein consists the chiefest
difficulty in this matter, and into which therefore we are now to enquire, viz.
Whether that were rather his own sin, or his Father Ahab's sin?

Whether we answer for this or for that, we say but the truth in both, 25.
for both sayings are true: [God punished him for his own] and [God punished
him for his fathers sin.] The difference only this: His own sins were the
impulsive cause that deserved the punishment; his fathers sin the impulsive
cause that occasioned it; and so indeed upon the point, and respectively to the
justice of God, rather his own sins were the cause of it, than his fathers:
both because justice does especially look at the desert; and also because that
which deserves the punishment is more effectually, and primarily, and properly
the impulsive cause of punishing, than that which only occasioneth it. The
terms whereby Artists express these two different kinds of impulsive causes
(borrowed from Galen and the Physicians) of Sce Keckerm. 1. Syst. log. 10.
called by Brulif. Causa dispositiva, and excitativa. Apud Altenst. in dict.
causa.
(...) and (...), would be excellent, and full of satisfaction, if they were of
easy understanding. But for that they are not so, especially to such as are
not acquainted with the terms and learning of the Schools, I forbear to use
them; and rather than to take the shortest cut over hedge and ditch, choose to
lead you an easier and plainer way, though it is something about, and that by a
familiar Example.

A man has lived for some good space in reasonable state of health, yet 26.
by gross feeding, and through continuance of time, his Body the whilst has
contracted many vicious, noisome, and malignant humors. It happens he had
occasion to ride abroad in bad weather, takes wet on his feet or neck, gets
cold with it, comes home, finds himself not well, falls a shaking first,
and anon after into a dangerous and lasting Fever. Here is a Fever, and here
are two different causes of it, an antecedent cause within, the abundance of
noisome and crude humors, (that is Interiores dispositiones quae irritantur ab
externis causis. Melancthon. Causa dispositiva. Brulifer.
Causa (...)) and the evident cause ab extra, his riding in the wet, and taking
cold upon it, (and that is Galen's Causa externa irritatrix. Melancth. Causa
excitativa. Brulifer.
causa (...).) Let us go on a little, and compare these causes. The Physician
is sent for, the sick man's friends they stand about him, and in comes the
Physician among them, and enquireth of him and them how he got his Fever. They
presently give him such Information as they can, (and the Information is both
true, and sufficient, so far as it reaches: they tell him the one cause, the
occasional cause, the outward evident cause;) [Alas, Sir, he rode such a
journey, such a time, got wet on his feet, and took cold upon it, and that has
brought him to all this:] That is all they are able to say to it; for other
cause they know none. But by and by, after some surview of the state of the
body, he is able to inform them in the other cause, the inward and original
cause; whereof they were as ignorant before, as he was of that other outward
one; and he tells them, The cause of the Malady is superfluity of crude and
noisome humors, rankness of blood, abundance of melancholy, tough phlegm, or
some other like thing within. Now if it be demanded, Which of these two is
rather the cause of his sickness? The truth is, that inward antecedent cause
within, is the very cause thereof; although perhaps it had not bred a Fever at
that time, if that other outward occasion had not been. For by that inward
hidden cause the body was prepared for an Ague, only there wanted some outward
fit accident to stir and provoke the humors within, and to set them on
working. And the Party's body being so prepared, might have fallen into the
same sickness, by some other accident as well as that; as, overheating himself
with exercise, immoderate watching, some distemper or surfeit in diet, or the
like. But neither that, nor any of these, nor any other such accident could
have cast him into such a fit, if the humors had not been ripe, and the body
thereby prepared to entertain such a disease. So as the bad humors within may
rather be said to be the true cause, and that cold-taking but the occasion of
the Ague, the disease it self issuing from the hidden cause within; and the
outward accident being the cause, not so much of the disease it self, why the
Ague should take him, as why it should take him at that time, rather than at
another; and hold him in that part, or in that manner, rather than in another.

From this example we may see in some proportion, how our own sins, 27.
and other men's, concur as joint impulsive Causes of those Punishments, which
God brings upon us. Our own sins they are the true Causa (...) interna,
antecedens, dispositiva.
hidden antecedent causes, which deserve the punishments; our Fathers sins, or
our Governors sins, or our Neighbors sins, or whatsoever other man's sins,
that are visited upon us, are only the Causa (...), externa, irritatriae,
excitativa.
outward evident* causes (or rather occasions) why we should be punished at
this time, and in this thing, and in this manner, and in this measure, and with
these circumstances. And as in the former Example, the Patient's friends
considered one cause, and the Physician another; they, the evident and outward;
he, the inward and antecedent cause; so respectively to God's Justice our own
sins only are the causes of our punishments; but in respect of his Providence
and Wisdom, our Fathers sins also, or other men's. For Justice looks upon the
desert only; and so the punishments are ever, and only from our own personal
sins, as we learned from our third Certainty; but it is Providence that
orders the occasions, and the seasons, and the other circumstances of God's
punishments.

Hence may we learn to reconcile those places of Scripture, which seem 28.
to cross one another in this Argument. In Ezekiel and Jeremiah it is said,
that Jer. 31. 30: and Ezekiel. 18. 20.
every man shall be punished for his own sins, and that the children shall not
bear the iniquity of the fathers: and yet the same Jeremiah complains as if
it were otherwise, ( Lam. 5.) Lam. 5. 7.
Our fathers have sinned, and are not: and we have born their iniquities. Yea
God himself proclaims otherwise, I am Exodus 20. 5.
a jealous God, visiting the sins of the Fathers upon the Children -- Nor only
does he visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children, but he visits also
the sins of Princes upon their Subjects; as 2 Samuel 24. 17.
David's people were wasted for his Sin in numbering them: yea, and he visits
sometimes the sins even of ordinary private men, upon public societies; [
Josh. 22. 20.
Did not Achan the son of Zerah commit a trespass in the accursed thing, and
wrath fell upon all the Congregation of Israel, and that man perished not alone
in his iniquity?] Now how can all this stand together?

Yes very well: even as well as in the act of punishing, God's Justice and 29.
his Wisdom can stand together. Mark then wheresoever the Scripture ascribes
one man's Punishment to another man's Sin, it points us to God's Wisdom and
Providence; who for good and just ends makes choice of these occasions, rather
than other sometimes, to inflict those punishments upon men, which their own
sins have otherwise abundantly deserved. On the contrary, wheresoever the
Scripture gives all punishments unto the personal Sins of the Sufferer, it
points us to God's Justice, which looks still to the desert, and does not
upon any occasion whatsoever inflict punishments, but where there are personal
Sins to deserve them; so that every man that is punished in any kind, or upon
any occasion, may join with David in that confession of his, Psalm. 51. Psalm.
51. 4.
Against thee have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight: that thou might be
justified in thy sayings, and clear when thou judge.

Say then, an unconscionable great one, by cruel oppression, wring, as 30.
Ahab did here, his poorer neighbors Vineyard from him, or by countenanced
sacrilege geld a Bishopric of a fair Lordship or Manor; and when he has done,
his prodigal Heir run one end of it away in matches, drown another end of it in
Taverns and Tap-houses, melt away the rest in Lust, and beastly sensuality: who
does not here see, both God's Justice in turning him out of that which was so
foully abused by his own Sins, and his Providence withal, in fastening the Curse
upon that portion, which was so unjustly gotten by his fathers sins? Every man
is ready to say, It was never like to prosper, it was so ill gotten; and so
acknowledge the Covetous fathers sin, as occasioning it; and yet every man can
say withal, It was never likely to continue long, it was so vainly lavished
out; and so acknowledge the prodigal Son's sin, as sufficiently deserving it.

Thus have we heard the main doubt solved. The sum of all is this: 31.
God punishes the Son for the Father's sin, but with temporal punishments, not
eternal; and with those, perhaps so as to redound to the Father's punishment in
the Son: perhaps, because the Son treads in his father's steps; perhaps,
because he possesses that from his father, to which God's curse adhereth;
perhaps, for other reasons best known to God himself, wherewith he has not
thought meet to acquaint us: but whatever the occasion be, or the ends,
evermore for the Sons own personal Sins, abundantly deserving them.

And the same resolution is to be given to the other two doubts proposed 32.
in the beginning; to that, Why God should punish any one man for another? and
to the third, Why God should punish the lesser offender for the greater? In
which, and all other doubts of like kind, it is enough, for the clearing of
God's justice, to consider, that when God does so, they are, first, only
temporal punishments which he so inflicteth; and those, secondly, no more than
what the sufferer by his own Sins has most rightfully deserved. All those
other considerations, as that the Prince and People are but one Body, and so
each may feel the smart of others sins and stripes: That oftentimes we have
given way to other men's sins, when we might have stopped them, or consent, when
we should have withstood them; or silent allowance, when we should have checked
them; or, perhaps furtherance, when we should rather have hindered them: That
the punishments brought upon us for our fathers, or other men's sins, may turn
to our great spiritual advantage, in the humbling of our Souls, the subduing of
our Corruptions, the increasing of our Care, the exercising of our Graces; That
where all have deserved the punishment, it is left to the discretion of the
Judge, whom he will pick out, the Father or the Son, the Governor or the
Subject, the Ringleader or the Follower, the Greater or the Lesser Offender,
to show exemplary justice upon, as he shall see expedient. I say, all these,
and other like Considerations many, though they are to be admitted as true, and
observed as useful, yet they are such as belong rather to God's Providence and
his Wisdom, than to his Justice. If therefore thou know not the very
particular reason, why God should punish thee in this or that manner, or upon
this or that occasion, let it suffice thee, that the Counsels and purposes of
God are secret; and thou art not to enquire with sorupolous curiosity into the
dispensation and courses of his Providence, farther than it has pleased him
either to reveal it in his Word, or by his manifest Works to discover it unto
thee. But whatsoever thou do, never make question of his Justice. Begin first
to make inquiry into thine own self, and if after impartial search, thou there
find not corruption enough to deserve all-out as much as God has laid upon
thee, then complain of Injustice, but not before. And so much for the Doubts.

Let us now from the premises raise some instructions for our use. First, 33.
Parents we think have reason to be careful (and so they have) for their
children, and to desire and labor, as much as in them lies, their welldoing.
Here is a fair course then for you that are parents, and have children to care
for, do you that which is good, and honest, and right, and they are like to
fare the better for it. Would thou then, Brother, leave thy lands, and thy
estate to thy Child, entire and free from Encumbrances? It is an honest care,
but here is the way; Juvenal. Satyr. 14.
Abstineas igitur damnandis; Leave them free from the (...). Isocr.
guilt of thy sins, which are able to cumber them beyond any statute or
mortgage. If not the bond of God's Law, if not the care of thine own Soul, if
not the fear of Hell, if not the inward checks of thine own Conscience:
Juvenal. Sat. 14.
At peccaturo obstet tibi filius infans; at the least, let the good of thy poor
sweet infants restrain thee from doing that sin, which might pull down from
heaven a plague upon them and theirs. Go to then, do not applaud thy self in
thy witty villainies, when thou have circumvented and prospered; when Ahab-like
thou have Ver. 19. hic.
killed and taken possession, when thou have larded thy leaner Revenues with
fat collops, sacrilegiously cut out of the sides or flanks of the Church, and
have nailed all these with all the appurtenances, by Fines, and Vouchers, and
Entails, as firm as Law can make them, to thy child, and his child, and his
child's child for ever. After all this stir, cast up thy bills, and see what a
goodly bargain thou have made: thou have damned thy self to undo thy Child;
thou have brought a curse upon thine own Soul, to purchase that for thy Child,
which will bring a curse both upon it and him. When thy Indentures were drawn,
and thy learned Council fee'd to peruse the Instrument, and with exact severity
to ponder with thee every clause and syllable therein; could none of you spy a
flaw in that clause [ with all and singular the appurtenances,] neither
observe, that thereby thou did settle upon thy Posterity, together with thy
Estate, the wrath, and vengeance, and curse of God, which is one of those
appurtenances? Had thou not a faithful Counselor within thine own Breast, if
thou would but have conferred and advised with him plainly and
undissemblingly, that could have told thee, thou had, by thy Oppression and
Injustice, ipso facto, cut off the entail from thy Issue, even long before thou
had made it? But if thou would leave to thy posterity a firm, and secure,
and durable estate, do this rather; purchase for them by thy charitable works,
the prayers: and blessings of the poor; settle upon them the fruits of a
religious, sober, and honest education; bequeath them the legacy of thy good
example, in all virtuous and godly living; and that portion thou leavest them
besides, of earthly things, be it much or little, be sure it be (...). Chrysostom.
in Ephesians. hom. 2.
well-gotten; otherwise never look it (...). Pausan. in Corinthiacis. V.
Juvenal. Sat. 13.
should prosper with them. 1 Cor. 5. 6.
A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, and sowereth it; and a little ill
gotten, like a Gangreen, spreads through the whole estate; and worse than
Aqua fortis, or the poisoned -- ardeo; Quantum nec ^tro delibutus Hercules
Nessi cruore. Horat. Epod. 17. See Sophocl. in Trachin.
shirt that Dejanira gave Hercules, cleaves unto it, and feeds upon it, and
by little and little gnaweth, and fretteth, and consumes it to nothing. And
surely, God's Justice has wonderfully manifested it self unto the World in
this kind, sometimes even to the public astonishment and admiration of all
men; that men of ancient Families, and great Estates, well left by their
Ancestors, and free from Debts, Legacies, or other Encumbrances, not notedly
guilty of any expenceful sin or vanity, but wary, and husbandly, and careful to
thrive in the World; not kept under with any great burden of needy friends, or
charge of Children; not much hindered by any extraordinary losses, ^or
casualities of fire, thieves, suretiship, or suits; that such men, I say,
should yet sink and decay, and run behind hand in the World, and their Estates
crumble and moulder away, and come to nothing, and no man knows how. No
question but they have sins enough of their own to deserve all this, and ten
times more than all this: but yet withal, who knows, but that it might, nay
who knows not that sometimes it does, (so legible now and then are Gods
Judgments) come upon them for the greediness, and avarice, and oppression, and
sacrilege, and injustice of their not long foregoing Ancestors? You that are
parents, take heed of these sins. It may be, for, some other reasons known best
to himself, God suffers you to go on your own time, and suspendeth the
judgments, your sins have deserved, for a space, as here he did Ahab's upon his
humiliation: but be assured, sooner or later, vengeance will overtake you or
yours for it. You have Hab. 2. ^.
Coveted an evil covetousness to your house: and there hangs a judgment over
your house for it, as rain in the clouds; which, perhaps in your sons, perhaps
in your grand-childs days, sometime or other, will come dashing down upon it,
and overwhelm it. Think not the vision is for many descents to come, -- De male
quaesitis vix gaudet tertius haeres: seldom does the Exodus 20. 5.
third, scarce ever the fourth generation pass, before God visit the sins of
the Fathers upon the Children; if he do not in the very next generation. [In
his sons days will I bring the evil upon his house.]

Secondly, if not only our own, but our Fathers sins too may be, shall be 34.
visited upon us: how concerns it us, as to repent for our own, so to lament
also the sins of our forefathers; and in our confessions and supplications to
God, sometimes to remember them, that he may forget them, and to set them
before his face, that he may cast them behind his back? We have a good
president for it in our public Letany; Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the
offenses of our forefathers! A good, and a profitable and a needful prayer it
is: and those men have not done well nor justly that have cavilled at it. (O
that men would be wise according to sobriety, and allow but just
interpretations to things advisedly established; rather than busy themselves
nodum in scirpo, to pick needless quarrels where they should not: What unity
would it bring to brethren, what peace to the Church, what joy to all good and
wise men!) As to this particular, God requires of the Israelites in Lev. 26.
that they should Lev. 26. 39. 40.
confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their Fathers. Psalm. 106. 6.
David did so, and Jer. 3. 15.
Jeremy did so, and Dan. 9. 5.
Daniel did so: in Psalm. 106. in Ierem, 3. in Dan. 9. And if David thought it a
fit curse to pronounce against Judas, and such as he was, in Psalm. 109. [ Psalm.
109 14.
Let the wickedness of his fathers be had in remembrance in the sight of the
Lord, and let not the sin of his mother be done away:] why may we not, nay how
ought we not, to pray for the removal of this very curse from us, as well as of
any other curses? The present age is rise of many enormous crying sins, which
call loud for a judgment upon the land: and if God should bring upon us a right
heavy one, whereat all ears should tingle; could we say other, but that it were
most just, even for the sins of this present generation? But if unto our own,
so many, so great, God should also add the sins of our forefathers; the
bloodshed, and tyranny, and grievous unnatural butcheries in the long times of
the Civil wars, and the universal Idolatries and superstitions covering the
whole land, in the longer and darker times of Popery: and if, as he sometimes
threatened to bring upon the Jews of Matthew. 23. 35, 36.
that one generation, all the righteous blood that ever was shed upon the
earth, from the blood of the righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias the
son of Barachias; so he should bring the sins of our Ancestors for many
generations past upon this generation of ours: who could be able to abide it?
Now, when the security of the times give us but too much cause to fear it, and
regions begin to look white toward the harvest: is it not time for us, with
all humiliation of Soul and Body to cast down our selves; and with all
contention of voice and spirit to lift up our prayers? and to say; Remember not
Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers; neither take thou
vengeance of our sins: Spare us good Lord, spare the people, whom thou have
redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for ever. Spare
us good Lord,

Thirdly, Since not only our fathers sins and our own; but our Neighbors 35.
sins too, ( aliquid malum propter vicinum malum) but especially the sins of
Princes and Governors, ( -- Hora^. 1. Epist. 2.
delirant reges, plectuntur Achivi) may bring judgments upon us, and enwrap us
in their punishments: it should teach every one of us, to seek his own private
in the common and public good; and to endeavor, if but for our own security
from punishment, to awaken others from their security in sin. How should we
send up 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
Supplications, and prayers, and intercessions for Kings, and for all that are
in authority; that God would incline their hearts unto righteous courses, and
open their ears to wholesome counsels, and strengthen their hands to just
actions? when but a sinful oversight in one of them, may prove the overthrow of
many thousands of us: as David but by once numbering his people in the pride of
his heart, lessened their number at one clap 2 Samuel 24. 15.
threescore and ten thousand. If Jos. 7. 8, 10, 15.
Israel turn their backs upon their enemies; up Joshua, and make search for the
troubler of Israel, firret out the thief, and do execution upon him: one Achan,
if but suffered, is able to undo the whole host of Israel; what mischief might
he do if countenanced, if allowed? The hour I see has overtaken me, and I must
end. To wrap up all in a word then, and conclude: Thou that have power over
others; suffer no sin in them by base connivence, but punish it: thou that have
charge of others; suffer no sin in them by dull silence, but rebuke it: thou
that have any interest in, or dealing with others; suffer no sin upon them, by
easy allowance, but distaste it: thou that have nothing else; yet by thy
charitable prayers for them, and by constant example to them, stop the course
of sin in others, further the growth of grace in others, labor by all means
(as much as in thee lies) to draw others unto God; lest their sins draw God's
judgments upon themselves and thee. This that thou may do, and that I may
do, and that every one of us, that fears God and wishes well to the Israel
of God, may do, faithfully and discreetly in our several stations and callings:
let us all humbly beseech the Lord, the God of all grace and wisdom, for his
Son Jesus sake, by his holy Spirit to enable us. To which blessed Trinity, one
only Wise, Immortal, Invisible, Almighty, most gracious and most glorious Lord
and God, be ascribed by every one of us, the kingdom, the power and the glory,
both now and for ever.

AD POPULUM.
The Fourth Sermon.
In St. Paul's Church London, Nov. 4. 1621.
1 COR. VII. 24. Brethren, let every man wherein he is called, therein abide
with God.
IF flesh and blood be suffered to make the Gloss, it is 1.
able to corrupt a right good Text. It easily turns the doctrine of Gods
grace into Jude 4.
wantonness: and as easily the doctrine of Christian liberty into
licentiousness. These Corinthians, being yet but 1 Cor. 3. 1, 3, 4.
Carnal; for the point of Liberty consulted (it seems) but too much with this
cursed Gloss. Which taught them to interpret their Calling to the Christian
Faith, as an Exemption from the duties of all other callings: as if their
spiritual freedom in Christ had cancelled ipso facto all former obligations,
whether of Nature or Civility. The Husband would put away his Wife, the Servant
disrespect his Master, every other man break the bonds of relation to every
other man: and all under this pretense, and upon this ground, that Christ has
made them free. In this passage of the Chapter, the Apostle occasionally
corrects this error: principally indeed as the present Argument led him, in
the particular of Marriage; but with a farther and more universal extent to all
outward states and conditions of life. The sum of his Doctrine this. He that
is yoked with a wife, must not put her away, but count her worthy of all love;
he that is bound to a Master, must not despise him, but count him worthy of all
honor; every other man that is tied in any relation to any other man, must not
neglect him, but count him worthy of all good offices and civil respects
suitable to his place and person: though She or He, or that other, be Infidels
and Unbelievers. The Christian Calling does not at all prejudice, much less
overthrow, it rather establishes and strengthens those interests, that arise
from natural relations, or from voluntary contracts (either domestical or
civil) betwixt Man and Man. The general rule to this effect he conceives in
the form of an Exhortation; that every man (notwithstanding his calling unto
liberty in Christ) abide in that station wherein God has placed him, contain
himself within the bounds thereof, and cheerfully and contentedly undergo the
duties* that belong thereto, verse. 17. As God has distributed to every man, as
the Lord has called every one, so let him walk.] And lest this Exhortation,
(as it fares with most other, especially such as come in but upon Ex incidenti
dat documentum generale. Lyran. ad ver. 17.
the by, as this does,) should be slenderly regarded: the more fully to Quod,
ut plene commendet, reiterat. Ambros. in 1 Cor. 7. 37.
commend it to their consideration and practice, he repeateth it once again
verse 20. [ Let every man abide in the same calling, wherein he is called.] And
now again once more; in the words of this verse; concluding therewith the whole
discourse into which he had digressed, [ Brethren, let every man, wherein he is
called, therein abide with God.]

From which words, I desire it may be no prejudice to my present discourse, if
I take occasion to entreat at this time of a very needful argument; viz.
concerning the Necessity, Choice, and Use of particular callings. 2.
Which whilst I do, if any shall blame me for shaking hands with my Text: let
such know, First, that it will not be very charitably done, to pass a hard
censure upon another labor; no nor yet very providently for their own good,
to slight a profitable truth for some little seeming impertinency, Secondly,
that the points proposed are indeed not impertinent: the last of them (which
supposes also the other two) being the very substance of this Exhortation: and
all of them such as may without much violence be drawn from the very words
themselves, at leastwise if we may be allowed the liberty (which is but
reasonable) to take in also the other two verses, the 17. and the 20. in sense,
and for substance, all one with this: as anon in the several handlings of them
in part will appear. But howsoever, Thirdly, (which Saint Bernard deemed a
sufficient Apology for himself in a case of like nature, Noverint -- me non tam
intendisse exponere evangelium, quam ex Evangelio sumere occasionem loquendi,
quod loqui delectabat. Bernard. super Missus est.
Noverint me non tam intendisse, etc.) let them know, that, in my choice of
this Scripture, my purpose was not so much to bind my self to the strict
exposition of the Apostolical Text, as to take occasion therefrom to deliver
what I desired to speak, and judged expedient for you to hear; concerning, 1.
the Necessity, 2. the Choice, and 3. the Use of particular Callings.

Points, if ever need to be taught and known; certainly, in these days most.
Wherein some habituated in idleness, will not betake themselves to any Calling:
like a heavy jade, that is good at bit, and 3.
naught else. These would be soundly spurred up, and whipped on end, 1.
Othersome, through weakness, do not make good choice of a fit Calling: 2.
like a young unbroken thing that has metal, and is free, but is ever wrying
the wrong way. These would be fairly checked, turned into the right way, and
guided with a steady and skilful hand. A third 3.
sort (and I think the greatest) through unsetledness, or discontentedness or
other untoward humor, walk not soberly, and uprightly, and orderly in their
Calling: like an unruly Colt, that will over hedge and ditch; no ground will
hold him, no fence turn him. These would be well fettered and side-hanckled for
leaping. The first sort are to be taught the Necessity of a Calling; the
second, to be directed for the Choice of their Calling; the third, to be
bounded and limited in the Exercise of their Calling. Of which three, in their
order: and of the First; first, the Necessity of a Calling.

The Scriptures speak of two kinds of Vocations or Callings: the one, 4.
ad Foedus; the other, ad Munus. The usual known terms are; the General, and
the Particular Calling. Vocatio ad Foedus, or the General Calling, is that
wherewith God calls us, either outwardly in the ministry of his Word, or
inwardly by the efficacy of his Spirit, or jointly by both, to the faith and
obedience of the Gospel, and to the embracing of the Covenant of grace and of
mercy and salvation by Jesus Christ. Which is therefore termed the General
Calling, (not for that it is of larger extent than the other, but) because the
thing whereunto we are thus called, is one and the same, and common to all that
are called. The same duties, and the same promises, and every way the same
conditions. Here is no difference in regard of Persons: but Ephesians. 4. 4, 5.
One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one Body, and one Spirit; even as we are all
called in one hope of our Calling: That Is the General Calling. Vocatio ad
Munus. Our Particular Calling, is that wherewith GOD enableth us, and directs
us, and puts us on to some special course and condition of life, wherein to
employ our selves, and to exercise the gifts he has bestowed upon us, to his
glory, and the benefit of our selves, and others. And it is therefore termed a
Particular Calling: not as if it concerned not all in general; (for we shall
prove the contrary anon;) but because the thing whereunto men are thus called,
is not one and the same to all, but differenced with much variety according to
the quality of particular persons, Ver. 7. hic*
Alius sic, alius vero sic: [Every man has his proper gift of God; one man on
this manner, another on that.] Here is Ibid.
(...) some called to be Magistrates, some Ministers, some Merchants, some
Artificers, some one thing, some another, as to their particular Callings. But
as to the General Calling, there is Jude 3.
(...), the common Salvation: all called to the same State of being the
servants and children of God; all called to the performance of the same duties
of servants, and to the expectation of the same inheritance of children; all
called to be Christians. Of both which Callings, the General and Particular,
there is not (I take it) any where in Scripture mention made so expressly and
together, as in this passage of our Apostle; especially at the 20. verse. [ Let
every man abide in the same calling wherein he is called.] Where, besides the
matter, the Apostles elegancy is observable in using the same word in
Antanaclasis. Piscat. hic.
both significations: the Noun signifying the Particular, and the Verb the
General Calling. Let every one abide in the same calling wherein he was called;
bearing sense, as if the Apostle had said, Let every man abide in the same
Particular Calling, wherein he stood at the time of his General Calling. And
the same, and no other, is the meaning of the words of my Text.

Whence it appears, that the Calling my Text implies, and wherein every man
is here exhorted to abide, is to be understood of the Particular, and not of
the General Calling. And of this Particular Calling it is we now intend to
speak. And that in the more Proper and restrained signification of it, as it
imports some settled course of life with reference to business, office, and
employment: accordingly as we say, a man is called to be a Minister, called to
be a Lawyer, called to be a Tradesman; and the like. Although I cannot be
ignorant, that our Apostle (as the stream, of his argument carried him) here
takes the word in a much wider extent; as including not only such special
courses of life as refer to employment, but even all outward personal states
and conditions of men whatsoever, whether they have such reference, or no: as
we may say, a man is called to Marriage, or to single life, called to riches or
poverty, and the like.

But, omitting this larger signification, we will hold our selves either 6.
only or principally to the former: and by Calling understand A special settled
course of life, wherein mainly to employ a man's gifts and time, for his own and
the common good. The Necessity whereof whilst we mention, you are to imagine,
not an absolute and positive, but a conditional and suppositive necessity. Not
as if no man could be without one de facto, (daily experience in these
dissolute times manifests the contrary:) but because de jure no man should be
without one. This kind of Calling is indeed necessary for all men: But how? Not
as a necessary thing, ratione termini, so as the want thereof would be an
absolute impossibility: but, virtute praecepti, as a necessary duty, the
neglect whereof would be a grievous and sinful enormity. He that will do that
which he ought, and is in conscience bound to do; must of necessity live in
some calling or other. That is it we mean by the necessity of a Calling. And
this Necessity we are now to prove.

And that First, from the Obedience we owe to every of Gods Ordinances; 7.
and the account we must render for every of Gods Gifts. Amongst those
Ordinances this is one, and one of the first; that Genesis 3. 19.
in the sweat of our faces every man of us should eat our bread, Genesis 3. The
force of which precept, let none think to avoid by a quirk: that forsooth it
was laid upon Adam after his transgression, rather as a Curse, which he must
endure; than as a Duty, which he should perform. For first; as some of Gods
Curses, (such is his Goodness) are promises as well as curses; as is that of
the Genesis 3. 15.
Enmity between the Woman's seed and the Serpents: so some of Gods Curses (such
is his Justice) are Precepts as well as Curses; as is that of the Genesis 3. 16.
Ephesians. 5. 22. Col. 5. 18. 1 Timothy 2. 11, etc.
Woman's subjection to the Man. This of eating our bread in the sweat of our
face, is all the three: it is a Curse; it is a Promise; it is a Precept. It is
a Curse; in that God will not suffer the earth to afford us bread, without our
sweat. It is a Promise; in that God assures us, we shall have bread for our
sweat. And it is a Precept too; in that God enjoyneth us, if we will have
bread, to sweat for it. Secondly, although it may not be gainsaid, but that
that injunction to Adam was given as a Curse; yet the substance of the
Injunction was not the thing wherein the Curse did formally consist. Herein was
the Curse: that whereas before the fall, the task which God appointed man was
with Non erat laboris afflictio, sed exhilaratio voluntatis August. in 8. de
Genesis ad lit. 8. -- Non labor servili, sed honesta animi voluptate. Ibid. c. 9.
pleasure of body, and content of mind, without sweat of brow or brain; now
after the Fall he was to toil and forecast for his living, with Sore travel,
Eccles. 1. 13. Great travel and a heavy yoke. Syrac. 40, 1.
care of mind, and travel of body, with Eccl. 12. 12.
weariness of flesh, Eccl. 1. 14, 17.
and vexation of spirit. But as for the substance of the Injunction, which is,
that every man should have somewhat to do, wherein to bestow himself, and his
time, and his gifts, and whereby to earn his bread: in this it appears not to
have been a Curse, but a Precept of divine institution; that Adam, in the time
and state of innocence, before he had deserved a Curse, was yet enjoined his
Task, Genesis 2. 15.
To dress and to keep the garden. And as Adam lived himself, so he bred up his
children. His two first born, though heirs apparent of all the world, had yet
their peculiar employments; the one in Genesis 4. 2.
tillage, the other in pasturage. And as many since, as have walked orderly,
have observed Gods Ordinance herein; Ephesians. 4. 28.
Working with their hands the thing that is good in some kind or other* those
that have set themselves in no such good way, our Apostle elsewhere justly
blaming as (...). 2. These. 3. 6, 11.
inordinate, or disorderly walkers. And how can such disorderly ones hope to
find approvance in the sight of our God, who is a God of Order? He commands
us to live in a Calling: and woe to us, if we neglect it.

But say there were no such express Command for it: the very distribution 8.
of God's gifts were enough to lay upon us this necessity. Where God bestows,
he binds: and to whom any thing is Luke 12. 48.
given, of him something shall be required. The inference is stronger, than
most are aware of; from the Ability to the Duty, from the Gift to the Work,
from the Fitting to the Calling. Observe how this Apostle knitteth them
together at the 17. Verse. [ Ver. 17. hic.
as God has distributed to every man, as the Lord has called every one, so
let him walk.] God has distributed to every man some proper gift, or other:
and therefore every man must glorify God in some peculiar Calling or other.
And in Ephesians. 4. having alleged that of the Psalm, He Psalm. 68. 18.
gave gifts unto men; immediately he infers, Ephesians. 4. 8, etc.
He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, etc. as giving us to understand, that
for no other end God did bestow upon some Apostolical, upon others Prophetical,
upon others gifts in other kinds; but that men should employ them, some in the
Apostolical, some in the Prophetical, some in Offices and Callings of other
kinds. And if we confess that Deus and Natura nihil faciunt frustra.
Nature does not, we may not think the God of Nature does bestow abilities,
whereof he intends no use: for that were to bestow them Frustra est potentia,
quae non perducitur in actum.
in vain. Since then he bestows gifts and graces upon every man, some or
other, and none in vain; let every man take heed, that he receive them not in
vain: let every man beware of Luke 19. 20.
napkening up the talent, which was delivered him to trade withal: Let all, As
1 Pet. 4. 10.
every one has received the gift, even so minister the same one to another, as
good Stewards of the manifold graces of God. The manifestation of the Spirit
being given to every man 1 Cor. 12. 7.
to profit withal; he that lives unprofitably with it, and without a Calling,
abuses the intent of the giver, and must answer for his abuse.

Secondly, the necessity of a Calling, is great in regard of a man's self: 9.
and that more ways than one. For man being by nature active, so as he cannot
be long, but he must be doing: he that has no honest vocation to busy himself
in, that has nothing of his own to do, must needs from doing nothing, proceed
to doing naught. That saying of Cato was subscribed by the wiser Heathens as an
Oracle, Catonis oraculum, quo nihil verius. Colum. 11. de re rust. 1.
Nihil agendo male agere disces. Syrac. 33. 28.
Idleness teaches much evil, says the wise son of Syrac: nay all kind of
evil, as some copies have it. It has an ear open to every extravagant motion;
it gives entertainment to a thousand sinful fancies; it exposes the soul to
all the assaults of her Ghostly enemies: and whereas the Devils greatest
business is, to tempt other men; the idle man's only business is to tempt the
Devil. Experience of all Histories and times shows us, what advantages the
Devil has won upon godly and industrious men otherwise, (as upon David in the
matter of Uriah, and many others) only by watching the opportunity of their
idle hours, and plying them with suggestions of noysom lusts, at such times, as
they had given themselves but some little intermission more than ordinary, from
their ordinary employments. How will he not then lead captive at his pleasure
those, whose whole lives are nothing else but a long vacation; and their whole
care nothing but to make up a Nos numerus sumus and fruges consumere nati.
Horat. 1. Epist. 2.
number, and to waste the good creatures of God? There is no readier sanctuary
for thee then, good Christian, when the Devil pursues thee, than to betake thy
self at once to prayer, and to the -- res age, tutus eris. Ovid. de remed.
works of thy Calling: fly thither, and thou art safe, as in a Castle. Non
licet is a very good, and proper, and direct answer, when the Devil would tempt
thee to sin; It is evil, and I may not do it: but yet Non vacat is the stronger
answer, and surer; I am busy, and I cannot do it. That gives him scope to
reply; and it is not safe to hold argument with the Devil upon any terms: he is
a cunning Sophister, and thou may be circumvented by a subtilty before thou
art aware. But this stubborn and blunt answer cutteth off all reply; and
disheartneth the Tempter for that time. It was Saint Hierom's advice to his
friend; Hieron. ad Rusticum. Tom. 1. Ep. 4.
Semper boni aliquid operis facito, ut Diabolus te semper inveniat occupatum;
Be always doing something, that the Devil may never find thee at leisure. There
is no Cross, no Holy water, no Exorcism so powerful to drive away and to
conjure down the Fiend, as Employment is, and faithful labor in some honest
Calling.

Thirdly, Life must be preserved, Families maintained, the poor relieved: 10.
this cannot be done without Bread, for that is the Lev. 26. 26.
staff of life; and Bread cannot be gotten, or not honestly, but in a lawful
vocation or Calling, Which whoever neglects, is in very deed no better, than
a very (...). Phocylides. (...). Chrysostom. in Ephesians. Hom. 2.
thief: the Bread he eats he cannot call his own. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 11, 12.
We hear. says St. Paul, writing to the Thessalonians, that there are some
among you that walk inordinately, and work not at all, but are busy bodies:
Them therefore that are such, we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ,
that they work with quietness, and eat their own bread. As if it were not their
own bread, if not gotten with the work of their own hands, and in the sweat of
their own faces. And again, writing to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4. 28.
Let him that stole, steal no more: but rather let him labor, etc. If he will
not steal, he must labor; and if he do not labor, he does steal: steal from
himself, steal from his family, steal from the poor.

He steals from himself, and so is a kind of Felo de se. Spend he must: 11.
and if there be no gettings to repair what is spent, the stock will shrink and
waste, and (...). Hesiod. in (...).
beggary will be the end. God has ordained Labor as a proper means whereby to
obtain the good things of this life: without which, as there is no promise, so
ordinarily there is no performance of those blessings of plenty and
sufficiency. God has a bountiful hand; Psalm. 145. 16.
He opens it, and fills all things living with plenteousness: but unless we
have a diligent hand, wherewith to receive it, we may starve. Qui vitat molam,
vit^t sarinam. Adag.
No Mill, we say, no Meal. And he that by the sloth of his hand disfurnisheth
himself of the means of getting, he is as near of kin to a waster as may be;
(that they may call Prove. 18. 9.
Brothers:) and it is but just, if Gods curse light upon him, and that he has;
and bring him to want, yea to nothing.

He steals also from his Family, which should eat the fruit of his labors.
13.
The painful house-wife; see in what a happy case her husband is, and her
children, and her servants, and all that belong to her. They Prove. 31. verse.
15, 21, 27, 28.
are not afraid of hunger, or cold, or any such thing: they are well fed, and
well clad, and carefully looked unto. Her husband praises her, and her
servants, and her children, when they have kneeled down, and asked her
blessing, arise up, and call her blessed, Prove. 31. But the idle man, that for
want of a course to live in, impoverisheth himself, and his family, whom he is
bound to maintain; is a burden to his friends, an eyesore to his kindred; the
shame of his name, the ruin of his house, and the bane of his posterity. He
bequeatheth misery to his offspring instead of plenty: they that should fare
the better for him, are undone by him; and he that should give his children
Gods blessing and his, pulls upon himself Gods curse and theirs. 1 Timothy 5. 8.
If any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own house, he
has denied the Faith, and is in that respect even worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5. 8. The very Infidels take themselves bound to this care: Let not him
that professes the faith of Christ, by his supine carelessness this way,
justify the Infidel, and deny the Faith.

He steals also (which is the basest Theft of all) from the poor: in 13.
robbing them of that relief, which he should minister unto them out of his
honest gettings; the overplus whereof is their proper revenue. The good
house-wife, of whom we heard something already out of the 31st of the Proverbs,
Prove. 31. 13.
Seeks wool and flax, Verse. 19.
Lays her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the distaff. But cui bono,
and to what end, and for whose sake, all this? Not only for her self, Verse. 22.
To make her coverings of Tapestry, though that also; nor yet only for her
household, Verse. 21.
To cloth them in scarlet, though that also: but withal that she might have
somewhat in her hands Verse. 20.
To reach out to the poor and needy; like another Dorcas, to make Acts 9. 39.
coats and garments for them, that Job 51. 20.
their l^yns might bless her. So every man should be painful and careful, to
get some of the things of this Earth by his faithful labor: not as a foolish
Worldling, to make a Mammon of it; but as a wise Steward to Luke 16. 9.
make him Friends with it. So Romans 22. 13.
Distributing it to the necessities of the poor Saints, that it may redound
also upon the by, to his own advantage: whilst sowing to them temporal things,
the comfort of his Alms, he reapeth in recompense of it, their spiritual
things, the benefit of their Prayers. Saint Paul exhorts the Ephesians by
word of mouth, (and it was the very close of his solemn farewell, when he took
his last leave of them, and should see their face no more;) that Acts 20. 34,
35.
By their labor they ought to support the weak, and minister to the
necessities of others; remembering the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It
is more blessed to give than 14.
to receive. And after his departure, he thought it needful for him to put them
in mind of the same duty once again by letter; Ephesians. 4. 28.
Let him that stole steal no more, but rather let him labor, working with his
hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give to him that needs. Lay
all this that I have now last said together: and say if you know a verier Thief
than the Idle person? that steals from himself, and so is a foolish Thief;
steals from his Family and friends, and so is an unnatural Thief; steals
from the poor, and so is a base Thief.

Fourthly, and lastly: a Calling is necessary in regard of the Public. God
has made us (...). Arist. 1 Pol. 2.
sociable creatures; contrived us into Policies and Societies and
Commonwealths; made us Membra sumus corporis magni, Senec. Epist. 93.
fellow members of one body, and Romans 12. 5.
every one another members. As therefore we are not Non nobis solum nati
samus; sed partim patria, partim parentibus, etc. Cic. ex Plat. Epist. 9. In
commune nati sumus. Senec. Ep. 95.
born, so neither must we live, to and for our selves alone: but our Parents,
and Friends, and Acquaintance, nay every man of us has a kind of right and
interest in every other man of us, and our (...). Arist. 8. Pol. 1.
Country and the Commonwealth in us all. And as in the artificial body of a
Clock one Wheel moves another, and each part gives and receives help to and
from other; and as in the natural body of a Man, consisting of many members,
all the members Romans 12. 4.
Have not the same Office, (for that would make a confusion) yet there is no
member in the body so mean or small, but has its proper faculty, function and
use whereby it becomes useful to the whole Body, and helpful to its
fellow members in the body: so should it be in the Civil Body of the State, and
in the Mystical Body of the Church. Every man should confer aliquid in
publicum, put to his helping hand to advance the common good, employ himself
some way or other, in such sort, as he may be (...). Arist. 8. Pol. 1.
serviceable to the whole body, and profitable to his fellow* members in the
body. For which reason, the ancient renowned Commonwealths were so careful to
ordain, that no man should live but in some Profession; and take district
Examination who did otherwise; and to punish them, some with fasting, some with
infamy, some with banishment, yea and some with death. The care of the Indians,
Egyptians, Athenians, and other herein, See Valor. Max. 2. 6. Patric. 1. de
Rep. 8. Cassan. 11. Catal. glor. consid. 1.
Historians relate, and I omit. It were to be wished that Christan
Commonwealths would take some greater care, if but from their example, to rid
themselves of such unnecessary burdens as are good for nothing but to devour
the fruits of the Land; and either force these -- (...). Hesiod in (...). Plat.
Polit. 8.
droans to take pains for their living, or else thrust them out of the Hives
for their Idleness.

Which course if it were taken; what would become of many thousands 15.
in the World, quibus anima pro sale, who like Swine live in such sensual and
unprofitable sort, as we might well doubt whether they had any living souls in
their bodies at all or no, were it not barely for this one argument, That their
bodies are a degree sweeter than Carrion? I mean all such of what rank and
condition soever they be, as, for want of a Calling, mis-spend their precious
time, bury their Masters talent, waste Gods good Creatures, and wear away
themselves in idleness, without doing good to themselves, to their friends, to
humane society. Infinite is the number of such -- (...). Homer. Iliad. 6.
unprofitable burdens of the Earth: but there are amongst other, three sorts
of them especially, whereof the World ringeth, and such as a man that has to
speak of this argument can scarce baulk without some guilt of unfaithfulness.
It -- (...). Plat. in Theaet.
is no matter how you rank them; for there is never a better of the three. And
therefore take them hand over head, as they come they are Monks, Gallants, and
Rogues.

First, those (...), Tit. 2. 12.
Evil Beasts, slow-bellies; stall-fed Monks 16.
and Friars: who live mewed up in their Cells and Cloisters; like Boars in a
Franck, pining themselves into Lard, and beating down their bodies till their
girdles crack. I quarrel not the first Institution and Original of these kind
of men: which was then excusably good, the condition of those times considered:
and might yet be tolerably followed even in these times, if those gross
Superstitions and foul Abuses, which in process of time have adhered, and are
by long and universal custom grown almost essential thereunto, could be fairly
removed. But Incredibile dictu est, quantum a majoribus suis degeneraverint.
Polyd. Virgil. Hist. Angl. lib. 6.
Monkery was not then that thing, which now it is. There was not then that
Opinion of Sanctity and Perfection in the Choice; that imposition of unlawful,
unnatural, and (to some men) impossible Vows, in the Entrance; that clogg of
ridiculous Habits and Ceremonies, and regular irregular Observances, in the
Use; that heavy Note of Apostasy upon such as altered their course, in the
loose: all which now there are. Those by their fastings, and watchings, and
devotions, and charity, and learning, and industry, and temperance, and
unaffected austerity and strictness of life, won from many of the ancient
Fathers (as appeared in their writings) ample and large testimonies of their
virtue and piety, and that most deservedly: although their willingness ( out of
a zealous desire to excite others to the imitation of their virtues) to set
forth their praises in the highest Panegyric strains they could, drew from
their pens now and then such Hyperbolical excesses in modo loquendi, as gave
occasion to those Superstitions in after-ages, which they then never dreamed
of. But such were those Monks of old: so good, so godly. Whereas these V.
Erasm* in Adag. Monacho indoctior. Nic. de Clemang. 3. de corrupto Eccl. statu,
c. 21 -- 23. Camden. in Brit. p. 766. Fr. Mod. in l. de ordin. Eccles. Polyd.
Virg. 7. de invent. 4. Alu. Pelag. 2. de planct. Eccl. 2. 73. 83, etc.
Palingen. in Leo. Virg. Sagittat etc.
of latter times, by their affected absurd habits, and gestures, and Rules; by
their gross and dull ignorance; by their insufferable pride, though pretending
humility; and their more than Pharisaical overlooking of others, by their
insatiable Avarice, and palpable Arts of getting into their hands the fattest
of the Earth, and that under color of* Religion, and pretenses of Poverty; by
their sensual wallowing in all ease, and idleness, and fullness of bread, and
(the fruits of these) in abominable and prodigious filthiness and luxury:
became as Proverbs and as by-words in the mouths and pens of men of all sorts.
No sober Writer almost of any note, even in those darker times, but noted and
bewailed the corrupt Estate of the Church and Clergy in that behalf: for by
this time, you must know, these droans had thrust themselves against all reason
and common sense, into the rank of Churchmen, and shrouded themselves under
the Title of the Clergy. Diverse godly and learned men Richard Armachanus, Gul.
de S. Amore, Nic* de Clemangis, Rob. Abbas Molismensis, etc.
wrote against the Abuses, desired a Reformation, labored to have Monkery
reduced, if not to the first Institution, (there seemed to be little hope of
that, things were so far out of course) yet at leastwise to some tolerable
expression of it. The Poets wanted no sport the while; who made themselves
bitterly merry with descanting upon the lean skuls, and the O Monachi, vestri
stomachi sunt amphora Bacchi, etc.
fat paunches of these lasie gutlings: there was flesh-hold enough for the
riming Satyrists, and the Wits of those times, whereon to fasten the sorest and
the strongest teeth they had.

Not to insist upon other Differences; that which concerns the point 17.
we have in hand, argues a manifest and wide declination in these kind of men
from their primitive purity. The ancient V. de Aegyptiorum Monachis Chrysostom.
in Mat. hom. 8.
Monks lived upon the labor of their hands: and thereby not only maintained
themselves, (which they might do with a very little in that course of
Abstinence and Austerity wherein they lived) but relieved many others, and did
many pious and charitable Works out of that they had earned with their fingers.
And when about S. Augustine's, and S. Hierom's times, Monks began to relish
Ease, and under pretense of Reading and Prayer to leave off working, and to
live upon the sweat of other men's brows; both those good Fathers misliked it:
Saint Hierome to Aegyptiorum monasteria hunc ordinem tenent, ut nullum absque
operis labor suscipiant. Hier. Tom. 2. Epist. 4.
Rusticus alleging the laudable Custom of the Monasteries in Egypt, which
admitted none to be Monks but with express condition of labor; and Saint
Augustine in a just Tom. 3. libro de opere Monachorum.
Treatise opposing it not without some bitterness, rebuking them as
contumacious and peevishly Qui autem se dicunt vacare lectioni, nonne illic
inveniunt quod praecipit Apostolus? Quae est ista ergo perversitas lectioni
nolle obtemperare, dum vult ei vacare, and, ut quod bonum est diutius legatur,
id eo facere nolle quod legitur? c. 17. ib.
perverse, who reading in the Scriptures, that he that will not labor, shall
not eat, do ye resist the Apostles Admonition, and under pretense that they may
have leisure to read, refuse to obey what they do read. But Ease is (...).
Euripid. in Hipp. coron.
pleasing to flesh and blood; and will not be easily wrung from those that have
any while given themselves to it, especially when it can pretend the face and
color of Religion. So that for all this the humor still increased and spread;
till at the length there grew whole Orders of disorderly Mendicants begging
runagate Friars: who by their Affected poverty, diverting the Charity of
well-minded people from those that were truly poor, enriched themselves with
the spoils of the poor, and under color of long prayers, made a prey not now
(as those craving Pharisees of old, whose simplicity they pity) of Matt. 23. 14.
Widows houses, but of goodly Lordships, and whole Countries before them. It is
well known in this our Land, how both Church and Commonwealth groaned under
the burden of these heavy Lubbers: the Commonwealth, whilst they became Lords
of very little less (by their computation who have traveled in the search)
than the one half of the Temporalties of the Kingdom; and the Church, whilst
they engrossed into their hands the fruits of most of the best Benefices in the
Realm; allowing scarce so much as the Chaff toward the maintenance of those
that 1 Cor. 9. 9.
trod out the Corn. Their profession is (God be thanked) now long since
suppressed, and their habitations demolished, by the violent and Iehu-like
reformation of a mighty King: and the land by that means well-purged of those
overspreading Locusts. There is nothing of them now remains, but the Rubbish
of their Nests, and the stink of their Memory; unless it be the sting of their
devilish Sacrilege in robbing the Church by damnable Impropriations.

But let them go. The next we meet withal are those, with whose either 18.
Birth, or Breeding, or Estate it sorteth not (as they think) to be tied to
labor in any Vocation. It is the sin of many of the Gentry, whom God has
furnished with means and abilities to do much good; to (...). Epitaph.
Timocreontis, apud Athen. Dipnos. 5.
spend their whole days and lives, in an unprofitable course of doing either
nothing, or as good as nothing, or worse than nothing. I cannot be so either
stupid, as not to apprehend; or rigorous, as not to allow a difference in the
manner of employment, and in other circumstances thereto belonging, between
those that are nobly or generously born and bred, and those of the meaner and
ordinary rank. Manual, and Servile, and Mechanic Trades and Arts, are for men
of a lower condition. But yet no man is born, no man should be bred unto
idleness. There are generous, and ingenuous, and liberal Employments, sortable
to the greatest Births and Educations. For some man whom God has blessed with
power and authority in his Country; with fair Livings and large Revenues; with
a numerous Family of Servants, Retainers and Tenants, and the like: it may be a
sufficient Calling, and enough to take up his whole time, even to keep
Hospitality, and to order and overlook his Family, and to dispose of his Lands
and Rents, and to make Peace, and preserve Love and Neighborhood among them
that live near or under him. He that does but this as he ought to do, or is
otherwise Non otiose vivit, qui qualitercunque utiliter. 2. 2. qu. 187. 5. ad 2.
industrious for the common good; must be acknowledged a worthy member of the
Common wealth: and his course of life, a Calling (although perhaps not so
toylsom, yet) in suo genere, as necessary and profitable, as that of the
Husbandman, Merchant, Lawyer, Minister; or any other.

But for our ( mere or parcel) Gallants, who live in no settled course of 19.
life, but spend half the day in sleeping, half the night in gaming, and the
rest of their time in other Pleasures and Vanities, to as little purpose as
they can devise; as if they were born for nothing else but to eat and drink,
and snort and sport; who are spruce and trim as the Lilies Mat. 6. 29.
( Solomon in all his royalty was not clothed like one of these:) yet they
neither sow, nor reap, nor carry into the Barn; they neither labor nor spin,
nor do any thing else for the good of humane society: let them know, there is
not the poorest contemptible creature, that cries Oysters and Kitchinstuff in
the streets, but deserves his Bread better than they; and his course of life
is of better esteem with God and every sober wise man, than theirs. A horse
that is neither good for the Way, nor the Cart, nor the Race, nor the Wars, nor
any other Service; let him be of never so good a Nempe volu^rem. Sic laudamus
equum. Nobilis hic, quocunque venit de gramine -- Sed venale pecus Corythae,
posteritas and Hirpini, si rara jugo victoria sedit, Nil ibi majorum respectus,
gratia nulla Umbrarum, dominos preciis mutare jubentur Exiguis. Juvenal. Satyr.
8.
Breed, never so well marked and shaped; yet he is but a Jade: his Master
sets no store by him, thinks his meat ill bestowed on him; every man will
say, better knock him on the head than keep him; his Skin, though not much
worth, is yet better worth than the whole Beast besides.

Consider this, you that are of Noble or Generous Birth. Look unto the Rock,
whence you were hewn; and to the pit, whence you were dug. 20.
Search your Pedigrees; collect the scattered Monuments and Histories of your
Ancestors: and observe by what steps your worthy Progenitors raised their
houses to the height of Gentry, or Nobility. Scarce shall you find a man of
them, that gave any accession, or brought any noted Eminency to his house; but
either serving in the Camp, or sweating at the Bar, or waiting at the Court, or
adventuring on the Seas, or trucking in his Shop, or some other way (...).
Euripid.
industriously bestirring himself in some settled Calling, and Course of life.
You usurp their Arms, if you inherit not their Virtues: and those Effigies quo
Tot bellatorum, si luditur alea pernox Ante Numantinos? Juven. Sat. 8.
Ensigns of Honor and Gentry which they by industry achieved, sit no
otherwise upon your shoulders, than as rich trappings upon Asses backs; which
serve but to render the poor Beast more ridiculous. If you by brutish
sensuality, and spending your time in swinish luxury, stain the colors, and
embase the metals of those badges of your Gentry and Nobility, which you claim
by descent: think, when we worship or honor you, we do but Narium cujusdam,
Atlanta vocamus; Aethiopem Cygnum. Juven. Ibid.
flout you; and know, the -- Honores, Quos illis damus, and dedimus, quibus
omnia debes. Juven. Ibid.
Titles we in courtesy give you, we bestow upon their Memories whose
degenerate Offspring you are, and whose Arms you unworthily bear; and they do
no Quis enim generosum dixerit hunc, qui Indignus genere? Ibid.
more belong to you, than the reverence the good man did to Isis, belonged to
the Ass that carried her Image.

The third sort of those that live unprofitably and without a Calling, are our
idle sturdy Rogues, and vagrant towns-end Beggars: the very scabs, and filth,
and vermin of the Commonwealth. I mean such as have health, 21.
and strength, and limbs, and are in some measure able to work and take pains
for their living; yet rather choose to wander abroad the Country, and to spend
their days in a most base and ungodly course of life: and which is yet more
lamentable, by I know not what connivence, contrary to all Conscience, Equity,
and Law are suffered. All Christian Commonwealths should be the Gal. 6. 16.
Isreal's of God; and in his Israel, God as he promised there should be some
always Mat 26. 11.
poor, on whom to exercise Charity; so he ordained there should be As some
understand that in Deuteronomy. 15. 4.
no beggar, to make a trade and profession of begging. Plato, than whom never
any laid down a more exact Idea of an happy Commonwealth, allows not any
(...). Plat. de legib. 11.
beggar therein: alleging, that where such were tolerated* it was impossible
but the State must abound with (...). Id. de Rep. l. 8.
pilfering and whoring, and all kind of base Villainy. The Civil Laws have flat
Constitutions against them, in the titles Cod. Justin. lib. 11. Tit. 25. and
Cod. Theo. 14. Tit. 11.
de Mendicantibus non invalidis. But I think never Kingdom had more wholesome
Laws in both kinds, I mean both for the competent relief of the orderly poor,
and for sharp restraint of disorderly Vagabonds; than those provisions which in
many of our own Memories have been made in this land. But Horat. l. 3* Carm. 24.
Quid leges sine moribus --? Those Laws are now no Laws for want of due
Execution: But Beggars are Beggars still, for want of due Correction. Tacit.
lib. 1. Hist.
Et vetabitur semper, and retinebitur; the saying is truer of Rogues and
Gypsies in England, than ever it was of Mathematicians in Rome. You to whose
care the preservation of the Justice, and thereby also of the Peace of the Land
is committed, as you tender the Peace and Justice of the Land, as you tender
your own quiet and the safety of your Neighbors; as you tender the weal of
your Country, and the honor of God: breath fresh life into the languishing
Laws by severe Execution; be rather cruel to these Vipers than to the State. So
shall you free us from the Plague, and your selves from the Guilt, and them
from the Opportunities of infinite sinful abominations.

But we are unreasonable to press you thus far, or to seek to you or any 22.
others for Justice in this matter; having power enough in our own hands to do
our selves Justice upon these men, if we would but use it. Even by making a
strait Covenant with our Eoers, not to heed them; and with our Eyes, not to
pity them; and with our Hands, not to relieve them. Say I this altogether of my
self? or says not the Apostle even the same? 2 These. 3. 10.
He that will not labor, let him not eat: relieve him not. But has not Christ
required us to feed the hungry, and to cloth the naked, and to be free and
charitable to the poor? Nothing surer: God forbid any man should preach against
Charity and Almesdeeds. But remember, that ^s God approves not 1 Cor. 13. 3.
Alms or any other work, if without Charity; so nor Charity it self, if without
Discretion. Tim. 1. 5, 3.
Honor Widows, says Saint Paul, But those that are Widows indeed: so relieve
the poor, but relieve those that are poor indeed. Not every one that asks;
not every one that wants; nay more, not every one that is poor, is poor
indeed: and he that in his indiscreet and mis-guided charity should give to
every one that asks, or wants, or is poor, Meat, or Clothing, or Alms;
would soon make himself more hungry, and naked, and poor, than he that is most
hungry, or naked, or poor. The poor, whom Christ commends to thee as a fit
Object for thy Charity, the poor indeed; are those that want not only the
things they ask, but want also means to get without asking. A man that is
blind, or Aged, and past his work; a man that is sick, or weak, or lame, and
cannot work; a man that desires it, and seeks it, and cannot get work; a man
that has a greater Charge upon him than his honest pains can maintain; such a
man as one of these, he is poor indeed. Let thine Ears be open, and thine Eyes
open, and thy Bowels open, and thy Hands open to such a one: it is a charitable
deed, and a Phil. 4. 18.
Sacrifice of sweet smelling, Heb. 13. 16.
With such sacrifices God is well pleased: Forget not thou to offer such
sacrifices upon every good opportunity, and be well assured God will not forget
in due time to reward thee. But for a lusty, able, upright man (as they style
him in their own dialect) that had rather beg, or steal, or both, than dig: he
is no more to be relieved as a poor man, than a woman that has poisoned her
husband is to be honored as a Widow. Such a woman is a Widow, for she has no
more an husband than any other Widow has: but such a woman is not 1 Timothy 5.
Compare ver. 3. with v. 5. and 16.
a Widow indeed, as St. Paul would be understood; not such a Widow as he would
have honored: it is Alms to hang up such a Widow rather than to honor her.
And I dare say, he that helps one of these sturdy Beggars to the stocks, and
the whip, and the house of Correction, not only deserves better of the
Commonwealth* but does a work of greater Charity in the sight of God, than he
that helps him with Meat, and Money, and Lodging. For he that does this,
corrupts his Charity by a double Error. First, he maintains, and so
encourages the other in idleness; who, if none would relieve him, would be
glad to do any work rather than starve. And Secondly, he disableth his Charity,
by mis-placing it; and unawares robs the poor, whilst he thinks he
relieveth them. As he that gives any honor to an Idol, robs the true God,
to whom alone all religious honor is due: so he that gives any Alms to an
idle Beggar, Pars sacrilegii est, rem pauperum dare non pauperibus. Hieron. ad
Pammach. Epist. 26.
robs the truly poor, to whom properly all the fruits of our Alms are due.
And so it comes to pass oftentimes (as Saint Ambrose sometimes complained)
that the Neque transcribatur vita pauperum in spolia fraudulentorum. Ambros. 2.
Offic. 16.
maintenance of the poor is made the spoil of the loyterer.

But I forget my self, and you, and the time; whilst I give way to my just
indignation against these base Excrements of the Commonwealth. You have seen
the Necessity of a Calling; without it, we despise Gods Ordinance, 23.
and smother his Gifts; we expose our selves to sinful temptations; we deprive
our selves, our families, and the poor of due maintenance; we withdraw our
bounden service from the Commonwealth. It is not the pretense of Devotion,
that can exempt the lazy Monk; nor of Birth, the riotous Gallant; nor of Want,
the able Beggar; nor of any other thing, any other man, from this common
Necessity. And that is the sum of our first point, viz. the Necessity of a
Calling. Proceed we now to the second, the Choice of a Calling.

A point indeed (I must confess) not directly intended in the words of 24.
my Text: yet being after a sort, employed therein (for the Apostles wish, that
every particular man would abide in his own proper station, and particular
Calling, cannot but imply that there is a difference and choice of such
Callings;) and being withal a matter of such great consequence to be taught and
known; I thought it would be more expedient for the present discharge of my
duty in this place, to take it in, (though with some hazard of the imputation
of Impertinency to my self) than by passing it over, to defraud them (and it is
likely there are many such here present) whom it may concern in point of
Conscience of such instructions, as may give them profitable directions in a
business so material. Concerning which, it behooves every man the rather to
have an especial care, because much of a man's comfort and content in this life
depends thereupon: it being scarce possible that that man's life should be
(...). Socratis dictum, apud Stob. sermon.
comfortable to him, or he go on with any cheerfulness in his course, that
lives in a Calling, for which neither he is fit, nor the Calling fit for him.
Neither will the consideration hereof be useful only for such, as are yet free
to choose; but even for those also, who have already made their choice. For
since the very same Rules which are to direct us in the Choice of our Calling,
are to help us also for the Trial of our Callings; it can be no loss to the
best of us all, to give heed to those Rules: thereby either to rectify our
Choice; or to quicken our alacrity in what we have chosen, by warranting our
courses to our own souls, and silencing many unnecessary Scruples, which are
wont frequently to arise concerning this matter, in the Consciences of men.

And first, we are to lay this as a firm ground, that that is every man's 25.
Proper and right Calling, whereunto God calls him. For he is the Author, as
of our General, so of our Particular Callings too: [ As the Lord has called
every one, Verse. 20.] When therefore we speak of the Choice of a Calling, you
are not so to understand it, as if it were left free for us ever, to make our
Choice where, and as we list. The Choice that is left to us, is nothing but a
conscionable Enquiry which way God calls us, and a conscionable Care to take
that way. So that if it shall once appear, that God calls us this way or that
way, there is -- mortalia quaerunt Consilium; certus jussa capesse Dei. Auson.
Theodosio.
no more place for choice; all that we have to do, is to obey. -- Auson. ib.
Obsequium sufficit esse meum. The Enquiries we are to make ordinarily, are (as
you shall hear anon) what lawfulness there is in the thing, what Abilities
there are in us, what Warrant we have from without. But all these must cease,
when God once expresses himself, and calls us with an audible Voice. No more
enquiry 1.
then into the thing, how lawful it is. If God bid Peter Acts 10. 13, etc.
kill and eat, and send him to preach unto the Gentiles; there is no answering
(...), Not so Lord; nor alleging the uncleanness of the meat, or the
unlawfulness of going into the way of the Gentiles: Injusta justa habenda --
what God will have clean, he Ib. Verse. 28.
must not account common. His very Call to any thing, makes it lawful. No more
enquiry into our selves, how able 2.
we are. If God call Exodus 4. 10, etc.
Moses, one of a slow speech, and not eloquent, from the sheepfold, to plead
for his people before a Tyrant; or Judge. 6. 14, 15.
Gideon, a mean stripling, of a small Family and Tribe, from the threshing
floor, to deliver Israel out of the hands of their Oppressors; or Jer. 1. 6,
etc.
Jeremy, a very child, and one that could not speak, from his Cottage in
Anathoth, to set him over Nations and Kingdoms, to root out and to plant; or
Amos 7. 13, 14, 15.
Amos a plain Country-fruit-gatherer, from the Herd in Tekoah, to prophecy at
Bethel, and in the Kings Court: it is a fruitless and unseasonable modesty to
allege unsufficiency or unworthiness. Auson. ubi supra.
Iuvat idem Qui jubet. Where he sets on work he gives strength to go
through with it. His very calling of any man makes him able. No more enquiry
into outward means, what warrant we have. If God Romans 1. 1.
call Paul to be an Apostle, and Acts 9. 15.
to bear his Name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the Children of Israel;
it is needless to Gal. 1. 16, 17.
confer with flesh and blood, or to seek confirmation at Jerusalem from them
which were Apostles before him, by the imposition of their hands. Gods work in
him supplieth abundantly the want of those solemnities; and Paul is as good an
Apostle as the best of them, although he be Ibid. verse. 1.
an Apostle, not of men, neither by man. Gods calling any man to any Office,
seals his Warrant. Auson. ubi supra.
Non tutum renuisse Deo. Away with all excuses and pretenses, and delays: when
God calls, submit thy will, subdue thy reason, answer his Call, as Samuel was
taught to do, 1 Samuel 3. 9, 10.
Speak Lord, for thy servant hears.

If it were expedient for us, that God should still deal with us as he did 26.
long with the Jewish, and a while with the Infant Christian Church, by
immediate inspirations; and call us either by secret Enthusiasms, or sensible
Insinuations (as he did many of them) into the way wherein he would have us
walk: the Rule for our Choice would be easy; or rather there would need no
Rule at all (because indeed there would be left no Choice at all;) but this
only, even to get up and be doing, to put our selves speedily into that way
whereunto he did point us. But since the wisdom of God has thought it better
for us, to take counsel from his written word, which he has left us for our
ordinary direction in this and all other difficulties; rather than to depend
upon immediate and extraordinary inspirations: it will be very profitable for
us to draw thence some few Rules, whereby to make reasonable judgments
concerning any course of life, whether that it be, whereunto God has called
us, or no. The Rules, as I have partly intimated already, may be reduced to
Three Heads: according as the Enquiries we are to make in this business, are of
Three sorts. For they either concern the course it self; or else our selves,
that should use it; or else Thirdly, those that have Right and Power over us in
it. If there be a fail in any of these; as if either the course it self be not
lawful, or we not competently fit for it, or our Superiors will not allow of
us, or it: we may well think, God has not called us thither. God is just; and
will not call any 1.
man to that, which is not honest and good: God is All-sufficient; and will 2.
not call any man to that, which is above the proportion of his strength: God
is wonderful in his providence, and will not call any man to that, whereto 3.
he will not open him a fair and orderly passage. Somewhat by your patience of
each of these.

And first, of the Course we intend. Wherein let these be our Enquiries: 27.
First, whether the thing be simply and in it self lawful, or no: Secondly, 1.
whether it be lawful so as to be made a Calling, or no: Thirdly, whether 2.
it will be profitable, or rather hurtful to the Commonwealth. Now observe 3.
the Rules. The first Rule this, Adventure not on any course without good
assurance that it be in it self lawful. The ground of this Rule is plain and
evident. For it cannot be, that God, who hates, and forbids, and punishes
every sin in every man, should call any man to the practice of any sin. Ephesians. 4.
28.
Let him that stole, steal no more, says St. Paul; But rather let him labor
with his hands, the thing that is good, Ephesians. 4. If it be not something that
is good; it is good for him to hold his hands off: let him be sure, God never
called him to labor in that: and he were as good hold to his old trade, and
steal still, as labor with his hand the thing that is not good. If Acts 19.
25. -- 27.
Diana of Ephesus be an Idol, Demetrius his occupation must down: he must make
no more silver shrines for Diana, though by that craft he have his wealth.
Tertullian excellently enlarges himself in this argument in his Praesertim
cap. 5. -- 8.
Book De Idololatria; strongly disapproving their practice, who being
Christians, yet got their living by making Statues and Images, and other
ornaments to sell to Heathen Idolaters. Offenders against this Rule, are not
only such as live by Stealing, and Robbing, and Piracy, and Purse-cutting, and
Witchcraft, and other such like ungodly practices as are made capital even by
the Laws of Men, and punishable by death: but all such also, as maintain
themselves by, or get their living in any course, absolutely condemned by the
Law of God, howsoever they may find amongst men either express allowance as
Whores, and Bawds do in the holy Mother Church of Rome; or at least some kind
of toleration by connivance, as Charmers, and Fortune Tellers, and Wizards, do
amongst us. Which sort of people it is scarce credible how generally and
miserably our common Ignorants are besotted with the opinion of their skill,
and how pitifully they are gulled by their damnable impostures, through their
own foolish credulity These superstitions helped to root out the Deuteronomy. 18. 10,
-- 12.
Amorites out of the land of Canaan: and it may pass among Readiness best Acts,
that he rooted out these 1 Samuel 28. 9.
Superstitions out of the land of Israel: And great pity it is, that such as
make a trade of these superstitions are not by some severe provisions rooted
out of this, and every other Christian Land. Let this first Rule be remembered
of us in every choice and trial of our Callings; No unlawful thing, can be a
lawful calling.

No, nor yet every lawful thing neither. For many things may be lawful 28.
in the private use, which yet may not lawfully be made a Calling, or trade of
life. Who can reasonably deny the lawfulness of many disports and recreations,
as Bowling, or Shooting, or even Cards and Dice? And yet who can (...). Arist.
8. Pol. 3.
reasonably think it to be a commendable Calling, for any man to be a professed
Bowler, or Archer, or Gamester, and nothing else? Therefore take a second Rule;
Make not a Calling of that, which was not made to be a Calling. If you shall
ask, How you shall know a thing to be such? I answer generally, all such things
as are of this nature, as are indifferent for men of all sorts and Callings to
use with due caution and circumstances; and more especially matters of delight,
and recreations are such. And the reasons are good. The Hic verse. 17.
ground of particular Callings is some (...). v. 7.
particular gift of God, according to the differences that are to be found in
particular men in regard either of the soul or of the body, or of outward
things: whereas such things as these, whereof we now speak, become of lawful
and commendable use, not so much from any special ability received from God,
which should be exercised therein, as from the common necessity of our weak
nature, which is to be refreshed thereby. And the end also, for which God
permits us these things, is not to employ our strength and time in them; but
to give us some Uti quidem illis licet: sed sicut somno, and quietibus cateris,
tum cum gravibus seriisque rebus satisfecerimus. Cic. 1. Offic.
refreshing, when we are wearied with former labor, and so to fit us for fresh
and future employment. The works of our Callings, they are as our Meats and
Drinks; these of Delight, as Sauces, or as (...). Arist. 8. Polit. 3.
Physic, and as Sauces or Physic they are to be used and not otherwise. As
absurd then as it would be for a man to accustom himself to no other diet but
slabber-sauces, and Druggs: so absurd a thing it is for a man to have no other
Calling, but Dicing, and Carding, and Gaming. Amongst offenders against this
Rule, that I reckon not Iuglers, and Fiddlers, and Tumblers, and Bearwards, and
Rope-dancers, and Rhymers, and the rest of that Rabble; they may thank the
baseness of their condition, rather than the lawfulness of their Course. I
strike rather, at those that are both eminent and pernicious; especially those
Bawds of unthriftiness and almost every other Vice; (for where Unthriftiness
is, there is almost every other Vice,) I mean those parcel-Gallants that have
nothing to live on but their Wits, and no other use of their Wits, but to
destil a kind of maintenance from juicy heirs, and flush novices by play. I
would our Pantomimes also and Stage Players would examine themselves and their
Callings by this Rule. If they should have been tried by the Bench of Fathers
and Councils of old, or would have put it to most voices among later Divines
both Popish and Reformed; they had been utterly cast and condemned by the first
Rule, and not have been reprieved till now; most holding, not the Calling only,
but the very Practice and Thing it self unlawful and damnable. For my own part,
I dare not at all say the Practice is, neither will I now say the Calling is,
unlawful: only let them that make a calling of it, consider themselves and
their calling well, and examine whether God has bestowed upon them some gifts,
which they might have employed a better way; and what inducements they have,
and of what weight those inducements are, to give their consciences security,
that they have done well, in embracing this as their calling. And when they
have done thus, freely and faithfully, as in the sight of God: if their own
hearts condemn them not, neither do I: in the mean time, I would but be their
Remembrancer of thus much only, that there are some things lawful to do, which
are not lawful to live by; some things lawful as Delights, which are not lawful
as callings. And so much for that second Rule.

There is yet a third Rule behind, and that is this. Resolve not upon that 29.
course for thy calling, what pretenses soever, or what reasons thou may
have for the lawfulness of it otherwise, which is rather hurtful than
profitable for the Commonwealth. The Sea before Sect. 14.
Public good is one of those main respects which enforce the necessity of a
calling: the same respect then must of necessity enforce such a calling, as may
at least stand with the Public good. 1 Cor. 12. 7.
The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man (says our Apostle after
at the twelfth Chapter) to profit withal. Yea, perhaps to profit himself
withal. If it were but so, yet that were enough to infer more: since the (...).
Xenophon. de Venatione.
private good is included in the public, tanquam trigonum in tetragono. But
the Apostle meant to speak home; and therefore he made choice of a word that
will not admit that gloss of private profit: (...). That very word impliedly
prefers the Sanis hominibus publica privatis potiora sunt. Sen. 1. de Clem.
4.
public good before the private; and scarcealloweth the private, other than as
it is interwoven in the public. Now things in themselves lawful, and at some
times useful, may in regard of the End, or of the matter, or by some accident
otherwise, happen at some other times to be hurtful to the Commonwealth: and
hereof such due consideration would be had in the choice and exercise of our
Callings, as ever to have one eye upon the Common good, and not wholly to look
after our own private gain. Offenders against this Rule, are most of our
Engrossers, and Forestallers, and sundry kinds of Hucksters and Regraters: as
also those that export money, corn, or other needful commodities out of the
Land in times of want or scarceness, or bring in unnecessary commodities when
there is plenty at home: and all those that project new devices, and unjust
Monopolies, to fill their own Coffers; perhaps not without pretension of some
small benefit to the Commonwealth, but certainly not without sensible and
grievous pressures of those that are a great part of the Commonwealth.

Thus have we delivered three Rules, concerning the Quality of a right 30.
Calling: and pointed out some special offenders against each of them. And now
methinks I see the Usurer hugging himself, and clapping his sides, that he has
come off so fairly: surely his Calling is absolute good, whereon none of these
Rules could fasten. But it is indeed with the Usurer in this case, as with the
Drunkard. If the Drunkard should ask me against which of the ten Commandments
he offended; I confess I could not readily give him a direct punctual answer:
Not that he sins not against any; but because he sins against so many of
them, that it is hard to say against which most. He sins against the sixth
Commandment, by distempering his body; he sins against the seventh, by
enflaming his lust; he sins against the eighth, by making waste of the good
Creatures of God. Right so is it with our Usurer in this case: He would pose
me, that should ask me the Question, which of these three Rules fetches in the
Usurer and his Calling, Verily I cannot well tell which most; I think every one
of the three may: howsoever, among the three I am sure I have him. If Usury be
simply unlawful (as most of the learned have concluded) then the first Rule
has him. I 1.
should be very tender to condemn any thing as simply unlawful, which any even
imaginary conjuncture of Circumstances would render lawful; and would choose
rather by an over-liberal Charity to 1 Pet. 4. 8.
cover a multitude of sins, (if I may abuse the Apostles phrase to that sense)
than by a too superstitious restraint make one. Yet the Texts of Scripture are
so express, and the grounds of Reason, brought by learned men, seem so strong
against all Usury; that I have much ado to find so much charity in my self, as
to absolve any kind of Usury, (properly so called) with what cautions or
circumstances soever qualified, from being a sin. But I will suspect mine own
and the common judgment herein, and admit for this once ( dat^ non concesso,)
that Usury be in some case lawful, and so our Usurer escape the first Rule;
which yet cannot be, till his teeth be knocked out for biting: But you must
knock out his brains too, before he escape our second Rule: 2.
I dare say, the most learned Usurer that lives (and they say some learned
ones are Usurers) will never be able to prove, that Usury if it be at all
lawful, is so lawful, as Artem nequitiae delegerunt, unde vitam transigant: and
inde se volunt pascere, unde offendant eum, a quo omnes pascuntur. August. in
Psalm. 129.
to be made a Calling. Here all his Doctors and his Proctors, and his Advocates
leave him. For, can it possibly enter into any reasonable man's head to think,
that a man should be born for nothing else, but to tell out money, and take in
paper? which if a man had many millions of gold and silver, could take up but a
small portion of that precious time which God would have spent in some honest
and fruitful employment. But what do I speak of the judgment of reasonable men
in so plain a matter; wherein I dare appeal to the conscience, even of the
Usurer himself; and it had need be a very plain matter, that a man would refer
to the conscience of an Usurer. No honest man need be Pervagatissimus ille
versus, qui vetat artem pudere proloqui, quam factites. Cic. in Orator.
ashamed of an honest Calling: if then the Usurers Calling be such, what need
he care who knows, or why should he shame with it? If that be his trade, why
does he not in his Bills and Bonds and Noverints, make it known to all men by
those presents that he is an Usurer, rather than write himself Gentleman, or
Yeoman, or by some other style? But say yet our Usurer should escape, at least
in the judgment of his own hardened conscience, from both these Rules, as from
the sword of Iehu and Hazael: there is yet a third Rule, like the sword of
Elisha, to strike him stone-dead, and he shall never be able to escape that.
Let him show wherein his Calling is profitable to humane society. He keeps
no Hospitality: if he have but a barred chest, and a strong lock to keep his
God and his Scriptures (his Mammon and his Parchments in it) he has house-room
enough. He fleeceth many; but cloatheth none. He biteth and devoureth; but
eats all his morsels alone: He gives not so much as a crum, no not to his
dearest Broker or Scrivener; only, where he biteth, he allows them to scratch
what they can for themselves. The King, the Church, the poor, are all wronged
by him, and so are all that live near him: in every common charge, he slippeth
the collar, and leaves the burden upon those that are less able. It were not
possible, Usurers should be so bitterly inveighed against by sober Heathen
Writers; so severely censured by the Civil, and Canon Laws; so uniformly
condemned by godly Fathers and Councils; so universally Jer. 15. 10.
hated by all men of all sorts, and in all Ages and Countries; as Histories and
experience manifest they ever have been and are: if their Practice and calling
had been any way profitable, and not indeed every way hurtful and incommodious
both to private men and public societies. If any thing can make a calling
unlawful; certainly the Usurers Calling cannot be lawful.

Our first care past, which concerns the Calling it self; our next care 32.
in our choice must be, to enquire into Our selves, what Calling is most fit
for us, and we for it. Wherein our Enquiry must rest especially upon three
things; our Inclination, our Gifts, and our Education. Concerning which, let
this be the first rule: Where these three concur upon one and the same Calling,
our consciences may rest assured that that Calling is fit for us: and we ought,
so far as it lies in our power, to resolve to follow that. This Rule, if well
observed, is of singular use, for the settling of their consciences, who are
scrupulous and doubtful concerning their inward Calling to any office or
employment. Divines teach it commonly, and that truly, that every man should
have an inward Calling from God, for his particular course of life: and this in
the Calling of the Ministry is by so much more requisite, than in most other
Callings, by how much the business of it is more weighty than theirs, as of
things more immediately belonging unto GOD. Whence it is, that in our Church
none are admitted into Holy Orders, until they have personally and expressly
made profession before the Bishop, that they find themselves Book of Ordering,
etc.
inwardly called and moved thereunto. But because, what that inward Calling is,
and how it should be discerned, is a thing not so distinctly declared and
understood, generally, as it should be: it often falls out, that men are
distressed in Conscience with doubts and scruples in this case, whilst they
desire to be assured of their inward Calling, and know not how. We are to know
therefore, that to this inward Calling there is not of necessity required any
inward, secret, sensible testimony of Gods blessed sanctifying Spirit to a man's
soul, (for then an unsanctified man could not be rightly called;) neither yet
any strong working of the Spirit of illumination, (for then a mere heathen man
could not be rightly called) both which consequents are false. For 1 Samuel 10.
24.
Saul and Joh. 6. 70.
Judas were called; the one to the Kingdom, the other to the Apostleship; of
whom it is certain the one was not, and it is not likely the other was, endued
with the holy Spirit of Sanctification. And many Heathen men have been called
to several employments, wherein they have also labored with much profit to
their own and succeeding times; who in all probability never had any other
inward motion, than what might arise from some or all of these three things now
specified, viz. the Inclination of their nature, their personal Abilities, and
the care of Education. If it shall please GOD to afford any of us, any farther
gracious assurance than these can give us, by some extraordinary work of his
Spirit within us; we are to embrace it with joy and thankfulness, as a special
favor: but we are not to suspend our resolutions for the choice of a course,
in expectation of that extraordinary assurance; since we may receive
comfortable satisfaction to our souls without it, by these ordinary means, now
mentioned. For, Who 1.
need be scrupulous, where all these concur? Thy Parents have from thy
childhood destinated thee to some special course, (admit the Ministry; and
been at the care and charge to breed thee up in learning, to make thee in some
measure fit for it: when thou art grown to some maturity 2.
of years and discretion, thou find in thy self a kind of desire to be doing
something that way in thy private study by way of trial: and withal 3.
some measure of knowledge, discretion, and utterance (though perhaps not in
such an eminent degree as thou could wish, yet) in such a competency, as
thou may reasonably persuade thy self thou might thereby be able (with his
blessing) to do some good to Gods people, and not be altogether unprofitable in
the Ministry. In this so happy concurrence of Propension, Abilities, and
Education; make no farther enquiry, doubt not of thine inward calling: Tender
thy self to those, that have the power of Admission for thy outward calling;
which once obtained, thou art certainly in thine own proper Course. Up and be
doing; for the Lord has called thee, and (no doubt) the Lord will be with thee.

But say, these three do not concur; as oftentimes they do not. A man 33.
may be destinated by his friends, and accordingly bred, out of some covetous,
or ambitious, or other corrupt respect, to some Calling; wherefrom he may be
altogether averse, and whereto altogether unfit; as we see some Parents, that
have the donations or Advocations of Church Livings in their hands, must needs
have some of their Children (and for the most part they set by the most
untoward and misshapen chip of the whole block to make timber for the Pulpit;
but some of their children they will have) thrust into the Ministry, though
they have neither a head nor a heart for it. Again, a man may have a good
sufficiency in him for a Calling, and yet out of a sloathful desire of ease and
liberty, if it seem painful or austere; or an ambitious desire of eminency and
reputation, if it seem base and contemptible; or some other secret corruption,
cannot set his mind that way; as Solomon says, there may be Pro. 17. 11.
A price in the hand of a fool to buy wisdom, and yet the fool have no heart to
it. And diverse other occurrents there may be, and are, to hinder this happy
conjuncture of Nature, Skill, and Education. Now in such Cases, as these, where
our Education bends us one way, our Inclination swayeth us another way, and
it may be our Gifts and Abilities lead us a third; in this distraction, what
are we to do? which way to take? what Calling to pitch upon? In point of
Conscience, there can no more General Rules be given, to meet with all Cases,
and regulate all difficulties, than in point of Law, there can be general
resolutions given to set an end to all suits, or provisions made to prevent all
inconveniences. Particulars are infinite, and various: but Rules are not, must
not, cannot be so. He whose case it is, if he be not able to direct himself,
should do well to take advice of his learned Counsel. This we can readily do in
matters of Law for the quieting of our Estates: why should we not do it at
least as readily in matter of Conscience, for the quieting of our souls? But
yet for some light, at least in the generality; what if thou should proceed
thus?

First, have an eye to thy Education: and if it be possible to bring the rest
34.
that way, do so rather than forsake it. For besides that it would be some
grief to thy Parents, (to whom thou should be a comfort) to have cast away
so much charge as they have been at, for thy education; and some dishonor to
them withal, (whom thou art bound by the law of God and Nature to Exodus 20. 12.
honor,) to have their judgments so much slighted, and their choice so little
regarded by their child: the very consideration of so much precious time, as
has been spent in fitting thee to that course, which would be almost Haud
aequum fa^it, qui quod didicit, id dediscit. Plaut. in Amphitr.
all lost upon thy change, should prevail with thee to try all possible means
rather than forego it. It were a thing indeed much to be wished, that Parents,
and Friends, and Guardians, and all those other whatsoever, that have the
Education of young ones committed unto them all greedy desires to make their
children great, all base penurious niggardness in saving their own purses, all
fond cherishing of their children in their humors, all doting opinion of their
forwardness, and wit and towardliness, all other corrupt partial affections
whatsoever, laid aside; would Inque eo vel maxim probavi -- Apollonium, qui
cum mercede docer^t, tamen non patiebatur eos, quos judicabat non posse
oratores evadere, operam apud sese perdere, dimittebatque and ad quamcumque
artem putabat esse aptum, ad eam impellere, atque hortari solebat, Cic. 1. de
Orat.
out of the observation of their natural propensions and inclinations, and of
their particular abilities and defects, frame them from the beginning to such
courses; as wherein they were likeliest to go on with cheerfulness and profit.
This indeed were to be wished: but this is not always done. If it have not been
so done to thee; the fault is theirs, that should have done it, and not thine:
and thou art not able now to remedy that which is past and gone. But as for
thee, and for the future; if thy Parents have not done their part, yet do not
thou forget thy duty: if they have done one fault in making a bad choice; do
not thou add another, in making a worse change: disparage not their Judgments
by misliking, neither gainsay their Wills by forsaking their choice, upon
every small incongruity with thine own Judgment or Will. If thine Inclination
draw thee another way; labor thoroughly to subdue thy nature therein: Suspect
thine own corruption: Think this backwardness proceeds not from true judgment
in thee, but issues rather from the root of some carnal affection: Consider,
thy years are green, Iuvenile vi^ium est, regere non posse impetum. Senec. in
Troad.
affections strong, judgment unsettled: Hope that this backwardness will grow
off, as years and stayedness grow on: Pray and endeavor that thou may daily
more and more wean thy affections from thine own bent, and take liking to that
course, whereunto thou have been so long in framing. Thus possibly thou may
in time make that cheerful and delightful unto thee, which now is grievous and
irksome. And as for thy insufficiency, if that dishearten thee (which is indeed
a main rub,) do thus. Impute thy former non-proficiency to thine own sloth and
negligence: Think, if after so long time spent in this course, thou have
attained to no greater perfection in it; how long it would be ere thou should
come to a tolerable mediocrity in another: Resolve, not to lose all that
precious time forepast by beginning the world anew; but rather save as much of
it, as is redeemable, by adding to thy diligence: Suspect that it comes from
thy pride, that thou can not content thy self with a Calling, wherein thou
may not be excellent; and imagine, that God, of purpose to humble thee, might
divert thy education to another, for which thou art less apt: Observe, what
Nihil est quod non expugnet pertinax opera, and intenta ac diligens cura.
Senec. -- Labor omnia vincit Improbus. Virgil. 1. Georg. Praelitius est contra
rerum naturam, and quidem victor abiit, malignitatem ejus perri^acissim^ ^ob^re
superan^o. de Domest. Val Max. 8* 7. (...). Heli^dor. l. 3. Ae^^^^. Hist.
strange things past belief, and such as have seemed insuperable, have been
conquered and subdued by the obstinacy and improbity of unwearied labor, and
of assiduity: Doubt not, but by Gods blessing upon thy faithful industry, to
attain in time, if not to (such perfection as thou desire, and might
perhaps have attained in some other course, if thou had been bred up to it;
yet) to such a competent sufficiency, as may render thy endeavors acceptable
to God, comfortable to thy self, and serviceable to community. If by these and
the like considerations, and the use of other good means, thou can bring thy
affections to some indifferent liking of, and thy abilities to some indifferent
mediocrity for, that course which Education has opened unto thee, thou have no
more to do There Is thy Course, that is thy Calling, that is the work whereunto
God has appointed thee.

But if after long striving, and pains, and trial, thou can neither bring 35.
thy mind to it, nor do any good upon it, having faithfully desired and
endeavored it, so that thou must needs leave the course of thy Education, or
(which is another case) if thy Education have left thee free, (as many Parents,
God knows, are but too careless that way;) then Secondly, thou art in the
next place to consider of thy Gifts and Abilities; and to take direction from
them, rather than from thine inclination. And this Rule I take to be very
sound: not only from the Apostles intimation, verse. 17. ( Verse. 17. hic.
As God has distributed to every man, as the Lord has called every one) where
he seems to make the Choice of men's Callings, to depend much upon the
distribution of Gods Gifts: but withal, for two good Reasons. One is, because
our Gifts and Abilities, whether of body or mind, being in the brain or hand,
are at a better certainty, than our Propensions and Inclinations are, which are
seated in the Heart. The heart is Jer. 17. 9.
deceitful above all things: and there are so many rotten corruptions in it,
that it is a very hard thing for a man to discern his own Inclinations and
Propensions, whether they spring from a sound, or from a corrupt root. Whereas
in the discerning of our Gifts and Abilities; we are less subject to gross
Errors and mistakings: I mean for the truth and reality of them; howsoever we
are apt to overvalue them for the Fereplus nobis videmur posse quam possumus.
Senec. de tranquil. c. 4.
measure and degree. Now it is meet in the choice of our Callings, we should
follow the surer guide: and therefore rather be led by our Metiri se quemque
suo modulo ac pede verum est. Horat. 1. Ep. 7.
Gifts, than by our Inclinations. The other Reason is; because our Inclinations
cannot so well produce Abilities, as these can draw on them. We say indeed,
there is nothing hard to a willing mind: and in some sense, it is true. Not as
if a willing mind could make us do more than we are able. A man can do no more,
than he can do, be he never so willing: but decause a willing mind will make us
exerere vires, stir up our selves to do as much as we are able, which we use
not to do in those things we go unwillingly about. Willingness then may quicken
the strength we have: but it does not put any new strength into us. But
Abilities can produce Inclinations de novo; and make them where they find them
not. As we see, every other natural thing is inclinable to the exercise of
those natural faculties, that are in it: so certainly would every man have
strongest inclination to those things, whereto he has strongest abilities, if
wicked and untoward affections did not often corrupt our inclinations, and
hinder them from moving their own proper and natural way. It is best then to
begin the choice of our Callings from our Abilities, which will fetch on
inclinations; and not from our Inclinations, which without Abilities will not
serve the turn.

Concerning which gifts or abilities; what they are, and how to make 36.
true judgment of them, and how to frame the choice of our Callings from them:
to speak punctually and fully would require a large discourse, I can but touch
at some few points therein, such as are of daily use; and proceed. First, by
gifts and abilities we are to understand not only those 1.
of the Mind; Judgment, Wit, Invention, Memory, Fancy, Eloquence, etc. and
those of the Body; Health, Strength, Beauty, Activity, etc. but also those
which are without; Birth, Wealth, Honor, Authority, Reputation, Kindred
Alliance, etc. generally any thing, that may be of use or advantage unto us for
any employment. Secondly, as our abilities on 2.
the one side, so on the other side, all our wants and defects, which might
disable us more or less for any employment, are to be duly weighed and
considered of, and the one laid against the other; that we may know how to
make, as near as we can, a just estimate of our strength and sufficiency.
Thirdly, it is a safer way to undervalue, than to overprize our selves, lest 3.
ignorantly confident, we affect a Calling above our strength; which were to
fly with waxen wings, and to owe the world a laughter. Be we sure of this: If
God have not gifted us for it, he has not called us to it. Fourthly, in the
judging of our Abilities, we should have a regard to 4.
the outward circumstances of times and places, and the rest. Those gifts,
which would have made a sufficient Priest, in the beginning of the Reformation,
in that dearth of learning and penury of the Gospel, now the times are full of
knowledge and learning, would be all little enough for a Parish-Clerk. Fifthly,
something, would be yielded to the judgments of 5.
other men concerning our Abilities. It is either secret pride, or base
faintness of heart, or dull sloth, or some other thing, and not true modesty in
us: if being excellently gifted for some weighty employment in every other man's
judgment, we yet withdraw our selves from it, with pretensions of
unsufficiency. Sixthly and lastly; let us resolve on that course, caeteris 6.
paribus; not only for which we are competently fit, but for which we are
absolutely fittest. A good Actor it may be could very sufficiently act any part
in the play; represent the Majesty of a King, or the humor of a Swaggerer, or
the pranks of a Bedlam, or any thing: but yet if he be notedly excellent at
some part rather than another, he would not willingly be put from that to act
another. Ergo Histrio hoc videbit in scena, quod non videbit sapiens in vita?
Shame we to let these men be wiser in their generations, than we in ours. And
thus much for Abilities.

There is yet a doubt remains concerning a man's Inclination. In case 37.
we have examined our gifts, and find them in a good measure of competency for
such or such a course; and yet remain still averse from it, and cannot by any
possible means work over our affections to any tolerable liking of it: in such
a case what is to be done, or how shall we judge what Calling is fittest for us
to take? whether that whereto our Abilities lead us, or that whereto our
Inclinations draw us. As I conceive it, in such a case, we are to hold this
order. First, if our Inclinations cannot be won over to that course, for which
our abilities lie fittest; we are to take a second surview of our Abilities, to
see if they be confidently fit for that whereto our inclination swayeth us: and
if upon due and partial examination we find they are, we may then Recte facit,
animo quando obsequitur suo. Quod omnes homines facere oportet, dum ^d modo
fiat bono. Plaut. in Amphitr.
follow the sway of our inclinations. The reason is this. A man's inclination
cannot be forced. If it can be fairly won over, well and good: but violence it
cannot endure at any hand. And therefore if we cannot make it yield to us in
reason, there is no remedy, we must in wisdom yield to it, (provided ever it be
honest:) or else all is lost. What ever our sufficiencies be; things will not
fadge that are undertaken Male respondent coacta ingenia; reductante natura,
irritus labor est. Senec, de tranquil. ^. 9.
without an heart: there is no good to be done against the hair.

But then, secondly, if upon search we find our selves altogether unsufficient
38.
and unfit for that Calling, whereunto our Inclination is strongly and
violently carried, we are to oppose that Inclination with a greater violence,
and to set upon some other Calling, for which we are in some medioerity gifted,
speedily and resolvedly, and leave the success to Almighty God. The Reason
this: It being certain that God never calls any man but to that, for which he
has in some competent measure enabled him: we are to hold that for a
pernicious and unnatural Inclination at the least, if not rather for a wicked
and Diabolical Suggestion, which so stiffly exciteth us to a Function, whereto
we may be assured God never called us.

But yet, thirdly, (and I would commend it unto you as a principal good 39.
Rule, and the fairest outlet of all other from amid these difficulties,) we
should do well to deal with* these mutinous and distracting Thoughts within us,
as wise Statists do when they have to deal with men divided in Opinions, and
Factions, and Ends. How is that? They use to bethink themselves of a middle
course, to reduce all the several Opinions to a kind of Temper, so as no side
be satisfied fully in the proposals they have tendered, and yet every side in
part; as we commonly hold those to be the Apud arbitrum neque nihil, neque
tantum quantum postulavimus consequemur. Quis unquam ab arbitris quantum petit,
tantum abstulit? Cic. pro Rosc. Com.
justest Arbitrators, and to make the best, and the fairest end of differences
between the parties for whom they arbitrate, that by pleasing neither, please
both. So here, if our Educations, Abilities, and Inclinations look several
ways, and the Inclination be peremptory and stiff, and will not condescend to
either of the other two, it will be a point of good wisdom in us, if we can
bethink our selves of some such meet temper, as may in part give satisfaction
to our Inclinations* and yet not leave our Gifts and Educations wholly
unsatisfied. And that is easily done by proposing the full latitude of our
Educations and Abilities, as the utmost bounds of our choice, and then leaving
it to our Inclinations to determine our particular choice within those bounds.
For no man's Education or Gifts run so Mathematically, and by the Line, to that
point whereto they direct him, but that there is a kind of latitude in them;
and that for the most part (by reason of the great variety and Nulla ars non
alterius artis, aut matter, aut propinqua est. Tert. de Idol. cap. 8.
affinity of Offices and Employments) very large and spacious. One Instance
shall serve both to exemplify and illustrate this Rule. A man designed by his
Parents to the Ministry, and for that end brought up in the University,
studieth there Philosophy, History, and the Arts, and the Tongues, and
furnishes himself with general knowledge, which may enable him, as for the
Work of the Ministry, so for the exercise of any other Profession, that has to
do with Learning; so as not only the Calling of the Ministry, but that of the
Lawyer too, and of the Physician, and of the Tutor and Schoolmaster, and
sundry other besides these, do come within the latitude of his Education and
Abilities. Certainly if his Mind would stand thereunto, no Course would be so
proper for such a man, as that which he was intended for of the Ministry. But
he proves obstinately averse from it, and cannot be drawn by any Persuasion of
Friends, or Reason to embrace it. It is not meet to force his Inclination quite
against the bent of it; and yet it is pity his Abilities and Education should
be cast away. This middle course therefore is to be held, even to leave it free
for him, to make his choice of Law, or Physic, or Teaching, or any other
Profession that belongs to a Scholar, and comes within his Latitude, which
of them soever he shall find himself to have the strongest Inclination and
Propension unto. And the like course we are to hold in other cases of like
nature; by which means, our Inclinations, which cannot be driven to the Center,
may yet be drawn within the Circumference of our Educations and Abilities. He
that observes these Rules I have hitherto delivered, with due respect to his
Education, Abilities, and Inclination, and deals therein faithfully and
unpartially, and in the fear of God, may rest secure in his Conscience of his
Inward Calling.

But there must be an Outward Calling too; else yet, all is not right. 40.
The general Rule, [ 1 Cor. 14. o.
(...)] Let allthings be done honestly, and in order, enforces it. There are
some Callings which conscionably discharged, require great pains and care; but
yet the Profits will come in, whether the Duties be conscionably performed, or
no. Our Calling of the Ministry is such, and such are all those Offices, as
have annexed unto them a certain standing Revenue, or annual Fee. Now into such
Callings as these, every unworthy fellow that wants maintenance, and loves
ease, would be intruding (as we of the Clergy find it but too true,) and there
would be no order kept herein, if there were not left in some others a power to
keep back unsufficient men. There are again diverse callings necessary for the
public, which yet bring in either no profits at all, (if not rather a charge)
or at least profits unproportionable to the pains and dangers men must undergo
in them, such as are the Callings of Justice of Peace, the High Sheriff of a
County, a Constable, Churchwarden, Soldier, etc. Now from these Callings, men
of sufficiency, to avoid trouble and charge, would withdraw themselves; and so
the King and Country should be served either not at all, or by unworthy ones.
Here likewise would be no order, if there were not left in some others a power
to impose those Offices upon sufficient men. It may be, those in whom either
Power resideth, may sometimes, yea often abuse it, (for they are but men)
keeping back sufficient men, and admitting unsufficient, into callings of the
former; sparing sufficient men, and imposing upon unsufficient, offices of the
latter kind. This is not well: but yet what wise man knows not, that there
could not be avoided a necessity of general inconveniences, if there should
not be left a possibility of particular mischiefs? And therefore it is needful
there should be this power of admitting and refusing, of sparing and imposing,
in Church and Commonwealth, though it may happen to be thus mischievously
abused, rather than for want of this power, a multitude of unsufferable
inconveniences (as needs there must) should ensue. And from this power must
every man have his warrant for his outward Calling to any Office or Employment
in Church or Commonwealth.

Now then to frame a case to either of these two sorts of Callings. A man 41.
desires a lawful Calling, suppose the Ministry; not only his Inclination
bends him, but his Education also leads him, and his Gifts encourage him
that way: hitherto all things concur to seal unto his Conscience GOD's calling
him to this Function. But for so much as he has not (as it is not fit any man
should have) power to give himself either See Heb. 5.
Orders to be a Priest, or Institution into a Pastoral Charge; he must, for his
admission into that holy Function, depend upon those to whom the power of
admitting or refusing in either kind is committed. He may tender himself and
his Gifts, to examination, and modestly crave admission; which once obtained,
he has no more to do; his Calling is warranted, and his choice at an end. But
if that be peremptorily denied him (whether reasonably or no, it now mattereth
not,) he is to rest himself content a while, to employ himself at his Study, or
in some other good course for the time, and to wait God's leisure and a farther
opportunity. And if after some reasonable expectation, upon further tender with
modest importunity he cannot yet hope to prevail; he must begin to resolve of
another Course, submit himself to Authority and Order, acknowledge God's
Providence in it, possess his soul in patience, and think, that for some secret
corruption in himself or for some other just cause, God is pleased that he
should not, or not yet enter into that Calling.

On the other side, a Gentleman lives in his Country in good credit and 42.
account, known to be a sufficient man both for Estate and Understanding,
thought every way fit to do the King and his Country service in the Commission
of the Peace; yet himself, either out of a desire to live at ease, and avoid
trouble, or because he thinks he has as much business of his own as he can
well turn him to, without charging himself with the cares of the public; or
possibly out of a privy conscientiousness to himself of some defect, (as, it
may be, an Irresolution in Judgment, or in See Syrac. 7. 6.
Courage, or too great a propension to foolish pity,) or for some other reason
which appears to him just, thinks not that a fit Calling for him, and
rather desires to be spared. But for so much as it is not fit a man should be
altogether his own Judge (especially in things that concern the Public) he
must herein depend upon those to whom the power of sparing or imposing in this
kind is committed. He may excuse himself by his other many occasions, allege
his own wants and insufficiences, and what he can else for himself, and
modestly crave to be spared. But if he cannot by fair and honest suit get off,
he must submit himself to Authority and Order, yield somewhat to the Judgment
of others, think that God has his secret work in it, and rest upon the warrant
of his outward Calling.

The outward Calling then, is not a thing of a small moment, or to be 43.
lightly regarded. Sometimes (as in the case last proposed) it may have the
chief and the casting voice; but where it has least, it has always a Negative
in every regular choice of any Calling or Course of life. And it is this
outward Calling, which (I say not principally but) even alone must rule every
ordinary Christian in the judging of other men's Callings. We cannot see their
hearts, we know not how God might move them, we are not able to judge of their
inward Callings. If we see them too neglectful of the duties of their Calling;
if we find their Gifts hold very short and unequal proportion with the weight
of their Calling, or the like, we have but little comfortable assurance to make
us confident that all is right within. But yet (unless it be such as are in
place of Authority and Office, to examine men's sufficiences, and accordingly to
allow or disallow them) what has any of us to do to judge the heart, or the
Conscience, or the inward Calling of our Brother? So long as he has the
warrant of an orderly outward Calling, we must take him for such as he goes
for, and leave the trial of his heart to God, and to his own heart. And of this
second general point, the choice of a Calling, thus far.

Remains now the third and last point proposed; The Use of a Man's 44.
calling. Let him Ver. 17. hic.
walk in it, verse. 17. Let him Ver. 20.
abide in it, ver. 20. Let him abide therein with God, here in my Text. At this
I aimed most in my choice of this Text; and yet of this I must say least.
Preachers ofttimes do with their proposals, as Parents sometimes do with their
Children: though they love the later as well, yet the first go away with the
largest portions. But I do not well to trifle out that little sand I have left,
in Apologies, let us rather on to the matter, and see what Duties our Apostle
here requires of us, under these Phrases of abiding in our Callings, and
abiding therein with God.

It may seem he would have us stick to a Course; and when we are in a 45.
Calling, not to forsake it, nor change it, no not for a better, no not upon
any terms. Perhaps some have taken it so; but certainly the Apostle never meant
it so. For taking the word [ Calling] in that extent wherein he treats of it
in this Chapter; if that were his meaning he should consequently teach, that no
single man might marry, nor any Servant become free, which are apparently
contrary, both unto common Reason, and unto the very purpose of the Chapter.
But taking the word as we have hitherto specially intended it, and spoken of
it, for some settled Station and Course of Life, whereby a man is to maintain
himself, or wherein to do profitable service to human Society, or both; is it
yet lawful for a man to change it, or is he bound to abide in it perpetually
without any possibility or liberty to alter his course upon any terms? I
answer: it is lawful to change it, so it be done with due caution. It is lawful
first, in subordinate Callings. 1.
For where a man cannot warrantably climb unto an higher, but by the steps of
an inferior Calling, there must needs be supposed a lawfulness of
relinquishing the inferior. How should we do for Generals for the Wars, if
Colonels, and Lieutenants, and Captains, and common Soldiers might not
relinquish their charges? and how for Bishops in the Church, if beneficedmen
and College-Governours were clench'd and riveted to their Cures, like a Nail in
a sure place, not to be removed? Nay, we should have no Priests in the Church
of England (since a Priest must be a Deacon first) if a Deacon might not leave
his Station, and become a Priest. But St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 3. 13.
They that have used the Office of a Deacon well, purchase to themselves a good
degree; and so in lower Callings it is, that men should give proof of their
worthiness for higher. It is lawful, secondly, yea necessary, when 2.
the very Calling it self, though in it self good and useful, does yet by some
accident become unlawful or unuseful. As when some Manufacture is prohibited by
the State, or when some more exact device of later Invention has made the old
unprofitable. It is lawful, thirdly, when a man by 3.
some accident becomes unable for the duties of his Calling; as by Age,
Blindness, maim, decay of Estate, and sundry other impediments which daily
occur. It is lawful, fourthly, where there is a want of sufficient men, or 4.
not a sufficient number of them in some Callings, for the necessities of the
State and Country, in such cases Authority may interpose, and cull out men from
other Callings, such as are fit, and may be spared, to serve in those. Not to
branch out too many particulars, it is lawful generally, where either 5.
absolute Necessity enforces it, or lawful Authority enjoyneth it, or a
concurrence of weighty Circumstances faithfully, and soberly, and discreetly
laid together, seems to require it.

But then it must be done with due Cautions. As first, not out of a Desultory
46.
lightness. Some men are ever Nullam mentem animi habeo; ubi sum, ibi non sum,
ubi non sum, ibi est animus. Plaut. in Cistel.
restless, as if they had Wind-mills in 1.
their heads, every new crotchet puts them into a new Course. But these
rowling-stones carry their curse with them, they seldom gather moss; and who
prove many Conclusions, it is a wonder, if their last Conclusion prove not
Beggary: If thou art well, (...). apud. Stob. Sermon.
keep thy self well, lest thinking to meet with better, thou find worse. Nor,
secondly, out of the greediness of a covetous or ambitious lust. Profit and
Credit are things respectively amongst 2.
other things to be considered both in the choice and change, but not
principally, and above all other things; certainly not wholly, and without, or
against all other things. Thirdly, nor out of sullenness, or a discontentedness
at thy present Condition. Content grows from the mind, not from the
condition; and therefore change of the Calling, the mind unchanged, 3.
will either not afford content, or not long. Thy new broom that now sweepeth
clean all discontents from thee, will soon grow stubbed, and seave as much
filth behind to annoy thee as the old one thou flungest away. Either learn with
St. Paul, in whatsoever state Phil. 4. 11.
thou art to be therewithal content; or never hope to find content in
whatsoever state thou shall be. Much less, fourthly, out of an evel eye against
thy neighbor that lives by 4.
thee. There is not a baser sin than envy, nor a fouler mark of envy, than to
forsake thine own trading, to justle thy neighbor out of his. Nor, fifthly, 5.
out of degenerous false-heartedness. That man would soon dare to be evil, that
dare not long to be good. And he that flincheth from his Calling, at the first
frown, who can say he will not flinch from his conscience at the next? In an
upright course, fear not the face of man, neither Eccl. 10. 4.
leave thy place, though the spirit of a Ruler rise up against thee. Patience
will conjure down again that spirit in time, only, if thou keep thy self within
thy circle. But, sixthly, be sure thou change not, if thy Calling be of that
nature, that it 6.
may not be changed. Some degrees of Magistracy seem to be of that nature, and
therefore some have noted it rather as an act of Impotency in Charles the
fifth, than a fruit either of Humility, or Wisdom, or Devotion, that he
resigned his Crown, to betake himself to a Cloister. But our Calling of the
Ministry is certainly such: There may be a change of the station, or degree in
the Ministry, upon good cause and with due circumstances, but yet still so as
that the main Calling it self remain unchanged. This Calling has in it
something that is sacred, and singular, and different from other Callings. As
therefore things once dedicated and hallowed to religious services, were no
more to return to common uses; (for that were to profane them ipso facto, and
to make them unclean;) so persons once set apart for the holy work of the
Ministry, ( Acts 13. 2. whence (...), Romans 1. 1^.
separate me Paul and Barnabas) and invested into their calling with solemn
collation of Joh. 20. 22.
the holy Ghost in a special manner; if any more they return to be of that lump
from which they are separated; they do, as it were, puff the blessed breath of
Christ back into his own face, and renounce their part in the Holy Ghost.
Bethink thy self well therefore beforehand, and consider what thou art in
doing, when thou beginnest to reach forth thine hand toward this spiritual
Plow; know, when it is once there, it may not be pulled back again, no not for
a Dictatorship. That man can be no less than disorderly at the least, that
forsakes his orders. You see I do but point at things as I go, which would
require further enlarging, because I desire to have done.

This then, that we should persevere in our Callings until death, and not 47.
leave or change them upon any consideration whatsoever, is not the thing our
Apostle means by abiding in our Callings. The word imports diverse other
Christian Duties, concerning the use of our Callings: I will but touch at them,
and conclude. The first is contentedness; that we neither repine at the
meanness of our own, nor envy at the eminence of another Calling. Ver. 21. hic.
Art thou called, being a servant? care not for it, says this Apostle, but a
little before my Text. All men cannot have rich, or easy, or honorable
Callings: the necessity of the whole requires that some should drudge in baser
and meaner offices. 1 Cor. 12. 17.
If all the body were eye, where were the hearing? And if there were none to
grind at the Mill, there would soon be none to sit upon the Throne. Solomon's
Temple had not been reared to this hour, if there had not been 3 King. 5. 15.
burden-bearers and laborers, as well as curious workers in stone, and brass,
and gold. There should be no shame in that, whereof there can be no want; nay 1
Cor. 12. 22.
much more those members of the body, which seem to be more feeble, are
necessary. Grudge not then at thine own lot, for not the meanest Calling, but
has a promise of God's blessing; neither envy another lot; for not the
greatest Calling, but is attended with worldly vexations. Wheresoever thy
calling is, therein abide; be content with it.

The second is Faithfulness, and Industry, and Diligence* What is here 48.
called, abiding in it, is at v. 17. called Ver. 17. hic.
walking in it; and in Romans 12. waiting on it, Romans 12. 7.
Let him that has an office, wait on his office.) 1 Cor. 4. 2.
It is required in stewards that a man be found faithful: and every man in his
Calling, is 1 Pet. 4. 10.
a Steward. He that professes a Calling, and does nothing in it, does no more
abide in it, than he that leaves it, or he that never had it. Spartam quam
nactus es, orna; whatsoever Calling thou have undertaken, therein abide; be
painful in it.

The third is Sobriety, that we keep our selves within the proper bounds 49.
and limits of our Callings. For how does he abide in his Calling, that is ever
and anon flying out of it, and starting beyond it? like an extravagant soldier,
that is always breaking rank. 2 Samuel 6. 6.
Uzza had better have ventured the falling, than the fingering of the Ark,
though it tottered. It is never well, when the Ne suitor ultra crepidam. vid.
Plin. 35. Not. Hist. 10.
Cobbler looks above the Ankle, nor when Laymen teach us what, and how we
should teach them. The Pope should have done well, to have thrown away his
keys, (as they say one of them once did) before he had taken the sword into his
hands; and Midwives well, to Matthew. 28. 29.
go teach all Nations, before they baptize them in the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Let it be the singular absurdity of the
Church of Rome, to allow Vicars to dispose of Crowns, and Women of Sacraments.
As for thee, whatsoever thy Calling be, therein abide, keep within the bounds
of it.

But yet abide with God. The clause was not added for nothing; it teaches 50.
thee also some duties. First, so to demean thy self in thy particular calling,
as that thou do nothing but what may stand with thy general calling.
Magistrate, or Minister, or Lawyer, or Merchant, or Artificer, or whatsoever
other thou art, remember thou art withal a Christian. Pretend not the Iam illa
objici solita vox, Non habeo aliud quo vivam. Tertul. de Idol. cap. 5. v. ibid.
cap. 12. pulchre.
necessities of thy particular Calling to any breach of the least of those Laws
of God, which must rule thy general Calling. God is the author of both
Callings, of thy general Calling, and of thy particular Calling too. Do not
think he has called thee to service in the one, and to liberty in the other,
to Justice in the one, and to Cosenage in the other; to Simplicity in the one,
and to Dissimulation in the other; to Holiness in the one, and to Profaneness
in the other; in a word, to an entire and universal Obedience in the one, and
to any kind or degree of Disobedience in the other.

It teaches thee, secondly, not to ingulf thy self so wholly into the business
51.
of thy particular Calling, as to abridg thy self of convenient opportunities
so the exercise of those religious duties, which thou art bound to perform by
virtue of thy general calling, as Prayer, Confession, Thanksgiving, Meditation,
etc. God allows thee to serve thy self, but he commands thee to serve him
too. Be not thou so all for thy self, as to forget him; but as thou art ready
to embrace that liberty which he has given thee to serve thy self, so make a
conscience to perform those duties which he has required of thee for his
service. Work and spare not, but yet pray too, or else work not. Prayer is the
means to procure a blessing upon thy labors from his hands, who never fails
to serve them that never fail to serve him. Did ever any man Job 1. 9.
serve God for naught? A man cannot have so comfortable assurance, that he
shall prosper in the affairs he takes in hand, by any other means, as by
making God the Alpha and Omega of his endeavors, by beginning them in his
name, and directing them to his Glory. Neither is this a point of duty only, in
regard of Gods command, or a point of wisdom only, to make our labors
successful; but it is a point of Justice too, as due by way of Restitution. We
make bold with his day, and dispense with some of that time which he has
sanctified unto his service, for our own necessities; it is equal we should
allow him at least as much of ours, as we borrow of his, though it be for our
necessities, or lawful Comforts. But if we rob him of some of his time (as too
often we do) employing it in our own businesses, without the warrant of a just
necessity, we are to know that it is theft, yea, theft in the highest degree,
sacrilege; and that therefore we are bound, at least, as far as petty Thieves
were in the Law, to a Exodus 22* 1. 2 Samuel 12. 6.
fourfold restitution. Abide in thy Calling, by doing thine own part, and
laboring faithfully; but yet so, as God's part be not forgotten in serving him
daily.

It teaches thee, thirdly, to watch over the special sins of thy particular 52.
Calling. Sins, I mean not that cleave necessarily to the Calling, for then the
very Calling it self should be unlawful; but sins, unto the temptations whereof
the condition of thy Calling lays thee open, more than it does unto other
sins, or more than some other Callings would do unto the same sins; and
wherewith, whilst thou art stirring about the businesses of thy Calling, thou
may be soonest overtaken, if thou do not heedfully watch over thy self and
them. The Magistrates sins, Partiality and Injustice; the Ministers sins, Sloth
and Flattery; the Lawyers sins, Maintenance and Collusion; the Merchants sins,
Lying and Deceitfulness; the Courtiers sins, Ambition and Dissimulation; the
great Man's sins, Pride and Oppression; the Gentleman's sins, Riot and
Prodigality; the Officers sins, Bribery and Extortion; the Countrymans sins,
Envy and Discontentedness; the Servants sins, Tale-bearing and Purloyning. In
every State and Condition of life, there is a kind of opportunity to some
special sin, wherein, if our watchfulness be not the greater, mainly to oppose
it, and keep it out, we cannot abide therein with God.

All that I have done all this while in my passage over this Scripture, is but
this. I have proved the necessity of having a Calling; laid down Directions for
the choice and trial of our Callings; and showed, what is required of us in the
use of our Callings for the abiding therein with God. And having thus
dispatched my Message, it is now time I should spare both your ears, and my own
sides. God grant that every one of us may remember so much of what has been
taught, as is needful for each of us, and faithfully apply it unto our own
Souls and Consciences, and make a profitable and seasonable use of it in the
whole course of our lives, even for Jesus Christ his sake, his blessed Son, and
our alone Savior. To whom, etc.

AD POPULUM.
The Fifth Sermon.
At St. Paul's Cross London, Nov. 21. 1624.
1 Timothy IV. 4. For every Creature of God is good: and nothing to be refused, if
it be received with Thanksgiving.
OF that great and Universal Apostasy, which should be in the 1.
Church through the tyranny and fraud of Antichrist; there are elsewhere in the
Scriptures more full, scarce any where more plain Predictions, than in this,
passage of St. Paul, whereof my Text is a part. The Quality of the Doctrines
foretold Verse. 1. contrary to the Faith, Erroneous, Devilish; [ Verse 1.
Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart
from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and doctrines of Devils.] The
Quality of the Doctors, foretold, verse 2. Liars, Hypocritical, Unconscionable;
[ Verse. 2.
Speaking lies in Hypocrisy, having their consciences seared with a hot Iron.]
But lest these generalities should seem not sufficiently distinctive; each side
charging other (as commonly it happens where differences are about Religion)
with Apostasy and Error, and Falsehood, and Hypocrisy: the Apostle thought it
needful to point out those Antichristian Doctors more distinctly, by specifying
some particulars of their devilish Doctrines. For which purpose he gives
instance in Verse. 3.
two of their Doctrines, whereof he makes choice, not as being simply the
worst of all the rest, (though bad enough) but as being more easily discernable
than most of the rest; viz. a Prohibition of Marriage, and an injunction of
Abstinence from certain meats. Which particulars, being so agreeable to the
present Tenets of the Romish Synagogue, do give even of themselves alone, a
strong suspicion, that there is the seat of Antichrist. But joined unto the
other Prophecies of 2 These. 2. 3. etc.
St. Paul, and Apoc. 13. 11, etc.
St. John, in other places, make it so unquestionable; that they who will needs
be so unreasonably charitable, as to think the Pope is not Antichrist, may at
the least wonder, (as Moulins accomplishment in the Preface.
one says well) by what strange chance it fell out, that these Apostles should
draw the picture of Antichrist in every point and limb, so just like the Pope,
and yet never think of him.

The words of the Text, are the ground of a Confutation; indeed properly 2.
and directly of the later of these two Errors only, concerning Abstinence from
certain meats: but yet so, as it strongly overthrows the other too,
concerning Marriage; and in truth generally, all other superstitious Precepts
or Prohibitions of like Nature. Marriage being the holy Ordinance of God, as
Meats are the good Creatures of God: and neither Marriage, nor Meats, nor any
other Creature or Ordinance, being to be refused as upon tie of Conscience;
provided ever, they be received with such thankfulness, and such other
requisite conditions, as become Christian men. For every Creature of God is
good; and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving.

Which words give us occasion to consider of Three points, which according 3.
to the number and order of the several clauses in this Verse are these. First,
the 1.
Quality of Gods Creatures, as they come from him, and are given to us: [ Every
Creature of God is good.] Secondly, the Use of Gods Creatures, consisting 2.
in their lawfulness unto us, and our liberty unto them: [ And nothing to be
refused.] Thirdly, a Condition necessary on our parts, lest the Creatures
otherwise 3.
good and lawful, should become unto us evil and hurtful; and that is
Thankfulness: [If it be received with Thanksgiving.] The two first set out the
bounty of God toward us; who has made a world of Creatures, and all good, and
has not envied us the use of any of them: and the third, contains our duty
unto God in regard thereof; viz. to return unto him, for the free use of all
his good Creatures, the tribute of our Thanks. Of these three points it is my
purpose, by Gods grace, and with your patience, to speak in such manner, as
shall be most for our edification; in such measure as the usual hours will
allow; and in such Order as the Text gives them: and first of the first, from
the first clause thereof; Every Creature of God is good.

By Creature understand, not only such as are appointed for nourishment: but 4.
even all kind of created Beings; the ^n. 1. 1.
Heaven and the Earth, and ^^od. 20. 11.
all things therein contained ^l. 1. 16.
visible and invisible, with all their several Properties and Accidents. Of all
and each of these the Apostles assertion is true; Every Creature of God is
good. He concludes all kinds of meats to be good; because they are the
Creatures of God: which argument were not good, if every Creature were not
good. And by goodness understand, not only that goodness ad intra, whereby
every thing is simply and metaphysically good, in regard of the nature,
perfection, and being thereof: but that goodness, ad extra, too, whereby every
thing is in the kind, and in some measure endowed with an ability to do some
good without and beyond it self. You may call them an Scalig. ^. 307. sect.
absolute, and a Relative goodness. And every creature has both of these.
There being in the meanest and basest of Gods Creatures, not only an Absolute
Goodness, whereby it is perfect in its proper kind, Qua Ens, as it has a being
and existence; but also a Relative Goodness too; and that twofold. One,
respecting God the Creator: whose glory, more or less, it serves to show
forth, Qua Creatura, as it is the Work of his hands. Another, respecting its
(...), ^. in Prot. ^ Menon.
Fellow Creatures: to some of whom it is some way or other serviceable, Qua
pars Mundi, as it is a part of the whole; but especially, serviceable unto Man,
for whose service (next under the glory of God) the whole was Created. The sum
is, Every Creature which God has made is good. Good, absolutely and in it
self, as a Thing: Good, in that it sets forth the glory of him that made it,
as a Creature: Good, as a part of the World, for the service it does to man,
and other Creatures.

Hereof we need neither further, nor other testimony, than Gods own approbation
5.
registered in the story of the Creation, Genesis 1. Where we may see Gods
allowance stamped, both upon the several Creatures of each several day, that
they were n. 1. 4, 12, 21, 25.
good: and also upon the whole frame of the Creatures, when the work was
finished; that behold they were Ibid. v. 21.
Exceeding good. Et nusquam in toto corpore menda fuit. In this goodly Systeme
and fabric of Nature that which is beyond all, is, the Harmony and conjuncture
of the parts, exceeding in goodness, beauty and perfection: yet so, as no one
part is superfluous or unprofitable; or, if considered singly and by it self,
destitute of its proper goodness and usefulness. As in the Natural Body of a
man; not the least member, or string, or sinew, but has his proper office and
comeliness in the body: and as in the Artificial Body of a Clock or other
Engine of motion, not the least wheel, or pin, or notch, but has his proper
work and use in the Engine. God has given to every thing he has made, that
Wisd. 11. 20.
number, weight and measure of perfection and goodness, which he saw fittest
for it unto those ends for which he made it. Every Creature of God is good.

A truth so evident; that even those among the Heathen Philosophers, who 6.
either denied or doubted of the Worlds Creation, did yet, by making (...).
Arist. 1. Ethic. 6.
Ens and Bonum, terms convertible, acknowledge the goodness of every Creature.
It were a shame then for us, who Heb. 11. 3.
Through faith understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God; if
our assent unto this truth should not be by so much firmer than theirs, by how
much our evidence for it is stronger than theirs. They perceived the thing; we
the ground also: they saw it was so; we, why it is so. Even because it is the
work of God; A God full of goodness; a God who is nothing but goodness; a God
Pars naturae eorum est esse bonos. (De Diis.) Senec.
essentially and infinitely good, yea, very Goodness it self. As is the
Workman, such is his (...). Plat in Timaeo.
workmanship.

Not for degree, (that is here impossible;) but for the truth of the Quality:
nor alike good with him, but like to him in being good. In every Creature there
are certain tracts and footsteps, as of Gods Essence, whereby it has its
Being: so of his Goodness too, whereby it also is good. The Sea Aug. passim in
scriptis contr. Manichaeos.
Manichees saw the strength of this Inference: Who, though they were so
injurious unto the Creatures, as to repute some of them evil; yet durst not be
so absurd, as to charge the true God to be the cause of those they so reputed.
Common reason taught them, that from the good God could not proceed any evil
thing: no more than Darkness could from the light of the Sun, or Cold from the
heat of the fire. And therefore, so to defend their Error, as to avoid this
absurdity, they were forced to maintain another absurdity (indeed a greater,
though it seemed to them the less of the two) viz. to say there were two Gods,
a good God, the Author of all good things; and an evil God, the Author of all
evil things. If then we acknowledge that there is but 1 Cor. 8. 6.
one God, and that one God good; (and we do all so acknowledge:) unless we will
be more absurd than those most absurd Heretics, we must withal acknowledge all
the Creatures of that one and good God to be also good. He is so the causer of
all that is good; for Jam. 1. 17.
Every good gift, and every perfect giving, descends from above from the
Father of lights: as that he is the causer only of what is good: (for with him
is no variableness neither shadow of turning, says St. James.) As the Sun, who
is Pater luminum, the fountain and Father of lights (whereunto St. James in
that passage does apparently allude) gives light to the Moon, and Stars, and
all the lights of Heaven, and causes light wheresoever he shines, but no
where causes darkness: so God the Father, and fountain of all goodness, so
communicates goodness to every thing he produces, as that he Errat, si quis
putet illos ( Deos) nocere velle, qui non possunt Sen. Epist. 95. Nec dant
malum, nec habent. Ibid.
cannot produce any thing at all, but that which is good: Every Creature of God
then is good.

Which being so; certainly then, first (to raise some Inferences from the
Premises for our farther instruction and use) certainly I say; Sin and Death,
and such things as are evil, and not good, are not of Gods making, they are
none of his Creatures: for all his Creatures are good. Jam. 1. 13.
Let no man therefore say, when he is tempted, and overcome of sin, I am
tempted of God: neither let any 7.
man say, when he has done evil, It was God's doing. God indeed preserves the
Man, actuateth the Power, and orders the Action to the glory of his Mercy or
Justice: but he has no hand at all in the sinful defect and obliquity of a
wicked action. There is a natural (or rather transcendental) Goodness, Bonit as
Entis, as they call it, in every Action, even in that whereto the greatest sin
adhereth: and that Mali author non est, qui omnium quae sunt author est: quia
in quantum sunt, in tantum bona sunt. Aug. 83. Quaest. 21.
Goodness is from God, as that Action is his Creature. But the Evil that
cleaves unto it, is wholly from the default of the Person that commits it;
and not at all from God. And as for the Evils of Pain also; neither are they of
Gods making. Wisd. 13. 16.
Deus mortem non fecit, says the Author of the Book of Wisdom, God made not
death, neither does he take pleasure in the destruction of the living: but
wicked men by their words, and works, have brought it upon themselves: Perditio
tua ex te Israel, Hosea 13. Hos. 13. 9.
O Israel, thy destruction is from thy self: that is, both thy sin, whereby
thou destroyest thy self, and thy Misery whereby thou art destroyed, is only
and wholly from thy self. Certainly, God is not the cause of any Evil, either
of Sin or Punishment. Conceive it thus: not the Cause of it ( formally, and) so
far forth as it is Evil. For otherwise, we must know, that ( materially
considered) all Evils of Punishment are from God: for Amos 3. 6.
Shall there be evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3. 6. In
Evils of sin, there is no other, but only that Natural or Transcendental
goodness (whereof we spoke) in the Action: which goodness though it be from
God, yet because the Action is morally bad, God is not said to do it: But in
Evils of Punishment, there is, over and besides that Natural Goodness, whereby
they exist, a kind of Moral Goodness, (as we may call it, after a sort;
improperly, and by way of reduction) as they are Instruments of the Justice of
God: and whatsoever may be referred to Justice, may so far forth be called
good: and for that very goodness, God may be said in some sort to be the Author
of these evils of Punishment, though not also of those other evils of Sin. In
both, we must distinguish the Good from the Evil: and ascribe all the Good,
wheresoever it be, ( Transcendental, Natural, Moral, or if there be any other)
to God alone; but by no means any of the Evil. We are unthankful, if we impute
any good, but to him: and we are unjust, if we impute to him any thing but good.

Secondly, from the goodness of the least Creature, guess we at the Wisd. 13.
1, etc.
excellent 8.
goodness of the great Creator. A. Gell. 1. Noct. Attic. 1.
Ex pede Herculem. God has imprinted, as before I said, some steps and
footings of his goodness in the Creatures: from which we must take the best
scantling, we are capable of, of those admirable and inexpressible and
unconceivable perfections that are in him. There is no beholding of the body of
this Sun, who dwells in such a 1 Timothy 6. 16.
a Glorious light as none can attain unto; that glory would dazzle with
blindness the sharpest and most Eagly eye that should dare to fix it self upon
it, with any stedfastness: enough it is for us, from those Tanta haec formarum
variet as in rebus conditis, quid nisi quidam sunt radii Deitatis?
demonstrantes quidem quod vere sit a quo sunt; non tamen quid sit, prorsus
definientes. Bern. Ser. 31. in Cant.
rays and glimmering beams which he has scattered upon the Creatures, to
gather how infinitely he exceeds them in brightness and glory. Bern. ibid.
De ipso vides, sed non ipsum: We see his, but not Him. His Creatures, they are
our best, indeed our only instructers. For though his revealed Word teach us,
that we should never have learned from the Creatures without it: yet, (fitted
to our capacity) it teaches no otherwise, than by resemblances taken from the
Creatures. Romans 1. 19, 20.
(...), as St. Paul calls it, Romans 1. the whole Latitude of that, which may
be known of God, is manifest in the Creatures: and the invisible things of God
not to be understood but by things that are made. St. Basil therefore calls
the world Basil.
(...), the very School where the knowledge of God is to be learned: And there
is a double way of teaching, a twofold method of training us up into that
knowledge in that school: that is to say, Aquin. 1. qu. 12. 12.
Per viam Negationis, and per viam Eminentiae, First (...). Dama^^. 1. de fid.
Orthod. 4
Via Negationis: look whatsoever thou find in the Creature, which savoureth
of defect or imperfection; and know, God is not such. Are they limited? subject
to change, composition, decay, etc? Remove these from God; and learn that he is
infinite, simple; unchangeable, eternal. Then Via Eminentiae: look whatsoever
perfection there is in the Creature in any degree; and know that the same, but
(infinitely and incomparably) more eminently, is in God. Is there Wisdom, or
Knowledge, or Power, or Beauty, or Greatness, or Goodness, in any kind, or in
any measure in any of the Creatures? Affirm the same, but without measure, of
God^^ and learn that he is infinitely wiser, and skilfuller, and stronger, and
fairer, and greater, and better. In every good thing, so differently excellent
above and beyond the Creatures; as that, though yet they be good, yet compared
with him, they deserve not the name of good, Mar. 10. 18.
There is none good but one, that is God, Mar. 10. None good, as he: simply,
and absolutely, and essentially, and of himself such. The creatures that they
are good, they have it from him; and their goodness depends upon him: and
they are good but in part, and insome measure, and in their own kinds.
Whenever therefore we find any good from, or observe any goodness in any of
the Creatures: let us not bury our meditations there, but raise them by those
stairs (as it were) of the Creatures, to contemplate the great Goodness of him
their Creator. We are unhappy truants; if in this so richly furnished School of
God's good Creatures; we have not learned from them at the least so much
knowledge of him and his goodness, as to admire and love, and depend upon it
and him. Look upon the workmanship, and accordingly judge of the Workman: Every
Creature of God is good: surely then the Creator must needs excel in goodness.

Thirdly, there is in men, amongst other cursed fruits of self-love, an aptness
9.
to measure things, Non ex sui natura, sed ex suo commodo, vel incommodo. Aug.
12. de Civit. 4.
not by the level of exact truth, but by the model of their own apprehensions.
Who is there that cannot fault another work? The Plin. 35. Not. Hist. 10.
Cobbler could espy something amiss in Apelles his masterpiece; because the
Picture was not drawn just according to his fancy. If a thousand of us hear a
Sermon, scarce one of that thousand, but he must show some of that little wit
he has in disliking something or other: There the Preacher was too elaborate,
here too loose: that point he might have enlarged, contracted this; he might
have been plainer there, showed more learning here; that observation was
obvious, that exposition enforced, that proof impertinent, that illustration
common, that exhortation needless, that reproof unseasonable: one misliketh his
Text, another his Method, a third his Style, a fourth his Voice, a fifth his
Memory; every one something. A fault more pardonable, if our censures stayed at
the works of men, like our selves; and Lucian in Hermotimo.
Momus-like, we did not quarrel the works of God also, and charge many of his
good Creatures, either with manifest ill, or at leastwise with
unprofitableness. See Sirac, 39. 16, 17, etc.
Why was this made? Or why thus? What good does this, or what use of that? It
had perhaps been better, if this or that had never been; or if they had been
otherwise. Thus we sometimes say or think. To Ne tanti artificis opus in aliquo
reprehendere vanitate humanae temeritatis audeamus. Aug. 12. de Civit. 4.
rectify this corruption, remember this first clause of my Text, Every
Creature of God is good. Perhaps thou see not, what good there is in some of
the Creatures? Like enough so: but yet consider, there may be much good which
thou see not. Say, it gives thee no nourishment: Possibly it may do thee
(...). Damasc. 2. de fid. Orthod. 12.
service in some other kind. Say, it never yet did that: yet it may do
hereafter. Later times Quam multa animalia hoc primum cognovimus saeculo? and
quidem multa venientis avi populus ignota nobis, sciet. Senec, 7. Not. qu. 31.
have found out much good use of many Creatures, whereof former ages were
ignorant: and why may not aftertimes find good in those things which do us
none? Say, it never did, nor ever shall do service to man, (although who can
tell that?) yet who knows but it has done, or may do service to some other
Creature, that does service to man? Say, not that neither: yet this good thou
may reap even from such Creatures, as seem to afford none; to take (...)tur
qui(...)n assu(...)s and re(...)is, ad (...)dinem; (...)dam to(...)is, ad
pa(...)m; qui(...)n ordi(...), ad justi(...) quibus(...)onside(...), ad
ali(...)eritatis (...)ntum.
knowledge of thine own ignorance, and to humble thy self thereby, who art so
far from comprehending the essence, that thou can not comprehend the very
works of God. The most unprofitable Creatures profit us, at least this way:
(...) 3. quaest.
Visu, si non usu, as Bernard speaks; if not to use them, yet to see in them
as in a glass Gods wisdom, and our own ignorance. And so they do us good; if
not (...). Sermon. 5. (...)t.
cedendo in cibum, if not exhibendo ministerium, in feeding and serving us; yet
exercendo ingenium, as the same Bernard speaks; in exercising our wits, and
giving us a sight of our ignorance.

But yet those Creatures, which are apparently hurtful to us; as Serpents, and
Wild beasts, and sundry poisonous plants; but above all, the Devils, and cursed
Angels: May we not say, they are ill, and justly both blame and hate them? Even
these also are good, as they are the Creatures of God, and the workmanship of
his hands. It is only through sin that they are evil either to us, as the rest;
or in themselves, as the Devils. These (now wicked) Angels were 10.
glorious Creatures at the first: by their own voluntary transgression it is,
that they are now the worst, and the basest. And as for all the other Creatures
of God, made to do us service; they were at first, and still are good in
themselves: if there cleaves to them any evil, whereby they become hurtful to
us, that is by accident; and we have to thank none but our selves for that. For
who, or what could have harmed us, if we had been followers of that which was
good? It was (...). 8. 20.
not of their own accord, but through our sinfulness, that the Creatures became
subject unto vanity, and capable either to do, or to suffer ill. They had been
still harmless, if we had been still faultless: it was our (...). (...)ost. in
(...)om. 25.
sin, that at once forfeited both our innocence, and theirs. If then we see any
ill in them, or find any ill by them; let us not lay the blame, or wreak our
hatred upon them: let us rather bestow our blame and hatred where it is most
due; the blame upon our selves, the hatred upon our sins. If Balaam had done
justly, he should have spared the (...). 22. 27,
Ass, and have corrected himself: but the false Prophet does the fault, and the
poor beast must bear both blame and strokes. When we suffer, we curse; or at
the easiest, blame the Creatures: this weather, that flood, such a storm, has
blasted our fruits, sanded our grounds, shipwrack'd our wares, and undone us.
When alas, these have neither heart nor strength against us, but what our
selves put into them by our sins. Every sense of evil therefore in or from the
Creatures, should work in us a sense of our disobedience unto God; should
increase in us a detestation of the sins we have committed against God; should
teach us by condemning our selves, to acquit the good Creatures of God: which
as they are good in themselves, so should they have been ever and only good
unto us, if we had been true to our selves, and continued good and faithful
servants unto God. They are all good: do not thou accuse any of them, and say
they are evil: do not thou abuse any of them, and make them evil.

Hitherto of the first Point, the goodness of the Creatures, [Every Creature of
11.
God is good.] Follows the second, which is their Use: consisting in their
lawfulness unto us, and our; liberty unto them; every Creature of God is good,
and nothing to be refused. [Nothing.] That is, most agreeable to the argument
of the former verse, nothing fit for food: but more generally, (and so I rather
think the Apostle intends) no Creature of God, whereof we may have use or
service in any kind whatsoever. Nothing, which may yield us any comfortable
content for the support of this life, in point of health, ease, profit,
delight, or otherwise (with due sobriety, and other requisite conditions)
nothing is to be refused. By which Refusal, the Apostle means not a bare
forbearance of the things; (for, that we both may, and in many cases ought, so
to refuse some of the Creatures, shall anon appear:) but the thing he
forbids, is, the forbearance of the Creature, as upon immediate tie of
Conscience; viz. either out of a superstitious opinion of the unlawfulness of
any creature, for some supposed natural or legal uncleanness in it; or out of a
like superstitious opinion of some extraordinary perfection, or operative and
effectual holiness in such refusal. The Point is this. All the Creatures of God
are lawful for us to use: so as it is against Christian liberty, either to
charge the use of them with sin, or to place holiness in the abstaining from
them. 12.


Our Apostle often teaches this Point. In Romans 14. at verse. 20. [ Romans 14. 20.
All things are pure:] and at verse. 14. there he delivers it as a certain
truth, and upon knowledge, [ Ibid. 14.
I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of
it self,] and therefore he imputes it as an error and weakness in judgment, to
them that refused some kind of meats out of a superstitious opinion, or but
timorous fear of their unlawfulness, at verse. 2. [ Ibid. 2.
One believes he may eat all things: another, who is weak, eats herbs:] And
in 1 Cor. 10. [ 1 Cor. 10. 25.
Whatsoever is sold in the Shambles, that eat, asking no question for
Conscience sake:] and anon verse. 27. [ Ibid. 27.
If an unbeliever bid you to a feast, and you be disposed to go; Whatsoever is
set before you, eat, asking no question for Conscience sake.] And, to the end
we might know the liberty he there gives to extend to all other Creatures, as
well as meats; he pronounces of them all universally at verse. 23. [ Ibid. 23.
(...), All things are lawful for me.] And so he does in Tit. 1. 15.
universally too; [ Tit. 1. 15.
Omnia munda mundis, To the pure all things are pure.] From all which
Testimonies we may conclude, there is no unlawfulness or impurity in any of the
Creatures, but that we may with security of conscience, freely use them without
sin. If we use them doubtingly against Conscience, or indiscreetly against
Charity, or otherwise inordinately against Sobriety; they become indeed in such
cases sinful unto us: But that is through our default, not theirs, who sinfully
abuse that, which we might lawfully use. And that abuse of ours, neither Romans
14. 14.
defiles the things themselves; nor ought to 1 Cor. 10. 29, 30.
prejudice the liberty of another, that may use them well.

And as there is no sin in the use: so neither is there any Religion or
perfection 13.
to be placed in the refusal of any of Gods Creatures. Rather on the contrary,
to abstain from any of them, out of a conceit of any such perfection or
holiness, is it self a sinful superstition. Our Apostle ranketh it with
Idolatrous Col. 2. 16.
Angel worship, and condemns it as sinful and superstitious, Col. 2. from
Verse 16. to the end of the Chapter. The subjecting of our selves to those and
such like ordinances, Touch not, Taste not, Handle not, though it may have a
show of Wisdom in Will Worship, and in a voluntary humility and neglecting of
the body, yet it is derogatory to that liberty wherein Christ has set us free,
and reviving of those rudiments of the world, from which we are dead with
Christ. Every Creature of God is good; and nothing to be refused, out of a
superstitious either fear of unlawfulness, or opinion of holiness.

Now the Ground of this our Right or Liberty unto the Creatures is double: 14.
the one, Gods Ordinance at the first Creation; the other, Christ's purchase in
the work of Redemption. At the Creation, God made all things for man's use, as
he did man for his own service; and as he reserved to himself his absolute
Sovereignty over Man; so he gave unto man a kind of limited Genesis 1. 29.
Sovereignty over the Creatures in Genesis 1. Psalm. 8. 6. -- quod nos in hoc
pulcherrimo domicilio voluerunt (Dii) secundas sortiri, quod terrenis
praefecerunt. Sen. 2. de ben. 16.
He has put all things in subjection under our feet, says David, Psalm. 8.
Which Dominion over the Creatures was one special branch of that glorious
Gen..1. 17.
Image of God in us, after which we were created: and therefore was not, nor
could be absolutely Bonis naturae mala adventitia dum non succedunt, sed
accedunt, non exterminant, conturbant, non deturbant. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 82.
lost by sin; but only decayed and defaced, and impaired; as the other branches
of that Image were. So that albeit man by sin lost a great part of his
Sovereignty, ( (...)ost. in m. 9.
(...), as speaks St. Chrysostom, especially so far as concerns the
execution of it; many of the Creatures being now rebellious and noysom unto
Man, and unanswering his commands and expectations: yet the Right still
remains even in corrupt nature; and there are still to be found some tracings
and Characters, as in man of superiority, so in them of subjection. But those
(...). Dam. (...)d. Or(...).
dim, and confused, and scare legible: as in old Marbles, and Coins, and
out-worn Inscriptions, we have much ado to find out what some of the Letters
were.

But if by sin we had lost all that first title we had to the Creature wholly
and utterly: yet as God has been pleased graciously to deal with us, we are 5.
fully as well as before. God the Father has granted us, and God the Son has
acquired us, and God the Holy Ghost has sealed us a new Patent. By it,
whatsoever Defect is, or can be supposed to be, in our old Evidence, is
supplied; and by virtue of it, we may make fresh challenge, and renew our claim
unto the Creatures. The blessed Son of God 1. 20.
Having made peace through the blood of his Cross, has reconciled us to his
Father; and therein also reconciled the Creatures both to us and him:
reconciling by him (says our Apostle, Col. 1. 20.) (...) all things (not men
only) unto himself. For God having given us his Son (...). 1. 2.
the Heir of all things; has he not 1. 8. 32.
with him given us all things else? Has he not permitted us the free use of
his Creatures in as ample Right as ever? (...). 8. 36.
If the Son have made us free, we are free indeed. And as verily as Christ is
Gods, so verily (if we be Christ's) all things are ours. This Apostle sets
down the whole series and form of this spiritual Hierarchy, (if I may so speak)
this subjection and subordination of the Creatures to Man, of Man to Christ, of
Christ to God, 1 Cor. 3. (...)r. 3. 22,
All are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

Strengthened with this double title, what should hinder us from possession? 16.
Why may we not freely use that liberty, which was once given us by God, and
again restored us by Jesus Christ? Why should we not (...). 5. 1.
stand fast in, and contend earnestly for the maintenance of that liberty,
wherewith Christ has set us free: by rejecting all fancies, opinions, and
Doctrines, that any way trench upon this our Christian Prerogative; or seek
either to shorten, or to corrupt, our freedom unto, and power over the
Creatures? First, if any shall oppose the legal Prohibitions of the Old
Testament; whereby some Creatures were v. 11.
forbidden the Jews, pronounced by God himself unclean, and decreed unlawful:
it should not trouble us. For, whatever the principal reasons were, for which
those prohibitions were then made unto them (as there be diverse reasons given
thereof by Divines both ancient and modern;) certain it is, they now concern
not us. The Church, during her nonage and pupillage, (though she were (...)al.
4. 1, 2.
Heir of all, and had right to all; yet was to be held under Tutors and
Governors, and to be trained up under the Law of Ceremonies as (...)al. 3. 24,
25.
under a School master, during the appointed time. But, (...)al. 4. 4.
When the fullness of the time appointed was come, her wardship expired, and
livery sued out (as it were) by the coming and suffering of Christ in the
flesh: the Church was then to enter upon her full Royalties, and no more to be
burdened with those (...). Gal. 4. 9.
beggarly rudiments of legal observances. The (...)ol. 2. 14.
handwriting of Ordinances was then blotted out; and the muddy (...)ph. 2. 14.
partition wall broken down; and the legal impurity of the Creatures scowred
off by the (...) Da (...)s. 4 de fid. thod. 4.
blood of Christ. They have little to do then, but withal much to answer; who,
by seeking to bring in Judaism again into the Christian Church, either in whole
or in part, do thereby, as much as lies in them, (though perhaps unawares to
themselves, yet indeed and in truth) ial. 5. 2, 4,
evacuate the Cross of Christ. In that Acts 10. 11, 15.
large sheet of the Creatures, which reaches from Heaven to the Earth,
whatsoever we find, we may freely kill and eat, and use every other way to our
comforts without scruple. God having cleansed all, we are not to call or esteem
any thing common or unclean; God having created all good, we are to 2.
refuse nothing. If any shall oppose, secondly, the seeming morality of some of
these prohibitions, as being given Genesis 9. 4.
before the law of Ceremonies, pressed from Lev. 17. 11, 14.
Moral Reasons, and confirmed by Acts 15. 20, 29.
Apostolical Constitution since; upon which ground some would impose upon the
Christian Church this, as a perpetual yoke, to abstain from blood: Or, thirdly,
the Profanation which some 3.
Creatures have contracted by being used in the exercise of idolatrous Worship,
whereby they become Anathema, and are to be held as execrable things, as Josh.
7. 1.
Achan's wedge was, and the 2 King. 18. 4.
Brazen Serpent which Hezekiah stamped to powder; upon which ground also, some
others have inferred an utter unlawfulness to use any thing in the Church,
which was abused in Popery, by calling them Rags and Relics of Idolatry,
neither this nor that ought to trouble us. For although neither my aim, (which
lies another way) nor the time will permit me now to give a just and full
satisfying answer to the several Instances and their grounds; yet the very
words and weight of my Text, do give us a clear resolution in the general, and
sufficient to rest our Consciences, and our Judgments, and Practice upon; that,
notwithstanding all pretensions of reason to the contrary, yet these things,
for so much as they are still good, ought not to be refused. For the Apostle
has here laid a sure foundation, and impregnable, in that he groundeth the use
upon the power; and from the Goodness of the Creature infers the lawfulness
of it. [ Every Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused.] He
concludes, it is therefore not to be refused, because it is good. So that look
whatsoever Goodness there is in any Creature, that is, whatsoever natural power
it has, which either immediately and of it self is, or may, by the improvement
of human Art and Industry, be taught to be of any use unto man, for necessity,
nourishment, service, lawful delight or otherwise; the Creature wherein such
goodness or power is to be found, may not be refused as upon tie of Conscience,
but that power and goodness it has, may lawfully be employed to those uses for
which it is meet in regard thereof. Ever provided, we be careful to observe all
those requisite conditions, which must guide our Consciences, and regulate our
Practice, in the use of all lawful and indifferent things. They that teach
otherwise, lay burdens upon their own Consciences, which they need not, and
upon the Consciences of their Brethren which they should not; and are injurious
to that liberty which the blessed Son of God has purchased for his Church, and
which the blessed Spirit of God has asserted in my Text.

Injurious, in the second place, to this branch of our Christian liberty, is
the 17.
Church of Rome, whom St. Paul in this passage has branded with an indelible
note of infamy; inasmuch as those very Doctrines, wherein he gives instance,
as in Doctrines of Devils, are the received Tenets and Conclusions of that
Church. Not to insist on other prejudices done to Christian liberty, by the
intolerable usurpation of 2 These. 2. 3.
the man of sin, who exercises a spiritual Tyranny over men's Consciences, as
opposite to Evangelical liberty, as Antichrist is to Christ; let us but a
little see how she has fulfilled St. Paul's Prediction, in teaching lying and
devilish Doctrines, and that with seared Consciences and in Hypocrisy, in the
two specialties mentioned in the next former Verse, viz. forbidding to marry,
and commanding to abstain from Meats.

Marriage, the holy Ordinance of God, instituted in the Genesis 2. 18.
place and estate of 18.
Innocence, honored by Joh. 2. 2.
Christ's presence at Cana in Galilee; the Seedplot of the Church, and the 1
Cor. 7. 2.
sole allowed remedy against Incontinency and burning lusts, by the Apostle
commended as Heb. 13. 4.
honorable in all men, and commanded in case of 1 Cor. 7. 9.
ustion to all men, is yet by this Rev. 17. 13.
purple strumpet forbidden, and that sub mortali, to Bishops, Priests, Deacons,
Sub deacons, Monks, Friars, Nuns; in a word, to the whole Clergy (as they
extend that title) both Secular and Regular. Wherein, besides the Devilishness
of the Doctrine in contrarying the Ordinance of God, and in denying men,
subject to sinful lusts, the lawful remedy, and so casting them upon a
necessity of sinning; see if they do not teach this lie with seared
Consciences? For with what Conscience can they make the same thing a Sacrament
in the Lay, and Bellarm. de Monach. cap. 34.
Sacrilege in the Clergy? With what Conscience permit Stews, and forbid
Marriage? With what Conscience allege Scriptures for the single life of
Priests, and yet confess it to be an Aquin. 2. 2. qu. 88. 2. Bellar. de Cler.
cap. 18. Becan. 1. man. Controv. 13. ca. 11.
Ordinance only of Ecclesiastical, and not of Divine right? With what
Conscience confess Fornication to be against the Law of God, and Priests
Marriage only against the Law of holy Church, and yet make Marriage in a Priest
a Coster. ^^^^id. cap.^^. ^^^ ^^.
far fouler sin than Fornication or Incest? With what Conscience exact a vow of
Continency from Clerks, by those Canons which ^^^. ^^. qu. ^^^* ^^. c. 12. ^^.
1. ca. Dilectissimis.
defend their open Incontinency? With what Conscience forbid lawful Marriages
to some, and yet by dispensation allow unlawful Marriages to others?

And is not the like also done in the other particular concerning Meats? The
Laws of that Church forbidding some Benedictines and Carthusians.
Orders of men, some kinds of 19.
Meats perpetually, and all men some Meats upon certain days; and that not for
civil Respects, but with opinion of satisfaction, yea, merit, yea, and
Supererogation too. In which also, besides the Devilishness of the Doctrine, in
corrupting the profitable and religious exercise of fasting, and turning it
into a superstitious observation of Days and Meats; judge if they do not teach
this Lie also, as the former, with seared Consciences. For, with what
Conscience can they allow an ordinary Confessor to absolve for Murder,
Adultery, Perjury, and such petty crimes, but reserve the great sin of eating
flesh upon a Friday or Ember-day, to the censure of a Penitentiary, as being a
matter beyond the power of an ordinary Priest to grant absolution for? With
what Conscience make the tasting of the coarsest flesh a breach of the
Lent-fast, and surfeiting upon the delicatest Fishes and Confections, none?
With what Conscience forbid they such and such meats, for the taming of the
flesh, when they allow those that are far more nutritive of the flesh, and
incentive of fleshly Lusts? With what Conscience enjoin such abstinence for a
penance, and then presently release it again for a Penny? Indeed the Gloss upon
the Did. 84. ca. Presbyter.
Canon, that does so, has a right worthy and a right wholesome note: Note,
says the Gloss. Ibid.
Gloss, That he who gives a Penny to redeem his Fast, though he give money for
a speritual thing, yet he does not commit Simony, because the Contract is made
with God. If these men had not seared up their Consciences, would they not,
think you, feel some check at the broaching of such ridiculous and inconsistent
stuff, as flows from these two heads of Devilish Doctrines, of forbidding to
marry, and commanding to abstain from Meats?

I deny not, but the Bawds of that strumpet, the Doctors of that Church, 20.
have their colorable pretenses wherewith to blanch over these errors, else
the Lies would be palpable, and they should not otherwise fill up the measure
of their Apostasy, according to the Apostles Prophecy, in teaching these Lies
in Hypocrisy. But the colors, though never so artificially tempered, and
never so handsomely laid on, are yet so thin, that a steady eye, not bleared
with prejudice, may discern the Lie through them, for all the Hypocrisy; as
might easily be shown, if my intended course led me that way, and did not
rather direct me to matter of more profitable and universal use. Having
therefore done with them, it were good for us, in the third place, (that we
might know our own freehold with better certainty, and keep our selves within
our due bounds;) to enquire a little what is the just extent of our Christian
liberty unto the Creatures, and what restraints it may admit. A point very
needful to be known for the resolution of many doubts in Conscience, and for
the cutting off of many questions and disputes in the Church, which are of very
noysom consequence, for want of right information herein. I have other matter
also to entreat of, and therefore since I may not allow this Enquiry so large a
Discourse, as it well deserves, I shall desire you to take into your Christian
Consideration these Positions following.

The first, Our Christian liberty extends to all the Creatures of God. This
21.
arises clearly from what has been already delivered; and the testimonies of
Scripture for it are express. Romans 14. 20.
All things are pure; 1 Cor. 10. 23.
All things are lawful; 1 Cor. 3. 22.
All are yours: elsewhere, and here, nothing to be refused.

The second Position. Our Christian Liberty equally respects the using, and
the not using of any of God's Creatures. There is no Creature but a Christian
man, by virtue of his Liberty, as he may use it upon just occasion, so he may
22.
also upon just cause refuse it. 1 Cor. 6. 12.
All things are lawful for me, says St. Paul, but I will not be brought under
the power of any thing. Where he established this Liberty in both the parts of
it; Liberty to use the Creatures, or else they had not all been lawful for him;
and yet Liberty not to use them, or else he had been under the power of some of
them. Whence it follows, that all the Creatures of God stand in the nature of
things indifferent; that is, such as may indifferently be either used or not
used, according as the rules of godly discretion, circumstances duly
considered, shall direct.

The third Position. Our Christian Liberty for the using or not using of the 23.
Creature, may without prejudice admit of some restraint in the outward
practice of it. Ab illicitis semper, quandoque and a licitis; I think it is St.
Gregory's: A Christian must never do unlawful, nor yet always lawful things.
St. Paul had liberty to eat flesh, and he used that liberty, and ate flesh; yet
he knew there might be some cases wherein to abridge himself of the use of that
liberty so far, as 1 Cor. ^. 13.
not to eat flesh whilst the world stands. But what those Restraints are, and
how far they may be admitted without prejudice done to that liberty, that we
may the better understand, let us go on to*

The fourth Position. Sobriety may and ought to restrain us in the outward
practice 24.
of our Christian liberty. For our Diet, all Fish, and Flesh, and Fowl, and
Fruits, and Spices, are lawful for us, as well as Bread and Herbs; but may we
therefore with thriftless prodigality and exquisite riot fare deliciously and
sumptuously every day, under pretense of Christian liberty? Likewise for our
Apparel, all stuffs and colors, the richest Silks, and Furs, and Dies, are as
lawful for us, as Cloth, and Leather, and Sheeps-russet; Christian liberty
extends as well to one as another. But do we think that liberty will excuse
our pride, and vanity, and excess, if we tuffle it out in Silks and Scarlets,
or otherwise in stuff, color, or fashion unsuitably to our Years, Sex,
Calling, Estate, or Condition? In all other things of like nature; in our
Buildings, in our Furniture, in our Retinues, in our Disports, in our
Recreations, in our Society, in our Marriages, in other things, we ought as
well to consider, what in Christian Sobriety is meet for us to do, as what in
Christian liberty may be done. Scarce is there any one thing, wherein the Devil
puts slurs upon us more frequently, yea, and more dangerously too (because
unsuspected) than in this very thing, in making us take the uttermost of our
freedom in the use of indifferent things. It therefore concerns us so much
the more to keep a sober watch over our selves and souls, in the use of God's
good Creatures, lest otherwise under the fair title and habit of Christian
Liberty, we yield our selves over to a carnal Licentiousness.

The fifth Position. As Sobriety, so Charity also may, and ought to restrain 25.
us in the outward exercise of our Christian Liberty. Charity, I say, both to
our selves and others. First, to our selves: for regular Charity begins
there. If we are to Matthew. 5. 29, 30.
cut off our right hand, and to pluck out the right eye, and to cast them both
from us, when they offend us, much more then ought we to deny our selves the
use of such outward lawful things, as by experience we have found, or have
otherwise cause to suspect to be hurtful either to our bodies, or souls. So a
man may, and should refrain from meats, which may endanger his bodily health;
but how much more then from every thing, that may endanger the health of his
soul? If thou find thy self enflamed with lust, by dancing; if enraged with
choler, by game; if tempted to Covetousness, Pride, Uncleanness, Superstition,
Cruelty, and sin, by reason of any of the Creatures, it is better for thee to
make a Covenant with thine eyes, and ears, and hands, and senses (so far as thy
Condition and Calling will warrant thee) not to have any thing to do with such
things, than by gratifying them therein, cast both thy self and them into hell.
Better by our voluntary abstinence to depart with some of our liberty unto the
Creatures, than by our voluntary transgression forfeit all, and become the
Devil's Captives. 26.


But Charity, though it begin at home, yet it will abroad; and not resting at
our selves, reaches to our Brethren also; of whom we are to have a due regard
in our use of the Creatures. An Argument wherein St. Paul often enlarges
himself, as in Romans 14. and 1 Cor. 8. the whole Chapters throughout, and in a
great part of 1 Cor. 10. The resolution every where is, That 1 Cor. 14. 26.
all things be done to edification; that things lawful become 1 Cor. 10. 23.
inexpedient, when they offend, rather than edify; that though Romans 14. 20.
all things indeed are pure, yet it is evil for that man which uses them with
offense; that albeit flesh and wine, and other things be lawful, yet Ibid.
verse. 21.
it is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor to do any thing
whereby a man's brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak. Hitherto
appertains that great and difficult common place of Scandal, so much debated
and disputed of by Divines. The Questions and Cases are manisold, not now to be
rehearsed, much less resolved, in particular: But the Position is plain in the
general, that in case of Scandal, for our weak brother's sake, we may, and
sometimes ought to abridge our selves of some part of our lawful Liberty.

Besides these two, Sobriety and Charity, there is yet one restraint more, 27.
which arises from the Duty we owe to our Superiors, and from the bond of
civil Obedience, which if it had been by all men as freely admitted, as there
is just cause it should, how happy had it been for the peace of this Church?
Concerning it, let this be our sixth Position; The determination of Superiors
may, and ought to restrain us in the outward exercise of our Christian Liberty.
We must 1 Pet. 2. 13, 15, 16.
submit our selves to every ordinance of man, says St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 13.
and it is necessary we should do so; for so is the Will of God, Verse. 15.
Neither is it against christian Liberty if we do so, for we are still as free
as before; rather if we do not so, we abuse our liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, as it follows there, verse. 16. And St. Paul tells us, we
Romans 13. 5.
must needs be subject, not only for fear, because the Magistrate Ibid. ver. 4.
carries not the Sword in vain, but also for conscience sake, because Ibid.
ver. 1.
the powers thus are, are ordained of God. This duty so fully pressed, and so
uniformly by these two grand Apostles, is most apparent in private Societies.
In a family, the Master, or Pater-familias, who is a kind of petty Monarch
there, has authority to prescribe to his Children and Servants in the use of
those indifferent things, whereto yet they, as Christians, have as much Liberty
as he. The Servant, though he be 1 Cor. 7* 22.
the Lord's freeman, yet is limited in his diet, lodging, livery, and many
other things by his Master; and he is to submit himself to his Masters
appointment in these things, though perhaps in his private affection he had
rather his Master had appointed otherwise; and perhaps withal, in his private
judgment, does verily think it fitter his Master should appoint otherwise. If
any man, under color of christian Liberty, shall 1 Timothy 6. 3, 5.
teach otherwise, and exempt Servants from the obedience of their Masters in
such things, St. Paul in a holy indignation inveigheth against such a man, not
without some bitterness, in the last Chapter in this Epistle, as one that is
proud, and knows nothing, as he should do, but doateth about questions and
strife of Words, etc. Verse. 3, 5.

Now look what power the Master has over his Servants for the ordering of 28.
his family; no doubt the same at the least, if not much more, has the supreme
Magistrate over his Subjects, for the peaceable ordering of the Commonwealth,
the Magistrate being Pater patriae, as the Master is Pater-familias. Whosoever
then shall interpret the determinations of Magistrates in the use of the
Creatures, to be contrary to the liberty of a Christian; or under that color
shall exempt inferiors from their obedience to such determinations, he must
blame St. Paul; nay, he must blame the Holy Ghost, and not us, if he hear from
us, that he is proud and knows nothing, and doateth about unprofitable
Questions, Surely, but that experience shows us it has been so, and the
Scriptures have fore told us that 1 Cor. 11. 19.
it should be so, that there should be differences, and sidings, and partakings
in the Church; a man would wonder how it should ever sink into the hearts and
heads of sober understanding men, to deny either the power in Superiors to
ordain, or the necessity in Inferiors to obey Laws and Constitutions so
restraining us in the use of the Creatures.

Neither let any man cherish his ignorance herein, by conceiting, as if there
29.
were some difference to be made between Civil and Ecclesiastical Things, and
Laws, and Persons in this behalf. The truth is, our liberty is equal in both;
the power of Superiors for restraint equal in both, and the necessity of
obedience in Inferiors equal in both. No man has yet been able to show, nor I
think ever shall be, a real and substantial difference indeed, between them to
make an inequality. But that still, as civil Magistrates have sometimes, for
just politic respects, prohibited some Trades, and Manufactures, and
Commodities, and enjoined other-some, and done well in both; so
Church Governors may, upon good considerations, (say it be but for Order and
Uniformitiessake,) prescribe the Times, Places, Vestments, Gestures, and other
ceremonial Circumstances to be used in Ecclesiastical Offices and Assemblies:
As the Apostles in the first Council holden at Jerusalem, in Acts 15. laid upon
the Churches of the Gentiles for a time, a Acts 15. 28, 29.
restraint from the eating of Blood, and things sacrificed to Idols, and
strangled.

Thus we see our christian Liberty unto the Creatures, may without prejudice 30.
admit of some restraints in the outward exercise of it; and namely, from the
three respects of Christian Sobriety, of Christian Charity, and of Christian
Duty and Obedience. But now in the comparing of these together, when there
seems to be a repugnancy between one and another of them, there may be some
difficulty; and the greatest difficulty, and which has bred most trouble, is,
in comparing the cases of scandal and disobedience together, when there seems
to be a repugnancy between Charity and Duty. As for example: Suppose in a thing
which simply and in it self we may lawfully, according to the Liberty we have
in Christ, either use or forbear; Charity seems to lay restraint upon us one
way, our weak brother expecting we should forbear, and Duty a quite contrary
way, Authority requiring the use, in such a case what are we to do? It is
against Charity to offend a brother; and it is against Duty to disobey a
Superior; and yet something must be done, either we must use, or not use;
forbear, or not forbear. For the untying of this knot, (which, if we will but
lay things rightly together, has not in it so much hardness as it seems to
have;) let this be our seventh Position. In the use of the Creatures, and all
indifferent things, we ought to bear a greater regard to our public
Governors, than to our private Brethren, and be more careful to obey them,
than to satisfy these, if the same course will not in some mediocrity satisfy
both. Alas! that our brethren who are contrary-minded, would but with the
spirit of sobriety admit common reason to be Umpire in this case: Alas! that
they would but consider, what a world of Contradictions would follow upon the
contrary opinion, and what a world of Confusions upon the contrary practice.
Say what can be said in the behalf of a Brother; all the same, and more may be
said for a Governor: For a Governor is a Brother too, and something more; and
Duty is Charity too, and something more. If then I may not offend my Brother,
then certainly not my Governor; because he is my Brother too, being a man, and
a Christian, as well as the other is. And the same Charity that binds me to
satisfy another Brother, equally binds me to satisfy this. So that, if we
go no farther, but even to the common bond of Charity, and relation of
Brotherhood, that makes them equal at the least, and therefore no reason, why
I should satisfy one that is but a private Brother, rather than the public
Magistrate, who (that public respect set aside) is my Brother also. When the
Scales hang thus even, shall not the accession of Si tantopere cavenda sunt
scandala parvulorum, quanto amplius praelatorum. Bern. de praecept. and disp.
Magistracy to common Brotherhood in him, and of Duty to common Charity in me,
be enough to cast it clear for the Magistrate? Shall a Servant in a Family,
rather than offend his fellowservant, disobey his Master? And is not a double
scandal against Charity and Duty both (for Duty implies Charity) greater than
a single scandal against Charity alone? If private men will be offended at our
Obedience to public Governors, we can but be sorry for it: We Prudenter
advertat qui hoc cogitat, scandalum scandalo non been emendari. Qualis
emendatio erit, si ut aliis scandalum tollas, alios scandalizas? Bern. de
Praecept. and disp.
may not redeem their offense by our disobedience. He that takes offense where
none is given, sustaineth a double person, and must answer for it, both as the
giver and the taker. If offense be taken at us, there is no woe to us for it,
if it do not come by us; Mat. 18. 7.
Woe to the man by whom the offense comes: and it does not come by us, if we
do but what is our duty to do. The Rule is certain and equitable; the respect
of private scandal cease, where lawful Authority determines our liberty; and
that restraint which proceeds from special Duty, is of superior reason to
that which proceeds but from common charity.

Three Moderators then of our christian liberty to the Creatures we are to
allow 31.
of, Sobriety, Charity, and Duty; unto every of which a just regard ought to be
had. Neither need we fear, if we suffer Sobriety on one side, and Charity on
another, and Duty on a third, thus to abridge us in the use of our christian
liberty; that by little and little it may be at length so pared away among
them, that there may be little or nothing lest of it. To remove this suspicion,
let this be our eighth and last Position. No respect whatsoever can, or ought
to diminish the inward freedom of the Conscience to any of the Creatures. And
this inward freedom is it, wherein especially consists our Christian Liberty
to the Creature. This freedom we are all bound to maintain to the utmost of our
powers, and not to suffer our selves to be made 1 Cor. 7. 23.
the servants of men, (otherwise than in Gal. 5. 13.
serving one another by love,) but to Gal. 5. 1.
stand fast in the liberty wherein Christ has set us free. Now this liberty
consists in a certain resolution of Judgment, and a certain persuasion of
Conscience arising thence, that all the creatures of God are in themselves
lawful, and free for us either to use or refuse, as we shall see it expedient
for us; and that neither the use, nor the forbearance of them, does of it self
either commend or discommend us unto God, or any way either please him as a
part of his Worship, or offend him as a transgression of his Law. Romans 14. 17.
The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, says St. Paul; 1 Cor. 8. 8.
Neither if we eat, are we the better; neither the worse, if we do not eat; nor
on the contrary. Now here is the Wickedness, and the Usurpation of the
High Priest of Rome, that he challenges to himself a spiritual Power over the
Consciences of men, which is the greatest tyranny that ever was, or can be
exercised in the world, laying impurity upon the things he forbids, and
annexing operative holiness, and power both satisfactory and meritorious, to
the things he injoyneth. Which Usurpation, whosoever hates not in him with a
perfect hatred, is justly unworthy of, and shamefully unthankful for that
liberty and freedom, which the blessed Son of God has purchased for* his
Church.

But this inward freedom once established in our hearts, and our Consciences 32.
fully persuaded thereof, let us thenceforth make no scruple to admit of such
just restraints in the outward exercise of it, as Christian Sobriety, Charity,
and Duty shall require. For we must know, that the Liberty of a Christian is
not in eating, and drinking, and doing what and when, and where and how he
list; but in being assured, that it is all one before God, (in the things
themselves barely considered) whether he eat or not eat, wear or not wear, do
or not do, this or that; and that therefore, as he may upon just cause eat, and
wear, and do, so he may upon just cause also refuse to eat, or wear, or do this
thing or that. Indeed otherwise, if we well consider it, it were but the empty
name of liberty, without the thing: for how is it liberty, if a man be
determinately bound the one way, and tied ad alteram partem contradictionis
precisely, and not left indifferent and equal to either? If then the regards of
Sobriety, Charity, or Duty, do not require a forbearance, thou know every
creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused; thou have thy liberty
therefore, and may, according to that liberty, freely use that Creature. But
if any of those former respects require thou should forbear, thou know
that the Creature still is good, and as not to be refused, so not to be
imposed: thou have thy liberty therefore here, as before, and ought,
according to that liberty, freely to abstain from that Creature. Both in using
and refusing, the Conscience is still free; and as well the use as the refusal,
and as well the refusal as the use, do equally and alike belong to the true
liberty of a Christian.

We have seen now, what liberty God has allowed us, and therein we may 33.
see also his great goodness and bounty toward us, in making such a world of
Creatures, and all of them good; [Every Creature of God is good] and not
envying us the free use of any of those good Creatures; [ Nothing to be
refused.] But where is our Duty answerable to this Bounty? Where is our
thankfulness proportionable to such receipts? Let us not rejoice too much in
the Creatures goodness, nor glory too much in our freedom thereunto, unless
there be in us, withal, a due care, and Conscience to perform the Condition,
which God requires in lieu thereof; neither can their goodness do us good, nor
our freedom exempt us from evil. And that condition is, the Duty of
Thanksgiving, expressed in the last clause of the verse, [ if it be received
with thanksgiving.] Forget this Proviso, and we undo all again, that we have
hitherto done, and destroy all that we have already established concerning both
the goodness of the Creature, and our liberty in the use thereof; for without
thanksgiving, neither can we partake their goodness, nor use our own liberty
with comfort. Of this therefore in the next place, wherein the weight of the
Duty considered, together with our Backwardness thereunto, if I shall spend the
remainder of my time and meditations, I hope my labor (by the blessing of God,
and your prayers) shall not be unprofitable, and my purpose therein shall find,
if not allowance in your judgments, at least in your Charity, Excuse. To speak
of which Duty of Thanksgiving in the full extent, and by way of common place,
were to enter into a spacious field, indeed a very sea of matter without
bottom. For mine own ease therefore and yours, I shall confine my self to that
branch of it, which is most immediately pertinent to my Text, viz. That tribute
of Thanks which we owe unto God for the free use of his good Creatures,
forbearing to meddle with the other branches thereof, otherwise than as they
fall within the reach of this, by way either of Proportion or Inference.

And first, we are to know, that by Thanksgiving in my Text, is not meant 34.
only that subsequent act, whereby we render unto God praise and thanks for the
Creature, after we have received it, and enjoyed the benefit of it, which yet
is most properly Thanksgiving, but we are to extend the word farther, even to
those precedent acts of Prayer and Benediction, whereby we beseech God to give
his blessing to the Creature, and to sanctify the use of it to us. For what in
this verse is called Thanksgiving, is in the next verse comprehended under the
name of Verse. 5. hic.
Prayer. And we shall accordingly find in the Scriptures elsewhere, the words
(...) and (...), the one whereof signifies properly Blessing, the other
Thanksgiving, used oftentimes promiscuously the one for the other. The Blessing
which our blessed Savior Jesus Christ used at the Consecration of the
sacramental bread, Luke 22. 17, 19.
St. Luke and 1 Cor. 11. 24.
St. Paul express by the word (...); Matthew. 26. 27.
St. Matthew and Mark 14. 22, 23.
St. Mark, by (...). And the Prayer of Blessing used before the eating of
common Bread, is by Matthew. 15. 36.
every of the four Evangelists in some places described by the word (...). And
by three of them in other-some places, Matthew. 14. 19. Mark 6. 14. Luke 9 16.
by (...). And the name See Casaub. exercit. 16. in Baron. sect. 33.
(...) is sometimes found in the Writings of the Ancients, for the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper; the more usual name whereof is (...), or the holy Eucharist.
And we in our ordinary manner of speech, call as well the Blessing before meat,
as the Thanksgiving Mark 8. 6. Joh. 6. 11. Acts 27. 35.
after, by the common name of Grace, or saying of Grace. Both these then
together, Grace before meat, and Grace after meat, a Sacrifice of Prayer before
we use any of the good Creatures of God, and a Sacrifice of Praise after we
have used them; the Blessing wherewith we bless the Creature in the Name of
God, and the Blessing wherewith we bless the Name of God for the Creature: both
these, I say, together, is the just extent of that Thanksgiving, whereof my
Text speaks, and we are now to entreat.

Concerning Meats and Drinks, unto which our Apostle has special reference 35.
in this whole passage, this duty of Thanksgiving has been ever held so
congruous to the partaking thereof, that long and ancient custom has
established it in the common practice of Christians, not only with inward
Thankfulness of heart to recount and acknowledge God's goodness to them
therein, but also outwardly to express the same in a vocal solemn form of
Blessing or Thanksgiving, that which we call Grace, or saying of Grace. Which
very Phrases, whether or no they have ground, (as to me it seems they have)
from those words of our Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 1 Cor. 10. 30.
For if I by Grace be a partaker, why am I evil spoken of, for that for which I
give thanks?) I say, howsoever it be with the Phrase, sure we are, the thing it
self has sufficient ground from the examples of Christ, and of his holy
Apostles; from whom the custom of giving Thanks at meals seems to have been
derived throughout all succeeding Ages, even to us. Of Christ himself we read
often, and in every of the Evangelists, that he blessed and gave thanks in the
name of himself and the People, before meat; in the 14, and 15, of Matthew. 14.
19. and 15. 36.
Matthew, in 6, and 8. of Mark 6. 41. and 8. 6.
Mark, in 9. of Luke 9. 16.
Luke, and in 6. of Joh. 6. 8.
John. And in Matthew. 26. that after meat also, when Supper was ended, he and
his Disciples (...). Matthew. 26. 30.
sang an Hymn before they departed the room. And St. Luke relates of St. Paul,
Acts 27. when he and his company in the Ship, who were well toward three
hundred persons, were to refresh themselves with food after a long Fast, that
he took bread, and first Acts 27. 35.
gave thanks to God in the presence of them all, and then after brake it, and
began to eat: yea, St. Paul himself so speaks of it, Romans 14. as of the known
practice of the Church among Christians of all sorts, Weak and Strong. He that
was strong in the Faith, and knew the liberty he had in Christ to eat
indifferently of all kinds of Meats, flesh as well as herbs; did eat of all
indifferently, and gave God thanks for all. The weak Christian too, who made
scruple of some kinds of flesh or other Meats, and contented himself with
herbs, and such like things, yet gave God thanks for his herbs, and for
whatsoever else he durst eat. Romans 14. 6.
He that eats, eats to the Lord, (says he there, at verse. 6.) for he
gives God thanks: and he that eats not, to the Lord he eats not, and
gives God thanks too. Notwithstanding they differed in their judgments and
opinions, and consequently in their practice, concerning the lawful or unlawful
use of some meats: yet they consented most sweetly, and agreed both in their
judgment and practice, in the performance of this religious service of
Thanksgiving.

So then giving of thanks for our meats and drinks before and after meals, in
36.
an outward and audible form, is an ancient, a commendable, an Apostolical, a
Christian practice: ordinarily requisite as an outward Testimony of the inward
thankfulness of the heart; and therefore not to be omitted ordinarily, neither
but in some few cases. There being the like necessity of this duty, in regard
of inward thankfulness, as there is of vocal prayer, in regard of inward
Devotion; and of outward Confession, in regard of inward belief: and look what
Exceptions those other outward duties may admit* the very same mutandis
mutatis, and in their proportion, are to be admitted here. But not only meats
and drinks but every other good Creature also of God, whereof we may have use,
ought to be received with a due measure of thankfulness. And if in these things
also, so often as in good discretion it may seem expedient for the advancing of
Gods glory, the benefiting of his Church, or the quickening of our own
Devotion, we shall make some outward and sensible expression of the
thankfulness of our hearts for them: we shall therein do an acceptable service
unto God, and comfortable to our own souls. For, for this cause God instituted
of old, among his own people, diverse solemn feasts and sacrifices, together
with the sanctifying of the first fruits, and of the first born, and diverse
other ordinances of that nature: as, on the other side to be fit remembrancers
unto them of their duty of thankfulness: so to be as well good testimonies, and
fit expressions of their performance of that duty.

But if not always the outward manifestation thereof: yet God ever expects 37.
at least the true and inward thankfulness of the heart, for the use of his
good Creatures. Col. 3. 17.
Whatsoever you do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus,
giving thanks unto God and the Father by him, Col. 3. Phil. 4. 6.
Be careful for nothing: but in every thing by prayer and supplication with
thanksgiving, let your request be made known unto God, Phil. 4. Psalm. 103. 1, 2.
Bless the Lord, O my soul (says David in Psalm. 103.) and all that is within
me, praise his holy name: Praise the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his
benefits. Forget not all his benefits: as much as to say, by an ordinary
Hebraism, forget not any of all his benefits. He summoneth all that is in him,
to bless God for all he has from him: he thought it was necessary for him, not
to receive any of the good Creatures of God, without Thanksgiving. Which
necessity of Thanksgiving will yet more appear, if we consider it, either as an
act of Justice, or an act of Religion: as it is indeed and truly both.

It is first, an Act of Justice. The very Law of Nature, which contains 38.
the first seeds and principles of Justice, binds every man that receives a
benefit, to a thankful Acknowledgment of it first, and then withal ( Ability
and Opportunity supposed) to some kind of Retribution. The best Philosophers
therefore make Gratitude Cic. 2. de invent. 13. and 36.
a branch of the Law of Nature; and so account of it as of a thing, than which
there is Quid tam contra officium, quam non reddere quod acceperis? Ambros. 1.
Offi. 31. Nullum officium referenda gratia magis necessarium est. Cic. 1. de
Offic.
not any Office of Virtue more necessary: as nor any thing on the contrary more
detestable, than Ingratitude. You cannot lay a Erunt homicidae, tyranni, fures,
adulteri, raptores, sacrilegi, pr^ditores: infra ista omnia ingratus est.
Senec. 1. de benef. 10.
fouler imputation upon a man, nor by any accusations in the World render him
more odious to the opinions of all men; than by charging him with
unthankfulness. Ingratum dicas, omnia dixeris: do but say, He is an unthankful
wretch; you need say no more, you can say no worse, by any mortal creature.
Verily, every benefit carries with it the force of an Obligation; and we all
confess it: if we receive but some small kindness from another, we can readily
and complementally protest our selves much bound to him for it. Indeed when we
say so; we often speak it but of course, and think it not: but yet when we do
so, we speak more truth than we are aware of. For, if it be in truth a kindness
in him, we are in truth and equity bound to him thereby. The common saying is
not without ground, Qui beneficium accipit, libertatem vendidit. Some men
therefore refuse kindnesses and courtesies at other men's hands; because
forsooth they will not be beholden to them. Which though it be a perverse and
unjust course, and indeed a high degree of unthankfulness, (for there is
unthankfulness, as well in Non solum is gratus debet esse, qui accepit
beneficium; veram etiam is, cui potestas accipiendi fuit. Cic. de Provinc.
Consul. Tam teneor dono quam si demittar onustus. Hor. 1. Ep. 7.
not accepting a kind offer, as in not requiting a good turn;) and therefore
also a high degree of folly, (for it is a foolish thing for a man, out of the
bare fear of unthankfulness one way, to become wilful, unthankful another;)
though, I say, it be a fond and perverse course in them: yet it argues withal
in them a strong apprehension of the Equity of that principle of Nature and
Justice, which binds men that receive benefits ad (...), to a necessity of
requital and retribution. Truth it is, to God our Heavenly, Father first, and
then to our Earthly Sirac. 7. 28.
Parents, none of us can reddere paria: none is able to make a full requital to
to either of them; especially not to God. But that freeth us not from the debt
of thankfulness, as not to our Parents, so neither to God: it rather binds us
the faster thereunto. The same Law of Nature, which teaches us to requite a
good turn to the utmost, where there is wherewithal to do it, and withal a fair
opportunity offered; teaches us, where there wants either ability or
opportunity, to endeavor by the best convenient means we can to testify at
least the thankfulness of our hearts, and our unfeigned desires of requital.
Which In beneficio reddendo, plus animus, quam census operatur: magisque
praeponderat benevolentia, quam possibilitas referendi muneris. Ambros. 1.
Offic. 32.
desire and endeavor if every ingenuous man, and our earthly Parents, do
accept of, where they find it, as of the deed it self: can we doubt of Ut*
desint vires, tamen est laudanda voluntas: Hac ego contentos aguror ess^ D^^s.
Ovid. de Pont.
Gods acceptance of our unfeigned desire herein, though infinitely and without
all proportion short of a just requital and retribution? David knew right well,
that when a man has done all he can, he is but an Luke 17. 10.
unprofitable servant, and Job 22. 2.
cannot be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable to himself
and his neighbors; and that Psalm. 16. 2, 3. Nulla ex nobis utilitas Deo
speranda est. Senec. 1. de benef. cap 3. Nec ille collato eget, nec nos ei
quicquam confer possumus. Ibid. cap. 9.
his goodness, though it might be pleasurable to the Saints that are on the
earth, yet it could not extend unto the Lord. All this he knew: and yet knowing
withal that God accepts the will for the deed, and the desire for the
performance; he doubted not to raise up his Language to that key, in Psalm. 116.
Quid retribuam? What requital shall I make? What shall I render unto the Lord,
for all his benefits toward me? I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call
upon the Name of the Lord. This thankful heart he knew God valued, as a
Sacrifice: nay, Psalm. 116. 12, 13.
preferred before Sacrifices. For having rejected them at Verse. 8. [ (...).
Xenoph. 1. (...).
I will not reprove thee for thy Sacrifices, etc.] He exacteth this at Verse.
14. of Psalm, 50.] Offer unto God thanksgiving, etc.] God respects not so much
the Calves out of our stalls, or the fruits from off our grounds: as these Psalm
50. 8, 14.
Vitulos labiorum, these calves of our lips, as the Prophet; and these Hos. 14.
2.
Fructus labiorum, these fruits of our lips, as the Apostle calls them, [
Heb. 13. 15.
Let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of
our lips, giving thanks to his name, Heb. 13.] More than this, in his Mercy he
will not desire: less than this, in all Reason we cannot give. Thankfulness is
an Act of Justice: we are unjust, if we receive his good Creatures, and not
return him thanks for them.

It is not only an Act of Justice: it is an Act of Religion too, and a branch
of 39.
that service whereby we do God worship and honor. Psalm. 50. 23.
Whosoever offers praise, he honors me, Psalm. 50. ver. last. Now look what
honor we give unto God, it all redoundeth to our selves at the last with
plentiful advantage, [ 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Them that honor me, I will honor, 1 Samuel 2.] Here then is the fruit of this
religious act of Thanksgiving; that it sanctifies unto us the use of the good
Creatures of God, which is the very reason S. Paul gives of this present
speech in the next Verse. Every Creature of God is good, says he here, and
nothing to be refused, if it be received with Thanksgiving: for, says he
there, Ver. 5. hic^
it is sanctified by the Word of God, and Prayer. Understand not by the Word of
God there, his written Word, or the Scriptures, as some yet give the sense, not
without violence to the words, though the thing they say be true: but more both
naturally to the construction of the Words, and pertinently to the drift and
scope of our Apostle therein, understand rather the Word of his eternal Counsel
and decree, and of his power and providence, whereby he orders and commands
his Creatures in their several kinds, to afford us such service and comforts,
as he has thought good. Which sanctifying of the Creatures by the Word of Gods
decree and providence, implies two things: the one, respecting the Creatures,
that they do their kindly Office to us; the other, respecting us, that we reap
holy comfort from them. For the plainer understanding of both which, instance
shall be given in the Creatures appointed for our nourishment: and what shall
be said of them we may conceive of, and apply unto every other Creature in the
proper kind thereof.

First then, the Creatures appointed for food, are sanctified by the word of
God; 40.
when together with the Creatures he gives his blessing, to go along with it:
by his powerful word, Commanding it, and by that Command enabling it to feed
us. Which is the true meaning of that speech in Deuteronomy. 8. alleged by our
Savior against the Tempter, [ Deuteronomy. 8. 3. Mat. 4. 4.
Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God.] Alas, what is Bread to nourish us without his word: Unless he
say the word, and command the Bread to do it, there is no more sap or strength
in Bread, than in stones. The power and nutritive virtue which the Bread has,
it has from his decree; because the word is already gone out of his mouth,
that Psalm. 104. 15.
bread should strengthen man's heart. As in the first Creation, when the
Creatures were produced in actu primo, had their beings given them, and natural
powers and faculties bestowed on them, all that was done by the word of Gods
powerful decree, [ Psalm. 33. 9.
He spoke the word, and they were made; he commanded, and they were created.]
So in all their operations in actu secundo, when they do at any time exercise
those natural faculties and do those Offices for which they were created; all
this is still done by the same powerful word and decree of God, [ Heb. 1. 3.
He upholdeth all things by the word of his power. As we read of bread, so we
often read in the Scriptures of Lev. 26. 26. Psalm. 105. 16. Ezekiel. 4. 16.
Firmamentum panis. Vulg.
the staff of bread: God sometimes threatens he will break the staff of bread.
What is that? Bread indeed is the staff of our strength; it is the very stay
and prop of our lives: if God break this staff, and deny us bread, we are gone.
But that is not all, bread is our staff: but what is the staff of Bread?
Verily, the Word of God, blessing our Bread, and commanding it to feed us, is
the staff of this staff: sustaining that virtue in the bread, whereby it
sustaineth us. If God break this staff of bread, if he withdraw his blessing
from the bread, if by his countermand he inhibit or restrain the Virtue of the
Bread; we are as far to seek with bread, as without it. If sanctified with Gods
word of blessing; a little pulse Dan. 1. 12, 15.
and water, hard and homely fare shall feed Daniel as fresh, and fat, and fair,
as the Kings dainties shall his Companions: a 3 King. 19. 6, 8.
Cake and a cruse of water shall suffice Elijah nourishment enough to walk in
the strength thereof forty days and nights: a few Joh. 6. 9, 12.
barley loaves and small fishes shall multiply to the satisfying of many
thousands, eat while they will. But if Gods Word and Blessing be wanting; Genesis
41. 20, 21.
the Lean Kine may eat up the Fat, and be as thin, and hollow, and ill-liking
as before: and we may, as the Prophet Haggai speaks, Hag. 1. 6.
eat much, and not have enough, drink our fills, and not be filled.

This first degree of the Creatures Sanctification by the Word of God, is a 41.
common and ordinary blessing upon the Creatures; whereof, as of the Matt. 5.
45.
light and dew of Heaven, the wicked partake as well as the godly, and the
thankless as the thankful. But there is a second degree also, beyond this;
which is proper and peculiar to the Godly. And that is, when God not only by
the word of his Power bestows a blessing upon the Creature: but also causes
the Echo of that word to sound in our hearts by the voice of his holy Spirit,
and gives us a sensible taste of his goodness to us therein: filling our
hearts not only Acts 14. 17.
with that joy and gladness, which arises from the experience of the Effect,
viz. the refreshing of our natural strength, but also joy and gladness more
spiritual and sublime than that, arising from the contemplation of the prime
cause, viz. the favor of God toward us in the face of his Son: that which
David calls the Psalm. 4. 6.
light of his countenunce. For as it is the kind welcome at a friends Table,
that makes the cheer good, rather than the quaintness or variety of the
dishes, Ovid. Metamorph. 8.
Super omnia vultus accessere boni; so that Prove. 15. 17.
a dinner of green herbs with love and kindness, is better entertainment than a
stalled Ox with bad looks; so the light of Gods favorable countenance, shining
upon us through these things, is it, which Psalm. 4. 6, 7.
puts more true gladness into our hearts, than does the Corn, and the Wine,
and the Oil themselves, or any other outward thing that we do or can partake.
Now this sanctified, and holy, and comfortable use of the Creatures, arises
also from the Word of Gods decree; even as the former degree did, but not from
the same decree. That former issued from the decree of common Providence; and
so belonged unto all, as that Providence is common to all. But this latter
degree proceeds from that special Word of Gods decree, whereby for the merits
of Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 15. 45.
the second Adam, he removes from the Creature that Genesis 3. 17.
curse wherein it was wrapped through the sin of the first Adam. And in this
the wicked have no portion; as being out of Christ: so as they cannot partake
of Gods Creatures, with any solid or sound comfort; and so the Creatures remain
(in this degree) unsanctified unto them. For this reason, the Scriptures style
the Heb. 12. 23.
Faithful Primogenitos, the firstborn; as to whom belongs Deuteronomy. 21. 17.
a double portion: and Romans 4. 13.
Haeredes Mundi, heirs of the World; as if none but they had any good right
thereunto. And S. Paul deriveth our Title to the Creatures, from God, but by
Christ; [ 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23.
All things are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods:] As if these
things were none of theirs, who are none of Christ's. And in the Verse before my
Text, he says of meats, that Ver. 3 hic.
God has created them to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe,
and know the truth; as if those that wanted Faith and Saving Knowledge, did but
usurp the Bread they eat. And indeed it is certain the wicked have not right to
the Creatures of God, in such ample sort, as the Godly have. A kind of Right
they have, and we may not deny it them: given them by Gods unchangeable
ordinance at the creation: which being a branch of that part of Gods Image in
man, which was of natural, and not of supernatural grace, might be, and was
foully defaced by sin: but was not, neither could be wholly lost, as has been
See before, sect. 14.
already in part declared. A Right then they have: but such a right, as,
reaching barely to the use, cannot afford unto the user true comfort, or sound
peace of Conscience, in such use of the Creatures. For, though nothing be in,
and of it self unclean; for, Every Creature of God is good: yet to them that
are unclean, ex accidenti every Creature is unclean and polluted, because it is
not thus sanctified unto them by the Word of God. And the very true cause of
all this, is the impurity of their hearts, by reason of unbelief. The Holy
Ghost expressly assigns this cause, Tit. 1. 15.
To the pure all things are pure: but to them that are defiled and unbelieving
is nothing pure: but even their mind and conscience is defiled. As a Sincerum
est nisi vas, quodcunque infundis acescit. Hor. 1. Epist. 2.
nasty vessel sowreth all that is put into it: so a Conscience not Fide
purificans corda. Acts 15. 9.
purified by Faith, casts pollution upon the best of Gods Creatures.

But what is all this to the Text, may some say: or what to the Point: What is
all this to the Duty of Thanksgiving? Much every manner of way; or else blame
S. Paul of impertinency; whose discourse should be incoherent and unjoynted, if
what I have now last said were beside the Text. For since the Sanctification of
the Creature to our use, depends upon the powerful and good Word of God,
blessing it unto us: that Duty must needs be necessary to a sanctified use of
the Creature, without which we can have no fair assurance unto our Consciences,
that that Word of Blessing is proceeded out of the mouth of God. And such is
this Duty of Thanksgiving: appointed by God, as the ordinary means, and proper
instrument, to procure that Word of Blessing from him. When we have performed
this sincerely and faithfully; our hearts may then with a most cheerful, but
yet humble confidence, say Amen, so be it: in full assurance that God will join
his Fiat to ours; Crown our Amen with his: and to our So be it of Faith and
Hope, add his of Power and Command: blessing his Creatures unto us, when we
bless him for them; and sanctifying their use to our comfort, when we magnify
his goodness for the receipt. You see therefore how, as unseparable and
undivided companions, the Apostle joyneth these two together: the one, as the
Cause, the other, as the Means of the Creatures sanctification; [ it is
sanctified by the Word of God, and Prayer:] By the Word of Gods powerful
decree, as the sole efficient, and sufficient Cause: and by the Prayer of
Thanksgiving (for such Prayer he means, as either has Thanksgiving joined
with it, or else is a part of Thanksgiving, or Thanksgiving a part of it:) by
Prayer I say and Thanksgiving, as the proper Means to obtain it. This is the
blessed effect of Thanksgiving, as it is an Act of Religion. And thus you have
heard two grand Reasons, concluding the necessity of Thanksgiving unto God, in
the receiving and using of his good Creatures. The one, considering it as an
Act of Justice: because it is in the only acceptable discharge of that
obligation of debt, wherein we stand bound unto God for the free use of so many
good Creatures. The other, considering it is an Act of Religion: because it is
the most proper and convenient Means to procure from the mouth of God a word of
Blessing, to sanctify the Creatures to the uses of our lives, and to the
comfort of our Consciences. This Thanksgiving being an Act both of Justice and
Religion: whenever we either receive or use any good Creature of God without
this, we are unjust in the Receipt, and in the Use Profane. It is now high
time we should from the Premises infer something for our farther use and
edification.

And the first Inference may be, shall I say for Trial; or may I not rather say
43.
for Conviction? Since we shall learn thereby, not so much to examine our
Thankfulness, how true it is; as to discover our Unthankfulness, how foul it
is. And how should that discovery cast us down to a deep condemnation of our
selves for so much both Unjustice and Profaneness, when we shall find our
selves guilty of so many failings in the performance of such a necessary Duty
both of Justice and Religion? But we cannot abide to hear on this ear: We
unthankful to God? Far be that from us: we scarce ever speak of any thing we
have, or have done, or suffered; but we send this Clause after it, I thank God
for it. And how are we unthankful, seeing we do thus? It is a true saying,
which one says; Thanking of God, is a thing all men do, and yet none do as
they should. It is often in udo, but seldom in imo: it swimmeth often upon the
tip of our tongues, but seldom sinketh into the bottom of our hearts. I thank
God for it, is, as many use it, rather a Usu quodam magis quam* sensu, vel
affectu, personare in ore multorum gratiarum actionem advertere est. Bern. in
Cant. Ser. 13.
Byword, than a Thanksgiving: so far from being an acceptable service to God,
and a magnifying of his Name; that it is rather it self a grievous sin, and a
taking of his holy Name in vain. But if we will consider duly and aright, not
so much how near we draw unto God with our lips, as how far our hearts are from
him when we say so: we shall see what small reason we have, upon such a slender
lip-labor to think our selves discharged either of the bond of thankfulness,
or from the sin of unthankfulness. Quid verba audiam, fact a cum videam? Though
we say, I thank God, a thousand and a thousand times over; yet if in our Deeds
we bewray foul unthankfulness unto him, it is but Protestatio contraria facto:
and we do thereby but make our selves the greater and deeper liars.

Every sin is spacious and diffused, and spreads into a number of branches:
44.
this of ingratitude not least. Yet we will do our best to reduce all that
multitude to some few principal branches. There are required unto true
Thankfulness Three things; Recognition, Estimation, Retribution. He that has
received a benefit from another, he ought first, faithfully to acknowledge it;
secondly to value it worthily; thirdly, to endeavor really to requite it. And
whosoever fails in any of these, is (so far as he fails) unthankful more or
less. And do not some of us fail in all; and do not all of us fail in some of
these? For our more assured, whether Examination, or Conviction; let us a
little consider how we have and do behave our selves in each of the three
respects; in every of which, we will instance but in two kinds; and so we shall
have six degrees of Ingratitude: still holding our selves as close as we can to
the present point, concerning our Thankfulness or Unthankfulness, as it
respects the use we have of, and the benefit we have from the good Creatures
of God.

And first, we fail in our Recognition, and in the due acknowledgment of 45.
Gods blessings. And therein first, and let that be the first degree of our
unthankfulness; in letting so many blessings of his slip by us, without any
regard, or so much as notice taken of them: Whereas Knowledge must ever go
before Acknowledgment, and Apprehension before Confession. There is a twofold
Confession to be made unto God: the Confessio gemina est: aut Peccati, aut
Laudis. Aug. exp. 2. in Ps. 29. (...). Chrysostom. in Psalm. 93.
one of our sins; the other, of his goodness. That belongs to Repentance;
this to Thankfulness. Both of them consist in an Acknowledgment: and in both,
the acknowledgment is most faithful, when it is most punctual: and in both, we
come to make default, for want of taking such particular information, as we
ought, and might. In our Repentance we content our selves commonly with a
general Confession of our sins; or at the most, possibly sometimes make
acknowledgment of some one or a few grosser falls, which gall our Consciences,
or which the World cries shame of: and if we do that, we think we have made an
excellent Confession. So in our Thanksgivings, ordinarily we content our selves
with a general acknowledgment of Gods goodness and mercies to us; or sometimes
possibly recount some one or a few notable and Beneficia quaedam magnitudo non
patitur excidere: sed numero plura, and temporibus diversa es^luunt. Senec. 3.
de benef. 5.
eminent favors, such as most affect us, or whereof the World takes notice:
and this is all we do. But we do indeed in both these, deal unfaithfully with
God, and with our own souls. If we desire to show our selves truly penitent, we
should take knowledge (so far as possibly we could) of all our sins, small and
great (at least the several species and kinds of them, for the Individuals are
infinite:) and bring them all before God in the Confession of Repentance. And
if we desired to show our selves truly thankful; we should take notice (so far
as possibly we could, and in the species at least) of all Gods blessings, small
and great: and bring them all before him in the Confession of praise. We should
even Joh. 6. 12.
Colligere fragmenta, gather up the very broken meats, and let nothing be lost,
those Colligere fragmenta, ne pereant, id est, nec minima beneficia oblivisci.
Bernard. in Cant. sermon. 51.
small petty blessings, as we account them, and as we think, scarce worth the
Observation. Did we so: how many baskets full might be taken up, which we daily
suffer to fall to the ground, and be lost? Like Swine under the Oaks, we grouze
up the Acorns, and snouk about for more, and eat them too, and when we have
done, lie routing, and thrusting our Noses in the Earth for more: but never
lift up so much as half an eye, to the Tree that shed them. Every crum we put
in our mouths, every drop wherewith we cool our tongues, the very Air we
continually breath in and out through our throats and nostrils, a thousand
other such things whereof the very commonness takes away the Observation, we
receive from his fullness: and many of these are renewed every morning, and some
of these are renewed every minute: And yet how seldom do we so much as take
notice of many of these things? How justly might that complaint which God
makes against the unthankful Israelites, be taken up against us? Isa. 1. 3.
The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib: but Israel does not
know, my people does not consider.

The second degree of our Unthankfulness to God, and that also for want 46.
of faithful Acknowledgment, is, in ascribing the good things he has given us
to our own deserts, or endeavors, or to any other thing or Creature, either in
part, or in whole, but only to him. Such things indeed we have, and we know it
too, (perhaps but too well) but we bestirred our selves for them, we beat our
brains for them, we got them out of the fire, and swet for them; we may thank
our good friends, or we may thank our good selves for them. Thus do we Hab. 1.
16.
Sacrifice unto our own nets, and burn incense to our drag, as if by them our
portion were fat, and our meat plenteous. And as Luke 13. 1.
Pilate mingled the blood of the Galileans with their own Sacrifices; so into
these spiritual Psalm. 50. 14.
Sacrifices of Thanksgiving, which we offer unto God, we infuse a quantity of
our own swink and sweat, of our own wit and forecast, of our own power and
friends, still some one thing or other of our own; and so rob God, if not of
all, yet of so much of his honor. This kind of unthankfulness God both foresaw
and forbad in his own people, Deuteronomy. 8. warning them to take heed, verse. 17.
lest when they abounded in all plenty and prosperity, Deuteronomy. 8. 14, 17.
They should forget the Lord, and say in their hearts, My power, and the might
of my hand has gotten me this wealth. The very saying or thinking of this was
a forgetting of God. Ibid. 18.
But (says Moses there) Thou shall remember the Lord thy God: for it is he
that gives thee power to get wealth, etc. The whole Chapter is none other but
a warn-word against unthankfulness. All Est superbia, and delictum maximum, uti
datis tanquam innatis; and in acceptis beneficiis gloriam usurpare benficii.
Bernard. de dilig. Deo.
glorying in our selves, all vain boasting of the gifts of God, or bearing our
selves high upon any of his blessings is a kind of smothering of the receipt:
and argues in us a kind of lothness to make a free acknowledgment of the
Giver's bounty; and so is tainted with a spice of unthankfulness in this
degree. 1 Cor. 4. 7.
If thou did receive it; why do thou glory, as if thou had not received
it? Says my Apostle elsewhere. He that glories in that, for which he even
gives thanks; does by that glorying, as much as he dares, reverse his Thanks.
The Pharisee, who Luke 18. 11.
thanked God he was not like other men; did even then, and by those very
thanks, but bewray his own wretched unthankfulness.

Besides a faithful Recognition, in freely acknowledging the benefit received;
47.
there is required unto thankfulness a just Estimation of the benefit, in
valuing it, as it deserves? Wherein we make default, if either we value it not
at all, or undervalue it. The third Degree then of our Ingratitude unto God, is
the Forgetfulness of his benefits. When we so easily Apparet illum non s^pe de
reddendo cogitasse, cut obrepsit oblivio. Sen. 3. de benef. 1. Perveniunt eo
quo, ut ego existimo, pessimus quisque and ingratissimus pervenit; ut
obliviscantur. Ib. 5.
forget them, it is a sign we set naught by them. Every man readily remembers
those things, he makes any reckoning of: in so much that although old age be
naturally forgetful, yet Nec vero quenquam senum audivi oblitum, quo loco
thesaurum obruisset: Omnia quae curart meminerunt: vadimonia constituta, qui
sibi, quibus ipsi debeant. Cic. de Senect.
Tully says, He never knew any man so old, as to forget where he had hid his
gold, or to whom he had lent his moneys. In Deuteronomy. 8. Moses warns the people
(as you heard) to Deuteronomy. 8. 14.
beware, lest being full, they should forget the Lord that had fed them; and
David stirs up his soul in Psalm. 103. to Psalm. 103. 2.
bless the Lord, and not to forget any of his benefits. We all condemn
Pharoah's Butler of unthankfulness to Joseph, (and so we may well do; for he
afterward Genesis 41. 9.
condemned himself for it:) in that having received comfort from Joseph, when
they were fellow prisoners, he yet Genesis 40. 23.
forgot him when he was in place where, and had power and opportunity to
requite him. How inexcusable are we that so condemn him? seeing wherein we
judge him, we condemn our selves as much, and much more: for we do the same
things, and much worse. He forgot Joseph, who was but a man like himself: we
forget God. He had received but one good turn; we many. It is like he had none
about him to put him in mind of Joseph; for as for Joseph himself, we know he
lay by it, and could have no access: we have God himself daily rubbing up our
Memories, both by his Word and Ministers, and also by new and fresh benefits.
He, as soon as a fair occasion presented it self, confessed his fault, and
remembered Joseph; thereby showing his former forgetfulness to have proceeded
rather from Negligence than Wilfulness: we after so many fresh Remembrances and
blessed Opportunities; still continue in a kind of wilful and confirmed
Resolution, still to forget. Well may we forget these private and smaller
blessings; when we begin to grow but too forgetful of those great and public
Deliverances God has wrought for us. Two great Deliverances, in the memory of
many of us, has God in his singular mercy wrought for us of this Land: such as
I think, take both together, no Christian Age or Land can parallel; One
formerly, from a foreign Invasion abroad; another since that, from an Hellish
Conspiracy at home: both such, as we would all have thought, when they were
done, should never have been forgotten. And yet, as if this were Terra
Oblivionis, the Land where all things are forgotten, how does the memory of
them fade away, and they by little and little grow into forgetfulness! We have
lived to see Eighty eight almost quite forgotten, and buried in a perpetual
Amnesty, ( God be blessed, who has graciously prevented, what we feared
herein!) God grant that we, nor ours ever live to see November's fifth
forgotten, or the solemnity of that day silenced.

A fourth Degree of unthankfulness is, in undervaluing Gods blessings, and 48.
lessening the worth of them. A fault whereof the murmuring Israelites were
often guilty: who although they were brought into a Exodus 3. 8, 17.
good Land, flowing with milk and honey, and abounding in all good things both
for necessity and delight; yet as it is in Psalm. 106. 24.
Psalm. 106. They thought scorn of that pleasant Land: and were ever and anon,
and upon every light occasion repining against God and against Moses, always
receiving good things from God, and yet always discontent at something or
other. And where is there a man among us that can wash his hands in innocence,
and discharge himself altogether from the guilt of unthank fullness in this
kind? Where is there a man so constantly and equally content with his portion,
that he has not sometimes or other either grudged at the leanness of his own,
or envied at the fatness of another lot? We deal with our God herein, as Hiram
hid with Solomon. Solomon gave him Twenty Cities in the Land of Galilee: but
because the Country was low and deep (and so in all likelihood the more
fertile for that) 1 Kings 29. 11, 13.
they pleased him not; and he said to Solomon, what Cities are these thou have
given me? and he called them Cabul; that is to say, dirty. So we are witty to
cavil and to quarrel at Gods gifts, if they be not in every respect such, as
we, in our vain hopes or fancies, have ideated unto our selves. This is dirty,
that barren; this too solitary, that too populo us; this ill-wooded, that
ill-watered, a third ill-aired, a fourth ill-neighboured. This (...), Jude 16.
grudging and repining at our portions, and faulting of God's gifts, so
frequent among us, argues but too much the unthankfulness of our hearts.

The last thing required unto Thankfulness (after a faithful Acknowledgment 49.
of the receipt, and a just Valuation of the thing received) is Retribution and
Requital. And that must be real, if it be possible; but at the least it must be
votal in the Desire and Endeavor. And herein also (as in both the former)
there may be a double fail; if, having received a benefit, we requite it either
not at all, or ill. Not to have any care at all of Requital, is the fifth
degree of Unthankfulness. To a Requital (as you See before Sect. 38.
heard) Justice binds us, either to the party himself that did us the good
turn, if it may be, and be either expedient or needful, or at the least, to
his. David retained such a grateful memory of Ionathan's true Friendship and
constant Affection to him, that after he was dead and gone, he hearkened after
some of his friends, that he might requite Ionathan's love by some kindness to
them. [ 2 Samuel 9. 1.
Is there yet any left of the house of ^^^ul, that I may show him kindness for
Jonathan's sake?] And surely he were a very unthankful wretch, that having been
beholden to the Father, as much as his life and livelihood is worth, would
suffer the Son of so well deserving a Father to perish for want of his help,
and would not strain himself a little, even beyond his power (if need were) to
succor him. Indeed to God, as we heard, we can render nothing that is worthy
the name of Requital, we must not so much as think of that. But yet somewhat we
must do, to express the true and unfeigned thankfulness of our hearts, which
though it be nothing less, yet it pleases him for Christ's sake to interpret
as a Requital. And that to him and his; to him by seeking his glory, to His, by
the fruits of our Christian Charity. We adventure our states and lives, to
maintain the honor and safety of our Kings in their just wars, from whom
perhaps we never received particular favor or benefit, other than the common
benefit and protection of Subjects. And are we not then foully ungrateful to
God, to whose Goodness we owe all that we have or are; if, for the advancement
of his glory, and the maintenance of his truth, we make dainty to spend the
best, and most precious things we have, yea, though it be the dearest
heart-blood in our bodies? But how much more ungrateful, if we think much, for
his sake to forgo Liberty, Lands, Livings, Houses, Goods, Offices, Honors, or
any of these smaller and inferior things? Can there be greater unthankfulness,
than to grudge him a small, who has given us all? In these, yet peaceable
times of our Church and State (God be thanked) we are not much put to it; but
who knows how soon a heavy day of trial may come, (we all know it cannot come
sooner, or heavier than our sins have deserved;) wherein woe, woe to our
unthankfulness, if we do not freely and cheerfully render unto God of those
things he has give us, whatsoever he shall require of us. But yet even in
these peaceable times there want not opportunities, whereon to exercise our
Thankfulness, and to manifest our desires of requital, though not to him, yet
to his. To his Servants and Children in their Afflictions; to his poor
distressed members in their manifold necessities. These opportunities we never
did, we never shall want, according to our Savior's Prediction, (or rather
Promise) Matthew. 26. 11.
Pauperes semper habebitis; The Poor you shall always have with you, as my
Deputy-receivers; but me (in person) ye shall not have always. And what we do,
or not do, to Matthew. 25. 50.
these, whom he thus constituted his Deputies, he takes it as done or not done
unto himself. If when God has given us Prosperity, we suffer these to be
distressed, and comfort them not, or victuals, to perish, and feed them not; or
clothing, to starve, and cover them not; or power, to be oppressed, and rescue
them not; or ability in any kind, to want it, and relieve them not: Let us make
what shows we will, let us make what profession we will of our Thankfulness to
God, what we deny to these we deny to him; and as we deal with these, if his
case were theirs (as he is pleased to make their case his) we would so deal
with him. And what is to be unthankful, if this be not?

And yet behold, unthankfulness, more and greater than this; unthankfulness 50.
in the sixth, and last, and highest, and worst degree. We requite him evil for
good. In that other we were unjust, not to requite him at all; but injurious
also in this, to requite him with ill. It sticks upon King Ioash as a brand
of infamy for ever, that he slew 2 Chronicles. 24. 22, 23.
Zachary the Son of Iehoiada the High Priest, who had been true and faithful to
him both in the getting of the Kingdom, and in the Administration of it,
recorded to all Posterity, 2 Chronicles. 24. Thus Ioash the King remembered not the
kindness which Iehoiada the Father had done him, but slew his Son; and when he
died, he said, The Lord look upon it, and require it. And it was not long
before the Lord did indeed look upon it, and require it; the very next verse
begins to lay down the vengeance that God brought upon him for it. And yet
compared ^^th ours, Ioash his ingratitude was nothing. Iehoiada was bound as a
Subject to assist the right Heir, God is not bound to us, he is a Debtor to
none. Ioash had right to the Crown before Iehoiada set it on his head: we have
no right at all to the Creature, but by God's gift. Ioash, though he dealt not
well with the Son, yet he evermore esteemed the Father so long as he lived, and
was advised by him in the Affairs of his Kingdom; we rebel even against God
himself, and cast all his Counsels behind our backs. Ioash slew the Son, but he
was a mortal man, and his Subject, and he had given him (at least as he
apprehended it) some affront and provocation; we by our sins and disobedience
crucify the Son of God, Sym. Nic^n.
The Lord and giver of life, by whom, and in whom, and from whom we enjoy all
good Blessings, and of whom we are not able to say that ever he dealt unkindly
with us, or gave us the least provocation. But as Israel (whom God calls
Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
Iesurun, and compares to an Heifer fed in large and fruitful Pastures) going
always at full bit, grew fat and wanton, and kicked with the heel; so we, the
more plentifully God has heaped his blessings upon us, the more wantonly have
we followed the swinge of our own hearts, and the more contemptuously spurned
at his holy Commandments. It was a grievous Bill of complaint, which the
Prophet in the name of God preferred against Israel, in Hosea 2. That his Hos.
2. 8.
Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and the Silver, and Gold which he had given them,
they employed in the Service of Baal an abominable Idol. If when God gives us
Wit, Wealth, Power, Authority, Health, Strength, Liberty, every other good
thing; in stead of using these things to his glory, and the comfortable relief
of his Servants, we abuse them, some or all, to the service of those Idols
which we have erected to our selves in our hearts; to the maintenance of our
Pride and Pomp, making Lucifer our God; of our Pelf and Profits, making Mammon
our God; of our swinish pleasures and sensuality, making our Phil. 3. 9.
Belly our God: Are we not as deep in the Bill as those Israelites were? As
unjust as they? As profane as they? As unthankful every way as they? Flatter
we not our selves: Obedience to God's Commandments, and a sober and charitable
use of his Creatures, is the best, and surest evidence of our Thankfulness to
God, and the fairest requital we can make for them. If we withdraw our
obedience, and fall into open rebellion against God; if we abuse them, in
making them either the occasions or instruments of sin to the dishonor of God,
and damage of his Servants; we repay him ill and unworthily for the good we
have received, and are guilty of Unthankfulness in this foulest and highest
degree.

Now we have seen what we are, let us say the worst we can by unthankful 51.
ones; call them Wretches, Caitiffs, Churles, any thing; load them with
infamies, disgraces, contumelies; charge them with Injustice, Profaneness,
Atheism; condemn them, and with them the vice it self, Unthankfulness, to the
pit of Hell: do all this, and more, and spare not; and as David did at Nathan's
Parable, when we hear any case or example of ingratitude in any of the former
degrees, whether really done, or but in a Parable, pronounce sentence upon the
guilty, 1 Samuel 12. 5.
The man that has done this thing shall surely die. But withal let us
remember, when we have so done, that our hearts instantly prompt us what Nathan
told David, Ibid. 7.
Thou art the man. We, we are the men, we are these unthankful ones; unthankful
to God, first, in passing by so many of his blessings without taking any
consideration of them; unthankful, secondly, in ascribing his Blessings wholly
or partly to our selves, or any other but him; unthankful, thirdly, in valuing
his Blessings so lightly, as to forget them; unthankful, fourthly, in
diminishing the worth of his Blessings, and repining at our portion therein;
unthankful, fifthly, in not rendering to him and his, according to the good he
has done for us; but sixthly, and most of all, unthankful in requiting him
evil for good, and hatred for his good will. Dealing thus with him, let us not
now marvel, if he begin to deal something strangely, and otherwise than he was
wont with us. If he deny us his Creatures, when we want them; if he take them
from us when we have them; if he withhold his blessing from them, that it shall
not attend them; if we find small comfort in them, when we use them, if they be
unanswering our expectations, when we have been at some pains and cost with
them; if, as the Prophet speaks, Hagg. 1. 6.
We sow much and bring in little, we eat and have not enough, we drink and are
not filled, we cloth us and we are not warm, and the wages we earn we put into
a bag with holes: if any of these things befall us, let us cease to wonder
thereat; our selves are the causers of all our woe. It is our great
unthankfulness that blasteth all our endeavors, that leaveneth with sowerness
whatsoever is sweet, and turns into poison whatsoever is wholesome in the good
Creatures of God. It is the Ver. 5. hic.
Word of God, and Prayer, that sanctifies them to our use; and they are then
good when they are received with thanksgiving. So long as we continue
unthankful, we are vain if we look for any sanctification in them, if we expect
any good from them.

I have now done with my first Inference, for Trial, or rather Conviction: 52.
I add a second of Exhortation. The duty it self being so necessary as we have
heard; Necessary, as an Act of Justice for the receipt of the Creature; and
necessary as an Act of Religion for the sanctifying of the Creature: how should
our hearts be enflamed with an holy desire, and all our powers quickened up to a
faithful endeavor, conscionably to perform this so necessary a duty? One would
think, that very necessity, together with the consciousness of our former
unthankfulness, should in all reason be enough to work in us that both desire
and endeavor. In all reason it should so; but we are unreasonable, and much
ado there is to persuade us to any thing that is good, even when we are
persuaded. Wherefore to enforce the exhortation more effectually, I must have
leave to press the performance of this duty upon our Consciences, with some
farther Inducements, and important Considerations.

Consider, first, the excellency of the Duty. There are but three heads, 53.
whereto we refer all that is called good; Iucundum, Utile, Honestum; Pleasure,
Profit, and Honesty. There is nothing desirable and lovely, but in one or other
of these three respects. Each of these singly we account good, but that
excellently good, wherein they all concur. We love things that will give us
delight, sometimes when there is neither profit, nor credit in them; we love
things that will bring us profit, though possibly neither delightful greatly,
nor s^emly; and we love things that we think will do us honesty, oftentimes
without regard either of Pleasure or Profit. How should we then be affected to
this duty of giving thanks, and singing Praises unto our GOD, wherein all those
do jointly concur, and that also in an excellent measure? David has wrapped
them all together in one verse in the beginning of Psalm. 147. Psalm. 147. 1.
Praise ye the Lord, for it is good; yea, it is a pleasant thing, and praise is
comely. It is good, it will bring you profit; it is pleasant, it will afford
you delight; and it is comely, it will do you honesty; and what can heart wish
more? Again, many good virtues and graces of God in us shall expire together
with us, which though they be eternal in their fruit and reward, yet are not so
as to their proper Acts; which after this life shall cease, because there shall
be neither need, nor use of them then, 1 Cor. 13. 8.
Whether there be Prophecies, they shall fail; or whether there be tongues,
they shall cease; or whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away. There
shall be no use of taming the flesh by Fasting, or of supplying the want either
of others by Alms, or of our selves by Prayer. Nay, even Faith and Hope
themselves shall have an end; for we shall not then need to believe, when we
shall see; nor to expect, when we shall enjoy. But giving of Thanks, and
Praise, and Honor, and Glory unto God, shall remain in the Kingdom of Heaven,
and of Glory. It is now the continual blessed Rev. 4. 8, 11. and 7. 11, 12.
exercise of the glorious Angels and Saints in Heaven, and it shall be ours
when we shall be translated thither. O that we would learn often to practice
here, what we hope shall be our eternal exercise there! Oh, that we would
accustom our selves, being Ephesians. 5. 18, 20.
filled in the Spirit, to speak to our selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and
spiritual Songs, singing and making Melody in our hearts to the Lord, giving
thanks always for all things unto God and the Father, in the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, as speaks our Apostle, Ephesians. 5.

Consider, secondly, the multitude, and variety, and continuance of God's 54.
Blessings, and let that provoke thy Thankfulness. If thou had received but
one or a few benefits, yet thanks were due even for those few, or for that one,
more than thou art able to return. But what can thou allege, or how excuse
thy unthankfulness, when his mercies are renewed every morning, nay, every Omni
momento me tibi obligas, dum omni momento mihi tua magna beneficia praestas.
Aug. Solil. cap. 18. Tot munera, quae sine intermissione diebus ac noctibus
(Dii) fundunt. Senec. 4. de bene^. 3.
moment? when he is ever Psalm. 145. 16.
opening his hand, and pouring out his blessings, and Psalm. 68. 29.
loading, and even overwhelming thee with his Benefits, as if he did vie with
thee, and would have thee see how easily he can overcome thy evil with his
goodness, and infinitely outstrip thine infinite ingratitude with his more
infinite munificence? His Angels are about thee, though thou know it not;
from a thousand unknown dangers he delivers thee, which thou suspectedest
not: he still continues his goodness unto thee, and repreiveth thy
destruction, though thou deservedst it not. What should I say more? thy very
life and being thou owe to him* Acts 17. 28.
In whom we all live, and move, and have our being: thence resolve with holy
David, to sing praise unto the Lord, Psalm. 104. 33.
as long as thou live; and to sing praise unto thy God, whilst thou have thy
being. Many and continual receipts should provoke many and continual Thanks.

Consider, thirdly, thy future necessities. If thou were sure of that thou
have, that thou and it should continue together for ever, and never part; and
that thou could make pretty shift to live upon the Old stock hereafter, and
never stand in need to him for more, there might be so much less need to 55.
take care for giving thanks for what is past. But it is not so with any of us;
of what we have, we are but Tenants at Courtesy, and we stand continually upon
our good behavior, whether we should hold of him any longer, or no; and much
of our future happiness stands upon our present thankfulness. And with what
face can we crave to have more (and yet more we must have, or we cannot
subsist) if we be not thankful for what we have? Bern. Sermon. 77.
Peremptoria res est ingratitudo, says St. Bernard, it cutteth off all
kindness. August. Soliloq. c. 18.
Ventus urens and exsiccans, like that Exodus 14. 21. Gratiarum cessat decursus,
ubi recursus non fuerit Bern. Sermon. 50.
strong East Wind, which in a night dried up the Red Sea; it holds off the
streams of God's bounty from flowing, and dries up those Channels whereby his
mercies were wont to be conveyed unto us. Certainly this is one special cause
why God so often says us Nay, and sends us away empty when we ask, even
because we are so little thankful to him for former receipts. The Eccl. 1. 7.
Su^ reddantur origini fluentae gratiae, ut uberius fluant. Bern. Ser. 89.
rivers return all their waters to the Sea, from whence they had them; and they
gain this by the return, that the Sea feeds them again, and so by a continual
fresh supply, preserves them in perpetual being and motion. If they should
Alioquin, nisi ad fontem redeant, exsiccantur. Pern. Ibid.
withold that tribute, the Sea would not long suffice them nourishment. So we
by giving, receive; and by true paying the old debt, get credit to run upon a
new score, and provoke future blessings, by our thankfulness for former; as the
earth by sending up vapors back to Heaven from the dew she has received
thence, fills the bottles of Heaven with new moisture, to be poured down upon
her again in due season, in kindly and plentiful showers. By our Prayers and
Thanksgivings we erect a Ladder, like that which Gen* 28. 12.
Jacob saw, whereon the Angels ascended and descended, we preserve a mutual
intercourse betwixt Heaven and Earth, and we maintain a kind of continual
trading, as it were, betwixt God and us. The Commodities are brought us in,
they are God's blessings; for these we traffic by our Prayers and
Thanksgivings. Let us therefore deal squarely, as wise and honest Merchants
should do. Let us keep touch, and pay; it is as much as our credit is worth.
Let us not think to have Commodities still brought us in, and we send none out,
Horat. ^. Ep. 1.
Omnia te adversum spectantia, this dealing cannot hold long: rather let us
think, that the quicker, and speedier, and more returns we make, our gains will
be the greater; and that (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 26. (...). Ibid. hom. 25.
the oftener we pray and praise God for his blessings, the more we secure unto
our selves both the continuance, and the increase of them.

Consider, fourthly, thy misery, if thou should want those things which God
56.
has given thee. ( a) Carendo magis quam fruendo. Fools will not know (p)
(...). Tum denique homines nostra intelligimus bona, quum quae in potestate
habuimus, ea amisimus. Plaut. in captiv. 1, 2.
that true worth of things but by wanting, which wiser men had rather learn by
having them. Yet this is the common Folly of us all; we will not prize God's
blessings as we should, till he for our unthankfulness, take them from us, and
teach us to value them better before we have them again. We repine at God's
great blessings, we grudge at his gentle Corrections, judging these too heavy,
those too light. We think our very Peace a burden, and complain of plenty, as
some would do of scarcity; and undervalue the blessed Liberty we have of
treading in his Courts, and partaking his holy Ordinances; and all this,
because by his great goodness we have so long enjoyed them; and this is our
guise in every other thing proportionably. Did we but feel a while the miseries
of our Neighbour-Countrys, who want the Blessings which we thus slight; or
could we but fore-think what our misery should be, if we (as they) had our
Throats ever before the Sword, or were wasted with extreme Famines and
Pestilences, or lived either in thick darkness, without the Gospel, or under
cruel Persecution for it. Did we thus, though our hearts were as hard and cold
as stones, it could not be but those thoughts would soften them, and inflame
them to magnify and bless the holy name of God for our long and present peace,
for that measure of plenty whatever it be which we yet have, and for the still
continued liberty of his glorious Gospel and sincere Worship among us. God
grant, that from our wretched unthankfulness, he take not just occasion, by
taking these great blessings from us, to teach us at once both how to use them
better, and how to value them better.

Consider, fifthly, thy Importunity with God, when thou want any thing, 57.
and according to that, proportion thy thanks when thou have it. I remember
what Bern. l. 4. de consid. ad Eugen.
Bernard writes of the Popes Servants and Courtiers in his time: Importuni ut
accipiant, inquieti donec acceperint, ubi acceperint, ingrati. When Suitors
come to the Popes Court with their businesses, the Courtiers and Officers lie
in the wind for them, greedily offering their service, and never quiet with
them till they have got something; but by that they have got the money, they
have forgot the man; and having first served their own turn, they then leave
the business to go which way it will. Not much unlike is our dealing with God.
When we Multos videmus usque hodie satis importune petentes, quod sibi deesse
cognovevint, sed paucos admodum novimus, qui dignas super acceptis beneficiis
gratias agere videantur. Bern. Sermon. de diversis 27.
would have something, some outward blessing conferred, or some outward
calamity removed, (for thankless devotions seldom look farther than after these
outward things;) we are, as St. Chrysostom speaks, Chrysostom. in Psalm. 137.
(...), very eager and earnest with God, we must have no Nay; we wrestle with
him, and that stou^ly, as if we would out-wrestle Genesis 32. 25, 26.
Jacob for a blessing, and we will not let him go till we have obtained it. But
(...), says Chrysostom there: When our turn is served, and we have what we
would have, by and by all our devotion is at an end, we never think of thanks.
All the ten Lepers begged hard of Christ for a cleansing; the Text says, Luke
17. 13, 17.
They lift up their voices, they were all loud enough whilst they were Suitors:
Sed ubi novem? There returned not to give God thanks for their cleansing, of
the whole ten, any more than barely one single man. It is our case just. When
we want any of the good Creatures of God for our necessities, we Psalm. 81. 10.
open our mouths wide, till he Psalm. 145. 16.
open his hand, and fill them with plenteousness; but after, as if the filling
of our Mouths were the stopping of our Throats, so are we speechless and
heartless. Shame we to be so clamorous, when we crave from him; and so dumb 58.
when we should give him thanks.

Consider, lastly, how freely God has given thee, what he has given thee.
Bern. in Psalm. Qui habitat. Sermon. 14.
Dupliciter gratis, says Bernard, sine merito, sine labor. Freely both ways;
freely without thy desert, and freely without so much as thy pains. Freely,
first, without thy desert. Jacob, a man as well deserving as thou, yet
confessed himself, Genesis 32. 10.
Not worthy of the least of all God's Mercies. And St. Paul cutteth off all
challenge of desert, by that Interrogatory, Romans 11. 35.
Who has first given him, and it shall be recompensed him? As who should say,
No man can challenge God, as if he owed him ought. If he have made himself a
Debtor to us by his Promise, (and indeed he has so made himself a debtor to
us) yet that is still gratis, and for nothing; because the Promise it self was
free without either Nulla Deo dandi beneficii causa est. Sen. 4. de benef. 3.
Ego rebar spontaneas esse numinum benignitates ultroque ab his fluere
inexpectata benevolentiae munera. Arnob. cont. Gent. l. 3. Deus nulli debet
aliquid, qui omnia gratuito praestat. Et si quisquam dicet, ab illo aliquid
deberi merit is suis, certe ut esset non ei debebatur; non enim erat, cui
deberetur. Aug. 3. de lib. arb. 16.
Debt in him, or Desert in us. Nay more, God has been good to us, not only
when we had not deserved it* but (which still more magnifieth his bounty, and
binds us the stronger to be thankful,) when we had deserved the quite
contrary. And how is it possible we should forget such his unspeakable
kindness, in giving us much good, when we had done none, nay, in giving us much
good, when we had done much ill? And as he gave it sine merito, so sine labor
too; the Creature being freely bestowed on us, as on the one side not by way of
reward for any desert of ours, so neither on the other side by way of wages for
any labor of ours. To show that God gives not his Blessings for our labor
merely, he sometimes gives them not, where they are labored for; and again he
gives them sometimes where they are not labored for. If in the ordinary
dispensation of his Providence, he bestowed them upon them that labor, as
Solomon says, Prove. 12. 24. and 13. 4.
The diligent hand makes rich; and seldom otherwise, for 2 These. 3. 10.
He that will not labor, it is fit he should not eat;) yet that labor is to
be accounted but as the means, not as a sufficient cause thereof. And if we dig
to the root, we shall still find it was gratis; for even that power to labor
was the gift of God, Deuteronomy. 8. 18.
It is God that gives thee power to get wealth. Yea in this sense, See before
Sermon. 3. ad Cler. Sect. 18.
nature it self is grace, because given gratis and freely, without any labor,
preparation, disposition, desert, or any thing at all in us.

All these considerations, the excellency of the Duty, the continuance of 59.
God's Blessings, our future necessity, our Misery in wanting, our Importunity
in craving, his free Liberality in bestowing, should quicken us to a more
conscionable performance of this so necessary, so just, so religious a Duty.
And thus having seen our Unthankfulness discovered in six points, and heard
many Considerations to provoke us to thankfulness, it may be we have seen
enough in that to make us hate the fault, and we would fain amend it; and it
may be we have heard enough in this to make us affect the Duty, and we would
fain practice it, may some say, but we are yet to learn how. The Duty being
hard, and our backwardness great, what good course might be taken, effectually
to reform this our so great backwardness, and to perform* that so hard a Duty?
And so you see, my second Inference for Exhortation breeds a third, and that
is for direction; which for satisfaction of those men that pretend willingness,
but plead ignorance, I should also prosecute, if I had so much time to spare:
wherein should be discovered, what be the principal causes of our so great
Unthankfulness; which taken away, the effect will instantly, and of it self
cease. Now those Causes are especially, as I conceive, these five, viz. 1.
Pride, and Self-love; 2. Envy, and Coffeehouse; 3. Riotousness, and
Epicurism; 4. Worldly Carefulness, and immoderate Desires; 5. Carnal Security,
and foreslowing the time. Now then, besides the application of that which has
already been spoken in the former Discoveries and Motives, (for every Discovery
of a fault does virtually contain some means for the correcting of it; and
every true Motive to a duty, does virtually contain some helps unto the
practice of it:) besides these, I say, I know not how to prescribe any better
remedies against unthankfulness, or helps unto thankfulness, than faithfully to
strive for the casting out of those sins, and the subduing of those Corruptions
in us, which cause the one, and hinder the other. But because the time, and my
strength are near spent, I am content to ease both my self and you, by cutting
off so much of my provision, as concerns this Inference for Direction, and
desire you that it may suffice for the present, but thus to have pointed at
these Impediments, and once more to name them. They are Pride, Envy, Epicurism,
Carefulness, Security.

I place Pride where it would be, the foremost, because it is of all other 60.
Maxim facit ingratos nimius sui suspectus, and insitum mortalitati vitium se
suaque mirandi. Sen. 2. de benef. 26.
the Impediment of Thankfulness. Certainly there is no one thing in the World,
so much as Pride, that makes men unthankful. He that would be truly thankful,
must have his eyes upon both; the one eye upon the Gift, and the other upon the
Giver; and this the proud man never has. Either through Caecus amor sui. Hor.
1. Carm. od. 18.
self-love he is stark blind, and sees neither; or else through Partiality, he
winketh on one eye, and will not look at both. Sometimes he sees the Gift, but
too much, and boasts of it; but then he forgets the Giver, he 1 Cor. 4. 7.
boasts as if he had not received it Sometimes again he over-looketh the
Gift, as not good enough for him, and so repineth at the Giver, as if he had
not given him according to his worth. Either he undervalueth the Gift, or else
he overvalueth himself; as if he were himself the Giver, or at least the
Deserver; and is in both unthankful. To remove this impediment, whoever
desires to be thankful, let him humble himself, nay, empty himself, nay, deny
himself, and all his desert; confess himself with Jacob, Genesis 32. 10.
less than the least of God's mercies, and condemn his own heart of much sinful
Sacrilegus invasor gloriae tuae. Bern. in Can. Sermon. 13.
sacrilege, if it dare but think the least thought tending to rob God of the
least part of his honor. 61.
Envy follows Pride; the Superbiae prima sob^les inanis gloria -- mox
invidiam gignet. Greg. 31. Mor. 31.
daughter the Mother, a second Non potest quisquam and invidere, and gratias
agere. Sen. 3. de benef. 3.
great Impediment of thankfulness. The fault is, That men, not content only to
look upon their own things and the present, but Vehemens, and importunum malum
in^ idia, quae nos inquietat, dum comparat. H^c mihi prastitit, sed illi plus,
sed illi maturius. Sen. 2. de benef. 28.
comparing these with the things of other men, or times, instead of giving
thanks for what they have, Illis non tam jucundum est, multos post se videre,
quam grave aliquem ante se. Sen. Ep. 73.
repine that others have more or better; or for what they now have, complain,
that it is not with them as it has been. These thoughts are enemies to the
tranquillity of the mind, breeding many discontents, and much unthankfulness;
whilst our Matthew. 20. 15.
eyes are evil, because God is good to others, or has been so to us. To remove
this impediment, whoever desires to be truly thankful, let him look upon
(...). Plut. de tranquil. anim. Nulli ad aliena respicienti, sua placent. Sen.
3. de ira 30.
his own things, and not on the things of other men; and therein consider, not
so much what he wants, and fain would have, as what he has, and could not
well want. Let him think, that what God has given him, came from his free
bounty, he owed it not; and what he has denied him, he withholdeth it either
in his Justice for his former sins, or in his Mercy for his farther good, that
God gives to no man all the desire of his heart in these outwardly things, to
teach him not to look for absolute contentment in this life, least of all in
these things. If he will needs look upon other men's things, let him compare
himself rather Quodque aliena capella gerat distentius aber, tabescat, neque se
majo^i pauperiorum turb. e comparet? Hor. 1. Ser. Sat. 1. (...). Plu. ubi supra.
with them that have less, than those that have more; and therein withal
consider, not so much what Nec ea intuemur, quae nos aliis praeposuere, sed ea
sola ^^uae ser^^na praecedentium ostentat. Sen. 3. de benef. 3.
himself wants which some others have, as what he has which many others
want. If a few that enjoy God's Blessings in these outward things in a greater
measure than he, be an eyesore to him, let those many others, that have a
scanter Portion, make him acknowledge that God has dealt liberally and
bountifully with him. We should do well to understand that saying of Christ,
not barely as a Prediction, but as a kind of Promise too (as I have partly
intimated See Sect. 49.
before) The Matthew. 26. 11.
poor you shall always have with you; and to think that every Beggar that
seeks to us, is sent of God, to be as well a Glass wherein to represent God's
bounty to us, as an Object whereon for us to exercise ours. And as for former
times, let us not so much think how much better we have been, as how well we
are; that we are not so well now, impute it to our former unthankfulness, and
fear, unless we be more thankful for what we have, it will be yet and every day
worse and worse with us. Counsel very needful for us in these declining times,
which are not (God knows, and we all know) as the times we have seen; the
leprous humor of Popery secretly stealing in upon us, and as a Leprosy
spreading apace under the skin; and penury and poverty, as an ulcerous sore,
openly breaking out in the very face of the Land. Should we murmur at this, or
repiningly complain that it is not with us, as it has been; God forbid, that
is the way to have it yet, and yet worse: Rather let us humble our selves for
our former Unthankfulness, whereby we have provoked God to withdraw himself in
some measure from us, and bless him for his great mercy, who yet continues his
goodness in a comfortable and gracious measure unto us, not withstanding our so
great unworthiness and unthankfulness. Thousands of our Brethren in the world,
as good as our selves, how glad would they be, how thankful to God, how would
they rejoice and sing, if they enjoyed but a small part of that peace and
prosperity in outward things, and of that liberty of treading in God's Courts,
and partaking of his Ordinances, which we make so little account of, because it
is not every way as we have known it heretofore?

The third Impediment of Thankfulness, is Riot and Epicurism: that which 62.
the Prophet reckons in the Catalogue of Sodom's sins, Ezekiel. 16. 49.
Fullness of Bread, and abundance of Idleness. This is both a Cause and a Sign
of much unthankfulness. (...), and (...), Fullness, and Forgetfulness; they are
not more near in the sound of the words, than they are in the sequel of the
things: Deuteronomy. 8. 10, 11.
When thou have eaten, and art full, Then beware lest thou forget the Lord thy
God, Deuteronomy. 8. It much argues, that we make small account of the good Creatures
of God, if we will not so much as take a little pains to get them: but much
more, if lavishly and like prodigal fools we make waste and havoc of them. He
that has received some Token from a dear Friend, though perhaps of little
value in it self, and of less use to him: yet if he retain any grateful memory
of his friend, he will Quod non me movet aestimatione: Verum est (...) mei
sodalis, Catul.
value it the more, and set greater store by it, and be the more careful to
preserve it, for his Friend's sake: but if he should make it away-causelesly,
and the rather, because it came so easily, (as the Ding-thrift's Proverb is,
Lightly come, lightly go;) every man would interpret it as an evidence of his
unfriendly and unthankful heart. But Riot is not only a Sign; it is also a
Cause, of unthankfulness: in as much as it makes us value the good things of
God, at too low a rate. For we usually value the worth of things,
proportionably to their use; judging them more or less good, according to the
good they do us, be it more or less. And how then can the Prodigal, or Riotous
Epicure, that consumes the good Creatures of God in so short a space, and to
so little purpose; set a just price upon them, seeing he reapeth so little good
from them? A pound, that would do a Poor man, that takes pains for his living,
a great deal of good, maintain him and his Family for some weeks together;
perhaps put him into fresh trading, set him upon his legs, and make him a man
for ever: what good does it to a prodigal Gallant, that will set scores and
hundreds of them flying at one Afternoons sitting in a Gaming-House? Shall any
man make me believe, he valueth these good gifts of God as he should do, and as
every truly thankful Christian man would desire to do; that in the powdering
and perfuming of an Excrement that never grew from his own scalp, in the
furnishing of a Table for the pomp and luxury of a few hours, in making up a
rich Suit to case a rotten Carcass in, in the pursuit of any other lustful
vanity or delight, expendeth beyond the proportion of his revenue or condition,
and the exigence of just occasions? To remedy this, whoever would be truly
thankful, let him live in some honest Vocation, and therein bestow himself
faithfully and painfully, bind himself to sober, discreet, and moderate use of
God's Creatures; remember, that Christ would not have the very broken meats
lost; think, that if for every word idly spoken, then by the same proportion
for every penny idly spent, we shall be accountable to God at the day of
Judgment.

Immoderate Care, and Solicitude for outward things is another Non patitur
aviditas quenquam esse gratum. Senec. 2. de benef. 27. Nullum habet malum
cupiditas majus, quam quod est ingrata. Id. Epist. 73.
impediment of Thankfulness. Under which Title I comprehend Covetousness
especially, but not only: Ambition also, and Voluptuousness, and every other
Vice, that consists in a desire and expectation of something Novis semper
cupiditatibus occupati, non quid habeamus, sed quid petamus, inspicimus. Quid
domi est, vile est. Sequitur autem, ut ubi quid acceperis, leve nov^rum
cupidit^s fecerit, author quoque eorum non sit in pretio. -- Ideoque caduca
memoria est, futuro imminentium, Id. 3. de benef. 3.
for the future. Which desire and expectation, if inordinate, must needs in the
end determine in unthankfulness. For the very true Reason, why we desire things
inordinately, is, because we promise to our selves more comfort and content
from them, than they are able to give us; this being ever our Error, when we
have any thing in chase, to sever the Good which we hope from it from the
Inconveniences that go therewith, and* looking only upon that, never so much
as to think of these. But having obtained the thing we desired, we find the one
as well as the other, and then the Inconveniences we never thought of before,
Nihil ^que adept ^^, and concupiscentibus gratum. Plin.
abateth much of the weight and the price we formerly set thereupon, and takes
off so much from the estimation we had of the good: whereby it comes to pass,
that by how much we over-valued it in the pursuit, by so much we undervalue it
in the possession. And so* instead of giving thanks to God for the Good we have
received, we complain of the Inconveniences that adhere thereunto: and so much
underprize it, as it falls short of our expectation; and look how far we do
underprize it, so far are we unthankful for it. To remove this Impediment:
whoever would be thankful, let him moderate his desires after these outward
things; forecast as well the inconveniences that follow them, as the
Commodities they bring with them; lay the one against the other, and prepare as
well to digest the one, as to enjoy the other.

The last Impediment of Thankfulness, is Carnal Security joined ever with 64.
Delays and Procrastinations. When we receive any thing from God, we know we
should give him Thanks for it, and it may be we think of doing such a thing:
but we think withal, another day will serve the turn, and so we put it off for
the present, and so forwards from time to time; till in the end we have quite
forgotten both his benefit, and our own Duty, and never perform any thing at
all. My Text does after a sort meet with this corruption: for here the Apostle
says, the Creature should be received with thanksgiving; as if the thanks
should go with the receipt, the Qui gratus futurus est, statim dum accipit, de
reddendo cogitat. Sen. 2. de benef. 25.
receipt and the thanks both together. To remove this Impediment: consider, how
in every thing Delays are hurtful and dangerous: how our Affections are best
and hottest at the first, and do in process of time insensibly deaden, and at
last die, if we do not take the opportunity, and strike (as we say) whilst the
Iron is hot; how that, if pretensions of other businesses or occasions may
serve the turn to put off the tendering of our devotions, and rendering of our
thanks to God, the Devil will be sure to suggest enough of these pretensions into
our heads, and to prompt us continually with such Allegations, that we shall
seldom or never be at leisure to serve God, and to give him thanks.

Let us remember these five impediments, and beware of them; Pride, Envy, 65.
Epicurism, Wordly Carefulness, and Delay. All which are best remedied by their
contraries. Good helps therefore unto thankfulness are, 1. Humility, and Self
denial; 2. Contentedness, and Self-sufficiency; 3. Painfulness, and Sobriety;
4. The Moderation of our desires after earthly things; 5. Speed and Maturity.
And so much for this third Inference of Direction. I should also have desired,
if the time would have permitted, although my Text speaks of our Thanksgiving
unto God precisely as it respects the Creature; yet to have improved it a
little farther by a fourth Inference: that if we be thus bound to give God
thanks for these outward blessings, how much more ought we then to abound in
all thankfulness unto him for his manifold Ephesians. 1. 3.
Spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ; for Grace and Election, for
Mercy and Redemption, for Faith and Justification, for Obedience and
Sanctification, for Hope and Glorification. If we ought to pray for, and to
give thanks for our Matthew 6. 11.
daily bread, which nourishes but our bodies, and then Matthew. 15. 17.
is cast into the draught, and both it and our bodies perish: how much more for
that Joh. 6. 51.
Bread of life, which came down from heaven, and feeds our Souls unto eternal
life, and neither they nor it can perish: If we must say for that, Give us this
day our daily bread: shall we not much more say for this Joh. 6. 34.]
Lord evermore give us this bread? But I have done. Beseech we now Almighty God
to guide us all with such holy discretion and wisdom, in the free use of his
good Creatures; that keeping our selves within the due bounds of Sobriety,
Charity, and civil Duty, we may in all things glorify God: and above all
things, and Ep. 5. 20*
for all things give thanks always unto God and the Father in the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ. To which our Lord Jesus Christ, the blessed Son of God,
together with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, three Persons, and one only
wise, gracious, and everlasting God, be ascribed (as is most due) by us and his
whole Church, all the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, both now and for
evermore.

Amen, Amen.
AD POPULUM.
The Sixth Sermon.
At St. Paul's Cross London, April 15. 1627.
Genesis XX. 6. And God said unto him in a dream; Yea, I know that thou did this
in the integrity of thine heart: For I also withheld thee from sinning against
me; therefore suffered I thee not to touch her.
FOR our more profitable understanding of which words, it 1.
is needful we should have in remembrance the whole story of this present
Chapter; of which story these words are a part. And thus it was. Abraham comes
with Sarah his Wife, and their Family, as a Stranger, to sojourn among the
Philistines in Gerar: covenanteth with her beforehand, thinking thereby to
provide for his own safety, because she was beautiful, that they should not be
to know that they were any more than Brother and Sister. Abimelech, King of the
place, hears of their coming, and of her beauty; sends for them both;
enquireth whence, and who they were; hears no more from them, but that she
was his Sister; dismisseth him; takes her into his house. Hereupon God
plagueth him and his House with a strange Visitation; threatens him also with
Death; gives him to understand, that all this was for taking another Man's
Wife. He answers for himself. God replieth. The Answer is in the two next
former Verses. The Reply in this, and the next following Verse.

His Answer is by way of Apology: he pleads first Ignorance; and then, and 2.
thence, his Innocence, [ Verse 4, 5*
And he said, Lord will thou slay also a righteous Nation? Said not he unto me,
She is my Sister? And she, even she her self said, He is my Brother: in the
integrity of my heart, and innocence of my hands, have I done this.] That is
his Plea. Now God replieth: of which Reply, letting pass the remainder in the
next Verse, which concerns the time to come, so much of it as is contained in
this Verse, has reference to what was already done and past; and it meets
right with Abimelech's Answer. Something he had done; and something he had not
done: he had indeed Verse. 2.
taken Sarah into his House, but he had Verse. 4.
not yet come near her. For that which he had done, in taking her; he thought
he had a just excuse, and he pleads it: he did not know her to be another
man's Wife; and therefore, as to any intent of doing wrong to the Husband, he
was altogether innocent. But for that which he had not done, in not touching
her; because he took her into his house with an unchaste purpose; he passes
that over in silence, and not so much as mentions it. So that his Answer, so
far as it reached, was just: but, because it reached not home, it was not full.
And now Almighty God fitteth it with a Reply, most convenient for such an
Answer: admitting his Plea, so far as he alleged it, for what he had done, in
taking Abraham's Wife, having done it simply out of ignorance [ Yea, I know
thou did this in the integrity of thine heart:] and withal supplying that
which Abimelech had omitted, for what he had not done, in not touching her; by
assigning the true cause thereof, viz. his powerful restraint, [ For I also
withheld thee from sinning against me, therefore suffered I thee not to touch
her.

In the whole Verse we may observe, First, the manner of the Revelation; 3.
namely, by what means it pleased God to convey to Abimelech the knowledge of
so much of his Will, as he thought good to acquaint him withal: it was even the
same, whereby he had given him the first information, at Verse 3. it was by a
dream, [ And God said unto him in a dream:] and then after, the substance of
the Reply; whereof again the general parts are two. The former, an Admission of
Abimelech's Plea, or an Acknowledgment of the integrity of his heart, so far as
he alleged it, in that which he had done, [ Yea, I know that thou did it in
the integrity of thine heart.] The latter, an Instruction or Advertisement to
Abimelech, to take knowledge of Gods goodness unto, and providence with him, in
that which he had not done: it was God that over-held him from doing it, [ For
I also withheld thee from sinning against me, therefore suffered I thee not to
touch her.

By occasion of those first words of the Text, [ And God said unto him in a 4.
dream:] if we should enter into some Enquiries, concerning the nature and use
of Divine Revelations in general, and in particular of Dreams: the Discourse as
it would not be wholly impertinent, so neither altogether unprofitable.
Concerning all which these several Conclusions might be easily made good.
First, that 1.
God revealed himself and his Will frequently in old times, especially before
the sealing of the Scriptures-Canon (...) Heb 1. 1.
in sundry manners: as by Visions, Prophecies, Ecstasies, Oracles, and other
supernatural means; and namely, and amongst the rest, by Number 12. 6. Joel 2. 28.
Job 33. 14, 16. (...), Homer. Iliad. (...).
Dreams. Secondly, that God imparted his Will by such kind of supernatural
Revelations, not only to the godly and faithful, (though to them most
frequently, and especially:) but sometimes also to Hypocrites within the
Church, as to ^ Sam. 10. 10.
Saul and others: yea, and sometimes even to Infidels too out of the Church, as
to Genesis 41. 25, 2^.
Pharaoh, Number. 14. 2, 4, etc.
Balaam, Dan. 2. 28, 45.
Nebuchadnezzar, etc. and here to Abimelech. Thirdly, that since the Writings
of the Prophets ^.
and Apostles were made up, the Scripture-Canon sealed, and the Christian
Church by the preaching of the Gospel, become Oecomenical: Dreams, and other
supernatural Revelations, as also other things of like nature, as Miracles, and
whatsoever more immediate and extraordinary manifestations of the Will and
Power of God, have ceased to be of ordinary and familiar use: so as 3.
now, we ought rather to suspect delusion in them, than to expect direction
from 4.
them. Fourthly, that although God have now Isa. 8. 20.
tied us to his holy written Word, as unto a perpetual infallible Rule, beyond
which we may not expect, and against which we may not admit, any other
direction, as from God: yet he has no where abridged himself of the power and
liberty, even still to intimate unto the Sons of men the knowledge of his Will,
and the glory of his Might, by Dreams, Miracles, or other like supernatural
manifestations; if at any time, either in the want of the ordinary means of the
Word, Sacraments and Ministry, or for the present necessities of his Church, or
of some part thereof, on for some other just cause, perhaps unknown to us, he
shall see it expedient so to do. He has prescribed us: but he has not limited
himself. Fifthly, that because the 5.
Devil and wicked Spirits may suggest Dreams, probably foretell future events
foreseen in their causes, and work many strange effects in Nature, applicando
activa passivis; which because they are without the sphere of our
comprehension, may to our seeming have fair appearances of Divine Revelations
or Miracles, when they are nothing less: for the avoiding of strong delusions
in this kind, it is not safe for us to give easy credit to Dreams, Prophecies,
or Miracles, as Divine, until upon due trial there shall appear, both in the
End whereto they point us, a direct tendance to the advancement of Gods Glory;
and in the Means also they propose us, a See Deuteronomy. 13, 1, etc.
conformity unto the revealed will of God in his written Word. Sixthly, that so
to observe our ordinary Dreams, 6.
as thereby to Contra onirocriticos. See Aquin. 2. 2. q. 95. 6. Joh. Sarisb. 2.
Policr. 17. Petr. Bles. Epist. 65.
divine or foret^l of future contingents, or to forecast therefrom good or
ill-luck (as we call it) in the success of our affairs; is a silly and
groundless, but withal an unwarranted, and therefore an unlawful, and therefore
also a damnable Superstition. Seventhly, that there is yet to be made a lawful,
yea, and a very profitable use, even of our ordinary Dreams: and of the
observing thereof: and that both in Physic and Divinity. Not at all by
foretelling particulars 7.
of things to come: but by taking from them, among other things, some
reasonable conjectures in the general, of the present estate both of our Bodies
and Souls. Of our Bodies first. For since the predominancy of Secundum morum
and humorum varietates, variantur and somnia Alia namque vident sanguin^i, alia
colerici, alia flegmati^i, alia melancholici, Auctor. de spir. and anim. cap.
25. apud. August. Tom. 3.
Choler, Blood, Phlegm, and Melancholy: as also the differences of strength, and
health* and Iuxta etiam infirmitatum diversitates diversa accidunt somnia. Ibid.
diseases, and distempers, either by diet, or passion, or otherwise, do cause
impressions of different forms in the fancy: our (...). Arist. cap. 1. de
divinat. ex insom.
ordinary dreams may be a good help to lead us into those discoveries, both in
time of health, what our natural constitution, complexion, and temperature is;
and in times of sickness, from the rankness and tyranny of which of the humors
the malady springs. And as of our Bodies; so of our Souls too. For since our
Dreams, for the most part a dream comes through the multitude of business,
Eccles. 5. 2. Res, quas in vita usurpant, homines cogitant, curant, vident.
Quaequae agunt vigilantes, agitantque, ea si cui in somnis accidant, minus
miruth est. Aretius. Quaecunque mentis agitat infestus vigor, ea per quietem
sacer and arcanus refert veloxque sensus. Senec. in octav. Act. 4. See Dealt.
Ibid.
look the same way, which our freest thoughts incline; as the Voluptuous beast
dreameth most of pleasures, the Covetous wretch most of profits, and the proud
or Ambitious most of praises, preferments, or revenge, the observing of our
ordinary Dreams may be of good use for us unto that discovery, which of these
three is our Master* sin, (for unto one of the three every other sin is
reduced) 1 John 2. 16.
The Lust of the flesh, The Lust of the Eyes, or the Pride of Life.

But concerning Revelations and Dreams, It shall suffice to have only proposed
these few Conclusions without farther enlargement: the manner of Gods revealing
his will here to Abimelech, by Dream, being but an incidental Circumstance upon
the bye, and not belonging to the main of the present story. We will therefore
without more ado proceed to the substance of Gods Reply, in the rest of the
verse: and therein begin with the former general part, which is Gods Admission
of Abimelech's Plea and Apology for himself. The ground of whose Plea was
Ignorance, and the thing he pleaded, his own Innocence, and the integrity of
his heart: and God who is the searcher of all hearts, allows the allegation,
and acknowledges that integrity, [ Yea, I know that thou did this in the
integrity of thy heart.]

The (...)
Original word here translated Integrity, is rendered by some (...) T^rg. Chald.
Truth, 6.
by others (...) Sept.
Purity, and by others Simplici cord. Vulgar.
Simplicity: and it will bear them all, as signifying properly In the
perfection of thy heart. H. A.
Perfection or Innocence. You would think by that word, that Abimelech had in
this whole business walked in the sight of God with a pure, and upright, and
true, and single, and perfect heart. But alas, he was far from that. God Ver.
17, 18.
plagued him and his for that he had done: and God does not use to punish the
Carcass for that, wherein the heart is single. Again, God withheld him, or else
he would have done more and worse: and it is a poor perfection of heart; where
the active power only is restrained, and not the inward corruption subdued.
Besides, Sarah was taken into the house, and there kept for lewd purposes: and
how can truth and purity of heart consist with a continued resolution of sinful
uncleanness? Abimelech then cannot be defended, as truly and absolutely
innocent: though he plead Innocence, and God himself bear witness to the
Integrity of his heart. For had his heart been upright in him, and sincere, in
this very matter of Sarah, he would never have taken her into his house at all,
as he did. But that he pleads for himself, is, that in this particular
wherewith it seemed to him God by so threatening him did charge him, in wronging
Abraham by taking his Wife from him, his Conscience could witness the innocence
of his heart, how free he was from any the least injurious purpose, or so much
as thought, that way. It was told him by them both, that she was his Sister;
and he knew no other by her than so, when he took her into his house, supposing
her to be a single Woman: if he had known she had been any man's Wife, he would
not for any good have done the man so foul an injury, nor have sinned against
his own soul, by defiling another bed: In the integrity of his heart, and
innocence of his hands, he did what he had done. This is the substance of his
Allegation, and God approves the integrity of his heart so far; viz. as free
in this particular from any intent, either to injure Abraham, or to sin against
the light of his own Conscience, by committing Adultery with another Wife.

The meaning of the words thus cleared: we may observe in them three things. 7.
First, the fact, for which Abimelech pleads; and that was, the taking of
Sarah, 1.
who was another Wife, into his House. Secondly, the ground of his plea; 2.
and that was his Ignorance: he knew not when he took her, that she was
another wife. Thirdly, the thing he pleads upon that ground; and that was
his 3.
Innocence and the integrity of his heart. Each of these three will afford us
some observable instruction for our use. And the first thing we will insist
upon from these words, shall be, The grievousness of the sin of Adultery,
hateful even in the judgment of those men, who made small or no conscience at
all of Fornication. See how this is raised from the Text. Abimelech's heart
never smote him fortaking Sarah into his House, so long as he supposed her to
be but a single Woman: led with the common blindness and custom of the
Gentiles, he either knew not or considered not, that such Fornication (though
in a King) was a sin. But the very frame of his Apology shows, that if he had
known her to be another man's Wife; and yet had taken her, he could not then
have pretended the integrity of his heart, and the innocence of his hands as
now he does, and God allows it: but he should have been (...), his own heart
would have condemned him for it, and he should therein have sinned grossly
against the light of his own Conscience.

It cannot be doubtful to us, who by the good blessing of God upon us, have 8.
his holy Word to be Psalm. 119. 105.
A light unto our feet, and a Lanthorn unto our paths, from the evidence
whereof we may receive more perfect and certain information, than they could
have from the glimmering light of depraved Nature; I say, it cannot be doubtful
to us, but that all Fornication, how simple soever, is a sin foul and odious in
the sight of God, and deadly to the Committer. As first 1.
being opposite directly to that 1 These. 4. 3, 4.
holiness and honor, and sanctification, which God prescribes in his will.
Secondly, causing usually consumption of Prove. 5. 10. -- 6. 26. Job 31. 12.
estate, 2.
rottenness of Prove. 5. 11
bones, and loss of Prove. 6. 33. Prove. 7. 22, 23.
good name. Thirdly, Hos. 4. 11. 4.
stealing away the heart of those that are once ensnared therewith, and
bewitching them even unto perdition in such powerful sort, that it is seldom
seen, a man once brought under by this sin, to recover himself again, and to
get the victory over it. Fourthly; putting over the guilty to the severe Heb.
13. 14
immediate judgment of God himself; who 3.
for this sin slew of the Israelites in one day 1 Cor. 10. 8.
23 or Number. 25. 9.
24 thousand. And having fifthly, one singular deformity above all other sins
in all other kinds, that it is a direct sin 1 Cor. 6. 18.
against a man's own body; in depriving it (by making it the instrument of
filthiness, and the 1 Cor. 6. 15.
members of an harlot) of that honor whereunto God had ordained it, to be a 1
Cor. 6. 15.
member of Christ, and 1 Cor 6. 19.
the Temple of the 5.
Holy Ghost.

But yet of this foul sin the Gentiles made no reckoning; So long as they
abstained from Viri licito se errare credunt, si solo abstineant adulterio:
meretricios autem usus tanquam legi naturae suppeter^ putant. Ambros. 2. de
Abrah. 11. Solo stupro atque adulterio condemnato, passim per lupanaria and
ancillul^^ libido permittitur. Hier. Ep. 30. Usum scortorum terrena civitas
licitam turpitudinem fecit. Aug. 14. de Civitat. 18.
married persons, it never troubled their Consciences to defile themselves with
those that were single by fornication; because they esteemed it either as no
sin, or as one of the least. It was not only the fond speech of an 9.
indulgent and doting old Father in the excuse of his licentious Son in the
Comedy, Mitio apud Terent. in Adelph. 1, 2.
Non est flagitium mihi creed adolescentulum scortari; (and yet he spoke but as
the generality of them then thought:) but it was the serious plea also of the
grave Roman Orator, in the behalf of his Client, in open Court, before the
severity of the sage and Reverend bench of Judges, Cicer. pro Caelio.
Quando hoc non factum est? Quando reprehensum? Quando non permissum? And,
Datur omnium concessu, etc. 1 These. 4. 5.
Nor in the lust of concupiscence, (says St. Paul) as the Gentiles which know
not God. An error so universally spread, and so deeply rooted in the minds and
in the lives of the Gentiles; who Ephesians. 4. 18, 19.
having their understanding darkened through the ignorance that was in them,
because of the blindness of their hearts, wrought such uncleanness, not only
without remorse, but even with greediness: that the Apostles had much ado with
those men, whom by the preaching of the Gospel they had converted from
Gentilism to Christianity, before they could reclaim them from an Error so
inveterate both in the judgment and practice. St. Paul therefore, as it both
became and concerned him, being Romans 11. 13. Gal. 2. 7. 1 Timothy 2. 7. and 2 Timothy
1. 11.
the Apostle and Doctor of the Gentiles, often touches upon this string in his
As Romans 1. 29. and 13. 13. 2 Cor. 12. 31. Gal. 5. 19. Ephesians. 4. 19. and 5. 3.
etc. Col. 3. 5. 1 These. 4. 3, etc.
Epistles written unto the Churches of the Gentiles. But no where does he set
himself more fully and directly; with much evidence of reason and strength of
argument, against this Sin and Error, than in the 1 Cor. 5. 19. -- 11. 6, 9. --
and 7. 1. etc. -- 10. 8.
first Epistle he wrote to the Corinthians: because among them this sin was
both it self most rife in the practice (the Hinc (...) pro scortari. Hadr. Jun.
in Adag. and (...) habet Aristoph. in Plut. Act 1. Scen. 2. Qu^^ supra mill
prostare ad fanum Veneris quod est in Corintho scribit, Strab. 8. Geograph.
Atque hinc natam paroemiam. (...). Bourdin, in Comment. ad Aristoph. Thesmophor.
Corinthians being notedly infamous for lust and wantonness;) and it was also
as much -- Libidinis quae nusquam gentium regnabat impunitius, quam Corinthi.
slighte^ there as any where: many of them thinking that the Erasm. Paraphras.
in 1 Corinthians. in Argumen.
body was made for fornication, as the belly for meats; and that fornication
was as fit and convenient for the body, as meats for the belly. Out of which
consideration, the Apostles in that first General Council, holden at Jerusalem,
Acts 15. thought it needful by Ecclesiastical Canon, among some other
indifferent things for the Churches peace, to lay this restraint upon the
converted Gentiles, that they should Acts 15. 28, 29.
abstain from Fornication. Not, as if Fornication were in it self an
indifferent thing, as those other things were; nor, as if those other things
were in themselves and simply unlawful, as Fornication was: but the Apostles
did therefore join Fornication, and those other indifferent things together in
the same Canon; because the Gentiles accounted fornication a thing as
indiffereut, as what was most indifferent. Some remainders of the common error
there were, it seems, among some Christians in St. Augustine's days: who both
Quod aliquando qui committunt, nescio qua perversitate contemnunt; and nescio
unde sibi testimonia nulla and vana conquirunt, dicentes, Peccata carnis Deus
non curat. August. Sermon. 16. de verb. Dom c. 1. Ista punienda and nimium gra
via mala, id^o a multis viris sine ullo timore Domini committuntur, quia ita a
pluribus in consuetudinem missa sunt, and ita vilia vel levia ducuntur, ut nec
jam inter gravia crimina putentur. Sermon. de Temp. 143.
relates the opinion, and confu^^th it. And some in the Popish Church have not
come far behind herein: so many of them I mean as hold that Durand 4. distinct.
33. q. 2. and alii.
Simple fornication is not intrinsecally, and in the proper nature of it, a sin
against the Law of Nature; but only made such, by divine positive Law. A
strange thing it is, and to my seeming not less than a Mysterium iniquitatis. 2
These. 2. 7.
mystery, that those men that speak so harshly of Marriage which God has
ordained, should withal speak so favorably of fornication which God has
forbidden: preposterously preferring the disease which springs from our
corruption, before the 1 Cor. 7. 2.
remedy which God himself has prescribed in his Word. But howsoever, if some
Christians have spoken, and written, and thought so favorably of fornication,
as (to their shame) it appears they have done: the less may we marvel, to see
Abimelech, a King and an Infidel, allow himself the liberty to continue in the
sin of Understand that in this passage concerning Abimelech, I use the word
Fornication us it does include Concubinatum also.
Fornication; and yet notwithstanding such allowance, stand so much upon his
own innocence, and integrity, as he does.

God forbid, any man that hears me this day, should be so either ignorant 10.
or uncharitable, as to conceive all, or any of that I have yet said, spoken to
give the least shadow of liberty or excuse to Fornication, or any uncleannes,
which St. Paul would not have so much as Ephesians. 5. 3.
named among the Saints; -- not named with allowance, not named with any
extenuation, not named but with some detestation. But the very thing, for which
I have spoken all this, is to show how inexcusable the Adulterer is: when even
those of the Gentiles, who by reason of the Ephesians. 4. 18.
darkness of their understandings, and the want of Scripturelight, could espy
no obliquity in Fornication; could yet through all that darkness see something
in Adultery, deservedly punishable (even in their judgments) with death. They
could not so far quench that (...).
spark of the light of nature which was in them, nor Romans 1. 18.
hold back the truth of God in unrighteousness: as not by the glympse thereof,
to discern a kind of reverend Majesty in God's holy Ordinance of Wedlock, which
they knew might not be Heb. 13. 4.
dishonored, nor the bed defiled by Adultery, without guilt. They saw,
Adultery was a mixed crime, and such as carried with it the face of Injustice as
well as Uncleanness; nor could be committed by the two offending parties,
without wrong done to a third. And therefore if any thing might be said
colourably to excuse Fornication, (as there can be nothing said justly;) yet if
any such thing could be said for Fornication, it would not reach to excuse
Adultery; because of the injury that cleaves thereunto. Against Fornication
God has ordained 1 Cor. 7. 2.
Marriage as a Remedy: what a beast then is the Adulterer, and what a Monster,
whom that remedy does no good upon? In the marriage-knot, there is some
expression and representation of the Love-covenant betwixt Ephesians. 5. 23.
Christ, and his Churoh: but what good assurance can the Adulterer have that he
is within that Covenant, when he breaks this Knot? Every married person has
ipso facto surrendered up the right and interest he had in and over 1 Cor. 7. 4.
his own body, and put it out of his own into the power of another: what an
arrant Thief then is the Adulterer, that takes upon him to dispose at his
pleasure that which is none of his? But I say too well by him, when I compare
him but to a thief; Solomon makes him worse than a Thief. [ Prove. 6. 30, etc.
Men do not despise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul, when he is
hungry, etc. But whosoever commits Adultery with a Woman, lacks understanding:
he that does it, destroys his own soul, etc.] Where he makes both the injury
greater, and the reconcilement harder, in and for the Adulterer, than for the
Thief. Nay, God himself makes him worse than a Thief in his Law: in his Moral
Law, next after Murder placing Exodus 20. 13, 15.
Adultery before Theft, as the greater sin; and in his Judicial Law, punishing
Exodus 32. 1, etc.
Theft with a mulct* but Lev. 20. 10. Deuteronomy. 22. 22.
Adultery with Death, the greater Punishment. To conclude this first point;
Abimelech, an Heathen-man, who had not the knowledge of the true God of Heaven
to direct him in the right way; and withal a King, who had therefore none upon
earth above him, to control him if he should transgress: would yet have
abhorred to have defiled himself knowingly by Adultery with another man's Wife,
although the man were but a stranger, and the woman exceeding beautiful.
Certainly Abimelech shall one day rise up in judgment, and condemn thy
filthiness and injustice, whosoever thou art, that committest, or causest
another to commit Adultery: Romans 1. 32.
Who knowing the judgment of God* that they which do such things are worthy of
death, either do the same things thy self, or have pleasure in them that do
them; or being in place and office to punish incontinent persons, by easy
commutations of public penance for a private pecuniary mulct, do at once
both beguilty thine own Conscience with fordid Bribery, and embolden the
Adulterer to commit that sin again without fear, from which he has once
escaped without shame, or so much as valuable loss.

And thus much for that first Observation. The next thing, we shall observe 11.
from Gods approving of Abimelech's answer, and acknowledgment of the integrity
of his heart, is, That some ignorance has the weight of a just excuse. For we
noted before, that Ignorance was the ground of his Plea. He had indeed taken
Sarah into his house, who was another man's Wife: but he hops, that shall not
be imputed to him as a fault, because he knew not she was a married woman; the
parties themselves (upon enquiry) having informed him otherwise. And therefore
he appealeth to God himself, the trier and judger of men's hearts, whether he
were not innocent in this matter: and God gives sentence with him, [ Yea, I
know that thou did this in the integrity of thine heart.] Where you see his
ignorance is allowed for a sufficient excuse.

For our clearer understanding of which point (that I may not wade farther 12.
into that great question, so much mooted among Divines, than is pertinent to
this story of Abimelech, and may be useful for us thence, viz. Whether or no,
or how far, Ignorance and Error may excuse, or lessen sinful Actions proceeding
therefrom, in point of Conscience) let us first lay down one general, certain,
and fundamental ground, whereupon indeed depends especially the resolution of
almost all those difficulties, that may occur in this, and many other like
Questions. And that is this. It is a condition so essential to every sin to be
Voluntary; that all other circumstances and respects laid aside, every sin is
simply and absolutely by so much greater or lesser, by how much it is more or
less voluntary. For whereas there are in the reasonable soul three prime
Faculties, from whence all humane Actions flow; the Understanding, the Will,
and the sensual Appetite or Affections: all of these concur indeed to every
Action properly Humane; yet so, as the Will carries the greatest sway, and is
therefore the justest measure of the Moral goodness, or badness thereof. In any
of the three there may be a fault, all of them being depraved in the state of
corrupt nature; and the very truth is, there is in every sin (every complete
sin) a fault in every of the three. And therefore all sins, by reason of the
blindness of the Understanding, may be called Ignorances; and by reason of the
impotency of the Affections, Infirmities; and by reason of the perverseness of
the Will, Rebellions. But for the most part it falls out so, that although
all the three be faulty, yet the obliquity of the sinful Action springs most
immediately and chiefly from the special default of some one or other of the
three. If the main defect be in the Understanding, not apprehending that good
it should, or not aright: the sin arising from such defect we call more
properly a sin of Ignorance. If the main defect be in the Affections, some
passion blinding or corrupting the Judgment; the sin arising from such defect
we call a sin of Infirmity. If the main defect be in the Will with perverse
resolution bent upon any evil: the sin arising from such wilfulness we call a
Rebellion, or a sin of Presumption. And certainly these sins of Presumption are
the Gravius quidem infirmitate, quam ignorantia; sed multo gravius studio, quam
infirmitate peccatur. De poenit. d. 3. ex Gregor.
greatest of the three, because the wilfullest: and those of Ignorance the
least, because there is in them the least disorder of the Will, which does its
office in some measure, in following the guidance of the understanding: the
greater fault being rather in the understanding, for misguiding it. And of sins
of Ignorance, compared one with another, that is ever the least, wherein the
defect is greater in the understanding, and in the will less.

From this Principle do issue sundry material conclusions: and namely, amongst
13.
many other, most pertinently to our purpose these two. The one; that all Error
and Ignorance does not always and wholly excuse from sin. The other; that yet
some kind of Ignorance and Error does excuse from sin, sometimes wholly, but
very often at least in part. The whole truth of both these conclusions, we may
see in this one action of Abimelesh, in taking Sarah into his house. In him
there was a twofold Error; and thence also a twofold Ignorance. The one was an
Error in universali, (Ignorantia Iuris, as they call it;) concerning the nature
of Fornication: which being a heinous sin, he took to be either none at all, or
a very small one. The other was an error in particulari, (Ignorantia Facti)
concerning the personal condition and relation of Sarah to Abraham: whose
Sister he thought her to be, and not Wife, though she were both.

That former Ignorance ( Ignorantia Iuris) in Abimelech, was in some degree 14.
voluntary. For Abimelech had in him the common Principles of the Law of
Nature; by the light whereof, if he had been careful to have improved it, but
even so far as right reason might have led a prudent and dispassionate natural
man, he might have discerned in the most simple Fornication such incongruity
with those Principles, as might have sufficiently convinced him of the
unlawfulness thereof. It is presumed, that all Ignorance of that, which a man
is bound to know, and may know, if he be not wanting to himself, is so far
forth wilful. Now Abimelech was bound to know, that all carnal knowledge of man
and woman out of the state of Wedlock was simply unlawful; and so much, if he
had not been wanting to himself in the use of his Naturals, he might have
known: and therefore it was a kind of wilful ignorance in him in some degree,
that he did not know it. And therefore further, he cannot be wholly excused
from sin, in taking Sarah, notwithstanding both that, and his other ignorance:
for although he did not know her to be Abraham's Wife, yet he knew well enough
she was not his own wife; and being not so to him, whatsoever she was to
Abraham it skilled not, he should certainly not have taken her. To plead
Ignorance, that he knew not Fornication to be a sin, would little help him in
this case. For men must know, they stand answerable unto God for their Actions;
not merely according to the knowledge, which they ought and might to have had,
those means considered, which he had afforded them of knowledge. Those means,
even where they are scantest, being ever sufficient, at the least thus far,
Romans 1. 20.
(...), as the Apostle speaks, Romans 1. to leave the transgressor without
excuse, and to make void all pretensions of Ignorance.

That Error then did not wholly excuse Abimelech from sin; because his
Ignorance 15.
was partly wilful: yet we may not deny, but even that error did lessen and
extenuate the sinfulness of the Action something, and so excuse him in part: a
tanto, though not a toto. Because it appears by many evidences, that his
ignorance therein was not grossly affected and wilful: and look how much measure
you abate in the wilfulness, so much weight you take off from the sin. The
light of Nature, though to a man that could have made the best of it, it had
been sufficient to have discovered the vicious deformity, and consequently the
moral unlawfulness of Fornication; yet was it nothing so clear in this
particular, as in many other things that concerned common equity, and
commutative Justice. Besides, common Opinion, and the Custom of the times, and
Consent (though corrupt Consent) of most Nations, in making but a light matter
of it; might easily carry him with the stream, and make him adventure to do as
most did* without any scruple, or so much as suspicion of such foul wickedness,
in a course so universally allowed and practiced. These respects make his
wilfulness less, his ignorance more pardonable, and his sin more excusable. And
I make no question, the premises considered, but that Abraham's sin in denying
Sarah to be his Wife (notwithstanding Verse. 12.
the equivocating trick he had to help it) was by many degrees greater, than
was Abimelech's in taking her: as being done more against knowledge, and
therefore more wilfully. Abimelech's sin in taking her, though with some
degrees of wilfulness, being yet a sin rather of Ignorance: whereas Abraham's
sin in denying her, was a sin of Infirmity at the least, if not much rather a
sin of Presumption.

Now although this former Error (Ignorantia Iuris) could not wholly excuse 16.
Abimelech from sin in what he had done, but in part only; for he sinned
therein, by giving way to unchaste desires and purposes, against the seventh
Commandment: yet that other Error of his ( Ignorantia Facti, in mistaking a
married woman for a single) does wholly excuse his fact from the sins of
injustice, in coveting and taking another man's Wife, against the eighth and the
tenth Commandments. He had not the least injurious intent against Abraham, in
that kind and degree: and therefore though he took his wife from him indeed,
yet not knowing any such matter by her, especially having withal made ordinary
and requisite enquiry thereafter, it must be granted he did it unwittingly, and
therefore unwilfully: and therefore also unsinfully, as to that species of sin.
S. Augustine says truly, Peccatum ita est voluntarium, ut, si non sit
voluntarium, non est peccatum: without some consent of the will, no complete
actual sin is committed. Such ignorance therefore, as preventeth a toto, and
cutteth off all consent of the will, must needs also excuse, and that a toto,
the Actions that proceed therefrom, from being sins. It is clear from the
words of my Text, that Abimelech's heart was sincere in this action of taking
Sarah, from any injury intended to Abraham therein; although de facto he took
his wife from him: because he did it ignorantly.

By what has been spoken, we may see in part, what kind of Ignorance it is, 17.
that will excuse us from sin, either in whole, or in part; and what will not.
Let us now raise some profitable Inferences from this Observation. First, our
Romish Catholics often twit us with our fore elders. [ What, say they, were
they not all downright Papists? Believed, as we believe? Worshipped, as we
worship? You will not say, they all lived and died in Idolatry, and so are
damned. And if they were saved in their faith, why may not the same faith save
us? And why will not you also be of that Religion that brought them to Heaven?]
A motive more plausible, than strong: the Vanity whereof our present
Observation duly considered and rightly applied fully discovers. We have much
reason to conceive good hope of the salvation of many of our Forefathers: who,
led away with the common superstitions of those blind times, might yet by those
general truths, which by the mercy of God were preserved amid the foulest
overspreadings of Popery, agreeable to the Word of God, (though clogged with an
addition of many superstitions and Antichristian inventions withal) be brought
to true Faith in the Son of God; unfeigned Repentance from dead works; and a
sincere desire and endeavor of new and holy Obedience. This was the Religion,
that brought them to Heaven; even Faith, and Repentance, and Obedience. This is
the true, and the Old, and Catholic Religion: and this is our Religion, in
which we hope to find salvation; and if ever any of you that miscal your selves
Catholics come to Heaven, it is this Religion must carry you thither. If
together with this true Religion of Faith, Repentance, and Obedience, they
embraced also your additions, as their blind guides then led them; prayed to
our Lady, kneeled to an Image, crept to a Cross, flocked to a Mass, as you now
do: these were their spots and their blemishes; these were their 1 Cor. 3. 12.
hay and their stubble; these were their Errors and their Ignorances. And I
doubt not, but as S. Paul for his blasphemies and persecutions, so they
obtained mercy for these sins, because they did them ignorantly in misbelief.
And upon the same ground, we have cause also to hope charitably of many
thousand poor souls in Italy, Spain, and other parts of the Christian World at
this day: that by the same blessed means they may obtain mercy and salvation in
the end, although in the mean time through ignorance they defile themselves
with much foul Idolatry, and many gross Superstitions.

But the ignorance that excuses from sin, is Ignorantia Facti, according to 13.
that has been already declared: whereas theirs was Ignorantia Iuris, which
excuses not. And besides, as they lived in the practice of that worship which
we call Idolatry, so they died in the same without repentance: and so their
case is not the same with S. Paul's, who saw those his sins, and sorrowed for
them, and forsook them: But how can Idolaters, living and dying so without
repentance, be saved? It is answered, that ignorance in point of fact, so
conditioned as has been showed, does so excuse a toto; that an Action
proceeding thence, though it have a material inconformity unto the Law of God,
is yet not formally a sin. But I do not so excuse the Idolatry of our Fore
fathers, as if it were not in it self a sin, and that (without repentance)
damnable. But yet their Ignorance being such as it was: nourished by Education,
Custom, Tradition, the Tyranny of their Leaders, the fashion of the times, not
without some show also of Piety and Devotion; and themselves withal, having
such slender means of better knowledge: though it cannot wholly excuse them
from sin without repentance damnable, yet it much lesseneth and qualifieth the
sinfulness of their Idolatry; arguing that their continuance therein was more
from other prejudices, than from a wilful contempt of Gods holy word and Will.
And as for their Repentance, it is as certain, that as many of them as are
saved, did repent of their Idolatries; as it is certain no Idolater, nor other
sinner, can be saved without Repentance. But then there is a double difference
to be observed, between Repentance for ignorances, and for known sins. The one
is, that known sins must be confessed, and repented of, and pardon asked for
them in particular, every one singly by it self, (I mean for the kinds, though
not ever for the individuals) every kind by it self, at least where God
allows time and leisure to the Penitent, to call himself to a punctual
examination of his life past, and does not by sudden death, or by some disease
that takes away the use of reason, deprive him of opportunity to do that:
Whereas for Ignorances, it is enough to wrap them up all together in a general
and implicit Confession, and to crave pardon for them by the lump, as David
does in Psalm 19. [ Psalm. 19. 12.
Who can understand all his Errors? Lord, cleanse thou me from my secret sins.]
The other difference is, that known sins are not truly repented of, but where
they are Prove. 28. 13.
forsaken; and it is but an hypocritical semblance of penance without the truth
of the thing, where is no care, neither endeavor, of reformation. But
ignorances may be faithfully repented of and yet still continued in. The
reason; because they may be repented of in the general, and in the lump,
without special knowledge that they are sins: but without such special
knowledge they cannot be reformed. Some of our forefathers then, might not
only live in Popish Idolatry, but even die in an Idolatrous act, breathing out
their last with their lips at a Crucifix, and an Ave-mary in their thoughts:
and yet have truly repented, (though but in the general, and in the crowd of
their unknown sins) even of those very sins; and have at the same instant true
Faith in Jesus Christ, and other Graces accompanying salvation.

But why then may not I, will some Popeling say, continue as I am, and yet 19.
come to Heaven, as well as they continued what they were and yet went to
Heaven? If I be an Idolater, it is out of my Error and Ignorance* and if that
general Prayer unto God at the last, to forgive me all my Ignorances, will
serve the turn, I may run the same course I do without danger or fear: God will
be merciful to me for what I do ignorantly. Not to preclude all possibility of
mercy from thee, or from any sinner: Consider yet, there is a great difference
between their state and thine, between thine ignorance and theirs. They had but
a very small enjoyance of the light of Gods Word, Mat. 5. 15.
hid from them under two bushels for sureness: under the bushel of a Tyrannous
Clergy, that if any man should be able to understand the books, he might not
have them; and under the bushel of an unknown tongue, that if any man should
chance to get the books, he might not understand them. Whereas to thee, the
light is holden forth, and set on a Candlesti^k; the books open; the language
plain, legible, and familiar. They had eyes, but, saw not: because the light
was kept from, and the land was dark about them, as the Exodus 18. 21, 23.
darkness of Egypt: But thou live as in a Goshen, where the light
encompasseth thee in on all sides; where there are Joh. 5. 35.
burning and shining lamps in every corner of the land. Yet is thy blindness
greater, (for who so blind, as he that will not see?) and more inexcusable:
because thou Mat. 13. 15.
shuttest thine eyes against the light, lest thou should see and be
converted, and God should heal thee. Briefly, they wanted the light, thou
shunnest it: they lived in darkness; thou delightest in it: their ignorance was
simple; thine affected and wilful. And therefore although we doubt not, but
that the times of their ignorance God Acts 17. 30.
winked at; yet thou have no warrant to presume, that God will also in these
times wink at thee, who Luke 7. 30.
rejectest the counsel of God against thine own soul, and for want of 2 These.
2. 10, 11.
love and affection to the truth, are justly given over to strong delusions, to
believe Fables, and put thy confidence in things that are lies. So much for
that matter.

Secondly, Here is a needful admonition for us all, not to flatter our selves
for 20.
our ignorance of those things, that concern us in our general or particular
Callings: as if for that ignorance our reckoning should be easier at the day of
judgment. Ignorance indeed excuses sometimes, sometimes lesseneth a fault; but
yet not all ignorance, all faults; not wilful and affected ignorance, any
fault. Nay, it is so far from doing that, that on the contrary it makes the
offense Ignorantia direct and per se voluntaria auget voluntarium, and per
consequens peccatum. Aquin. 1. 2. qu. 76. 4.
much more grievous, and the offender much more inexcusable. A heedless
servant, that Luke 12. 48.
neither knows, nor does his Masters will deserves some stripes. A stubborn
servant that knows it, and yet transgresses it, deserves more stripes. But
worse than them both is that ungracious servant, who fearing his Master will
appoint him something he had rather let alone, keeps himself out of the way
beforehand, and micheth in a corner out of sight, of purpose that he might not
know his Masters will; that so he may after stand upon it when he is chidden,
and say, He knew it not: such an untoward servant deserves yet more stripes.
Would the Spirit of God, think you, in the Scripture so often call upon us to
Prove. 2. 3, 4, 7. and 23. 23.
get the knowledge of Gods will, and to increase therein; or would he commence
his Hos. 4. 1.
suit against a land, and enter his action against the people thereof, for want
of such knowledge, if ignorance were better or safer? Oh, it is a fearful thing
for a man to See Prove. 1. 24, etc.
sha^^ instruction, and to say, he desires not the knowledge of God. Psalm. 36.
3.
Noluerunt intelligere, ut been agerent. When men are once come to that pass,
that they will not understand nor seek after God; when they Joh. 3. 20.
hate the light, because they take pleasure in the Ephesians. 5. 11.
works of darkness; when they Impia men's odit etiam ipsum intellectum: and hom^
aliquando nimium mente perversa timet intelligere, ne cogatur quod intellexerit
facere. Aug. de ver. Apost. ser. 13.
are afraid to know too much, lest their hearts should condemn them for not
doing thereafter; when like the Psalm. 58. 4.
deaf Adder they stop their ears against the voice of the charmer, for fear
they should be charmed by the power of that voice out of their crooked and
Serpentine courses; when they are so Ex intentio ne voluntatis ad peccandum
provenit, quod aliquis vult subire ignorantiae damnum, propter libertatem
peccandi. Aqu. 1. 2. 76. 4.
resolved to take freedom to sin, that they choose to be still Ignorant, rather
than hazard the forgoing of any part of that freedom: what do they, but even
run on blindfold into hell? And through inner, post along unto (...). Mat. 25.
30.
utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth? Bern. de 12.
grad. humil.
Frustra sibi de ignorantia blandiuntur, says S. Bernard, qui, ut liberius
peccent, libenter ignorant. S. Paul so speaks of such men, as if their case
were desperate* [ 1 Cor. 14. 38.
If any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant:] as who say; if he will need^ be
wilful, at his peril be it. But as many as desire to walk in the fear of God
with upright and sincere hearts, let them thirst after the knowledge of God and
his will, as the Psalm. 41. 2.
Heart after the rivers of waters; let them Prove. 2* 3, 4.
cry after knowledge, and lift up, their voices for understanding; let them
seek it as silver* and dig for it as for hid treasures; let their feet tread
often in Gods Courts, and even wear the thresholds of his house; let them
delight in his holy Ordinances, and rejoice in the light of his Word; depending
upon the ministry thereof with unsatisfied ears, and unwearied attention, and
feeding thereon with uncloyed appetites: that so they may see, and hear, and
learn, and understand, and believe, and obey, and increase in wisdom, and in
grace, and in favor with God and all good men.

But then in the third place consider, that if all ignorance will not excuse an
offender, 21.
though some do: how can thou hope to find any color of excuse or
extenuation, that sinnest wilfully with knowledge, and against the light of
thine own Conscience? The least sin thus committed; is in some degree a
Presumptuous sin, and carries with it a contempt of God: and in that regard is
Quo quisque melius sapit, eo deterius delinquit. Greg. in Pastorali.
greater than any sin of Ignorance. Jam. 4. 17.
To him that knows, to do good, and does it not, to him it is a sin, says S.
James: Sin beyond all plea of excuse. S. Paul, though he were a 1 Timothy 1. 13.
Persecutor of the truth, a Blasphemer of the Lord, and injurious to the
Brethren; yet he obtained Mercy, because he did all that ignorantly. His bare
ignorance was not enough to justify him: but he stood in need of Gods mercy,
or else he had perished in those sins for all his ignorance, but yet who can
tell, whether ever he should have found that mercy, if he had done the same
things, and not in ignorance? Ignorance then, though it do not deserve pardon*
yet it often finds it: because it is not joined with open contempt of him,
that is able to pardon. But he that sins against knowledge, does Ponere
obicem, (if you will allow the Phrase, and it may be allowed in this since:) he
does not only provoke the Justice of God by his sin, (as every other sinner
does) but he does also damm up the Mercy of God by his contempt, and does his
part to shut himself out for ever from all possibility of pardon; unless the
boundless overflowing mercy of God come in upon him with a strong tide, and
with an unresisted current break it self a passage through. Do this then, my
beloved Brethren. Labor to get knowledge, labor to increase your knowledge,
labor to abound in knowledge: but beware you rest not in your knowledge.
Rather 2 Pet. 1. 5, 7.
give all diligence, to add to your knowledge Temperance, and Patience, and
Godliness, and Brotherly kindness, and Charity, and other good graces. Without
these, your knowledge is unprofitable; nay, damnable. Eccles. 1. 18.
Qui apponit soientiam, apponit dolorem; is true in this sense also. He that
increases knowledge, unless his care of obedience rise in some good proportion
with it, does but lay more rods in steep for his own back, and increase the
number of his stripes, and add to the weight and measure of his own most just
condemnation. Know this, that although Integrity of heart may stand with some
ignorances, as Abimelech here pleads it, and God allows it: yet that man's
heart is devoid of all singleness and sincerity, who allows himself in any
course he knows to be sinful, or takes this liberty to himself, to continue
and persist in any known ungodliness. And thus much for our second Observation.

I add but a Third; and that taken from the very thing which Abimelech here 22.
pleads, viz. the integrity of his heart; considered together with his
present personal estate and condition. I dare not say, he was a Castaway: for
what knows any man, how God might, after this time, and even from these
beginnings, deal with him in the riches of his mercy? But at the time, when the
things storied in this Chapter were done, Abimelech doubtless was an
unbeliever, a stranger to the Covenant of God made with Abraham, and so in the
state of a carnal and mere natural man. And yet both he pleads, and God
approves, the innocence and integrity of his heart in this business, [ Yea, I
know that thou did this in the integrity of thine heart.] Note hence, That in
an unbeliever, and natural man, and therefore also in a wicked person and a
castaway, (for as to the present state, the unregenerate and the Reprobate,
are equally incapable of good things,) there may be truth and singleness, and
integrity of heart in some particular actions.

We use to teach, and that truly, according, to the plain evidence of
Scripture, 23.
and the judgment of the ancient Fathers against the contrary tenet of the
latter Church of Rome* that all the works of unbelievers and natural men, are
not only stained with sin, (for so are the best works of the faithful too;) but
also are really and truly sins: both in their own nature, because they spring
from a corrupt fountain, for Joh. 3. 6.
That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and it is impossible that a Mat. 7.
18.
corrupt tree should bring forth good fruit* and also in Gods estimation,
because he beholds them as out of Christ, Mat. 3. 7.
in and through whom alone he is well pleased. St. Augustin's judgment
concerning such men's works is well known, who pronounces of the best of them,
that they are but splendida peccata, glorious sins* and the best of them are
indeed no better. We may not say therefore, that there was in Abimelech's
heart, as nor in the heart of any man, a legal integrity; as if his person, or
any of his actions were innocent, and free from sin, in that perfection which
the Law requires. Neither yet can we say, there was in his heart, as nor in
the heart of any unbeliever, an Evangelical integrity* as if his person were
accepted, and for the persons sake all or any of his actions approved with God,
accepting them as perfect, through the supply of the abundant perfections of
Christ then to come. That first and legal integrity supposes the righteousness
of works, which no man has: this latter and Evangelical integrity, the
righteousness of Faith, which no unbeliever has; no man's heart being, either
legally perfect, that is in Adam; or Evangelically perfect, that is out of
Christ. But there is a third kind of integrity of heart, inferior to both
these, which God here acknowledges in Abimelech; and of which only we affirm,
that it may be found in an Unbeliever and a Reprobate: and that is, a Natural
or Moral integrity; when the heart of a mere natural man is careful to follow
the direction and guidance of right reason, according to that light (of Nature,
or Revelation) which is in him, without hollowness, halting, and hypocrisse;
Rectus usus Naturalium, we might well call it: the term were fit enough to
express it; had not the Papists and some other Sectaries, with sowring it by
the Leaven of their Pelagianism, rendered it suspicious. The Philosophers and
learned among the Heathen, by that which they call a good conscience,
understand no other thing than this very Integrity whereof we now speak. Not
that an Unbeliever can have a good conscience, taken in strict propriety of
truth, and in a spiritual sense. For the whole man being corrupted through the
fall of Adam; the conscience also is wrapped up in the common pollution: so
that Tit. 1. 15.
to them that are defiled and unbelieving nothing is pure, but even their mind
and conscience is defiled, as speaks St. Paul, Tit. 1. and being so defiled,
can never be made good, till Heb. 10. 22.
their hearts be sprinkled from that pollution, Heb. 9. 14.
by the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without
spot to God, and till the Conscience be purged by the same blood from dead
works to serve the living God, as speaks the same Apostle. Heb. 9. and 10.

But yet a good Conscience in that sense as they meant it, a Conscience morally
24.
good, many of them had; who never had Faith in Christ, nor so much as the
least inkling of the Doctrine of Salvation. By which, Romans 2. 14.
Not having the Law, they were a Law unto themselves; doing by nature many of
the things contained in the Law: and choosing rather to undergo the greatest
miseries, as shame, torment, exile; yea, death it self, or any thing that could
befall them, than wilfully to transgress those rules, and notions, and dictates
of piety and equity, which the God of Nature had imprinted in their
Consciences. Could heathen men and unbelievers have taken so much comfort in
the testimony of an excusing Conscience, as it appears many of them did; if
such a Conscience were not in the kind (that is Morally) Good? Or how else
could St. Paul have made that protestation he did in the Council, [ Acts. 23. 1.
Men and Brethren, I have lived in all good conscience before God until this
day:] At least, if he meant to include, (as most of the learned conceive he
did) the whole time of his life, as well before his conversion, as after?
Balaam was but a cursed Hypocrite, and therefore it was but a Copy of his
countenance, and no better, (for his heart even then hankered after 2 Pet. 2.
15.
the wages of unrighteousness) when he looked asquint upon Balak's liberal
offer, with this answer. Number. 22. 18.
If Balak would give me his house full of Gold and silver, I cannot go beyond
the word of the Lord my God, to do less or more. But I assure my self, many
thousands of Unbelievers in the world, free from his hypocrisy, would not for
ten times as much as he there spoke of, have gone beyond the Rules of the Law
of Nature written in their hearts, to have done either less or more. Abimelech
seems to be so affected; at least, in this particular action and passage with
Abraham: wherein God thus approves his integrity, Yea I know that thou did
this in the integrity of thine heart.

The Reason of which moral integrity in men unregenerate and merely natural, 25.
is that imperium Rationis, that power of natural Conscience and Reason, which
it has and exercises over the whole man: doing the office of a Lawgiver, and
having the strength of a Law; [ Romans 2. 14.
They are a Law unto themselves] says the Apostle, Romans 2. As a Law, it
prescribes what is to be done: as a Law, it commands that what is prescribed
be done: as a Law, it proposes rewards and punishments, accordingly as what it
prescribes and commands, is done or not done. Abimelech's own Reason, by the
light of Nature informed him, that to take another man's Wife from him was
injurious; and enjoyneth him therefore, as he will avoid the horrors and
upbraidings of a condemning heart, by no means to do it. Resolved accordingly
to do, and to obey the Law of Reason written in his heart, before he durst take
Sarah into his house, he makes inquiry first, whether she were a single woman,
or a wife; and therefore, although (upon misinformation) he took another man's
wife, unwitting that she was so, he pleads here, and that justly, the
integrity of his heart. And from obedience to the same Law, especially, spring
those many rare examples of Justice, Temperance, Gratitude, Beneficence, and
other moral virtues, which we read of in Heathen men, not without admiration:
which were so many strong evidences also of this moral integrity of their
hearts.

A point that would bear much enlargement, if we intended to amplify it by 26.
Instances; and did not rather desire to draw it briefly into use, by
Inferences. A just condemnation, it may he first, to many of us, who call our
selves Christians, and Believers, and have many blessed means of direction and
instruction for the due ordering of our hearts and lives which those Heathens
wanted: yet come so many paces, nay, leagues, short of them, both in the
detestation of vicious and gross enormities, and in the conscionable practice
of many offices of virtue. Among them, what strictness of Justice? which we
either slack or pervert. What zeal of the common good? which we put off each
man to other, as an unconcerning thing. What remission of private injuries?
which we pursue with implacable revenge. What contempt of honors, and riches?
which we so pant after, so adore. What temperance and frugality in their
provisions? wherein no excess satisfies us. What free beneficence, to the
poor, and to pious uses? whereto we contribute penuriously and with grudging.
What conscience of Oaths and Promises? which we so slight. What reverence of
their Priests? whom we count as the scum of the people. What loathing of
swinish drunkenness? wherein some of us glory. What detestation of Usury, as a
monster in nature? whereof some of ours make a trade. Particularities are
infinite, but what should I say more? Certainly, unless our righteousnesses
exceed theirs, we shall never come to heaven: but how shall we escape the
nethermost hell, if our unrighteousnesses exceed theirs? Romans 2. 27.
Shall not Uncircumcision which is by nature, if it keep the Law, judge thee,
who by the Letter and Circumcision do transgress the Law? said St. Paul to
the Jew: Make application to thy self, thou that art a Christian.

Secondly, if even in Unbelievers, and Hypocrites, and Castaways there may 27.
be in particular actions, integrity and singleness of heart: then it can be
but an uncertain Rule for us to judge of the true state of our own and other
men's hearts, by what they are in some few particular actions. Men are indeed
that, not which they show themselves in some passages, but what they are in the
more general and constant tenor of their lives. If we should compare Abimelech
and David together, by their different behavior in the same kind of
temptation, in two particulars of the sacred History, and look no farther, we
could not but give Sentence upon them quite contrary to right and truth. We
should see Abimelech on the one side, though allured with Sarah's beauty: yet
free from the least injurious thought to her husband, or adulterous intent in
himself. We should behold 2 Samuel 11. 2, etc.
David on the other side, inflamed with lust after Bathsheba, whom he knew to
be another man's Wife: plotting first, how to compass his filthy desires with
the Wife: and then after, how to conceal it from the Husband; by many wicked
and politic fetches: and, when none of those would take, at last to have him
murdered, being one of his principal 2 Samuel 23. 39.
Worthies, in a most base and unworthy fashion, with the loss of the lives of a
number of innocent persons more: besides the betraying of Gods cause, the
disheartning of his People, and the encouragement of his and their enemies.
When we should see and consider all this on both sides, and lay the one against
the other: what could we think but that Abimelech were the Saint, and David the
Infidel; Abimelech the man after Gods own heart, and David a stranger to the
Covenant of God; Yet was David all this while within that Covenant: and (for
any thing we know, or is likely) Abimelech, not. Particular actions then, are
not good evidences either way: as wherein both an unbeliever, awed sometimes by
the Law, of natural Conscience, may manifest much simplicity and integrity of
heart; and the true Child of God, swayed sometimes with Romans 7. 23.
the law of sinful concupiscence, may bewray much foul Hypocrisy, and
infidelity. But look into the more constant course of both their lives: and
then may you find the Hypocrite and the unbeliever wholly distinguished from
the godly: by the want of those right marks of sincerity that are in the godly:
no zeal of Gods glory; no sense of original corruption; no bemoaning of his
privy Hypocrisy and secret Atheism; no suspicion of the deceitfulness of his
own heart; no tenderness of Conscience in smaller duties; no faithful
dependence upon the providence or promises of God for outward things; no
self-denial, or poverty of spirit; no thirst after the salvation of his
brethren, and the like: none of these, I say, to be found in any constant
manner in the general course of his life; although there may be some sudden
light flashes of some of them now and then in some particular Actions: Measure
no man's heart then, especially not thine own, by those rarer discoveries of
moral integrity in particular actions: but by the powerful manifestations of
habitual grace, in the more constant tenor of life and practice.

We may learn hence thirdly, not to flatter our selves too much upon every 28.
integrity of heart; or to think our selves discharged from sin in the sight of
God, upon every acquital of our own Consciences: when as all this may befall an
Hypocrite, an Unbeliever, a Reprobate. When men accuse us of hypocrisy or
unfaithfulness; or Psalm. 35. 11.
lay to our charge things we never did: it is, I confess, a very comfortable
and blessed thing, if we can find protection against their accusations in our
own hearts, and be able to plead the integrity thereof in bar against their
calumniations. Our integrity (though it be but Moral, and though but only in
those actions wherein they charge us wrongfully) and the testimony of our own
consciences, may be of very serviceable use to us thus far, to make us
regardless of the accusations of unjust men: that one testimony within shall
relieve us more, than a thousand false witnesses without can injure us. 1 Cor.
4. 3.
With me it is a very small thing, says St. Paul, that I should be judged of
you, or of man's judgment: as if he should have said, I know my self better than
you do; and therefore so long as I know nothing by my self of those things,
wherein you consure me, I little reckon what either you, or any others shall
think or say by me. We may by his example make use of this; the inward
testimony of our hearts being sufficient to Justify us against the accusations
of men: but we may not rest upon this; as if the acquital of our hearts were
sufficient to justify us in the sight of God. St. Paul knew it, who durst not
rest thereupon: but therefore adds in the very next following words. 1 Cor.
4. 3, 4.
Yea, I judge not mine own self; for I know nothing by my self, yet am I not
hereby justified: but he that judges me, is the Lord. Our hearts are close,
and false; and nothing so Jer. 17. 9, 10.
deceitful as they: and who can know them perfectly, but he that made them, and
can search into them? Other men can know very little of them: our selves
something more: but God alone all. If therefore when other men condemn us, we
find our selves aggrieved: we may remove our cause into an Higher Court; appeal
from them to our own Consciences, and be releived there. But that is not the
Highest Court of all; there lies yet an appeal further and higher than it,
even to the Judgment seat, or rather to the Mercy-seat of God: who both can
find just matter in us, to condemn us, even in those things wherein our own
hearts have acquitted us; and yet can withal find a gracious mean to justify
us, even from those things wherein our own hearts condemn us. Whether therefore
our hearts condemn us, or condemn us not: 1 John 3. 20.
God is greater than our hearts and knows all things. To conclude all this
Point, and therewithal the first general part of my Text; Let no Excusations of
our own Consciences on the one side, or confidence of any integrity in our
selves, make us presume we shall be able to stand just in the sight of God, if
he should enter into judgment with us: but let us rather make suit unto him,
that since we cannot Psalm. 19. 19.
understand all our own errors, he would be pleased to cleanse us from our
secret sins. And on the other side, let no accusations of our own Consciences,
or guiltiness of our own manifold frailties and secret hypocrisies, make us
despair of obtaining his favor and righteousness: if denying our selves, and
renouncing all integrity in our selves, as our selves, we cast our selves
wholly at the footstool of his mercy, and seek his favor in the face of his
only begotten Son Jesus Christ the righteous.

Of the former branch of Gods reply to Abimelech, in those former words of 29.
the Text, [ Yea, I know that thou did this in the integrity of thy heart]
hiherto. I now proceed to the latter branch thereof, in those remaining words [
For I also withheld thee from sinning against me: therefore suffered I thee
not to touch her.] (...) The word signifies properly to hold in or to keep
back; Varablus in Schol. hic.
Retinui, or Junius hic.
Cohibui, or as the Latin has it, Vulgar. hic.
Custodivi te: implying Abimelech's forwardness to that sin; certainly he had
been gone, if God had not kept him in, and held him back. The Greek word
renders it, Septuag. hic.
(...), I spared thee: and so the Latin Parcere, is sometimes used for impedire
or prohibere, to hinder, or not to suffer: as in that of Virg. Eclog. 3.
Virgil, Parcite oves nimium procedere. Or taking parcere in the most usual
signification, for sparing: it may very well stand with the purpose of the
place; for indeed God spares us no less, indeed he spares us much more, when
he makes us forbear sin, than when having sinned he forbeareth to punish; and
as much cause have we to acknowledge his mercy, and rejoice in it, when he
holds our hands that we sin not, as when he holds his own hands that he
strike not. For I also withheld thee from sinning against me. How! Did not
Abimelech sin in taking Sarah, or was not that as Psalm. 51. 4.
every other sin is, a sin against God? Certainly, had not Abimelech sinned in
so doing, and that against God, God would not have so plagued him as he did,
for that deed. The meaning then is; not, that God with held him wholly from
sinning at all therein; but that God with held him from sinning against him in
that foul kind and in that high degree, as to defile himself by actual
filthiness with Sarah, which but for Gods restnaint he had done: [ therefore
suffered I thee not] Septuag. hic.
(...) Vulg. hic.
Non demisi te, that is, I did not let thee go: I did not leave thee to thy
self; or most agreeable to the letter of the Text in the (...)
Hebrew, non dedi, or non tradidi; I did not deliver, or give. That may be, non
dedi potestatem, I did not give thee H. A. hic.
leave or power, and so giving is sometimes used for suffering, as Psalm. 16.
Psalm. 16. 10.
Non dabis sanctum tuum, Thou will not suffer, etc. and Genesis 31. 37. Exodus* 3.
19. and 12. 23. Number. 22. 13. Judge. 1. 24. and 15. 1. Esther 9. 14.
elsewhere. Or non dedi te tibi, I gave thee not to thy self. A man cannot be
put more desperately into the hands of any enemy, than to be left in manu
consilii sui, delivered into his own hands, and given over to the lust of his
own heart. Or as it is here translated, I suffered thee not. We should not draw
in God as a party, when we commit any sin, as if he joined with us in it, or
lent us his helping hand for it: we do it so alone, without his help, that we
never do it, but when he lets us alone, and leaves us destitute of his
help. For the kind and manner, and measure, and circumstances, and events, and
other the appurtenances of sin, God orders them by his Almighty power and
providence so, as to become serviceable to his most wise, most just, most holy
purposes: but as for the very formality it self of the sin, God is (to make the
most of it) but a sufferer; [Therefore suffered I thee not, To Touch her.]
Signifying that God had so far restrained Abimelech from the accomplishment of
his wicked and unclean purposes, that Sarah was preserved free by his good
providence, not only from actual adultery, but from all unchaste and wanton
dalliance also with Abimelech.

It was Gods great mercy to all the three Parties, that he did not suffer this
30.
evil to be done: for by this means he graciously preserved Abimelech from the
sin, Abraham from the wrong, and Sarah from both. And it is to be acknowledged
the great mercy of God, when at any time he does, (and he does ever and anon
more or less) by his gracious and powerful restraint withold any man, from
running into those extremities of sin and mischief, whereinto his own
corruption would carry him headlong, especially when it is agog by the cunning
persuasions of Satan, and the manifold temptations that are in the world
through lust. The points then that arise from this part of my Text, are these,
1. Men do not always commit those evils, their own desires, or outward
temptations prompt them unto. 2. That they do it not, it is from Gods
restraint. 3. That God restrains them, it is of his own gracious goodness and
mercy. The common subject matter of the whole three points, being one, viz.
Gods restraint of man's sin; we will therefore wrap them up all three together,
and so handle them, in this one entire Observation, as the total of all three.
God in his mercy oftentimes restrains men from committing those evils, which
if that restraint were not, they would otherwise have committed.

This Restraint, whether we consider the Measure, or the Means which God 31.
uses therein; is of great variety. For the Measure; God sometimes restrains
men a toto, from the whole sin, whereunto they are tempted; as he withheld
Joseph from consenting to the persuasions of his Mistress: sometimes only a
tanto, and that more or less, as in his infinite wisdom he sees expedient;
suffering them perhaps but only to desire the evil, perhaps to resolve upon it,
perhaps to prepare for it, perhaps to begin to Act it, perhaps to proceed far
in it, and yet keeping them back from falling into the extremity of the sin, or
accomplishing their whole desire in the full and final consummation thereof; as
here he dealt with Abimelech. Abimelech sinned against the eighth Commandment,
in taking Sarah injuriously from Abraham, say he had been but her brother; and
he sinned against the seventh Commandment in a foul degree, in harboring such
wanton and unchaste thoughts concerning Sarah, and making such way as he did
(by taking her into his house) for the satisfying of his lust therein: but yet
God withheld him from plunging himself into the extremity of those sins, not
suffering him to fall into the act of uncleanness. And as for the Means whereby
God withholds men from sinning; they are also of wonderful variety.
Sometimes he takes them off, by diverting the course of the corruption, and
turning the affections another way. Sometimes he awaketh natural Conscience;
which is a very tender and tickle thing, when it is once stirred, and will
boggle now and then at a very small matter in comparison, over it will do at
some other times. Sometimes he affrighteth them with apprehensions of outward
Evils; as shame, infamy, charge, envy, loss of a friend, danger of humane Laws,
and sundry other such like discouragements. Sometimes he cools their
resolutions, by presenting unto their thoughts the terrors of the Law, the
strictness of the last Account, and the endless unsufferable torments of
Hellfire. Sometimes, when all things are ripe for execution, he denies them
opportunity, or casts in some unexpected impediment in the way, that quasheth
all. Sometimes he Quosdam praesciens Deus multa peccare posse, flagellat eos
infirmitate corporis, ne peccent; ut eis utilius sit frangi languoribus ad
salutem, quam remanere incolumes ad damnationem. Hug. 2. de. Anim.
disableth them, and weakneth the arm of flesh wherein they trusted, so as they
want power to their will; as here he dealth with Abimelech. And sundry other
ways he has, more than we are able to search into, whereby he lays a
restraint upon men, and keeps them back from many sins and mischiefs, at
least from the extremity of many sins and mischiefs, whereunto otherwise Nature
and Temptation would carry them with a strong current. Not to speak yet of that
sweet, and of all other the most blessed and powerful restraint which is
wrought in us by the Spirit of Sanctification, renewing the soul, and subduing
the corruption that is in the flesh unto the obedience of the Spirit; at which
I shall have fitter occasion to touch anon.

In the mean time, that there is something or other, that restrains men from
32.
doing some evils, unto which they have not only a natural proneness, but
perhaps withal an actual desire and purpose; might be shown by a world of
instances: but because every man's daily experience can abundantly furnish him
with some, we will therefore content our selves with the fewer, See Genesis 31.
23, etc.
Laban meant no good to Jacob, when taking his Brethren with him, he pursued
after him seven days journey in an hostile manner: and he had power to his
will, to have done Jacob a mischief, Jacob being but imbellis turba, no more
but himself, his wives and his little ones, with his flocks and herds, and a
few servants to attend them, unable to defend themselves, much more unmeet to
resist a prepared enemy: yet for all his power, and purpose, and preparation,
Laban, when he had overtaken Jacob, durst have nothing at all to do with him,
and he had but very little to say to him neither; The worst was but this, [
Thus and thus have you dealt with me. And Genesis 31. 23.
It is in the power of mine hand to do you hurt: but the God of your father
spoke unto me yesternight, saying; Take thou heed that thou speak not to Jacob
either good or bad:] See the story in Genesis 31. The same Jacob had a Brother, as
unkind as that Uncle, nay, much more despitefully bent against him than he; for
he had vowed his destruction, ( Genesis 27. 41.
The days of mourning for my father are at hand, and then I will slay my
Brother Jacob;) and although the Ibid. v. 44. 45.
Mother well hoped, that some few days time and absence would appease the fury
of Esau, and all should be forgotten; yet Genesis 31. 38.
twenty years after the old grudge remained; and upon Jacob's approach, Genesis
32. 6.
Esau goes forth to meet him with 400 men, armed (as it should seem) for his
destruction: which cast Ibid. v. 7, 8.
Jacob into a terrible fear, and much distressed he was, good man, and glad to
use the best wit he had, by dividing his Companies, to provide for the safety
at least of some part of his charge. And yet behold at the encounter, no use at
all of the 400 men, unless to be spectators and witnesses of the joyful Genesis
33. 4, etc.
embraces and kind loving complements that passed between the two brothers, in
the liberal offers and modest refusals each of others courtesies; in the 32 and
33 of Genesis. A good Probatum of that Observation of Solomon, Prove. 16. 7.
When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be at peace
with him. Balaam the Conjurer, when the king Balak had cast the hook before
him, baited with ample Number. 22. 7, 17.
rewards in hand, and great promotions in reversion, if he would come over to
him and curse Israel; had both Covetousness and Ambition enough in him to make
him bite: so that he was not only 2 Pet. 2. 15.
willing, but even desirous, to satisfy the King; for he loved the wages of
unrighteousness with his heart, and therefore made Number. 23. 13, 14, 17, 28.
trial (till he saw it was all in vain) if by any means he could wring a
permission from God to do it. But when his Number. 24. 3, etc.
eyes were opened to behold Israel, and his mouth open that he must now
pronounce something upon Israel: though his eyes were full of Envy, and his
heart of Cursing, yet God put a parable of Blessing into his mouth: and he was
not able to utter a syllable of any thing other than good concerning Israel, in
22 and 24 of Numbers.

In all which, and sundry other instances, wherein when there was intended
beforehand 33.
so much evil to be done, and there was withal in the parties such a forward
desire, and such a solemn preparation to have it done: and yet when all came to
all, so little or nothing was done, of what was intended, but rather the
contrary: it cannot first be imagined, that such a stop should be made, but by
the powerful restraint of some superior, and overruling hand; neither may we
doubt in the second place, that every such restraint, by what second and
subordinate means soever it be furthered, is yet the proper work of God, as
proceeding from, and guided by his Almighty and irresistible providence. And as
for that which happened to Balaam, that it was Gods doing, the evidence is clear;
we have it from the mouth of two or three witnesses. The Wizard himself
confesses it, Number. 22. 13.
The Lord will not suffer me to go with you, Number. 22. The King that set him on
work upbraideth him with it; Number. 24. 11.
I thought indeed to promote thee to great honor: but lo, the Lord has kept
thee back from honor, Number. 24. And Moses would have Israel take knowledge of
it; Deuteronomy. 23. 5.
The Lord, thy God would not hearken unto Balaam, but the Lord thy God turned
the curse into a blessing, because the Lord thy God loved thee, Deuteronomy. 23. It
was God then that turned Balaam's curse into a blessing, and it was the same
God, that turned Laban's revengeful thoughts into a friendly Expostulation; and
it was the same God, that turned Esau's inveterate malice into a kind brotherly
congratulation. He that has set Job 38. 8, 11.
bounds to the Sea, which, though the waves thereof rage horribly, they cannot
pass, (Hitherto shall thou go, and here shall thou stay thy proud waves;) and
did command the waters of the Exodus 15. 8.
Red Sea to stay their course, and stand up as on heaps; and by his power could
enforce the waters of the Psalm. 114. 3.
River Jordan, to run quite against the Current up the Channel; he has Prove.
21. 1.
in his hands, and at his command the hearts of all the sons of men, yea,
though they be the greatest Kings and Monarchs in the world, as the Rivers of
waters: and can wind and turn them at his pleasure, inclining them which way
soever he will. Psalm. 76. 10.
The fierceness of man shall turn to thy praise (says David in Psalm. 76. 10.)
and the fierceness of them shall thou retain: the latter clause of the verse is
very significant in the Original, and comes home to our purpose, as if we
should translate it, (...) Residuum irarum ^inges. Vatablus.
Thou shall gird the remainder of their wrath, or of their fierceness. The
meaning is this. Suppose a man's heart be never so full fraught with envy,
hatred, malice, wrath, and revenge, let him be as fierce and furious as is
possible; God may indeed suffer him, and he will suffer him to exercise so much
of his corruption, and proceed so far in his fierceness, as he sees expedient
and useful for the forwarding of other his secret, and just, and holy
appointments, and so order the sinful fierceness of man by his wonderful
providence, as to make it serviceable to his ends, and to turn it to his glory:
but look whatsoever wrath and fierceness there is in the heart of a man, over
and above so much as will serve for those his eternal purposes, all that
surplusage, that overplus and remainder whatsoever it be he will gird; he will
so bind, and hamper, and restrain him, that he shall not be able to go an inch
beyond his tedder, though he would fret his heart out. The fierceness of man
shall turn to thy praise, so much of it as he does execute: and the remainder
of their fierceness thou shall restrain, that they execute it not. Be he never
so great a Prince; or have he never so great a spirit, all is one, he must come
under. No difference with God in this, betwixt him that sits on the Throne,
and her that grindeth at the Mill: Psalm. 76. 12.
He shall refrain the spirit of Princes, and is wonderful among the Kings of
the earth, in the last verse of that Psalm.

Now of the truth of all that has been hitherto spoken in both these branches
34.
of the Observation, (viz. that first there is a restraint of evil; and then
secondly, that this restraint is from God) I know not any thing can give us
better assurance, taking them both together, than to consider the generality
and strength of our Natural corruption. General it is first, in regard of the
persons; overspreading 1.
the whole lump of our nature: there is not a child of Adam free from the
common infection; Psalm. 14. 2.
They are all corrupt, they are altogether abominable, there is none that does
good, no not one. General secondly, in regard of the subject, 2.
overrunning the whole man, soul and body, with all the parts and powers of
either, so as Isa. 1. 6.
from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head there is no whole part.
Joh. 3. 6.
Whatsoever is born of the flesh is flesh; and Tit. 1. 15.
To them that are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure, but even their mind
and Conscience is defiled; and Genesis 6. 5.
All the imaginations of the thoughts of their hearts are only evil
continually. General thirdly, in regard of the object: averse from all kind of
good, 3.
( Romans 7. 18.
In me, that is in my flesh, dwells no good thing:) and prone to all kind of
evil. ( Psalm. 36. 4.
He has set himself in no good way, neither does he abhor any thing that is
evil.) Add to this generality, the strength also of our corruption: how
vigorous, and stirring, and active it is, and how it carries us headlongly
with full speed into all manner of evil, Jer. 8. 6.
As the horse rusheth into the battle; so as we have no hold of our selves,
neither power to stay our selves, till we have run as far as we can, and
without the mercy of God plunged our selves into the bottom of the bottomless
pit. Lay all this together, and there can be no other sufficient reason given,
than this restraint whereof we now speak, why any one man should at any one
time refrain from any one sin being tempted thereunto; whereinto any other man
at any other time has fallen, being alike tempted. Every man would kill his
brother, as Genesis 4. 8.
Cain did Abel; and every man defile his sister, as 2. Sam. 13. 11.
Amnon did Thamar; and every man oppress his inferior, as 1 Kings 21. 16.
Ahab did Naboth, and every man supplant his betters, as 2 Samuel 16. 3.
Zibah did Mephibosheth; and ever man betray his Master, as Mat. 26. 15.
Judas did Christ: every man being as deep in the loins of Adam, as either Cain
or Judas, or any of the rest. Their nature was not more corrupt than ours,
neither ours less corrupt than theirs: and therefore every one of us should
have done those things, as well as any one of them, if there had not been
Nullum peccatum est quod unquam fecerit* homo, quod non possit facere alter
homo, si Creator desit a quo factus est homo. August. ^oliloq. cap. 15.
something without and above nature to withhold us, and keep us back therefrom,
when we were tempted; which was not in that measure afforded them, when they
were tempted. And from whom can we think that restraiut to come, but from that
God, who is the Author and the Lord of nature, and has the power, and command
and rule of Nature; by whose grace and goodness we are whatsoever we are: and
to whose powerful assistance we owe it, if we do any good (for it is he that
sets us on;) and to his powerful restraint, if we eschew any evil (for it is
he that keeps us off.) Therefore I also withheld thee from sinning against
me.

And as to the third point in the Observation, it is not much less evident than
35.
the two former; namely, that this Restraint, as it is from God, so it is from
the Mercy of God. Hence it is that Divines usually bestow upon it the name of
Grace: distinguishing between a twofold Grace; a special renewing Grace, and a
Common restraining Grace. The special and renewing Grace is indeed and so
incomparably more excellent, that in comparison thereof the other is not worthy
to be called by the name of Grace, if we would speak properly and exactly; but
yet the word [ Grace] may not unfitly be so extended, as to reach to every act
of Gods providence, whereby at any time he restrains men from doing those
evils, which otherwise they would do; and that in a threefold respect: of God,
of themselves, of others. First, in respect of God, every restraint from sin,
may be called Grace; inasmuch as it proceeds ex mero motu, from the mere good
1.
will and pleasure of God, without any cause, motive, or inducement in the man
that is so restrained. For, take a man in the state of corrupt nature, and
leave him to himself; and think, how it is possible for him to forbear any sin,
whereunto he is tempted. There is no power in nature to work a restraint: nay,
there is not so much as any proneness in nature to desire a restraint: much
less then is there any worth in Nature, to deserve a restraint. Issuing
therefore, not at all from the powers of Nature, but from the free pleasure of
God, as a beam of his merciful providence, this Restraint may well be called
Grace. And so it may be secondly, 2.
in respect of the Persons themselves: because, though it be not available to
them for their everlasting salvation; yet it is some favor to them more than
they have deserved, that by this means their sins (what in number, what in
weight) are so much lesser, than otherwise they would have been; whereby also
their account shall be so much the easier, and their stripes so many the fewer;
Chrysostom in Genesis hom. 25. and alibi sape.
St. Chrysostom often observes it, as an effect of the mercy of God upon them,
when he cutteth off great offenders betimes with some speedy destruction: and
he does it out of this very consideration, that they are thereby prevented from
committing many sins, which if God should have lent them a longer time, they
would have committed. If his observation be sound; it may then well pass for a
double mercy of God to a sinner, if he both respite his destruction, and withal
restrain him from sin: for by the one, he gives him so much longer time for
repentance, which is one Mercy; and by the other, he preventeth so much of the
increase of his sin, which is another Mercy. Thirdly, it may be called Grace,
in respect of other men. For in restraining men from doing evil, 3.
God intends, as principally, his own glory, so withal the good of mankind;
especially of his Church, in the preservation of humane society; which could
not subsist an hour, if every man should be left to the wildness of his own
nature, to do what mischief, the Devil and his own heart would put him upon,
without restraint. So that the restraining of men's corrupt purposes and
affections proceeds from that Tit. 3. 4*
(...), (as the Apostle somewhere calls it) that love of God to mankind,
whereby he wills their preservation: and might therefore in that respect bear
the name of grace, though there should be no good at all intended thereby to
the Persons so restrained. Just as those (...), those spiritual gifts, which
God has distributed in a wonderful variety for the edifying of his Church,
though they oftentimes bring no good to the receiver, are yet styled graces in
the Scriptures, because the distribution of them proceeds from the gracious
love and favor of God to his Church, whose benefit he intended therein. God
here restrained Abimelech; as elsewhere he did Laban, and Esau, and Balaam, and
others not so much for their own sakes, though perhaps sometimes that also; as
for their sakes, whom they should have injured by their sins, if they had acted
them. As here Abimelech for his chosen Abraham's sake; and Laban and Esau for
his servant Jacob's sake; and Balaam for his people Israel's sake. As it is
said in Psalm. 105. and that with special reference (as I conceive it) to this
very story of Abraham, Psalm. 105. 14.
He suffered no man to do them wrong, but reproved even Kings for their sakes;
saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm: He reproved even
Kings, by restraining their power, as here Abimelech; but it was for their
sakes still, that so Sarah his anointed might not be touched, nor his Prophet
Abraham sustain any harm.

We see now the Observation proved in all the points of it. 1. Men do not
always 36.
commit those evils, they would, and might do. 2. That they do not, it is from
Gods restraint, who withholds them. 3. That restraint is an act of his
merciful providence, and may therefore bear the name of Grace: in respect of
God, who freely gives it; of them, whose sins and stripes are the fewer for
it; of others, who are preserved from harm the better by it. The Inferences we
are to raise from the Premises for our Christian Practice and comfort, are of
two sorts: for so much as they may arise from the consideration of Gods
Restraining Grace, either as it may lie upon other men, or as it may lie upon
our selves.

First, From the consideration of Gods restraint upon others; the Church, 37.
and Children, and servants of God may learn, to whom they owe their
preservation, even to the power and goodness of their God, in restraining the
fury of his and their enemies. We live among Ezekiel. 2. 6.
Scorpions, and Mat. 10. 16.
as sheep in the midst of Wolves; and they that Psalm. 69. 4.
hate us without a cause, and are mad against us, are more in number than the
hairs of our heads: And yet as many and as malicious as they are, by the mercy
of God still we are, and we live, and we prosper in some measure, in despite
of them all. Is it any thanks to them? None at all. The Genesis 3. 15.
seed of the Serpent bears a natural and an immortal hatred against God, and
all good men: and if they had horns to their curstness, and power answerable to
their wills, we should not breath a minute. Is it any thanks to our selves? Not
that neither: we have neither number to match them, nor policy to defeat them,
nor strength to resist them; weak, silly Luke 12. 32.
little flock, as we are. But to whom then is it thanks? As if a little flock
of sheep escape, when a multitude of ravening Wolves watch to devour them, it
cannot be ascribed either in whole, or in part, either to the sheep in whom
thereis no help, or to the Wolf in whom there is no mercy; but it must be
imputed all and wholly to the good care of the shepherd, in safe-guarding his
sheep, in keeping off the Wolf: so for our safety and preservation in the
midst, and in the spite of so many Enemies, Psalm. 115. 1.
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, whose greatest strength is but weakness;
much less unto them, whose tendrest Prove. 12. 10.
mercies are cruel; but unto thy Name be the Glory. O thou Psalm. 80. 1.
Shepherd of Israel, who out of thine abundant love to us, who are the Psalm.
95. 7.
flock of thy Pasture, and the sheep of thy hands, have made thy power glorious
in curbing and restraining their malice against us. Psalm* 107. 8, 15, etc.
Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord, for his goodness, and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men! Wonders we may well call them;
indeed they are Miracles: if things strange, and above, and against the
ordinary course of Nature may be called Miracles. When we read the stories in
the Scripture, of Dan. 6. 23.
Daniel cast into the Den among the Lions, and not touched; of the Dan. 3. 27.
three Children walking in the midst of the fiery furnace, and not scorched; of
a Acts 28. 5.
viper fastening upon Paul's hand, and no harm following: we are stricken with
some amazement, at the consideration of these strange and supernatural
accidents; and these we all confess to be miraculous escapes. Yet such Miracles
as these, and such escapes, God works daily in our preservation:
notwithstanding we live encompassed with so many firebrarnds of hell, such
herds of ravening Wolves, and Lions, and Tigers, and such numerous Mat. 3. 7.
generations of vipers: I mean wicked and ungodly men, the spawn of the old
Serpent, who have it by kind from their father, to thirst after the destruction
of the Saints and servants of God; and to whom it is as natural so to do, as
for the fire to burn, or a Viper to bite, or a Lion to devour. O that men would
therefore praise the Lord for this his goodness, and daily declare these his
great wonders, which he daily does for the children of men.

Secondly, since this restraint of wicked men is so only from God, as that
nothing 38.
either they, or we, or any Creature in the world can do, can withold them
from doing us mischief, unless God lay his restraint upon them: it should teach
us so much wisdom, as to take heed how we trust them. It is best and safest for
us, as in all other things, so in this, to keep the golden mean, that we be
neither too timorous nor too credulous. If wicked men then threaten and plot
against thee yet fear them not: God can restrain them if he think good, and
then assure thy self they shall not harm thee. If on the other side, they
cologue and make show of much kindness to thee, yet trust them not: God may
suffer them to take their own way, and not to restrain them, and then assure
thy self they will not spare thee. Thou may think perhaps of some one or
other of these, that sure his own good nature will hold him in; or thou have
had trial of him heretofore, and found him faithful as heart could wish; or
thou have some such tie upon him by kindred, neighborhood, acquaintance,
covenant, oath, benefits, or other natural or civil obligation, as will keep
him off, at least from falling foul upon thee all at once. Deceive not thy
self; these are but slender assurances for thee to abide upon. Good nature!
alas where is it? Since Adam fell, there was never any such thing in rerum
natura: if there be any good thing in any man, it is all from Grace; Nature is
all naught, even that which seems to have the preeminence in nature, Romans 8.
7.
(...), is stark naught. We may talk of this and that, of good natured men, and
I know not what! But the very truth is, set grace aside, (I mean all grace,
both renewing and restraining grace) there is no more good nature in any man
than there was in Cain and in Judas. That thing, which we use to call good
nature, is indeed but a subordinate means or instrument, whereby God
restrains some men more than others from their birth, and special
constitution from sundry outrageous exorbitances, and so is a branch of this
restraining grace whereof we now speak. And as for thy past Experience, that
can give thee little security: thou know not what fetters God laid upon him
then, nor how he was pleased with those fetters. God might full sore against
his will, not only restrain him from doing thee hurt, but also constrain him to
do thee good: as sometimes he commanded 1 King. 17.
the Ravens to feed Eliah; a bird so (...). Arist. 6. hist. Anim. 6. Pellunt
nidis pullus sicut and corvi. Plin. 10. Not. hist. 12.
unnatural to her young ones, that they might famish for her, if God did not
otherwise provide for them; and therefore it is noted in the Scripture as a
special argument of Gods Providence, that he feeds the Psalm. 147. 9. Job 38.
41. Luke 2. 24.
young Ravens that call upon him. But as nothing that is constrained is
durable, but every thing when it is constrained against its natural
inclination, if it be let alone, will at length usque recurrit. Horat. 1.
Epist. 10.
return to his own kind, and primitive disposition, as these Ravens which now
fed Eliah, would have been as ready another time to have pecked out his eyes:
so a Natural man is a natural man still, howsoever overruled for the present:
and if God as he has hitherto by his restraint withheld him, shall but
another while withold his restraint from him; he will soon discover the in
bred hatred of his heart against good things and men, and make thee at the last
beshrew thy folly in trusting him, when he has done thee a mischief unawares.
And therefore if he have done thee seven courtesies, and promise fair for the
eighth; yet trust him not; for there are Prove. 26. 25.
seven abominations in his heart. And as for whatsoever other hank thou may
think thou have over him, be it never so strong: unless God manacle him, with
his powerful restraint, he can as easily unfetter himself from them all, as
Judge. 16. 9. 12.
Samson from the green Withs and Cords wherewith the Philistines bound him. All
those forementioned relations came in but upon the bye, and since: whereas the
Genesis 3. 15.
hatred of the wicked against goodness, is of an ancienter date, and has his
root in ( corrupt) Nature: and is therefore of such force, that it makes void
all obligations, whether civil, domestical, or other, that have grown by virtue
of any succeeding contract. It is a ruled case, Mat. 10. 36.
Inionisi domestici, A man's enemies may be they of his own house. Let not any
man then, that has either Religion or Honesty, have any thing to do with that
man; at least, let him not trust him more than needs he must, that is an Enemy
either to Religion or Honesty. So far as common Humanity, and the necessities
of our lawful Occasions and Callings do require, we may have to do with them,
and rest upon the good providence of God for the success of our affairs even in
their hands, not doubting but that God will both restrain them from doing us
harm, and dispose them to do us good so far as he shall see expedient for us:
but then, this is not to trust them, but to trust God with them. But for us to
put our selves needlessly into their hands, and to hazard our safety upon their
faithfulness by way of trust; there is neither wisdom in it, nor warrant for
it. Although God may do it, yet we have no reason to presume that he will
restrain them for our sakes, when we might have prevented it our selves, and
would not: and this we are sure of, that nothing in the world can preserve us
from receiving mischief from them unless God do restrain them. Therefore trust
them not.

Thirdly, if at any time we see wickedness set alost, bad men grow to be great,
39.
or great men show themselves bad, sinning with an high hand, and an arm
stretched out, and God seems to strengthen their hand by adding to their
greatness, and increasing their power; if we see the Hab. 1. 13.
wicked devouring the man that is more righteous than he, and God hold his
tongue the whilst; if we see the ungodly course it up and down at pleasure
which way soever the lust of their corrupt heart carries them without
control, like a wild untamed Colt in a spacious field, God (as it were) laying
the reins in the neck, and letting them run: in a word, when we see the whole
world out of frame and order: we may yet frame our selves to a Godly patience,
and sustain our hearts amidst all these evils with this comfort and
consideration; that still God keeps the reins in his own hands, and when he
sees his time, and so far as he sees it good, he both can and will, check,
and control, and restrain them at his pleasure; as the cunning Rider sometimes
gives a fiery horse head and lets him fling and run as if he were mad; he
knows he can give him the stop, when he list. The great Psalm. 104. 26.
Leviathans, that take their pastime in the Sea, and with a little stirring of
themselves can make Job 41. 31, 32.
the deep to boil like a pot, and cause a path to shine after them as they go;
he can Ibid. ver. 5.
play with them as children do with a bird: he suffers them to swallow his
hook, and to play upon the line, and to roll and tumble them in the waters but
anon he strikes the hook through their noses, and fetches them up, and lays
them upon the shore, there to beat themselves without help or remedy, exposed
to nothing but shame and contempt. What then if God suffer those that hate him
to prosper for the time, and in their prosperity to Lord it over his heritage!
What if Princes should Psalm. 119. 23.
sit and speak against us Ibid ver. 161.
without a cause, as it was sometimes David's case! Let us not fret at the
injuries, nor envy at the greatness of any; let us rather betake us to David's
refuge, to be Ibid ver. 23.
occupied in the statutes, and to meditate in the holy Word of God. In that
holy Word we are taught, that the hearts even of Kings, how much more then of
inferior persons, are in his rule and governance, and that he does dispose and
turn them, as seems best to his godly wisdom; that he can Psalm. 76. 12.
refrain the spirit of Princes, Psalm. 149. 8.
bind Kings in Chains, and Nobles in links of Iron; and though they Psalm. 2. 6.
rage furiously at it, and lay their heads together, in consultation how to
break his bands, and cast away his cords from them, yet they imagine but a vain
thing; whilst they strive against him on earth, he laugheth them to scorn in
heaven; and maugre all opposition, will establish the Kingdom of his Christ,
and protect his people. Say then the great ones of the World exercise their
power over us, and lay what restraints they can upon us: our comfort is, they
have not greater power over us, than Regum timendorum in propriosgreges, Reges
in ipsos imperium est Iovis. Hor. 2. Carm. Od. 1.
God has over them; nor can they so much restrain the meanest of us, but God
can restrain the greatest of them much more. Say our enemies curse us with
Bell, Book and Candle: our comfort is, God is able to return the curse upon
their own heads, and in despite of them too, Deuteronomy. 23. 5.
turn it into a blessing upon us. Say they make warlike preparations against us
to invade us: our comfort is, God can Psalm. 48. 7.
break the Ships of Tarshish, and s^atter the most Psalm. 69. 4.
invincible Armadoes. Say they that hate us be more in number than the hairs of
our head: our comfort is, the very Mat. 10. 30.
hairs of our head are numbered with him, and without his sufferance not the
least Luke 21. 8.
hair of our heads shall perish. Say (to imagine the worst) that our Enemies
should prevail against us, and Psalm. 106. 41.
they that hate us should be Lords over us for the time: our comfort is, he
that loves us is Lord over them, and can bring them under us again, when he
sees time. In all our fears, in all our dangers, in all our distresses, our
comfort is, that God can do all this for us: our care should be by our holy
obedience to strengthen our interest in his protection, and not to make him a
stranger from us, yea an enemy to us, by our sins and impenitency; that so we
may have yet more comfort, in a cheerful confidence, that God will do all this
for us. The Assyrian, whose Isa. 10. 7.
ambition it was to be the Catholic King, and universal Monarch of the World,
stiling himself the great King, ( Isa. 36. 4.
thus says the great King, the King of Assyria; when he had sent Isa. 27. 28,
29.
messengers to revile Israel and an Army to besiege and destroy Jerusalem: yet
for all his rage he could do them no harm, the Lord Isa. 10. 12.
brought down the stout heart of the King of Assyria, Isa. 37. 33.
put a hook in his nose, and a bridle in his lips, and made him return back by
the way by which he came, without taking the City, or so much as casting a
bank, or shooting an arrow against it. Nay, he that is indeed Job 41. 34.
the great King over all the children of pride, and has better title to the
style of most Catholic King than any that ever yet bare it, whose Territories
are large as the Earth, and spacious as the Air, I mean the Devil, the Ephesians. 2.
2.
Prince of this World; he is so fettered with the chain of Gods power and
Providence, that he is not able with all his might and malice, no not though he
raise his whole forces and muster up all the powers of darkness and Hell into
one band, to do us any harm in our souls, in our bodies, in our children, in
our friends in our goods, no not so much as our very Mat. 8. 31. 32.
Pigs, or any small thing that we have, without the special leave* and
sufferance of our good God. He must have his Dedimus protestatem from him or he
can do nothing.

Fourthly, since this restraint is an act of Gods mercy, whom we should strive
40.
to resemble in nothing more Luke 6. 46*
than in showing mercy: let every one of us, in imitation of our Heavenly
Father, and in compassion to the souls of our Brethren, and for our own good,
and the good of humane society, endeavor our selves faithfully the best we can
to restrain, and withold, and keep back others from sinning. The Magistrate,
the Minister, the Householder, every other man in his place and calling, should
do their best, by rewards, punishments, rebukes, encouragements, admonitions,
persuasions, good example, and other like means to suppress vice, and restrain
disorders, in those that may any way come within their charge. Our first desire
should be, and for that we should bend our utmost endeavors, that if it be
possible, their hearts might be seasoned with grace and the true fear of God:
but as in other things, where we cannot attain to the full of our first aims,
Cicero.
Pulchrum est (as he says) in secundis tertiisve consistere; so here we may
take some contentment in it, as some fruit of our labors, in our Callings, if
we can but wean them from gross disorders: and reduce them from extremely
debaucht courses to some good measure of Civility. It ought not to be, it is
not our desire, to make men Hypocrites; and a mere Civil man is no better: yet
to us, that cannot judge but by the outward behavior, it is less grief when
men are Hypocrites, than when they are Profane. Our first aim is, to make you
good: yet some rejoicing it is to us, if we can but make you less evil. Our aim
is, to make you of Natural, holy and Spiritual men: but we are glad, if of
dissolute, we can but make you good Moral men: if instead of planting Grace, we
can but root out Vice: if instead of the power of godliness in the reformation
of the inner man, we can but bring you to some tolerable stayedness in the
conformity of the outward man. If we can but do this, though we are to strive
for that, our labor is not altogether in vain in the Lord. For hereby, first,
men's 1.
sins are both less and fewer: and that secondly, abateth somewhat both of the
2.
number and weight of their stripes, and makes their punishment the easier:
and thirdly, there is less scandal done to Religion; which receives not so
much soil 3.
and dis-reputation by close hypocrisy, as by lewd and open profaneness:
Fourthly, 4.
the Kingdom of Satan is diminished, though not directly in the strength, for
he loses never a Subject by it: yet somewhat in the glory thereof, because he
has not so full and absolute command of some of his subjects as before he had,
or seemed to have. Fifthly, much of the hurt that might come by evil example,
is 5.
hereby prevented. Sixthly, the people of God are preserved from many injuries
6.
and contumelies, which they would receive from evil men, if their barbarous
manners were not thus civilized; as a fierce Mastiff does least hurt, when he
is chained and muzled. Seventhly and lastly, and which should be the strongest
motive of all the rest, to make us industrious to repress vicious affections in
others; 7.
it may please God these sorry beginnings may be the In ipsis improbis dum
formidato supplicio fraenatur faculta^, invocato Deo sanatur voluntas. Aug.
Tom. 2.
forerunners of more blessed and more solid graces. My meaning is not, that
these Moral restraints of our wild corruption, can either actually or but
vertually prepare, dispose, or qualify any man for the grace of Conversion and
Renovation; or have in them Virtutem seminalem, any natural power which by
ordinary help may be cherished and improved so far as an Egg may be hatched
into a Bird, and a kernel sprout and grow into a tree; (far be it from us to
harbor any such Pelagian conceits;) but this I say, that God, being a God of
Order, does not ordinarily work but in order, and by degrees, bringing men from
the one extreme to the other by middle courses: and therefore seldom brings a
man from the wretchedness of forlorn nature to the blessed estate of saving
grace, but where first by his restraining grace in some good measure he does
correct nature, and moralize it. Do you then that are Magistrates, do we that
are Ministers, let all Fathers, Masters, and others whatsoever, by wholesome
severity (if fairer courses will not reclaim them) deter audacious persons from
offending, break those that are under our charge of their wills and wilfulness,
restrain them from lewd and licentious practices and company, Lev. 19. 17.
not suffer sin upon them for want of reproving them in due and seasonable
sort, Jude ver. 23.
snatch them out of the fire, and bring them as far as we can out of the snare
of the Devil to Godward; and leave the rest to him. Possibly, when we have
faithfully done our part, to the utmost of our power; he will set in
graciously, and begin to do his part, in their perfect conversion. If by our
good care, they may be made to forbear swearing, and ^ursing and blaspheming;
they may in time by his good grace be brought to Eccles. 9. 2.
fear an Oath: If we restrain them from gross prophanations upon his holy day
in the mean time; they may come at length to think his Sabbath Isa. 21. 13.
a delight: If we keep them from swilling, and gaming, and revelling, and
rioting, and roaring, the while; God may frame them ere long to a sober and
sanctified use of the Creatures: and so it may be said of other sins and
duties. I could willingly enlarge all these points of Inferences, but that
there are yet behind sundry other good Uses, to be made of this restraining
Grace of God, considered as it may lie upon our selves; and therefore I now
pass on to them.

First, There is a root of Pride in us all, whereby we are apt to think better
41.
of our selves, than there is cause: and every infirmity in our Brother, (which
should rather be an item to us of our frailty) serves as fuel to nourish this
vanity, and to swell us up with a Pharisaical conceit, that forsooth we are
Luke 18. 11.
not like other men. Now, if at any time, when we see any of our brethren fall
into some sin, from which by the good hand of God upon us we have been hitherto
preserved, we then feel this swelling begin to rise in us, as sometimes it will
do: the point already delivered may stand us in good stead, to prick the
bladder of our pride, and to let out some of that windy vanity; by considering,
that this our forbearance of evil, wherein we seem to excel our brother, it not
from nature, but from grace; not from our selves, but from God. And here a
little let me close with thee, whosoever thou art, that please thy self with
odious comparisons, and stand so much upon terms of betterness; Thou art
neither extortioner, nor adulterer, drunkard, nor swearer, thief, slanderer,
nor murderer; as such and such are. It may be, thou art none of these: but I
can tell thee what thou art, and that is as odious in the sight of God as any
of these: Thou art a proud Pharisee, which perhaps they are not. To let thee
see thou art a Pharisee, do but give me a direct answer, without shifting or
mincing, to that Question of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 4. 7.
Quis te discrevit? Who has made thee to differ from another? Was it God, or
thy self, or both together? If thou say, It was God; thou art a dissembler,
and thy boasting has already confuted thee: for what have thou to do to glory
in that which is not thine? Ibid.
If thou had received it, why do thou glory, as if thou had not received
it? If thou say it was from thy self; what Pharisee could have assumed more?
All the shift thou have, is to say, it was God indeed that made the difference,
but he saw something in thee for which he made thee to differ: thou
acknowledgest his restraint in part, but thine own good nature did something.
If this be all, thou art a very Pharisee still, without all escape. That
Pharisee never denied God a part, no nor the chiefest part neither: he began
his vaunting prayer with an acknowledgment of Gods work, ( Luke 18. 11.
I thank thee O God that I am not like other men.) It was not the denial of all
unto God, but the assuming of any thing unto himself, that made him a right
Pharisee. Go thy way then, and if thou will do God and thy self right, deny thy
self altogether, and Gratiae tuae deputo, and quaecunque non feci mald. Aug. 2.
Confess. 7.
give God the whole Glory of it, if thou have been preserved from any evil. And
from thy brothers fall, besides compassioning forlorn Nature in him, make a
quite contrary use unto thy self; even to humble thee thereby with such like
thoughts as these, Gal. 6. 1.
Considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted, [Am I any better than he? Of
better mold than he? Or better tempered than he? Am not I a Child of the same
Adam, a vessel of the same clay, a chip of the same block, with him? Why then
should I be Romans 11. 20.
high-minded, when I see him fallen before me? Why should I not rather fear,
lest my foot slip, as well as his has done? I have much cause with all
thankfulness to bless God for his good Providence over me, in not suffering me
to fall into this sin hitherto: and with all humility to implore the
continuance of his gracious assistance for the future, without which I am not
able to avoid this or any other evil.]

Secondly, since all restraints from sin, by what second means soever they are
42.
conveyed unto us, or forwarded, are from the merciful providence of God,
whenever we observe that God has vouchsafed us, or does offer us, any means
of such his gracious restraint; it is our duty joyfully to embrace those means,
and carefully to cherish them, and with all due thankfulness to bless the name
of God for them. Oh how often have we plotted, and projected, and contrived a
course for the expedition of our, perhaps ambitious, perhaps covetous, perhaps
malicious, perhaps voluptuous designs: and by the providence of God some
unexpected intervening accident has marred the curious frame of all our
projects, that they have come to nothing; as a Spider's web spun with much art
and industry is suddenly disfigured, and swept away with the light touch of a
besom. How often have we been resolved to sin, and prepared to sin, and even at
the pits brink ready to cast our selves into hell: when he has plucked us
away, as he plucked Genesis 19. 16.
Lot out of Sodom, by affrightments of natural Conscience, by apprehensions of
dangers, by taking away the opportunities, by ministering impediments, by
shortning our power, by sundry other means? Have we now blessed the name of God
for affording us these gracious means of prevention and restraint? Nay, have we
not rather been enraged thereat, and taken it with much impatience, that we
should be so crossed in the pursuit of our vain and sinful desires and
purposes? As way-ward children cry and take pet, when the Nurse snatcheth a
knife from them, wherewith they might perhaps cut their fingers, perhaps haggle
their throats; or puts them back from the wells mouth when they are ready,
with catching at Babies in the water, to tip over: and as that merry mad man in
the Poet, was in good earnest angry with his Friends for procuring him to be
cured of his madness, wherein he so much pleased himself, as if they could not
have done him a greater displeasure, Horat 2. Epist. 1.
-- Pol me occidistis amici, -- Non servatis --: such is our folly. We are
offended with those that reprove us; testy at those that hinder us; impatient
under those crosses that disable us: yea, we fret and turn again at the
powerful application of the holy word of God when it endeavors to reform us,
or restrain us from those evils wherein we delight. Let us henceforth mend this
fault; cheerfully submit our selves to the discipline of the Almighty; and
learn of holy David with what affections to entertain the gracious means he
vouchsafes us of restraint or prevention: as appears by his speeches unto
Abigail, when she by her Wisdom had pacified his wrath against Nabal, whose
destruction he had a little before vowed in his heart, 1 Samuel 25. 32, etc.
Blessed ^e the Lord God of Israel that sent thee this day to meet me; and
blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou which have kept me this day from
coming to shed blood, and from avenging my self with mine own hand, He blessed
God as the Cause; and her, as the Instrument; and her discreet behavior and
advice, as the Means of staying his hand from doing that evil, he had vowed
with his mouth, and was in his heart purposed to have done.

Thirdly, since we owe our standing to the hand of God, who holds us up; 43.
without whose restraint we should fall at every turn, and into every
temptation: we cannot but see what need we have to seek to him daily and hourly
to withold us from falling into those sins, whereinto either our corrupt
nature would lead us, or outward occasions draw us. We may see it by the
fearful falls of David and Peter, men nothing inferior to the best of us, how
weak a thing man is to resist temptation, if God withdraw his support, and
leave him but a little to himself. Which made David pray to God that he would
Psalm. 19. 13.
keep back his servant from presumptuous sins. He well knew, though he were the
faithful servant of God, that yet he had no stay of himself; but, unless God
kept him back, he must on, and he must in, and he must in deep, even as far as
to presumptuous sins. No man, though he be never so good, has any assurance,
as upon his own strength, though it be never so great, that he shall be able to
avoid any sin, though it be never so foul. When a Heathen man prayed unto
Jupiter, to save him from his Enemies; one that overheard him would needs mend
it with a more needful prayer, that Jupiter would save him from his Friends: he
thought they might do him more hurt, because he trusted them; but as for his
Enemies he could look to himself well enough, for receiving harm from them. We
that are Christians, had need pray unto the God of Heaven, that he would not
give us up into the hands of our professed Enemies: [and to pray unto God, that
he would not deliver us over into the hands of our false-hearted Friends: but
there is another prayer yet more needful, and to be pressed with greater
importunity than either of both, that God would save us from our selves, and
not give us up into our own hands; for then we are utterly cast away. There is
a way-ward old man that lurketh in every of our bosoms, and we make but too
much of him: than whom, we have not a more spightful Enemy, nor a more false
Friend. Alas! we do not think, what a man is given over to, that is given over
to himself: he is given over to Romans 1. 16.
Vile Affections; he is given over to a Ibid. ver. 28.
Reprobate Sense; he is given over to Ephesians. 4. 19.
commit all manner of wickedness with greediness. It is the last and
fearfullest of all other judgments, and is not usually brought upon men, but
where they have obstinately refused to hear the Voice of God, in whatsoever
other tone he had spoken unto them; then to leave them to themselves, and to
their own counsels. [ Psalm. 81. 11, 12.
My people would not hear my Voice, and Israel would none of me: so I gave them
up unto their own hearts lust, and let them follow their own imaginations.] As
we conceive the state of the Patient to be desperate, when the Physician gives
him over, and lets him eat, and drink, and have, and do, what, and when, and
as much as he will without prescribing him any diet, or keeping back any thing
from him he has a mind unto. Let us therefore pray faithfully and fervently
unto God, as Christ himself has taught us, that he would not, by leaving us
unto our selves, Mat. 6. 13.
lead us into temptation, but by his gracious and powerful support deliver us
from all those evils, from which we have no power at all to deliver our selves.

Lastly, since this Restraint, whereof we have spoken, may be but a common 44.
Grace, and can give us no sound nor solid comfort if it be but a bare
Restraint, and no more: though we ought to be thankful for it, because we have
not deserved it; yet we should not rest, nor think our selves safe enough, till
we have a well-grounded assurance, that we are possessed of an higher and a
better Grace, even the grace of sanctification. For that will hold out against
temptations, where this may fail. We may deceive our selves then, (and
thousands in the world do so deceive themselves:) if upon our abstaining from
sins, from which God withholds us, we presently conclude our selves to be in
the state of grace, and to have the power of godliness, and the spirit of
sanctification. For between this restraining grace, whereof we have now spoken,
and that renewing grace whereof we now speak; there are sundry wide
differences. They differ first, in their fountain. Renewing Grace springs
from the special love of God toward those that are his in Christ: Restraining
Grace* is a fruit of that general mercy of God, whereof it is said in the
Psalm, that Psalm. 145.
his mercy is over all his works. They differ secondly, in their extent: both
of Person, Subject, Object and Time. For the 2.
Person; Restraining Grace is common to good and bad: Renewing Grace proper and
peculiar to the Elect. For the Subject; Restraining grace may bind one part or
faculty of a man, as the hand or tongue, and leave another free, as the heart
or ear: Renewing grace works upon All in some measure, sanctifies the whole
man, 1 These. 6. 23.
Body, and soul, and spirit, with all the parts and faculties of each. For the
Object; Renewing grace may withold a man from one sin, and give him scope to
another: Restraining grace carries an equal and just respect to all Gods
Commandments. For the Time; Restraining grace may tie us now, and by and by
unloose us: Renewing grace holds out unto the end, more or less, and never
leaves us wholly destitute. Thirdly, they differ in their Ends. 3.
Restraining Grace is so intended chiefly for the good of humane society,
especially of the Church of God, and of the members thereof; as that
indifferently it may, or may not, do good to the Receiver; but Renewing Grace
is especially intended for the Salvation of the Receiver, though Ex consequenti
it do good also unto others. They differ fourthly, and lastly, in their
Effects. Renewing Grace 4.
mortifieth the corruption, and subdueth it, and diminishes it; as water
quenches fire, by abating the heat: but Restraining Grace only inhibiteth the
exercise of the corruption, for the time, without any real diminution of it
either in substance or quality; as the Dan. 3. 25.
fire wherein the three Children walked, had as much heat in it at that very
instant, as it had before and after, although by the greater power of God, the
natural power of it was then suspended from working upon them. The Lions that
spared Daniel were Lions still, and had their ravenous disposition still;
albeit God Dan. 6. 22.
stopped their mouths for that time, that they should not hurt him: but that
there was no change made in their natural disposition, appears by their
entertainment of their next guests, whom they devoured with all greediness,
Ibid. ver. 24.
breaking their bones before they came to the ground. By these two instances
and examples, we may in some measure conceive of the nature and power of the
restraining Grace of God in wicked men. It bridleth the corruption that is in
them for the time, that it cannot break out; and manacleth them in such sort,
that they do not show forth the ungodly disposition of their heart: but there
is no real change wrought in them all the while; their heart still remaining
unsanctified, and their natural corruption undiminished. Whereas the renewing
and sanctifying grace of God, by a real change of a Lion makes a Lamb;
alters the natural disposition of the soul, by draining out some of the
corruption; begets a new heart, a new spirit, new habits, new qualities, new
dispositions, new thoughts, new desires; makes a Ephesians. 4. 24.
new man, in every part and faculty completely New. Content not thy self then
with a bare forbearance of sin, so long as thy heart is not changed, nor thy
will changed, nor thy affections changed; but strive to become a new man, to be
Romans 2. 2.
transformed by the renewing of thy mind; to hate sin, to love God, to wrestle
against thy secret corruptions, to take delight in holy duties, to subdue thine
understanding, and will, and affections, to the obedience of Faith and
Godliness. So shall thou not only be restrained from sinning against God, as
Abimelech here was; but also be enabled, as faithful Abraham was, to please
God: and consequently assured with all the faithful children of Abraham, to be
1 Pet. 1. 5.
preserved by the Almighty power of God through faith unto salvation. Which
Grace, and Faith, and Salvation, the same Almighty God, the God of Power, and
of Peace, bestow upon us all here assembled, 1 Cor. 1. 2.
With all that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ, our Lord,
both theirs and ours: even for the same our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, his most
dear Son, and our blessed Savior and Redeemer: To which blessed Father, and
blessed Son, with the blessed Spirit, most holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity,
be ascribed by us and the whole Church, all the Kingdom, the Power, and the
Glory, from this time forth and for ever.

Amen.
AD POPULUM.
The Seventh Sermon.
At St. Paul's Cross London, May 6. 1632.
1 Pet. II. 16. As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the servants of God.
THere is not any thing in the World more generally desired than 1.
Liberty: nor scarce any thing more generally abused. Insomuch as even that
blessed liberty which the eternal Son of God has purchased for his Spouse the
Church, and endowed her therewithal, has in no Age been free from Abuses:
whilst some have sinfully neglected their Christian liberty, to their own
prejudice; and other some have as sinfully stood upon it, to the prejudice of
their brethren. So hardly, through Pride and Ignorance, and other Corruptions
that abound in us do we hit upon the golden mean, either in this, or almost in
any thing else: but easily swerve into the Vicious Extremes on both hands,
declining sometimes into the Defect, and sometimes into the Excess. The
Apostles therefore, especially St. Peter, and St. Paul, the two chiefest
planters of the Churches, endeavored early to instruct believers in the true
Doctrine, and to direct them in the right use of their Christian liberty, so
often in their several Epistles as fit occasion was offered thereunto. Which we
may observe them to have done most frequently and fully in those Two Cases,
which being very common, are therefore of the greater consequence, viz. the
case of Scandal, and the case of Obedience.

And we may further observe concerning these Two Apostles, that St. Paul 2.
usually touches upon this Argument of Liberty, as it is to be exercised in
the case of Scandal: but St. Peter oftener, as in the Case of Obedience. Whereof
on St. Peter's part, I conceive the reason to be this; That being Gal. 2. 7.
the Apostle of the Circumcision, and so having to deal most with the Jews, who
Seditiosissima gens. Jos. Scalig. not. in Luke 22. 52.
could not brook subjection, but were of all Nations under heaven the most
impatient of a foreign yoke; he was therefore the more careful to deliver the
doctrine of Christian Liberty to them in such a manner, as might frame them
withal to yield such Reverence and Obedience to their Governors, as became
them to do. And therefore St. Peter beats much upon the point of Obedience.

But he no where presses it more fully than in this Chapter: Wherein after 3.
the general exhortations of subduing the lusts that are in their own bosoms,
verse. 11. and of ordering their conversation so as might be for their credit
and honesty in the sight of others, ver. 12. when he descends to more
particular duties, he begins first with, and insisteth most upon, this duty
of subjection and obedience to Authority, in the greatest remaining part of the
Chapter. The first Precept he gives in this kind, is set down with sundry
Amplifications and Reasons thereunto belonging, in the next verses before the
Text ( submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake:) And
then he does by way of Prolepsis, take away an Objection, which he foresaw
would readily be made against that and the following Exhortations, from the
pretext of Christian liberty: in the words of the Text, ( As free, and not
using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of God.)

Conceive the words as spoken in answer to what those new converts might 5.
have objected. We have been taught, that the Son of God has made us free, and
then we are Joh. 8. 36.
free indeed: and so not bound to subject our selves to any Masters and
Governors upon Earth, no not to Kings; but much rather bound not to do it,
that so we may preserve that freedom which Christ has purchased for us, and
reserve our selves the more entirely for Gods service, by refusing to be the
servants of men.

This Objection the Apostle clearly takes off in the Text, with much holy
wisdom, 6.
and truth. He tells them, that being indeed set at liberty by Christ they
are not therefore any more to enthral themselves to any living soul or other
creature; not to submit to any Ordinance of man as slaves, that is, as if the
ordinance it self did by any proper, direct and immediate virtue, bind the
conscience. But yet, all this notwithstanding, they might and ought to submit
thereunto as 1 Cor. 7. 22.
the Lords freemen, and in a free manner; that is, by a voluntary and
uninforced both subjection to their power, and obedience to their lawful
commands. They must therefore take heed they use not their liberty for an
occasion to the flesh, nor under so fair a title, palliate an evil
licentiousness, making that a cloak for their irreverent and undutiful Carriage
toward their Superiors. For albeit they be not the servants of men, but of
God: and therefore owe no Obedience to men as upon immediate tie of conscience,
and for their own sake, but to God only: yet for his sake, and out of the
conscience of that Obedience which they owe to his command of Exodus 20. 12.
honoring of father and mother, and of being Romans 13. 1.
subject to the higher powers, they ought to give unto them such honor and
obedience, as of right belongs unto them according to the eminency of their
high places. ( As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the servants of God.)

From which words thus paraphrased, I gather Three Observations: all concerning
7.
our Christian Liberty, in that branch of it especially which respects human^
Ordinances, and the use of the creatures, and of all indifferent things. Either
1. in the Existence of it, [ As free,] or 2. in the Exercise of it, [ And not
using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness] or 3. in the End of it, [ but
as the servants of God.] The first Observation this; We must so submit our
selves to superior 1.
Authority, as that we do not thereby impeach our Christian Liberty: [As free.]
The second this; We must so maintain our liberty, as that we do not under that
2.
color either commit any sin, or omit any requisite office either of charity
or duty: [ and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness.] The third
this; In the 3.
whole exercise both of the liberty we have in Christ, and of the respects we
owe unto men, we must evermore remember our selves to be, and accordingly
behave our selves as those that are Gods servants: [but as the servants of
God.] The sum of the whole Three Points in brief this; We must be careful
without either infringing or abusing our liberty, at all times, and in all
things to serve God.

Now then to the several points in that order as I have proposed them, and 8.
as they lie in the Text: [(...), As free.] Which words have manifest reference
to the Exhortation delivered Three Verses before the Text; as declaring the
manner how the duty there exhorted unto ought to be performed: yet so as that
the force of them stretches to the Exhortations also contained in the Verses
next after the Text. Submit your selves to public Governors both supreme and
subordinate; be subject to your own particular Masters; honor all men with
those proper respects that belong to them in their several stations: But look
you do all this ((...)) not as slaves, but as free: do it without impeachment
of the liberty you have in Christ. Of which liberty, it would be a profitable
labor (but that I should then be forced to omit sundry other things which I
deem needful to be spoken, and more nearly pertinent to the points proposed) to
discover at large the Nature, and Parts, and Causes, and Effects, and Adjuncts;
that we might the better understand the amplitude of that power which Christ
has settled upon his Church, and thence learn to be the more careful to
preserve it. But I may not have time so to do; it shall therefore suffice us to
know, that as the other branches of our liberty, whether of glory or grace;
whether from the guilt of sin in our justification, or from the dominion of sin
in our sanctification, with the several appendices and appurtenances to any of
them: so this branch of it also which respects the use of indifferent things;
First is purchased for us by 1.
the blood of Joh. 8. 36. and Gal. 5. 1.
Christ, and is therefore usually called by the name of Christian liberty.
Secondly, is revealed unto us outwardly in the preaching of the Gospel of God
and of Christ, which is therefore called Jam. 1. 25. and 2. 12.
the Law of liberty. And thirdly, 2.
is conveyed unto us inwardly and effectually by the Operation of the Spirit of
God and of Christ, which is therefore called a Psalm. 51. 12.
free spirit (O stablish thou 3.
me with thy free spirit) because, where the spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty, 2 Cor. 3. 17.

Now this liberty, so dearly purchased, so clearly revealed, so firmly
conveyed; 9.
it is our duty to maintain with our utmost strength in all the parts and
branches of it, and (as the Apostle exhorts) to Gal. 5. 1.
stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and not to
suffer our selves either by the devices of other men, or by our own sloth and
wilful default to be entangled again with the yoke of bondage. And namely in
this particular branch whereof we now speak, whatsoever serviceable offices we
do to any of our brethren, especially to those that are in Authority, we must
perform our duty therein with all cheerfulness of spirit, and for Conscience
sake: but still with freedom of spirit, and with liberty of Conscience; as
being servants to God alone, and not to men. We find therefore in the
Scriptures a peremptory charge both ways; that we neither usurp mastership, nor
undergo servitude. A charge given by our Savior Christ to his Disciples in the
former behalf, that they should Mat. 23. 8. 10.
not be called Rabbi, neither Masters; Matthew. 23. and a charge given by the
Apostle Paul to all Believers in the latter behalf, that they should 1 Cor. 7.
23.
not be servants of men, 1 Cor. 7.

God forbid any man of us, possessed with an Anabaptistical spirit, or rather
10.
frenesy, should understand either of those passages, or any other of like
sound; as if Christ or his Apostle had had any purpose therein to slacken those
sinews and ligaments, and to dissolve those joints and contignations, which tie
into one body, and clasp into one structure, those many little members and
parts, whereof all humane Societies consist: that is to say, to Non venit
Christus conditiones mutare, Hier. in Ep. 6.
forbid all those mutual Relations of superiority and subjection which are in
the world, and so to turn all into a vast Chaos of Anarchy and Confusion. For
such a meaning is contrarious to the express determination of Matt. 22. 21.
Christ, and to the constant doctrine of Romans 31. 1, etc. Ephesians. 6. 5. Col. 3. 22.
St. Paul in other places: and we ought so to interpret the Scriptures, as that
one place may consist with another, without clashing or contradiction. The true
and plain meaning is this; that we must not acknowledge any our supreme Master,
not yield our selves to be wholly and absolutely ruled by the will of any, nor
enthral our Judgments and Consciences to the sentences or laws of any man, or
Angel, but only Christ our Lord and Master in Heaven.

And this Interpretation is very consonant unto the Analogy of Scripture in 11.
sundry places. In Ephesians. 6. (to omit other places) there are two distinctions
implied, the one in the 5. the other in the 7. Verses, both of right good use
for reconciling of sundry Texts that seem to contradict one another, and for
the clearing of sundry difficulties in the present argument. Ephesians. 6. 5.
Servants (says St. Paul there) be obedient to them that are your Masters
according to the flesh. Which limitation affords us the distinction of
Masters -- secundum Carnem: quia est and dominus secundum spiritum, ille est
verus* Dominus. Aug. in Psalm. 124.
according to the flesh only, and of Masters after the spirit also. Intimating
that we may have other Masters of our flesh, to whom we may (and must) give due
reverence, so far as concerns the flesh; that is, so far as appertains to
the outward man, and all outward things. But of our spirits, and souls, and
consciences; as we can have no Fathers, so we may have no Masters upon Earth,
but only our Master and our Father which is in Heaven. And therefore (in Mat
23.) Christ forbids the calling of any man upon Earth Matt. 23. 9.
Father, as well as he does the calling of any man Master. And both the
prohibitions are to be understood alike, and as has been now declared.

Again (says St. Paul there) Ephesians. 6. 7.
with good will doing service, as to the Lord, and 12.
not to men; which opposition imports a second distinction, and that is of
Masters, into supreme, and subordinate: those are subordinate Masters, to whom
we do service in ordine ad alium, and as under another. Those are supreme
Masters, in whom our obedience rests in the final resolution of it, without
looking farther or higher. Men may be our Masters, and we their servants, the
first way; with subordination to God, and -- distinguebant Dominum aeternum a
temporali: tamen subditi erant, propter Dominum aeternum, etiam domino
temporali. Aug. in Psalm. 124.
for his sake: And we must do them service, and that with good will: but with
reservation ever of our bounden service to him, as our only supreme Sovereign
and Absolute Master. But the latter way, it is high sacrilege in any man to
challenge, and it is High Treason against the sacred Majesty of God and of
Christ for us to yield to any other but them, the mastership, that is; the
sovereign and absolute Mastership over us.

Briefly; we must not understand those Scriptures that forbid either Mastership
or Servitude, as if they intended to discharge us from those mutual
Obligations, wherein either in nature or civility we stand tied one to another,
in the state Oeconomical, Political or Ecclesiastical; as anon it shall further
appear: but only to beget in us a just care, amidst all the offices of love and
duty which we perform to men, to preserve inviolate that liberty which we have
in Christ; and so to do them service, as to maintain withal our own freedom
(...), as free.

A thing whereof it behooves us to have a special care, and that for sundry 13.
and weighty respects. First, in regard of the trust reposed in us in this
behalf. Every Religiosus hom^ sanctusque diligenter and circumspecte solet
tueri fidei commissa. Sen. de tranqu. cap. 11.
honest man takes himself bound to discharge with faithfulness the trust
reposed in him, and to preserve what is committed unto him by way of trust,
(though it be another man's) Nisi ad suum modum curam in deposito praestat,
fraud non caret, l. 32. ff. de deposito.
no less, if not rather much more carefully, than he would do if it were his
own; that so he may be able to give a good account of his trust. Now these two,
the Christian Faith, and the Christian Liberty, are of all other the choicest
Jewels, whereof the Lord Jesus Christ has made his Church the depository.
Every man therefore in the Church ought Jude ver. 3.
earnestly to contend, as for the maintenance of the Faith, (as St. Jude
speaks) so also for the maintenance of the liberty, which was once delivered
to the Saints: even eo nomine, and for that very reason, because they were both
delivered unto them under such a trust. 1 Timothy 6. 20.
O Timothee, depositum custodi: St. Paul more than once calls upon Timothy to
2 Timothy 1. 14.
keep that which was committed to his trust. He means it in respect of the
Christian Faith; which he was bound to keep entire as it was delivered him, at
his peril, and as he would answer it another day. And the like obligation lies
upon us, in respect of this other rich deposition, this (...) of Christian
liberty: for which we shall be (...). Pittaci dictum apud Stob. Ser. 1.
answerable to Christ, from whom we received it, how we have both kept it, and
used it. And if by our default, and for want either of care or courage in us (
dolo vel lata culpa, as the Lawyers say) we lose or imbezel it (as she said in
the Canticles, Cant. 1. 6.
They made me the keeper of the Vineyard, but mine own Vineyard have I not
kept:) No doubt it will lie heavy upon us when we come to give in our Accounts.
Rather we should put on a resolution (like that of Exodus 10. 26.
Moses, who would not yield to leave so much as an hoof behind him) not to part
with a jot of that liberty wherewith Christ has entrusted us, by making our
selves the servants of men.

Especially since we cannot so do, Secondly, without manifest wrong to Christ;
14.
nor thirdly, without great dishonor to God. Not without wrong to Christ. St.
Paul therefore disputes it as upon a ground of right, 1 Cor. 7. Ye are bought
with a price, says he, 1 Cor. 7. 22.
be ye not the servants of men: and in the next Chapter before that, 2 Cor. 6.
19, 20.
ye are not your own, for you are bought with a price. As if he had said,
Though it were a great weakness in you to put your selves out of your own power
into the power of others, by making your selves their servants: yet if you were
your own, there should be no injury done thereby to any third person; but, unto
whosoever should complain as if he were wronged, you might return this
reasonable answer, ( Mat. 20. 13, 15.
Friend, I do thee no wrong; Is it not lawful for me to do as I will with mine
own?) But says he, this is not your case: you are not your own, but Christ's.
He has bought you with his most precious blood; he has paid a valuable
(rather an invaluable) price for you: and having bought you, and paid for you,
you are now his; and you cannot dispose your selves in any other service,
without apparent wrong to him.

Neither only do we injure Christ, by making our selves the servants of men; 15.
but we dishonor God also: which is a third reason. For to whom we make our
selves servants, him we make our Lord and God. The covetous worldling therefore
by Matthew. 6. 24.
serving Mammon, makes Mammon his God: which made St. Paul two several times
to set the brand of Idolatry upon covetousness, Ephesians. 5. 15.
the covetous man which is an Idolater, Ephesians. 5. and Col. 3. 5.
covetousness which is Idolatry, Col. 3. And the voluptuous Epicure is
therefore said to make his Phil. 3. 19.
belly his God, Phil. 3. because he Romans 16. 18.
serves his own belly, as the phrase is, Romans 16. Neither can I imagine upon
what other ground the Devil should be called 2 Cor. 4. 4.
the God of this world, than this, that 1 John 5. 19.
(...), the men of this evil world by doing him service do so make a God of
him. For Service is a principal part of that honor that belongs to God
alone, and whereof in his jealousy he will not endure that any part should be
given away from him to another: Matthew. 4. 10.
Ipsi soli servies, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve. We cannot serve any other, but to his great dishonor.

Yea, and our own too; which may stand for a fourth reason. Ye see your calling
16.
brethren, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. 26. He would have men take notice of
their Christian Calling (it is a holy and a high calling:) that so they might
Ephesians. 4. 1.
walk worthy of it, and carry themselves in every respect answerably thereunto.
Now by our Calling we are Freemen: for Gal. 5. 13.
Brethren, you have been called unto liberty, Gal. 5. or (which is all one) to
the service of God. And being so, we infinitely abase our selves, and disparage
our Calling; when of freemen we become slaves; and make our selves of Gods,
men's servants: incomparably more to our own dishonor, than if one that is free
of a rich Company, and has born Office in it, should for base respects bind
himself Apprentice again with a Master of poor condition in some pedling Trade.
It is V. Pauliff. de capit. diminut.
diminutio capitis (as the Civilians call it) for a man to descend from a
higher to a lower condition: of the three degrees whereof that is esteemed the
greatest, ( maxima diminutio capitis) which is with loss of liberty. Leo the
Emperor therefore by special and severe constitution (as you may see it in Leo
Novell. constit. 59.
The Novels) forbad all Freemen within the Empire the sale of their liberties;
calling it facinus in those that were so presumptuous as to buy them, and no
less than folly, yea, madness ( dementia and vesania) in those that were so
base as to sell them: not without some indignation at the former Laws, for
suffering such an indignity to be so long practiced without either chastisement
or restraint. And if he justly censured them as men of -- qui tam ignavi and
abjecti animi est. -- Ibid.
abject minds, that would for any consideration in the world willingly forego
their civil and Roman liberty; what flatness of spirit possesses us, if we
wilfully betray our Christian and spiritual liberty?

Whereby, besides the dishonor, we do also (which is the fifth Reason, and 17.
whereunto I will add no more) with our own hands pull upon our own heads a
great deal of unnecessary cumber. For whereas we might draw an Matthew. 11. 30.
easy yoke, carry a light burden, observe 1 John 5. 3.
commandments that are not grievous, and so live at much hearts-ease in the
service of God and of Christ: by putting our selves into the service of men, we
thrust our necks into a (...) Plat. apud S^ob. Ser. 46.
hard yoke of bondage, such as neither we nor any of our fathers were ever able
to bear; we lay upon our own shoulders (...), heavy and importable burdens; and
subject our selves to Ordinances, which are both grievous and unprofitable; and
such are so far from preserving those that use them from perishing, that
themselves Col. 2. 21.
perish in the using.

Now against this liberty, (which if we will answer the trust reposed in us,
and 18.
neither wrong Christ, nor dishonor God, nor yet debase and encumber our
selves, where we should not) we must with our utmost power maintain: The
Offenders are of two sorts: to wit, such as either injuriously encroach upon
the liberty of others; or else unworthily betray away their own. The most
notorious of the former sort are the Bishops of Rome; whose usurpations upon
the Consciences of men, show them to be true successors of the Scribes and
Pharisees, in Matthew. 23. 4.
laying heavy burdens upon men's shoulders which they ought not, and in Mark 7.
9.
rejecting the Word of God to establish their own Traditions; rather than the
Successors of St. Peter, who forbids 1 Pet. 5. 3.
dominatum in Cleris, in the last Chapter of this Epistle at Verse. 3, To teach
their own judgments to be infallible; to make their definitions an universal
and unerring Rule of Faith; to style their Decrees and Constitutions Oracles;
to assume to themselves all power in Heaven and Earth; to require subjection
both to their Laws and Persons, as of necessity unto salvation; to suffer
themselves to be called by their Parasites, Gl^ss in extravag. Joh. 22.
Dominus Deus noster Papa, and Cum inter. e Stapleton de princip. fid. in
praefat.
Optimum, maximum, and supremum in terris numen; all which and much more is
done and taught, and professed by the Popes, and in their behalf: if all this
will not reach to St. Paul's 2 These. 2. 4.
exaltari supra omne quod vocatur Deus: yet certainly, and no modest man can
deny it, it will amount to as much as St. Peter's 1 Pet. 5. 3.
dominari in Cleris, even to the exercising of such a Lordship over the Lords
Heritage, the Christian Church, as will become none but the Lord himself, whose
Heritage the Church is.

Besides these, that do it thus by open Assault, I would there were not others
19.
also, that did by secret underminings go about to deprive us of that liberty
which we have in Christ Jesus, even then when they most pretend the maintenance
of it. They inveigh against the Church Governors, as if they lorded it over
Gods Heritage; and against the Church Orders and Constitutions, as if they were
contrary to Christian liberty. Wherein, besides that they do manifest wrong to
the Church in both particulars: they consider not that those very accusations
which they thus irreverently dart at the face of their Mother, (to whom they
owe better respect) but miss it, do recoil pat upon themselves, and cannot be
avoided. For whereas these Constitutions of the Church are made for Order,
Decency, and Uniformity sake* and to serve unto Edification; and not with any
intention at all to lay a tie upon the consciences of men, or to work their
judgments to an opinion, as if there were some necessity, or inherent holiness,
in the things required thereby; neither do our Governors, neither ought they
to press them any further: (which is sufficient to acquit both the Governors
from that Lording, and the Constitutions from that trenching upon Christian
liberty, wherewith they are charged:) Alas that our brethren who thus accuse
them, should suffer themselves to be so far blinded with prejudices and partial
affections, as not to see, that themselves in the mean time, do really exercise
a spiritual Lordship over their disciples, who depend in a manner wholly upon
their judgments, by imposing upon their consciences sundry Magisterial
conclusions, for which they have no sound warrant from the written Word of God.
Whereby, besides the great injury done to their brethren in the impeachment of
their Christian liberty, and leading them into error; they do withal exasperate
against them the minds of those that being in authority look to be obeyed; and
engage them in such sufferings, as they can have no just cause of rejoyceing in.

For, beloved, this we must know; that as it is injustice to condemn the
innocent, 20.
as well as it is injustice to clear the guilty, and both these are equally
Prove. 17. 15.
abominable to the Lord: so it is superstition to forbid that as sinful, which
is in truth indifferent, and therefore lawful; as well as it is superstition to
enjoin that as necessary, which is in truth indifferent, and therefore
arbitrary. Does that heavy woe in Isa. 5. appertain (think ye) to them only,
that out of profaneness Isa. 5. 20.
call evil good: and nothing at all concern them, that out of preciseness call
good evil? Does not he decline out of the way, that turns aside on the right
hand, as well as he that turns on the left? They that positively make that to
be sin, which the Law of God never made so to be; how can they be excused from
symbolizing with the Pharisees and the Papists, in making the narrow ways of
God yet narrower than they are, Mat. 15. 9.
teaching for Doctrines men's Precepts, and so 1 Cor. 7. 35.
casting a snare upon the consciences of their brethren? If our Church should
press things as far, and upon such grounds, the one way, as some forward
spirits do the other way; if, as they say [it is a sin to kneel at the
Communion, and therefore we charge you upon your consciences not to do it;] so
the Church should say [it is a sin not to kneel, and therefore we require you
upon your consciences to do it,] and so in all other lawful (yet arbitrary)
Ceremonies: possibly then the Church could no more be able to acquit her self
from encroaching upon Christian Liberty, than they are that accuse her for it.
Which since they have done, and she has not; she is therefore free, and
themselves only guilty.

It is our duty, for the better securing of our selves, as well against those
open 21.
impugners, as against these secret underminers, to look heedfully to our
trenches and fortifications, and to Gal. 5. 1.
stand fast in that liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, lest by some
device or other we be lifted out of it. To those that seek to enthral us, we
should Gal. 2. 5.
give place by subjection, no not for an hour; lest we be ensnared by our own
default, ere we be aware. For indeed we cannot be ensnared in this kind, but
merely by our own default; and therefore St. Paul often admonishes us, to take
heed that none Ephesians. 5. 6. Col 2. 4, 8, 18. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.
deceive, spoil, or beguile us; as if it were in our power if we would but use
requisite care thereunto, to prevent it; and as if it were our fault most, if
we did not prevent it. And so in truth it is, For we oftentimes betray away our
own liberty, when we might maintain it; and so become servants unto men, when
we both might and ought to keep our selves free.

Which fault we shall be the better able to avoid, when we shall know the 22.
true causes, whence it springs: which are evermore one of these two, an
unsound head, or an unsound heart. Sometimes we esteem too highly of others, so
far as either to envassal our judgments to their opinions, or to enthral our
consciences to their precepts; and that is our weakness: there the fault is in
the head. Sometimes we apply our selves to the wills of others, with an eye to
our own benefit or satisfaction in some other carnal or worldly respect: and
that is our fleshliness: there the fault is in the heart. This latter is the
worst, and therefore in the first place to be avoided. The most and worser
sort, unconscionable men, do often transgress this way; when for fear of a
frown or worse displeasure, or to curry favor with those they may have use of,
or in hope either of raising themselves to some advancement, or of raising to
themselves some advantage, or for some other like respects, they become
officious instruments to others for the accomplishing of their lusts in such
services, as are evidently (even to their own apprehensions) sinful and wicked.
So 1 Samuel 22. 18.
Doeg did King Saul service in shedding the blood of fourscore and five
innocent Priests: and 2 Samuel 13. 28.
Absalom's Servants murdered their Masters brother, upon his bare command: and
Mat. 15. 15.
Pilate, partly to gratify the Jews, but especially for fear of John 19. 12.
Caesar's displeasure, gave sentence of death upon Jesus, who in his own
conscience he thought had not deserved it. In such cases as these are, when we
are commanded by our superiors, or required by our friends, or any other way
solicited to do that which we know we cannot do without sin; we are to
maintain our liberty (if we cannot otherwise fairly decline the service) by a
flat and peremptory denial, though it be to the greatest power upon earth. As
the three young men did to the great Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3. 18.
Be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship
the golden Image which thou have set up. And the ancient Christians to the
heathen Emperors, Daveniam, Imperator: tu carcerem, ille gehennam. And the
Apostles to the whole Council of the Jews, Acts 2. 19.
whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken to you, more than unto God,
judge ye, Acts 4. He that will displease God to Gal. 1. 10.
please men, he is the servant of men, and cannot be the servant of God.

But honest and conscionable men, who do not easily and often fail this way. 23.
Romans 16. 18.
(...) (as the word is, Romans 16.) men that are not evil, are yet apt sometimes
to be so far carried away with an high estimation of some men, as to subject
themselves wholly to their judgments, or wills, without ever questioning the
truth of any thing they teach, or the lawfulness of any thing they enjoin. It
is a dangerous thing Jude v. 16.
(...), as St. Jude speaks, to have men's persons in admiration; though they
be of never so great learning, wisdom, or piety: because the best and wisest
men that are, are Act. 14. 15. and Jam. 5. 17.
(...), subject to the like infirmities as we are both of sin and error, and
such as may both H^mana authorit asplerumque fallit. Aug. 2. de Ordin. 9.
deceive others, and be themselves deceived. That honor which Pythagoras his
Scholars gave to their Master, in resting upon his bare Authority ((...)) as a
sufficient proof, yea, as -(...) Aeli. 4. var. 17.
a divine Oracle, many judicious even among the heathen altogether Neque vero
probare sol^^ id, qu^^ de P^^^^gorie^s acce^imus -- Cic. 1. de not. deorum.
misliked, as too servile, and prejudicial to that libertas Philosophica, that
freedom of judgment which was behoveful for the study of Philosophy. How much
more then must it needs be prejudicial in the judgment of Christians to that
libertas Evangelica, that freedom we have in Christ, to give such honor to any
other man, but the man Christ Jesus only; or to any other Writings than to
those which are in truth 1 Pet 4. 11.
the Oracles of God, the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament?

There is I confess much reverence to be given to the Writings of the godly 24.
ancient Fathers; more to the Canons and Decrees of general and provincial
Councils, and not a little to the judgment of learned, sober and godly Divines
of later and present times, both in our own and other reformed Churches. But we
may not Hor 1. Ep 1. -- Ut isti qui in verba ^urant, necquid dicanur estimant,
sed ^ quo. Sen. ^p. 12.
jurare in verba, build our faith upon them as upon a sure foundation, nor pin
our belief upon their sleeves; so as to receive for an undoubted truth
whatsoever they hold, and to reject as a gross error whatsoever they disallow,
without farther examination. St. John bids us 1 John 1. 7.
try the Spirits, before we believe them, 1 John 4* And the Acts 17. 11.
Beraeans are remembered with praise fol so doing, Act. 17. We blame it in the
Schoolmen, that some adhere pertinaciously to the opinions of Thomas, and
others as pertinaciously to the opinions of Scotus, in every point wherein they
differ; insomuch as it were grande piaculum, a heinous thing, and not to be
suffered, if a Dominican should dissent from Thomas, or a Franciscan from
Scotus, though but in one single controversed conclusion. And we blame it
justly: for St. Paul blamed the like sidings and partakings in the Church of
Corinth (whilst one professed himself to be of Paul, another of Apollo, another
of Cephas) as a fruit of 1 Cor. 4. 1.
carnality unbeseeming Christians. And is it not also blameworthy in us, and a
fruit of the same carnality, if any of us shall affect to be accounted rigid
Lutherans, or perfect Calvinists; or give up our judgment to be wholly guided
by the Writings of Luther or Calvin, or of any other mortal man whatsoever?
Worthy instruments they were both of them of Gods glory, and such as did
excellent service to the Church in their times, whereof we yet find the
benefit; and we are unthankful, if we do not bless God for it: and therefore it
is an unsavory thing for any man to gird at their names, whose memories ought
to be precious. But yet, were they not men? Had they received the spirit in the
fullness of it, and not by measure? Knew they o^herwise than in part, or
prophesied otherwise than in part? Might they not in many things, did they not
in some things mistake and err? Howsoever the Apostles Interrogatories are
unanswerable: what, says he 1 Cor. 1. 13.
was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul? Even so,
was either Luther or Calvin crucified for you? Or were ye baptized into the
name either of Luther or Calvin, or any other man; That any one of you should
say, I am of Luther, or any other, I am of Calvin; and I of him, and I of him?
What is Calvin or Luther, nay, 1 Cor. 3. 5.
what is Paul or Apollo, but Ministers by whom ye believed? That is to say,
Instruments, but not Lords of your belief.

To sum up, and to conclude this first point then. To do God and our selves 25.
right, it is necessary we should with our utmost strength maintain the
doctrine and power of that liberty wherewith Christ has endowed his Church,
without either usurping the mastery over others, or subjecting our selves to
their servitude: so, as to surrender either our judgments or consciences, to be
wholly disposed according to the opinions or wills of men, though of never so
excellent piety or parts. But yet lest while we shun one extreme, we fall into
another, as (the Lord be merciful unto us) we are very apt to do; lest while we
seek to preserve our liberty that we do not lose it, we stretch it too far, and
so abuse it: the Apostle therefore in the next clause of the Text puts in a
caveat for that also, ( not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness:)
whence arises our second observation. We must so maintain our liberty, that we
abuse it not: as we shall, if under the pretense of Christian liberty, we
either adventure the doing of some unlawful thing, or omit the performance of
any requisite duty. (As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness.)

The Apostles intention in the whole clause will the better appear, when we 26.
know what is meant by Cloak, and what by Maliciousness. The Greek word (...),
which is no where else found in the whole New Testament but in this verse only;
signifies properly any Covering: as the covering of Exodus 16. 14. and 36, 16.
Badger^ skins, that was spread over the Tabernacle, is in the Septuagints
Translation called (...). An it is very fitly translated a cloak, (though it do
not properly so signify;) in respect of that notion wherein the word in our
English Tongue is commonly and proverbially used: to note some fair and
colorable pretense, wherewith we disguise and conceal from the conusance of
others, the dishonestly and faultiness of our intentions in some things
practiced by us. Our Savior Christ says of the obstinate Jews that had heard
his Doctrine, and seen his Miracles, that Joh. 15. 22.
they had no cloak for their sin, Ioh. 15. he means they had no color of
plea, nothing to pretend by way of excuse. And St. Paul professes in the whole
course of his Ministry not to have used at any time 1 These. 2. 5.
a cloak of covetousness, 1 Thessalonians. 2. that is, he did not under color of
preaching the Gospel, endeavor to make a prey of them, or a gain unto himself.
In both which places the Greek word is (...), which signifies a fair show,
pretense, or color, which we use to call a cloak.

It is a corruption very common among us; whatsoever we are within, yet 27.
we desire Gal. 6. 11.
(...), to make a fair show outwardly, and to make bright Mat. 23. 25.
the outside of the platter, how sluttish soever the inside be. We are loath to
forbear those sins, which we are ashamed to profess: and therefore we blanch
them, and color them, and cloak them; that we may both do the thing we desire,
and yet miss the shame we deserve. A fault of an ancient original, and of long
continuance: ever since Genesis 3. 7.
Adam first patcht together a cloak of fig leaves, to cover the shame of his
nakedness. Since which time, (unless it were some desperately profane
Wretches, that being void of shame as well as grace, Isa. 3. 9.
proclaim their sins as Sodom, and hide them not, but rather glory in them:)
what man ever wanted some handsome cloak or other to cast over Nullum vitium est
sine patrocinio. Senec. ep. 116.
the foulest and ugliest transgressions? 1 Samuel 15. 15.
Saul spares Agag, and the fatter cattle, flat contrary to the Lords express
command: and the offering of sacrifice must be the cloak. 1 Kin. 21. 13.
Iezabel by most unjust and cruel oppression murthereth Naboth to have his
Vineyard; and the due punishment of blasphemy must be the cloak. The covetous
Mat. 23. 14.
Pharisees devour Widows houses, and devotion must be the cloak: So in the
Church of Rome, Monkery is used for a cloak of Idleness and Epicurism; The seal
of confession for a cloak of packing treasons, and diving into the secrets of
all Princes and Estates: Purgatory, Dirges, Indulgences, and Jubilees, for a
cloak of much rapine and avarice. Seneca said truly of most men, that they
studied more Sen. Ep. 116.
excusare vitia, quam excutere, rather sollicitous how to cloak their faults,
than desirous to forsake them: and St. Bernard's complaint is much like it,
both for truth and elegancy, that men did not set themselves so much Bernard.
colere virtutes, to exercise true virtue, and the power of godliness, as
colorare vitia, to mask foul vices under the vizard of virtue and godliness.
Alas, that our own daily experience did not too abundantly justify the
complaint in the various passages of common life; not needful being so evident;
and being so many, not possible to be now mentioned. We have a clear instance
in the Text, and it should grieve us to see it so common in the world: that the
blessed liberty we have in Christ, should become (...), a cloak, and that of
maliciousness.

You see what the Cloak is: see now what is Maliciousness. (...) is the word;
28.
which is properly rendered by malice or maliciousness. And as these English
words, and the Latin word malicia, whence these are borrowed; so likewise (...)
in Greek, is many times used to signify one special kind of sin, which is
directly opposite to brotherly love and charity, and the word is usually so
taken, wheresoever it is either set in opposition to such charity, or else
ranked with other special sins of the same kind, such as are Romans 1. 29. Col.
3. 8. Tit. 3. 3.
anger, envy, hatred, and the like. And if we should so understand it here, the
sense were good: for it is a very common thing in the world to offend against
brotherly charity, under the color of Christian liberty; and doubtless our
Apostle here intends the remedy of that abuse also. Yet I rather conceive
that the word maliciousness in this place is to be taken in a larger
comprehension, for all manner of evil, and of naughtiness, according to the
adequate signification of the Greek and Latin Adjectives, (...) and malus, from
whence the substantive used in the Text is derived. Of which maliciousness so
largely taken, that special maliciousness before spoken of, is but a branch.
The Apostles full purpose then in this clause of the Text, is to restrain all
that abuse of Christian liberty, whereby it is made a cloak for the palliating
of any wicked or sinful practice in any kind whatsoever. And so understood, St.
Peter's admonition here is paralleled with St. Paul's elsewhere; Brethren
(says he) you have been called unto liberty; only use not your liberty for an
occasion to the flesh, Gal. 5. 15. To use liberty for an occasion to the flesh,
and to use liberty for a cloak of maliciousness; is the very same thing, and it
is a very great sin.

For the proof whereof I shall need to use no other Arguments, than the words
29.
of the Text will afford. First, every act of maliciousness is a sin: and
secondly, to cloak it with a fair pretense, makes it a greater sin: but then
thirdly, to use Christian liberty for the cloak, gives a farther addition to
it, and makes it a greater sin. First, it is a sin to do any act of
maliciousness. (...) and (...) we 1.
know are conjugata, and do mutually infer each other. It is a superfluous
thing, and such as we might well enough be without Jam. 1. 21.
(...) superfluity of maliciousness, Iam. 1. Nor so only, but it is an hurtful
thing, and of a noxious 2.
and malignant quality, as leaven sowring the whole lump of our services to
God; 1 Cor. 5. 8.
(...), the leaven of maliciousness, 1 Cor. 5. It is a thing to be repented of;
Acts 8. 22.
(...), repent of this thy wickedness or maliciousness, says 3.
St. Peter to Simon Magus, Acts 8. It is a thing to be cast away from us, and
abominated 4.
as a filthy garment or polluted cloth: 1 Pet. 2. 1.
(...), laying aside or casting away all maliciousness, says the same Apostle
again in the first verse of this Chapter.

It is evil then to do any act of maliciousness: but much worse when we have 30.
so done, to cloak it with a fair pretense. For besides that all things
howsoever cloaked and covered from the eyes of men, are Heb. 4. 1^.
naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do; this cloaking of
our sins is but a farther evidence of our hypocrisy in his sight: who as he is
a God of pure eyes, and therefore cannot but hate all sin; so is he a God that
loves a pure heart, and therefore of all sins hates hypocrisy. They that by
injustice and oppression devour widows houses, shall certainly receive
damnation for that, but if withal they do it under the color of devotion, and
of long prayers, Mat. 23. 13.
(...), they shall receive the greater damnation for that also.

But if men will need be hypocrites, and must have a cloak for their
maliciousness, 31.
they might yet at least bethink themselves of somewhat else of lighter price
to make a cloak of; and not to use to so base a purpose so rich a stuff, as is
this blessed liberty which the Son of God has purchased with his most precious
blood. As in nature, corruption optimi pessima: so in morality, by how much
better any thing is in the right use of it, by so much is it worse in the
abuse. As the quickest spirited Wine has the sowrest lees, and the best wit
misgoverned is the most pernicious; and an Angel when he falls becomes a
Devil; so to use this liberty which is a spiritual thing, for an occasion to
the flesh, to take this liberty, which (if I may so speak) is the very
livery-cloak of the servant of God, and to make it a cloak of maliciousness for
the service of sin; must needs be presumption in an high degree, and an
unsufferable abuse.

Now we see how great a sin it is thus to abuse our liberty, it will be needful
32.
in the next place to enquire more particularly, wherein this abuse consists,
that so we may be the better able to avoid it. We are therefore to know, that
Christian liberty may be used, or rather abused for a cloak of maliciousness,
these four ways following. First, we may make it a cloak of maliciousness, if
we hold our selves by virtue thereof discharged from our obedience, either to
the whole morallaw of God, or to any part of it. Where, to omit those that out
of the wretched Noli ergo liberate abuti ad libere peccandum. Aug. in Joh.
tract. 41.
profaneness of their own hearts, pervert this branch of Evangelical doctrine,
as they do all the rest, to their own destruction. As a Spider turns the
juice of the sweetest and most medicinal herbs into poison: so these Jude ver.
4.
turn the grace of God into wantonness, and the liberty they have in Christ
into a profane licentiousness. Great offenders this way are the Libertines and
Antinomists who quite cancel the whole Law of God, under the pretense of
Christian liberty, as if they that were in Christ, were no longer tied to yield
obedience to the Moral Law: which is a pestilent error, and of very dangerous
consequence; Whereas our blessed Savior himself, has not only professed that
he came not to destroy the Law, but expressly forbidden any man to think so of
him. ( Mat. 5. 17. V. Augustine. lib. 17, 18, etc. contra Fa^stum Manichaeum
fuse; and in quaest. V. and N. T. quaest. 69.
Think not that I came to destroy the Law, I came not to destroy it, but to
fulfill it.) And St. Paul rejects the consequence with an absit, as both
unreasonable and impious, if any man should conclude, that by preaching the
righteousness of faith, the Law were abolished, Romans 3. ult.
Do we then make void the Law through faith? God forbid: yea (says he rather)
we establish the Law, Romans 3.

But they interpret those words of Christ in this sense, He came not to destroy
33.
the Law, but to fulfill it: that is, he came not to destroy it without
fulfilling it first, but by fulfilling it in his own person, he has destroyed
it unto the person of every believer: and therefore is Christ said to be Romans
10. 4. Finis perficiens, non interficiens Aug. 2. contr. advers. legis 7.
the end of the Law to every one that believes, Romans 10. Whence it is that the
faithful are said to be Romans 7. 6.
freed from the Law, delivered from the Law, Romans 7. 4. Gal. 2. 19.
dead to the Law, and to be Romans 6. 14. Gal. 5. 18.
no longer under the Law, and other like speeches there are many every where in
the New Testament; I acknowledge both their Expositions to be just, and all
these allegations true, yet not sufficient to evict their conclusion. Not to
wade far into a controversy, which I had not so much as a thought to touch
upon, when I fixed my choice upon this Scripture; it shall suffice us to
propound one distinction, which well heeded, and rightly applied, will clear
the whole point concerning the abrogation and obligation of the Moral law under
the New Testament, and cut off many needless curiosities, which lead men into
error. The Law then may be considered either as a Rule, or as a Covenant.
Christ has freed all believers from the rigor and curse of the Law,
considered as a Covenant; but he has not freed them from obedience to the Law,
considered as a Rule. And all those Scriptures that speak of the Law as if it
were abrogated or annulled, take it considered as a Covenant; those again that
speak of the Law as if it were still in force, take it considered as a Rule.
The Law as a Covenant, is rigorous; and under that rigor we now are not, if we
be in Christ: but the Law as a Rule is equal; and under that equity we still
are, though we be in Christ.

The Law as a Rule only shows us, what is good and evil, what we are to 34.
do, and not to do. ( Mic. 6. 8.
He has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of
thee;) without any condition annexed either of reward if we observe it, or of
punishment if we transgress it. But the Law, as a Covenant exacteth punctual
and personal performance of every thing that is contained therein, with a
condition annexed of Gods acceptance, and of blessing, if we perform it to the
full; but of his wrath and curse upon us, if we fail in any thing. Now by
reason of transgression, we having broken all that Covenant, the Law has his
work upon us, and involveth us all in Gal. 3. 10.
the Curse: so as by Ibid. verse. 11.
the Covenant of the Law no flesh living can be justified. Then comes in
Christ: who subjecting himself for our sakes to the Covenant of the Law, first
fulfilleth it in his own person, but in our behalf, as our surety; and then
disannulleth it, and instead thereof establishes Heb. 8. 6.
a better Covenant for us, even the Covenant of Grace. So that now as many as
believe, are free from the Covenant of the Law, and from the Curse of the Law;
and set under a Covenant of Grace, and under promises of Grace. There is a
translation then of the Covenant: but what is all this to the Rule? That is
still where it was, even as the nature of good and evil is still the same it
was. And the Law considered as a Rule, can no more be abolished or changed,
then can the nature of good and evil be abolished or changed. It is our
singular comfort then, and the happiest fruit of our Christian liberty, that we
are freed by Christ, and through faith in him from the Covenant and Curse of
the Law: but we must know that it is our duty, notwithstanding the liberty that
we have in Christ, to frame our lives and conversations according to the Rule
of the Law. Which if we shall neglect under the pretense of our Christian
liberty; we must answer for both: both for neglecting our duty, and for abusing
our liberty. And so much for the first way.

The second way, whereby our liberty may be used for a cloak of maliciousness;
35.
is, when we stretch it in the use of things that are indeed indifferent beyond
the just bounds of sobriety. Many men that would seem to make conscience of
their way, will perhaps ask the opinion of some Divine, or other learned man,
whether such or such a thing be lawful or no; and if they be once persuaded
that it is lawful, they then think they have free liberty to use it in what
manner and measure they please: never considering what Because we are free, we
may not run wild. Hall. 15. Contempl. 3.
caution and moderation is required even in lawful things to use them lawfully.
St. Gregory's Rule is a good one, Gregor.
Semper ab illicitis, quandoque and a licitis: things unlawful we must never
do; nor ever lawful things, but with due respect to our Calling, and other
concurrent Quaedam quae licent, tempore and loco mutato non licent. Sen.
controv. 25.
Circumstances. Wine, and Music, and gorgeous Apparel, and delicate Fare, are
such things as God in his goodness has created and given to the children of
men for their comfort; and they may use them lawfully, and take comfort in them
as their portion: but he that shall use any of them intemperately, or
unseasonably, or vainly, or wastefully, abuses both them and himself. And
therefore we shall often find both the things themselves condemned, and those
that used them blamed in the Scriptures. The men of Israel for Amos 6. 4, 6.
stretching themselves upon their Couches, and eating the Lambs out of the
flock, and chaunting to the sound of the Viol, and drinking Wine in bowls,
Amos. 6. and the women for their Isa. 3. 18, 23.
bracelets, and earrings, and wimples, and crisping-pins, and their other
bravery in Isa. 3. And the rich man for Luke 16. 19.
faring deliciously, and wearing fine linen in the parable, Luke 16. Yea, our
Savior himself pronounces a woe against Luke 6. 25.
them that laugh, Luke 6. And yet none of all these things are or were in
themselves unlawful: it was the excess only, or other disorder in the use of,
them, that made them obnoxious to reproof. Though some in their heat have said
so, yet who can reasonably say, that horse-matches, or playing at cards or
dice, are in themselves wholly unlawful? And yet on the other side, what sober
wise man, because the things are lawful, would therefore approve of that vain
and sinful expense which is oftentimes bestowed by men of mean estates, in the
dieting of Horses, and wagering upon them, or of that excessive abuse of
gaming, wherein thousands of our Gentry spend, in a manner, their whole time,
and consume away their whole substance: both which ought to be far more
precious unto them? I might instance in many other things in like manner. In
all which, we may easily err either in point of judgment, or practice, or
both; if we do not wisely sever the use from the abuse. Many times because the
abuses are common and great, we peevishly condemn in others the very use of
some lawful things. And many times again, because there is evidently a lawful
use of the things, we impudently justify our selves in the very abuses also.
That is foolish preciseness in us; and this profane partiality: by that we
infringe our brethrens liberty; by this pollute our own. The best and safest
way for us in all indifferent things is this: To be indulgent to others, but
strict to our selves; in allowing them their, liberty with the most, but taking
our own liberty ever with the least.

But is not this to preach one thing, and do another? Ought not our Doctrine 36.
and our Practice to go together? It is most true, they ought so to do: Neither
does any thing I have said, make to the contrary. What we may doctrinally
deliver to be absolutely necessary, we may not in our own practice omit: and
what we may doctrinally condemn as simply unlawful, we are bound in our own
practice to forbear. But things of a middle and indifferent nature, we may not
( doctrinally) either impose them as necessary, neither forbid as unlawful; but
leave a liberty in them both for other men and our selves to use them, or not
to use them, as particular circumstances, and occasions, and other reasons of
convenience shall lead us. And in these things both we must allow others a
liberty, which for some particular reasons it may not be so fit for us to take;
and we may also tie our selves to that strictness for some* particular reasons,
which we dare not to impose upon others. It was a foul fault, and blameworthy
in the Scribes and Pharis^es, to tie Mat. 23. 4.
heavy burdens upon other men's shoulders, which they would not touch with one
of their fingers: but if they should (without superstition, and upon reasonable
inducements) have laid such burdens upon themselves, and not imposed them upon
others; for any thing I know, they had been blameless. There are many things
which in my conscience are not absolutely and in Thesi necessary to be done;
which yet in Hypothesi for some personal respects I think so fit for me to do,
that I should resolve to undergo some inconveniency rather than omit them;
still reserving to others their liberty to do as they should see cause. There
are again many things which in my conscience are not absolutely and in Thesi
unlawful to be done; which yet in Hypothesi, and for the like personal
respects, I think so unfit for me to do, that I should resolve to undergo some
inconvenience rather than do them: yet still reserving to others the like
liberty as before, to do as they should see cause. It belongs to every sober
Christian advisedly to consider, not only what in it self may lawfully be done
or left undone; but also what in godly wisdom and discretion is fittest for him
to do, or not to do, upon all occasions, as the exigence of present
circumstances shall require. He that without such due consideration will do all
he may do at all times, under color of Christian liberty, he shall undoubtedly
sometime use his liberty for a cloak of maliciousness. And that is the second
way, by using it excessively.

It may be done a third way, and that is by using it uncharitably, which is the
37.
case whereon I told you St. Paul beats so often. When we use our liberty, so
as to 1 Cor. 8. 9.
stumble the weak consciences of our brethren thereby, and will not remit in
any thing the extremity of that right and power, we have in things of
indifferent nature, Romans 15. 2.
to please our neighbor for his good unto edification, at least so far as we
may do it without greater inconvenience; we Rom 14. 15.
walk not charitably: and if not charitably, then not Christianly. Indeed the
case may stand so, that we cannot condescend to his infirmity without great
prejudice either to our selves, or to the interest of some third person. As for
instance; when the Magistrate has positively already determined our liberty in
the use of it the one way; we may not in such case redeem the offense of a
private brother with our disobedience to superior authority in using our
liberty the other way: and other like cases there may be. But this I say, that
where without great inconvenience we may do it; it is not enough for us to Romans
15. 1.
please our selves, and to satisfy our own consciences, that we do but what we
lawfully may: but we ought also to Gal. 6. 2.
bear one another burdens, and to forbear for one another sakes what
otherwise we might do, and so to fulfill the Law of Christ. St. Paul, who has
forbidden us in one place to make our selves 1 Cor. 7. 23.
the servants of any man, 1 Cor. 7. has yet bidden us in another place Gal. 5.
13.
by love to serve one another, Gal. 5. 13. And his practice therein consents
with his doctrine (as it should do in every teacher of truth) for though he
were 1 Cor. 9. 19.
free from all, and knew it, and would not 1 Cor. 6. 12.
be brought under the power of any, yet in love he became 1 Cor. 9. 19. 22.
servant to all, that by all means he might win some. It was an excellent
saying of Luther. Luther. in Call. 5.
Omnia libera per fidem, omnia serva per charitatem. We should know, and be
fully persuaded with the persuasion of faith, that all things are lawful: and
yet withal we should purpose and be fully resolved for charity's sake to
forbear the use of many things, if we find them inexpedient. He that will have
his own way in every thing he has a liberty unto, whosoever shall take offense
at it, makes his liberty but a cloak of maliciousness by using it uncharitably.

The fourth and last way, whereby we may use our liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness 38.
is, by using it undutifully, pretending it unto our disobedience to lawful
authority. The Anabaptists that deny all subjection to Magistrates in
indifferent things, do it upon this ground, that they imagine Christian liberty
to be violated, when by humane Laws it is determined either the one way or the
other. And I cannot but wonder, that many of our brethren in our own Church,
who in the question of Ceremonies must argue from their ground (or else they
talk of Christian liberty to no purpose) should yet hold off, before they grow
to their conclusion: which to my apprehension seems by the rules of good
discourse to issue most naturally and necessarily from it. It were a happy
thing for the peace both of this Church and of their own consciences, if they
would in calm blood review their own dictates in this kind; and see whether
their own principle (which the cause they are engaged in, makes them dote
upon) can be reasonably defended; and yet the Anabaptists inference thence
(which the evidence of truth makes them to abhor) he fairly avoided. Yet
somewhat they have to say for the proof of that their ground: which if it be
sound, it is good reason we should subscribe to it; if it be not, it is as good
reason they should retract it. Let us hear therefore what it is, and put it to
trial.

First, say they, Ecclesiastical Constitutions (for there is the quarrel)
determine 39. 1. 2.
us precisely ad unum in the use of indifferent things, which God and Christ
have left free ad utrumlibet. Secondly, by inducing a necessity upon the thing
they enjoin, they take upon them as if they could alter the nature of things,
and make that to become necessary which is indifferent, which is not in the
power of any man (but of God only) to do. Thirdly, these Constitutions are so
far pressed, as 3.
if men were bound in conscience to obey them, which takes away the freedom of
the conscience: for if the conscience be bound, how is she free? Nor so only,
but fourthly, the things so enjoined, are by consequence imposed upon us as 4.
of absolute necessity unto salvation, forasmuch as it is necessary unto
salvation, for every man to do that which he is bound in conscience to do; by
which device, kneeling at the Communion, standing at the Gospel, bowing at the
name of Jesus, and the like, become to be of necessity unto salvation. Fifthly,
say they, 5.
these Constitutions cannot be defended but by such Arguments as the Papists
use for the establishing of that their rotten Tenet, that humane Laws bind the
conscience as well as Divine. Than all which premises, what can be imagined
more contrarious to true Christian liberty?

In which Objections (before I come to their particular answer) I cannot but 40.
observe the unjust (I would we might not say unconscionable) partiality of the
Objectors. First, in laying the accusation against the Ecclesiastical Laws
only; 1.
whereas their Arguments (if they had any strength in them) would as well
conclude against the Political Laws in the Civil State, and against domestical
orders in private Families, as against the Laws Ecclesiastical; yet must these
only be guilty, and they innocent, which is not equal. Let them either damn
them all or quit them all; or else let them show wherein they are unlike, which
they have not yet done, neither can do. Secondly, when they condemn the things
enjoined 2.
as simply and utterly unlawful upon quite other grounds; and yet keep a stir
about Christian liberty, for which argument there can be no place without
supposal of indifferency, (for Christ has left us no liberty to unlawful
things) how can they answer this their manifest partiality? Thirdly, if they
were put to 3.
speak upon their consciences, whether or no, if power were in their own hands,
and Church Affairs left to their ordering, they would not forbid those things
they now dislike, every way as strictly, and with as much imposition of
necessity, as the Church presently enjoyneth them; I doubt not but they would
say Yea: and what equity is there in this dealing, to condemn that in others,
which they would allow in themselves? Fourthly, in some things they are content
to submit to the Ecclesiastical 4.
Constitutions notwithstanding their Christian liberty, which liberty they
stiffly pretend for their refusal of other some: whereas the case seems to be
every way equal in both; all being enjoined by the same Authority, and for the
same end, and in the same manner. If their liberty be impeached by these; why
not as much by those? Or if obedience to those may consist with Christian
liberty. why not as well obedience to these? in allowing some, rejecting
others, where there is the same reason of all: are not they very partial?

And now I come to answer their arguments, or rather flourishes, for they are
in 41.
truth no better. That first allegation, that the determining of any thing in
unam partem takes away a man's liberty to it, is not true. For the liberty of a
Christian to any thing indifferent consists in this; that his judgment is
thoroughly persuaded of the indifferency of it: and therefore it is the
determination of the judgment, in the opinion of the thing, not the use of it,
that takes away Christian liberty. Otherwise not only Laws Political and
Ecclesiastical, but also all Vows, Promises, Covenants, Contracts, and what
not, that pitcheth upon any certain resolution de futuro, should be prejudicial
to Christian liberty: because they do all determine something in unam partem,
which before was free and indifferent in utramque partem. For example: if my
friend invite me to sup with him, I may by no means promise him to come;
because the liberty I had before to go, or not to go, is now determined by
making such a promise: neither may a young man bind himself an Apprentice, with
any certain Master, or to any certain Trade, because the liberty he had before
of placing himself indifferently with that Master, or with another, and in that
trade, or in another, is now determined by such a contract. And so it might be
instanced in a thousand other things. For indeed to what purpose has God left
indifferent things determinable both ways by Christian liberty, if they may
never be actually determined either way without impeachment of that liberty? It
is a very vain power, that may not be brought into act, but God made no power
in vain. Our Brethren, I hope, will wave this first argument, when they shall
have well examined it: unless they will frame to themselves under the name of
Christian liberty, a very Chimaera, a non ens, a mere notional liberty; whereof
there can be no use.

That which was alleged secondly, that they that make such Laws, take upon 42.
them to alter the nature of things, by making indifferent things to become
necessary, being said gratis without either truth or proof, is sufficiently
answered by the bare denial. For they that make Laws concerning indifferent
things, have no intention at all to meddle with the nature of them; they leave
that in medio as they found it: but only for some reasons of convenience to
order the use of them; the indifferency of their nature still being where it
was. Nay, so far is our Church from having any intention of taking away the
indifferency of those things which for order and comeliness she enjoyneth; that
she has by her public declaration protested the contrary: wherewith they
ought to be satisfied. Especially since her sincerity in that declaration (that
none may cavil, as if it were protestatio contraria facto) appears by these
two most clear Evidences 1. 2.
among many other; in that she both allows different Rites used in other
Churches, and also teaches her own rites to be mutable: neither of which she
could do, if she conceived the nature of the things themselves to be changed,
or their indifferency to be removed by her Constitutions.

Neither is that true, which was thirdly alleged, that where men are bound 44.
in conscience to obey, there the conscience is not left free; or else there
would be a contradiction: For there is no contradiction, where the Affirmative
and Negative are not ad idem, as it is in this case; for Obedience is one
thing, and the Thing Commanded another; The Thing is commanded by the Law of
Man, and in regard thereof the conscience is free: but Obedience to men is
commanded by the Law of God, and in regard thereof the conscience is bound. So
that we are bound in conscience to obedience in indifferent things lawfully
commanded; the conscience still remaining no less free in respect of the things
themselves so commanded, than it was before. And you may know it by this; In
Laws properly humane (such as are those that are made concerning indifferent
things) the Magistrate does not, nor can say; this you are bound in conscience
to do, and therefore I command you to do it; as he might say, if the bond of
obedience did spring from the nature of the things commanded. But now when the
Magistrate begins at the other end, as he must do, and says, I command you
to do this or that, and therefore you are bound in conscience to do it; this
plainly shows, that the bond of obedience arises from that power in the
Magistrate and duty in the subject, which is of Divine Ordinance. You may
observe therefore that in humane Laws not merely such (that is, such as are
established concerning things simply necessary; or merely unlawful;) the
Magistrate may there derive the bond of obedience from the nature of the things
themselves. As for example, if he should make a Law to inhibit Sacrilege or
Adultery; he might then well say, You are bound in conscience to abstain from
these things, and therefore I command you so to abstain; which he could not so
well say in the Laws made to inhibit the eating of flesh, or the transportation
of Grain. And the reason of the difference is evident, because those former
Laws are rather Divine than Humane (the substance of them being divine, and but
the sanction only humane) and so bind by their immediate virtue, and in respect
of the things themselves therein commanded; which the latter being merely
humane (both for substance and sanction) do not*

The consideration of which difference, and the reason of it, will abundantly
43.
discover the vanity of the fourth allegation also: wherein it was objected
that the things enjoined by the Ecclesiastical Laws are imposed upon men, as of
necessity to salvation: which is most untrue. Remember once again, that
obedience is one thing, and the things commanded another; Obedience to lawful
Authority is a duty commanded by God himself, and in his Law, and so is a part
of that Heb. 12. 14.
holiness without which no man shall see God: but the things themselves
commanded by lawful Authority, are neither in truth necessary to salvation, nor
do they that are in Authority impose them as such; only they are the object
(and that but by accident neither and contingently, not necessarily) about
which that obedience is conversant, and wherein it is to be exercised. An
example or two will make it plain, We know, every man is bound in conscience to
employ himself in the works of his particular calling with faithfulness and
diligence; and that faithfulness and diligence is a branch of that holiness and
righteousness which is necessary unto salvation. Were it not now a very fond
thing and ridiculous, for a man from hence to conclude, that therefore drawing
of wine, or making of shoes, were necessary to salvation, because these are the
proper employment of the Vintners and Shoemakers Calling, which they in
conscience are bound to follow: nor may without sin neglect them? Again, if a
Master command his servant to go to the Market, to sell his corn, and to buy in
provision for his house, or to wear a livery of such or such a color and
fashion: in this case, who can reasonably deny but that the servant is bound in
conscience to do the very things his Master bids him to do; to go, to sell,
to buy, to wear? And yet is there any man so forsaken of common sense, as
thence to conclude, that going to market, selling of corn, buying of meat,
wearing a blue coat, are necessary to salvation? Or that the Master imposes
those things upon the servant as of necessity unto salvation? The obligation of
the servants conscience to do the things commanded, arises from the force of
that divine Law which binds servants to obey their masters in lawful things.
The master in the things he so commands, has no particular actual respect to
the conscience of his servant, (which perhaps all that while never came within
his thoughts,) but merely respects his own occasions and conveniences. In
this example as in a glass let the objectors behold the lineaments and features
of their own Argument. Because kneeling, standing, bowing, are commanded by the
Church, and the people are bound in conscience to obey the Laws of the Church;
therefore the Church imposes upon the people kneeling, standing and bowing, as
necessary to salvation.

If that which they object, were indeed true, and that the Church did impose 44.
these Rites and Ceremonies upon the people, as of necessity to salvation, and
require to have them so accepted: doubtless the imposition were so prejudicial
to Christian liberty, as that every faithful man were bound in conscience for
the maintenance of that liberty, to disobey her authority therein, and to
confess against the imposition. But our Church has been so far from any
intention of doing that her self, that by her foresaid public declaration she
has manifested her utter dislike of it in others. What should I say more? Hor.
1. Sat. 3.
Denique teipsum concute. It would better become the Patriarchs of that party
that thus deeply (but untruly) charge her; to look unto their own cloaks, dive
into their own bosoms, and survey their own positions and practice: if happily
they may be able to clear themselves of trenching upon Christian liberty, and
ensnaring the consciences of their brethren, and imposing upon their Proselites
their own traditions of kneel not, stand not, bow not, (like those mentioned
Col. 2. of Col. 2. 21.
touch not, taste not, handle not) requiring to have them accepted of the
People, as of necessity unto salvation. If upon due examination they can acquit
themselves in this matter, their accounts will be the easier: but if they
cannot, they shall find when the burden lights upon them, that it will be no
light matter to have been themselves guilty of that very crime, whereof they
have unjustly accused others.

As for consent with the Papists in their doctrine concerning the power that
men's 45.
Laws have over the conscience, which is the last objection, it ought not to
move us. We are not ashamed to consent with them, or any others, in any truth;
but in this point we differ from them, so far as they differ from the truth:
which difference I conceive to be, neither so great as some men, nor yet so
little as other some men would make it. They teach that Humane Laws, especially
the Ecclesiastical bind the consciences of men, not only in respect of the
obedience, but also in respect of the things themselves commanded, and that by
their own direct immediate and proper virtue. In which doctrine of theirs,
three things are to be misliked. First, 1.
that they give a pre-eminence to the Ecclesiastical Laws above the Secular in
this power of binding. We may see it in them, and in these objectors; how men
will run into extremities beyond all reason, when they give themselves to be
led by corrupt respects. As he said of himself and his fellow-Philosophers.
Hor. 1. Ep. 17.
Scurror ego ipse mihi, populo tu: so it is here. They of Rome carried with a
wretched desire to exalt the Papacy, and indeed the whole Clergy, as much as
they may, and to avile the secular powers as much as they dare; they therefore
ascribe this power over the conscience to the Ecclesiastical Laws especially,
but do not show themselves all out so zealous for the Secular. Ours at home on
the contrary, out of an appetite they have to bring in a new platform of
Discipline into the Church, and for that purpose to present the established
Government unto the eyes and the hearts of the people in as deformed a shape as
they can; quarrel the Ecclesiastical Laws, especially for tyrannizing over the
conscience, but do not show themselves so much aggrieved at the secular.
Whereas the very truth is, whatsoever advantages the secular powers may have
above the Ecclesiastical, or the Ecclesiastical above the secular in other
respects; yet as to the power ^^ binding the Conscience, all humane Laws in
general are of like reason, and stand upon equal terms. It is to be misliked;
secondly, in the Romish Doctrine, that they subject 2.
the conscience to the things themselves also, and not only tie it to the
obedience; whereby they assume unto themselves ( interpretative) the power of
altering the nature of the things by removing of their indifferency, and
inducing a necessity; for so long as they remain indifferent, it is certain
they cannot bind. And thirdly 3.
and principally, it is to be misliked in them, that they would have this
binding power to flow from the proper and inherent virtue of the Laws
themselves immediately and per-se; which is in effect to equal them with the
divine Law: for what can that do more? Whereas humane Law^ in things not
repugnant to the Law of God, do bind the conscience indeed to obedience, but it
is by consequent, and by virtue of a former Divine Law, commanding us in all
lawful things to obey the superior powers.

But whether mediately, or immediately, may some say, whether directly or by 46.
consequent, whether by its own or by a borrowed virtue; what is it material to
be argued, so longas the same effect will follow, and that as entirely to all
intents and purposes, the one way as well as the other? As if a debt be alike
recoverable; it skilleth not much whether it be due upon the original bond* or
upon an assignment. If they may be sure to be obeyed, the higher powers are
satisfied: Let Scholars wrangle about words and distinctions; so they have the
thing, it is all they look after. This Objection is in part true, and for that
reason the differences in this controversy are not altogether of so great
consequence as they have seemed to some. Yet they that think the difference
either to be none at all, or not of considerable moment, judge not aright; for
albeit it be all one in respect of the Governors, whence the Obligation of
Conscience springs so long as they are conscio^ably obeyed, as was truly
alleged: Yet unto inferiors, who are bound in conscience to yield obedience,
it is not all one; but it much concerns them to understand whence that
Obligation arises, in respect of this very point whereof we now speak, of
Christian liberty, and for two weighty and important considerations.

For first If the obligation spring as they would have it from the Constitution
47.
it self, by the proper and immediate virtue thereof; then the conscience of
the subject is tied to obey the Constitution in the rigor of it: whatsoever
occasions may occur, and whatsoever other inconveniences may follow thereupon;
so as he sins mortally, who at any time, in any case (though of never so
great necessity) does otherwise than the very letter of the Constitution
requires, (yea, though it be extra casum scandali and contemptus.) Which were
an heavy case, and might prove to be of very pernicious consequence; and is
indeed repugnant to Christian liberty, by enthralling the conscience where it
ought to be free. But if, on the other side, which is the truth, the
Constitution of the Magistrate bind the conscience of the subject, not
immediately and by its own virtue, but by consequent only, and by virtue of
that Law of God which commands all men to obey their superiors in lawful
things: then is there a liberty left to the subject, in cases extraordinary,
and of some pressing necessity, not otherwise well to be avoided, to do
otherwise sometimes than the Constitution requires. And he may so do with a
free conscience, so long as he is sure of these two things: First, that he be
driven thereunto by a true and real, and not by a pretended necessity only; and
secondly, that in the manner of doing he use such godly discretion, as neither
to show the least contempt of the Law in himself, nor to give ill example to
others to despise Government or Governors. And this first difference is
material.

And so is the second also, if not much more; which is this. If the Magistrates
48.
Constitution did bind the conscience virtute propri^, and immediately; then
should the conscience of the subject be bound to obey the Constitution of the
Magistrate ex intuitu praecepti, upon the bare knowledge, and by ^he bare
warrant thereof, without farther enquiry; and consequently should be bound to
obey as well in unlawful things, as lawful. Which consequence (though they that
teach otherwise will not admit) yet in truth they cannot avoid* for the proper
and immediate cause being supposed, the effect must needs follow. Neither do I
yet see what sufficient reason they that think otherwise can show, why the
conscience of the subject should be bound to obey the Laws of the Magistrate in
lawful things, and not as well in unlawful things. The true reason of it is
well known to be this, even because God has commanded us to obey in lawful
things, but not in unlawful. But for them to assign this reason, were evidently
to overthrow their own Tenent: because it evidently deriveth the bond of
Conscience from a higher power than that of the Magistrate, even the
Commandment of God. And so the Apostles indeed do both of them derive it. St.
Paul in Romans 13. men must Rom 13. 1, 6.
be subject to the higher powers* Why? Because the powers are commanded of God;
And that for conscience sake too: Why? Because the Magistrates are the
Ministers of God. Neither may they be resisted: And why? Because to resist them
is to resist the Ordinance of God. That is St. Paul's doctrine. And St. Peter
accords with him: 1 Pet. 2. 13.
Submit your selves (says he) to every ordinance of man. What, for the man's
sake? Or for the Ordinance sake? No: but propter Dominum, for the Lords sake,
ver^ 13. And all this may very well stand with Christian liberty: for the
conscience all this while is Cum Christo jubente servis homini, non illi servis
sed ei qui jussit. Aug. in Psalm. 124.
subject to none but God.

By these Answers to their Objections, you may see what little reason some 49.
men have to make so much noise as they do about Christian liberty. Whereupon
if I have insisted far beyond both your expectations, and my own first purpose:
I have now no other thing whereby to excuse it, but the earnestness of my
desire, if it be possible, to contain within some reasonable bounds of sobriety
and duty, those of my brethren, who think they can never run far enough from
superstition, unless they run themselves quite out of their allegiance. There
are sundry other things, which I am forced to pass by, very needful to be
rightly understood, and very useful for the resolution of many cases of
conscience which may arise from the joint consideration of these two points, of
Christian Obedience, and of Christian Liberty. For the winding of our selves
out of which perplexities, when they may concern us, I know not how to commend
both to my own practice and yours, a shorter and fuller rule of direction, than
to follow the clew of this Text: Wherein the Apostle has set just bounds both
to our obedience and liberty. Bounds to our obedience; that we obey, so far as
we may without prejudice to our Christian liberty; in all our acts of obedience
to our superiors still keeping our consciences free, by subjecting them to none
but God, Submit your selves etc. but yet as free and as the servants of God,
and of none besides. Bounds to our Liberty; that (the freedom of our judgments
and consciences ever reserved) we must yet in the use of indifferent things
moderate our liberty, by ordering our selves according unto Christian sobriety,
by condescending sometimes to our brethren in Christian Charity, and by
submitting our selves to the lawful commands of our Governors in Christian
duty. In any of which respects if we shall fail, and that under the pretension
of Christian liberty: we shall thereby quite contrary to the express direction
of both the Apostles, but abuse the name of liberty, for an occasion to the
flesh, and for a cloak of maliciousness.

[ As free, but not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the
servants of God.]

And so I pass from this second to my third and last Observation; wherein, if
50.
I have been too long or too obscure in the former, I shall now endeavor to
recompense it, by being both shorter and plainer. The Observation was this: In
the whole exercise both of the liberty we have in Christ, and of those respects
we owe unto men, we must evermore remember our selves to be, and accordingly
behave our selves as those that are Gods servants: in these last words, ( But
as the servants of God,) containing our condition and our carriage. By our
condition, we are (...), the servants of God: and our carriage must be (...),
as the the servants of God, I shall fit my method to this division; and first
show you sundry reasons, for which we should desire to be in this Condition, to
be (...), the servants of God: and then give some directions, how we may frame
our carriage answerably thereunto, to demean our selves (...), as the servants
of God.

For the first: We cannot imagine any consideration, that may be found in 51.
any service in the world, to render it desirable; which is not to be found,
and that in a far more eminent degree, in this service of God. If Justice may
provoke us, or Necessity enforce us, or Easiness hearten us, or Honor allure
us, or Profit draw us, to any service: behold here they all concur; the service
of God and of Christ is excellently all these. It is of all other the most
just, the most necessary, the most easy, the most honorable, the most
profitable service. And what would you have more?

First, It is the most just service; whether we look at the title of Right on
his 52.
part, or reasons of Equity on ours. As for him, he is our Lord and Master
pleno jure, he has right to our best services by a threefold title, like a
treble cord, which Satan and all the powers of darkness cannot break or
untwine. A right of 1.
Creation. ( Isa. 44. 21.
Remember O Jacob, thou art my servant, I have formed thee; thou art my
servant, O Israel, Isa. 44.) Princes and the great ones of the world expect
from those that are their Creatures (rather that are called so, because they
raised them, but in truth are not so, for they never made them;) yet they
expect much service from them, that they should be forward instruments to
execute their pleasures, and to advance their intentions: how much more may the
Lord justly expect from us who are every way his Creatures, (for he raised us
out of the dust, nay* he made us of nothing) that we should be his servants to
do his will, and instruments to promote his glory? Besides this Ius creationis;
he has yet two other Titles to our services, Ius redemptionis, and Ius
liberationis. He has bought us out of the hands of our enemies, and so we are
his 2.
by purchase: and he has won us out of the hands of our enemies, and so we are
his by conquest. We read often in the Law, of servants Exodus 12. 44. and alibi.
bought with money, (...). and it is but reason, he that has paid a valuable
consideration for a man's service, should have it. Now God has bought us and
redeemed us, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.
not with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with his own, most
procious blood. And being bought with such a price, we are 1 Cor. 6. 19.
not our own, to serve the lusts of our own flesh; nor any man's else, that we
should be the servants of men; but his only that has bought us and paid for
us, to 1 Cor. 6. 20.
glorify him both in our bodies and souls, for they are his jure redemptionis
by the right of Purchase and Redemption. Again, when we were mancipia peccati
and diaboli, 3.
The Devils Captives, and Slaves to every ungodly lust: in which condition if
we had lived and died, after a hard and toilsom service in the mean time, our
wages in the end should have been eternal death: God by sending his Son to live
and die for us, has conquered sin and Satan, and freed us from that wretched
thraldom; to this end,

That Luc. 1. 74, 75.
being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we might serve him in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our lives. ( Psalm. 116.
16.
I am thy Servant, 53.
I am thy servant, and the Son of thine handmaid; thou have broken my bondsin
sunder, Psalm. 116.) That is jus liberationis, the right of conquest and
deliverance. Having so many and so strong titles thereunto, An qui fundum
aufert ejus a quo emptus est, and tradit ei qui nihil in eo habet juris,
injustus est: and qui seipsum aufert dominanti Deo, a quo factus est, and
malignis servit spiritibus, justus est? Aug. 19. de Civ. 21.
with what justice can we hold back our services from him? It is the first and
most proper act of Justice, jus suum cuique to Rom 13. 7.
render to all their dues, and to let every one have that which of right
appertains unto him. And if we may not deny Mat. 22. 21.
unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, it is but right we should also give
unto God the things that are Gods, by so many, and just Titles.

Especially since there are reasons of Equity on our part in this behalf, as
well as there is title of right on his part. You know the rule of Equity, what
it is; even to do to others, as we would be done to. See then 1. how we deal
with those that are under our command. We are rigid and importunate exactors of
service from them: we take on unreasonably, and lay on unmercifully, and bewray
much impatience and distemper, if they at any time slack their services toward
us, how should this our strictness in exacting services from those that 54.
are under us, add to our care and Vis u^ tibi servi^t, cum quo factus es; and
non vis servire ei, a quo factus es? Aug. de 10. Chord. c. 10.
conscience in performing our bounden services to our Lord and Master that is
over us? But as it is with some unconscionable dealers in the world, that
neither have any pity to forbear their debtors, nor any care to satisfy their
creditors; and as we use to say of our great ones (and that but too truly of
too many of them) that they will neither do right, nor take wrong; such is our
disposition. We are neither content to forego any part of that service which we
take to be due to us; nor willing Quod laudas in servo, non exhibes Domino: and
eo sceleratius quia vis ut meliorem tu habeas servum quam te Deus. Aug. Ibid
to perform any part of that service, which we know to be due to God. See
secondly, how we have dealt even with God himself. It is the masters part to
command, not to serve: yet have we against all reason and good order done our
endeavor to make him who is our Master become our slave. Himself complains
of it by his Prophet ( Isa. 43. 23, 24.
I have not caused thee to serve with an offering, and wearied thee with
incense, but thou have made me to serve with thy sins, and wearied me with 2.
thine iniquities, Isa. 43.) Now what can be imagined more preposterous and
unequal, than for a servant to make his master do him service, and himself the
while resolve to do his master none? See thirdly, what Christ has done for us:
though he were the Eternal Son of the Eternal God, no way inferior to the 3.
Father, no way bound to us; yet out of his free love to us, and for our good,
he took upon him Phil. 2. 7.
the form of a servant, and was among us Luc. 22. 17.
as one that ministers. That love of his should in all equity and
thankfulness, yet further bind us to answer his so great love, by making our
selves servants unto him, who thus made himself a servant for us. Thus both in
point of right and equity, the service of God is a just service. It is
secondly, the most necessary service. Necessity first, because we are servi 55.
1.
nati, of a servile condition, born to serve. We have not the liberty to choose
whether we will serve, or no: all the liberty we have, is to choose our Master;
(as Joshua said to the people, Josh. 24. 15.
Choose you whom you will serve.) Since then there lies upon us a necessity of
serving, it should be our wisdom to make a virtue of that necessity, by making
choice of a good master; with his resolution there, I and my house will serve
the Lord. It is necessary secondly, for our safety 2.
and security: lest if we withdraw our service from him, we perish justly in
our rebellion, according to that in the Prophet ( Isa. 60. 12.
The nation and kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish.) It is
necessary thirdly, Nihil illi jam liberi est, spospondit. Senec. Epist. 36.
by our own voluntary act: when we bound our selves by solemn vow and promise
in the face of the open Congregation at our Baptism, to continue Christ's
faithful soldiers and servants unto our lives end. Now the word is gone out of
our lips* we may not alter it; nor after we have made a vow, Prove. 20. 25.
enquire what we have to do. Thus the service of God is a necessary service.

It is thirdly, (which at the first hearing may seem a Paradox, yet will appear
56.
upon farther consideration to be a most certain truth) of all other the most
easy service: in regard both of the certainty of the employment; and of the
help we have toward the performance of it. He that serves many Masters, or
even but 1.
one if he be a fickleman, he never knows the end of his work: what he does
now, anon he must undo; and so Sisyphus-like he is ever doing, and yet has
never done. Mat. 6. 24.
No man can serve two Masters: not serve them so, as to please both; scarce so,
as to please either. And that is every man's case, that is a slave to sin: Senec.
( Tot Domini, quot vitia. Every lust calls for his attendance; yea), and
many times contrary lusts Nos tum graves* Dominos, interdum altern^s vicibus
imperantes, interdum patimur. Sen. Ep. 37.
at once, (as when Ambition bids, Let fly* and Covetousness cries as fast,
Hold:) whereby the poor man is En quid agis? Duplici in diversum scinderis
hamo: Hun^cine, an hunc sequeris? Pers. Satyr. 5.
infinitely distracted, between a lothness to deny either, and the
impossibility of gratifying both. St. Paul therefore, speaking of the state of
the Saints before conversion, expresses it thus, Tit. 3. Tit. 3. 3.
( We our selves also, were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving
diverse lusts and pleasures;) and that diversity breeds distraction. But the
servant of God is at a good certainty; and knows before hand both what his
work must be, and what his wages must be. As is the Master himself, so are his
Commandments, Heb. 13. 8.
Yesterday, and to day the same, and for ever* without variableness, or so much
as Iam. 1. 17.
shadow of turning. 1 John 2. 7.
( Brethren I write no new Commandment unto you, but the old Commandment which
ye had from the beginning, 1 John 2.)

It is some ease to know certainly what we must do; but much more to be assured
of sufficient help for the doing of it. If we were left to our selves for the
doing of his will, so as the yoke lay all upon our necks, and the whole burden
upon 57.
our shoulders: our necks, though their sinews were of Iron, would break under
the yoke; and our shoulders, though their plates had the strength of brass,
would crack under the burden. But our comfort is, that (as St. Austin sometimes
prayed, Augustine.
Da, Domine, quod jubes, and jube quod vis:) so he that sets us on work,
strengthens us to do the work Phil. 4. 13.
( I can do all things through him that strengthens me, Phil. 4.) Nay, rather
himself does Isa. 26. 1.
the work in us, 1 Cor. 15. 10.
( Yet not I, but the Grace of God in me, 1 Cor. 15.) The Son of God puts
his neck in the yoke with us, whereby it becomes his yoke as well as ours; and
that makes it so easy to us; and he puts his shoulder under the burden
with us, whereby it becomes his burden as well as ours; and that makes it so
light to us; Mat. 11. 30.
( Take my yoke upon you; for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light) Auson.
in carm. ad Theodos.
Iuvat idem, qui jubet. What he commands us to do, he helps us to do; and
thence it is, that 1 John 5. 3.
his Commandments are not grievous. Thus the service of God is an easy service.

It is fourthly, the most honorable service. Caeteris paribus, he goes for
the 58.
better man, that serves the better Master. And if men of good rank and birth
think it an honor for them, and a thing worthy their ambition to be the Kings
servants, because he is the best and greatest Master upon earth: how much more
then is it an honorable thing, and to be desired with our utmost ambitions, to
be the servants of God, who is Optimus-Maximus, and that without either
flattery or limitation, the best and greatest Master, and in comparison of whom
the best and greatest Kings are but as worms and grasshoppers. Sirac 23. 28.
It is a great glory to follow the Lord, says the Son of Sirac, Sirac 23. And
the more truly any man serves him, the more still will it be for his own
honor. For 1 Samuel 2. 20.
them that honor me I will honor, says God, 1 Samuel 2. and Christ, Ioh. 12.
Joh. 12. 26.
If any man serve me, him will my Father honor. Thus the service of God is an
honorable service.

It is fifthly and lastly, the most profitable service. We are indeed Luke 17.
10.
unprofitable 59.
servants to him, but sure we have a very profitable service under him. They
that speak against the Lord with stout words, saying, Mal. 3. 13, 14.
It is vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his
Ordinances? Mal. 3. or, as it is in Job 21. Job 21. 25.
What is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit should we have
if we pray unto him? speak without all truth and reason; for verily never man
truly served God, who gained not incredibly by it. These things among other,
the servants of God may certainly reckon upon, as the certain vails and
benefits of his service, 1.
wherein his Master will not fail him, if he fail not in his service:
Protection, Maintenance, Reward. Men that are in danger, cast to put themselves
into the service of such great Personages as are able to give them protection.
Now God both can and will protect his servants from all their enemies, and from
all harms. Psalm. 143. 12. ( I am thine, O save me. Psalm. 119. 94.)
( Of thy mercy cut off mine enemies, and destroy all them that afflict my
soul, for I am thy servant, Psalm. 143.) Again, God has all good things in
store both for necessity and comfort, and he is no niggard of either; but that
his servants may be assured of a sufficiency of both, when others shall be left
destitute in want and 2.
distress, Isa. 65. 13, 14.
( Behold my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry; behold my servants
shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty; behold my servants shall rejoice, but ye
shall be ashamed; behold my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall
cry for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of spirit, Isa. 65.) And whereas
the servant of sin, (besides 3.
that he has no fruit nor comfort of his service in the mean time) when he
comes to receive his wages at the end of his term, finds nothing but shame
or death; shame, if he leave the service, and if he leave it not, death: Romans
6. 21.
(What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? For the
end of those things is death.) The servant of God on the contrary, besides that
he reapeth much comfort and content in the very service he does in the mean
time, he receives a blessed reward also at the last, even eternal life. He
has Romans 6. 21.
his fruit in holiness, (there is his comfort onward) and the end everlasting
life, there is his full and final reward; a reward far beyond the merit of his
service. And so the service of God is a profitable service.

And now I pray you, What can any man allege or pretend for himself if he 60.
shall hang back, and not with all speed and cheerfulness tender himself to so
just, so necessary, so easy, so honorable, so profitable a service; Methinks,
I hear every man answer, as the Israelites sometimes said to Joshua with one
common voice, Josh. 24. 16.
God forbid, that we should forsake the Lord, to serve any other: Nay, but we
will serve the Lord, for he is our God, Josh. 24. But beloved, let us take heed
we do not gloze with him, as we do one with another: we are deceived, if we
think God will be Gal. 6. 7.
mocked with hollow and empty protestations. We live in a wondrous complemental
age, wherein scarce any other word is so ready in every mouth, as your servant,
and at your service, when all is but mere form, without any purpose, or many
times but so much as single thought, of doing any serviceable office to those
men, to whom we profess so much service. However we are one toward another,
yet with the Lord there is no dallying: it behooves us there to be real. If we
profess our selves to be, or desire to be called (...), the servants of God; we
must have a care to demean our selves (...), in all respects as becomes the
servants of God. To which purpose, when I shall have given you those few
directions I spoke of, I shall have done. Servants owe many duties to their
earthly Masters in the particulars; but three generals comprehend them all,
Reverence, Obedience, Faithfulness. Whereof the first respects the Masters
person, the second his pleasure, the third his business. And he that will be
Gods servant in truth, and not only in title, must perform all these to his
heavenly Master.

Reverence is the first; which ever arises from a deliberate apprehension of
61.
some worthiness in another more than in a man's self; and is ever accompanied
with a fear to offend, and a care to please, the person reverenced: and so it
has three branches; whereof the first is Humility. It is not possible, that
that servant who (...), Maenand.
thinks himself the wiser, or any way the better man of the two, should truly
reverence his Master in his heart. St. Paul therefore would have servants to 1 Timothy 6. 1.
count their own Masters worthy of all honor, 1 Timothy 6. 1. he knew well they
could not else reverence them, as they ought. Plaut.
Non decet superbum esse hominem servum, could he say in the Comedy; A man that
thinks goodly of himself, cannot make a good servant either to God or man.
Then are we meetly prepared for his service, and not before, when truly
apprehending our own vileness and unworthiness, both in our nature, and by
reason of sin; and duly acknowledging the infinite greatness and goodness of
our Master; we unfeignedly account our selves altogether unworthy to be called
his servants.

Another branch of the servants reverence is, fear to offend his Master. This
fear 62.
is a disposition well becoming a servant, and therefore God as our Master, and
by that name of Master challenges it, Mal. 1. Mal. 1. 6.
( If I be a Father, where is my honor? And if I be a Master, where is my
fear? says the Lord of Hosts.) Fear and reverence are often joined together,
and so jointly required of the Lords servants. Psalm. 2. 11.
( Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice to him with reverence, Psalm. 2.) and
the Apostles would have us furnished with grace, Heb. 12. 28.
whereby to serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear, Heb. 12.

From which fear of offending, a care and desire of pleasing cannot be severed:
63.
which is the third branch of the servants Reverence to his Master. St. Paul
bids Titus exhort servants to Tit. 2. 9.
please their Masters well in all things. So must Gods servant do; he must
study to Col. 1. 10.
walk worthy of him unto all pleasing: not much regarding how others interpret
his doings, or what offense they take at him, so long as his Master accepts
his services, and takes his endeavors in good part. Whosoever is not thus
resolved to please his Master, although he should thereby incur the displeasure
of the whole world besides, is not worthy to be called the servant of such a
Master. Gal. 1. 10.
( If I yet sought to please men, I should not be the servant of Christ, Gal.
1.) And all this belongs to Reverence.

Obedience is the next general duty Ephesians. 6. 5.
( Servants be obedient to your Masters, 64.
Ephesians. 6. Romans 6. 16.
Know you not, whom you yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are
to whom ye obey? Romans 6.) As if there could be no better proof of service than
obedience: and that is twofold, Active, and Passive. For Obedience consists
in the subjecting of a man's own will to the will of another: which subjection,
if it be in something to be done, makes an Active; if in something to be
suffered, a Passive Obedience. Our Active Obedience to God, is the keeping his
Commandments, and the doing of his will: as the people said, Josh. 24. Josh.
24. 24
The Lord our God will we serve, and his voice will we obey. And this must be
done Psalm. 18. 44.
in auditu auris, upon the bare signification of his pleasure, without
disputing or debating the matter: as Mat. 8. 9.
the Centurions servant, if his Master did but say, Do this, without any more
ado, did it. So Abraham the servant of the Lord, Heb. 11. 8.
when he was called to go out into a place which he should receive for an
inheritance, obeyed, and went out, though he knew not whither. Nor only so, but
in Genesis 22.
the greatest trial of Obedience that ever we read any man (any mere man) to
have been put unto, being commanded to sacrifice Heb. 11.
his only begotten Son, of whom it was said, That in Isaac shall thy Seed be
called: he never Romans 4. 20.
stumbled (as not at the promise through unbelief, so neither) at the command
through disobedience, but speedily went about it; and had not failed to have
done all that was commanded him, had not the Lord himself, when he was come
even to the last act, inhibited him by his countermand. If mortal and wicked
men look to be obeyed by their servants upon the warrant of their bare command,
in evil and unrighteous acts; 2 Samuel 13. 28.
( When I say unto you, Smite Amnon, then kill him, fear not: have not I
commanded you? says Absalom to his servants, 2 Samuel 13.) Ought not the express
command of God much more to be a sufficient warrant for us to do as we are
bidden, none of whose commands can be other than holy and just?

That is our Active obedience. We must give proof of our Passive obedience
also, 65.
both in contenting our selves with his allowances, and in submitting our
selves to his corrections. He that is but a servant in the house, may not think
to command whatsoever the house affords at his own pleasure; (that is the
Masters prerogative alone:) but he must content himself with what his Master is
content to allow him; and take his portion of meat, drink, livery, lodging, and
every other thing, at the discretion and appointment of his Master. Neither may
the servant of God look to be his own carver in any thing; neither ought he to
mutter against his Master (with that Mat. 25. 24.
ungracious servant* in the Parable) complaining of his hardness, and
austerity, if his allowances in some things fall short of his desire: but 1 Timothy 6. 8.
having food and raiment, be it never so little, never so coarse, he should be
content with it; nay, though he should want either or both, he should be
content without it. We should all learn of an old experienced servant of God,
St. Paul, what grace and long experience had taught him, Phil. 4. 11.
In whatsoever state we are, to be therewith content.

We are to show our Obedience to our heavenly Master yet further, by submitting
66.
to his wholesome Discipline, when at any time he shall see cause to give us
correction. Our Apostle, a little after the Text, would have servants to be
subject even to their 1 Pet. 2. 18.
froward Masters, and to take it patiently when they are buffeted undeservedly,
and without fault. How much more ought we Lev. 6. 21, 23.
to accept the punishment of our iniquity (as we have the phrase, Lev. 26.) and
with patience to yield our backs to the whip; when God, who has been so
gracious a Master to us, shall think fit to exercise some little severity
toward us, and to lay stripes upon us? Especially, since he never strikes us:
First, but for our fault, (such is his justice:) nor Secondly, (such is his
mercy) but for our good. And all this belongs to that Obedience, which the
servant of God ought to manifest, both by doing and suffering according to the
will of his Master.

The third and last general duty is Fidelity, Mat. 24. 45.
( Who is a faithful and wise servant? 67.
Mat. 25. 21.
Well done thou good and faithful servant,) as if the wisdom and goodness of a
servant consisted in his faithfulness. Now the faithfulness of a servant may be
tried especially by these three things: by the heartiness of his service, by
being tender of his Masters honor and profit, and by his quickness and
diligence in doing his business. A notable example whereof we have in Abraham's
servant, Genesis 24. in all the three particulars. For first, being many miles
distant from his Master, he was 1.
no less solicitous of the business he was put in trust withal, than he could
have been, if he had been all that while in the eye of his Master. Secondly, he
framed 2.
himself in his speeches and actions, and in his whole behavior to such a
discreet carriage, as might best set forth the credit and honor of his Master.
Thirdly, he 3.
used all possible diligence and expedition; losing not any time, either at
first for the delivery of his message, or at last for his return home, after he
had brought things to a good conclusion. Such faithfulness would well become us
in the service of God in all the aforesaid respects.

The first whereof is Heartiness in his service. There are many servants in the
68.
world, that will work hard, and bustle at it lustily for a fit, and so long as
their Masters eye is upon them; but when his back is turned, can be content to
go on fair and softly, and fellow-like. Such Ephesians. 6. 5, 7.
(...) the Apostle condemns, Col. 3. and elsewhere, admonishing servants
whatsoever they do to do it heartily, Col. 3. 22, 23.
and to obey their Masters not with eye-service, but in singleness of heart.
Toward our heavenly Master, true it is, if we had but this eye-service, it
were enough; because we are never out of his eye: his eyes are in all corners
of the earth, Prove. 15. 5.
beholding the evil and the good; Psalm. 11. 4.
and his eyelids try the children of men; Psalm. 149. 3.
he is about our beds, and about our paths, and spieth out all our goings. And
therefore if we should but study to approve our selves and our actions before
his sight; it could not be but our services should be hearty, as well as handy;
because our hearts are no less in his sight than our hands are. We cannot
content our Master, nor should we content our selves, with a bare and barren
profession in the service of God; neither with the addition of some outward
performances of the work done: but since our Master calls for the Prove. 23. 6.
heart* as well as the hand and tongue; and requires Psalm. 51. 6.
truth in the inward parts no less, rather much more, than show in the outward:
let us but join that inward truth of the heart, unto the outward profession and
performance; and doubtless we shall be accepted. 1 Samuel 12. 14.
( Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with all your heart, 1 Samuel 12.)

Secondly, We must show our faithfulness to our Master by our zeal in his
behalf. 69.
A faithful servant will not endure an evil word spoken of his Master behind
his back, but he will be ready upon every occasion to vindicate his credit, and
to magnify him unto the opinion of others: He will make much of those that
love his Master, and set the less by those that care not for him. And as to his
credit principally, so he has an eye also in the second place to the profit of
his Master. He will have a care to save his goods the best he can; it (...).
Eurip. in Med. act. 1.
will grieve his very heart to see any of them vainly wasted or imbezeled by
his fellow servants; yea, and it will be some grief to him, if any thing under
his hand do but chance to miscarry, though it be without his fault. See we, how
far every of us can apply all this to our own selves in the service of God. If
we have no heart to stand up in our rank and place for the maintenance of Gods
truth and worship, when it is discountenanced or overborn either by might or
multitudes: If our blood will not appear a little, when cursed miscreants blast
the honor of God with their unhallowed breath, by blaspheming oaths, fearful
imprecations, scurrile profanations of Scripture, licentious and bitter
sarcasms against the holy Ordinances of God: If a profound drunkard, and
obscene rimer, an habituated swearer, a complete roarer, every loose companion
and professed scorner of all goodness, that does but peep out with a head, be
as welcome into our company, and find as full and free entertainment with us,
as he that carries the face, and for any thing we know has the heart of an
honest and sober Christian, without either profaneness or preciseness: If we
grieve not for the miscarriages of those poor souls that live near us,
especially those that fall any way under our charge: what faithfulness is there
in us, or what zeal for God, to answer the title we usurp, so often as we call
our selves the servants of God?

Thirdly, If we be his faithful servants, we should let it appear by our
diligence 70.
in doing his businesses. No man would willingly entertain an idle servant,
that is (...). Ap. Stob. ser. 60.
good at bit, and nothing else; one of those the old riming verse describes.
(Sudant quando vorant, frigescunt quando laborant) such as eat till they sweat,
and work till they freeze. Mat. 25. 26.
(O thou wicked and slothful servant, says the Master in the Parable, to him
that napkined up his Talent, Mat. 25.) they are rightly joined, wicked and
slothful, for it is impossible a slothful servant should be good. The Poets
therefore give unto Mercury, who is Interpres divum, the Messenger (as they
feign) of Jupiter, and the other Gods, wings both at his hands and feet: to
intimate thereby what great speed and diligence was requisite to be used by
those that should be employed in the service of Princes, for the managing of
their weighty affairs of State. Surely, no less diligence is needful in the
service of God, but rather much more: by how much both the Master is of greater
Majesty, and the service of greater importance, Romans 12. 11.
( Not slothful in business, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, says St.
Paul.) Let all those that trifle away their precious time in unconcerning
things, or put off the repentance of their sins, and the reformation of their
lives till another age; or any other way slack their bounden service unto God,
either in the common-duties of their general, or in the proper works of their
particular calling; tremble to think what shall become of them, when all they
shall be Jer. 48. 10.
cursed, that have done the Lords work (in what kind soever) negligently.

We see now what we are to do; if we will approve our selves and our services
71.
unto the Lord our heavenly Master. What remains, but that we be willing to
do it: and for that end pray to the same our Master, who alone can Phil. 2. 12.
work in us both the will and the deed, that he would be pleased of his great
goodness to give to every one of us courage to maintain our Christian liberty
inviolate as those that are free; wisdom to use it right, and not for a cloak
of maliciousness; and grace at all times, and in all places, to behave our
selves as the servants of God; with such holy reverence of his Majesty,
obedience to his will, faithfulness in his employments, as may both procure to
us and our services, in the mean time gracious acceptance in his sight, and in
the end a glorious reward in his presence: even for Jesus Christ his sake, his
only Son, and our alone Savior.

FINIS.
A Table of the Places of Scripture, to which some light (more or less) is
given in the foregoing Fourteen Sermons.
Chap. Ver. Page. Genesis III. 4-5 122 -- 15 206.290 -- 16 206 -- 19 206 iv 2 206
vi 6 172 ix 25 190 xv 15 180 xviii 20 127 -- 32 182 xix 8 33 -- 9 182 -- 16 181
xx vi 269, etc. xxiv 12, etc. 112 xxxi 23, etc. 286 xxxii 6 287 xxxiii 4, etc.
287 Exodus II. 14 8 x 26 303 xi 5-6 193 xiv 4 155 xx 5 193. 198. 201. xxiii s i
ii-iii 117, etc. Lev. 26. 21 324 -- 23 324 -- 26, etc. 266. 208 Number. 22. 27 238
xxiii 19 172 xxv 5 139 Deuteronomy. 8. 3 251 -- 14 255 -- 17 255 -- 18 263 xv 4 213
xvii 2 105 xxxii 15 258 Josh. 24. 15 320 -- 24 323 Judge. 3. 9-10 139 v 7 139
xix 30 105 1 Samuel 2. 30 321 iv 18 138 xii 24 325 xv 15 308 1 Samuel 13. 28 324 xv
4 110 xxi 14 146 3 King. 3. 9 99 x 20 107 xxi 13 308 -- s xxix 151, etc. 4
King. 2. 9 51 vi 25-26 196 viii 27 195 x 10 179 -- 30 191 xxii 20 180 1 Chro.
26. 29-31 138 2 Chro. 19. 6 108 xxiv 22 258 Nehem. 5. 15 131 Job 1. 3 98 -- 5 8
-- 20 193 ix 33 2 xiii 7 62 xxii 30 182 xxix 9 98 -- s 14-17, etc. 95, etc.
Those that have this note s prefixed, are the Texts of the Sermons.
Psalm 2. 11 323 iii 7 107 iv 6-7 252 xiv 4 106 xviii 44 323 xix 12 272. 278.
-- 13 296. xxxv 11 284 xxxvi 3 279 -- 6 186 xxxvii 1 167 xxxix 11 189 xlv 6-7
99 l 22 183 li 6 325 -- 12 301 lii 2-4 122 lvii 4 106 lviii 4 279 -- 6 107
lxxiii 2-3 188 -- 17 188 lxxv 2-4 108. 149 lxxvi 10 288 -- 12 288 lxxxi 12 297
lxxxii 6 102. 108. ciii 1-2 249 cv 14 290 cvi 6 201 -- sxxx 133, etc. -- 31 139
cvii 8 290 cix 14 101 -- 16 98 cxvi 12 250 -- 16 320 cxix 6 159 -- 94 322 --
141 3 cxliii 12 322 cxlv 8 177 -- 16 208 cxlvii 1 260 cxlix 8 293 Prove. 1. 13
125 iii 3 103 xii 13 143 xiv 21 5 xv 8 164 -- 17 252 xvi 12 149 xvii 16 221
xviii 7 125 -- 9 208 -- 13 105 -- 17 126 xx 25 321 xxi 1 287 xxiv 26 99 xxv 2
105 xxvi 13 143 -- 25 292 xxviii 13 278 xxix 7 127 -- 12 130 xxx 1 5 -- 33 121
xxxi 21 208 Eccles. 1. 4 191 -- 18 280 viii 11 143 ix 1 156 x 4 229 -- 10 54 xi
4 142 xii 9 56 Isaiah 1 24 171 iii 9 308 -- 15 106 -- 18-23 311 v 20 305 viii
20 140 xxvi 12 321 xxviii 21 311 xxxvii 35 191 xxxix 8 180 xliii 23-24 320 xliv
21 319 lii 11 176 lv 8-9 186 lvii 1 181 lx 12 320 lxv 13-14 322 Ierem. 3. 15
201 v 1 282 viii 6 288 xvii 9 223 xviii 7-8 172. 174. -- 18 122 xxiii 29 161
xlviii 10 326 Lam. 5. 7 198 Ezekiel. 22. 9 123 xxix 20 165 xxxiii 11-14 171. 174
Dan. 3. 16 71 -- 18 306 vi 3-5 124 ix 5 201 Hos. 2. 8 258 iv 1 279 xi 8 171
xiii 9 236 Amos 3. 6 196. 236 vi 4-6 311 Ion. 3. 9 174 Micah 6. 8 299 Zach. 5.
4 195 Mal. 1. 6 323 Chap. Ver. Page Matthew. 3. 7 195 iv 10 303 v 15 56 -- 16 44.
156 -- 17 310 -- 29-30 244 -- 37 32 vi 2, etc. 165 -- 24 321 vii 12 123 ix 13
29 xi 19 156 -- 30 304. 321 xii 31-32 26 -- 36 25 xiii 5*6 154. 159 -- 20-21
154 xviii 7 246 -- 10 36 xix 21-22 158 xxiii 4 312 -- 8 301 -- 10 301 -- 13 309
-- 14 308 -- 23 99 -- 35-36 201 xxiv 45 324 -- 51 156 xxv 21 324 -- 26 325 --
28 55 xxvi 11 213. 257 xxvii 25 190 xxviii 20 46 Mark 4. 16-17 154 x 18 237
Luke* 3. 14 125 vi 25 311 viii 6 154 ix 50 70* x 28 179 xii 14 8 -- 48 279 xv
17 168 xvi 2 127 -- 9 209 -- 19 311 -- 25 167 xvii 13 262 xviii 11 4. 295 xix 8
121. 130 -- 41 164 -- 53 35 xxi 15 57 -- 26 137 xxiii 2 24 -- 11 4 John 20 22
47 iii 36 66 ix 2-3 189 x 12 25. 107 xv 22 308 xvi 26 310 xix 12 24 xx 22 47.
229 Acts 4. 19 306 viii 22 309 x 28 215 -- 45-46 43 xiv 12 66 -- 15 306 -- 17
252 xv 9 253 -- 28-29 273 xvii 11 307 -- 28 260 xxiii 1 282 xxiv 25 163 xxvi 9
68 Romans 1. 16 156 -- 19-20 223 ii 5-6 188 -- 14 282. 283 -- 15 63 -- 22 34 iii
viii 21, etc. -- 31 310 iv 13 252 -- 20 323 vi 14 310 -- 16 323 -- 21-22 322 --
23 187 vii 4 310 -- 6 310 x 4 310 xi 35 262 xii 7 100 -- 11 326 xiii 1 110 --
1. 6 318 -- 4 102. 108. 118. 144 -- 6 102 xiv 2 66 -- iii 1, etc. -- 4 9 -- 5
69 -- 6 249 -- 10 9 -- 13 8 -- 14 29. 70. -- 15 312 -- 20-21 29 -- 22 71 -- s
xxiii 59, etc. xv 1-2 312 -- 14 125 xvi 18 306 1 Cor. 1. 13 307 -- 26 291 iii
4-5 307 -- 21 168 -- 22-23 240. 252 iv 3 284 -- 4 284 -- 5 9. 142 -- 7 49. 255.
295 v 8 309 vi 12 243. 312 -- 18 273 -- 19-20 303. 319 vii 4 274 -- 7 44 -- 17
46 -- 21 213 -- 23 301. 312 -- s xxiv 203, etc. -- 31 57 -- 36 73 viii 1 5. 51
-- 8 247 ix 19-22 312 x 11 140 -- 30 248 xii 4 6 -- s vii 41, etc. 207. 218 --
29 48 xiii 5 10 xiv 37 47 -- 38 280 xv 10 321 2 Cor. 1. 19-20 172 iii 17 290 iv
4 303 v 21 190 ix 10 51 xii 7 5. 52. Gal. 1. 10 125. 306 -- 16-17 216 -- 10 323
ii 5 305 -- 14 20 -- 19 310 iii 10-11 310 -- 24-25 240 iv 4 240 v 1 240. 301.
305 -- 13 303. 312 -- 18 310 vi 1 295 -- 2 312 -- 11 308 Ephesians. 1. 3 192 iv 8,
etc. 207 -- 16 55 -- 28 199. 208 v 3 273 -- 6 305 -- 15 303 vi 5-7 302. 324
Phil. 3. 19 303 iv 13 221 Col. 1. 10 323 -- 20 240 ii 4 305 -- 8 305 -- 22 304
iii 5 303 -- 22-23 325 1 These. 2. 5 308 -- 16 190 v 23 297 2 These. 2. 3 305 --
4 30^ iii 6 207 -- 10 104. 214 -- 11 208 -- 12 208 1 Timothy 1. 8 72 -- 13 26. 68.
280 iii 13 228 iv 3 239 -- s iv 233, etc. -- 5 311 -- 12 3 -- 16 54 v 3 103.
214 -- 8 208 vi 1 323 -- 3-5 245 -- 8 324 -- 20 25. 302 2 Timothy 1. 6 25. 47 --
14 25. 303 Tit. 1. 15 253 iii 3 321 -- 8 58 Heb. 1. 3 25. 1 iv. 1 179 -- 12 161
-- 13 9 vi 4-5 155 -- 18 178 viii 6 310 x 30 9 xi 8 323 xii 9 176 -- 11 187 --
23 252 -- 28 323 Iam. 1. 6 50 -- 8 112 -- 17 43. 280 -- 21 309 -- 25 301 ii 12
301 iv 12 9 -- 15 174 -- 17 71. 280 v 17 306 1 Pet. 2. 13 94. 110. -- s xvi
299, etc. -- 18 324 -- 24 190 v 3 8. 304 2 Pet. 2. 1 309 -- 15 287 iii 18 26 1
Ioh. 2. 7 321 iv 1 307 v 3 304. 321 Jude 3 302 -- 4 310 -- 16 306

FINIS.
XXI SERMONS. VIZ.

XVII AD AULAM. III AD MAGISTRATUM. I AD POPULUM.
BY The Right Reverend FATHER in GOD, Robert Sanderson, Late Lord Bishop of
LINCOLN.

Sometime Fellow of Lincoln-Colledge in Oxford, and Regius Professor in the
said University.

Jerem. vi. 16. -- Ask for the old Paths, where is the good way, and walk
therein. ''(...)
"(...)
Eurip. LONDON, Printed for B. Took, T. Passenger, and T. Sawbridge, and are
to be sold by Thomas Hodgkin, next door to the Dolphin-Inn in West-Smithfield.
MDCLXXXVI.

THE PREFACE.
1. I Had thought to have given somewhat a larger account in this Preface, than
now I do: as well concerning the publishing of these Sermons, [1. Why at all?
2. Why now? so late? ^3. Why these? so many? so few?] as concerning the Sermons
themselves [1. The Truth, and 2. The Choice of the Matters therein handled. 3.
The Manner of handling] and such other things, as some Readers out of curiosity
expect to be satisfied in. But considering with my self, that there may be
times, wherein it may be a point of the greatest Amos 5. 13.
Prudence to keep silence; and wherein, as it was wisely said of old, Qui been
latuit been vixit, He lives best, that appears least; so it may be as truly
said* Qui been tacuit, been dixit, He speaks best that says least: I thought
it safer to save that labor, than to adventure the possibility of having
offense taken, upon no better security than the not having meant to give any.

2. Therefore in short; thus. After these Sermons were preached; so far was I
from any forwardness to publish them, that for some years they were thrown
aside without any thought at all of printing them, but rather a resolution to
the contrary. I could not observe any such scarcity of printed Sermons abroad,
as that there should be any great need of sending out more: and the copying out
of most of them again (which was to be done, ere the work could be fitted for
the Press, and could not well be done by any other hand than my own) could not
be any such pleasing task to me (especially at these years 69 current) as to
tempt me to a willingness to undergo a drudgery of so much toil and irksomness.
Wherefore, though I was often and earnestly solicited thereunto, both by the
entreaties and letters of friends, and some considerable offers also from such
as trade in Books, to quicken me on: yet my consent came on very heavily, and
my resolutions remained uncertain: Until I understood that one, who having by
some means or other light on a Copy of one single Sermon of mine, preached at
Newport in the Isle of Wight during the Treaty there, upon Gal. 5. 22. had Vide
Epistolam meam divulgatam -- Hoc ne oportuit me inconsulto? Lips. Cent. 2.
Epist. 100.
surruptitiously without my consent, or so much as knowledge (and that -- Et an
sic oportuit? solam? imo and corruptam? Ibid.
negligently and imperfectly enough) printed it. Which, not knowing how to help
for what was past, nor for the future how far it might become a leading example
for others to follow, (as Exempli improbi res est: nec probus aliquis neget.
Ibid -- mali exempli est, arbitriu^ hoc sibi sumer in scripta aliena. Id. ad
lector. praefix. 2 Centur. Miscell.
ill Precedents seldom want seconds;) but well knowing withal, that there were
in several men's hands, Copies also of most of the Sermons here printed: I had
no other way left to secure the rest from running the same Fate their fellow
had done, than by yielding my absolute consent to the publishing of them, and
preparing them (as my leisure would serve) for the Press. For I had learned by
this late, and some former experiences, that there are men, of those that --
nam quae reverentia legum, Quis pudor aut metus est unquam properantis avari;
Juven. Sat. 14.
make haste to be rich, who bear so little reverence to the Laws of common
Equity and Ingenuity, that they will transgress them all for the gain of ( e)
three-half-pence or a piece of bread. Aristoph. in Plat.
(...).

3. But when thus resolved, I came to seek up my scattered Copies, which lay
neglected (so little did I value them) some in one corner, some in another: of
the Two and Twenty, which I intended to publish (viz. Nineteen Ad Aulam,
preached at the Court in my Attendance, Ordinary and Occasional there; and
Three Ad Magistratum, preached before some of the Reverend Judges in their
Circuits:) after the best search I could make, I fell short Five of my whole
Number: Those Ad Magistratum were all found; and being all now published, there
need no farther account to be given of them.

The Nineteen Ad Aulam, were these, viz.
I. on Eccles. vii. 1. Whitehall. 1631. II. on Prove. xvi. 7. Whitehall. 1632.
III. on 1 Pet. ii. 17. Newark. 1633. IV. 1 on Luke xvi. 8. Otelands. 1636. V.
on Psalm. xix. 13. Belvoir. 1636. VI. 1 on Phil. iv. 11. Greenwich. 1637. VII. 2
on Phil. iv. 11. Otelands. 1637. VIII. on Isai. lii. 3. Greenwich. 1638. IX. on
Romans xv. 5. Theobalds. 1638. X. on Psalm. xxxvii. 11. Berwick. 1639. XI. on 1 Timothy iii. 16. Berwick. 1639. XII. 1 on 1 Cor. x. 23. Whitehall. 1640. XIII. on
Psalm. cxix. 75. Whitehall. 1640. XIV. 3 on 1 Cor. x. 23. Hampton. 1640. XV. on
Romans xv. 6. Whitehall. 1641. XVI. on Psalm. xxvii. 10. Woburne. 1647. XVII. 2 on
Luke xvi. 8. Stoke Pogeys. 1647. XVIII. on Gal. v. 22. Newport. 1648. XIX. on
Heb. xii. 3. Newport. 1648.

Of these the I. II. III. IV. and X. were all missing; and the XVIII. was
before fallen into the hands of another; who would not be persuaded to part with
his Copy, (as he called it) either to me upon entreaty, (perhaps to chastise me
for my Ignorance, who was so silly before as to think I had had some right to
my own;) or to his fellow-Stationer upon any reasonable (or rather as I am
informed, unreasonable) terms: which is done, though not all out so agreeably
to the old Rule, Quod tibi fieri non vis; yet very conformly to the old
Proverb, (...). --

4. Of these Six, thus in hazard to be all left out in the Impression; Three
are recovered, and here presented to public view, and Three are not. The first
(viz. that on Eccles. vii. 1.) I made a shift by the help of my memory to make
up (as near as it would serve me, to what I had so long since spoken) out of an
old Copy of a Sermon formerly preached upon the same Text elsewhere. For I am
not ashamed to profess that most of those Ad Aulam were framed upon such Texts,
and out of such Materials, as I had formerly made use of in other places: but
always cast (as it were) into new moulds. For both fit it was the difference of
the Auditories in the one place, and in the other should be some what
considered: and besides my first crude meditaons being always hastily put
together, could never please me so well at refrigerato inventionis amore.
Quint. Epist ad Tryph.
a second and more leisurable review, as to pass without some additions,
defalcations, and other alterations, more or less. The Second and Third also (
viz. that on Prove. xvi. 7. and that on 1 Pet. ii. 17.) it was my good hap,
searching purposely among the Papers of my late worthy friend and neighbor
(whose memory must ever be precious with me) Thomas Harrington Esquire
deceased, there to find, together with the Copies of diverse others which I
wanted not, transcribed with his own hand. But the Fourth and Fifth are here
still wanting, because I could not find them out: and so is the Eighteenth
also, because I could not get it in. The want of which last, though happening not
through my default, yet I have made a kind of compensation for, by adding one
other Sermon of those Ad Populum, in lieu of that which is so wanting, to make
up the number an even score notwithstanding.

5. As for the Sermons themselves the matter therein contained, the manner of
handling, etc. I must permit all to the Readers doom. Who if he be homo
quadratus, perfectly even, and unbyassed both in his Judgment and Affection,
(that is to say, neither prepossessed with some false principle to forestal the
one, nor carried aside with partiality for, or prejudice against, any person or
party, to corrupt the other) will be the better able to discern, whether I have
any where in these Papers exceeded the bounds of Truth and Soberness, or laid
my self open to the just imputation either of Flattery or Falsehood. There has
been a generation of men ( wise (...), and for their own Luke 16. 8.
purposes, but Malignants sure enough) that labored very much (when time was)
to possess the world with an opinion, that all Court Chaplains were Parasites,
and their Preaching little other than daubing. I hope these Papers will appear
so innocent in that behalf, as to contribute somewhat toward the shame and
confutation of that slander.

6. The greater fear is, that (as the times are) all men will not be well
pleased with some passages herein, especially where I had occasion to speak
something of our Church Ceremonies; then under command, but since grown into
disuse. But neither ought the displeasure of men, nor the change of times, to
cast any prejudice upon the Truth: which in all variations and turnings of
affairs remains the same it was from the beginning, and has been accustomed,
and therefore can think it no new thing, to find unkind entertainment abroad,
especially from them whose interest it is to be (or at leastwise to seem to be)
of a different persuasion. For, that the truth is rather on my side in this
point than on theirs that dissent from me, there is, besides other, this strong
presumption onwards; That I continue of the same judgment I was of, twenty,
thirty, forty years ago; and profess so to do, with no great hopes of bettering
my temporal condition by so professing: whereas hundreds of those, who now
decry the Ceremonies) (as they do also some other things of greater importance)
as Popish and Antichristian, did, not many years since, both use them
themselves, and by their subscriptions approve the enjoining of them; but
having since in compliance with the Times professed their dislike of them,
their portion is visibly grown fatter thereby. If the face of affairs be not
now the same it was, when the Sermons wherein this Point is most insisted on
were preached, What was then done, is not sure in any justice now chargeable
upon me as a crime: who never pretended to be a Prophet; nor could then either
foresee that the times would so soon have changed, or have believed that so
(...). Naz.
many men would so soon have changed with the times.

7. Of the presumption aforesaid I have here made use; not that the business
stands in need of such a Reserve, for want of competent proof otherwise,
which is the case wherein Ubi deficit plena probatio pr^sumptionibus agendum
est.
the Lawyers chiefly allow it: but to save the labor of doing that over again
in the Preface, which I conceive to be already done in the work it self. With
what success I know not; that lies in the breast of the Reader. But that I
spoke no otherwise than I thought, and what my intentions were therein; that
lies in my own breast, and cannot be known to the Reader; who is therefore in
charity bound to believe the best, where there appears no pregnant
probability to the contrary. The discourses themselves, for much of the matter,
directly tend to the peace both of Church and State, by endeavoring to
persuade to Unity and Obedience: and for the manner of handling have much in
them of Plainness, little (I think nothing at all) of Bitterness, and so are of
a temper fitter to instruct than to provoke. And these I am sure are no
Symptoms of very bad Intentions. If there be no worse Construction made of
them than I meant, nor worse Use; I trust they neither will deserve much blame,
nor can do much hurt. Howsoever, having now adventured them abroad; though
having little else to commend them but Truth and Perspicuity, two things which
I have always had in my care (for whereto else serves that (...), wherewith
God has endued man, but to speak reason, and to be understood?) if by the good
blessing of Almighty God, whom I desire to serve in the spirit of my mind, they
may become (in any little degree) instrumental to his Glory, the edification of
his Church, and the promoting of any one soul in Faith and Holiness toward the
attainment of everlasting salvation: I shall have great cause of rejoicing in
it, as a singular evidence of his underserved mercy toward me, and an
incomparably rich reward of so poor and unworthy labors. Yet dare I not
promise to my self any great hopes, that any thing that can be spoken in an
argument of this nature, though with never so much strength of reason, and
evidence of truth, should work any kindly effect upon the men of this
generation: when the times are nothing favorable, and themselves altogether
undisposed to receive it: No more than the choicest Music can affect the ear
that is stopped up; or the most proper Physic operate upon him, that either
cannot, or will not take it. But as the Sun, when it shines clearest in a
bright day, if the beams thereof be intercepted by a beam too, (but of another
kind) lying upon the eye, is to the party so blinded, as if the light were not
at all, so I fear it is in this case. Not through any incapacity in the Organ
so much, especially in the learneder part among them; as from the interposition
of an unsound Principle, which they have received with so much affection, that
for the great complacency they have in it, they are loath to have it removed.
And as they of the Roman party, having once thoroughly imbibed this grand
Principle, that the Catholic Church (and that must needs be it of Rome) is
infallible, are thereby rendered incapable to receive any impressions from the
most regular and concluding discourses that can be tendered to them, if they
discern any thing therein disagreeing from the dictates of Rome; and so are
perpetually shut up into a necessity of erring (if that Church can err) unless
they can be wrought off from the belief of that Principle: which is not very
easily to be done, after they have once swallowed it, and digested it, without
the great mercy of God, and a huge measure of selfdenial: Even so have these
our Anti-ceremonial Brethren framed to themselves a false Principle likewise,
which holds them in Error, and hardneth them against all impressions or but
Offers of reason to the contrary.

8. All Errors, Sects and Heresies, as they are mixed with some inferior
Truths, to make them the more passable to others; so do they usually owe their
original to some eminent Truths (either misunderstood or misapplied) whereby
they become the less discernable to their own Teachers: whence it is that such
Teachers 2 Timothy 3. 1.
both deceive and are deceived. To apply this then to the business in hand.
There is a most sound and eminent Truth, justly maintained in our own and other
Reformed Churches, concerning the Perfection and Sufficiency of the Holy
Scriptures. Which is to be understood of the revelation of supernatural Truths,
and the Substantials of Gods Worship; and the advancing of Moral and Civil
duties to a more sublime and spiritual height, by directing them to a more
noble end, and exacting performance of them in a holy manner: But without any
purpose thereby to exclude the belief of what is otherwise reasonable, or the
practice of what is prudential. This Orthodox Truth has by an unhappy
misunderstanding proved that great stone of offense, whereat all our late
Sectaries have stumbled. Upon this foundation (as they had laid it) began our
Anti-ceremonians first to raise their so often renewed Models of Reformation:
but they had first transformed it into quite another thing; by them perhaps
mistaken for the same, but really as distant from it, as Falsehood from Truth;
to wit this, That Nothing might lawfully be done or used in the Churches of
Christ, unless there were either Command or Example for it in the Scriptures.
Whence they inferred, that whatsoever had been otherwise done or used, was to
be cast out as Popish, Antichristian, and Superstitious. This is that unfound
corrupt Principle whereof I spoke: that root of bitterness, whose stem in
process of time has brought forth all these numerous branches of Sects and
Heresies, wherewith this sinful Nation is now so much pestered.

9. It is not my purpose, nor is this a place for it, to make any large
discovery of the cause of the mistake; the unsoundness of the Tenent it self,
and how pernicious it is in the Consequents. Yet I cannot but humbly and
earnestly entreat them, for the love of God, and the comfort of their own
souls; as they tender the peace of the Church, and the honor of our Religion;
and in compassion to thousands of their Christian Brethren, who are otherwise
in great danger to be either misled or scandalized: that they would think it
possible for themselves to be mistaken in their Principle, as well as others,
and possible also for those Principles they rest upon to have some frailties
and infirmities in them, though not hitherto by them adverted, because never
suspected; that therefore they would not hasten to their Conclusion, before
they are well assured of the Premises, nor so freely bestow the name of Popish
and Superstitious upon the opinions or actions of their Brethren, as they have
used to do, before they have first and thoroughly examined the solidity of their
own Grounds: finally, and in order thereunto, That they would not therefore
despise the Offer of these few things ensuing to their consideration, because
tendered by one that stands better affected to their Persons than Opinions.

10. And first I beseech them to consider, how unluckily they have at once both
straightened too much, and yet too much widened, that which they would have to be
the adequate Rule of warrantable actions; by leaving out Prudence, and taking
in Example. Nor does it sound well, that the examples of men, though never so
Godly, should as to the effect of warranting our actions, stand in so near
equipage with the commands of God, as they are here placed jointly together
without any character of difference so much as in degree. But the superadding
of Examples to Commands in such manner as in this Assertion is done, either
signifies nothing, or overthrows all the rest: which is so evident, that I
wonder how it could escape their own observation. For that Example which is by
them supposed sufficient for our warranty, was it self either warranted by some
Command or former Example or it was not. If it were; then the adding of it
clearly signifies nothing: for then that warrant we have by it, proceeds not
from it, but from that precedent Command or Example which warranted it. If it
were not: then was it done merely upon the dictates of Prudence and Reason: and
then if we be sufficiently warranted by that Example (as is still by them
supposed) to act after it, we are also sufficiently thereby warranted to act
upon the mere dictates of Prudence and Reason, without the necessity of any
other either Command or former Example for so doing. What is the proper use
that ought to be made of Examples, is touched upon a little in the 8. Sermon Ad
Aulam, toward the latter end; but it is very needful to be better understood
than it is, considering the ill use that has been made of Scriptureexamples
both in former, and (much more) in these our later times.

11. Secondly, I beseech them to consider (whereof also I have given some touch
more than once in the ensuing Sermons) what scandal is given, and what
advantage to the Anabaptists, Familists, Quakers, and the whole crew of our
modern Sectaries, by what other name or title soever they are called or
distinguished. When this gap was once opened [ What Command have you in
Scripture, or what Example for this or that?] Un^ Eurusque Notusque: it was
like the opening of Pandora's Box, or the Trojan Horse. As if all had been let
loose; swarms of Sectaries of all sorts broke in, and (as the Frogs and Locusts
in Egypt) overspred the face of the Land. Nor so only; but as often it happens,
these young Striplings soon outstript their Leaders, and that upon their own
ground: leaving those many Parasangs behind them, who had first showed them the
way, and made entrance for them. For as those said to others; What Commands or
Example have you for kneeling at the Communion? For wearing a Surplice? etc.
For Lord Bishops? For a penned Liturgy? For keeping Holy Days? etc. and there
stopped: So these to them; Where are your Lay-Presbyters, your Classes, etc. to
be found in Scripture? Where your Steeple Houses, your National Church? Your
Tithes and Mortuaries? Your Infantsprinklings? Nay, where your Metre-Psalms?
Your two Sacraments? Your observing a weekly Sabbath? (for so far I find they
are gone, and how much farther, I know not, already: and how much farther they
will hereafter, for Erranti nullus terminus, God only knows) show us, say
they, a Command or Example for them in Scripture.

Fugerunt trepidi vera and manifesta loquentem Juven. Sat. 2.

Stoicidae --
Thus do these pay them home in their own metal: and how the pay can be
honestly refused, till they order their Mintage better, I yet understand not.
If any of them shall say with him in the Satyrist,

-- haec ego nunquam Id. Sat. 14.

Mandavi (dices olim) nec talia suasi;
the reply is ready in the next verse there,

Mentis causa malae tamen est, and origo, penes te. I doubt not but many of
those that made a stand sooner, are highly displeased with those that rush on
headlong and adventured farther; yea, and it may be, declaim against them with
some vehemence both in the Pulpit and Press. But truly no great reason, if they
lent them their Premises, to fall out with them about the Conclusion. The
Master in the Fable did not well to beat his Maid for serving him with thin
Milk, when it was his own Cow that gave it. For why should he that gives
another Scandal, be angry with him for taking it? Or he that helps to set it
on tumbling down the hill, blame the stone if it tumble on still Ex virtute
impressa, and do not stop just where he would have it? so mischievous a thing
is it, as Aristotle often observes, Arist. 3. de coelo 7. See also 1. de coelo
5. de incessu animal. cap. 7. de generat. animal. cap. 7.
(...). not to lay the foundation upon a firm bottom at the first. It had been
best, if this had been looked to sooner and from the beginning: but better than
not at all, if it would be well considered yet, and some remedy thought on to
help it as much as may be, before it grow past all hope of recovery.

12. But thirdly, and above all I beseech them to consider, whether Basil*
that (...), which many times marreth a good business, has carried them; and
how mightily (though unwittingly, and I verily believe most of them
unwillingly) they promote the Interest of Rome, whilst they do with very great
violence (but not with equal prudence) oppose against it: so verifying that of
the Historian Poet, spoken in another case,

-- Omnia dat qui justa negat. Lucan
I mean, in casting out not Ceremonies only, but Episcopacy also, and Liturgy,
and Festivals out of the Church, as Popish and Antichristian, -- Hoc Ithacus
velit. If any of these things be otherwise guilty, and deserve such a
regulation upon any other account (which yet is more than I know) farewell they:
but to be sent away packing barely upon this score, that they are Popish and
Antichristian; this brings in such a plentiful harvest of Proselytes to the
Jesuit, that he does not now, as formerly, gaudere intus and in sinu (laugh in
his sleeve, as we say) but (...), openly and in the face of the Sun triumph
gloriously and in every Pamphlet proclaim his Victories to the World. If you
shall say, that the Scandal is taken by them, not given by you: it is (to all
but your selves) as much as nothing: whilst the contrary is demonstrable, and
that there is in these very pretensions, a proper (and as I may say a natural)
tendency to produce such effects, as we see to have ensued thereupon. The truth
whereof will evidently appear by stating the Case thus. A man otherwise
rational and conscientious, but somewhat wavering in point of Religion, yet
desiring in sincerity of heart to be of the truer Church, if he knew which were
it, has some temptations offered him by his Education, Friends, Books, the
confusions among us, or otherwise to incline him toward the Church of Rome.
Which temptations, being not able of himself to conquer, he repaireth to a
Presbyterian (suppose) or Independent: he acquainteth him with his doubts, and
desires satisfaction therein: tells him among other things, that he had a
good opinion of the Church of England heretofore, whilst she had Episcopal
Government, and a well-formed Liturgy, and did observe Christian Festivals, and
some kind of outward decency in the worship of God, as all the Churches of
Christ had and did in the the purest and primitive times; but now that all
these things are laid aside, he must needs be of another mind, unless they can
fully satisfy him concerning the premises. In this Case, I would fain know
what possible satisfaction such a man could receive from either of these,
holding to their Principles. To tell him these things were Popish, and
therefore to be cast out of the Church, were the next way to put him quite off:
he would presently conclude (and it is impossible he should do otherwise, being
already so prepared as in the Case is supposed) that certainly then that which
we call Popery is the old Religion, which in the purest and primitive times was
professed in all Christian Churches throughout the World. That only (...),
which is usually the last Reserve in these disputes, That the mystery of
iniquity began to work betimes; will seem (to him) but a ridiculous begging of
the Question; and he will tell them, that every Sectary may say the same to
them. Whereas the sober English Protestant, is able by the Grace of God, with
much evidence of truth, and without forsaking his old Principles, to justify
the Church of England, from all imputations of Heresy or Schism, and the
Religion thereof as it stood by Law established from the like imputation of
Novelty; and to apply proper and pertinent answers to all the Objections of
those whether Papists, or others) that are contrary minded, to the full
satisfaction of all such, as have not by some partial affection or other
rendered themselves incapable to receive them.

12. I confess I had no purpose (as may appear by the beginning of my Preface)
when I set pen to paper, to have said much, if any thing at all, of these
matters: But I had so very much more to say for the pressing of each of these
three considerations, and the business withal seemed to me of so much
importance, that after I had once begun, I had much ado to repress my self from
drawing this Preface into a yet far greater length. But since I had thus
adventured to unbowel my self, and to lay open the yery inmost thoughts of my
heart in this sad business before God and the world: I shall hope to find so
much charity from all my Christan Brethren, as to show me my Error, if in any
thing I have now said I be mistaken, that I may retract it; and to pardon those
excesses in modo loquendi, if they can observe any such which might possibly
(whilst I was passionately intent upon the matter) unawares drop from my Pen.
Civilities which we mutually owe one to another, -- damus hanc veniam,
petimusque vicissim. Considering how hard a thing it is, amidst so many
passions and infirmities, as our corrupt nature is subject to, to do or say all
that is needful in a weighty business, and not in some thing or other to
over-say or over-do: Yet this I can say in sincerity of my heart, and with
Comfort, that my desire was (the nature of the business considered) both to
speak as plain, and to offend as little as might be. If I can approve my
carriage herein to the judgment and consciences of sober and charitable men; it
will be some rejoicing to me: but I am not hereby justified. I must finally
stand or fall to my own Master, who is the only infallible Judge of all men's
hearts and ways. Humbly I beseech him to look well if there be any way of
wickedness or hypocrisy in me; timely to cover it himself, and discover it to
me, that it may be by his grace repented of, and pardoned by his mercy; by the
same mercy and grace to guide my feet into the ways of Peace and Truth, and to
lead me in the way everlasting.

December. 31. 1655.
O be favorable and gracious unto Sion; build thou the Walls of Jerusalem;
Repair the breaches thereof; and make no long tarrying, O Lord our Helper and
our Redeemer ETIAM VENI DOMINE JESU.
The Reader is desired to take notice, That the Eighteenth Sermon (one of those
mentioned by the Author in his Preface to have been formerly omitted) is in
this Impression added.

THE CONTENTS, or SUMMARY Of the several ensuing SERMONS.
Sermon I. Ad Aulam, on ECCLES. vii. 1.
Sect. 1 FCclesiastes; the Preachers Sermon; 2 -- or Solomon's Paradoxes. 3-6
The use of Rhetorical Exornations in Sermons. 7-10 THE WORDS OF THE TEXT
severally explained. 11-12 A good Name to be preferred before the most precious
Ointments; As, 13-14 -1. being a more peculiar blessing. 15-16 -2. yielding
more solid content. 17-18 -3. enabling to worthier performances. 19-22 -4.
being of larger extention, both for Place and Time: 23-25 Yet not to be
preferred before a good Conscience. 26-27 THE INFERENCES: 1. The sin of those
that rob others of their good Names. 28-29 -2. The folly of those, that value
any outward things above a good Name. 30-31 -3. That it is not enough for a
man, that he can satisfy his own Conscience in what he does. But 32 -4. There
ought to be a great care had also of preserving a good Name, And that upon
these 33 CONSIDERATIONS. I. That it is our bounden Duty. 34-5 -2. That by our
care much may be done in it. 36 -3. That a good name lost is of hard recovery.
37, etc. Some RULES OF DIRECTION tending as helps thereunto.
Sermon II. Ad Aulam, on PROVE. xvi. 7.
Sect. 1. THe Sum and Division of THE TEXT. 2 -- 6 The Words in the former part
of the Text explained. 7 POINT I. The necessity of seeking to PLEASE God. 8 --
9. -- both in point of Duty (and Relations;) 10 -- 11 -- and in point of Wisdom
(and Benefit.) 12 -- 14 POINT II. God is pleased with our ways; wherein he
finds -- 1. Conformity to his ways, 15 -- 16 -- 2. and Obedience to his Will.
17 -- notwithstanding their imperfection. 18 -- 1. as being his own work in us;
and 19 -- 2. beholding them as in the face of Christ. 20 The Inference; for
comfort. 21 The Words in the latter part of the Text explained. 22 -- 24 POINT
III. God procures the peace of those that please him. 25 -- Their own
endeavor (subordinately) concurring. 26 -- 8 A grand Objection removed. 29
FOUR INFERENCES briefly touched. 30 A FIFTH INFERENCE farther considered: for
the preventing of a double fallacy; to wit, 31 -- 2 -- 1. that of imputing our
sufferings wholly to the injustice of others. 32 -- 4 -- 2. that, of thinking
the better of our selves and our own ways, because we have Enemies. 35 The
Conclusion.
Sermon III. Ad Aulam, on 1 PET. ii. 17.
Sect: 1 -- 3. THe Scope, and Division of THE TEXT. 4 -- 8 The Duty of
HONORING ALL MEN, explained. 9 -- 10 -- and enforced; by Reasons taken 1. from
Justice, 11 -- 2. from Equity, 12 -- 14 -- 3. from Religion. 15 A REPROOF 1. of
those that honor none but themselves. 16 -- 17 -- 2. of those that honor none
but their Superiors. 18, etc. -- 3. of those that limit the duty with a
condition, Si meruerint. 24 -- 26 -- Who are meant by THE BROTHERHOOD. 37, etc.
-- and what by loving the brotherhood. 30 Two grounds of this duty, viz. 1.
Their Goodness in themselves. 31, etc. -- their Nearness to us; in sundry
relations. 36, etc. We may in loving the Brethren, prefer some: 39, etc. -- But
not exclude any.
Sermon IV. Ad Aulam, on PSALM xix. 13.
Sect. 1 -- 3. A General view of the xix. PSALM. 4 -- 6 The Scope and Division
of the Text. 7 The reading considered and cleared. 8 Of Presumption in General.
9 -- 11 Of the Sin of Presumption, materially taken. 12 -- 14 From the
distinction of Sins; of Ignorance, Infirmity, and Presumption. 15 -- 18 --
Severally Exemplified: 19 The nature of Presumptuous Sins declared. 20 -- 24
The heinousness of Presumptuous Sins declared by sundry Intimations in the
Text; 25 -- and by Reasons drawn, partly from their Cause; 26 -- 27 -- partly
from their evil Effects. -- 1. before Repentance, 28 -- 2. at the time of
Repentance, 29 -- 32 -- 3. after Repentance. 33 For the avoiding of
Presumptuous Sins; 34 with our Prayers to God, 35 we are to join our own
Endeavors. Four Particular Rules for direction herein, viz. 36 -- 1. Do
nothing against Conscience. 37 -- 38 -- 2. Get the mastery of thine own Will.
39 -- 43 -- 3. Beware of Engagements to Sin. 44 -- 45 -- 4. Resolve not to
yield to any Temptation. 46 The Conclusion.
Sermon X. Ad Aulam, I. Ser. on PHIL. iv. 11.
Sect. 1 -- 4. THe occasion, Scope, 5 -- Paraphrase and 6 -- Division of the
Text. 7 -- 12 Four Observations from the Apostles Protestation. 13 -- 14 The
Nature of Contentment gathered from the Text in three Particulars, viz. 15 --
16 I. That a man be content with his own Estate, without coveting that which is
another. 17 -- 19 Illustrated by Examples both ways: 20 -- 21 and proved from
Grounds both of Justice, 22 -- and Charity. 23 Not all desire of that which is
another forbidden. 24 -- but the Inordinate only: Whether in respect 25 -- 26
1. -- Of the Object, of the Desire. 27 -- 29 2. -- The Act, or of the Desire.
30 -- 31 3. -- The Effects of the Desire. 32 The Inference thence, 33 II. That
a man be content with his present Estate. 34 Because 1. That only is properly
his own. 35 2. All looking beyond that disquieteth the mind. 36 3. The present
is ever best. 37 -- 38 The Duty pressed: 39 -- 40 -- and the misunderstanding
of it prevented. 41 III. That a man be content with any Estate: 42 -- 44 with
the Reasons thereof, 45, etc. -- and Inferences thence.
Sermon VI. Ad Aulam, II. Sermon. on PHIL. iv. 11.
Sect. 1-3 THe Art of Contentment, 4 1. Not from Nature, 4 2. -- Institution, 6
3. -- or Outward Things. 7 -- But from God: who teaches it us, 8 -- 1. by his
Spirit: 9 -- 2. by his Promises: 10, etc. -- 3. by the Rod of Discipline. 12
Inferences. I. Where this learning is to be had. 13 II. Sundry motives
thereunto. 14 III. The Trial of our proficiency therein, by Six Marks; 15 -- 1.
The despising of unjust gain. 16 -- 2. The moderating of worldly Desires and
Care. 17 -- 3. The careful using and of what we have. 18 -- 4. the charitable
dispensing of what we have. 19 -- 5. The bearing both of wants with patience.
20, etc. -- 6. -- and losses -- with patience. 22 Seven Helps, to further us in
this Learning. 23 -- 24 -- 1. A right persuasion of the Goodness and Truth of
God. 25 -- 2. A through sense of our own unworthiness. 26 -- 3. Thankfulness
for what we have. 27 -- 4. A prudent comparing of our Estates with other men's.
28 -- 5. To consider the vanity of all outward things. 29 -- 30 -- 6. Sobriety
in a frugal and temperate use of the Creature. 31 -- 7. To remember, that we
are but Pilgrims here.
Sermon VII. Ad Aulam, on ISA. lii. 3.
Sect. 1. THe Sum and Division of the Text. 2 -- 4 Part I. Man's Sale. 5
Inferences thence: To take knowledge, 1. of our Misery, therein. 2 2. and
Presumption therein. 7 The Materials of the Contract: viz. 8 -- 10 I. The
Commodity; and therein our Baseness. 11 -- 15 II. The Price; and therein our
Folly. 15 -- 18 An Objection by way of Excuse, removed. 19 -- 24 III. The
Consent; and therein our Inexcusableness. 25 PART II. Man's Redemption wrought.
26 I. EFFECTUALLY. Wherein are considered, 27 1. The Power, of the Redeemer. 28
2. The Love, of the Redeemer. 29 3. The Right, of the Redeemer. 30 And thence
Inferred a threefold Duty: viz. 1. of Affiance, relatively to his Power. 31 2.
of Thankfulness, relatively to his Love. 32 3. of Service relatively to his
Right. 33 II. FREELY. As to us; who paid nothing toward it: 34 -- 37 But yet
a valuable price paid by our Redeemer. 38 Inferences thence: To exclude Merit.
39 -- But not Endeavors. 40 The Conclusion.
Sermon VIII. Ad Aulam, on ROMANS xv. 5.
Sect. 1 -- 2 THe Scope and Division of the Text. 3 -- 5 THE FORMALITY of the
Prayer. Observations thence, viz. I. Prayer to be joined with Instruction. 6 --
9 II. God the only Author of Peace. 10 III. Concerning the Style FIVE
ENQUIRIES, viz. 11 -- 13 1. Why the God of Patience? 14 -- 16 2. -- Why of
Consolation? 17 -- 19 3. Of the Choice of these two Attributes; 20 4. -- Their
Conjunction; 21 5. -- and Order. 22 In the matter of the Prayer; three
Particulars. 23 I. THE THING prayed for: viz. Like mindedness, 24 -- 26 --
Opened; 27 -- and Pressed, upon these Considerations. 28 1. That we are members
of the same Body, 29 2. -- and of the same Family. 30 3. That it forwardeth the
building up of Gods Church. 31 -- 33 4. -- but the want of it gives Scandal to
the Enemies thereof. 34 -- 35 II. The FORMER QUALIFICATION: importing an
agreement, 1. Universal, 36 -- 38 2. Mutual. 39 -- 40 III. The Later
QUALIFICATION: importing an agreement, 1. according unto Truth and Godliness.
41 -- 42 2. after The Example of Christ. 43 The Conclusion.
Sermon IX. Ad Aulam, on 1 TIMOTHY iii. 16.
Sect. 1 -- 4. THe Occasion, Scope and Division of THE TEXT. 5 -- 6 Of the word
Mystery. 7 I. POINT. The Gospel A GREAT MYSTERY. Because. 8 -- 9 -- 1. it could
not have been known; 10 -- 13 -- 2. had it not been revealed, and 14 -- 15 --
3. being revealed, cannot be perfectly comprehended. 16 -- 17 INFERENCES
thence, I. Reason not to be the measure of Faith. 18 -- 19 II. Disquisition of
Truth to be within the bounds of Sobriety. 20 -- 21 III. Offense not to be
taken at the difference of Opinions among Christians. 22 -- 23 II. POINT.
Christianity a Mystery of Godliness: In regard 24 -- 26 1. both of the general
Scope thereof; 27 2. and of the special Parts thereof; 28 3. and the means of
conserving it. 29 -- 31 INFERENCES thence, I. for the trial of Doctrines: 32 --
33 -- with application to the present Church of England. 34 II. For the
ordering of our Lives. 35 The Conclusion.
Sermon X. Ad Aulam, on PSALM. cxix. 75.
Sect. 1. THe Division of THE TEXT. 2 -- 6 What is meant by the Judgments of
God. 7 POINT I. The righteousness of Gods Judgments, 1. as proceeding from him;
8 -- 9 2. as deserved by us. 10 INFERENCES thence. 1. Not to murmur against the
ways of Gods providence. 11 2. but to submit our wills to his. 12 -- 14 David's
many troubles: 15 -- 17 -- and God the causer thereof. 18 POINT II. That God
causes his servants to be troubled, it is out of his faithfulness: whether we
respect 19 1. his Promises, 20 -- 22 2. or their Relations. 23 The Inference
thence: To bear troubles cheerfully. 24 -- 25 POINT III. The faithfulness of
God in sending troubles evidenced from. 26 -- 30 1. The End, he aims at
therein. 31 -- 34 2. The Proportion, he holds therein. 35 -- 36 3. The
Issues, he gives thereout.
Sermon XI. Ad Aulam. I. Ser. on 1 COR. x. 23.
Sect. 1 -- 2. THe Scope and Division of the Text. 3 -- 4 All things meant of
Indifferent things only. 5 What things are Indifferent. 6 -- 8 POINT I. The
Liberty we have to indifferent things. 9 -- 10 The Error of those that
overmuch restrain this Liberty 11 -- 14 -- blamed: as 1. unrighteous in it
self; 15 -- 22 -- 2. Dangerous in the Consequents. 23 With some APPLICATION to
this Church. 24 The chief Causes of that Error discovered: 25 -- 27 -- viz. 1.
Ignorance, 28 -- 30 2. and Partiality. 31 POINT II. All Christians have title
to this Liberty: 32 -- The Unregenerate as well as the Godly; 33 -- 35 -- And
the Clergy, as the Laity. 36 The Conclusion.
Sermon XII. Ad Aulam, II. Ser. on 1 COR. x. 23.
Sect. 1 -- 2. THe Scope and Division of the Text. 3 -- 5 OBSEKV. I. Expediency
not considerable, but in Lawful things only. 6 -- Illustrated by the contrary
Examples of David: -- In the matter of Saul; 7 -- and in the matter of Uriah. 8
-- 11 THE INFERENCE thence. Not to do any unlawful thing, seem it never so
expedient. 12 OBSERVE. II. Things otherwise lawful, to be forborne when they are
inexpedient. 13 -- 16 What Expedience is: 17 -- and how it differs from
lawfulness. 18 THE INFERENCE. Expediency to be examined in all other actions,
as well as Lawfulness. 19 -- 21 Two important Reasons thereof. 22 -- 23 OBSERVE.
III. Edification the measure of Expediency. 24 -- 27 what is Edification. 28 --
29 In the exercise of Liberty; much left to the Discretion, and to the Charity
of particular men. 30 -- 33 34 -- 35 A necessary Caution: touching the
Authority of Superiors in different things. 36 -- 41 The Cases of Obedience
and Scandal compared. 24, etc. Our whole Duty for Practice summed up in Three
Rules.
Sermon XIII. Ad Aulam, on ROMANS xv. 6.
Sect. 1 -- 2. THe Scope and Division of the Text. 3 -- 9 The words [That you
may glorify God] opened in Six Particulars. 10 -- 11 POINT I. The Glory of God
to be intended as our chiefest End. 12 Reas. 1. as being the chiefest Good. 13
-- 2. and that whereunto we are both in Duty, 14 -- 3. and Wisdom obliged. 15
Inferences of Admonition. That we do not either -- 1. bestow upon any Creature;
any of that Glory which is due to God. 16 -- 2. or draw to our selves, any of
that Glory which is due to God. 17 -- 3. or accept, if cast upon us by others,
any of that Glory which is due to God. 18 -- 19 -- 4. nor entitle the glory of
God to our own passion or interests, 20 -- 22 -- with some application hereof.
23 -- 24 POINT II. God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. With the Reasons,
both of the Style it self; 25 -- 26 -- And why it is here used; 27 POINT III.
God to be glorified of us: first with the mind; 28 -- and then with the mouth.
29 POINT IV. God is much glorified* by Christian unity and Likemindedness. 30
-- 31 -- Illustrated: from the resemblance of Music; 32 -- 33 -- and from the
resemblance of Building; 34 -- 35 -- and that in regard both of Dispatch; 36 --
37 -- and Strength. 38 The Conclusion.
Sermon XIV. Ad Aulam, on PSALM. xxvii. 10.
Sect. 1 -- 2. THe Scope and Division of the Text. 3 The words in the former
part of the Text opened. 4 POINT I. A possibility of failing in all worldly
helps. 5 -- 7 I. Either out of Choice; Instanced -- 1. in Parents, 8 -- 9 2.
and all other Friends; 10 -- 12 Or out of Necessity. 13 -- 15 The Inference.
Not to trust in any Creature. 16 The words in the latter part of the Text
opened. 17 POINT II. Gods help ready, when all others fail. 18 Proved 1. by
Instances; 19 2. by Reasons: taken partly from the Nature of God; viz. 20 -- 22
1. his Love, 23 -- 24 2. his Wisdom, 25 3. his Power, 26 4. his Eternity; 27 --
28 -- Partly from his Promises. 29 -- 32 Inferences thence. 33 The Conclusion.
Sermon XV. Ad Aulam, on LUKE. xvi. 8.
Sect. 1. THe Scope of the whole Parable, 2 -- and of the Text in particular. 3
The Division of the Text. 4 POINT I. The persons here compared, and opposed. 5
I. Who are meant by the children of the world. 6 -- 8 -- and why they are so
called. 9 -- 13 II. What is meant by Light. 14 -- 15 -- and who by Children of
Light. 16 The Inference, from their Opposition. 11 -- 18 POINT II. the children
of the world wiser than the children of Light. As being 19 1. More Sagacious;
than they. 20 2. More Industrious; than they. 21 3. More Cunning; than they. 22
-- 23 4. More United, than they. 24 -- -- 28 -- -- with sundry Reasons thereof:
29 Two Inferences thence; 1. Not to be scandalized at their prosperous
successes. 30 -- 31 2. But to emulate their wisdom. 32 -- 33 POINT III. The
Worldlings wisdom but folly. 34 -- -- Proved; and 35 -- discovered in sundry
particulars.
Sermon XVI. Ad Aulam, on HEB. xii. 3.
Sect. 1 -- 3. THe Occasion, Coherence, Scope, 4 -- and Division of the Text. 5
-- 6 The former general part. Wherein 4 Particulars; viz. I. The Malady;
Weariness. 7 -- 12 II. The Inward Cause; Faintness. 13 -- 18 III. The part
affected; The Soul or Mind, 19 -- 22 -- with the Inference thence. 23 -- 24 IV.
The Persons: and what fear there might be of their fainting under the Cross: in
regard 25 1. Of the greatness of the Trial. 26 -- 29 2. Of the natural Frailty
of man. 30 3. Of the neglect of watchfulness and preparation. 31 -- 32 4. Of
Gods disertion. 33 -- 35 The Inference thence. 36 -- 37 A Caution: concerning
the lawfulness of shunning afflictions: 38 -- 43 -- -- sundry Objections to the
contrary answered. 44, etc. A short view of the chief heads contained in the
Second General Part.
Sermon I. Ad Magistratum. I. Ser. on PROVE. xxiv. 10. -- 12.
Sect. 1. THe Scope and 2 -- 3 Division of the Text. 4 -- 5 The main duty, The
delivering of the Oppressed, proposed and proved 6 The Necessity thereof
inferred from diverse considerations; Some respecting 7 -- 8 I. God; viz. 1. his
Command. -- 2. his Example. 12 -- 13 II. Our selves, viz. The power we have; 14
-- 2. the need we may have. 15 -- 16 III. Those that are oppressed; viz. 1. The
greatness of their distress 17 -- 2. the paucity of their friends. 18 -- 22 --
3. the equity of their Cause. 23 -- 26 IV. The Effects of the Duty; viz. 1.
Honor to the Calling. 27 2. the blessing of the poor upon the Person. 28 3. a
reward from God for the Work. 29 -- 32 4. Mercy to the Land. 33 -- 34 The Sum
of all, and the Conclusion.
Sermon II. Ad Magistratum, II. Ser. on PROVE. xxiv. 10. -- 12.
Sect. 1. THe Scope, and 2 -- 5 -- Division of the Text. 6 Three Points
proposed to be handled. 7 I. POINT. The Excuse [We knew it not] may be
sometimes just, Either through 8 I. Ignorance of the Fact. When the oppressed 9
either have not 1. the Opportunity, to complain. 10 either have not 2. the Mind
to complain. 11 II. Doubtfulness in point of Right. Through 1. uncertainty of
the Evidence, 12 2. defect of proofs, 13 3. artifices to becloud the Truth. 14
-- 15 III. Inability to help. Through. 16 -- 18 1. some defect in the Laws, 19
-- 20 2. the iniquity of the Times. 21 -- 24 Inferences thence. 1. Governors
not to be rashly censured, if all be not remedied, 25 2. -- nor discouraged, if
they have done their part toward it. 26 -- 27 II. POINT. That Excuse sometimes
but pretended. 28 -- 29 -- Referred therefore to the judgment of the heart. 30
-- 32 III. POINT. That Excuse, where it is causelessly pretended, of no avail
with God. Because it can 33 1. neither escape his search, 34 2. nor avoid his
knowledge, 35 3. nor exempt from his punishment. 36 The Inference thence.
Sermon III. Ad Magistratum, on 1 SAMUEL xii. 3.
Sect. 1 -- 3. THe Occasion, 4 -- Scope, and 5 -- 7 -- Division of the Text. 8
POINT I. Samuels voluntary offering himself to the trial; 9 -- 13 -- Five
probable Reasons thereof. 14 -- 15 POINT II. Samuels confidence of his own
Integrity. 16 -- 18 The Inference and Application. 19 -- 21 POINT III. Samuels
Justice, I. In disclaiming all unjust gain. II. In general. 22 -- 24 -- With
the general inference thence, 25 -- 26 -- and special application to
Judicature, 27 -- 30 -- in the Particulars; viz. 1. Fraud, 31 -- 34 2.
Oppression, 35 -- 39 3. Bribery, 49 -- 41 (a special property whereof is to
blind the eyes.) 42, etc. III. In offering Restitution.
Sermon VIII. Ad Populum, on PROVE. xix. 21.
Sect. 1 -- 3. BEtween Gods ways and ours, 4 -- 5 Three remarkable Differences
in the Text. 7 -- 14 DIFF. I. in their Names, 15 -- 17 -- II. in their Number.
18 -- 21 III. in their manner of Existing. 22 REASONS thereof: taken from 23 --
24 1. The Sovereignty of God. 25 -- 26 2. The Eternity of God. 27 -- 28 3. The
Wisdom of God. 29 -- 30 4. The Power of God. 31 INFERENCES thence: 32 -- 3 The
First. 34 The Second. 35 -- 37 The Third. 38 -- 39 The Fourth. 40 -- 41 The
Fifth. 42 An Objection 43 -- 44 -- Answered.
AD AULAM.
The first Sermon.
WHITE HALL, November 1631.
Eccles. 7. 1. A good Name is better than precious Ointment: and --
1. WHere the Author professes himself a Preacher, it cannot be improper to
style the Treatise a Sermon. This Book is such; a Sermon* and, the Preacher
being a King, a Royal Sermon. He took a very large, but withal a very barren
Text. His Text the whole World, with Quicquid agunt homines votum, timor, ira,
volu^tat, Gaudia, discursus. -- Juvenal. Satyr. 1.
all the pleasures, and profits, and honors, and endeavors, and businesses,
and events that are to be found under the Sun. From which so large a Text,
after as exact a survey thereof taken, as unwearied diligence in searching,
joined with incomparable wisdom in judging could make, he could not yet with
all his skill raise any more than this one bare and short Conclusion; proposed
in the very entrance of his Sermon, as the only Doctrinal Point to be insisted
upon throughout: Vanity Eccles. 1. 2.
of Vanities, says the Preacher, Vanity of Vanities, all is vanity. This he
proves all along by sundry Instances, many in number, and various for the
kind, to make the induction perfect: that so having fully established the main
Doctrine, (which he therefore often inculcateth in his passage along,) that all
things in the World are but Vanity; he might the more effectually enforce the
main Use which he intended to infer from it, and reserveth (as good Orators use
to do) for the close and Epilogue of the whole Sermon; namely, that quitting
the World and the Vanities thereof, men should betake themselves to that which
alone is free from vanity, to wit, the fear and service of God, Eccl. 12. 13.
Hear the conclusion of the whole matter: fear God, and keep his Commandments:
for this is the whole duty of man.

2. To the men of the world, whose affections are set upon the World, and who
propose and promise to themselves much contentment and happiness from the
things of this World: as the main Doctrine it self is, so are most of the
Proofs and passages of the whole Sermon, very Paradoxes. We may (not unfitly)
therefore call this Book Solomon's Paradoxes. Look no further than a few of the
next following verses of this very Chapter. To prefer Ver. 2.
the house of mourning before the house of feasting; -- 3.
sorrow before laughter; -- 5.
rebukes before Praises; -- 6.
the end of a thing when it shall be no more, before the beginning of it, when
it is ing and coming on; a soft patient suffering spirit before a stout and
haughty mind; and -- 12.
learning before riches, as the Preacher here does: what are all these, and
other like many, if we respect the (...). Chrysip. apud Plutarch. de contrar.
Stoic.
common judgment of the World, but so many Paradoxes? The Writings of Zeno and
Chrysippus, (if we had them extant) with the whole School of Stoics, would not
afford us Paradoxes more or greater, than this little book of Solomon does.
There are no less than two in this short verse. Wherein, quite oppositely to
what value the World usually sets upon them, Solomon out of the depth of
that Wisdom, wherewith God had filled his heart, prefers a good Name before
precious Ointment; and the day of death before the day of ones birth. Paradoxes
both: Besides the common opinion; but (...). Cleanthes apud eund.
most agreeable to truth and reason both: as to him that shall duly examine
them both, will clearly appear. It will find us work enough at this time, to
examine but the former only, in those words. A good name is better than a
precious Ointment.

3. Wherein before I come to the pith of the matter; I cannot but take notice
of an Elegancy observable in the very bark and rind of the Letters in the
Hebrew Text, (...). The Figure Paronomasia, as Rhetoricians call it; a near
affinity both in the Letters and Sound, between the words, whereby the opposite
Terms of the Comparison are expressed, (...) the Name, and (...) the Ointment.
Such allusions and agnominations are no strangers in either of the holy
Tongues: but of frequent use both in the Old and New Testaments. Examples might
be alleged many: As out of the Old Testament: Jer. 1. 11. 12. Ose. 9. 15. Amos
5. 5. and 8. 2. Ezekiel. 7. 6. And out of the New many more: (...) and (...), Joh.
15. 2. (...), and (...), 2 These. 3. 11. (...), Heb. 11. 37. (...), three
together as it were with a breath, Romans 1. 29. 31. But omitting the rest, I
shall commend unto you but two, but those very remarkable ones: out of either
Testament, one. The one in Isa. 24. where the Prophet expressing the variety of
Gods inevitable judgments under three several appellations. Isa. 24. 18. See
also Isa. 5. 7.
The Fear, the Pit and the Snare; uses three several words, but agreeing much
with one another in letters and sound: (...) Pachadh, the Fear; (...) Pachath,
the Pit; (...) Pach, the Snare. The other in Romans 12. where the Apostle
exhorting men not to think of themselves too highly, but according to sobriety,
sets it off with exquisite elegancy thus, Romans 12. 3.
(...).

4. The more inconsiderate, (that I say not, uncharitable and unjust) they,
that pass their censures very freely (as I have sometimes heard some do, fondly
and rashly enough) upon Preachers: When now and then in their popular Sermons
they let fall the like Elegancies, scatter in here and there some flowers of
Elooution among. As if all use of Rhetorical ornaments did savor of an
unsanctified spirit; or were the rank superfluities of a carnal Wit; or did
adulterate, corrupt, and flatten 1 Pet. 2. 2.
the sincere milk of the Word. Or as if they that made use of such exornations,
did 2 Cor. 4. 5.
preach themselves and their own wit, rather than Christ Jesus and his Cross;
or else sought to make 1 Cor. 2. 5.
the Faith of their hearers to stand rather in in the wisdom of men, than in
the power of God.

5. These are the common Objections, but they are soon answered. I confess
there may be a fault this way, and (in young men especially, before their
judgments are grown to the just ripeness) many times there is: And so far the
exceptions made here against, may be (in some degree) admitted. (...) --
caeteraque hujusmodi scitamenta, quae isti (...) - immodice faciunt and
rancide. A. Gell. 18. noct. 8.
Affectation in this, as in every other thing, is both tedious and ridiculous:
And in this by so much more than in other things, by how much more the
condition of the person, and the nature of the business, require a sober,
serious and grave deportment. Those Preachers therefore, by a little vanity in
this kind, take the readiest way to bring, both their own discretions into
question, and the Sacred Word they handle into contempt, that play with words
as children do with a feather. A too too Transtucida illa and versi^olor
quorundam elocutio, res ipsas effeminat, quae illo verborum habitu vestiuntur.
Quint. 8. in prooem. -- nimiumque depicta. Cic. in Oratore.
lightcoloured habit, certainly suteth not well with the gravity of a Sermon.
But, as it will not ill-become a sober grave Matron (though she will never be
light and garish, yet) to be always decent in her attire; yea, and sometimes
also (upon fit occasions) to put on her Jewels, and other costlier ornaments:
So neither is it blameworthy, but rather a commendable thing in Preachers of
the Gospel, (though they ought to avoid by all means all fruitless ostentation
of a frothy Wit, yet) to endeavor at all times, so far as their gifts and
leisure will permit, to express themselves in pertinent and proper forms of
speech; yea, and sometimes also (as occasion may require, and especially Dandum
nonnihil temporibus atque auribus, nitidius aliquid atque affectatius
postulantibus. Quintil. 12. 10.
the disposition and temper of the hearers) to put their matter into a more
accurate and elaborate dress, and to adorn their discourses with the choicer
habiliments of Art.

6. Provided, First that it be done seasonably, discreetly, and with judgment:
Sparingly, and as it were Quod est in dicendo pulcherrimum, sed quam sequitur,
non cum affectatur. Quint. 8. in proem Sententia sine pigmentis, fucoque
puerili. Cic. 2. de Orat.
offering it self fairly, and without enforcement. And secondly, that it be
directed to the right end: Which is, not to gain glory or applause to the
speaker (that is a base and unworthy end:) much less to poison the Judgments,
or pervert the Consciences of their Hearers, by drawing them the more easily
thereby into Error or Sin (that is a cursed and pernicious end.) But either
thereby the better to inform the Understanding, or Excitatoria lamina. Quint.
12. 10.
to work upon the affections, or to quicken the attention, or to succor the
memories, or some other way to Romans 15. 2. -- hic ipso proderat, quod placebat.
de Cicerone Quintil. Ibid.
please their Neighbor for his good unto edification. I may not dwell on a
by-note: therefore in brief thus. If Preachers seek with wisdom to find out
pleasant words: besides the practice of the holy Prophets and Apostles to
warrant them therein, they have our Preachers warrant also for it. Who, as he
professes Eccl. 12. 10
elsewhere the doing of it, so here he has actually done it. Look but at the
very outside, the shell of the Letter, and you must grant, that the Preacher
has found out pleasant words.

7. But where he professes that, he professes another thing withal; without
which, pleasant words would be either to none, or to bad purpose; and that is,
that the things that should be written, should be upright, even words of Truth.
Search we therefore a little into the pith and kernel of the matter; and see if
he have performed that part also, as well as the other. A good name is better
than precious Ointment. The Terms of the comparison are (...) and (...); a
Name, an Ointment. The common Attribute wherein they both agree, is Goodness:
The name good, the Ointment good. The difference is in the inequality of
degree: Name and Ointment both good; yet so, that of the two Goods, the good
Name is better than the good Ointment. A good Name I understand then to be,
when Consentiens laus bonorum. Cic. 2. Tuscul.
the common voice of men, (either all, or most, or best) does from the approved
evidence of a man's worthy carriage in the constant tenor of his life and
conversation, give Gloria est frequens de aliquo fama cum laud. Cic. 2. de
invent.
a frequent and commendable testimony thereunto.

8. Then for the other Term in the comparison; whereas we read it Ointment, the
Greek calls it (...). Sept.
Oil. Between which two though there be some See Luke 7. 46.
difference, and accordingly as well in the Greek and Latin Tongues as in the
English, that difference is acknowledged by allowing them distinct names (...).
Eustath. in Iliad. and psgr;.
(...) and (...) in the Greek, Unguentum and Oleum in the Latin, as well as
Ointment and Oil in our English: yet the same Hebrew word comprehends both;
and the words are very often promiscuously and reciprocally used the one for
the other in the Greek, Latin, and most other Languages; because they agree
much in the same qualities, and are much of like use: and the most ancient
confections of Ointments did consist for the most part of Oil, (...). Athenae.
lib. 5.
with some addition of herbs, spices, or other ingredients. Yea, and even yet,
in the most precious and exquisite Ointments (such as are either most
aromatical for smell, or of most sovereign operation for medicine) Unguentum;
oleum conditum. (...). Clem. Alex. 2. paed. 8. Omnia Unguenta fiunt mixto
olivo: nam o'eum est materia apta suscipiendi^ odoribus, servandisque Casaub.
ad Pers. Sat 2.
common Oil has a very great part in the confection, and is therefore esteemed
as the basts or foundation of all Ointments. But whether Oil or Ointment, the
word seems to be here used (by a kind of Synecdoche) to signify all the
delights of the Sons of men. Because anciently, and in those Eastern Countries
especially, See Marsil. Cognat. 2. var. observe. 9.
Oils and Ointments were much in use, and in great request for pleasing
Recreans membra olei liquor. Plin. 12. not. hist. 1.
the senses, or comforting the brain, for refreshing the spirits, for chearing
the countenance, for suppling the joints, and for fundry other services tending
to delight and cheerfulness; Wherein they abounded even unto Wantonness and
Luxury. Whose excess therein, as in all other manner of riotous and voluptuous
living, was soon followed by the Greeks: and thence derived into Italy; and
entertained once at Rome, quickly overspread the greatest part of the World,
then under her Empire, as appears by the frequent complaints, and other
passages in the Writings of the Learned of those times. Not to speak of the
great use of Unguentis legatis, non tantum ea legata. videntur, quibus unguimur
voluptatis causa, sed and valetudinis. 1. in argento. ff. de aur. and arg. leg.
--
Oils and Ointments then, and ever since, in order to health, as well as
pleasure.

9. The Epithete here given to Ointments, is in some former Translations Good;
and so the Hebrew (...) properly signifies: but in our last rendered Precious.
All to one effect, for good things are ever precious; and the better they are,
the more precious. The meaning is, as if Solomon had said, A good Name is
better than the most fragrant and odoriferous Ointments, which for their
exquisite pleasantness are held in greatest price and estimation.

10. The word Better, which decideth the whole controversy between the
compared terms, and is the just importance of that which the Hebrews in their
Idiom (for want of the comparitve degree) express by the Preposition (...)
prefixed; must here be understood agreeably to the subject matter; and with
reference to Bonum jucundum Better; that is to say, more pleasant, more
contentful: or as Solomon says Prove. 22. 1.
elsewhere, comparing a good Name with Gold and Silver, Desiderabilius, more to
be wished or desired than a precious Ointment; or Eligibilius, in the choice to
be preferred before it.

11. From the Words thus opened, the whole result is briefly this: A good Name
is a thing very worthy to be of every good man highly esteemed; and to be held
much more valuable than Riches, pleasures, honors, or whatsoever other outward
things the men of this World can place their utmost felicity in. Wise Solomon
has elsewhere delivered his judgment as positively as may be in this matter,
concerning one of these, and that Prima fere vota and cunctis notissima
templis, Divitiae. Juvenal. Sat. 10.
the chiefest of all the rest in most men's account, the Worldlings Summum
bonum, Riches (Prove. 22.) Prove. 22. 1.
A good name is rather to be chosen than great Riches: and loving favor rather
than silver and gold. And the wise Son of Sirach also prefers a good name
before Sirac. 41. 12, 13.
a thousand great Treasures of Gold. Observe the gradation; Before gold,
Treasures of Gold, great treasures of gold, thousands of great treasures of
gold, yea and put life it self in to boot, Sirach 41. Compare we a little the
most esteemed delights of the sons of men, those Ointments that are most
precious in their esteem, with a good Name: and see if it do not in very many
respects go beyond them all.

12. If we should take an exact Inventory of all the particulars the World
affords, which worldly men hunt after with such eagerness, that they not only
spend all their strength and travel, but adventure their healths also and lives
in the pursuit; not so only, but for the obtaining whereof they truck away
their precious souls too: We shall find them all to come under one of these
three heads, whereunto St. John has reduced them, summing them up as it were
in the gross (1 Ioh. 2.) 1 John 2. 6.
The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. (Haec tria
pro trino numine mundus habet.) These are the things so much magnified and
adored in the World; with one or other of these baits Satan tricketh up all his
temptations, when he lays wait for our souls; Riches, Honors, and Pleasures.
And to each of these may the word Ointment in the Text (either by way of
Metaphor, or Metonymie of the adjunct) be very well extended. For Riches first,
it appears that Ointments were of ancient time accounted, and are so taken
notice of by Historians, as a special part of Castris Darii Regis expugratis,
in reliquo ejus apparatu Alexander cepit scrinium unguentorum. Plin. 13. not.
hist. 1.
the Royal treasure of Kings and Princes. And therefore are 2 Kings 20. 13.
the spices and precious Ointments reckoned amongst the things which Hezekiah
showed to the Babylonish Ambassadors, when with vain ostentation he desired
they should see the royal wealth and magnificence of his Treasures Ointments
also secondly, were the Ensigns and Symbols of the greatest honors, as being
used in the solemn consecration and inauguration of men into the Kingly and
Priestly dignities. Among the Heathens indeed in imitation of the Hebrews (as
many other of their rites came in upon that account,) but among the Hebrews, by
special appointment from God himself. Insomuch as Pineda.
some Interpreters conceive it not improbable, that Solomon in this place might
have respect to those Regal and S^c^rdotal anointings. But above all, thirdly,
Ointments were the special emblems and expressions of mirth and jollity* and
therefore were used in entertainments, and at feasts. Testimonies hereof from
the Writings of Poets and Histori^ns, both Greek and Latin, in great abundance,
besides that I find them ready v. Franc. Luisin. 2. parerg. 16. Bochi. observe.
in Ps. 22. F.
collected by sundry learned men, are of themselves obvious every where. But
finding store enough also in the holy Scripture, I need not recite any other.
There we read Isa. 61. 3.
of the Oil of joy, and Psalm. 45. 7.
the Oil of gladness. When thou fastest, says our savior, do not by an
affected sullenness and sadness make ostentation of thy fasting* ^^ hypocrites
do: but Mat. 6. 17, 18.
unge caput, etc. make semblance rather, by anointing thy head, and washing thy
face, as if thou were going to a feast; that so thou may be out of the reach
of all temptation to vain glory that way, while thou do not appear to men to
fast. When David records in Psalm. 23. how ^ountifully God had dealt with him
and showed him his goodness plenteously, he sets it forth in this manner;
Psalm. 23. 5.
Tho have prepared a table before me, thou ^ust anointed my head with Oil, and
my cup runs over. To omit other places, hitherto tends that ironical
speech of our Preacher to the Epicure, Chap. 9. Eccl. 9. 7, ^.
Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy drink with a merry heart.
Let thy garments ^e always white, (another sign of rejoicing that) and let thy
head lack ^o ointment. Riches, Honors, Pleasures* you see Ointment has
somewhat to do with them all, and so the word may well comprehend them all.

13. Now then to enter into the Comparison: First, all these Ointments (even
the most precious of them) are equally common to the Good and Bad. The worst of
men may have as large a share in them, as the best: the most notorious vicious
liver, as the most ^minently virtuous* person. For though they be in truth
secretly disposed by the most wise and just hand of a divine providence: yet to
the outward appearance (and farther our eye will not pierce) the dispensation
of them seems to come from Chance rather than Justice, and Fortune rather
than Merit. This the Preacher took into his consideration and complains of
it, Chap. 9. as one of the great evils and vanities among those that are done
under the Sun* that Eccl. 9. 1, 3.
all (outward) things come ali^e to all, and that there is one event to the
righteous and to the wicked: and thence infers, that no man can know (so as
to pronounce thereof with any certainty) whether he be in the love or hatred of
God, by all that is before him. If in respect of these outward things there be
any difference between the Good and the Bad; the advantage is rather on the
worse side, bad men oftentimes having a larger portion thereof, than good men
have. Why the holy and wise God, the first cause of all things that happen*
suffers it so to be as to particulars; that is counsel to us, and we may not
search into those secrets: only we are assured in the general, that he does it
for just and gracious ends best known to himself. But as to second causes, we
see evidently reason enough to satisfy us, why it should be likely to fall out
thus rather than otherwise; if but in this, that wicked men, what worldly ends
they propose to themselves they pursue to the utmost, not boggling at any thing
that they think may conduce to the obtaining of the same, be it right or wrong;
whereas godly, and virtuous men make conscience both of End and Means, and will
neither pitch upon any unworthy End, nor adventure upon any unlawful means.
Has it not been always seen, and still is, and ever will be (more or less) to
the worlds end, That extorting Usurers, oppressing Landlords, unconscionable
Traders, corrupt Magistrates, and griping Officers, have gotten together the
greatest wealth, and most abounded in riches? That obsequious Flatterers,
temporizing Sycophants, per^idious Traitors, bold and insolent Intruders,
bribing and Simoniacal Chafferers, have climbed up the highest rounds of Civil
and Ecclesiastical perferments? That men of base and unmanly condition, rather
to be called beasts than men, if not Monsters rather than either of both, (such
as some of the old Assyrian and Persian Monarchs, and after them some of the
Roman Emperors were) have surfeited of pleasures to the full, and wallowed in
all manner of luxury and sensuality? Worthless and wicked men may swim up to
the chin in Rivers of oil, and have their heads and beards, yea and the very
skirts of their garments too, bedrencht in great abundance with the choicest of
these outward Ointments.

14. But a Good Name is Peculium bonorum. Gracious and virtuous men have a more
special interest, a kind of peculiarity in it: as being (in the ordinary course
of Gods providence) the proper effect, and (by his good blessing) for the most
part the most certain temporal reward of Virtue and Piety. Phil. 4. 8.
Si qua virtus, si qua laus, says the Apostle, Phil. 2. If there be any
virtue, if there be any praise: As if there could be no praise where there is
no virtue; no more than there can be a Gloria umbra virtutis est. Senec. Ep. 79.
shadow, where there is no body to cast it. It was Heb. 11. 2.
by faith (and the fruits of faith) that the Elders obtained a good report. The
Projectors of the Tower of Babel aimed by that building to get themselves Genesis
11. 4.
a name; and so they did: but the name was -- 9.
Babel, a name of Confusion; little comfort or honor to them. Many men are
ambitious of a great name; and sometimes they -- and quidem quod petierat,
assecutus est. de Paus^nia V^ler. Max. 8. 14.
get it too: as he that set Diana's Temple on fire, -- voto adispiscend e samae
latioris. Solin. c. 43.
only to be talked of. But a great name is one thing, and a good name another.
Greatness may get a man a great name; but goodness only a good name. You that
are great men, if you be not good withal; do what you can for the preservation
of your name and memory, use all your best wit and art, spend the most costly
perfumes and precious ointments you have about it: when you have done your
utmost endeavors, we may justly put that rebuke upon you, which the Disciples
did unjustly upon the good woman in the Gospel, Matt. 26. 8.
Quorsum perditio haec? Whereunto serves this waste? Oleum and operam: you
shall not be able, after all this expense of oil and toil, to preserve your
names from stench and putrefaction. It is nothing but godliness and
righteousness that can do that. Prove. 10. 7.
The memorial of the just (when Envy and Calumny have done their worst to blast
it) shall yet be blessed: but the name of the wicked (when Hypocrisy and
Flattery have done their best to prevent it) shall rot notwithstanding. A good
name then is therefore first more excellent than any precious Ointment (either
in the Letter or Metaphor) because less common.

14. Compare, secondly, the delight and comforts, and contents of both: and see
the issue. Oils and Ointments do give exceeding great delight to the senses; so
as scarce any one kind of thing more: which perhaps might be some cause, why
Solomon should here make choice of them, rather than any other things, whereby
to express outward and sensual pleasures. And this they do by three distinct
qualities: whereby they affect three distinct senses. The Qualities are;
Laevor, Nitor, Odor: The Senses affected therewith, Feeling, Seeing, Smelling.
The first Quality is Laevor; a kind of gentle softness, and smoothness, and
supple glibbiness: wherewith the touch is much delighted. Upon which quality
David the Father, and Solomon the Son, do both reflect in those proverbial
speeches of theirs: where speaking, the one of flattering dissemblers, says
Psalm. 55. 21.
Molliti super oleum, Their words are softer than Oil, Psalm. 55. the other of
the whorish woman, says Prove. 5. 3.
her lips drop like a honeycomb; and her mouth is smoother than Oil, Prove. 5.
The second quality of Oils and Ointments is Nitor, a kind of brightness and
varnish, which they cast upon other bodies, making them look fresh and glister:
which quality takes the eye, and affects the sight. As colors laid in Oil,
have graceful verdure and luster beyond those that are not so laid. Of which
quality the Psalmist makes special mention, Psalm. 104. where describing the
manifold works of God, among other things he says that God brings food out
of the Earth, as namely, Wine to make glad the heart of man, Psalm. 104. 4.
and Oil to make him a cheerful countenance, or (as our last Translation has
it, somewhat nearer the Letter, but to the same sense) to make his face to
shine. Their third Quality is Odor; the sweet fragrancy which they send forth
round about them to a good distance: which makes them wondrous pleasant to the
Smell. The Poets therefore sometimes call Ointments and Perfumes -- perfusus
liquidis urget odoribus. Hor. 1. carm. 5.
Odors in the abstract: as if they were nothing else but smell. To this quality
do refer those reciprocal speeches in the Canticles, of the Spouse to her
wellbeloved in the first Chapter, Cant. 1. 3.
Because of the savor of thy good Ointments therefore do the Virgins love
thee; And of him again to her, in the fourth Chapter, -- -- 4. 10.
How fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse? How much better is thy love than
Wine? And the smell of thine Ointments than all Spices? When Mary poured out
her costly Spikenard on Christ's feet, the Story tells us, that Joh. 12. 3.
all the house was filled with the odor of the Ointment, Joh. 12.

16. Ointments then are good and pleasant. But as Aristotle sometimes
pronounced of the Rhodian and Lesbian Wine, when he had tasted of both; that --
utrumque oppido bonum sed (...). A Gel. 13. noct. Attic. 5.
the Rhodian was good too, but the Lesbian was the pleasanter: So it may as
reasonably be pronounced in the present contest, that though the precious
Ointment be good and pleasant in his kind, yet the good Name for goodness and
pleasantness is far beyond it. For whereas the precious Ointment, though it
have in it much variety of pleasure in regard of the three now-mentioned
qualities: yet can it bring all that delight no farther than to the outward
senses of Touch, Sight and Smell. As for that passage in Psalm. 109. Psalm. 109.
18.
It shall enter like Oil into his bones: It is perhaps rather to be understood
as an hyperbolical expression, than to be taken as exactly true in rigore
loquendi. But as for a good Name, that pierces farther than either bones or
marrow: It enters into the inner man, and brings rejoicing to the very
heart and ^oul. Prove. 15. 13.
A good report makes the bones fat, says Solomon: and that, I ween, is
another-gates matter, than to make the face to shine. This for material Oil.
Then for those other outward things, which for some respects (I told you) might
be also comprehended under the name of Ointments; Riches, Honors, and worldly
Pleasures: alas (...). Eurlp. in Hecub. Act. 2.
how poor and sorry comforts are they to a man that has forfeited his good
Name; that lives in no credit not reputation; that groaneth under the contempt
and reproach, and infamy of every honest, or but sober man! Whereas he that by
godly and virtuous Actions, by doing Justice, and exercising Mercy, and
ordering himself and his affairs discreetly, holds up his good Name and
reputation, has that yet to -- tamen, dum existimatio est integra, facile
consolatur honestas egestatem. Cic. pro Quinct.
comfort himself withal, and to fill his bones as with marrow and fatness;
though encompassed otherwise with many outward Ego si bonam famam mihi servasso
sat ero dives. Plaut. Mostel. 1. 3.
wants and calamities. Without which, even life it self would be unpleasant, I
say not to a perfect Christian only, but even to every ingenuous moral man. The
worthier ^ort of men among the Heathens, would have chosen rather to have died
the most cruel deaths, than to have lived infamous under shame and disgrace.
And do not those words of St. Paul (1 Cor. 9.) show, that he was not much
otherwise minded? 1 Cor. 9. 15. (...). Pind. Olymp. 7. 2.
It were better for me to dye, than that any man should make my glorying void.
Thus a good Name is better than any precious Ointment (take it as you will,
properly, or tropically) because it yields more solid content and
satisfaction to him that enjoys it, than the other does.

17. Compare them thirdly, in those performances whereunto they enable us. Oils
and Ointments, by a certain penetrative faculty that they have, being well
cha^ed in, do -- ut corpus unctione recreavi. Senec. Epist. 53.
supple the joints, and - (...). Joach. Camerar. problem. decur. 8. 1.
strengthen the sinews very much, and thereby greatly enable the body for
action, making it more nimble and vigorous, than otherwise it would be. Whence
it was, that among the Greeks, and from their example among the Romans, and in
other Nations, those that were to exercise Arms, or other feats of Activity in
their solemn Games, especially Exercent patrias oleo labente palaestras.
Virgil. Aen. 3.
Wrestlers, did usually by frictions and anointings, prepare and fit their
bodies for those Athletick performances, to do them with more agility and less
weariness. Insomuch as Chrysostom and other Greek Fathers almost every where
use the words (...) and (...), not only when they speak of those preparatory
advantages, (such as are prayer, fasting, meditation of Christ's Sufferings, or
of the Joys of Heaven, and the like) wherewith Christians may fortify and
secure themselves, when they are to enter the combat with their spiritual
enemies; but more generally to signify any preparing or fitting of a person
for any manner of action whatsoever.

18. But how much more excellent then is a good name? Which is of such mighty
consequence and advantage for the expediting of any honest enterprise that we
take in hand, either in our Christian course or civil life in this World? It is
an old saying, taken up indeed in relation to another matter somewhat distant
from that we are now treating of; but it holds no less true in this, than in
that other respect: Duo cum faciunt idem, non est idem. Let two men speak --
(...) Euripid. in Hecub. act. 2.
the same words, give the same advice, pursue the same business, drive the same
design; with equal right, equal means, equal diligence, every other thing
equal: yet commonly the success is strangely different, if the one be well
thought of, and the other labor of an ill name. So singular an advantage is
it, for the crowning of our endeavors with good success, to be in a good name.
If there be a good opinion held of us, and our names once up, (whether we
deserve it or no:) whatsoever we do is well taken; whatsoever we propose is
readily entertained; our counsels, yea, and rebukes too, carry weight and
authority with them. By which means we are enabled (if we have but grace to
make that good use thereof,) to do Nec vero negligenda est fama: nec mediocre
telum ad res gerendas existimare oportet benevolentiam civium Cic. de amicit.
the more good, to bring the more glory to God, to give better countenance to
his truth, and to good causes and things. Whereas on the other side, (...)
Chrysostom. Tom* (edit. Savil) 6. Orat. 17.
if we be in an ill name (whether we deserve it or no:) all our speeches and
actions are ill-interpreted; no man regards much what we say or do; our
proposals are suspected; our counsels and rebukes, though wholesome and just,
scorned and kicked at: so as those men we speak for, that side we adhere to,
those causes we defend, those businesses we manage, shall lie under some
prejudice, and be like to speed the worse, for the evil opinion that is held of
us. We know well it should be otherwise: Non quis, sed quid. As the Magistrate
that exercises public judgment, should lay aside all respect of the person,
and look at the cause only: so should we all in our private judgings of other
men's speeches and actions, look barely upon the truth of what they say, and the
goodness of what they do, and accordingly esteem of both; neither better nor
worse, more or less, for whatsoever fore-conceits we may have of the person.
Otherwise how can we avoid the charge of having Jam. 2. 1.
the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of Glory with respect of persons?
But yet since (...) Menand.
men are corrupt, and will be partial this way, do we what we can; and that the
World and the affairs thereof are so much steered by (...) Arist. 1. Rhet. In
homine virtutis opinio valet plurimum. Cic. in Topic.
Opinion: it will be a point of godly wisdom in us, so far to make use of this
common corruption, as not to disadvantage our selves for want of a good name,
and good Opinion, for the doing of that good (whilst we live here among men
subject to such frailties) which we should set our desires, and bend our
endeavors to do. And so a good Name is better than a good Ointment, in that it
enableth us to better and worthier performances.

19. Compare them Fourthly, in their Extensions: and that both for Place, and
Time. For place first. That Quality of the three beforementioned, which
especially sets a value upon Ointments, advancing their price and esteem
more eminently than any other consideration, is their smell: those being ever
held most precious, and of greatest delicacy, that excel that way. And herein
is the excellency of the choicest Aromatical Ointments, that they do not only
please the sense, if they be held near to the Organ; but they do also disperse
the fragrance of their scent round about them to a great distance. Of the
sweetest herbs and flowers the smell is not much perceived, unless they be held
somewhat near to the Nostril: But the smell of a precious Ointment will
instantly diffuse it self into every corner, though of a very spacious room; as
you heard but now of the Joh. 12. 3.
Spikenard poured on our Saviors feet, Ioh. 12. But see how in that very
thing, wherein the excellency of precious Ointments consists, a good Name
still goes beyond it. It is more diffusive, and spreads farther. Of King
Uzziah, so long as he did well and prospered, it is said, that ^ Chro. 26. 15.
his name spread far abroad, 2 Chronicles. 26. And the Prophet says of the People
of Israel, in respect of her first comely estate, before such time as she
trusted in her own beauty, and played the harlot, that Ezekiel. 16. 14.
her name went forth among the Heathen for her beauty, Ezekiel. 16.

20. Besides, a good name, as it reaches farther, so it lasts longer than
the most precious Ointments: and so it excels in the extension of Time, as
well as of Place. As for Riches, Pleasures, Honors, and whatsoever other
delights of mortal men, who knows not of what short continuance they are?
They many times Prove. 23. 5.
take them wings and fly away from us, leaving us behind to grieve for the
loss. If it happen thy stay with us to the last (as seldom they do) yet then is
the parting uncomfortable: we can neither secure them from the spoil of others;
nor can they secure us from the wrath of God. However, part we must: If they
leave not us whilst we live, sure enough we shall leave them when we die. It
may be when we are dead, some pious friend or other may bestow upon our
carcasses the cost of Joh. 19. 40.
embalming with Spices, Odours and Ointments: as we see the Custom was of old
both amongst the Heathens, and the People of God. And those precious Ointments
may perhaps preserve our dead bodies some few months longer from putrefaction,
than otherwise they would have endured. But at length, howsoever, the worm and
the grave will prevail: and we shall turn sooner or later; first to dirt, and
then to dust. And here is the utmost extension, continuance, and period of the
most precious Ointments (literal or Metaphorical) the World can afford.

21. But a good Name is a thing far more durable. It seldom leaves us, (unless
through some fault or neglect in our selves;) but continues with us all our
life long. At the hour of death also it stands by us, and gives some Mors
tum aquissimo animo appetitur, cum suis se laudibus vita occidens consolari
potest. Cic. 1. Tuscul.
sweetning unto the bitterness of those last pangs; when our consciences do not
suggest to our expiring thoughts any thing to the contrary, but that we shall
die desired, and that those that live by us and survive us, will account our
gain by that change to be their loss. Yea, and it remains after death
precious in the memories, and mouths, and ears, of those that either knew us,
or had heard of us. Surely no Ointments are so powerful to preserve our bodily
ashes from corruption, as a good name and report is to preserve our Piety and
Virtue from Oblivion. Sirac. 44. 14.
Their bodies are buried in peace, but their name endures for evermore,
Ecclus. 44. And upon this account expressly it is, that the same Ecclesiasticus
elsewhere (as you heard before) prefers -- 41. 12.
a good Name, not only before the greatest riches, because it will out-last a
thousand great treasures of gold; but even before life it self, yea, before a
good life (at least in this, though in other respects it be below it, as but an
appurtenance thereunto) that whereas -- 41. 13.
a good life has but a few days, a good Name possibly may endure for ever.

22. Now lay all together that has been said, that a good name is a more
peculiar blessing; That it brings more solid content; That it enableth us
more, and to more worthy performances; That it is of greater extension both for
place and time, reaching farther and lasting longer than the most precious
Ointments, either literally or Metaphorically understood: and then judge, if
what Solomon has here delivered in the Text, how great a Paradox soever it may
sound in the ears of a Wordling, be not yet a most certain and clear Truth,
viz. That a good name is better then a precious Ointment: and therefore in all
reason to be preferred by every understanding man before Pleasures, Riches,
Honors, or whatsoever other outward delights of wordly men.

23. But it is needful you should be here admonished (lest what has been
hitherto said should be in any part either mistaken, or misapplied) that all
this while I have spoken but of material Ointments, and such other contentment,
as the outward things of this World can afford. The preeminence of a good Name
thus far just, beware ye make not unjust by over-stretching. For there is
besides all these a spiritual Ointment also; an inward anointing, the anointing
of the inner man, the Soul and Conscience with oil of the Spirit, the saving
graces and sweet comforts of the Holy Ghost; that Psalm. 45. 7.
oil of gladness, wherewith the blessed Son of God was anointed above his
Fellows, and without measure, and whereof all the Faithful and elect Children
of God are in their measure his fellow partakers. 1 John 2. 20.
Ye have an Unction from the Holy One, says St. John: And again, -- 27.
The anointing which ye have received of him abides in you. This is a singular
and right precious Ointment indeed: infinitely more to be preferred before a
good Name, than a good name is to be preferred before other common and outward
Ointments. The inseparable adjunct and evidence whereof is that (...), which we
usually call a good Conscience. God forbid any man should so far tender his
(...) Plutarch. Augustine.
good name, as for the preservation of it to make shipwreck of the other. (...)
Duae sunt res, Conscientia and Fama, etc. says St. Augustine. Two things
there are, says he, whereof every man should be specially chary, and tender:
his Conscience, and his Credit. But that, of his Conscience, must be his first
care: this, of his Name and Credit, must be content to come (...) Pin. Pyth. 1.
15.
in the second place. Let him first be sure to guard his Conscience well: and
then may he have a due regard of his Good Name also. Let it be his first care
to secure all within, by making peace with God, and in his own breast; that
done, (but not before) let him look abroad if he will, and cast about as well
as he can, to strengthen his Reputation with and before the World.

24. A very preposterous course the mean while is that, which those men take
that begin at the wrong end; making their Consciences wait upon their Credit.
Alas, that notwithstanding the clear evidence both of Scripture and Reason to
the contrary, after so many sharp reprehensions by the Minister, so many strait
prohibitions by the Magistrate, there should yet be found among our Gentry, so
many spirits of that desperate unchristian resolution, as upon the slightest
provoking word that but touches upon their reputation, to be ready either to
challenge, or to accept the duel: Either of which to do, must needs leave a
deep sting in the Conscience (if yet it be penetrable and not quite seared up;)
since thereby they expose themselves to the greatest hazard, if not inevitable
necessity of wilful murder either of themselves or their brethren! 2. Alas,
that there should still be found amongst our Clergymen; that formerly being
persuaded that our Church Ceremonies and Service were unlawful, and having
(during such their persuasion) preached against them openly before their
Congregations as unlawful, but have been since convinced in their judgments of
the Lawfulness thereof, should yet withold their Conformity thereunto, and
choose rather, not only to expose themselves to such mischiefs and
inconveniences as that refusal may bring upon them, but to seem also ne pudorem
panit entiam^; sateamini, contumatia vindicatis errorem. Quint. declam. 17.
to persist in their former error (to the great scandal of their people, and
cheating their own Consciences) than by acknowledging that they have erred,
adventure the loss of that great reputation they had by their former opposition
gained amongst their credulous followers! 3. Alas, that there should still be
found among our People, men who being conscious to themselves of some secret
wrongs done to their brethren in their worldly estate by oppression, fraud, or
other false dealing; do yet hold off from making them just restitution or other
meet compensation for the same, and so become really cruel to their own
Consciences, whilst they are so fondly tender over their reputations with
others, as rather to continue still dishonest in retaining, than acknowledge
their former dishonesty in obtaining those ill gotten parcels.

25. But leaving all these to the judgment of God and their own hearts, and to
ruminate on that sad Text, ( Luke 16. Luke 16. 15.
That which is highly esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God;
For thee, Christian brother, who ever thou art, that shall at any time be in a
strait between two evils, shaken with doubtings and distractions, what to do,
when thy Conscience and thy Credit lie both at stake together: ''Thou have a
ready resolution from the old Maxim E malis minimum. As the Merchant in a storm
throws his dear commodities into the Sea to save himself: so do thou resolve
to Conscientiae satisfi^t: nil in samam laboremus. S^nec. 3. de ira 41.
redeem thy Conscience howsoever, and at any rate; whatsoever betide thy
Credit. I forbid thee not to be tender of thy good Name; (it is an honest
care:) but I charge thee upon thy soul, to be more tender of thy Conscience,

26. This admonition premised; I shall now with your patience proceed to some
Inferences, from what has been delivered concerning the excellency of a good
Name, and what a precious thing it is. But the more precious it is, the more
grievous first is their sin, that seek to rob others of it. We read in Pliny,
that there were some Ointments in the shops in his time, made of such -- (...)
Mat. 26. 7.
costly ingredients (so great was the riot of those times) that Excedunt que
quadring entos denarirs librae: tanti emitur voluptas aliena. Plin. 13. not.
hist. 3.
every pound weight was sold at 400 Roman Pence, which by computation (allowing
to the Roman Penny seven pence halfpenny of our Coin) comes to above twenty
two pounds English: which was a very great rate, especially considering the
time wherein he lived, about fifteen hundred years ago. We would all think,
that man had done a very foul robbery, that should have broken a shop, and
carried thence any considerable quantity of such Costly ware. And must we not
then adjudge him a far worse Thief, that injuriously takes away a man's good
Name from him: which we have heard to be in many respects far more precious
than the most precious Ointments can be? But Murder is a felony of a higher
degree than Theft. Sometimes we pity Thieves: but we detest Murderers. Yet
neither Thieves nor Murderers are more cruel and injurious, than Slanderers
and Back-biters, and Tale-bearers, and Whisperers, and false Accusers are.
Those bereave a man^ but of his Livelihood, or at most of his Life: but these
take that from him which is justly more dear to him than either Life or
Livelihood.

27. It were to be wished that all malicious and envious persons would lay this
to heart, who seek to raise their own Fame upon the ruin of their Brothers:
whose daily endeavor it is, and daily practice, to raise scandalous reports of
others, and to cast foul aspersions upon them without cause, to make their
Names unsavory, and thereby to render their persons odious, among such as will
be ready to spread the Report farther (and it is great odds they will do it
with some Ergo linguas vestras acuistis in gladios, quas movistis in mortes,
non corporum, sed honorum. Iugulistis non membra, sed nom ina* Opt at. lib. 2.
addition of their own too) or otherwise make In maledicto plus infamiae quam
in manu: in infamia plus paenae quam in morte. Quint. 6. Instit. 2.
ill use of it, to their prejudice. But since such mischievous persons will
not, or cannot, learn to do better, having been long accustomed to do ill; no
more then a Leopard can change his spots, or a blackamore his skin: It will
concern us very much, not to suffer our selves to become Receivers to these
Thieves, or Abbettors to these Murtheress, by setting our Ears wide open to
their detractions; but rather to suspect him as an Impe of Satan, that
delights in Satan's Office, in being an accuser of his Brethren.

28. Secondly, how distant are they from Solomon's judgment, that value any
outward thing in the World (it may be some little sordid (...) Procl. in Hesiod.
gain, or some petty slippery preferment, or some poor fruitless pleasure) at a
higher rate than they do their good Name: which Solomon here so much prefers
before them all? 1. The Covetous Worldling, so he may but lade himself fast
enough with thick clay, Rev. 12. 10.
what cares he what men say or think of him? Call him Churl, Miser, Caitiff,
Wretch, or what else they think good: (...). Plato.
at mihi plaudo domi. Tush, says he, let them say on: The Fox fares best when
he is cursed. If this man be a wise man, (as himself thinks none wiser;) sure
then Solomon was not so wise a man as he is taken for to say as he does, Prove.
22. -- quid enim salvis infamia nummis! Juvenal. Satyr. 1. -- tunicam mihi malo
lupini, Quam si me toto laudet viciniae Pago. -- Sat. 14.
A good Name is rather to be chosen than great riches, etc. 2. The Ambitious
man, that pants after Preferment; what regards he, though all the World
should tax him of Flattery, of Bribery, of Calumny, of Treachery, of Perjury:
So he can but climb up to the step at which he aimed, and from which he knows
not how soon he may be justled off by another as ambitious as himself? 3. The
luxurious Wanton, the prodigal Gamester, the Glutton, Drunkard; or other
voluptuous beast in any kind, when once imboldned in his ways, sits him down
in the seat of the scorner: laugheth at all mankind that will not Horat. 1.
Satyr. 1. Prove. 20. 1. 1 Pet. 4. 4.
run with him to the same excess of riot; resolves (against whatsoever
dislikes sober men bewray of his exorbitances) to take his own pleasure
howsoever, and then let others talk theirs; bestows a nickname (or perhaps a
rhyme or two) upon those that censure him: and then, as if he had stabbed them
dead, and the day were his, he insulteth like a Conqueror, and thinks he has
now quit himself sufficiently for the loss of his Reputation.

29. Quid facias illi? Without more than the ordinary mercy of God, in
awakening their Consciences by some immediate work of his own; desperate is the
condition of all these men. Shame is the most powerful moderatrix cupiditatum
verecundia. Cic. 2. de si^*
curb to restrain men from such vicious excesses as are of evil report: and
Reproof seasonably, lovingly and discreetly tendered, the most proper
instrument, to work Shame in those that have done amiss. What hope is there
then (as to humane endeavors* and the use of ordinary means) to reclaim such
men from the pursuit of their ^iciou^ lusts; as are once grown wretehless in
their good names: Since they grow also therewithal shameless in sin, and harden
their foreheads against all reproof. Plaut. in Bacchid. 3. 3.
Ego illum perditum duco, cui quidem periit pudor. He is but a lost man, that
has lost all (...). Nazianz. Carm. (ad Olympiad.) 56.
shame: there being then nothing left to keep him back from rushing headlong
into all manner of wickedness. Prove. 21. 1.
And he that being often reproved hardneth his neck, must needs be destroyed
without remedy: inasmuch as that which is the last and likeliest remedy to
preserve him from destruction (to wit reproof.) has by his wilful neglect (in
not making use of it) proved ineffectual to him.

30. Thirdly, the valuableness of a good name in the judgment of so wise a
person as Solomon was, may sufficiently inform us of the weakness of that Plea,
which is so often taken up for our own justification, and to put by the wholesome
admonitions of our friends, when we are dealt withal for the reforming or
forbearing some things in our practice; which if they be not evil, yet are
Malum, aut male coloratum. Bernard. 3. de consider.
illcoloured, look suspiciously, and carry in their faces some resemblance or
These. 5. 22.
appearance of evil, and for which we hear not well. It is an Nec paratum
habeas illud e tri^io; Sufficit mihi conscientia mea; non curo quid de me
loquantur homines. Hieron. Epist. 11.
usual plea with us in such cases: That, (...). Chrysostom. orat. 2. in Annam.
so long as we stand clear in our own Consciences, and are sure our hearts are
honest, we are not to regard the speeches and censures of men. There is a time
indeed, and there are Cases, wherein such a Plea will hold good. When men shall
go about by proposing disgraces to fright us out of any part of that duty that
by virtue of our ( general or particular) calling lies upon us; or shall
endeavor to Luke 6. 22.
put out our names as evil from amongst men, for having done but that which was
our bounden duty to do: in such like cases we may seasonably Nec in ea re, quid
aliis videatur, mihi puto curandum Mea mihi conscientia pluris est, quam omnium
ser^^o Cic. 12 ad Attic. 27.
comfort our selves in our own innocence, fly for refuge against the injuries
of Tongues into our own Consciences, as into a Castle; there repose our selves
with security; disregarding the reproaches of evil men, and professing with St.
Paul, that 1 Cor. 4 3.
with us it is a very small matter to be judged of them, or of man's judgment.

31. But where we may do more; we are not to think it Non sat tuum ^e officium
fecisse, si non id fai^a ad probat? Terent. Phorm. 4. 5.
enough to satisfy our own Consciences: but we are to endeavor, as much as in
us lies, to stop the mouths, or at leastwise to manifest our uprightness 2
Cor. 5. 11.
to the Consciences of others. What else meant St. Peter to exhort Christians
that they should 1 Pet ^. 12.
have their conversation honest among the Gentiles? Or as St. Paul so
frequently and earnestly to fall upon the point of Scandal? Or to be so careful
in his own person, to 2 Cor. 8. 21.
provide things honest, not only in the sight of God, but in the sight of men
also? Or to stir up others to good things by arguments drawn as well from
Praise as Virtue, from Fame as Conscience? As you shall find them mixtly thrown
together in the heap, ( Phil. 4.) Phil. 4. 8. Apostolici and pracepti est, and
exempli, ut habeamus rationem non censcienti^ tantum, sed and famae. Hieron.
(v^l Paulin.) Epist 14 ad Celamiam.
Finally Brethren, says he, whatsoever things are true, (that is taken from
Conscience;) whatsoever things are honest, (that from Fame;) whatsoever things
are just, whatsever things are pure, (those from Conscience again;) whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, (those again from
Fame:) think on these things etc. To say then, as some times we do, when we are
told that such or such doings will be little to our credit; That other men are
not to be 1 Cor. 10. 29.
judges of our Consciences, but we Romans 14. 4.
stand or fall to our own Master, and if we do otherwise than well, it is we
(not they) that must answer for it, etc. I say, these are no good answers. If
men were of St. Augustin's mind, in his Book De bono viduitatis (if that book
be his) they would not give them the hearing, Non audiendi sunt, etc. It is
confessed even by Heathens, that, for a man wholly to disregard what estimation
others have of him, is ^* neglige^e quid de se quisque sentiat non sol^m
arrogantis est, sed etiam dissoluti. Cic. de Offic. lib. 1.
not only arrogance and cruelty, but stupidity too.

32. Lastly, Since a good Name is a thing so precious; it should be the great
care of every one of us (next the care of our Souls) to keep that unstained:
that so we Phil. 2. 15.
may be blameless as well as harmless, carrying our selves as the Sons of God
without rebuke, though we live in the midst of never so crooked, perverse and
untoward a generation. Scandalous behavior will render our names unsavory;
Eccl. 10. 1.
as dead flies cause the Ointment of an Apothecary to send forth a stinking
savor. Apothecaries we see are very choice over their precious Confections
therefore, to preserve them from taint and putrefaction, Shall not a Christian
be as wise and chary in his generation, as a shop keeper in his; to keep the
Ointment of his good Name from Odor pro sama ponitur. Schindler lex in (...)
etc. Genesis 34. 30. ^xod 5. 21. 1 Samuel 13. 4.
stench and rottenness, which is so incomparably more precious than the others
are? Truly I see not why every honest godly man, should not strive as
earnestly, and with as good hope, to have every man's good word, as he should to
live in peace with every man. You well know, what the Apostle says for that (
Romans 12. 10.
Romans 12.) If it be possible, so much as in you lies, have peace with all men.
That is not solely in our own power, nay it is a thing scarce possible, else
the If were needless:) so is this too. But yet somewhat we may do toward it,
and possibly by our good endeavors obtain it in a competent measure, (else the
Exhortation were bootless:) and so we may do in this too.

33. To excite our care the more hereunto; (although the Excellency of the
thing it self, whereof we have spoken so much already, might alone suffice, if
it were seriously considered:) yet consider farther. First, That the
preservation of our good Names is a duty which by the Law of Nature, and the
Law of Charity (and whatsoever belongs to either of these is the very Law of
God) we are obliged unto. God has ingrafted in our Nature, as a spur to
virtuous and laudable actions, an Trahimur omnes laudis studio, and optimus
quisque maxim gloria ducitur. Cic. pro Archia.
appetency and praise of glory: and expects that we should make use of it
accordingly, so far as it may be servient to those ends for which he gave it,
and so as it be withal subservient to his glory that gave it. And the Law of
Charity binding us to Romans 13. 7. 1 Pet. 2. 17.
honor all men, and to preserve the just Reputation of our meanest Neighbor;
must consequently bind us to do our selves right in the point of honor:
forasmuch as we also, as men, are included in that generality. Yea, and that a
fortiori too; inasmuch as the duty of Charity to be performed to our selves, is
to be the rule and measure of that Charity which we owe to our Neighbor: And
it is not supposable, that he that has little care of his own, should be
merely tender of his brothers reputation.

34. Consider secondly, (as but now I touched) that it is partly in our own
power, what other men shall speak and think of us. Not that we are Lords either
of their tongues or thoughts, (for men generally, and wicked men especially
challenge a property in these two things, as absolute Lords within themselves:
Psalm. 2. 4.
Our tongues are our own, say they: and Thought is free.) But that we may, if
we behave our selves with godly discretion, win good report, even from those
that in their hearts wish no good to us; or at least put such a muzzle upon
their tongues, that whereas they would with all their hearts 1 Pet. 3. 16.
speak evil of us as of evil doers, they shall not dare for shame to accuse our
good conversation in Christ For -- 13.
who is he that will harm you, says St. Peter, if ye be followers of that
which is good? As if he had said, Men that have any shame left in them, will
not lightly offer to do you any harm, or to say any harm by you, unless by some
miscarriage or other of your own you give them the advantage. The o^d saying,
that every man is Fortunae suae faber, and so (...). Apostol. Byzant. in paroem.
Famae too, is not altogether without truth and reason. For seldom does a man
miscarry in the success of his affairs in the World, or labor of an ill name:
but where himself by some sinful infirmity or negligence, some rashness,
credulity, indiscretion, or other oversight, has made a way open for it. This
I note the rather, because it falls out not seldom to be the fate or fault of
very good men, by assed too much by self-love and partiality, to impute such
crosses and disgraces as they sometimes meet withal, wholly to the injuries of
wicked men; which if they would search narrowly at home, they might perhaps
find reason enough sometimes to impute (at least in part) unto themselves.
When, by busy intermedling where they need not; by their heat, violence and
intemperance of spirit in setting on those things they would fain have done, or
opposing those things they would fain hinder; by their too much stiffness or
peremptoriness either way concerning the use of indifferent things, without due
consideration of times, places, persons and other circumstances: by partaking
with those they think well of so far as to the justifying of their very Errors
and Exorbitances, and denying on the other side to such as are not of their own
way such fair and just respects, as to men of their condition are in common
civility due; or by some other like Partialities and Excesses, they provoke
opposition against themselves, their persons and good names: from such men
especially as do but wait an opportunity, and would greedily apprehend any
occasion, to do them some displeasure or disgrace.

35. That it may be otherwise, and better with you, Beloved, ponder well, I
beseech you, what our Solomon wrote long since, Prove. 19. Prove. 19. 3.
The foolishness of man perverteth his way, and his heart fretteth against the
Lord; or, which comes to one, against such persons as the Lord is pleased to
make use of as his rods wherewith to give him due correction. Neither cast off
this care of your good Names, by any pretensions of impossibility: which is
another Topic of Sophistry wherewith Satan teaches us to cheat our selves. It
is indeed, and I confess it, something a hard thing, and not simply (...), to
have every man's good word: but I may not yield it impossible. 3 John 12.
Demetrius has good report of all men, and of the truth it self, says St.
John. Do you what in you lies toward it, and if then men will yet be unjust,
and speak evil of you undeservedly, you have your comforts in God and in
Christ; and some comfort also in the testimony of your own hearts, that you
have faithfully done what was to be done on your part to prevent it, and by
walking honestly and wisely, to 2 Cor. 11. 12.
cut off occasion from them that seek occasion. But so far as you have been
wanting to your selves in doing your part; so much you take off, both from
frust^ a irascimur obtrectatoribus nostris, si eis ipsi obtrectandi materiam
minis^ramus. Hieron Epist. 14.
their blame, and from your own comfort. It concerns you to have a great care
of preserving your good Names, because by your care you may do much in it.

36. Consider thirdly, that a good Name is far easier kept than recovered. Men
that have had losses in sundry kinds, have in time had some reparations.
Sampson's locks were shorn of, but grew again: Job's Goods and Cattle driven,
but restored again: the Widows Child dead, but revived again: the Sheep and the
Groat in the Parable lost, but found again. But Hominum immortalis est infamia
Plaut. in Persa 3. 1.
the good Name once lost, the loss is little better than (...), -- (...)
Hesiod. (...). and bgr;.
desperate. He had need be a good Gamester they say, (and to have very good
fortune too) that is to play an After-game of Reputation. The shipwreck of a
good Name, though in most, and the most considerable respects, it be
incomparably less, yet in this one circumstance it is in some sort even greater
than the shipwreck of a good Conscience. The loss there may be recovered again
by Repentance, which is Hieron. saepe.
tabula secunda post naufragium: as in Act. 27. Act. 27. 44.
some on boards and some on broken pieces of the ship, got all safe to Land:
But when our good Names are shipwrackt, all is so shattered in pieces, that it
will be hard to find so much as a board or plank to bring us ashore. And the
Reason of the difference is manifest, which is this. When we have made
shipwreck of our Consciences, we fall into the hands of God: whose Mercies are
great, and his Compassions fail not; and who, if we timely and unfeignedly
repent, is both able and willing to restore us. But when we make shipwreck of
our good Names, we fall into the hands of men, whose bowels are narrow, their
tenderest Mercies cruel, and their Charity too weak and faint to raise up our
Credit again after it is once ruined. I have sometimes in my private thoughts
likened a flaw in the Conscience, and a flaw in the good Name, to the breaking
of a bone in the body, and the breaking of a Vitrea f^ma. Hor. 2. Sat. 3.
Crystal Glass, or China dish, at the Table. In the mischance there is no
comparison: a man had better break twenty glasses or dishes at his Table, than
one bone in his body. And so a man had better receive twenty wounds in his good
Name, than but a single raze in his Conscience. But yet here the recovery is
easier than there. A broken bone may be set again, and every splinter put in
his due place: and if it be skilfully handled in the setting, and duly tended
after, it may in short time knit as firm again as ever it was, yea and (as it
is said) firmer than ever, so as it will break any where else sooner than
there. But as for the shivers of a (...). As one breake^h a potters vessel,
that cannot be made whole again, Ier. 19. 11.
broken Glass or Earthen Dish, no art can piece them so as they shall be either
sightly or serviceable: they will not abide the file nor the hammer; neither
solder nor glue; nor other cement will fasten them handsomely together. The
application is obvious to every understanding, and therefore I shall spare it.
If Simon be once a Leper, the name will stick by him, when the disease has
left him. Let him be cleansed from his Leprosy never so perfectly, yet he will
be called and known by the name of Mat. 26. 2.
Simon the Leper to his dying day. Envious and malicious persons apprehend the
truth hereof but too well: one of whose Aphorisms it is, (and they practice
accordingly) Calumniare, fortiter, aliquid adhaerebit: Jer. 18. 18
Come and let us smite with the tongue; and be sure to smite deep enough: and
then, though the grief may be cured, and perhaps the skin grow over again: it is
odds but he will carry some mark or print of it to his grave. It should make us
very careful to preserve our Names from foul aspersions; because the stains
will not easily (if at all) be scoured off again.

37. But how may that be effectually done, may some say? Absolutely to secure
our selves from false Aspersions, truly it is not in your power, and therefore
I can prescribe no course to prevent it. If Malice or Envy be minded to throw
them on, there is no help for it but patience. But so far as depends upon our
selves, and the likeliest way withal to counter-work the uncharitableness of
others (to give you a very general answer) is: By 1 Pet. 3. 11. -- 13.
eschewing evil and doing good, by walking warily and circumspectly; by living
Tit. 2. 12.
soberly, righteously and godly in this present World. Praise is the reward of
Virtue -- virtutis, quam necessario gloria, etiamsi tu non agas consequatur.
Cic. 1. Tuscul.
as you heard: and the foundation of a good name is a good life. If any man
desire yet more particular directions, as namely what kinds of Actions are
especially to be practiced, and what kinds especially to be shunned in order to
this end, I shall commend unto his consideration these five Rules following;
which I shall but briefly point at, the time not suffering me to insist.

38. First, let him look well to his particular calling, and the duties that
belong to him in it; bestirring himself with all diligence and faithfulness,
and carrying himself uprightly and conscionably therein, and be sure to keep
himself within the proper bounds thereof. This Rule is given us, 1 These. 4. 1
These. 4. 11, 12.
That you study to be quiet, and to do your own business; Why so? That ye may
walk honestly toward them that are without.

39. Secondly, Let him carry himself lowly, dutifully, and respectfully to all
his Superiors and Betters: to Magistrates, to Ministers, to his Parents, to his
Masters, to the Aged, and to all others agreeably to their respective
conditions and relations. And this Rule we have, as in other places, so in 1
Pet. 2, 1 Pet. 2. 3. -- 18.
Honor all men, be subject even to your froward Masters, submit to the King as
supreme, and to Governors sent of him, etc. Why? For so is the will of God
that with well doing you may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men.

40. Thirdly, Let him be wise, charitable and moderate (with all brotherly
condescension) in the exercise of his Christian Liberty, and the use of
indifferent things. Not standing always upon the utmost of what he may, or what
he may not do; but yielding much from his own liberty for his brothers sake:
considering as well, what (as the case presently stands) is expedient for him
to do in relation to others, as what is simply and in it self lawful to be
done. St. Paul gives us the rule ( Romans 14.) Romans 14. 15, 16.
If thy Brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not charitably, etc.
Let not your good be evil spoken of.

41. Fourthly, Let him be mild, gentle, a lover and maintainer of Peace and
Concord: not violent, or boisterous, or peremptory either in his Opinions or
Courses: but readier to compose, than to kindle quarrels; and to qualify, than
to exasperate differences. This Rule we have ( Phil. 2.) Phil. 2. 14, 15.
Do all things without murmurings and disputings. And why so? That you may be
blameless and harmless, and without rebuke.

42. Fifthly, Let him be Liberal and merciful, 1 Timothy 6. 18.
willing to communicate the good things that God has lent him for the comfort
and supply of those that stand in need. This Rule I gather out of Psalm. 112.
Psalm. 112. 6, 9.
The righteous shall be had in an everlasting remembrance. He has dispersed
abroad, he has given to the poor: His righteousness shall endure for ever: his
horn also shall be exalted with honor.

43. Whosoever observes these directions, his memory shall (if God see it good for
him) be like the remembrance of good Josiah in Ecclesiasticus; Sirac. 49. 1.
Like the composition of the perfume made by the Art of the Apothecary: sweet
as honey (in the mouths of all that speak of him) and as music at a banquet of
Wine (in the Ears of all that hear of him.) Or if it be the good pleasure of
God, for the trial of his faith, and exercise of his patience, to suffer men to
Mat. 5. 11, 12.
revile him, and to speak all manner of Evil against him falsely in this World:
it shall be abundantly recompensed him in the increase of his reward in heaven,
at the last great day, when every man (whose name shall be found written in the
book of life) 1 Cor. 4. 9.
shall have praise of God, and of his holy Angels, and of all good men.

AD AULAM.
The Second Sermon.
WHITEHALL, November 1632.
Prove. XVI. 7. When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his Enemies to
be at peace with him.
1.THE words contain two blessed fruits of a gracious conversation: the one
more immediate and direct, Acceptance with God: the other more remote and by
consequence from the former, Peace with men. Or, if you will, a Duty, and the
Benefit of it: and these two coupled together (as they seldom go single) in one
conditional Proposition consisting of an Antecedent and a Consequent: wherein
we have Gods part and ours. Our part lies in the Antecedent: wherein is
supposed a Duty, which God expects from us ex Debito; and that is to frame
our ways so as to please the Lord. Gods part lies in the Consequent: wherein
the benefit is expressed, which (when we have performed the Duty) we may
comfortably expect from him ex promisso; and that is, to have our Enemies to be
at peace with us. The Antecedent in those former words ( when a man's ways
please the Lord:) The Consequent in these latter ( He makes even his Enemies
to be at peace with him). Of the Antecedent first; wherein three things are
observable: The Subject, the Act, and the Object. The Subject, A man's ways: The
Act, Pleasing: The Object, The Lord. Each of which are first to be opened
apart, for the clearer understanding of the words: and then to be laid together
again, for the better enforcement of the thing contained therein, [ When a man's
ways please the Lord.]

2. A man's ways:] That is the Subject. A man's (...). Basil. in Psalm. 1.
whole carriage in the course of his life, with all his thoughts, speeches, and
actions, whether good or bad, are by an usual Metaphor in the Scriptures
called, The ways of a man. And of these Ways Solomon speaks, rather than of
his person. Because it is possible, the Lord may graciously accept some man's
person, and yet take just exception at some of his Ways. 1. For thus it is;
when a man walks in the beaten track of the World, without ever turning his
feet into Gods Testimonies; neither that man nor his ways can please the Lord.
2. Again, When a man walks conscionably and constantly in the good ways of
God, without turning aside, either on the right hand, or on the left; both that
man and his ways are pleasing unto God. 3. But then again thirdly, when a man
in the more constant course of his life walks uprightly, and in a right way,
but yet in some few particularities treads awry; (either failing in his
judgment; or transported with passion; or drawn on by the example or persuasion
of others; or miscarrying through his own negligence, incogitancie or other
subreption; or overcome by the strength of some prevalent temptation; or from
what other cause soever it may proceed:) I say, when a man thus walking with
God in the main, has yet these out-steppings and deviations upon the bye,
(neither acted presumptuously, nor issuing from a heart habitually evil:)
although the person of such a man may still be accepted with God in Christ, and
his ways also be well-pleasing unto God, in regard of the main bent thereof;
yet in regard of such his sinful deviations, those particular passages in his
ways do not at all please, but rather highly displease, the Sacred Majesty of
God.

3. That for the Subject. The Act is, Pleasing: and Pleasing has reference to
Acceptance. Wherein the Endeavor is one thing, and the Event another. For:
tuitum est placere, we use to say. A man may have a full intention, and do his
best endeavor to please, and yet fail of his end: the Event not answering his
Expectation. Which is most apparent when we have to deal with men. For not only
men's dispositions are various one from another, and so there is no -- (...).
Tneogn.
possibility of pleasing all: because what would please one man, perhaps will
not please another. But even the same man is not alike disposed at all times,
and so there can be no certainty of pleasing any; Because what would please him
at one time, perhaps will not please him at another. Now in propriety of
speech, to please signifies rather the Event in finding acceptance, than the
Endeavor in seeking it. But when it undergoeth a moral Consideration, it is
quite contrary: Then it importe^h not so much the Event (which being not in our
power, ought not to be imputed to us, either to our praise, or dispraise, as
the Intention and Endeavor. So as he may besaid to please in a moral sense,
that does his best endeavor to please, however he speed. As S. Paul says of
himself, that he 1 Cor. 10. 33.
pleased all men in all things: which in the event doubtless he neither did.
(for we know he had -- 16. 9.
many Adversaries:) neither could do, the thing it self being altogether
impossible. But he did it in his intention and endeavor, as he sundry times
expounds himself. If it be demanded whether of the two is rather meant in the
Text: I answer, both are meant; the Endeavor principally, and consequently
also the Event. For by reason of Gods goodness and unchangeableness, there may
be a good assurance of the Event, where the desire of pleasing is unfeigned,
and the Endeavor faithful. As it was told Cain in Genesis: Genesis 4 7.
If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? We may do well and not find
Acceptance with men: But was there ever any thing in the World well done, and
the Lord accepted it not? That for the Act, Pleasing.

4. But Act us distinguuntur secundum Objecta. Whatsoever the ways are, it is a
part of every man's intention to please howsoever: it is the Object especially
that makes the difference. All men strive to please: but some to please
themselves, some to please other men, and some few to please the Lord. There be
that regard not either the displeasure of God or man, so they may but please
themselves, (...) in S. Peter's word: it signifies as much as Self-pleasers:
Translations have well rendered it self willed; men that will have their own way
in every thing, that will speak their pleasure of every man, that will say what
they list, and do what they list, let who will take offense at it. S. Peter in
the same place where he has given us the Name, has also given us part of
their Character. 2 Pet. 2. 10.
Presumptuous are they, says he, and they are not afraid to speak evil of
dignities. For commonly you may observe it, they that love to please
themselves, seldom please themselves better, than when they have with most
petulancy of spleen vented their disaffection toward them that are in
authority. Which for the most part proceeds from an over-weaning conceit they
have of their own either wisdom or wit: although in S. Augustine's judgment,
they are quite devoid of both; whose censure of them is sharp, Aug. lib. de
ovibus, c^p. 9.
Valdo stulto homini placet, qui sibi placet: He that casts to please
himself, casts to please a very fool. Nor are they only void of wisdom in
his, but in S. Paul's judgment also of Christianity; who voucheth against them
Christ's Example; Romans 15. 3.
For even Christ pleased not himself, Romans 15.

5. Beside S. Peter's (...), these Self-pleasers; there are also S. Paul's Ephesians.
6. 6. Col. 3. 22.
(...) Men-pleasers. And what, is that a fault too? To please other men out of
a Christian indulgence, by condescending to their weakness, and gratifying them
in the exercise of that liberty and power we have in things of indifferent
nature; is so far from being a fault, that it is rather a commendable Office of
Christian Charity, which every man ought to practice. Romans 15. 2^
Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good unto edification, but
that must be only in lawful things, and so far forth as may tend to
Edification, and subordinately to a greater care of pleasing God in the first
place. But if we shall seek to please men beyond this, by doing for their sakes
any unlawful thing, or leaving undone any necessary duty; by accompanying them
in their sins, or advancing their designs in any thing that may offend God;
then are we (...) Men-pleasers in an evil sense, and our ways will not please
the Lord. S. Paul, who in one place professes menpleasing 1 Cor. 10. 33.
even as I please all men in all things) taking it in the better sense;
protests against it as much in another place ( Gal 1. 10.
If I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ;) taking it in the
worse sense.

6. To draw to a Head then; We may please our selves, and we should seek to
please our brethren, where these may be done, and the Lord pleased withal: But
when the same ways will not please all, we ought not to be careful to satisfy
others in their unreasonable Expectances, much less our selves in our own
inordinate Appetites; but disregarding both our selves and them, bend all our
studies and endeavors to this one point, how we may approve our hearts and our
ways unto the Lord: that is, to God the only Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
God and Christ must be in the final resolution, the sole Object of our
pleasing. Which is the substance of the whole words of the Antecedent laid
together, which we have hitherto considered apart, and comes now to be
handled. The handling whereof we shall dispatch in three Enquiries, whereof two
concern the Endeavor, and one the Event. For it may be demanded first, what
necessity of pleasing God? And if it be needful, then secondly, how and by what
means it may be done? And both these belong to the Endeavor: and then it may
be demanded thirdly, concerning the Event, upon what ground it is that any of
our endeavors should please God? Of which in their order.

7. First, That we should endeavor so to walk as to please God. The Apostle
needed not to have Col. 1. 10, 11.
prayed so earnestly as he does, Col. 1. and that without ceasing; neither to
have adjured us so deeply as he does, 1 Thessalonians. 4. even 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1.
by the Lord Jesus; if it did not both well become us in point of Duty, and
also much concern us in point of Wisdom so to do. First, It is a Duty whereunto
we stand bound by many Obligations. He is our Master, our Captain, our Father,
our King. Every of which respects lays a several necessity upon us of doing
our endeavor to please him: if at least there be in us any care to discharge
with faithfulness, and as we ought the parts of Servants, of Soldiers, of
Sons, of Subjects.

8. First, He is our Master, Joh. 13. 13.
[ Ye call me Lord and Master, and ye say well, for so I am] and we are his
servants, Psalm. 116. 16.
O Lord I am thy servant, I am thy servant and the son of thy Handmaid. And he
is no honest servant that will not strive to please his Master, Tit 2. 9.
[ Exhort servants to obey their own Masters, and to please them well in all
things, Tit. 2.] Next he is our Captain, Heb. 2. 10.
It became him to make the Captain of their salvation perfect] and we are his
Soldiers, 2 Timothy 2. 3.
[ Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ, says
Saint Paul to Timothy.] We received our Pressed. money, and book'd our Names
Vocati sumus ad militiam Dei vivi jam tunc, cum in Sacramenti verba
respondimus. Tertul. ad Marty^ c. 3.
to serve in his Wars, when we bound our selves by Solemn Vow, and took the
Sacrament upon it in our Baptism, manfully to fight under his Banner, against
Sin, the World, and the Devil, and to continue his faithful Soldiers unto our
lives end. And he is no generous Soldier that will not strive to please his
General. 2 Timothy 2. 4.
[ No man that warreth entangleth himself in the Affairs of this life, that he
may please him that has chosen him to be a Soldier, 2 Timothy 2.] Thirdly, He is
our Father, and we his Children, 2 Cor. 6. 18.
[ I will be a Father to you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the
Lord Almighty:] and when we would have any thing of him, we readily bespeak him
by the name of Father, and that by his own direction, saying, Our Father which
art in Heaven. And that Son has neither grace nor good nature in him, that
will not strive to please his Father. It is noted as one of Esau's Impieties,
whom the Scripture has branded as Heb. 12. 16.
a Profane Person, that Genesis 26. 35.
he grieved, and -- 28. 8.
displeased his parents in the choice of his Wives. Mal. 1. 6.
[ If I be a Father, where is mine honor? Mal. 1.] Lastly, He is our King.
Psalm. 95. 3.
[ The Lord is a great God, and a great King above all Gods;] and we are his
Subjects, -- 100. 3.
[ his people and the Sheep of his Pasture] and he is no Loyal Subject that
will not strive to please his Lawful Sovereign. That form of speech ( Nehem. 2.
5, 7, etc.
if it please the King) so frequent in the mouth of Nehemiah, was no affected
strain of Courtship, but a just expression of Duty: otherwise that religious
man would never have used it.

9. And yet there may be a time wherein all those Obligations may cease, of
pleasing our earthly Masters, or Captains, or Parents, or Princes. If it be
their pleasure we should do something that lawfully we may not: we must
disobey, though we displease. Only be we sure that to color an evil
disobedience, we do not pretend an unlawfulness where there is none. But we can
have no color of plea for refusing to do the pleasure of our heavenly Lord and
Master in any thing whatsoever; inasmuch as we are sure nothing will please
him, but what is just and right. With what a forehead then can any of us
challenge from him either Wages as Servants, or Stipends as Soldiers, or
Provision as Sons, or Protection as Subjects; if we be not careful in every
respect to frame our selves in such sort as to please him? You see it is our
Duty so to do.

10. Yea, and our Wisdom too: in respect of the great benefits we shall reap
thereby. There is one great benefit expressed in the Text; If we please the
Lord, He will make our Enemies to be at peace with us: of which more anon. The
Scriptures mention many other, out of which number I propose but these three.
First, if we please him, he will preserve us from sinful temptations. Solomon,
Eccl. 1.
7. speaking of Eccl. 7. 26.
the strange woman, whose heart is as Nets and Snares, and her hands as bands,
says that whosoever pleases the Lord shall escape from her, but the sinner shall
be taken by her. He that displeases God by walking in the bypath of sin, God
shall withhold his grace from him, and he shall be tempted and foiled: but
whosoever pleases God by walking in his holy ways, God shall so assist him with
his grace, that when he is tempted, he shall escape. And that is a very great
benefit. Secondly, If we please him, he will hear our Prayers, and grant our
Petitions 2.
in whatsoever we ask; if what we ask be agreeable to his will, and expedient
for our good: ( 1 John 3. 22.
whatsoever we ask, we know we receive of him, because we keep his
Commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight.) And that is
another very great benefit. Thirdly, If we please him in the mean time, he will
3.
in the end Ea victoria (speaking of Martyrdom) habet and gloriam placendi Deo,
and pr^dam^ivendi in aternum. Tertul. Apol. cap. 50.
translate us into his heavenly Kingdom: whereof he has given us assurance in
the person of Enoch; Heb. 11. 5.
Whom God translated that he should not see death, because before his
translation he had this testimony that he pleased God. And this is the greatest
benefit that can be imagined.

11. Go then wretched man, that have not cared to displease the immortal God,
for the pleasing of thy self, or of some other mortal man; cast up thy Bills,
examine thy Accounts, and see what thou have gained. 1. By displeasing God thou
have strengthened the hands of those enemies against thee, with whom thou
might have been at peace. 2. Thou have exposed thy self for a prey to those
temptations, from which thou might have escaped. 3. Thou have blocked up the
passage against thine own Prayers, that they cannot have access before the
Throne of grace. 4. Thou have utterly debarred thy self from ever entering into
the Kingdom of 4.
glory. All this thou have lost, not now to be regained, save only by bewailing
the time past, that thou have not sought to please him better heretofore: and
by redeeming the time to come, in seeking to please him better hereafter.

12. Which how and by what means it may best be done, is our next Enquiry.
Wherein to give you a general and easy direction, without descending into
particulars, these two things will do it, Likeness and Obedience. For the
first, (...) Arist. 2. Rhetor.
Similis Simili is a common saying, and common experience proves it true:
Likeness ever breeds liking. As men we see are best pleased every one with
such notions and expressions, as sort best with their own fancies, and with
such companions as are of their own temper. So good Soldiers are best pleased
with those that are valiant, like themselves: and good Wits with those that are
facetious, like themsel^^s: and good Scholars with those that are judicious,
like themselves: and accordingly it is with all other sorts of men in their
kinds. Yea, of so great moment is likeness unto complacency; as that two men,
if they be of different dispositions, as it may be the one of a quick, stirring
and active; the other of a slow, remiss, and suffering spirit; or it may be the
one of an open, free and pleasant conversation; the other of a sad, close, and
reserved temper: although they may be honest and holy men both; yet I say two
such men will take little pleasure either in the company of the other, as
experience also shows. Horat. Epist. 18.
Oderunt hilarem tristes, etc.

13. Now a wicked man is altogether unlike God, both in his inward Affections,
and in his outward Conversation. He loves the ways of sin, which God hates:
and Psalm. 50. 17.
hates to be reformed, which God requires. He Psalm. 10. 3.
speaks well of evil men, as the covetous, and others whom God abhors; and
Luke 6. 22.
casts out their names as evil, in whom God delights. Is it possible that
God who is 1 John 15.
light should take pleasure in him that is nothing but darkness? And God, who
is Joh. 4. 24.
a Spirit, in him who is nothing but flesh? And God, who is 1 John 4. 16.
Love, in him who is nothing but rancour, and malice, and uncharitableness? And
God, who is Psalm. 145. 15.
righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works, a just, a merciful, a
bountiful God: in him who is altogether unclean, or unjust, or cruel, or
covetous? It cannot be.

14. But then as for the Godly, no marvel if both their persons and ways be
well pleasing unto God; being that both their persons are inwardly renewed
after his Image, and their ways also outwardly framed after his Example. They
love what he loves, hate what he hates in the Affections of their hearts; and
they are Ephesians. 5. 1.
followers of God as dear children in the conversation of their lives. They
desire and endeavor to be 1 Pet. 1. 16.
holy as he is holy; Mat. 5. 48.
perfect as he is perfect; and Luke 6. 36.
merciful as he their heavenly Father is merciful. And as earthly Parents,
though they love all their Children well, yet commonly love those best that are
likest themselves: so our heavenly Father is well pleased with all his
Children, because they are indeed all like him; but best pleased with those
that nearliest resemble him. The more we grow in likeness to him, the more
shall we grow also in liking with him.

15. The other thing wherewith to please God, is our Obedience, when he
beholds in our ways a proof of our willing and cheerful subjection to his
most righteous Commands. All Superiors are best pleased with those that owe
them service, when they find them most pliable to their Wills, and most careful
to observe what is given them in charge: neither are ever so much, or so justly
displeased with them, as when they see them to slack their own Obedience, and
slight their Commands. Do you think the Centurion could have been pleased with
those he had under him, if Mat. 8. 9.
when he said to one Come, he should have gone the other way? And to another
Go, he should have stood still? And to another, Do this, he should have left
that undone, and done the quite contrary? Obedience is a thing wherein God 1 Samuel 15. 21.
more delights than in Sacrifice, and the keeping of the Commandment will
please him better than a Bullock that has horns and hoofs. The Apostle gives
this very reason, in Romans 8. why Romans 8. 7, 8.
they that are in the flesh (carnal and worldly men) cannot please God, even
because the carnal mind is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can
be, so long as it continues carnal. Intimating, that if it could be subject,
it could not choose but please.

16. Great therefore is the vanity of those men, who think to gain and to hold
the favor of God by the outward performances of Fasting, Prayer, Almsdeeds,
hearing Gods Word, receiving the Holy Sacrament, and the like; (just as the
hypocritical Jews of old did by Sacrifices and Oblations:) when as all the
while their hearts are rotten, and their conversation base. But let not any of
us deceive our selves with vain confidences. For as the Lord of old often cried
down Sacrifices by his Prophets, though they were in those times a necessary
and principal part of that holy worship which himself had prescribed: so no
doubt he will now reject these outside services, though otherwise and in
themselves excellent d^ties in their kinds; if there be no more in them but
mere outside. And they are no better where there is not withal a conscience
made of Obedience. The Lord who Prove. 16. 2.
weighs the spirits, (as it is a little before in this Chapter) and ^er. 17.
10.
searches the hearts and reins; sees the falseness of our spirits; and
observes every prevaricating step both of our hearts and lives. There is no
dallying therefore with him: either let us set our hearts and our faces aright,
and Heb. 12. 13.
make straight steps to our feet, or our ways will not please the Lord. Psalm.
5. 4.
Deus non volens iniquitatem, he is a God that has no pleasure in wickedness,
Psalm. 5.

17. We have hitherto enquired into the Reasons why we should endeavor to
please the Lord: and into the means how it may best be done. There remains yet
a third Enquiry, which concerns the success or the Event; and that is, how it
comes about, that such poor things as our best Endeavors are, should so far
find acceptance with the Lord as to please him. Likeness indeed will please,
and Obedience will please: But then it should be such a likeness, as will hold
at least some tolerable proportion with the Exemplar; such Obedience, as will
punctually answer the Command: and such is not ours. True it is, if the Lord
should look upon our very best Endeavors as they come from us, and respect us
but according to our merit; he might find in every step we tread, just matter
of offense, in none of acceptance. If he should Psalm. 130. 3.
mark what is done amiss, and be extreme in it, no flesh living could be able
to please him. It must be therefore upon other and better grounds than any
desert in us, or in our ways, that God is graciously pleased to accept either
of us or them. The Apostle has discovered two of those grounds, and joined
them both together in a short passage in Heb. 13. ( Heb. 13. 21.
Now the God of peace make you perfect in every good work to do his will,
working in you that which is pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ.)
Implying that our good works are pleasing unto him upon these two grounds:
First, Because he works them in us: Secondly, Because he looks upon us and
them in Christ.

18. First, Because he works them in us. As we see (...). Arist. 4. Ethic. 2.
most men take pleasure in the Rooms of their own contriving, in the Engines
and Manufactures of their own devising, in the Fruits of those Trees which
themselves have planted. Now the crooked ways of evil men, that walk according
to the course of the World, are indeed the Works of the Devil; he is Ephesians. 2. 2.
the spirit that works in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. such works
therefore may please the Devil, whose they are: But it is not possible they
should please God who sent his Son into the World, on purpose 1 John 3. 8.
to destroy the Works of the Devil. And as for those strayings also and
outsteppings, whereof Gods faithfullest servants are now and then guilty,
although they be not the Works of the Devil (for he has not now so much power
over them as to work in them) yet are they still Gal. 5. 19.
the Works of the flesh, as they are called, Gal. 5. Such works therefore may
be pleasing to the flesh, whose they are: but they are so far from being
pleasing unto God, that they rather Ephesians. 4. 30.
grieve his holy Spirit. The works then that must please God, are such as
himself has wrought in us, by that his holy Spirit; which are therefore called
Gal. 5. 22.
the fruits of the Spirit in the same Gal. 5. As it is said by the Prophet (
Isa. 26. 12.
O Lord, thou will ordain peace for us, for thou also have wrought all our
works in us.) And again in the Psalm, ( Psalm. 37. 23.
The Lord orders a good man's ways, and makes them acceptable unto himself)
they are therefore acceptable unto him, because they are ordered by him.

19. That is one ground. The other is because God looks not upon us as we are
in our selves, neither deals with us according to the rigor of a legal
Covenant: but he beholds us Ephesians. 1. 6.
(...), in the face of his beloved One, even Jesus Christ his only Son, and as
under a Covenant of Grace. He is Mat. 3. 17.
his beloved Son, in whom alone he is well pleased for his own sake; and in
whom, and for whose sake alone it is, if at any time he be well pleased with
any of us, or with any of our Ways. For being by him, and Gal. 3. 26.
through faith in his Name, made the children of God by adoption and grace, he
is now pleased with us, as a loving Father is with his beloved Child. As a
loving Father takes in good part the willing Endeavors of his Child, to do
whatsoever he appoints him, though his performances be very small: So the
Lord is graciously pleased to (...). Nazianz. Orat. 20.
accept of us, and our weak services, according to that willingness we have,
and not according to that exactness we want: not weighing our merits, but
pard^ning our offenses, and passing by our imperfections, as our loving Father
in Jesus Christ. That is the other ground.

20. And we doubt not, but the acceptance we find with God upon these two
grounds, if seasonably applied, will sustain the soul of every one that truly
fears God, with strong comfort, against two great and common discouragements,
whereunto he may be subject: arising the one from the sense of men's
displeasure; the other from the conscience of his own imperfections. Sometimes
God and his own heart condemn him not, and yet the World does; and that
troubles him: Sometimes God and the World condemn him not, and yet his own
heart does; and that troubles him more. If at any time it be either thus or so
with any of us, let us remember but thus much, and we shall find comfort in it;
that although we can neither please other men at all, nor our selves
sufficiently; yet our Works may for all that be graciously accepted by our good
God, and so our ways may please the Lord.

21. But I forbear the amplification of these comforts: that I may proceed from
the Antecedent in those former words ( when a man's ways please the Lord) of
which I have spoken hitherto; unto the Consequent in the remaining words ( he
makes even his Enemies to be at peace with him.) Wherein also, as in the
former part, we have three things observable. The Persons, the Effect, the
Author. The Persons, a man's Enemies; the Effect, Peace; the Author, the Lord.
(He makes a man's Enemies to be at peace with him.) The words being of an easy
understanding, will therefore need the less opening. Only thus much briefly.
First for the Persons, they that wish him ill, or seek to do him Harm in his
Person, Estate or good Name, they are a man's Enemies. And Solomon here
supposes it possible, that a man whose Ways please the Lord, may yet have
Enemies: Nay, it is scarce possible it should be otherwise; Mat. 10. 36.
Inimici Domestici, rather than fail, Satan will stir him up Enemies out of his
own house. 2. And these Enemies are then said to be at peace with him (which is
the Effect) when either there is a change wrought in their Affections, so as
they now begin to bear him less ill will than formerly they have done; or when
at leastwise their evil Affections toward him are so bridled, or their power
so restrained, as not to break out into open hostility, but (whatsoever their
thoughts are within) to carry themselves fairly and peaceably toward him
outwardly; so as he is at a kind of peace with them, or howsoever sustaineth no
harm by them. Either of which when it is done, it is thirdly, Psalm. 77. 10.
juxta vulgat*
Mutatio dextrae excelsi, it is merely the Lords doing, and it may well be
mavelous in our Eyes; It is he that makes a man's Enemies to be at peace with
him.

22. The scope of the whole words is to instruct us, that the fairest and
likeliest way for us to procure peace with men, is to order our ways so as to
please the Lord. You shall therefore find the favor of God, and the favor of
men often joined together in the Scriptures, as if the one were (and so usually
it is) a consequent of the other. So it is said of our blessed Savior ( Luke
2.) that Luke 2. 52.
he increased in favor with God and men. Prove. 3. 3, 4.
My son, let not mercy and truth forsake thee, etc. so shall thou find favor
and good understanding in the sight of God and man, says our Solomon, Prove. 3.
And S. Paul, Romans 14. ( Romans 14. 18.
He that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of
men.) In all which places favor and acceptance with God goes before: favor
and approbation with men follows after.

23. You may see the proof of it in the whole course of the Sacred Story:
wherein the Lords dealing with his own people in this kind is remarkable. When
they started aside to walk after their own counsels, and displeased him, how he
stirred them up enemies round about them; how he sold them into the hands of
those that spoiled them; how he hardened the hearts of all those that contended
with them, that they should not pity them. Again, on the other side, when they
believed his Word, walked in his Ways, and pleased him, how he raised them up
friends, how he made their Enemies to bow under them, how he inclined the
hearts of Strangers and of Pagans to pity them. Instances are obvious, and
therefore I omit them.

24. Of which Effect the first and principal cause is none other than the
overruling hand of God, who not only disposes of all outward things according
to Ephesians. 1. 5.
the good pleasure of his will, but has also in his hands the hearts of all
men, even of the greatest Prove. 21. 1.
Kings, as the rivers of water, to turn them which way soever he will: as our
Solomon speaks at the 21. Chapter of this Book. The Original there is ((...)
Palge majim) as you would say, the divisions of waters. Which is not to be
understood of the great Rivers, though the greatest of them all, even the wide
and great Sea also is in the hands of God, to turn which way soever he will:
(as he turned the waters of the Red Sea backwards to let his people go through,
and then turned them forward again to overwhelm their enemies.) But the
Allusion there is clearly to the little trenches, whereby in those drier
Eastern Countries, husbandmen used to derive water from some Fountain or
Cistern to the several parts of their (...). -- Homer. Odyss. 11.
Gardens, for the better nourishing of their Herbs and Fruit Trees. Now you
know when a Gardener has cut many such trenches all over his Garden, with what
ease he can turn the water out of any one into any other of those Channels:
suffering it to run so long in one, as he thinks good, and then stopping it
thence, and deriving it into another, even as it pleases him, and as he sees
it most conducible for the necessities of his Garden: With much more ease can
the Lord stop the current of any man's favor and affections in the course
wherein it presently runs, and turn it quite into another Channel: drying it
up against one man, and deriving it upon another, even as it seems good in
his sight, and as will best serve other his holy and just purposes; whether he
intend to chastize his Children, or to comfort them, or to exercise any other
part or passage of his blessed providence upon them. Thus Exodus 11. 1.
he gave his people favor in the sight of the Egyptians, so as they lent them
all their precious things at their departure, who but a little before had
consulted the rooting out the whole generation of them. And thus after that in
his just displeasure against them for their sins, he had Psalm. 106. 40, 44.
given them over into captivity into their enemies hands: when he was pleased
again with their Humiliations, he not only pitied them himself, according to
the multitude of his mercies; but he turned the hatred of their Enemies also
into compassion, and made all those that had led them away captives, to pity
them, as it is in Psalm 160.

25. The Lord is a God of Power, and therefore can work such effects as he
pleases for our peace without any apparent means on our parts. But being
withal a God of order: for the most part therefore, and in the ordinary course
of his providence, he works his own purposes by second Causes, and
subordinate means. At least he has so tied us to the use of probable means for
the bringing about of what he has promised, that although we ought to be
persuaded he can, yet we may not presume he will work our good without our
Endeavors. Now the subordinate means to be used on our part, without which we
cannot reasonably expect that God should make our Enemies to be at peace with
us; is our fair and amicable conversation with others. For 1 Pet. 13.
who will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good? says St. Peter.
As if he had said, so long as you carry your selves graciously and wisely, if
the hearts of your Enemies will not be so far wrought upon as to love and
affect you; yet their mouths will be muzled, and their hands ^anacled from
breaking out into any outrageous either terms or actions of open hostility: so
as you shall enjoy your peace with them in some measure. Though they mean you
no good, yet they shall do you no harm.

26. But it may be objected, both from Scripture and Experience, that sundry
times when a man's Ways are right, and therefore pleasing unto God, his Enemies
are nothing less, if not perhaps much more, enraged against him than formerly
they were. Our Savior often foretold his Disciples, that they should Matthew.
10. 22. -- 24. 9.
be hated of all men for his sake. And David complains in Psalm. 38. of some
that were Psalm. 38. 20.
against him, eo nomine, and for that very reason, because he was a follower of
that which was good. What a seeming distance is there between the Prophets and
the Apostles speeches? Or else how may they be reconciled? 1 Pet. 13.
Who is he that will harm you if you be followers of that which is good? says
the one: Yea, says the other, there are some against me, even therefore,
because I follow that which is good. As if by seeking to please God, he had
rather lost his friends than gained his Enemies.

27. There are sundry Considerations that may be of good use to us in the
present difficulty: As First, if God have not yet made our Enemies to be at
peace with us, yet it may be he will do it hereafter: being no way bound to us,
we may give him leave to take his own time. Acts 1. 17.
Non est vestrum nosse, if it be not for us to know, much less is it for us to
prescribe, the seasons which the Father has kept in his own power. It is his
Prerogative to appoint the times, it is our Duty to wait Psalm. 27. 14.
his leisure. It may be, ( secondly) neither is it unlikely, that we do not
Gal. 2. 14.
(...), walk with an even foot, and by a straight line; But tread awry in
something or other which displeases God; and for which he suffers their
enmity to continue. But it is more certain, ( thirdly) that we please him, but
imperfectly, and in part: even as those Graces wherewith we please him, are in
us but imperfectly, and in part. And therefore no marvel, if our peace also be
but imperfect, and in part. Possibly he will procure our peace more, when we
please him better.

28. But where none of these, or the like Considerations will reach home; it
will sufficiently clear the whole difficulty, to consider but thus much, (and
it is a plain and true answer) that generally all Scriptures that run upon
temporal promises, are to be understood (...), not as universally, but as
commonly true: Or (as some Divines express it) Melancthon.
cum exceptione crucis, not absolutely and without all exception, but evermore,
with this reservation, unless the Lord, in his infinite Wisdom, see cause why
it should be good for us to have it otherwise. But this you shall ever observe
withal, (and it infinitely magnifieth the goodness of our gracious Lord and God
toward us;) that where he sees it not good to give us that blessing in
specie, which the Letter of the Promise seems to import; he yet gives it us
eminenter; that is to say, if not that, yet some other thing fully as good as
that, and which he well knows (though perhaps we cannot yet apprehend it so)
to be presently -- mutat utiliori dono. Bernard. sermon. 5. de quadrag.
far better for us than that. Say he do not give us Wealth or Advancement, yet
if he give us a contented mind without them, is it not better? Say he do not
speedily remove a temptation from us, whereunder we groan, (which was St.
Paul's Case;) yet if he supply us 2 Cor. 12. 9.
with a sufficiency of grace to encounter with it; is it not better? So in the
present Case, if he do not presently make our Enemies to be at peace with us?
yet if he teach us to profit by their Enmity, in exercising our faith and
patience, in quickening us unto prayer, in furthering our humiliations, or
increasing any other grace in us, is it not every way and incomparably better?
Now will any wise man tax him with breach of Promise, who having promised a
Pound of Silver, gives a Talent of Gold? Or who can truly say, that that man
is not so good as his Word, that is apparently much better than his Word?

29. From the Words thus cleared may be deduced many profitable Inferences, for
our further instruction; but that the time will not suffer us to enlarge them.
As first, We may hence know, what a blessed and desirable thing Peace is: 1.
not only that inward peace with God, and in our own breasts, which Phil. 4. 7.
passes all understanding: but even this outward peace with men. When the Holy
Spirit of God here in the Text uses it as an especial strong inducement to
quicken us up the rather to the performance of that with cheerfulness, which we
are in Duty bound to perform howsoever, in seeking to please the Lord. We may
learn hence ( secondly,) if at any time we unfeignedly desire peace, by what
course we may be 2.
likeliest to procure it. Preposterous is the course, which yet most of men
take, when to make their Peace with mortal men, they hazard the disfavour of
the Eternal God. The right and ready way is chalked out in the Text: First, to
make our peace with God, by ordering our Ways so as to please him; and then to
commit our Ways to his ordering, by leaving the whole success to him: and so
doing it is not possible we should miscarry. Those that are now our Enemies,
either he will turn their hearts toward us, so as to become our Friends, if he
sees that good for us; or else he will so curb and restrain them, that with
all their Enmity they shall not be able to do us any harm, if he see that
better for us; or if by his just sufferance they do us harm one way (and yet he
will not suffer that neither, unless he see that absolutely best for us) it
shall be recompensed to us by his good providence, in a far greater comfort
another way. We may learn hence, ( Thirdly) how hateful the practice is, and
how wretched the condition of 3.
Make-bates, Tale-bearers, Whisperers, and all those that sow dissension among
Brethren. Light and Darkness are not more contrary than are Gods Ways and
theirs. He is the Author of Peace, and lover of Concord: they are the Authors
of Strife, and lovers of Discord. It is his Work to make a man's enemies to be
at peace with him: It is their business to make a man's friends to be at odds
with him. We may learn hence ( Fourthly,) if at any time our Enemies grow to 4.
be at peace with us; to whom we owe it. Not to our selves; it is a thing
beyond our power or skill to win them: Much less, to them; whose Malice is
stiff, and will not easily relent. But it is principally the Lords own Work. He
is Heb. 13. 20.
the God of Peace, which makes men Psalm. 68 6.
to be of one mind in an house; it is he that -- 46. 9
causes wars to cease in all the Earth, and that gives unto his people -- 29.
11.
the blessing of peace. And therefore the glory of it, and the thanks for it,
belong to him alone.

30. But I willingly omit all further enlargement of these inferences, that I
may somewhat the longer insist upon one other inference only, very needful to
be considered of in these times; which is this. We may hence learn, ( Fifthly)
if 5.
at any time we want peace, probably to guess where the fault may partly be,
and that by arguing from the Text thus. I read here, that when a man's ways
please the Lord, he makes his Enemies to be at peace with him: I find in mine
no relenting, but an utter averseness from peace ( Psalm. 120. 6.
I am for peace, but when I speak to them thereof, they make them ready to
battle:) I have cause therefore to fear that all is not right with me: either
my heart is not right, or my ways are not right: I will examine them both
thoroughly, and search if I can see Psalm. 139. 24.
any way of wickedness in me, for which my God may be justly displeased with
me, and for which he thus stiffneth mine Enemies still against me.

31. Thus to be jealous over our selves with a godly jealousy, would not only
work in us a due consideration of our ways, that so we might amend them, if
there be cause: but would be also of right use to prevent two notable pieces of
Sophistry, two egregious fallacies, wherewith thousands of us deceive our
selves. The former fallacy is, that we use many times, especially when our
Enemies do us manifest wrong, to impute our sufferings wholly to their
iniquity, whereof we should do wiselier to take some of the blame upon our
selves. Not at all to excuse them, whose proceedings are unjust, and for which
they shall bear their own burdens: But to acquit the Lords proceedings who
still is just, even in those things wherein men are unjust. Their hearts, and
tongues, and hands, are against us, only out of that Jam 1. 21.
(...) that superfluity of maliciousness wherewith their naughty hearts abound,
and for to serve their own cursed Ends; which is most unjust in them. But the
Lord sundry times hardneth their hearts, and whetteth their tongues, and
strengthens their hands against us in such sort, to chasten us for some sinful
Error, Neglect, or Lust in part still remaining in us unsubdued; which is most
just in him.

32. For (as I touched in the beginning) a man's heart may be right in the main,
and his Ways well-pleasing unto God in regard of the general bent and intention
of them: and yet by wrying aside in some one or a few particulars, he may so
offend the Lord, as that he may in his just displeasure for it, either raise
him up new Enemies, or else continue the old ones. As a loving father that has
entertained a good opinion of his son, and is well pleased with his behavior
in the generality of his carriage, because he sees him in most things dutiful
and towardly; may yet be so far displeased with him for some particular
neglects, as not only to frown upon him, but to give him sharp correction also.
Sic parvis componere magna. Not much otherwise is it in the dealing of our
heavenly Father with his children. We have an Experiment of it in David, with
whom doubtless God was well pleased for the main course of his life: otherwise
he had never received that singular testimony from his own mouth, that he was
Acts 13. 22.
secundum cor; a man after his own heart; yet because he stepped aside, and
that very foully in the matter of Uriah the Text says, 2 Samuel 11. that 2 Samuel
11. 27.
the thing that David had done, displeased the, Lord: and that which followed
upon it in the ensuing Chapter was, the Lord 12. 11.
raised up Enemies against him for it out of his own house.

33. The other fallacy is, when we cherish in our selves some sinful Errors,
either in judgment or practice, as if they were the good ways of God, the
rather for this, that we have Enemies, and meet with Opposition: as if the
Enmity of men were an infallible mark of a right way. The Words of the Text ye
see, seem rather to incline quite the other way. Indeed the very truth is,
neither the favo^^ or disfavour of men, neither their approving nor opposing,
is any certain mark at all either of a good or of a bad way. Our Solomon has
delivered it positively (and we ought to believe him,) Eccl. 9. that Eccl. 9. 1.
no man knows either love or hatred, by all that is before them. It is an
error therefore of dangerous consequence, to think that Non ex passione certa
est justitia: sed ex justitia, passio gloriosa. Aug. 1. cont. Epist. Parmem. c.
ult.
the enmity of the wicked is an undoubted mark either of truth or goodness. Not
only for that it wants the Warrant of truth to support it, (which is common
to it with all other Errors:) but for two other especial reasons besides. The
one is, because through blind self-love we are apt to dote upon our own
opinions more than we ought. How confidently do some men boast out their own
(...) [(...)] (...) Nazainz. Orat. 34.
private fancies and unwarranted singularities, as if they were the holy ways
of God. The other reason is, because through wretched uncharitableness we are
apt to stretch the Title of the wicked further than we ought. How freely do
some men condemn all that think or do otherwise than themselves, but especially
that any way oppose their courses, as if they were the wicked of the World, and
Persecutors of the godly!

34. For the avoiding of both which mischiefs, it is needful we should rightly
both understand and apply all those places of Scripture which speak of that
Opposition, which is sometimes made against truth and goodness. Which
opposition the Holy Ghost in such like places intended not to deliver as a mark
of godliness; but rather to propose as an Antidote against Worldly fears and
discouragements: That if in a way which we know upon other and impregnable
Evidences to be certainly right, we meet with opposition; we should not be
dismayed at it, as if some strange thing had befallen us, (...), Beloved, 1
Pet. 4. 12.
think it not strange, says St. Peter (concerning all such trials as these
are) as if some strange thing had happened: because it is a thing that at any
time may and sometimes does happen. But now to make such opposition a (...) or
mark whereby infallibly to judge of our ways whether they be right or no (as
some out of the strength of their heat, or ignorance, have done) is to abuse
the holy Scriptures, to pe^vert the meaning of the Holy Ghost, and to lead men
into a maze of Uncertainty and Error. We had all of us need therefore to
beware, that we do not like our own ways so much the better because we have
Enemies: it is much safer for us to suspect lest there may be something in us
otherwise than should be, for which the Lord suffers us to have Enemies.

36. And now the God of grace and peace give us all grace to order our ways so
as may be pleasing in his sight: and grant to every one of us, First, perfect
peace with him, and in our own consciences; and then such a measure of outward
peace both public and private, with all our Enemies round about us, as shall
seem good in his sight. And let the peace of God which passes all
understanding keep our hearts and minds in the knowledge and love of him, and
of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: And let the blessing of God Almighty, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost be upon us, and upon all them that hear his
word and keep it, at this present time and for evermore.

Amen, Amen.
AD AULAM.
The Third Sermon.
NEWARK. 1633.
1 Pet. 2. 17. Honor all men, Love the Brotherhood.
WHen the Apostles preached the Doctrine of Christian Liberty; a fit
opportunity was ministered for Satan's Instruments to work their feats upon the
new-converted Christians, false 1.
Teachers on the one side, and false Accusers on the other. For taking
advantage from the very name of Liberty, the Enemies of their Souls were ready
-- (...) 1 Timothy 6. 1. -- 3. b -- (...). Hic. verse. 12.
(...), to teach them under that pretense to despise their Governors: and no
less ready the enemies of their Faith, (...) to speak evil of them under that
color, as persons licentious and ill-affected to Government. The Preventing of
which, whether abuses or misconstructions of so wholesome a doctrine, caused the
holy Apostles to touch so often, and to beat so much (as in their Writings they
have done) upon the argument of Christian subjection and obedience: as a duty
highly concerning all those upon whom the Name of Christ is called, both for
their Consciences, and Credits sake, cheerfully to perform. If there be in them
at all any care, either to discharge a good Conscience before God, or to
preserve their own and the Gospels reputation before men: they must endeavor
both to do -- Verse. 15.
the will of the most Wise God, and to put to silence the ignorance of foolish
men, by submitting -- (...) -- verse. 13.
to every humane Creature that the Lord has set over them for his sake.

2. This I conceive to be the scope of that part of the Chapter whence the Text
is taken: which I now stand not with farther curiosity to Analyze. Suffice it
us to know, that in this seventeenth verse St. Peter shuts up his general
Exhortation concerning subjection to Superiors in four short Precepts or
Aphorisms of Christian life. [ Honor all men. Love the Brotherhood. Fear God.
Honor the King.] Which four, though considerable also apart, and as each has
a complete sense within it self: may yet not unfitly be ranged, and that
agreeably (as I conceive) to the Apostles intendment, into two Combinations.
The two former into one as thus: Honor all men] but not all men alike: you
must be ready to do all offices of respect and love, as occasion serves to
every man; but yet you are to remember that your brethren in Christ may claim a
nearer and deeper interest in your affections (and so in the exercise of your
charity too) than they* that are without have any reason to do. Honor all men:
but especially love the Brotherhood. The two latter also into one, thus: Prove.
24. 21.
Fear God and the King, where the fear of the one will consist with the fear of
the other. But where they are incompatible, hold fast to the fear of God
howsoever: but even in that case, where you may not fear the King, you must yet
do him all the honor otherwise that may be. Fear God, yet honor the King too.

3. We shall now hold us to the former Combination only: consisting of these
two Precepts, Honor all men, love the Brotherhood. In either of which we may
observe; First, the Duty, what it is: and then how that duty is either extended
or limited in regard of the Object. The duties are, Honor and Love. The duty
of Honor in the former Precept: tand that extended to every man. Honor all
men. The duty of Love in the latter Precept: and that limited to the Brethren,
Love the Brotherhood. Of which in their order: keeping the same method in both;
even this, to consider first Quid nominis, then Quid Iuris, and lastly Quid
facti. The first, by opening the Duty, and what we are to do: The next, by
enquiring into the Obligation, and why we are so to do: The last, by examining
our Performance, and whether we do therein as we ought to do or no. And first
of the former Precept, Honor all men.

4. Honor properly, is an acknowledgment or ( -- importat quandam
testificationem de excellentia alicujus. Aquin. 2. 2. qu. 103. 1. ^
) testification of some excellency or other in the person honored: by some
reverence or observance answerable thereunto. Thus we honor God above all, as
being transcendently excellent: and thus we honor our Parents, our Princes,
our betters, or superiors in any kind. And thus the word is clearly used in the
last Precept of the four in this verse. Honor the King. But so to take it in
this first Precept, would be subject to sundry difficulties and inconveniences:
this especially above the rest, that the Scripture should here bind us to an
impossible thing. Impossible, I say, not only ex hypothesi and by consequent,
in regard of the weakness and corruption of our nature; (for so is every good
duty impossible to be performed by us without the grace of God preventing and
assisting us:) but impossible ex natura rei, as implying a flat contradiction
within it self. For honoring (in that notion) being the preferring of some
before other some; we should be bound by this Text (were the word so to be
understood) to prefer every man before every other man: which how it should be
possible for us to do, is beyond the wit of man to imagine. For, to prefer all,
is in truth to prefer none: and so the Apostles command to honor all men,
shall be all one upon the point, as if he had directly forbidden us to honor
any man. It is necessary therefore (for the avoiding of this contradiction, and
sundry other absurdities which would follow thereupon, and I omit) to take the
word Honor in this place, in a signification somewhat looser and larger than
the former: so as to import all that esteem or regard, be it more or less,
which (either in justice or charity) is due to any man in respect of his place,
person, or condition; according to the eminency, merit, or exigency of any of
them respectively: together with the willing performance of such just and
charitable offices upon all emergent occasions as in proportion to any of the
said respects can be reasonably expected. In which sense, it is a possible
thing for us to honor, not only our Superiors, that are over us, or above us;
but our Equals too that are in the same rank with us: yea even our inferiors
also, that are below us, or under us.

5. And in this latitude you shall find the word Honor sometimes used in the
Scriptures: though not so frequently as in the proper signification. You have
one example of it, in the seventh verse of the next Chapter: where St. Peter
enjoyneth husbands to give honor to the Wife as to the weaker vessel. It was
far from his meaning doubtless, that the husband should honor the wife with
the honor properly so called, that of Reverence or Subjection: For that were
to invert the right order of things, and to pervert Gods Ordinance; who has
given man the preeminence, and commanded ( 1 Cor. 14. 34.
) the woman to be in subjection. The woman therefore may not by any means ( 1 Timothy 2. 11. 12.
) (...), usurp authority over the man: but it is her duty to ( (...) Ephesians. 5. 33.
reverence her husband, and she must see that she do it. His meaning clearly
is, that the husband should cherish the wife, as one that (though in some
degree of inferiority,) is yet his yoke fellow; bearing with the weaknesses,
whether of her Sex or Person, framing to her disposition, and yielding to her
desires, as far as reason and wisdom will allow. Being her head, he must not
make himself her slave, by giving her the honor of dutiful observance and
obedience: and yet, being his Companion, he may not make her his drudge, by
denying her the honor of a tender respect, and loving condescension. Which
kind of honor is in some measure, and according to their different
proportions, due also to be given by ( Me habere honorem ejus ingenio decet,
Pater Plautinus in Asinar. Act. 1. Sc. 1.
Parents to their Children, and by the greatest Masters to the meanest of their
Servants.

6. We have another example of the like use of the word, 1 Timothy 5. where St.
Paul bids 1. Tim. 5. 3.
Timothy honor Widows that are Widows indeed. Timothy was a man of eminent
rank in the Church of God, a Bishop; and that of no mean See, but of Ephesus a
famous City, and the chief Metropolis of Asia: and the Widows he there speaks
of, were ( Hoc omne praeceptum de his est viduis, quae Ecclesiae pascuntur
eleemosynis. Hieron. adver. Jovinian. lib.
) poor old women, such as in those times for the mean services they were to
perform to the Saints, were called also Diaconissoe, and were therefore to be
maintained out of the contributions of the Church, and the Common Stock. The
parties being of such wide distance, it had been most unseemly for him to have
given to them; but extreme and most ridiculous arrogance in them to have
expected from him, any honor properly so called; honor of reverence and
subjection. But the honor he was to give them, was such as was meet for
persons of that quality, especially in relation to their maintenance; that in
the execution of his Pastoral charge, amongst his other cares, he should take
care that those widows should be provided for in fitting sort; that so in the
Province of Ephesus there might be no cause of such complaint, as had formerly
been by the Grecians at Jerusalem Acts 6* that their Act. 6. 1.
widows were neglected in the daily ministration.

7. In like manner we are to understand the word Honor here in the Text: in
such a notion as may include (together with the Honor properly so called, and
due to Superiors only) all those fitting respects which are to be given to
Equals and Inferiors also; which is a kind of honor too but more improperly
so called. And then it falls in, all one with that of St. Paul. Romans 13. [
Render Romans 13. 7.
therefore to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom
custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor.] As if he had said, I would
not any of you should be behind with any man in any thing: but if you owe him
any duty, perform it to the full. If any honor or respect in whatsoever kind
or degree belong to him, account it as due debt: and let him have it, to the
utmost of what can with justice or in equity be demanded. So that we then
fulfill this Precept of our Apostle, when we are careful to our utmost power and
best understanding, to respect every man, whether Superior, Equal or Inferior
(secundum gradum and meritum:) according to his place and desert. For those two
are as it were the Standards, whereby to measure out to every man his
proportion of Honor in this kind: That is to say, every man is to be honored
and respected, according to the dignity of his place, whatsoever his deserts
are; and according to the merit of his person, whatsoever his place and
condition be.

8. It would be a tedious, indeed rather an endless task (and therefore I
undertake it not,) to drive the general into its particulars: and to show what
pe^uliar honors and respects are due to all estates of men, considered in
their several ranks and mutual relations. It must be the care of every godly
wise man to inform himself the best he can for that matter, so far as may
concern himself, and those whom he may have occasion to converse withal: and it
must be his resolution to give honor to every man accordingly; that is to say,
neither more or less, but as near as he can understand (within a convenient
latitude) that which is justly his due. Yet let him take this withal, that
where the case is doubtful, it is the safest course (lest self-love should
incline him to be partial) to pinch rather on his own part, than on his
Neigbours, especially if his Superior; That is to say, rather to forego a good
part of that honor, which he may think is due to himself, if he be not very
sure of it, than to keep back any small part of that honor, which (for any
good assurance he has to the contrary) may fall due to his neighbor.
Agreeably to the other Apostles advice, Romans 12. that (not in taking, but) (
Romans 12. 10.
) in giving honor we should go one before another.

9. Now we see, in the meaning of the words, both what duty we are to perform,
and to whom. The Duty, Honor; and that to all men: and all this but Quid
nominis. It may next be demanded, Quid Iuris: upon what tie we stand thus bound
to Honor all men; I answer Funiculus triplex. There lies a threefold tie
upon us for the performance of this Duty: to wit, of Justice, of Equity, of
Religion. A tie of Justice first: whose most proper and immediate office it is,
suum cuique; to give to every one that which of right appertains to him,
(...), is Aristotle's Phrase: but St. Paul's is far beyond it, in the forecited
Romans 13. Render to all their dues, (So we translate it: but the word is) (...)
which imports more than (...). It signifies Debts: accordingly Romans 13. 7.
whereunto he says in the next verse there pursuing his Metaphor, Owe nothing
to any man. We do not account it discourtesie, but dishonesty, in any man -- 8.
that is able, not to pay debts. Withold not good from them to whom it is
due, says Solomon, Prove, 3. Whosoever withholds a debt or a due from
another does an unjust act; and is next a kin to a thief: and, as a thief, is
bound to restitution. Prove. 3. 27.
The other word in the same place inforceth as much, (...), which is more than
Aristotle's (...). the very same word that is used, where Zache^^ Luke 19. 8.
promised fourfold restitution, (...), Luke 19. render or restore.

10. It is a thing not unworthy the observing: that all those words which
usually (...). Honos.
signify Honor in the three learned Languages, do either primarily signify,
or else are derived from such words as do withal signify, either a Price or a
Weight. Now by the rules of Commutative Justice, the price of every Commodity
ought to be according to the true worth of it. And things payable by weight are
by Law and Custom then only current, when they have their due and full weight,
and that usually with some draught over, rather than under. Even so it is a
righteous thing with us, to make a just estimate of every man's worth, and to
set a right valuation upon him, so near as we can, respectively to the quality
of his Place and his Personal desert; and to allow him his full proportion of
Honor accordingly: neither under-rating him in our thoughts, nor setting
lighter by him than we should do, in our carriage and conversation toward him.
A false Prove. 11. 1.
weight is abominable; and so is every one that tradeth with it: and certainly
that man makes use of a false beam, that sets light by his brother (or
perhaps sets him at naught) whom he ought to honor. The question is put on
sharply by the Apostle, Romans 14. Why do thou set at naught thy brother? As
who should Romans 14. 10.
say, With what face, with what conscience can thou do it? He that defalteth
any thing of that just honor which he ought to allow his brother, (let his
pretense be what it can be) how is he not guilty of the sin of Ananias and
Saphira, even according to the Letter. Act. 5. ((...), being the Phrase there)
in keeping back, as they did, part of the full price, when they should have
Acts 5. 3.
laid it down all. Thus we are tied in Justice to honor all men.

11. The next tie is that of Equity: where the Rule is, Quod tibi fieri non vis
-- A Rule which Severus, a wise Emperor, magnified exceedingly: Lamprid. in
Severo.
Lampridius says, that he learnt it of the Christians. And it may very well be
so: for Christ himself commended it to his Disciples, as a perfect breviate of
the whole Law, Whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, do ye even so
to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. He means so far as concerns
our dealings Mat. 7. 12.
and transactions with men. A short Lesson, but of a large comprehension: all
one (in the meaning and result) with that (...), as St. James calls it, that
Jam. 2. 8.
Royal Law, which comprehends in it the whole Second Table of the Law, with
all the several offices reducible to each Commandment therein; Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thyself. If we would but once perfectly learn this one Lesson,
and soundly follow it, ( Do as we would be done to) sailing always by that
Compass, and framing all our actions by that Rule: we should not need any other
Law for the guiding of our consciences, or other direction for the ordering of
our Conversations, in respect of our carriage toward others. But there is a
base wretched pride in us, that disordereth all both within and without; and
will not suffer us to be (I say not just, but even) so much as reasonable. Like
some broken Merchants, that drive their Creditors to low Compositions for great
Sums, but call hard upon their poor Neighbors for petty reckonings that stand
uncrost in the Book: or the Evil Servant in the Parable, Mat. 18, who having
craved Mat. 18. 24, - 28.
his Masters forbearance for a very vast Sum, went presently and shook his
fellowservant by the throat for a trifle: or as young prodigal heirs, that are
ready to borrow of every man that will lend them, but never take any care to
pay scores; so are many of us.

-- Nulla retrorsum. Horat. 1. Epist. 1.
We care not how much honor comes to our selves from others, how little goes
from our selves to others. Nay you shall observe it, (and the reason of it is
manifest; for the same pride that makes men over-prize themselves, makes them
also undervalue their brethren:) you shall observe it, I say, that those very
men that stand most upon the terms of bitterness, and look for most respect
from those that are below them, are ever the slackest in giving to those that
are above them their due honor. Who so forward (generally) to set bounds, and
to give Law to the higher powers, as those very men, that exercise the most
unbounded and unlimited tyranny, among their poor neighbors and underlings,
crowing over them without all mercy, and beyond all reason; I forbid no man to
maintain the rights, and to preserve the dignity that belongs either to his
Place or Person: rather I hold him much to blame; if he do not by all fair and
justifiable means endeavor so to do. For qui sibi nequam, cui bonus? He that
is wretchless of his own honor, there is no great fear that he will be over
careful of doing his neighbor right in giving him his. Let every man
therefore, in Gods name, take to himself that portion of honor and respect
that is due to him: and good luck may he have with his honor. Provided always,
that he be withal sure of these two things: First, that he take no more than
his due; for this is but just: and then, that he be as willing to give, as to
take; for that is but equal. He that does otherwise, is partial, and
unreasonable. And thus we are tied in Equity to honor all men.

12. There is yet a third tie; that of Religion: in respect of that Image of
God, which is to be found in man. All honor is in regard of some ( Habet
justam venerationem quicquid excellit. Cic. 1. de Not. Deor.
) excellency or other: and there is in man no excellency at all, of and from
himself; but all the excellency that is in him, is such only as God has been
pleased to put upon him. So as those Characters and impressions of excellency,
which God has stamped upon man, as some image of himself; is the true
foundation of all that honor that can any way belong unto him. And that
excellency is twofold: Natural and Personal. The Natural excellency is that,
whereby man excels other creatures: Personal that whereby one man excels
another.

13. Of the Natural first: which arises from the Image of God stamped upon man
in his Creation. And this excellency, being it was put upon the whole species
of mankind, is therefore to be found in all men; and that alike: so as in this
respect, all men are honorable, and all alike honorable. Thou that comparing
thy self with thy poorer Brother, think thy self the better man, and so
despisest him: compare thy self and him another while in puris naturalibus, and
thou shall find no difference. Take him as a man, he is every way as good a man
as thou: thou carriest a body about thee, no less mortal than his; he
harbors a soul within him, no less immortal than thine: And where is the
difference? Well then, here is the first honor we owe to all men, even as they
are men, and that without all either exception (none to be excluded) or
differences (none to be preferred) viz. this, That we despise no man, but that
as much as lies in us we preserve the being, and advance the well-being of
every man: and that because of Gods Image set upon him. As when a piece of base
metal is coined with the Kings stamp, and made current by his Edict; no man may
thenceforth presume either to refuse it in pay, or to abate the value of it: So
God having stamped his own Image upon every man, and withal signified his
blessed pleasure, how precious he would have him to be in our eyes and esteem,
(according as you shall find the tenor of the Edict in Genesis 9. At the hand of
Genesis 9. 3.
every man's brother will I require the life of man; with the reason of the
Edict also annexed, for in the Image of God made he man) we must look to answer
it as an high contempt of that Sacred Majesty, if we set any man at naught, or
make less account of him than God would have us. The contumelious usage of the
Image, is in common construction ever understood as a dishonor meant to the
Prototype: upon which consideration it was, that the Romans, when they meant to
set a mark of public disgrace or dishonor upon any eminent person, did
manifest their such intention, by throwing down, breaking, trampling upon, or
doing some other like disgrace unto their statues or pictures. And Pro. 14. 31.
-- 17. 5.
Solomon in sundry places interprets all acts of oppressing, mocking, or
otherwise despising our neighbors, not without a strong reflection upon God
himself; as tending to the contempt and dishonor of him their Maker.

14. Besides this Natural, God has put upon man a Personal Excellency: which
is an effect of his Providence in the Government of the World, as the former
was of his Power in the Creation of it. And here first begins the difference
that is between one man and another. That saying, Homo homini quantum praestat,
has no place till you come to this. And that in regard of Gods free
distribution of several gifts, and offices, and callings to several men with
admirable variety, and with no less admirable wisdom. Alius sic, Alius vero
sic: Even as the members of the natural body, besides life (which is common to
them 1 Cor. 7. 7.
all) have also their several abilities, functions and operations, with much
different variety each from other: And as the members according to those
differences are differently honored (one kind of honor belonging to the head,
another 1 Cor. 12. 23.
to the hand, another to the feet, and so to the rest, according as they are
some more, some less honorable:) so in the World men receive different honors
according to their different capacities; the King in one kind, the Priest in
another, the Soldier, the Husbandman, the Artificer, and so all the rest in
other kinds. It is an observation of some Divines, that there is some Image of
God (though I think it were better to call it Vestigium or Umbra, than Imago; a
shadow rather than Image; some weak representation and dark resemblance (they
mean) in Kings of his absolute Sovereignty, in Judges and Magistrates of his
Justice, in Priests of his Holiness, in Old men of his Eternity, in Parents of
his Causality, in Counselors of Wisdom, in Learned men of his Knowledge, in
Artificers, and Laborers of his operative Power, etc. A conceit to my
understannig, neither so light as to be rejected for a mere fancy; neither yet
so solid, as to build a firm conclusion upon, to satisfy either judgment or
conscience. But whether that conceit stand or fall; certain it is howsoever,
that it is Gods stamp alone that sets a value upon all humane Excellency,
whether Natural or Personal, and thereby renders it honorable. For whether we
consider men's Personal Excellencies, quoad statum and gradum, according to
their different particular places, callings and conditions; or quoad meritum,
according to their different particular graces, abilities and qualifications:
still they have their rise merely from Gods gracious distributions; who has
put them into those places by his all-ruling providence, and imparted those
graces to them by his powerful dispensation. Since therefore not the meanest man
in the World but has received from God some Personal Excellency in some kind
or other, and in some degree or other, whereby he may become some way or other
useful and serviceable to humane society (some very few excepted, as infants,
natural fools, and distracted persons; whose personal defects yet are by way of
meditation and reflection useful to others, and so they not to be despised, but
as less honorable members to be therefore rather the more carefully and
tenderly respected) there ought to be therefore 1 Cor. 12. 23
given to every man, even the very meanest, some kind and degree of respect and
honor, proportionable to that excellency. And thus in regard of the Image of
God shining both in their nature and persons, we are tied in Religion, to
honor all men.

15. We have seen hitherto both the Duty and the Obligation of it; Quid
nominis, and Quid Iuris: What we are to perform, and Why? We come now to the
Quid facti, to examine a little how it is performed among us. Slackly and
untowardly enough no doubt, (as to the generality:) as all other duties are.
Are there not some first, who are so far from honoring all men, as the Text
requires, that ( themselves only excepted) they honor no man at all: at least
not as they ought to do? No, not their known Superiors? But how much less then
their Equals or Inferiors? Despising Governments in their hearts, and speaking
2 Pet. 2. 10.
evil of Dignities with their mouths, and kicking against Authority with their
heels. No matter what shows and professions men make of I know not what respect
and observance; (They honor the King and the Church, and are in charity with
all the World: it were pity they should live else.) But quid verba audiam,
facta cum videam? Let protestations go, and look into the practice. How do they
honor the Magistrate, that decline, as much as they can, all needful services
for his support; and repine at what they cannot avoid? Or how the Minister,
that grudge him the portion, which if not by the Ordinance of God (for that
they think will bear a dispute) yet without all contradiction is settled upon
him Per leges and consuetudines Angliae.
by the same (and therefore by as strong a) title as they hold their own
inheritance by, and are ever studying to find out new devices and quillets to
put him beside it? Or how their Equals, that, to get aloft, depress their
brethren by odious comparisons, or (which is worse) disparage them by false
suggestions? Or how their Inferiors, that trample them under their feet, as
they do the clay in the streets; and use them with less regard many times than
they do the dogs that feed under their Tables; as the rich glutton did poor
Lazarus? Luke 16.


16. There are others secondly, that may perhaps be persuaded to yield some
honor to their betters; (that may be but reason:) but that they should be
bound to honor those that are not so good men as themselves, or at the most
but such like as themselves are, they see no great reason for that. But there
is no remedy: St Peter here tells them, that must be done too. He that says,
Honor all men, excludes none; no, not the lowest and meanest. Take heed that
ye Mat. 18. 10.
despise not one of these little ones, (Mat. 18.) there is a kind of honor (it
seems) due to the little ones; and they may not be despised. The poor man's
wisdom is despised, says the Preacher, Eccles. 9. He says it is so; and so it
is but too often, Eccles. 9. 16.
through the pride of the great and wealthy, (as it is said in the Psalm, Our
soul Psalm. 123. 4.
is filled with the scornful reproof of the wealthy, and with the
despitefulness of the pr^ud:) But he does not say, it should be so. Jobs
carriage was otherwise, in so far that he disavoweth it, and protests against
it utterly [ If I did despise the Job 31. 13.
cause of my manservant, or of my maid servant, when they contended with me,
etc.] He would afford the meanest servants he had, the honor to debate the
matter with them; and, if there were reason on their side, to allow it. The
greatest subject in the land need not think it any disparagement to him to give
a just respect to a very mean person; if he will but remember, that it is the
duty even of the King himself, to vouchsafe that honor to the poorest beggar
within his Realm as to protect him from violence, and to require an account of
his blood, though it should be spilt by the hand of a Lord.

17. And yet behold a greater than Job, (although, I take it, he was a King too
within his own Territories) a greater than any of the great Kings of the earth,
Phil. 2. 5, etc.
ready to teach us this duty by his example; even our Lord Jesus Christ: and
the same mind should be in us, that was in him. And what was that? He was
pleased so far to honor us, (base, sinful, unworthy Creatures as we were) as
for our sakes to lay aside his own greatness, emptying and divesting himself of
glory and Majesty, making himself of no reputation, and taking upon him the
form of a Servant. Ill do they follow either his Example, or his Apostles
Doctrine here, who think themselves too good to condescend to men of low
estate, by doing them any Romans 12. 16.
office of service or respect; though they need it never so much, crave it
never so often, deserve it never so well. And they, who look another way in the
day of their brothers distress; as the Priest and Levite passed by the wounded
man in the Parable, without regard: And (not to multiply particulars) all they,
who having Luke 10.
power and opportunity thereunto, neglect either to reward those that have
worth in them, according to their merit; or to protect those that are wronged,
according to their innocence; or to relieve those that are in want, according
to their necessity.

18. There are a third sort, that corrupt a good Text with an ill gloss; by
putting in a conditional limitation: like the botching in of a course shred
into a fin^ garment; as thus. The Magistrate shall have his Tribute, the
Minister his Tyth^, and so every other man his due honor; if so be he carry
himself worthily, and as he ought to do in his place, and so as to deserve it.
In good time! But I pray you then first (to argue the case a little with thee,
whoever thou art that thus glossest) Who must judge of his carriage, and
whether he deserve such honor, yea, or no? Why, that thou hopest thou art well
enough able to do thy self. Sure we cannot but expect good justice, where he
that is a party will allow no other to be judge but himself. Where the debtor
must arbitrate what is due to the creditor, things are like to come a fair
reckoning.

19. But secondly, how durst thou distinguish where the Law distinguishes not?
Where God commands, he looks to be answered with obedience: and do thou
think to come off with subtilties and distinctions? The Precept here in the
Text is plain and peremptory; admits no Equivocation, Exception, or
Reservation: suggesteth nothing that should make it reasonable to restrain the
Universality expressed therein by any such limitation: and therefore will not
endure to be eluded with any forced Gloss.

20. Least of all thirdly, with such a Gloss as the Apostle has already
precluded by his own comment, in the next verse: where he bids servants to
be subject to their Masters, not only to the good and gentle, but to the
froward also, and such as would be ready to buffet them when they had done no
fault. Such Masters sure could challenge no great honor from their servants
titulo m^rit^, and as by way of desert: But yet there belonged to them j^^
dominii, and by virtue of their Mastership, the honor of Obedience and
Subjection. Which honor, due unto them by that right, they had a good title
to: and it might not be detained from them either in part or in whole by
cavilling at their desert.

21. But tell me fourthly in good earnest, do thou believe, that another man's
neglect of his duty can discharge thee from the obligation of thine?

-- dic Quintiliane colorem. Can thou produce any public Law, or private
Contract, or sound Reason, whereon to ground; or but handsome Color, wherewith
to varnish such an imagination? Fac quodtuum est: do thou thy part therefore,
and honor him according to his place howsoever. He shall answer, and not thou,
for his unworthiness, if he deserve it not: but thou alone shall answer for the
neglect of thine own duty, if thou performest it not.

22. Lastly, ex ore tuo. When thou say, thou will honor him according to
his place, if he deserve it; do thou not observe that thou art still unjust
by thy own confession? For where place and merit concur, there is a double
honor due: ( The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor, 1 Timothy 5.)
There 1 Timothy 5. 17.
is one honor due to the place, and another to merit. He that is (...).
Chrysostom. in Coloss* sermon. 3. -- (...), Ibid.
in the place, though without desert, is yet worthy of a single honor, for his
place sake: and justice requires he should have it. But if he deserve well in
his place, by rightly discharging his duty therein, he is then worthy of a
double honor; and justice requires he should have that too. Consider now how
unjust thou art. If he deserve well, say thou, he shall have the honor due
to his place: otherwise not. Thou might as well say in plain terms: If he be
worthy of double honor, I can be content to afford the single: otherwise be
must be content to go without any. Now what justice, what conscience in this
dealing, where two parts are due, to allow but one; and where one is due, to
allow just none?

23. But I proceed no further in this argument; having purposely omitted sundry
things that occurred to my meditations herein, and contracted the rest, that I
might have time to speak something to the latter Precept also. Love the
brotherhood. To which I now pass, hoping to dispatch it with convenient
brevity: observing the same method, as before, Quid nominis, Quid juris, Quid
facti; What we are to do; and Why; and How we perform it.

24. First then for the meaning of the words, we must know, that as Adam and
Christ are Totum genus humanum quodammodo sunt homines duo, etc. Prosper.
sentent. c. 299.
the two roots of mankind; Adam as in a state of Nature, and Christ as in a
state of Grace: so there is -- (...). Basil. homil. in Laicis.
a twofold brotherhood amongst men, correspondent thereunto. First, a
Brotherhood of Nature, by propagation from the loins of Adam as we are men: and
secondly a Brotherhood of Grace, by profession of the faith of Christ, as we
are Christian men* As men, we are Membra sumus corporis magni: Natura nos
cognatos edidit. Senec. Epist. 95.
members of that great body, the World: and so all men that live within the
compass of the World are Brethren, by a more general communion of Nature. As
Christians we are members of that mystical body, the Church: and so all
Christian men that live within the compass of the Church are Brethren, by a
more peculiar Communion of Faith. And as the Moral Law binds us to love all
men as our Brethren, and partakers with us of the same common Nature in Adam:
so the Evangelical Law binds to love all Christians as our Brethren, and
partakers with us of the same common faith in Christ.

25. In which latter notion the word Brother is most usually taken in the
Apostolical Writings: to signify a Professor of the Christian Faith and
Religion, in opposition to heathen men and unbelievers. The name of Christian,
though of commonest use and longest continuance, was yet but of a latter date;
taken up first at Antioch, as we find Acts 11. whereas believers were before
usually called Act. 11. 26.
Disciples; and no less usually, both before and since, Brethren. You shall
read very often in the Acts, and Epistles of the holy Apostles, How the
Brethren assembled together to hear the Gospel preached, to receive the
Sacrament, and to consult about the affairs of the Church. How the Apostles, as
they went from place to place, to plant and water the Churches, in their
progress every where visited the Brethren: at their first coming to any place,
saluting the Brethren; Act. 15. 36. -- 21. 7. -- 15. 32. -- 18. 18. -- 11. 29.
2 Cor. 8. 18. -- 23. 1 Cor. 8. 12.
during their abode there, confirming the Brethren; at their departure thence,
taking leave of the Brethren. How Collections were made for relief of the
Brethren; and those sent into Judea from other parts by the hands of the
Brethren, etc. St. Paul opposes the Brethren, to them that are without; and so
includes all that are within the Church. What have I to do to judge them that
are without? 1 Cor. 5. As if he had said, Christ sent me an Apostle and
Minister of the Churches; and therefore I meddle not but with those that are
within the Pale of the Church: as for those that are without, if any of them
will be filthy let him be filthy still, I have nothing to do to meddle with
them. But says he, if any man that is within the Christian Church, any man
that is called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or Drunkard, or Rayler, or otherwise
stain his holy Profession by scandalous living; I know how to deal with him:
let the Censures of the Church be laid upon him, let him be cast out of the
Assemblies of the Brethren, that he may be thereby brought to shame and
repentance.

26. So then, Brethren (in the Apostolical use of the word) are Christians: and
the Brotherhood the whole Society of Christian men, the systeme and body of the
whole visible Church of Christ. I say the visible Church: because there is
indeed another Brotherhood more excellent than this whereof we now speak,
consisting of such only as shall undoubtedly inherit salvation; called by some
of the Ancients, The Church of Gods Elect, and by some later Writers, The
invisible Church. And truly this Brotherhood would (under God) deserve the
highest room in our affections; could we with any certainty discern who were of
it, and who not. But because the fan is not in our hand, to winnow the chaff
from 2 Timothy 2. 19.
the wheat, (Dominus novit) The Lord only knows who are his, by those secret
Characters of Grace and Perseverance, which no eye of man is able to discern in
another, (nor perhaps in himself infallibly:) we are therefore for the
discharge of our duty to look at the Brotherhood so far as it is discernable to
us, by the plain and legible Characters of Baptism and outward Profession. So
that whosoever abides in area Domini, and lives in the Communion of the
visible Church, being baptized into Christ, and professing the Name of Christ:
(let him prove as it falls out, chaff, or light corn, or wheat, when the Lord
shall come with his fan to purge his floor:) yet in the mean time so long as he
lies in the heap and upon the floor; We must own him for a Christian, and take
him as one of the Brotherhood, and as such an one love him. For so is the Duty
here, Love the Brotherhood*

27. To make Love complete, Two things are required: according to Aristotle's
description of it, (...), etc. Affect us cordis, and Effect us operis. The
inward affection of the heart, in wishing to him we love all good: and the
outward manifestation of that affection by our deed as occasion is offered, in
being ready to our power to do him any good. The heart is the root and the seat
of all true love: and there we must begin; or else all we do is but lost. If we
do never so many serviceable offices to our brethren, out of any by-end or
sinister respect; although they may possibly be very useful, and so very
acceptable to them; yet if our heart be not toward them, if there be not a
sincere affection within, it cannot be truly called Love. That Love, that will
abide the test, and answer the Duty required in the Text, must be such as the
Apostles have in several passages described it: (...), unfeigned love of the
brethren, 1 Pet. 1. Love out of a pure heart, 1 Timothy 1. Love without
dissimulation, 1 Pet. 1. 22. 1 Timothy 1. 5. Romans 12. 9.
Romans 12.

28. Of which inward affection the outward deed is the best discoverer: and
therefore that most come on too, to make the love perfect. As Iehu said to
Ionadab, 2 King. 10. 15.
Is thy heart right? If it be, then give me thy hand. As in the exercises of
our devotion toward God, so in the exercises of our charity toward men, heart
and hand should go together. Probatio delectionis, exhibitio Lam. 3. 41. Gregor.
est operis. Good works are the best demonstrations, as of true Faith, so of
true love. Where there is life and heat, there will be action. There is no life
then in that Faith, (St. James calls it plainly a dead Faith, Iam. 2.) nor
heat in Jam. 2. 26. Mat. 24. 12.
that Love, (according to that expression, Mat. 24. The Love of many shall wax
cold:) that does not put forth it self in the works of righteousness and mercy.
He then loves not the Brotherhood indeed, whatsoever he pretend, or at least
not in so gracious a measure as he should endeavor after; that does not take
every ^it opportunity of doing good either to the souls, or bodies, or credits,
or estates of his Brethren; That is not willing to do them all possible
services, according to the urgency of their occasions, and the just exigence of
circumstances, with his countenance, with his advice, with his pains, with his
purse, yea, and (if need be) with his very life too. This is the Non ultra:
farther than this we cannot go in the expressing of our love; ( Greater love
than this has no man, Joh. 15. 13.
that a man lay down his life for his friend:) and thus far we must go if God
call us to it. So far went Christ for our redemption: and so far the Scriptures
press his example for our imitation. Hereby perceive we the love of God,
because 1 John 3. 16.
he laid down his life for us: and we ought to lay down our lives for the
brethren, 1 John 3.

29. To recollect the Premises, and to give you the full meaning of the Precept
at once. To love the Brotherhood, is as much as to bear a special affection to
all Christians more then to Heathe^s; and to manifest the same proportionably,
by performing all loving offices to them, upon every fit occasion to the utmost
of our powers. A duty of such importance, that our Apostle, though here in the
Text he do but only name it in the bunch among other duties: yet afterward in
this Epistle seems to require it in a more special manner, and after a sort
above other duties, (Above all things have ^ervent charity among your selves,
Chap. 4.) And 1 Pet. 4. 8.
St. John upon the performance here of hangs one of the strongest assurances
we can have of our being in Christ. ( We know that we are passed from death to
life, because we love the brethren, 1 John 3. 14.)

30. Now of the Obligation of this duty, (for that is the next thing we are to
consider) there are two main grounds; Goodness and Nearness. First, we must
love the Brotherhood for their goodness. All goodness is lovely. There 1 Timothy
4. 4.
grows a Love due to every creature of God from this, that every creature of
God is good: Some goodness God has communicated to every thing to which he
gave a being: as a beam of that incomprehensible light, and a drop of that
infinite Ocean of goodness, which he himself is. But a greater measure of Love
is due to Man than to other Creatures, by how much God has made him better
than them. And to every particular man that has any special goodness in him,
there is a special Love due, proportionable to the kind and measure thereof: So
that whatsoever goodness we can discern in any man, we ought to love it in him,
and to love him for it; whatsoever faults or defects are apparently enough to
be found in him otherways. He that has good natural parts, if he have little
in him that is good besides, yet is to be loved even for those parts, because
they are good. He that has but good moralities only, leading a civil life,
though without any probable evidences of grace appearing in him, is yet to be
loved of us, if but for those moralities, because they also are good. But he
that goes higher, and by the goodness of his conversation shows forth (so
far as we can judge) the graciousness of his heart, deserves by so much an
higher room in our affections, than either of the former, by how much Grace
exceeds in goodness both Nature and Morality. Since then there is a special
goodness in the Brethren (quatenus such) in regard of that most holy faith
which they profess, and that blessed name of Christ which is called upon them:
we are therefore bound to love them with a special affection, and that eo
nomine under that consideration as they are brethren, over and above that
general love with which we are bound to love them as men; or that which
belongs to them as men of parts, or as Civil men.

31. The other ground of Loving the Brotherhood is their Nearness. The nearer,
the dearer, we say: and there are few relations nearer, than that of
brotherhood. But no brotherhood in the world is so closely and surely knit
together, and with so many and strong ties, as the fraternity of Christians in
the Communion of Saints, which is the Brotherhood in the Text. In which one
brotherhood, it is not easy to reckon how many brotherhoods are contained:
Behold some of many. First, we are Brethren by propagation; and that Unde est
is omnes fratres ostendite. De uno patre Christo and de una matre Ecclesia.
Arnob. in Psalm. 133. Romans 8. 29. Heb. 1. 3. Gal. 3. 26, 27.
ab utroque parente: (...) as well as (...). Children of the one Eternal God,
the common father of us all; and of the one Catholic Church, the common mother
of us all. And we have all the same Elder Brother, Jesus Christ; the firstborn
among many brethren, the lively Image of his Fathers Person, and indeed the
Foundation of the whole Brotherhood: for we are all (as many of us as have been
baptized into Christ) the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus; Therefore
as Joseph loved Benjamin, his brother of the whole blood, more affectionately
than the other ten that were his brethren but by the fathers side only: so we
ought with a more special affection to love those that are also the Sons of our
mother the Church, as Christians; than those that are but the Sons of God, only
as Creatures.

32. Secondly, we are Brethren by Education: (...), Foster brethren; as Herod
and Manaen were. We are all nursed with the same (...) the sincere Act. 13. 1.
milk of the Word: in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, which 1 Pet.
2. 2.
are ubera matris Ecclesiae; the two breasts, whence we sucked all that wholesome
nourishment by which we are grown up to what we are, to that measure of stature
A primis statim atatibus in eandem coire vitam, habet aliquem fraternitatis
affectum. Quintil. declam 16.
of strength, whatsoever it is, that we have in Christ. (...), says Aristotle:
and common experience shows it so to be. They that have been nursed, and
brought up together in their childhood, for the most part have their affections
so seasoned and settled then, that they love one another the better while they
live.

33. Thirdly, we are Brethren by Covenant, sworn brothers at our holy Baptism,
when we dedicated our selves to Gods Service, as his Soldiers by sacred and
solemn vow. Do we not see men that take the same Oath, pressed to serve
Legionarii equites cohortes suos contubernii affectione venerantur. Veg. 2. 21.
Commilitium auget charitatem. l. de herted. ff. de castrens* pecul. Contubernii
necessitudo. Cic. Pro Planc. Ephesians. 2. 19.
in the same Wars, and under the same Captains, Contubernales, and Comrades:
how they do not only call Brothers, but hold together as Brothers, and show
themselves mavelous zealous in one another behalf; taking their Parts and
pawning their credits for them, and sharing their fortunes with them? If one of
them have but a little silver in his Purse, his brother shall not want whilst
that lasts. Shame we with it that the children of this world should be kinder
((...)) toward those of their own Generation, than we are in ours.

34. Fourthly, we are Brethren by Co-habitation. We are all of one house and
family: not strangers and foreiners, but fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and
of the household of God. What a disquietness (and discredit both) is it to a
house where the children are ever jarring, and snarling, and fighting one with
another? Psalm. 133. 1, etc.
but a goodly sight ( Ecce quam bonum!) when they dwell together in love and
unity. Even so, a sad thing it is, and very grievous to the soul of every good
man, when in the Church, (which is the house of God) Christians that call
themselves brethren, fall foul upon one another: not only girding at and
clashing against, but biting, and nipping, and devouring one another, as if
they were bent to consume and destroy one another. But a most blessed thing on
the other side, pleasant as the holy oil, distilling from Aarons head upon his
beard and garments, and rejoicing the heart, as the dew upon the mountains
refreshes the grass: when there is nothing done in the house through strife or
vainglory, but such an accord Phil. 2. 2, 3.
amongst them, that all the brethren are of one mind and judgment; or if Gal.
6. 2. Romans 15. 1.
not always so, yet at leastwise of one heart and affection; bearing the
burdens, and bearing with the infirmities one of another; and ready upon all
occasions to do good, as to all men generally and without exception, so
especially to their Brethren, that are of the same household of faith with them.
Gal. 6. 10.


35. Lastly, we are Brethren by Partnership in our Fathers estate. Copartners
in the state of Grace; all of us enjoying the same Promises, Liberties, and
Privileges whereof we are already possessed in common: and Coheirs in the
state of Glory; all of us having the same joy, and everlasting bliss in
expectancy and reversion. For being the Sons of God, we are all heirs; and
being brethren, all Gal. 4. 7. Romans 8. 17.
joynt-heirs, (...), of one and the same glorious inheritance reserved for us
in the heavens: which St. Jude therefore calls, the common salvation. It
argues Jude Verse. 3.
a base wrangling spirit in us, having such goodly things in reversion; (enough
for us all, so as heart can wish no more:) to squabble and fall out for such
poor trifles as the things of this world are. We that have by Gods goodness
competent sustenance for our journey, and full Sacks to open at our coming
home; as Joseph's Brethren had when they came out of Egypt to return to their
own Land: shall we fall out among our selves, and be ready to mischief Genesis 45.
23.
one another by the way?

36. Having all these Obligations upon us, and being tied together in one
Brotherhood by so many bands of unity and affection; I presume we cannot doubt
de jure, but that it is our bounden duty thus to love the Brotherhood. There
remains now no more to be done, but to look to our performances, that they be
right: wherein the main thing we are to take heed of, (besides what has been
already applied) is Partiality. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus 1 Timothy 5. 21
Christ and the elect Angels, that thou observe these things without preferring
one before another, doing nothing by partiality. It was St. Paul's charge to
Timothy in another business: but may suit very well with this also.

37. Not but that we may (and in most cases must) make a difference between one
brother and another, in the measure and degree of our Love; according to the
different measures and degrees, either of their goodness considered in
themselves, or of their nearness in relation to us: those two considerations
being (as you heard) the grounds of our Love. So David loved Jonathan as his
own soul; his heart was knit to him: both because he was a good man, and had
withal approved himself his trusty friend. Yea, our blessed Savior himself
showed a more affectionate Love to John, than to any other of his Disciples (
the Disciple whom Jesus loved:) for no other known reason so much as for Joh.
13. 23.
this, that he was near of kin to him, his own mothers sisters Son, as is
generally supposed. No reasonable man among us then need make any question, but
that we may and ought to bear a greater love unto, and consequently to be
readier to do good unto ( Caeteris paribus) our Contrymen, our Neighbors,
our Kindred, our friends, than to those that are strangers to us, and stand in
no such Relation. And so no doubt we may, and ought in like manner (upon that
other ground of Goodness) more to love, and to show kindness sooner to a sober,
discreet, judicious, peaceable, humble, and otherwise orderly and regular man (
caeteris paribus;) than to one that is lightheaded, or lazy, or turbulent, or
proud, or debauched, or heretical, or schismatical.

38. But still that Proviso or Limitation, which I now twice mentioned, (
caeteris paribus) must be remembered: for there may such a disparity arise by
emergent occasions, as may render a mere stranger, a heathen, a notoriously
vicious person, a fitter object of our compassion, help, or relief, pro hic and
nunc, than the most pious Christian, or our dearest friend or allye. In cases
of great extremity, where the necessities of the party importune a present
succor, and will admit no delay, C^dat necessitudo necessitati: the former
considerations, whether of Nearness or Goodness, must be waved for the present,
and give way to those Necessities. He is most our Neighbor and Brother, in a
case of that nature, that stands in most need of our help: as our Savior
himself has clearly resolved it in the case of the wounded Traveller in the
Parable, Luke 10. Nor does this at all contradict what has been already
delivered concerning the preferring the brethren before others, either in the
affection of love, or in the offices which flow therefrom. For the affection
first: it is clear, that although some acts of compassion and charity be
exercised toward a stranger, yea, even an enemy that has great need of it,
rather than toward a friend or brother, that has either no need at all, or
very little in comparison of the other: it does not hinder but that the habit
or affection of love in the heart, may notwithstanding at the very same time be
more strongly carried toward the brother or friend, than toward the enemy or
stranger, as every man's own reason, and experience in himself, can tell him.
And as for the outward acts and offices of love, it is with them, as with the
offices of all other virtues and gracious habits or affections: which not
binding ad semper (as the graces and habits themselves do) are therefore
variable and mutable, as the circumstances by which they must be regulated vary
pro hic and nunc. And therefore the rules given concerning them, must not be
punctually and mathematically interpreted; but prudentially, and rationally:
and held (as we use to say in the Schools) communiter, but not universaliter;
that is to say, ordinarily and in most cases, where circumstances do not
require it should be otherwise; but not absolutely and universally, so as to
admit of no exception.

39. This rub then thus removed out of the way: it may yet be demanded where is
this partiality to be found whereof we spoke? Or what is it to have Jam. 2. 1.
the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of persons? If this putting of
a difference in our love between brother and brother, (which we have now
allowed of) be not it? I answer; It is no partiality, to make such a difference
as we have hitherto allowed: so long as the said difference is taken from other
peculiar and just respects, and not from the very condition of Brotherhood it
self, or any distinction made therein. But here is that evil partiality we are
to take heed of, when we restrain the Brotherhood to some one party or society
in the Church, such as we think good of, and exclude the rest, as if they had
no part nor fellowship in this Brotherhood; nor consequently any right to that
special affection, wherewith we are to love the Brethren. Which Partiality has
indeed been the very bane of the Churches unity and peace; and the chiefest
cause both of the beginning and continuance of most of the schisms, under which
Christendom has groaned from time to time.

40. Not to speak of the Donatists and other Schismatics of old, who confined
the Church to some little corner of the World: for which they were soundly
confuted by St. Augustine, Optatus, and other godly Fathers of their times.
First of all, extremely partial in this kind are the Romish Party at this day.
Who, contrary to all truth and reason, make the Roman and the Catholic Church
terms convertible, exacting external Communion with them, and subjection to
their Bishop, as a condition so essentially requisite for the qualifying of any
person to be a member of that Church of Christ, out of which there is no
Salvation, as that they have inserted a clause to that purpose into the very
C^tus hominum sub regimine legitimorum pastorum, ac praecipue unius Christi in
terris vica^ii Romani Pontificis. Bellarm. 3 de Eccl. milit.
definition of a Church. So cutting off from this brotherhood, in a manner
wholly, all the spacious Churches of Africa and Asia; together with all those
both Eastern and Western Churches of Europe also, which dare not submit to so
vast a power as the Bishops of Rome pretend to, nor can think themselves
obliged to receive all their dictates for undoubted Articles of faith.

41. The like Partiality appears secondly in our brethren of the Separation.
Marvel not that I call them Quia collegium Episcopale nolunt nobiscum habere
commune; non sunt Collegae, si nolunt: tamen fratres sunt. Optat. lib. 1. --
praeceptum nobis divinitus ut etiam ii qui negan ^^ fratres nostros esse,
dicamus, fratres nostri estis. Aug. Ep. 203. (...). Naz. orat. 33.
Brethren: though they will by no means own us as such: the more unjust and
uncharitable they. And in this uncharitableness (such a coincidence there is
sometimes of extremes) the Saparatists and the Romanists, consequently to their
otherwise most distant Principles, do fully agree; like Samsons Foxes tied
together by the tails to set all on fire, although their faces look quite
contrary ways. But we envy not either these, or those, their uncharitableness;
nor may we imitate them therein. But as the Orthodox Fathers did the wayward
Donatists then, so we hold it our duty now to account these our uncharitable
brethren (as well of the one sort, as the other) our Brethren still whether
they will thank us for it or no; Velint, nolint, fratres sunt. These our
Brethren, I say, of the Separation, are so violent and peremptory in
unchurching all the World but themselves: that they thrust and pen up the whole
Flock of Christ in a far narrower pingle, than ever the Donatists did:
concluding the Communion of Saints within the compass of a private Parlour or
two in Amsterdam.

42. And it were much to be wished in the third place, that some in our own
Church, who have not yet directly denied us to be their Brethren, had not some
of the leaven of this Partiality hidden in their breasts. They would hardly
else be so much swelled up with an high opinion of themselves, nor so much
sowred in their affections toward their brethren: as they bewray themselves to
be, by using the terms of Brotherbood, of Profession, of Christianity, the
Communion of Saints, the Godly Party, and the like; as titles of distinction to
difference some few in the Church ( a disaffected party to the established
Government and Ceremonies) from the rest. As if all but themselves were scarce
to be owned, either as Brethren, or Professors, or Christians, or Saints, or
Godly men. Who knows of what ill consequence, the usage of such appropriating
and distinctive titles (that sound so like the Pharisees, I am holier than
thou; and warp so much toward a Isa. 65. 5.
separation) may prove, and what evil effects they may produce in future? But
however, it is not well done of any of us in the mean time, to take up new
Forms and Phrases, and to accustom ourselves to a garb of speaking in
Scripturelanguage, but in a different notion from that wherein the Scriptures
understand it. I may not, I cannot judge any man's heart: but truly to me it
seems scarce a possible thing for any man that appropriateth the name of
Brethren (or any of those other titles of the same extent) to some part only of
the Christian Church, to fulfill our Apostles precept here of loving the
Brotherhood; according to the true meaning thereof. For whom he takes not in,
he must needs leave out: and then he can love them but as those that are
without; Perhaps wish them well, pray for their conversion, show them civil
respect, etc. which is no more than he might or would do to a very Jew, Turk or
Pagan.

43, As for us, beloved brethren, let us in the name and fear of God beware of
all rotten or corrupt partiality, in the performance either of this, or of any
other Christian duty, either to God or man. And let us humbly beseech the God
of all grace and peace, to put into our hearts a spirit of Wisdom and Charity,
that we may duly both honor and love all men in such sort as becomes us to
do: but especially that we may love and honor him above all, who has already
so loved and honored us as to make us Christians; and has further engaged
himself by his gracious Promise, to love, honor and reward all those that seek
his honor and glory. To whom be all honor and glory ascribed, etc.

AD AULAM.
The Fourth Sermon.
BEUVOYR. JULY, 1636.
Psalm. 19. 13. Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins: Let them not have
dominion over me. So shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the great
transgression.
1. THis Psalm is one of David's Meditations. That it is David's, we have it from
To the chief Musician a Psalm of David verse 1.
the Title in the beginning: That it is a Meditation, from Let -- and
meditation of my heart be, etc. verse. 14.
the close in the end of it. Now there are but two things especially, whereon
to employ our meditations with profit (to the right knowledge whereof Calvin
Instit. 1. Deus, Noverim me, Noverim te Bernard. sermon. 2. de diversis.
some have therefore reduced the whole body of Divinity:) God, and our selves.
And the meditation is then most both complete and fruitful, when it takes in
both. Which is to be done; either via ascensus, when we begin below, and at our
selves, and so build upwards, raising our thoughts higher to the contemplation
of God: or via descensus, when we begin aloft, and with him, and so work
downward, drawing our thoughts home upon our selves.

2. This latter is the method of this Psalm: in the former part whereof David
begins as high, as at the most Highest; and then descends as low as to
himself, in the latter. For the succouring of his Meditations there, he makes
use of the Est Natura liber primus, Scriptura secundus: Altera Posse docens,
altera Velle Dei. Jo. Rain. Chiliad. Epigr.
two great Books: that of Nature, or of the works of God; and that of
Scripture, or of the Word of God. In that, he reads the Power: in this, the
Will of this Maker. That declares his Glory: this reveals his Pleasure. That
from the beginning of the Psalm, ( The heavens declare the glory of God, etc.)
to the end of the sixth verse: This from the beginning of the seventh verse (
The Law of the Lord is perfect, etc. --) to the end of the eleventh verse.

3. Hence coming to re^^ect upon himself, he has now use of Unicuique est
liber sua conscientia: and ad hunc librum discutiendum and emendendum, omnes
alii inventi sunt. Bern. de intern. domo.
a third Book; that of his own conscience, wherein are enrolled the principal
acts and passages of his whole life: That by a just survey of the particulars
therein enregistred, he might observe what proportion he had held in the course
of his bypast life, both with that actual obedience, which some other
Creatures perform in their kinds, as also (and that especially) with that --
Conferamus itaque libros ostros cum libro vitae. Ibid.
exact obedience, which the Law of God requires in his Word. At the very first
opening whereof, before he read a line of the particulars, his known sins
presenting them in such numberless troops unto his thoughts, besides a world of
unknown ones: as not a little aghast to see so large a Roll so full and so thick
written ( intus and a tergo;) he is forced to break out into this passionate
acknowledgment, Quis intelligit? What living soul is able to understand all his
errors? Who can tell how often he has offended? In the next former verse.

4. But quid tristes querimoniae? Misery finds small ease in bare and barren
(...) Hom. Iliad. (...).
complaints: it rather craveth real and speedy succor. The Prophet therefore
upon the first apprehension of the multitude of his sins, instantly addresseth
himself unto God for remedy by Prayer. And his suit therein is double: the one
for Mercy, for the time past; the other for Grace, for the time to come. The
one that he might be freed from the guilt and defilement of the sins he had
hitherto done, known or unknown: ( O cleanse thou me even from my secret sins:)
in the remainder of that verse. The other, that he might be preserved from
contracting the guilt, or falling under the dominion of any sin thence-forward,
especially of any high grievous presumptuous sin, in this thirteenth verse (
keep back -- etc.

5. The words then are a Prayer: wherein we may observe distinctly and apart,
the Object matter of the Prayer; the Petitions made concerning that Object; and
the Reasons brought to enforce those Petitions. The Particulars in all five.
First, and principally, the Object matter of the whole Prayer: those sins,
concerning and against which the Prayer is made: styled here in our
Translations, Presumptuous sins. Secondly, and thirdly, two Petitions
concerning those sins: The one antecedently, that God would not suffer him to
fall into them, [ keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins;] 3. The other
by way of reserve, that at least he would not suffer him to fall under the
dominion of them, [ Let them not have dominion over me.] Fourthly, and fifthly,
two Reasons fitted to the aforesaid Petitions. The one fitted to the former
Petition, taken from his relative condition, as being one of Gods servants. Of
all sorts of men, Presumption is most hateful in a servant; and such am I to
thee, O Lord: Keep back thy servant therefore from presumptuous sins. 5. The
other Reason fitted to the latter Petition, taken from the benefit he should
reap by the grant. If God should please to keep him free from the dominion of
those sins, he should not doubt (his many failings otherwise notwithstanding)
but by his mercy to stand rectus in curia, innocent and upright (through his
gracious acceptance) from the great transgression of total and final
Apostasy, [ Then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the great
transgression.]

6. My purpose is not, to treat of each of these particulars, as I have
proposed them, apart; but to insist principally, upon that which is the most
principal, to which also (as being the common matter or argument of the whole
Verse) they do all in some sort refer, and upon that account will be
occasionally taken in every one of them somewhere or other in our passage, in
the handling thereof; I mean, the Object; here expressed by the name of
Presumptuous sins. Wherein I know not how to proceed, more pertinently to the
scope of the Text, and profitably to edification; than by making this threefold
plain discovery. First of the nature of these sins; that we may the sooner
learn to know them: Secondly, of their danger; that we may be the more careful
to shun them: and Thirdly, of the means of their prevention; that by the help
of God we may be the better able to escape them.

7. Some difference there is in the reading. Which as I may not wholly baulk;
for without the clearing of that, all the ensuing discourse might be suspected
to labor of impertinency:) so I shall not long insist upon; for the profit
would not countervail the pains. The Septuagint have (...), and the Vulgar
Latin following them, ab alienis parce -- etc. Some of the Fathers, and most of
the Expositors of the middle and latter Ages, led (as commonly they are) by one
of those Translations, conceive the meaning, as if David had here prayed, to be
kept from communicating with other men in their sins, and from e^wrapping
himself (by any kind or degree of consent) within the guilt of their
transgressions. Which truly is a very needful prayer; and the thing it self
worthy the care of every good man. But this difference needs not hinder us in
our proposed passage. First, because, although that were granted the truer
reading* the words might yet without much enforcement bear a construction
agreeable to our present intendment: and accordingly, Sensus fere idem est.
Bellarm. hic.
some that follow that reading have so understood them. But secondly, and
especially, because the mistake in the Greek and Latin Translations grew
apparently from the near affinity of Character between the two Hebrew letters
(...) and (...) which has occasioned the like mistake in sundry other words,
noted in the Sea Engelbert. Eng* pra fat. ad Schindler. lex. pentaglor.
Hebrew Lexicons: and some also between these very words As Mal. 3. 15. - 4. 1.
Zach. 12. 10. etc.
Zarim and Zadim in other places of Scripture, as well as in this. But since
the constant reading in all Copies extant is with Daleth and not Resh; and so
not only the old Hebrew Doctors, with Vatablus, Junius etc.
the learned Expsiotors of this last age, but some of the ancient Fathers
also, S. Hieron. vertit, a Superbis. Bellar.
St. Hierom by name (who was among them all incomparably the best skilled in
the Original) have expounded it: we need not put our selves to any farther
business for this matter, but take the common reading, as it is in our English
Translations both Old and New, [ Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins.]

8. And then the first thing we have to do, is to lay open the Nature of these
presumptuous sins: for that is ever the first question, that every man will ask
concerning any thing proposed to debate, under any name or notion; What does
that name or word import? To presume then, in the common use and notion of the
word with us, imports ever a kind of confidence or boldness in the Presumer.
And it may be taken, either in a good, or in a bad sense: But more usually in
the bad; as (by reason of common abuses) most other indifferent words are. He
that has a fast friend, that he thinks will support him, will sometimes
adventure upon an undertaking, which he is not able to go through withal alone,
nor durst undergo, if he had not such a friend to rely upon. When a man does
so; we say he presumes upon that friend: that is, he is confident, that friend
will not fail to assist him therein to his utmost power. Now if a man be bold
to do but what he may and should do, and that withal he have some good ground
for his confidence, (from the consideration of his friends ability, the
experience of his love, some former promises on his friends, or merit on his
own part, or other like) so as every man would be ready to say he had reason to
presume so far of his friend: this is a good, reasonable, and warrantable
presumption. But if he fail in either respect, as if he presume either to do
unlawful, unworthy, or unbefitting things, or to do even lawful things, when
there appears no great cause why any man should think his friend obliged by
the laws of friendship to assist him therein: then is such his presumption a
faulty and an evil presumption. And whatsoever may bear the name of a
Presumptuous sin in any respect, is some way or other tainted with such an evil
irrational presumption.

9. But we are further to note, that presumption in the worser sense, and as
applied to sin, may be taken either Materially, or Formally. If these terms
seem obscure; with a little opening I hope the difference between these two
will be easily understood. Taken materially, the sin of presumption is a
special kind of sin, distinguished from other species of sins by its proper
Object or Matter: when the very matter wherein we sin, and whereby we offend
God, is Presumption: and so it is a branch of Pride. When a man presuming
either upon his own strength, or upon Gods assisting him, undertaketh to do
something of himself, not having in himself (by the ordinary course of nature,
and the common aid which God affords to the actions of his creatures in the
ordinary ways of his providence sufficient strength to go through therewithal:
or expects to receive some extraordinary assistance from the Mercy, Power,
etc. of God, not having any sufficient ground (either from the general Promises
contained in the Scriptures, or by particular immediate revelation) that God
will certainly so assist him therein.

10. All those men, that overvalue themselves, or out of an overweening
conceit of their own abilities attempt things beyond their power; That lean to
their own understandings, as Solomon; That mind high things, and are wise in
their Prove. 3. 5. Romans 12. 16. Psalm. 131. 1.
own conceits, as St. Paul; That exercise themselves in great matters, and such
as are too high for them, as David expresses it. All those that persuade
themselves they can persist in an holy course without a continual supply of
Grace; or that think they can continue in their sins so long as they think
good, and then repent of them, and forsake them at their leisure, whenever
they list; or that doubt not but to be able by their own strength to stand out
against any temptation: All these, I say, and all other like, by presuming too
much upon themselves, are guilty of the sin of Presumption: ''To omit the
Poets, who have set forth the folly of this kind of Presumption in the Fables
of Phaethon, and Icarus: A notable example we have of it in the Apostle Peter,
(and therein a fair warning for others not to be high-minded, but to fear), who
in the great confidence of his Romans 11. 20.
own strength, could not believe his Master (though he knew him to be the God
Mat. 26. 33.
of truth) when he foretold him he would yield; but still protested, that if
all the world should forsake him, yet he would never do it.

11. Nor only may a man offend in this kind, by presuming upon himself too
Praesumptio non modo circa proprias vires, s^d etiam circa di^inam potentiam
vel miseri^^diam, contingere potest. Aquin. 22. qu. 21. 1.
much: but also by presuming even upon God himself without warrant. He that
repents truly of his sins, presuming of Gods mercy in the forgiveness
thereof; or that walks uprightly and conscionably in the ways of his Calling,
presuming of Gods Power for his protection therein; sins not in so
presuming. Such a presumption is a fruit of Faith, and a good presumption:
because it has a sure ground, a double sure ground for failing; first in the
Nature, and then in the Promise of God. As a man may with good reason presume
upon his Friend, that he will not be wanting to him in any good Office, that by
the just Laws of true friendship one friend ought to do for another. But, as he
presumes too much upon his friend, that cares not into what desperate
exigents and dangers he casts himself, in hope his friend will perpetually
redeem him, and relieve him at every turn: So whosoever trusts to the Mercy,
or to the Power of God, without the warrant of a Promise, presumes farther
than he has cause: And though he may flatter himself, and call it by some
better name, as Faith, or Hope, or Affiance in God; yet is it in truth no
better than a groundless and a wicked Presumption. Such was the Presumption of
those Sons of Sceva, who took upon Acts. 19. 13. (...) 16.
them (but to their shame and sorrow) to call over them that had evil spirits
the name of the Lord Jesus in a form of adjuration, Acts 19. when they had no
calling or warrant from God so to do. And all those men, that going on in a
wretched course of life, do yet hope they shall find mercy at the hour of
death: All those that cast themselves into unnecessary either dangers or
temptations, with expectance that God should manifest his extraordinary Power
in their preservation: All those that promise to themselves the End without
applying themselves to the means that God has appointed thereunto; (as to have
Learning without Study, Wealth without Industry, Comfort from Children without
careful Education, etc.) forasmuch as they presume upon Gods help without
sufficient Warrant, are guilty of the sin of Presumption, taken in the former
notion, and Materially.

12. But I conceive the Presumptuous sins here in the Text to belong clearly to
the other notion of the word Presumption, taken formally, and as it imports
(not a distinct kind of sin in it self, as that Groundless Presumption whereof
we have hitherto spoken does, but) a common accidental difference, that may
adhere to sins of any kind: even as Ignorance and Infirmity, (whereunto it is
opposed) also may. Theft and Murder, which are sins of special kinds,
distinguished either from other by their special and proper Objects; are yet
both of them capable of these common differences: inasmuch as either of them
may be committed, as sometimes through Ignorance, and sometimes through
Infirmity, so also sometimes through Wilfulness or Presumption.

13. The distribution of Sins into sins of Ignorance, of Infirmity, and of
Presumption, is very usual, and very useful, and complete enough without the
Aquin 1. 2. qu. 76. etc.
addition (which some make) of a fourth sort, to wit, Sins of Negligence or
Inadvertency; all such sins being easily reducible to some of the former three.
The ground of the distinction is laid in the Soul of man; wherein there are
three distinct prime faculties from which all our actions flow: the
Understanding, the Will, and the sensual Appetite or Affections. If nothing
were amiss in any of these, all our actions issuing thence would be perfect,
and free from all stain of sin. But it is a truth, and our misery, that in this
state of corruption the whole soul is out of frame, and all the faculties
thereof depraved. Much Blindness and Error in the Understanding; much Rashness
and Impetuousness in the Affections; much stubbornness and perverseness in the
Will: which renders our whole lives full of Swervings, Weaknesses, and
Rebellions. Yea, by reason of the joint concurrence of those three faculties in
their operations: there is in most sinful actions, (especially those that are
completely such) a mixture of Ignorance, Infirmity, and Wilfulness, or
Presumption. Whence it is, that all Sins are in the Scriptures indefinitely and
indifferently called; sometimes Errors, sometimes Infirmities, and sometimes
Rebellions.

14. But when we would speak more exactly of these three differences, and so as
to distinguish them one from another by their proper appellations: the enquiry
must be, when a sin is done, where the fault lay most; and thence it must have
the right denomination. 1. If the Understanding be most in fault, not
apprehending that good it should, or not aright: the sin so done, though
possibly it may have in it somewhat both of Infirmity and Presumption withal,
is yet properly a Sin of Ignorance. 2. If the main fault be in the affections,
through some sudden passion or perturbation of mind; blinding, or corrupting,
or but outrunning the Judgment; as of Fear, Anger, Desire, Joy, or any of the
rest: the Sin thence arising, though perhaps joined with some Ignorance or
Presumption withal, is yet properly a sin of Infirmity. 3. But if the
Understanding be competently informed with knowledge, and not much blinded or
transported with the incursion of any sudden, or violence of any vehement
perturbation, so as the greatest blame must remain upon the untowardness of the
Will, resolvedly bent upon the Evil: the Sin arising from such Wilfulness,
though probably not free from all mixture of Ignorance and Infirmity withal, is
yet properly a wilful Presumption; such a Presumptuous sin, as we are now in
treaty of.

15. Rules are soonest learned, and best remembered, when illustrated with ^it
Examples. And of such, the rich storehouse of the Scripture affords us in
each kind, variety and choice enough; whence it shall suffice us to propose but
one eminent one of each sort. The Men, all of them for their holiness, of
singular and worthy renown: David, St. Peter, and St. Paul. The sins, all of
them for their matter, of the greatest magnitude: Murdering of the innocent,
Abnegation of Christ, Persecution of the Church. Paul's Persecution, a grievous
Sin, yet a Sin of Ignorance: Peter's denial, a grievous Sin, yet a Sin of
Infirmity: David's Murder, a far more grievous sin than either of both, because
a sin of Presumption.

16. St. Paul before his conversion, whilst he was Saul, persecuted and wasted
Gal. 1. 13. Acts 8. 3.
the Church of God to the utmost of his power: making havo^k of the Professors
of Christ, entering into their very houses, and (...). Chrysostom. ibid. Acts 9. 2.
and 22. 5. (...). Acts 26. 11. -- 9. 1.
haling thence to prison both men and women; and posting abroad with Letters
into remote quarters, to do all the mischief he could every where, with great
fury, as if he had been ma^^, breathing out wherever he came nothing but
threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord. His -- Phil. 3. 6.
(...). Chrysostom ubi supra. Acts 26. 9.
affections were not set against them through any personal provocations, but
merely out of zeal to the Law: and surely his zeal had been good, had it not
been blind. Nor did his will run cross to his judgment, but was led by it; for
he verily thought in himself that he ought to do many things contrary to the
Name of Jesus: and verily his Will had been good, had it not been misled. But
the error was in his Understanding: his Judgment being not yet actually
convinced of the truth of the Christian Religion. He was yet fully persuaded
that Jesus was an Impostor, and Christianity a pestilent Sect raised by Satan
to the disgrace and prejudice of Moses and the Law. If these things had indeed
been so, as he apprehended them, his Affections and Will, in seeking to root
out such a Sect, had been not only blameless, but commendable. It was his
erroneous Judgment that poisoned all: and made that, which otherwise had been
zeal, to become Persecution. But however, the first discernable obliquity
therein being in the Understanding, that Persecution of his was therefore a Sin
of Ignorance: so called, and under that name condemned by (...)
himself, 1 Timothy 1. 13.

17. But such was not Peter's denial of his Master. He knew well enough who he
was: having conversed so long with him, and having long before so amply
confessed him. And he knew also, that he ought not for any thing in the world
to Mat. 16. 16.
have denied him: That made him so confident before, that he would not do it,
because he was abundantly satisfied that he should not do it. Evident it is
then, that Peter wanted no nowledge, either of his Masters person, or his own
duty: and so no plea left him of Ignorance, either Facti or Iuris. Nor was the
fault so much in his Will, as to make it a sin properly of Presumption. For
albeit de facto Mark. 14. 71.
he did deny him when he was put to it, and that with fearful oaths and
imprecations; yet was it not done with any prepensed Apostasy, or out of
design. Yea, he came rather with a contrary resolution: and he still honored
his Master in his heart, even then when he denied him with his tongue: and as
soon as ever the watch word was given him by the second Cock, to prefer to his
consideration what he -- 72. Luke 22. 62.
had done, it grieved him sore that he had so done, and he wep^ bitterly for
it: We find no circumstance in the whole relation, that argues any deep
obstinacy in his Will. But in his Affections then, Alas! there was the fail. A
sudden (...). Chrysostom. in Mat. 26. 75.
qualm of fear surprising his soul, when he saw his Master so despightfully
used before his face, (which made him apprehensive of what hard usage himself
might fall under; if he should then and there have owned him) took from him for
that time the benefit and (...). Arist. 5. Ethic. 10.
use of his reason: and so drew all his thoughts to this one point, how to
decline the present danger, that he had never a thought at so much liberty, as
to consult his judgment, whether it were a sin, or no. And thus, proceeding
from such a sudden distemper of passion, Peter's denial was a sin properly of
Infirmity.

18. But David's sin, in contriving the death of Uriah, was of a yet higher 2 Samuel 11. per totum.
pitch, and of a deeper dye, than either of these. He was no such stranger in
the Law of God, as not to know that the wilful murder of an innocent party,
such as he also knew Uriah to be, was a most loud crying sin: and therefore
nothing surer, than that it was not merely a sin of Ignorance. Neither yet was
it a sin properly of Infirmity: and so capable of that extenuating
circumstance, of being done in the heat of Anger, as his uncleanness with
Bathsheba was in the heat of Lust (although that extenuation will not be
allowed to pass for an excuse there, unless in tanto only, and as it stands
in comparison with this fouler crime.) But having time and leisure enough to
bethink himself what he was about, he does it in cool blood, and with much
advised deliberation: plotting and contriving this way and that way to perfect
his design. He was resolved, whatsoever should become of it, to have it done:
in regard of which settled resolution of his Will, this sin of David was
therefore a high presumptuous sin.

19. By the light of these Examples we may reasonably discover what a
Presumptuous sin is, and how it is distinguished from those of Ignorance and
Infirmity. Take the sum of all thus. When a man sufficiently convinced in his
understanding, that the thing he would do is unlawful, and displeasing unto
God; or at least has sufficient means so to convince him, if he be not
willingly wanting to himself in the use thereof, so as he cannot justly plead
Non putaram; And then besides has time and leisure to advise with himself, to
examine the case and every circumstance of it, and to apply the light that is
in his understanding thereunto; And yet when all is done, resolves contrary to
the dictates of his own reason, and the checks of his own Conscience, to go on,
to put his wicked intentions into act, and to fulfill his own will, the apparent
inconformity thereof unto the will of God, notwithstanding: this is a wilful
and a fearful Presumption. Her speech in the Poet expresses it in part.

-- Video meliora, proboque; Medea apud Ovid.

Deteriora sequor --
I see I should do that, and I know I should do better to do that: but I have a
(...). etc. Eurip. in Hippol. act. a*
mind rather to this; and therefore I will do this. When we advance our own
Wills, not only against the express will of our great God, but even against the
clear light of our own Consciences; and are not able, (nor indeed careful) to
give any other reason why we will do this or that, but only because we will
(pro ratione voluntas;) so making our own will (a piece of no good Logic) both
the Medium and the Conclusion: we do then rush headlong into those sins, from
which David here prays so earnestly to be withheld (Keep back thy Servant, O
Lord, from Presumptuous Sins.

20. Now see we what Presumptuous sins are: we are to consider next, how great
and mischievous they are. Certainly if there were not something in them, more
than in ordinary sins, David would not pray against them in such a special
manner as here we see he does: and that in four particulars.

21. First, because those other sins are quotidianae subreptionis, such as the
servant of God, though he walk neverso warily, may yetbe (and often is)
overtaken (...). Gal. 6. 1.
with, through incogitancy, and the frequency of such temptations as lie so
thick in our way every where, that the most watchful eye cannot always be
aware of them all: his Prayer therefore concerning them is, that as he is ever
and anon gathering soil by them, so God would be ever and anon cleansing him
from them [ O cleanse thou me from my secret faults.] But as for these greater
and presumptuous sins, he desires the powerful aidance of Gods holy Spirit to
withhold him wholly from them, and to keep him back from ever approaching too
near unto them [ Keep back thy Servant from presumptuous sins.] As a Traveller
in a deep rode, will be choice of his way throughout, to keep himself as clean
as he can from bespotting even with mire and dirt: but if he spy a rotten bog,
or a deep precipice just before him; he will make a sudden stop, hold back, and
cast about for a safer way, he will be sure (for fear of lying fast, or
venturing a joint) to keep out of that howsoever: So David here; Cleanse me
from those, but keep me back from these.

22. Secondly, in his Petition he makes mention of his service and dependence.
He often professes himself the servant of God, Truly I am thy servant, I am
Psalm. 116. 1^.
thy servant, and the Son of thy handmaid. And he often remembers it to good
purpose, and presses it for his advantage, upon sundry occasions in this book
of Psalms: as he does here very seasonably and pertinently, [ keep back thy
Servant -- ] Implying, that these Presumptuous sins are more unbecoming the
servant of God, and more unpardonable in him, than those other faults are. As a
discreet Master will pass by many oversights in his servant, if sometimes for
want of wit; and some negligences too, if happily for want of care, he do now and
then otherwise than he would have him. But it would exceedingly provoke the
spirit of the most suffering Master, to see his servant, though but once, to do
that which he knew would offend him in a kind of bravery, and out of a saucy
and Idem delictum in duobus non eodem modo efficiet: si alter per negligentiam
admisit, alter curavit ut nocens esset. Sen. l. de ira. 16.
self-willed Presumption: (as who say, I know it will anger my Master, but all
is one for that; I will do it tho:) no Patience would endure this. So the
servant of God, by one presumptuous sin does more grieve and exasperate the
holy Spirit of his gracious Master, and more highly provoke his just
indignation, than by many Ignorances or Negligences.

23. Thirdly, he speaks here of Dominion, [ Let them not have Dominion over
me.] Any small sin may get the upper hand of the sinner, and bring him under in
time, and after that is once habituated by long custom: so as he cannot easily
shake off the yoke, neither redeem himself from under the tyranny thereof. We
see the experiment of it but too often and too evidently in our common Swearers
and Drunkards. Yet do such kind of sins, for the most part, grow on by little
and little, steal into the throne insensibly, and do not exercise Dominion over
the enslaved soul, till they have got strength by many and multiplied Acts. But
a Presumptuous sin works a great alteration in the state of the soul at once,
and by one single act advances marvellously: weakening the spirit, and giving a
mighty advantage to the flesh, even to the hazard of a complete Conquest.

24. Lastly, he speaks of the great offense: Total and final Apostasy; which
some understand to be the very sin against the Holy Ghost: which cutteth off
from the offender all possibility of pardon and reconcilement, because it is
supposed to be attended with final impenitency; and without penance there is no
hope of reconcilement, or place for pardon. David petitioneth to be kept back
from these Presumptuous sins, and free from their Dominion, that so he might be
upright and innocent from the great transgression. As if these Presumptuous
sins did make some nearer approaches to that great transgression: and as if no
man could well secure himself against the danger of final impenitency, but by
keeping out of the reach of these Presumptuous sins.

25. From all these intimations in the Text we may conclude, there is something
more in Presumptuous sins, than in sins of Ignorance and Infirmity: the
Obliquity greater, and the Danger greater. Which we are now a little farther to
discover, that so our care to avoid them may be the greater. Their Obliquity is
best seen in the Cause: their Danger, in the Effects. It has been cleared
already, that Presumptuous sins spring from the perverseness of the will, as the
most proper and Immediate cause: and it is the will, that has the chief stroke
in all moral actions, torender them good or bad, better or worse. It is a
Maxim amongst the Cafuists, Involuntarium minuit de ratione peccati: and qui
injuriae* F. de furtis 47. 253.
Voluntas distinguit maleficia, say the Lawyers. So that albeit there be many
circumstances, as of Time, Place, Persons, etc. and sundry other respects,
especially those of the Matter, and of the End, very considerable for the
aggravating, extenuating, and comparing of sins one with another: yet the
consent of the Will is of so much greater importance than all the rest, that
(all other considerations laid aside) every sin is absolutely by so much
greater or lesser, by how much it is more or less voluntary. Sithence therefore
in sins of Ignorance and Infirmity there is less Wilfulness; the Will being
misled in the one by an Error in the Judgment, and in the other transported by
the violence of some Passion: and in sins of Presumption there is a greater
wilfulness; wherein the Will, wanting either information or leisure to resolve
better, does yet knowingly and advisedly resolve to do ill: it will necessarily
follow, that Presumptuous sins are therefore far greater sins, than either of
the other are. The Will being abundantly and beyond measure wilful, makes the
sin to be abundantly and beyond measure sinful. Doubtless far greater was
David's sin, in murdering (though but) his servant: than either Peter's, in
denying his Master; or Saul's, in blaspheming and persecuting his Savior.

26. Nor only do Presumptuous sins spring from a worse Cause than the other,
and thence are more Sinful: but do also produce worse Effects than they, and so
are more dangerous: whether we look at them before, or at the time of
Repentance, or after. Before Repentance, they harden the heart wonderfully; hey
wast the conscience in a fearful manner, and bring such a callous crust upon
the tnner man: that it will be Tardi^s peccatum solvitur quod per consilium
solidatur. Greg. de cura pastor. Part. 3.
a long and a hard work, so to supple, soften, and iintender the heart again,
as to make it capable of the impressions of Repentance. For alas! what hope to
do good upon a wilful man? The most grave admonitions, the most seasonable
reproofs, the most powerful exhortations, the most convincing Reasons that can
be used to such a man; are but Tabula coeco, as a curious Picture to a blind
man; (for who so blind, as he that will not see?) and Fabula surdo, a pleasant
tale to a deaf man; (for who so deaf as he that will not hear?)

27. Thus it is with wicked men and cast-aways, whose brawny hearts are by
these wilful rebellions fitted for, and fatted up unto destruction. And verily
not much better than thus is it with Gods faithful servants for the time; if at
any time they hap to fall into any presumptuous sin. In what a sad condition
may we think poor David was, after he had lain with the Wife and slain the
Husband? What music could he now (trow ye) find in his own Anthems? With what
comfort could he say his Prayers? Did not his tongue think ye, cleave to the
roof of his mouth? And had not his right hand well-nigh forgot her cunning? To
the judgment of man, no difference for some months together (during his
unrepentance). betwixt holy David, the man after Gods own heart, and a profane
scorner, that had no fear of God before his eyes. Such wast and havoc had that
great sin made, and such spoil of the graces and pledges of Gods holy Spirit in
his soul. Look how a sober wise man, who when he is himself is able to order
his words and affairs with excellent discretion; when in a sharp burning-^ever
his blood is inflamed, and his brains distempered, will rave, and talk at
random, and fling stones and dirt at all about him, and every other way in his
speeches and motions, behave himself like a fool or madman: so is the servant
of God, lying under the guilt of a Presumptuous sin, before Repentance.

28. And then when he does come to repent; Lord what a do there is with him,
before that great stomach of his will come down, and his Masterful spirit be
soundly subdued! And yet down it must, subdued it must be; or he gets no
pardon. What shrinking and drawing back, when the wound comes to be searched!
And yet Alto vulner^ diligens and longa medicina non desit. Cypr. ser. 5. de
lapsis.
searched it must be, and probed to the bottom; or there will be no perfect
recovery. Presumptuous sins, being so grievous has been showed, let no man
think they will be removed with -- (...). Naz. Arcan. carm. 8. Isa. 1. 18. 2
Cor. 7. 11.
mean and ordinary Humiliations: The Remedy must be proportioned, both for
strength and quantity, ( Ingredients and Dose) to the Quality and Malignity of
the distemper; or it will never do the cure. As stains of a deep dye will not
out of the cloth, with such ordinary washings, as will fetch out lighter spots;
so to cleanse the heart defiled with these deeper pollutions, these crimson and
scarlet sins, and to restore it pure white as snow or wool; a more solemn and
lasting course is requisite, than for lesser transgressions. It will Quam magna
deliquimus, tam granditer defleamus. Cypr. ibid.
ask more sighs, more tears, more Indignation, more revenge; a stronger
infusion of all those sovereign ingredients prescribed by St. Paul, 2 Cor. 7.
before there can be any comfortable hope that it is pardoned. The will of man
is a sour and stubborn piece of clay, that will not frame to any serviceable
use, without much working. A soft and tender heart indeed is soon rent in
pieces: like a silken garment, if it do but catch upon any little nail. But a
heart hardened with long custom of sinning, especially if it be with one of
these presumptuous sins, is like the knotty root-end of an old Oak, that has
lain long a drying in the Sun. It must be -- duro ^odo durus cuneus. Adag. --
gravissimus nodus non potest expelli nisi gravissimo oppressorio. Ambros.
a hard wedge that will enter, and it must be handled with some skill too to
make it do that: and when the wedge is entered, it will endure many a hard
knock, before it will yield to the Cleaver, and fall in sunder. And indeed it
is a blessed thing, and to be acknowledged a gracious evidence of Gods
unspeakable mercy, to those that have wilfully suffered such an unclean spirit
to enter in, and to take possession of their souls, if they shall ever be
enabled to out him again, though with never so much fasting and Prayer.
Potentes Potenter, they that have mightily offended, shall be sure to be
mightily tormented, if they repent not: and therefore it is but reason they
should be mightily humbled, when they do repent.

29. After repentance also, Presumptuous sins for the most part have their
uncomfortable Effects. Very seldom has any man taken the liberty to sin
presumptuously, but he has after met with that which has been grievous to
him: either in outward things, or in his good name, or in his soul; in some or
other of these, if not in all, even after the renewing of himself by
repentance, and the sealing of his pardon from God. Like a grievous wound or
sore, that is not only of a hard cure, but leaves also some remembrance behind
it, some scar in the flesh after it is cured.

30. First, a Presumptuous sinner rarely escapes without some notable outward
Affliction. Not properly as a debt payable to the Justice of God by way of
satisfaction, for there is no proportion between the one and the other. But
partly, as an evidence of Gods high displeasure against such a high
provocation; and partly, as a fit chastisement, wherewith he is pleased in
mercy to correct his servants, when they have demeaned themselves so
presumptuously: that both they and others may be admonished by that example to
do so no more. Be David the instance. What a world of mischief and misery did
he create unto himself by that one presumptuous fact in the matter of Uriah,
almost all the days of his life after? The Prophet Nathan at the very same
time, when he delivered him Gods royal and gracious pardon for it, under seal (
Transtulit peccatum, the Lord has put away thy sin:) yet did he withal read
him the bitter consequents of it; as you have them set down, 2 Samuel 12. And as
he foretold him, accordingly 2 Samuel 12. 13. 2 Samuel 13. 14. -- 29.
it fell out with him. His daughter defiled by her brother: that brother slain
by another brother: a strong conspiracy raised against him by his own Son: his
Concubines openly defiled by the same Son; himself afflicted with the 2 Samuel
15. 12. -- 16. 22. -- 18. 33. 2 Samuel 16. 5, etc.
untimely and uncomfortable death of that Son, who was his darling: reviled and
cursed to his face by a base unworthy Companion: besides many other affronts,
troubles, and vexations continually. He had few quiet hours all his life long:
and even upon his deathbed not a little disquieted with tidings of his two
Sons, almost up in arms about the Succession. We use to say, The wilful 1 King.
1. 17. etc.
man never wants woe: and truly David felt it by sad experience, what woe his
wilfulness wrought him.

31. Secondly, Presumptuous sins are often Scandalous; leaving an indelible
stain and blot upon the name and memory of the guilty offender, not to be
wholly wiped off, so long as that name and memory lasts. David must be our
instance here too: who sinned many other times and ways, besides that in the
matter of Uriah. It can be little pleasure to us to rake into the infirmities
of Gods Servants, and bring them upon the Stage; it would perhaps become our
charity better to cast a Mantle over their nakedness, where the fact will with
any tolerable construction bear an excuse. Yet since all things that are written
are written for our learning, and that it pleased the wisdom of God, Romans 15. 4.
for that end to leave so many of their failings upon record, as glasses to
represent unto us our common frailties, and as monuments and marks to mind us
of those rocks whereat others have been shipwrackt: it cannot be blamed in us,
to take notice of them, and to make the best use we can of them for our own
spiritual advantage. His diffidence then, and anxiety lest he should perish one
1 Samuel 27. 1.
day by the hands of Saul, when he had Gods promise that he should outlive
him. His deep dissimulation with and before Achis; especially when he tendered
his 1 Samuel 21. 12 and 27. 10. and 28. 8. 1 Samuel 25. 22. ^ Sam. 16. 4.
service to him in the Wars. His rash choleric vow to destroy Nabal, and all
that belonged to him; who had indeed played the churl and the wretch with him
(as covetous and unthankful men sometimes will do) but yet in rigore had done
him no wrong. His double injustice to his loyal Subject Mephibosheth (and
therein also his forgetfulness of his old and trusty friend Jonathan) first, in
giving away all his Lands upon ^he bare suggestion of a servant, and that to
the false Informer himself, and that without any examination at all of the
matter; and -- 19. 29. -- 18. 5. 33.
then, in restoring him but half again, when he knew the suggestion to be
false. His fond affection to his ungracious Son Absalom; in tendering his life
before his own safety, and the public good, and in taking his death with so
much unmanly impatience. His lenity and indulgence to his other Son Adonijah,
who was no better than he should be neither; to whom he never said so much at
any time, as Eli did to his Sons, Why have thou done so? His carnal confidence
in the multitude 1 King. 1. 6. ^ Sam. 24. 1. etc.
of his Subjects, when he caused them to be numbered by the Poll. These (and
perhaps some other) sinful oversights, which do not presently occur to my
memory, are registered of David, as well as the murder of Uriah. Yet as if all
these were nothing in comparison of that one: that one alone is put in by the
Holy Ghost by way of exception, and so inserted as an exception in that
glorious testimony, which we find given of him, 1 King. 15. 5. [ David did that
which was right in the eyes of the Lord, and turned not aside from any thing
that he commanded him all the days of his life, save only in the matter of
Uriah the Hittite.] That is, he turned not aside so foully, and so
contemptuously, so presumptuously, and so provokingly in any other thing, as he
did in that business of Uriah. All his Ignorances, and Negligences, and
Inconsiderations, and Infirmities are passed over in silence: only this great
Presumptuous sin stands up as a Pillar or Monument erected ad perpetuam rei
memoriam, to his perpetual shame in that particular: for all succeeding
generations to take warning and example by.

32. Yet were this more tolerable, if besides a Stain in the Name, these Pre
sumptuous sins did not also leave a Sting in the Conscience of the sinner,
which abides in him many times a long while after the sin is repented of and
pardoned; ready upon every occasion to smite him, and to gall him with some
touch and remorse of his old presumption. Like as a man, that having gotten
some sore bruise in his youth, and by the help of Surgery and the strength of
youth overworn it; may yet carry a grudging of it in his bonos or joints by
fits, perhaps to his dying day. And as for the most part such grudgings of an
old bruise are aptest to recur upon some new distemper of body, or upon change
of weather: so the grief of an old presumptuous sin is commonly most felt, upon
the committing of some new sin, or the approach of some new affliction. Do you
think David had not in all those afflictions that after befell him, and at the
apprehension of every sinful oversight into which he fell, a fresh remembrance
withal of the matter of Uriah, not without some grief and shame thereat? As
Genesis 42. 21. 22. V. Jacob. Armagh. Annals a. m. 2276. -- 2314. -- 50. 15. --
17.
the distress Joseph's brethren met with in Egypt, Genesis 42. brought to their
remembrance their treacherous dealings with him: which was (by probable
computation) at the least twenty years after the thing was done. Yea, and after
their Fathers death, (which by the like probable computation was dear upon
twenty year*s more) the remorse of the same sin wrought upon their Consciences
afresh, perplexing their hearts with new fears and jealousies. True it is, the
sinner once thoroughly purged of the sin by repentance, has no more conscience
of that sin, in that fearful degree (ordinarily) as to be a perpetual rack to
his soul, and to torment him with restless doubtings of his reconcilement even
to despair: yet can it not choose but put some affrightment into him, to
remember into what a desperate estate he had before plunged himself by his own
wilful disobedience, if God had not been infinitely gracious to him therein.
Great presumptions will not suffer him that has repented them, for ever quite
to forget them: and he shall never be able to remember them, without shame and
horror.

33. Great cause then had David to pray so earnestly (as we see here he does)
against them; and as great cause have the best of us to use our best care and
endeavor to avoid them: being they spring from such a cursed root, and are
both so grievous to the holy Spirit of God, and of such bitter consequence to
the guilty offender. Our next business will be, (the sin and danger being so
great) to learn what is best to be done on our part, for the avoiding and
preventing both of sin and danger. Now the means of prevention (our third
discovery) are, First, to seek help from the hand of God, by praying with David
here that the Lord would keep us back; and then to put to our own helping hand,
by seconding our prayers with our best endeavors, to keep our selves back from
these presumptuous sins.

34. A Jove Principium. We have no stay, nor command of our selves; (so
masterful are our Wills, and headstrong:) but that, if God should leave us
wholly to the wildness of our unruly nature, and to take our own course, we
should soon run our selves upon our own ruin. Like unto the horse and mule that
have no understanding, to guide themselves in a right and safe way; but Psalm.
32. 9.
they must be holden in with bit and bridle put into their mouths: else they
will either do or find mischief. If we be not kept back with strong hand (and
no other hand but the hand of God is strong enough to keep us back:) we shall
soon run into all extremities of evil with the greatest impetuousness that can
be, as the horse rusheth into the battle; running into every excess of riot as
fast as any temptation Jer. 8. 6. 1 Pet. 4. 4. Ephesians. 4. 19.
is set before us, and committing all manner of wickedness with all kind of
greediness. David knew it full well; and therefore durst not trust his own
heart too far* but being jealous over himself with a Godly jealousy, evermore
he made God his refuge. If at any time he had been kept back from sinning, when
some opportunity did seem to tempt or provoke him thereunto, he blessed God for
it* for he saw it was Gods doing, more than his own, ( Blessed be the Lord, 1 Samuel 25. 32. -- 34.
that has kept his servant from evil) in the case of Nabal, 1 Samuel 25. If at
any time he desired to be kept back from sinning, when Satan had laid a bait
for him without, suitable to some lust stirring within; he sought to God for
it: for he knew that he must do it; himself could not, ( keep back thy servant
also from presumptuous sins) here in the Text. Without his help and blessing
all endeavors are in vain: his help and blessing therefore must be sought for
in the first place by prayer.

35. But we may not think, when we have so done, that we have done all that
lies upon us to do; and so an end of the business. It is Gods blessing, I
confess, that does the deed; not our endeavors: but we are vain, if we expect
Gods blessing, without doing our endeavors. Can we be so senseless as to
imagine it should serve our turn to say, Lord keep us back: and yet our selves
in the mean time thrust forward as fast as we can? No: if we will have our
prayers effectual, (and in their efficacy is our chiefest hope and comfort;) we
must second our faithful prayers with our faithful endeavors. Oculus ad
Coelum; manus ad clavum. Then may we with confidence expect, that God should do
his part in keeping us back, when we are duly careful to do our part also
toward the keeping our selves back from presumptuous sins. Against which sins,
the best and most sovereign preservatives, I am yet able to prescribe, are
these fou^ following. -- (...) 1 John 5. 28.
It is every man's concernment: and therefore I hope it shall be without
offense, if after the example of God himself in delivering the Law, I speak to
every man's soul (as it were) in particular.

36. For the avoiding then of Presumptuous sins: First, be sure never to do any
thing against the clear light of thine own Conscience. Every known sin has a
spice of wilfulness and presumption in it. The very composure of David's Prayer
in the present passage implies as much; in passing immediately, after the
mention of his secret and unknown sins, to the mentioning of these presumptuous
Sins: as if there were scarce any medium at all between them. And every sin
against Conscience is a known sin. A man has not a heavier Foe than his own
Conscience, after he has sinned; nor before he sin, a faster Friend. Oh take
heed of losing such a Friend: or of making it, of a Friend, an Accuser. If I
should see one that I loved well fall into the company of a ^heater, or other
crafty Companion, that would be sure to inveigle him in some ill bargain, or
draw him into some hurtful inconvenience, if he should close with him; of whom
yet he had no suspicion: I should do but the part of a Friend to take him
aside, tell him who had him in hand, and bid him look well to himself, and
beware a cheat. But if he should after such warning given grow into farther
familiarity with him; and I should still give him signs one after another, to
break off speech, and to quit the company of such a dangerous fellow, and all
to no purpose: Who could either pity him, or blame me, if I should leave him at
last to be gulled and fooled, that set so little by (...). Homer. Il. ^.
the wholesome and timely admonitions of his friend? Much greater than his is thy
folly, if thou O ^^ miserum si contemnis hun^^stem. Senec. Ep. 43. Ho^. 1. Ep.
20. Ephesians. 4. 30.
neglectest the warnings, and despisest the murmurings of thine own conscience.
Thou suffer it but deservedly, if thy Conscience having so often warned thee
in vain, at length grow weary of that office, and leave thee to take thine own
course; and so thou become a prey to the Devil, and fall into sundry grievous
presumptions. Quis enim invitum servare laboret? Be careful not to grieve thine
own spirit by offending thy Conscience: and thou shall not lightly grieve the
Spirit of God by sinning Presumptuously.

37. Secondly, strive to be Master of thine own Will. We count our horses
unserviceable till they be broken: and the more headstrong, the more
unserviceable: And it is a point of the greatest skill in the Art of Education,
for Parents betimes to break their children of their Wills. If David had done
so with his Absalom, and his Adonijah, for ought we know, he might have had
more comfort of them. Why should not thou carry as steady and severe a hand
over thine own Soul, as a discreet Father would do over his Child? And be as
careful to break thy self of thine own Will; as he his Child of his? And to get
the Mastery over thy self in greater matters, it will behove thee to exercise
this Discipline first in lesser things: as he that would be a skilful Wood-man,
will exercise himself thereunto first by shooting sometimes at a dead mark. In
thy meats and drinks* in thy pastimes and society, in other delights and
things, such as are in themselves both lawful and honest; exercise this
sovereignty now and then over thine own will. When thou observest it eagerly
bent upon some one thing, (that may without sin or folly be left undone;)
sometimes deny thy self and thine own will therein; curb thy desires, though
they be somewhat importunate: and thou shall find in time incredible benefit by
it. There are some other, but this is one of the best uses of Fasting, and (to
my seeming) the most proper and immediate good that comes by it: not so much
to tame the flesh, and take down the body (though that also) as to cross the
appetite, and pull down the Will. That Isa. 58. 5.
Proverbial form of afflicting the soul, usual among the Hebrews, and that
peculiar to Solomon of putting a knife to the throat, do both look this way.
Prove. 23. 2. 1 Cor. 9. 27. -- 25.
And so does St. Paul's (...), 1 Cor, 9. which is an athletique pugilar word: as
those that beat one another with their fists, striving for the Mastery; so did
he to bring his body in subjection, that so he might have (as the phrase is
otherwhere in the same Epistle) (...), power over his own will. 1 Cor. 7. 37.


38. The fact was barbarous, but yet the Story memorable of Amurath Knolles.
the Great Turk, in cutting off with his own hands the head of his beautiful
Minion Irene, upon no dislike at all; but merely that his Princes (who were
displeased to see his mind, by doting upon her, drawn off from all care of the
public affairs) might withal see, how he could command himself, and conquer
his own affections. But we need not seek out so for an example: having one more
innocent, and of a far better man than he, in the Scriptures; even our David.
Who longing with an earnest appetite to drink of the water of the Well, 2 Samuel
23. 15. 16.
by the gate of Bethlehem: Yet when he had it brought him, by the brave attempt
of three of his Worthies, he would not taste a drop of it, but (in condemnation
of the inordinacy of his appetite, which had exposed such worthy persons to the
hazard of their lives) poured it out unto the Lord. What a mass of Sin and
Misery had he escaped, could he have so denied himself in the matter of Uriah?
Verily, there is no conquest like this, for a man to conquer himself: and he
that has Quem magis admiraberis, quam qui imperat sibi, quam qui se habet in
potestate? Gentes facilius est barbaras, etc. Senec. 5. de benef. 7. Prove. 16.
32. 2 Timothy 2. 26.
subdued his own will, has done a braver thing, than he that has taken a Town
or scaled the walls of a Castle. It is wilfulness only that begets
Presumption: the more therefore thou can master thine own will, the safer
thou art from sinning Presumptuously. That is the second.

39. Thirdly. Beware of engaging thy self to sin. It is a fearful thing, when
sin has got a tie upon a man. Then is one properly in the snare of the Devil:
when he has him as it were in a string, and may lead him captive to what
measure of presumption he will. And sundry ways may a man thus entangle
himself: by a Verbal, by a Real, by a Sinful Engagement. He shall do best to
keep himself out of all these snares. But if once he be in, there is no way out
again but one: even this, To lose his Pledge, to break in sunder the bonds
wherein he is tied, as Samson did the green withs, and to cast away those cords
from him. Judge. 16. 9.


40. A man has bound himself rashly by some Promise, vow or Covenant: to do
something he may not do, or not to do something he ought to do. He is now
engaged in a sin: the Devil has got this tie upon him. And though his
Conscience tell him he cannot proceed without sin; yet because of his vow, or
Mat. 6. 20. -- 26.
his oath, he is wilful, and must on. It was Herod's Case, for taking off the
Baptists head. It was against his Conscience to do it, for he knew he had not
deserved it: Yea, and it was against his mind too to do it, for the Text says
he was exceeding sorry that his Niece should put him upon it. But says the
Story withal, for his oaths sake, and because the great ones about him should
not say but the King would be as big as his word, he resolved it should be
done, and gave commandment accordingly to have it done. This I call a Verbal
Engagement.

41. There is a Real one too, as ill as this. For example. A man hears of a
bargain which he apprehends will be for his profit; or spieth out a likely
way for his advancement: and being unwilling to lose the opportunity, perhaps
disburseth some moneys, or puts his great friends upon it to further his
design. It may be afterward, upon better consideration, he espieth a flaw in
it, which he saw not before: or some intervening accident, which he could not
probably foresee, has cast such a rub in his way, that he cannot go on fairly,
as at first he hoped, but he must strain his conscience a little to remove that
rub. This he knows he should not do: but alas, he is now engaged. The Devil
has this tie upon him; It would not be for his ease to lose so much money, as
he is out of purse already in the adventure: And he shall hazard the loss of
his great friends hereafter, if having put them upon a business, should now
relinquish it: And so he resolves to go on. It was Amaziah's Case in part,
when to aid him against the Edomites he had hired a hundred thousand men of
Israel for an 2 Chronicles. 25. 6.
hundred talents of silver. A Prophet comes to him, and tells him it was the
Lords pleasure he should dismiss the Soldiers he had hired; for God would not
be with them: and if he did employ them, he should not prosper. The King was
troubled at it not a little. He might fear lest the cashiered Soldiers should
do him some displeasure as they returned back: and so they did, and that a
shrewd -- 13. -- 9.
displeasure too; but the thing he stuck at most, was the moneys he was out, (
What shall we do, says he, for the hundred talents, which I have given to the
Army of Israel?) He thought it went hard to part with such a round sum for
nothing. Indeed the Prophet put him into the right way; even to give it for
lost, and to rest upon the goodness of God, who was able to give him much more
than that. And the King did very well and wisely, to hearken to the counsel of
the Prophet, and to be content to sit down with the loss: And so he came well
off at the last, though he was dangerously engaged onward.

42. Besides that Verbal, and this Real, there is yet a third, which I call a
sinful Engagement, (because it is such originally, and a principio; for the two
former also are sinful a termino, and in the Event:) far worse than either of
both. And that is, when a man has already done some evil, from which he cannot
handsomely acquit himself, but to his loss or shame, or other punishment; unless
he either cover it, or maintain it, or some other way help himself, by laying
Scelera sceleribus tuenda sunt. Senec. 1. de clem. 13.
another sin upon it: as untoward Children and naughty Servants are wont, when
they have done a fault, and yet would shun the blame, to shift it off with a
lie. This is Quid eo infelicius cui jam esse malo necesse est? Ibid. Isa. 30.
1. Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
the most dangerous tie of all other: and there is nothing that so desperately
casts a man upon a wilful resolution of sinning, as when the committing of
one Sin brings with it a seeming necessity of doing another. This makes men
like the Giants in the Poets, imponere Pelion Ossoe, to heap sin upon sin, to
pile up transgressions one upon another, and to add thirst to drunkeness. It
was David's very case in the matter of Uriah He had never proceeded to such
black thoughts, as to plot the murder of a person so worthy and so innocent in
so base a manner, and with so much palpable hypocrisy; had he not been deeply
engaged before by another dishonest act already by him committed. He had lain
with the wife, she proving with child, and all his other shifts, whereby he had
attempted to cloak it, taking no effect; the thing was like to come to public
knowledge to his everlasting disgrace, if not also to the great reproach of
Religion. No way now to help it, but to take the husband out of the way, and to
marry the widow. He resolves upon it therefore: (...). Eurip. Hecuba act. 4.
so it must be, come what will come on it, Iacta est alea: David was already
in, and now no remedy but he must on.

43. These be fearful things. Therefore as wary men in the world love to keep
themselves out of bonds, so do thou beware of these Engagements. Seldom does a
man fall into a Presumptuous Sin, but where the Devil has got such a hank over
him, as one of these three, I have now mentioned. But he that has suffered
himself to be thus ensnared, has this only way left for his escape, even to
disengage himself out of hand, by breaking through the snare, if he cannot
fairly unty it: as Alexander cut the great knot in pieces with his sword, which
he Curt. lib. 3.
could else never have unloosed. Know that neither Oath, Vow, nor other tie
whatsoever is allowed by Almighty God to be Vinculum iniquitatis, to bind thee
to any sinful inconvenience. Whatsoever seeming necessity there is of doing
evil; consider it grows but by a latter contract: but God is able to plead a
precontract; be virtue whereof there lies upon thee an absolute necessity of
obedience. Oppose then, against all thy rash promises and vows, that solemn
promise and vow, thou made unto God in the face of the Congregation, and
tookest the holy Sacrament upon it in thy Baptism, to keep his holy
Commandments, and to continue his faithful servant and soldier unto thy lives
end. Let Equity teach thee, that the first bond should be first discharged: and
Reason, that if an Oath or Vow must stand, the first should rather. That is the
Third Preservative.

44. Lastly, and in a word: Obdura, Harden thy self with a holy obstinacy and
wilfulness; and Obtura, stop thy ears, like the deaf Adder, against all the
enchantments of Satan and his instruments, when they would by any cunning
inticement charm thee into any kind of Sin. It is Solomon's receipt, and a sure
one; no antidote like it: My Son, if Sinners entice thee; consent thou not. Yet
even Prove. 1. 10.
from these Sinners thou may learn this point of Wisdom: behold how resolute
and wilful they are in their courses. Dissuade them therefrom with the best art
you can devise: they will, it may be, give you the hearing; perhaps confess you
speak reason. But they hold the Conclusion still, in despite of all Premises:
when you have said what you can, they will do what they list. Why can thou
not be as obstinately good, as they are obstinately evil; And notwithstanding
all the sophisms of Satan, persuasions of carnal Reason, allurements or
discouragements in the world, say and hold; that thou will not for all that
depart from the obedience of thy Maker. Away from me ye wicked, for I will keep
the Commandments Psalm 119. 115. -- 106.
of my God; says David, Psalm. 119. As if he had said, Talk no more of it; save
your breath; I am resolved of my course, I have sworn and am steadfastly
purposed to keep the Commandments of my God: with Gods help there will I hold
me: and all the world shall not wrest me from it.

45, The Devil is an errand Sophister; and will not take an answer, though
never so reasonable and satisfactory, but will ever have somewhat or other to
reply. So long as we hold us but to Ob. and Sol. to argument and answer; he
will never out: but wrangle in infinitum. You may see it in Mat. 4. how ready
he Mat. 4. 6.
was with his Replies, even upon our blessed Savior himself; and that with
Scriptum est too: as if he meant to drop quotations with him. But as there
Christ's (...), Avoid Satan, non-plust the Tempter, beyond all the Reasons and
Authorities -- 10.
that could be produced: so the safest way for us to come off clear from him,
is to give him a flat denial without further reason, and let him take that for
an answer, if he will any. Thus to be Wilful, is a blessed wilfulness; a
resolution well becoming the servant and child of God, and a strong
preservative against wilful Presumption. The fort, is as good as half lost
(having to treat with such a cunning enemy) if you do but once admit of a
Treaty: therefore stand off.

46. But when we have done all, we must begin again. When we have resolved and
endeavored what we can, unless (...). Eurip. Supplic. Act. 2.
the Lord be pleased to set his Fiat unto it, and to confirm it with his royal
assent, all our labor is but lost. As he is the Alpha, so is he to be the
Omega too: and therefore we must set him at both ends. And as we were to begin
with him, so we are to conclude with him: Pray first, pray last: Pray before
all, that we may have grace to do our Endeavors; Pray after all, that he would
give a blessing to our endeavors. That so when Satan, the World, and our own
Flesh shall all conspire against us to drive us forward to the works of sin, we
may by his grace and blessing he kept back therefrom, and enabled to persevere
in true faith and holiness all the days of our lives. Which God our heavenly
Father grant us for his mercies sake, and for the merits of Jesus Christ his
only Son our Lord: to whom both with the Holy Ghost, etc

AD AULAM.
The Fifth Sermon.
GREENWICH, JULY, 1637.
Philip. 4. 11. Not that I speak in respect of want: for I have learned in
whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content.
1. SAint Paul found much kindness from these Philippians; and took much
comfort in it: And because it was more than ordinary, and beyond the kindness
of other Churches, he does therefore sometimes remember it with much
thankfulness both to God and them. Even in the beginning of Ver. 15.
the Gospel; that is presently after his first preaching it among them, (the
story whereof is laid down, Acts 16.) Acts 16. 1.
when having passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, he came and preached at
Thessalonica, which was another principal City of Macedonia: these Philippians
2 These. 3. 7, 9. -- 8.
hearing belike that the Apostle had little other means for his maintenance
there, than what he got by his hand-labour (wherein both for Examples sake, and
because he would not be chargeable to the Thessalonians, he employed himself
disigently both day and night;) they sent over, and so did no other Church but
they, and that once and again, to supply his necessities there. Ver. 15. 16.


2. And as they began, it seems they continued to show forth the truth of
their Faith, and to adorn their Christian Profession, by their cheerfulness and
liberality, in contributing to the necessities of their brethren upon every
good occasion. Acts 18. 11. 1 Cor. 9. 12. 15.
For at Corinth also the year following, where for the space of a year and half
together he did for good considerations forbear (as he had before done at
Thessalonica) to challenge that Maintenance from the people which by Gods
Ordinance he had a right unto: the supplies he had, he acknowledges -- 14. 2
Cor. 11. 9. -- 8.
to have come from the brethren of Macedonia; As if he had even robbed the
Philippians (it is his own word) in taking wages of them for the service done
to other Churches.

3. Not to speak of their great bounty some three or four years after that,
toward the relief of the poor brethren that dwelt in Judea; wherein the were
Romans 15. 26. 2 Cor. 8. 3.
willing of themselves without any great solicitation, and liberal (not only to
the utmost of, but) even somewhat beyond their power: Now also again, after
some three or four years more, St. Paul being at durance in Rome, their former
charitable care over him (which had not of a good while shown it self forth for
(...) Verse. 10.
lack of opportunity) began to re-flourish, and to put forth with a fresh
Verdure, as a Tree does at the approach of Summer. For they sent him a large
benevolence to Rome by Epaphroditus, of the receipt whereof he now certifieth
them -- 18.
by the same Epaphroditus at his return; expressing the great joy and comfort
he took in those gracious Evidences of their pious Affections, to the Gospel
first, -- 18. -- 19.
and then to him. He highly commends their Charity in it: and he earnestly
beseeches God to reward them for it.

4. Yet lest this just commendation of their beneficence, should through any
man's uncharitableness (whereunto corrupt Nature is too prone) raise an unjust 2
Cor. 12. 16. -- 18.
opinion of him, as if he sought theirs more than them, or being crafty, had
caught them with guile, to make a Prey or a Gain of them; so sinisterly
interpreting his extolling of their Charity for the time past, as if it were
but an artificial kind of begging for the time to come: He thought it needful
for him by way of Prolepsis to prevent whatsoever might be surmised in that
kind, which he begins to do in the words of the Text, to this effect.

5. True it is, nor will I dissemble it, when I received from Epaphroditus the
things that were sent from you: it was no small rejoicing to my heart, to see
your V. 10. -- 19.
care of me (after some years intermission) to flourish again: And I cannot but
give an Euge to your Charity: for truly you have done well to communicate with
my Afflictions. Yea, I should derogate from the Grace of God, which he has
bestowed upon you, and works in you, if I should not both acknowledge your
free benevolence toward me, and approve it as an odor of a sweet smell, a
sacrifice acceptable, and well-pleasing to God. Which I speak not out of a
greedy mind to make a gain of you, nor for a cloak of covetousness (God is my
witness) nor any other way so much in reference to my own private interest, as
for the glory of God, and to the comfort of your consciences. In as much as
this fruit of your Faith thus working by Love, does redound to the honor of
the Gospel in the mean time, and shall in the end abound to your account in the
day of the Lord Jesus. Otherwise as to my own particular, although my wants
were supplied, and my bowels refreshed through your liberality, (which, in the
condition I was in, was some comfort to me:) yet if that had been all I had
looked after; the want of the things you sent me, could not have much afflicted
me. The Lord whom I serve is God All-sufficient: and his Grace had been
sufficient for me, though your supplies had never come. He that enableth me,
(howsoever of my self unable to do anything, yet) to do all things through
Christ that strengthens me, has framed my heart by his Holy Spirit, and
trained me up hereunto in the School of Experience and Afflictions; to rest my
self contented with his allotment whatsoever it be, and to have a sufficiency
within my self, though in never so great a deficiency of outward things. [ Not
that I speak in respect of want: for I have learned in whatsoever state I am,
therewith to be content.]

6. The words contain a Protestation, and the Reason of it. First, because his
commendation of their Charity to him might be obnoxious to mis-construction, as
if he had some low covetous end therein: to prevent all evil suspicion that
way, he disavoweth it utterly by protesting the contrary, in the former part of
the Verse, [ Not that I speak in respect of want.] And then to make that
Protestation the more credible, he assigns as the Reason thereof the
contentedness of his mind [ For I have learned, says he, in whatsoever state I
am, therewith to be content.] Concerning which Contentedness in the latter part
of the Verse, he gives a touch what a manner of thing it was; and withal
acquainteth us how he came by it: giving us some hint, in that, of the Nature;
in this, of the Art of true Contentment. Which are the two things indeed mainly
to be insisted upon from the Text. Yet would not the Protestation be wholly
slipped over: since from it also may be deduced sundry profitable Inferences. Some
of which I shall first mind you of, with convenient brevity: and then pass on
to the main. (...). Not that I speak in respect of want.

7. Hence learn first, what a base and unworthy thing it is, indeed for any
man, for a Christian man much more; most of all for a Churchman, to be
covetously minded. Would our Apostle be so careful, to quit himself but of the
suspicion, if the crime itself were any whit tolerable? Nor does he it here
only; but upon every needful occasion otherwhere also, using the like
preventions and protestations. To the Ephesians: I have coveted no man's Silver,
or Gold, or Apparel. Acts 20. 33. 1 Cor. 9. 15. 2 Cor. 12. 14.
To the Corinthians: I have not written these things, that it should be so done
to me. I was not, neither will I be burdensome to you, for I seek not yours,
but you. To the Thessalonians: Neither at any time used we a cloak of
covetousness, God is witness. 1 These. 2. 5.
He calls God to be his Compurgator: which sure he would not do, nisi dignus
vindice nodus; if it did not much concern him to stand clear in the Eye of the
world in that behalf. And he speaks there of a cloak of covetousness too: for
who indeed shameth not to wear it outwardly? No man will profess himself
covetous, be he never so wretchedly sordid within: but he will for very shame
cast as handsome a cloak as he can over it ( Frugality, ( Nec debite tanquam
frugi audatur avarus. Juvenal Satyr. 14. Psalm. 10. 3.
) good Husbandry, Providence, some cloak or other) to hide the filthiness of it
from the sight of others. But filthy it is still; be it cloaked never so
honestly. Still God abhors it, as a filthy thing: [ He speaks well of the
covetous, whom God abhors.] To it in a more peculiar manner has the very
name of Sordidness been appropriated of old, and still is in every man's mouth.
Our Apostle has set a brand of Filthiness 1 Timothy 3. 3, 8. Tit. 1. 7.
upon it more than once ((...)) calling it filthy lucre. Yea, so unfit he
holds it to be found among the Priests, that he would not have it (if it were
possible) so much as once ( Ephesians. 5. 3. if that be the meaning of (...) there,
as translators have commonly rendered it.
) named (at least not with allowance, not without some stigma upon it) among
the Saints.

8. There is an honest care to be had, I confess, of providing for a man's self,
and those that depend upon him: no less requisite in a Churchman than in every
other man; if not (in some respects) even much more: and verily he wants
either Wit, or Grace, or both, whoever neglects it. Yea, further, since God
has assigned (( (...). 1 Cor. 9. 14.
) by his own Ordinance) wages to him that labors in his work, (and if he be
a faithful Labourer he is well worthy of it:) he may without injustice not only
expect it, but even exact it, of those that would unconscionably defraud him
therein. But why may not all this be done, and that effectually too, without
either bearing inwardly, or betraying outwardly, a greedy and covetous mind.
Whether then we provide for our own, by well husbanding what we have; or
whether we look for our own, by requiring our dues from others: still, still
let our Conversation be without covetousness. Take heed and beware of
covetousness, Heb. 13. 5. Luke 12. 15.
says our Savior: doubling his charge, that we should double our
circumspection. Which if we do not, and that with more than ordinary
heedfulness; the love of the World will creep upon us, and by little and little
get within us, and steal away our hearts ere we can think it. Take heed and
beware of covetousness. It is an evil spirit, but withal a subtle: and can
slyly wind it self in at a little hole; but having once made entrance, and
gotten possession, it is not so easily outed again. Rather it will quickly set
open a wide door to seven more, and in time to a whole legion of other evil
spirits (I cannot say, worse than it self, for there are not many such: but
certainly bad enough) to render the end of that man much worse than the
beginning. For the love of Money is the root of (very 1 Timothy 6. 10.
many, and even almost of) all evil: which while some have coveted after, they
have erred from the faith; made shipwreck of their Consciences, and entangled
themselves in a world of piercing cares and sorrows. But thou, O man of God,
fly -11.
from these things: fly covetousness. Observe how careful the Apostle is every
where to disclaim it: and be thou as careful evermore to avoid it.

9. Observe hence secondly, what an aptness there may be even in very good men
(through the remainders of Natural Corruption) to mis-interpret the speeches
and actions of their spiritual Fathers: as if in much of what they said or did,
they aimed most at their own secular advantage. That these Philippians had
charitable hearts, if there were no other proof, their great bounty, both to
our Apostles and others so often by him remembered, were evidence enough. Yet
surely, if he had not withal known those dregs of Uncharitableness, that (as
the sediments of depraved Nature) lurk in the hearts of the most charitable
men: he might have saved the labor, that sometimes he is put upon, of his own
purgation. Hard the mean while is the strait, men of our cloth are often put
unto. If we let all go, and permit it to men's Consciences how they will deal
with us, resolving to suffer and say nothing: besides that we expose our selves
both to loss and scorn; we also betray Gods and the Churches right; and we are
also unfaithful in the work of our Calling, in suffering sin upon our Neighbor
for want Lev. 19. 17.
of a rebuke. But if we look better about us, and require what of right
belongs to us: then do men set their mouths wide open against us straight;
And covetous are we, if we do but speak for our own, (that is the least and
best they can say:) but if sue for it, then not covetous only, but contentious
also. Yea, and this is often done with such palpable iniquity, that there lies
many times a deeper imputation upon us, for but seeking to right our selves,
than upon those who by doing us manifest wrong enforce us thereunto. Alas! is
this the double honor you would bestow upon those that labor in the Word:
first to rob them of their 1 Timothy 5. 17.
Maintenance, and then to rob them of their good Names? Do you thus reward the
Oxen that tread out the corn for you: First, to muzzle them up, that they
cannot 1 Cor. 9. 9.
eat; and then to thrust another muzzle upon them, that they may not complain.

10. This is hard, you will say. It is so: but no more than (so long as there
is such a proneness in most men, to mis-judg and mis-asperse those that are set
over them, especially if they once grow to differ about meum and tuum) we may
expect from the men of this Generation, and should prepare for before we put
our hand to the plow. It should not therefore much discourage us (St. Paul
counted it but a very small thing) so long as we know nothing by our selves, 1
Cor. 4. 3.
and do but what we may and ought: if we shall find our selves wrongfully and
upon light surmises taxed of Covetousness, of Ambition, of Time-serving, which
are the Crimes usually laid in our dish, not only by the scum of the people,
men of lower rank and repute, but sometimes even by persons of quality, yea,
such as pretend most to Religion. Since holy Paul, than whom never man lived
freer from such vicious affections, could not without so many Protestations
secure himself from ( Ne admittam culp^m ego meo sum promus pectori: Suspicio
est in pectore alie^^ sita Plaut. in Trinum. 1. 2. 1 Pet 3. 16.
) the sinister jealousies and censures of those from whom he received
maintenance. Rather should their forwardness to judge thus uncharitably of us,
make us to walk the more warily and wisely, not to give them cause, but to be
sure in our whole course to have both the warrant for what we are to do, and
for what we have done, the Testimony of a good Conscience. That if yet they
will needs speak evil of us, as of evil doers, they may do it gratis, and to
their own shame, and not ours.

11. Observe hence thirdly, with what great caution the Apostle here speaks;
and wheresoever else he is occasioned to speak of himself, or his own Affairs.
It were certainly good for us (in the public exercise of our Ministry at
least,) where we may avoid it, not to meddle at all with personal and
particular things, that concern either our selves or others. Both because the
more we descend to particulars, the more subject we are to mistakings, (for
descendendo contingit errare;) and the leaven of a little Error or Indiscretion
in the Pulpit, will sower a great lump of Truth and of Wholesome Doctrine: As
also because personal matters can hardly be so dealt in, (especially in
public) but that, through prejudices and the partiality of men's Affections,
offense and distaste will be taken thereat by some or other. It were best for us
therefore, (that we either do not mistake, or be not mistaken) to hold us to
general Truths, for bearing personal matters, as much as may be. But where a
Necessity lies upon us, not with coveniency to be avoided (as so the Case may
be) to speak of our own or other men's particular concernments: it should be our
great care by our blessed Apostles example, to balance well every word we
speak, and to use such caution and discretion therein, that we leave nothing
(as far as is possible) subject to misconstruction; neither inject scruples
into the heads and minds of our Hearers, which we shall not withal have
sufficiently removed: and not only to be sure to avoid the just giving, but to
use our best diligence also to prevent the unjust taking, of Offense at any
thing we shall deliver.

12. Observe Fourthly, how ready the Apostle is upon every needful occasion, as
to keep himself from the Crime, so to clear himself from ( Omnes bonos,
bonosque accurate add rei, Suspicionem and culpam ut ab se segregent. Plaut.
in Trinum. 1. 2.
) the suspicion of evil. He that is wanting to his own just defense,
transgresses the Law of God, and the Rule of Charity, in bearing false witness
against himself. And it is not only cruelty, but stupidity too, for a man
wholly to dis-regard what others think of him; Especially pernicious, when
their mis-conceits of the Person may draw prejudice upon his Doctrine, and
consequently bring scandal unto the Gospel of Jesus Christ. It carries with it
ever a strong presumption of Guilt, but an infallible argument it is of Vanity
howsoever: When a man swears to put away a Crime from him, before it be laid
to him; and labors (as a woman in travel) to be delivered of an Excuse, ere
any body have accused him. But, for to stop the mouth of Calumny upon a false
charge, or to prevent misprisions where they are likely to ensue, and may do
harm if they should ensue: there to justify our selves, and by public
manifesto (as it were) to disclaim what we might be wrongfully charged withal,
is many times expedient, and sometimes necessary. I am become a fool in
glorying, says our Apostle, but ye have compelled me. As 2 Cor. 12. 11.
who say; your undervaluing of me, to the great prejudice of the Gospel, but
advantage of false Teachers, has made that glorying now necessary for me,
which had been otherwise but Vanity and Folly. When his case falls to be
ours; we may then do, as he now does; purge our selves from false Crimes and
Suspicions, and maintain our own Innocence. Only be we first sure, that our
Consciences stand clear in the sight of God, before we endeavor to clear our
Credits before the faces of men. Lest by justifying our selves before them, we
contract a new Guilt before him: and so become indeed worse than we were, by
striving to seem better than we are.

All these from the protestation in the former part of the Verse, (...), etc.
not that I speak in respect of want.

13. But the main of our business is (as I said) in the latter part of the
verse: concerning the Nature and the Art of Contentment. All Arts have their
Praecognita: so has this. The first and chiefest whereof is (as in all other
Arts and Sciences) to understand, Quid sit, Qua de re agitur, what it is that
we are to treat of as the subject matter of the whole discourse: as whereunto
all the Precepts, Rules, and Conclusions therein contained, must relate. We
shall never learn the Art, unless we first know the Nature of Contentment. Of
that therefore first, from these words (very few in the Original) (...), In
whatsoever state I am.

14. Wherein the Nature of true Contentment is (by intimation) discovered from
the Object thereof in three particulars: partly limited and partly unlimited.
Limited first, in respect of the Person: it must be a man's own Estate. The Verb
here is in the first Person, (...) I am. Limited secondly, in respect of the
time: it must be a man's present Estate. The Verb here is of the Present Tense,
(...), I AM. But thirdly, for the Kind (high or low;) for the Quantity (great
or small;) for the Quality (convenient or inconvenient;) and in every other
respect, altogether indifferent and unlimited. So it be a man's own, and present
estate, it mattereth not else what it be; (...) indefinite, In whatsoever
estate. In these Three jointly consists the Nature of Contentment: in any of
which whoever fails, is short of St. Paul's learning. That man only has
learned to be content, that can suffice himself with his own estate, with the
present estate, with any estate. Of these Three therefore in their order. And
first of the Limitation in respect of the person, that a man rest satisfied
with his own estate.

15. The very thing (to my seeming) principally intended in the last
Commandment of the Decalogue, (...). which forbids expressly the coveting of
our Neighbors House, his Wife, his Cattle: and proportionably, the coveting of
his Farm, his Office, his Honor, his Kingdom: and generally the coveting of
any thing that is another. Which is as much in effect, as to require every man
to *rest fully satisfied with that portion of outward things, which God has
been pleased by fair and justifiable ways, in his good providence to derive
upon him, without a greedy desire of that which is another. They who conceit,
the thing in that Commandment properly forbidden, to be the Primi motus, those
first motions or stirrings of sin, which we call Concupiscence, arising in the
sensual Appetite (corrupted through Adam's fall, as all other faculties of the
soul are) before any actual deliberation of the understanding thereabout, or
actual consent of the Will thereunto: I must confess do not satisfy me. For
those motions or stirrings (supposing them sinful) are according to their
several objects (so far as they can be supposed sinful) forbidden in every of
the Ten Commandments respectively: even as the Acts are, to which they refer;
and from which they differ, not so much in kind, as in degree. I much rather
incline to their judgment, who think the thing properly and principally there
forbidden, to be an inordinate desire after that, which by right or property is
Another, and not Ours.

16. And then these words of the Apostle, Heb. 13. may serve for a (short, but
full) Commentary upon that last Commandment: both in the Negative, and in the
Affirmative part thereof. Let your Conversation be without Covetousness, Heb.
13. 5.
the Negative: and be content with such things as ye have, the Affirmative.
When we endeavor or desire to get from another that which is his, by any
fraudulent, oppressive, or other unjust course; we are then within the compass
of the Eighth Commandment, Thou shall not steal: as is evident from the Analogy
of our Saviors Expositions upon the other Commandments, wherein Murder and
Adultery are forbidden, Mat. 5. But the last Commandment, Thou shall not Covet,
comes more within us: condemning every inordinate desire of what is not ours,
albeit we have no actual intention to make it ours, by any unlawful (either
violent or fraudulent) means. The bare -- (...). Eurip. Hecub. Act. 5.
wishing in our hearts, that what is our Neighbors were Ours; his Wife, House,
Servant, Beast, or his any thing Ours; without considering whether he be
willing to part with it or no, or whether it be meet for him so to do or no: is
a cursed fruit of corrupt self-love, a direct breach of the holy Law of God in
that last Commandment, and flatly opposite to that (...) or self-sufficiency,
wherein true contentment consists.

17. Ahabs sin was this, when first his teeth began to water after Naboth's
Vin^^ard. He went indeed afterward a great deal farther. He brake the Eighth 1
King. 21. 1, etc.
Commandment, Thou shall not steal; and he brake the Sixth Commandment also,
Thou shall not kill: when he took Naboth's both Life and Vineyard from him by a
most unjust and cruel oppression. All this came on afterward. But his first
sin was merely against the last Commandment: in that he could not rest himself
satisfied with all his own Abundance, but his mind was set on Naboth's plat;
and unless he might have that too (lying so conveniently for him) to lay -- o
si angulus ille Proximus accedat; qui nunc denormat agellum! Horat. 2. satyr. 6.
to his demesnes, he could not be at quiet. He had not as yet (for any thing
appears in the Story) any settled purpose, any resolved design, to wrest it
from the owner by Violence, or to weary him out of it with injust Vexations: So
he might but have it upon any fair terms; (either by way of Sale, he would give
him full as much for it as it could be worth of any man's money; or by way of
Exchange, he would give him for it a better plat of ground than it was; either
way should serve his turn:) Naboth should but speak his own Conditions, and
they should be performed. Many a petty Lord of a Hamlet with us, would think
himself disparaged in a Treaty of Enclosure, to descend to such low
Capitulations with one of his poor Neighbors, as the great King of Israel then
did with one of his Subjects, and to sin but as modestly as Ahab yet did. Here
was neither Fraud nor Violence, nor so much as Threatening used: but the whole
carriage outwardly square enough, and the proposals not unreasonable. All the
fault (as yet) was within. The thing that made Ahab even then guilty in the
sight of God, was the inordinacy of his desire after that Vineyard, being not
his own: which Inordinacy, upon Naboth's refusal of the offered Conditions, he
farther bewrayed by many signs, the effects of a discontented mind. For in he
comes, heavy and displeased; takes pet, and his bed; looks at no body, and
out of sullenness forsakes his meat. Had he well learned this piece of the
lesson in the Text, to have contented himself with his own, both his body had
been in better temper, and his mind at better quiet, and his conscience at
better peace than now they were.

18. Abraham it seems had learnt it. Who was so far from all base desire of
enriching himself with the King of Sodom's Goods, that he utterly refused them,
Genesis 14. 21, etc.
when he might have taken them, and held them without any injustice at all. He
had, or might have had, a double Title to them. They were his (...). Arist. 1.
Polit.
Iure belli, by the Law of Arms and of Nations; having won them in the field,
and in a just war: and they might have been his jure donationis, by the Kings
free donation [ Give me the Persons, take the Goods to thy self] if he had been
minded to accept the offer. But Abraham would none: contenting himself with
what the Lord had blessed him withal, he did not desire, neither would he take
from a thread or a shooe-latchet, of any thing that appertained to the King of
Sodom.

19. But what need we seek any other (indeed where can we find a better)
Example to instance in, as to the matter we now treat of, than this our
Apostle: if we do but recall to mind that Protestation of his once before
mentioned, made before the Clergy of Asia in his Visitation at Miletum, Acts
20. [ I have coveted Acts 20. 33.
no man's Silver, or Gold, or Apparel.] Brave and noble was the challenge, that
1 Samuel 13.
Samuel made in a full Assembly of the whole people of Israel, [Behold here I
am, witness against me before the Lord, and before his Anointed. Whose Ox have
I taken, or whose Ass have I taken? Or whom have I defrauded? Whom have I
oppressed? Or of whose hands have I received a Bribe?] Possibly there are
Judges and Officers in the World, that would be loath to make so bold a
Challenge, and venture a fair trial upon it. Yet comes that Challenge far
short of this Protestation: Samuel speaks only of not taking; St. Paul also
of not coveting: according to the express letter of the prohibition in the
Decalogue. (...), Thou shall not covet, says the Law: his Conscience
answers, (...), I have not coveied. So good a Proficient was he, so perfect a
Scholar in this holy learning, that he con'd it Verbatim. (...) might he well
say and truly: for he had indeed learned to be content with his own.

20. And might not we learn it too, think ye, as well as he? Sure we might: for
what should hinder? Only if we would but tie our selves strictly to those Rules
(those I mean of Justice and Charity) which are the first Elements of this
learning. For Justice first: the Rule is, Suum cuique, That every man have what
of right to him appertains. Now every man's right unto any of the things of
this World arises from Gods disposal thereof by such ways and means
(ordinarily) as by the general Law, and common consent of all civil Nations, or
by the positive Laws of particular Kingdoms and Commonwealths (not repugnant
thereunto) are allowed for that end: as Descent, Gift, Purchase, Industry, etc.
Whose distributions, however unequal they may seem to us, are yet evermore just
in themselves, and as they come from him. So that every man is by us to be
accounted the just owner and proprietary of that whereof he is the legal
possessor: yea, though it do appear to us to have been very unjustly gotten,
either by himself, or by any of those from whom he had it. His very possession
I say, although without a justifiable Title, is yet sufficient to make it his,
as to the intendment of the Law in that behalf; that is to say, so far forth as
to render our desiring of it from him unlawful in foro interno: unless in that
one Case only, when the right is in us, though he be in possession. In all
other Cases possession is a good plea: the Title of Possession being in all
reason to be esteemed good against him, that is not able to show a better.

21. If then we be at any time carried with a restless and immoderate desire
after that, which the hand of Providence has been pleased to dispose
otherwhere, (and our selves have no Antecedent right, whereby to entitle it
Ours:) do we not take upon us (after a sort) to control the holy and wise
Appointments of our good God? For if it were indeed fitter for us than him, and
not in opinion only: could not the Lord by his Almighty power, and would he not
in the dispensation of his good providence, have by some honest means or other
disposed it upon us rather than upon him? By this extreme partiality to our
selves we become unjust Judges of evil thoughts: in settling that upon our
selves in our own thoughts; as fittest for us, which God has thought fit to
settle rather upon another. The Story in Xenophon, how young Cyrus was
corrected by Lib. 1. (...).
his Tutor, for bestowing the Two Coats upon Two of his School-fellows,
according to the fitness thereof to their Two Bodies in his own discretion;
without enquiring first (as he should have done) who was the right owner of
either; is so well known, and withal pertinent to our present purpose, that I
shall not need either to relate it, or apply it. When Almighty God then, by
disposing of these outward things, has manifested his pleasure to give our
neighbor a property in them: it is an unjust desire in us to covet them from
him, and to wish them transferred upon our selves.

22. The other Rule I told you of, is that of Charity. Which binding us to love
our neighbor as our selves, must needs bind us consequently to rejoice in his
good, as in our own; and not wish any thing to his prejudice, no more than to
our own: and consequently to these, to be content that he should enjoy that
which God has allotted him with our good wills, as we desire to hold that
which is in like manner allotted us with his good will. There is no such Enemy
to Brotherly love as is Self-love. For look how much we bestow upon our selves
more than we should, we must needs leave to our brother so much less than we
should. And it is nothing but this overmuch love of our selves, that makes us
so much covet to have to our selves, that which belongs not to us. If ye
fulfill Jam. 2. 8.
the Royal Law according to the Scripture, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self, ye do well, says St. James: Very well this. But if ye have respect to
Persons, -- 9.
(especially if ye become partial once to your own persons;) that is not well:
then you commit sin; says he, and are convinced of the Law as transgressors.

23. But this is Durus sermo, may some say. It were hard so to confine men's
minds to that which is their own, as not to allow any desire at all of that
which is another. If we should conceive the Law thus strict: it would destroy,
not only all Humane Ordinances, that concern Trading and Commerce, as buying,
selling, exchanging, etc. (without which public Societies cannot subsist;) but
even the Divine Ordinance also, of earning our livings by labor and industry.
Then might no man endeavor by honorable and virtuous achievements to raise
himself a fortune, or make way for his future advancement, or do any thing
whatsoever, whereby to acquire or derive upon himself a property in any thing
that were not his own already: Since none of all this can be done without a
desire (in some degree or other) of that which is another.

24. This Objection need not much trouble us* Nor justice, nor Charity, nor the
holy Law of God, which gives rules to both, condemn all desire of that which
is another: but an inordinate desire only: that which is orderly and rightly
qualified, they all allow. All the difficulty in this matter will be, (and that
will make us some business) how to discern between an orderly, and an
inordinate desire: that so we may be able to judge rightly concerning our own
desires at all times; whether they be such as are allowed, and may consist with
contentment, or such as are forbiden, and cannot consist therewith. Which is to
be done by duly considering of those three especial Qualifications, which are
all requisite (the concurrence, I mean, of the whole three) to the making up of
an orderly desire: in any of which if there be a failure* the desire becomes
inordinate and sinful. These three are in respect; First, of the Object;
Secondly, of the Act; Thirdly, of the Effect of the desire.

25. For the Object first. If I desire but that from my neighbor (say it be
his House, Land, Beast, or other Commodity) which I find him willing, or may
reasonably presume he will not be unwilling (for that I see no cause why he
should be so) to part withal; especially if the having thereof be visibly so
much greater advantage or convenience to me, than the parting therewith could
be loss or inconvenience to him, that I should be as ready to pleasure him with
mine, were my case his, as I am now desirous he should pleasure me with his: If
all this be done and meant by me bona fide, and that I am willing withal to
make him a valuable compensation to the full, for whatsoever loss or
inconvenience he shall sustain thereby, and according to the worth of the
thing: my desire is thus far regular. In this manner Abraham desired of Ephron
the Hittite, a spare portion in one end of his field for a burying-place for
Sarah: when Genesis 23. 4, etc.
as, being a stranger, he had no possession among them wherein to bury his
dead, Genesis 23.

26. But if I should desire to have that from him, which probably is as useful
and expedient for him, as it can be for me, or which he takes some pleasure or
content in, or is very unwilling howsoever (though for no great reason perhaps,
but for his minds sake only) to part withal; or which (if it were mine own
case) I should be loath to forego to another, that should in the like kind
desire it from me: If yet, when all this appears to me, I persist in my
former desire notwithstanding, and thirst after it still; this is an
uncharitable, and so an inordinate desire in me. Ahabs desire was such. After
he saw Naboths heart so set upon his ancient inheritance, that he would not
part with it upon any terms; For he had given him a flat denial, and rejected
all Motions for an alienation with an Absit (the Lord forbid it me, that I
should part with the Inheritance 1 King. 21. 3.
of my Ancestors;) yet he must have it tho; nothing will content him without
it. That for the Object.

27. Secondly, For the Act, or more imediate Effect of the Desire. If I desire
any thing that is my neighbors with a moderate and sober desire; so as I can
set my heart at rest, fall out as it will, and compose my affections to an
indifferent temper whether I obtain my desire or no, (If I may have it well and
good; if not, no great harm done, I am but where I was:) my desire is also thus
far regular, and hinders not but that I may be well enough content
notwithstanding.

28. But if my desire raise mud and perturbations in me, and breed troubled and
confused thoughts, so as to disquiet me in my sleep, distract me in my
devotions, disturb me that I cannot walk in the ways of my Calling, or perform
the common offices of life with any cheerfulness, or any other way distemper
the calm tranquillity of my mind and soul: then is my desire so far forth a^n
inordinate and covetous desire, and inconsistent with true Contentation. And
such again was Ahabs. When he could not have his longing, Nec manus, nec pes;
He could 1 King. 21. 4.
neither eat, nor drink, nor sleep, nor enjoy any thing he had, nor do any
thing he should for thinking of it: nothing but lowre, and tumble, and fret for
grief and despite: have it he must, or he should never be well.

29. There are thousands, that would loath be reputed Covetous, yet have a
grudging of his disease: and it is an evil disease. For tell me (to close a
little with thee, thou that scornest the name of Covetous) whence is it, that
thou either pinest away with envy at the Greatness of thy neighbors, or
repinest with murmuring at the scantness of thy own portion? These are parlous
symptoms. Why art thou ever and anon maundering that his -- majorque videtur Et
melior, vici^a seges. Juv. sat. 14.
Farm is better than thine, his Meadows greener than thine, his Corn ranker
than thine, his cattle fatter than thine, his Warehouse fuller than thine, his
Office gainfuller than thine, his service better rewarded than thine, his
trading quicker than thine; and I know not how many things more;

Quodque capella aliena gerat distentius uber
Tabescas? -- Hor. 1. Sermon. 1.

Must thine eyes needs be evil toward him because the hand of God has been
good to him? Toll quod tuum, and vade. Take that is thine, and go thy way, and
rest quiet with it. Be thankful to him that gave it, (it was more, I ween, then
he owed thee:) and in Gods name make the best of it ( Spartam quam nactus es,
hanc orna.) But do not desire that inordinately, which thou can* not compass
honestly, and which (if dishonestly gotten) thou should have little joy of,
when thou had it. Say thy lot be not all out as thou could wish (indeed
what man's almost is so?) yet take comfort in it onward, till better come.
Better may come, when God sees thee fit for better: but fit thou art not, so
long as thou art not contented with what thou have.

30. Lastly, for the consequents, or remoter effects of the Desire. Desire
looks ever at the end, carrying the mind and thoughts thither with some
eagerness: and therefore stirs endeavor in the use of such means as are
likely to bring men to the desired end the soonest, and so puts them upon
Action. Whence commonly such as the desire is, such is the endeavor also: and
that, both for Quantity and Quality. According to the strength of the desire is
the bent also of the endeavor: and according as the Desire is qualified (
Morally qualified, I mean, that is, either good or bad;) the endeavor also is
conditioned much what like it. If then I can so bound my desire of something
which another has, as to resolve and hold, not at any hand to attempt the
obtaining thereof by any other than by fair, and warrantable, and conscionable
means: my desire is also thus far a regular and lawful desire. So David, though
he could 1 Samuel 24. 4. and ^0. 8.
not but desire the accomplishment of Gods gracious promise of advancing him to
the Kingdom, which was not his yet (otherwise than in Gods designation) but
another: yet when he was urged by his followers, to lay hold of 1 Samuel 24. 6.
and 2^. 11.
a fair opportunity, which (as they thought) God had put into his hand for the
effecting thereof: his soul did so much abhor the very mention of such a fact,
that at two several times, he would not so much as take the advice into the
least deliberation, but rejected it with an Absit too. Shall I lay these hands
upon the Lords Anointed? God forbid. No says he, I will not do it for a
Kingdom. Such wicked facts I leave for wicked men to act. God can and will I
know in his due time make good his own promise without my sin. I shall be
content 1 Samuel 24. 13.
to wait his leisure, and to remain in the sad condition I am now in, till it
shall please him to bring me out of it, rather than clog my conscience with the
guilt of such a horrid crime.

31. But if my desire shall prompt me to that resolution so common in the
World, (rem si possis, recte; si non, quocunque modo rem) I would rather have
it Hor. 1. Ep. 1. Unde habeat quaerit nemo, sed oportet habere. Juven. sat. 14.
fairly, if it might be; but if it will not come so, yet would I have it
howsoever: my desire becomes an unjust and inordinate desire. Such was Ahabs
still: his example, you see, furnishes us at every turn. He must have the
Vineyard: yea, that he must.

Cujus si dominus pretio non vincitur ullo, etc. Juven. ibid.
If money will fetch it, Naboth shall have his own asking: But if that will not
do the deed, something else must. Letters shall be written, Witnesses suborned,
Judges awed, Justice perverted, and an innocent person (If the situation if his
Vineyard had not made him guilty) in a goodly formal pageant of a legal
proceeding with much base hypocrisy, and in a most undue unworthy manner,
accused, condemned, executed. Quid non mortalia pectora cogis? Stand amazed,
and consider, what a mass of sin and mischief, the least indulgence to a
vicious inordinate desire may lead you to at the last, more than perhaps you
could at the first suspect your self capable to fall into.

32. What should I say then, Brethren? Even what our Lord has said before me,
Take heed and beware of Covetousness; Look upon all Inde fere scelerum causae:
nec plura quam saeva cupido Immodici census. Juv. sat. 14. 1 Timothy 6. 10.
the frauds that are practiced every where among the sons of men; take a survey
of all the oppressions, the greater and lesser oppressions, that are done under
the Sun: you shall find the most of them to owe both their first-birth and
after-growth to this cursed root of Covetousness. Extortion, Bribery, Flattery,
Calumny, Perjury, Simony, Sacrilege, unjust Wars and Suits: Do they not all
come from hence? False weights and measures in the Markets; false lights and
wares in the Shops; false Pleas and Oaths in the Courts; exhaunsing of Fees,
trucking for Expedition, racking of Rents, cracking of Bankrupts, depopulating
of Towns, projecting of Monopolies, and God knows how many more, (my breath
would fail me, and the time, but to name them) are they not all from hence? And
does not the riseness of them abroad in the World, unanswerably convince the
men of this Generation of much injustice and uncharitableness, in coveting
other men's goods, and not being content with their own?

33. Upon this first point I have stood the longer, being the Principal of the
three, and the foundation of the other two. That now settled, we shall be like
to come off with quicker dispatch in the rest. The object of Contentment, as it
is limited in respect of the Person; It must be a man's own estate (of which
hitherto:) so is it limited in respect of the Time; It must be a man's present
Estate, (of which next.) The Text has not (...) in the preter, In what state I
have been; nor (...) in the future, In what state I shall be: but in the
present (...), In whatsoever state I am Look what God (who is Lord of all, and
dispenses to every man severally as he will) disposes upon him for the
present; although perhaps far short of what he may have had in some times
heretofore, or of what he may probably have in possibilities and reversions
hereafter: he that has a contented mind does not afflict himself, either with
pensive thoughts, at the remembrance of what he has been or with suspenceful
thoughts, in forecasting both his hopes and fears what he may be: But he gives
himself up to the Lords present disposal, and rests satisfied with the
portion that is before Heb. 13. 5.
him. (...), says the Apostle expressly. Heb. 13. being content -- (...).
Isocrat. orat. de pace. 1 Timothy 6. 8.
with the present things: and elsewhere, Having food and Raiment ((...) in the
present tense still) let us be therewith content.

34. Grant but the former part, already made good, That we are to be content
with our own; and this will follow of it self, That we are to be content with
the present: because nothing can be truly said to be our own, but the present.
What is past and gone, perhaps it was ours; but we cannot say, It is ours now:
and what is future, and to come, perhaps it may be ours, (and perhaps it may
not too;) but we cannot say, It is ours yet. Panem nostrum quotidianum, our
daily bread; or (as some translate it) hodiernum, our this days bread: so we
are taught to style it, when we beg it. Nostrum and Hodiernum may be well put
together: for it is only this days bread that is our bread. Another days bread
may be another man's bread, for ought we know.

Nam propriae telluris herum natura, nec illum, Horat. 2. sat. 2.

Nec me nec quenquam fecit --
All these things pass to and fro in the world from one hand to another, and so
to another, and another, ever and anon, uponsome casualty or other, many times
-- tanquam Sit proprium cuiquam, puncto quod mobilis horae Permutet dominos and
cedat in altera jura. Horat. 2. Epist. 2. Prove. 23. 5. Luke. 12. 20.
in a moment, shifting Masters; and seldom stay long in a place. When one would
think we had them fast, either they take them wings and fly away, and leave us
behind; or our thread is cut, and we drop away, and leave them behind. And how
suddenly this may be done, who knows? Perhaps before to morrow, ( stulte,
hac* nocte:) and then what was ours goes another way, who knows whither?
Perhaps to a mere stranger ( cujus erunt?) Thou fool, this night thy Soul shall
be required of thee: then whose shall these things be, thou now call thine?
Nothing is certainly ours, but the present: and of that we have no farther
certainty than the present. So that unless we can frame our minds to be content
with the present, we shall never be able to find any certainty whereon to rest.

35. Add hereunto secondly, that all solicitous looking forward and beyond the
present, does ipso facto and of it self take off so much from our content. It
raises up many foggy mists of hopes and fears, and other perturbations, that
disquiet the mind wonderfully, and torture it with suspencefulness and anxiety.
Spemque metumque inter dubii. Whilst men, through the desire of having, hang
in* suspense betwixt the hope of getting, and the fear of missing; they cannot
choose but pierce themselves through with many sorrows, and create themselves 1 Timothy 6. 10.
much unrest.

Laetus in praesens animus, quod ultra est Hor. 2. Carm. 16.

Oderet curare;
And again,

Dona praesentis cape laetus horoe, and -- 3. Carm 8.

Linque futura.
These and sundry other like passages we meet with in the Poets, together with
those phrases so usual with them,

-- (...). Anthol. 2. Epigr. 47. -- I Would potens sai, L^tusque vi^et, cui licet,
In di^m dixisse vixi. Horat. 3. od. 29.
In diem vivere, etc. -- would be good meditations for us: if we should
understand them in that Christian sense, whereto we now apply them, and which
the words themselves will bea^; and not in the Epicures sense, wherein for the
most part they that used them meant them. But I rather give it you in our
Saviors words; Take Mat. 6. 34*
therefore no thought for the morrow, for the morrow shall take thought for the
things of it self, sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof, Mat. 6.

36. A third consideration there is, nothing less available than either of the
former, but rather much more, to them that can lay hold of it ( for it is above
the reach of Poets and Philosophers, and beyond the ken even of professed
Christians that want the eye of Faith) to frame us to contentment with the
present, arising from the contemplation of the infinite love of our gracious
Lord God, jointly with his infinite wisdom. By these, as many as are truly the
Children of God (by faith, and not titulo tenus only) are assured of this most
certain truth; That whatsoever their heavenly Father in his wisdom sees best
for them, that evermore in his love he provideth for them: From which Principle
every man that truly fears God, and has fixed his hope there, may draw this
infallible conclusion demonstratively, and by the Laws of good discourse, ( per
viam regressus.) This my good God has presently ordered for me* and therefore
it must needs be he saw it presently best for me. Thus may we sugere mel de
petra; gather grapes of thorns, and figs of thistles, and satisfy our selves
with the honey of comfort out of the stony rock of barrenness and adversity.

37. Where are they then, that will tell you, On the one side, what jolly men
they have been: But miserum est fuisse. Having been born and bred to better
fortunes, their spirits are too great to stoop to so low a condition as now
they are in. If it were with them, as in some former* times, no men should lead
more contented lives than they should do. Or that will tell you on the other
side, what jolly men they shall be: when such fortunes as they have in chase or
in expectation shall fall into their hands; they doubt not, but they shall live
as contentedly as the best. Little do the one sort, or the other, know the
falseness of their own unthankful and rebellious hearts. If with discontent*
they repine at what they are; I shall doubt they were never truly content with
what they were, and I shall fear (unless God change their hearts) that they
will never be well content with what they shall be. He that is indeed content
when the Lord gives, can be content also when the Lord takes away; and with
Job bless the holy Name of Job 1. 21.
God for both. He had a mind contented in as good (though perhaps not in so
high) a measure, when he sat upon the dunghill, scraping himself with a
potsheard, in the midst of his incompassionate friends; as he had when he sat
in the gate, judging the people in the midst of the Princes and Elders of the
Land.

38. It were certainly therefore best for us to frame our minds now the best we
can to our present estate, be it better or worse: that whether it shall be
better or worse with us hereafter, we may the better frame our minds to it then
also. We should all do in this case, (...). Plato. Number. 9. 15. etc.
following the Lord which way soever he leads us, as the Israelites followed
the guidance of the cloudy-fiery-pillar. When it went, they went; when it
stood, they stood: and look which way it went to the North, or to the South,
the same way they took: and whether it moved swiftly or slowly, they also
framed their pace accordingly. We are in like sort to frame our selves and
wills to a holy submission, to whatsoever the present good pleasure of his will
and providence shall share out for us.

39. Which yet let no man so desperately mis-understand, as to please himself
hereupon in his own sloth and supinity, with Solomon's sluggard, (whom that wise
man censureth as a fool for it) who foldeth his hands together; and lets
Eccl. 4. 5. -- 6.
the world wag as it will, without any care at all what shall become of him and
his another day. And yet, as if he were the only wise man ( Sapientum octavus,
wiser than seven men that can render a reason) he speaks Sentences, Prove. 26.
16. -- 7.
(but it is like a Parable in a fools mouth, a speech full of reason in it
self, but by him witlesly applied) and tells you, that Better is a handful
with quietness, than both the hands full with travel and vexation of spirit.
Would you not think him the most contented soul that lives? But there is no
such matter. He is as desiring, and as craving, as the most covetous wretch
that never cease toyling and moyling to get more, if he might but have it,
and never sweat for it.

40. Nor yet Secondly so, as to pass censure upon his brethren, as if it were
nothing but Covetousness or Ambition, when he shall observe any of them by
their providence, industry, and good endeavors in a fair and honest course, to
lay a foundation for their future better fortunes: as the currish Philosopher
snarled at his fellow.

Si pranderet olus sapienter, regibus uti Hor. 1. Ep. 17.

Nollet Aristippus --
For so long as the ways we go are just and straight, and the care we take
moderate, and neither the things we look after unmeet for us, nor the event of
our endeavors improbable; if withal the minds we bear be tempered with such an
evenness, as to expect the issue with patience, and neither be puffed up beyond
measure with the good success of our affairs, nor cast down beyond measure if
they hap to miscarry: it hinders not, but we may at once both be well (...).
Eurip. in Jon. act. 2.
contented with the Present, and yet industriously provident for the future.
The same Poet has meetly well expressed it there, speaking again of the same
person, Omnis Aristippum decuit color, and status, and res. Tentantem majora,
fere praesentibus aequum. It is a point of wisdom, not a fruit of discontent,
when God opens to a man a fair opportunity of advancing his estate to an
higher or fuller condition than now he is in, to embrace the opportunity, and
to use all meet diligence in the pursuit, for the obtaining of his lawful
desires. Rather it is a fruit either of Pride, or Sloth, or both, to neglect
it, though upon the pretense of being content with the present.

41. Pass we now on from this Second, to the Third and last points observed
concerning the object of true Contentment: which was the Indifferency of it, as
it stands in the Text, for the kind, quantity, quality, and every other
respect (except the before excepted) altogether unlimited. (...),
indifferently. Be it high or low, rich or poor, base or honorable, easy or
painful, prosperous or troublous; all is a point: all that God sends is
welcome. He that has learned St. Paul's Lesson, can make a shift with any state,
and rest satisfied therewithal. The Apostle a little enlarges himself in the
next verse: showing that in the change of outward things, his mind yet
continued unchanged, and was still the same under the greatest contrarieties of
events. I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound: every where and
in all things I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, both ^o abound
and to suffer need. And elsewhere he says of himself and his fellow laborers
in the Gospel, that in all things they had been careful to approve themselves
as the Ministers of God, by the armor 2 Cor. 6. 4. 7, etc.
of righteousness on the right hand and on the left, by honor and dishonor,
by evil report and good report, etc. As indeed it is a point of the same skill,
to know how to abound, and how to want: and equally hard to bear prosperity
without insolence, and adversity without impatience. The wise Son of Agur was
therefore Prove. 30. 8.
equally afraid of both, when he prayed that God would neither give him
excessive Riches, nor extreme Poverty; As one that well knew, there was great
and equal danger in the one Extreme, as well as in the other; if God should
leave us to wrestle with the temptations, that may arise from either of them,
by our own strength alone without the aidance of his grace. But he whose heart
is established with grace, can sort his mind to any estate, and find content in
any. He can sleep, both securely in a Palace, and thankfully in a Cottage.

42. Reasons are: for I must hasten. First, Contentment comes from the mind
within, not from the things without. -- Non res praestat, sed animus, If the
things Seneca.
themselves were enough to afford content, or breed discontent: then should all
men that enjoy them alike, be alike contented therewith; and all men that want
them alike, be alike discontented thereat. Whereof daily experience shows the
contrary. It is therefore from the different furniture of the mind, that men
are differently affected both with plenty and want. Now the mind of a godly
man, being settled upon God by a holy dependence upon his providence: hence it
is, that neither height nor depth, neither want nor abundance, neither things
present, nor things to come, nor any worldly accident can drive him from that
Psalm. 112. 6, 7.
hold. He shall not be moved for ever, neither shall be daunted with any evil
tidings, because his heart is fixed, and his trust is in the Lord, Psalm. 112.

Si fractus illabatur orbis Hor. 3 Carm 3.

Impavidum ferient ruinae.
43. Secondly, such a vast disproportion there is between the reasonable soul
of man, and the sublunary Creatures, that the appetite of that cannot be filled
with any of these. Capacem Dei non implet nisi Deus. The soul being capable of
a Communion with God by grace, and the fruition of him in glory, cannot be
satisfied with any thing that is less than God; nor therefore with any thing
but God. At the last day, when the Saints shall enjoy fullness of glory in the
presence of God, their souls shall be completely satiated with joy and
happiness to their utmost capacity ( Satiabor cum apparuerit gloria, When I
awake, I shall be satisfied with Psalm. 17. 15.
thy likeness, Psalm. 17.) In the mean time they are satisfied with a kind of
fullness, according to the measure of their present capacity: such a fullness as
suffices for the sustaining of their Souls with patience and comfort, (
Sufficet tibi gratia: Till that sa^iety of Glory come, my grace is sufficient
for thee onward.) Hence 2 Cor. 12. 9.
grows another difference between the godly, and the worldly man. The one is
content with nothing: because for want of Grace he has not a sufficiency
within, to quiet the desires of his soul, not to be satisfied with outward
things. The other is content with anything: because he has a sufficiency of
grace within him, whereof (so long as he persisteth in that state, and but by
his own default) no creature in the world can deprive him.

44. Again thirdly, the increase of outward things rather provokes the
appetites of the soul, than stilleth them: and by that means rather puts a
man further off from content, than he was before.

Et minus haec optat, qui non habet. Iuven. sat. 14.
He that loves silver, says Solomon, shall not be satisfied with silver: nor
he that loves Eccl. 5. 10.
abundance with increase. As a River, the greater it grows by receiving in
little brooks, the wider and the deeper it wears the channel: so all outward
things, the more they increase, the more they enlarge the desires, still to
their own proportion. Was ever Voluptuous, or Ambitious, or Covetous, or
Malicious man so glutted either with pleasures, or preferments, or riches, or
revenge, as not to desire more? Only the Godly man's hopes are not so nipt with
the decay, nor his desires so extended upon the increase of these outward
things; as to hinder his content. Because neither his hopes, nor desires are
set upon the world, or the things of the world: but upon God, and his Christ,
and his Spirit, and his Promises.

45. First, then (to infer somewhat, briefly) why should thou that live in
a low and mean estate, envy him that has a far greater: which yet is as far
from giving him content, as thine would be if it were his? When riches
increase, they Eccl. 5. 11.
are increased that eat them: and what profit (or pleasure either) is there to
the owner thereof, save the beholding them with his eyes? All the advantage he
has is but this: that he can say, All this is mine. The Sun is as warm to thee
as to him: the air as sweet. Thy fare, though not so costly, yet as savoury:
thy body as healthy, thy mind as free, as his: thy sleep as soft, though upon a
harder bed: thy rest as safe, though under a meaner roof. If there be any
difference, here it is. That as his estate is greater; so his charge is
greater; and his cares greater, and his fears greater; and his troubles
greater: and at the last great day, his ^eckoning shall be greater. Therefore
envy him not.

46. Secondly, In this, as in most other things, most of us (God help us) make
our selves a great deal of work more than needs, because we go the wrong way to
work. For the bringing of our minds and our estates together, (for that is in a
manner the whole business: till they meet, there can be no true Contentment:)
we commonly begin at the wrong end, and so lose our labor. We strive to sit
all things to our minds: which (so long as our desires are vast and boundless)
is a tedious and bootless work.

-- -- Non si te ruperis -- Horace.
We may tug hard at it; sweat till our hearts ache: but it will not be. Why do
we not rather begin at the other end? Do that rather, which is not only
possible, but (the grace of God assisting) easy also? In striving to fit our
minds to the things. Non augendae res, sed minuendae cupiditates: that is the
way. To work our Seneca.
own Contentment, we should not labor so much (...). Plaut. 7. de legib. Genesis
28. 20.
to increase our substance (that is a preposterous course;) as to moderate our
desires: which is the right way, and the more feasible. Jacob did not propose
to himself any great matters; fat revenues, and large possessions: but only
bread to eat, and raiment to put on, Genesis 28. No matter of what course grain,
so it were but bread to give nourishment, and maintain life. No matter for the
stuff, or fashion, so it were but raiment to cover nakedness, and to keep off
heat and cold. Neither does St. Paul speak of any choicer or costlier matters.
Having food and raiment, says he, let us be therewith content. 1 Timothy 6. He
says not (...), delicates; but (...), ^ Tim. 6. 8.
food: nor (...), ornaments; but (...) raiment, coverings. Any filling for the
belly, any hilling for the back, would serve his turn.

47. Thirdly, since it is a point of the same skill to do both, to want, and to
abound; we should do well, whilst the Lord lends us peace and plenty, to
exercise our selves duly in the Art of abounding; that we be the better able to
manage the Art of wanting, if ever it shall please him to put us to it. For
therefore especially are we so much to seek, and so puzzled, that we know not
which way to turn us, when want or afflictions come upon us: because we will
not keep within any reasonable compass, nor frame ourselves to industrious,
thrifty, and charitable courses, when we enjoy abundance. It is our extreme
insolency and unthankfulness when we are full, that makes our impatience and
discontentedness break forth with the greater extremity, when the Lord
begins to empty us.

Quem res plus nimio delectavere secundae, Horat. 1. Epist. 10.

Mutatae quatient.
As in a Fever, he that burns most in his hot fit shakes most in his cold:
so no man bears want with less patience, than he that bears plenty with
least moderation; if we would once perfectly learn to abound, and not riot, we
should the sooner learn to want, and not repine.

48. But how am I on the sudden, whilst I am discoursing of the Nature, fallen
upon some of the Rules of the Art of Contentment? And yet not besides the Text
neither: the word (...) contains that too. Yet because to lay down the
grounds and method of that Art, and to do it to purpose, another hours work
would be but little enough: I shall therefore forbear to proceed any further at
this time. Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, etc.

AD AULAM.
The Sixth Sermon.
OTELANDS, JULY, 1637.
Philip. 4. 11. -- for I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content.
1. TO omit what was observed from the Apostles Protestation in those first
words of the verse [ not that I speak in respect of want:] from these words in
the latter part of the verse we have proposed formerly to speak of two things
concerning Christian Contentment: first of the Nature of it, and wherein it
consists; and then of the Art of it, and how it may be attained. The Nature
of it has been not long since somewhat opened, according to the intimations
given in the Text, in three particulars. Wherein was shown, that man only
lives truly contented, that can suffice himself first, with his own estate;
secondly, with the present estate; thirdly, (being his own and the present)
with any estate, (...), -- in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content.]
I am now by the Laws of good Order, and the tie of a former promise, to proceed
to the like discovery of the Art of contentment: by occasion of this word
(...), [ I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, to be therewith content.]

2. St. Paul was not framed unto it by the common instinct of nature: neither
had he hammered it out by his own industry, or by any wise improvement of
nature from the Precepts of Philosophy and Morality: nor did it spring from the
abundance of outward things, as either an effect, or an appurtenance thereof.
It was the Lord alone, that had wrought it in his heart by his saving and
sanctifying Spirit, and trained him up thereunto in the School of Experience
and Afflictions. The sum is, that true contentedness of mind is a point of high
and holy learning: whereunto no man can attain, unless it be taught him from
above. What the Apostle says of Faith, is true also generally of every other
Grace; and of this in particular, as an especial and infallible effect of
Faith: [Not of your Ephesians. 2. 8.
selves, it is the gift of God.] And of this in particular the Preacher so
affirms in Eccles. 5, [ Every man also to whom God has given riches and
wealth, and has Eccles. 5. 19.
given him power to eat thereof, and to take his portion, and to rejoice in his
labor, this is the gift of God.]

3. Neither is it a common gift, like that of the Rain and Sun, the comforts
Mat. 5. 46. Luke. 6. 35.
whereof are indifferently afforded to good and bad, to the thankless as well
as the thankful: but it is a special favor which God vouchsafes to none, but
to those that are his special favorites, his beloved ones; [ -- he gives his
beloved sleep, Psalm. 127.] whiles others rise up early, and go to bed late, and
eat the Psalm. 127. 3.
bread of sorrows; restlesly wearing out their bodies with toil, and their
minds with care: they lay them down in peace, and their minds are at rest. They
sleep: But it is the Lord only that makes their rest so soft and safe: he
gives them sleep. And the bestowing of such a gift is an argument of his
special love toward them that partake it; He gives his beloved sleep. It is
indeed Gods good blessing, if he give to any man bare riches: but if he be
pleased to second that common blessing with a farther blessing, and to give
contentment withal; then it is to be acknowledged a singular and most excellent
blessing; as Solomon says, [ The blessing of the Lord, it makes rich; and he
adds no sorrow with it.] In Prove. 10. 21. Eccles. 2. 26.
Eccles. 2. the same Solomon tells us, that contentment comes from none but
God, and is given to none but the Godly: For, says he, God gives to a man
that is good in his sight, and (that is the godly only) wisdom, and knowledge,
and joy. But as for the sinner, none of all this is given to him. What is his
portion then? Even as it there follows, [ But to the sinner he gives travel
to gather, and to heap up.] The sinner possibly may gather as much together as
the godly, or more; and raise to himself more and greater heaps of worldly
treasure: but when he has done, he has but his travel for his pains. He has
not wisdom and knowledge to understand the just valuation and the right use of
that which he has gathered together: he takes no joy; he takes no comfort in
those heaps; he finds nothing in them but cares, and disquietness, and
vexation of spirit; [ All his days are sorrows, and his travel grief, yet his
heart takes not rest in the night.] It is not -- 23.
therefore without cause, that our Apostle so speaks of contentment, as of
the hand maid unto godliness; [ But Godliness with contentment is great Gain] 1 Timothy 6. 1 Timothy 6. 6.


4. The truth whereof will yet farther appear unto us, if we shall consider of
these two grounds: First, that in all other things there is an insufficiency;
and Secondly, that there is a sufficiency in the grace of God to work
Contentment. We cannot conceive any other things, besides the Grace of God,
from which Contentment can be supposed to spring, but these three; Nature,
Morality, and Outward things. All which in the Trial will appear to be
altogether insufficient to work this effect. First, Nature (as it is now
corrupt) inclines our hearts and affections strongly to the world: the
inordinate love whereof, first breeds, and then cherishes our discontent.
Whiles between the desire of having, and the fear of wanting, we continually
pierce our selves through with a thousand cares and sorrows. 1 Timothy 6. 10.
Prove. 30. 15.
Our lusts are vast, as the Sea; and restless, as the Sea; and, as the Sea,
will not be bounded but by an Almighty Power. The horseleech has but two
daughters, but we have I know not how many craving lusts, no less importunately
clamorous than they: Till they be served, incessantly crying, Give, Give, but
much more unsatisfied than they; for they will be filled in time, and when they
are full they tumble off, and there is an end: But our lusts will never be
satisfied; like Pharoahs thin kine, when they have eaten up all the fat ones,
they are still Genesis 41. 21.
as hungry and as whining as they were before. We are by nature infinitely
covetous; we never think our selves rich enough, but still wish more: and we
are by nature infinitely timorous; we never think our selves safe enough, but
still fear want. -- Nam quic ^piet, me^^a quoque porrt: Qui metue^os vivit,
liber mihi non ei^ unquam Hor. 1. Epist. 1.
Neither of both which alone (much less both together) can stand with true
Contentment. This flower then grows not in the garden of ( corrupt) Nature,
which is so rankly overgrown with so many, and such pestilent and noisome
weeds.

5. But perhaps the soil may be so improved by the culture of Philosophy, and
the malignity of it so corrected by moral institution; as that Contentment may
grow and thrive in it. No: that will not do the deed neither. True it is, that
there are to be found in the Writings of Heathen Orators, Poets, and
Philosophers, many excellent and acute Sentences and Precepts tending this way:
and very worthy to be taken notice of by us Christians, both to our wonder and
shame. To our wonder, that they could espy so much light as they did, at so
little a peep-hole: but to our shame withal, who enjoying the benefit of divine
revelation, and living in the open Sunshine of the glorious Gospel of truth,
have profited thereby in so small a proportion beyond them. But all their
Sentences and Precepts fall short of the mark: they could never reach that
solid Contentment they levelled at.

Sunt verba and voces, -- Hor. 1. Epist. 1.
As he said: and he said truer than he was aware of; for they are but words
indeed, empty of truth and reality. The shadow of contentment they might catch
at: but when they came to grasp the substance, Nubem pro Iunone; they ever
found themselves deluded. As the blinded Sodomites that beset Lots house, they
Genesis 19. 11.
fumbled about the door, perhaps sometimes stumbled at the threshold: but could
not for their lives either find or make themselves a way into the inner Rooms.
The greatest Contentments their speculations could perform unto them, were but
aegri somnia; Not a calm and soft sleep, like that which our God gives Hor.
de. Art.
his beloved ones; but as the slumbering dorms of a sick man; very short, and
those also interrupted with a medley of cross and confused fancies. Which
possibly may be some small refreshing to them amidst their long weary sins: but
cannot well be called Rest. Now the very true reason of this unsufficiency in
what soever Precepts of morality unto true Contentment, is, because the Topics
from whence they draw their persuasions are of too flat and low an elevation.
As being taken from the dignity of man, from the baseness of outward things,
from the mutability of Fortune, from the shortness and uncertainty of life, and
such like other considerations, as come within their own sphere; Useful indeed
in their kind, but unable to bear such a pile and roof as they would build
thereupon. But as for the true grounds of sound Contentment, which are the
persuasions of the special providence of God over his Children, as of a wise
and loving Father, whereby he disposes all things unto them for the best; and
a lively faith resting upon the rich and precious Promises of God revealed in
his holy word: they were things quite out of their element, and such as they
were wholly ignorant of. And therefore no marvel if they were so far to seek in
this high and holy learning.

6. But might there not in the third place be shaped, at least might there not
be imagined, a fitness and competency of outward things, in such a mediocrity
of proportion every way unto a man's hopes and desires; as that contentment
would arise from it of it self, and that the party could not choose but rest
satisfied therewithal? Nothing less. For first, experience shows us, that
contentment arises not from the things, but from the mind; even by this, that
discontents take both soonest and sorest of the greatest and wealthiest men.
Which would not be, if greatness or wealth were the main things required to
breed Contentment. Secondly, those men that could not frame their hearts to
contentment, when they had less, will be as far from it, if ever they shall
have more. For their desires, and the things, will still keep at a distance;
because as the things come on, so their desires come on too. As in a Coach,
though it hurry away never so fast, yet the hinder wheels will still be behind
the former, as much as they were before. And therefore our Apostle in the next
verse makes it a point of equal skill, and of like deep learning, to know how
to be full, as well as how to be hungry; and how to abound, as well as how to
suffer need. Thirdly, it is impossible that Contentment should arise from these
things; because contentment supposes a sufficiency ((...) supposes (...))
whereas there is ever some deficiency or other in the things desired. What man
had ever all things so sortable to his desires, but he could espy something or
other wanting.

-- tamen Curtoe nescio quid semper abest rei. Hor. 3. Od. 23.
And many times, all he has does him not so much pleasure, as the want of that
one thing tortureth him. As all Haman's wealth, and honors, and favor with
Esther 5. 13.
the King, and power in the Court, availed him nothing, for want of Mordecai's
knee. And Ahab could not be merry, nor sleep, nor eat bread, though he swayed 1
King. 21. 4.
the Scepter of a mighty Kingdom, for want of Naboth's Vineyard. Or if we could
suppose Contentment should arise from the things; yet fourthly, it could have
no stability nor certainty of continuance: because the things themselves are
subject to casualties and vicissitudes. And the mind of a man that should
repose upon such things, must needs Gaudium in materia convertibili, mutari
necesse est, re mutata. Bern. sermon. 1. de diversis.
rise and fall, ebb and flow, just as the things themselves do. Which is
contrary to the state of a true contented mind; which still remains the same
and unchanged, notwithstanding whatsoever changes and chances happen in these
outward and mutable things.

7. We see now the unsufficiency of Nature, of Morality, of Outward things, to
bring Contentment. It remains then, that it must spring from Religion, and
from the Grace of God, seated in the heart of every godly man: which casts
him into a new mould, and frames the heart to a blessed calm within,
whatsoever storms are abroad, and without. And in this Grace there is no
defect. As the Lord sometimes answered our Apostle, when he was importunate
with him for that which he thought not fit at that time to grant; sufficit tibi
gratia, My Grace is sufficient for thee. He then that would attain to St. Paul's
learning, must 2 Cor. 12. 9.
repair to the same School, where St. Paul got his learning, and he must apply
himself to the same Tutor that St. Paul had. He must not languish in Porticu,
or in Lycaeo; at the feet of Plato or Seneca: but he must get him into the
Sanctuary of God, and there become (...), he must be taught of God, and by the
anointing of his holy Spirit of grace; which anointing teaches us all things,
1 Ioh. 1 John 2. 27.
2. All other Masters are either Ignorant, or Envious, or Idle. Some things
they are not able to teach us, though they would: some things they are not
willing to teach us, though they might: but this Anointing is every way a most
complete Tutor, able, and loving, and active: this anointing teaches us all
things, and amongst other things this Art of Contentation also.

8. Now as for the means, whereby the Lord traineth us up by his holy grace
unto this learning: they are especially these three. First, by his spirit he
works this persuasion in our hearts, that whatsoever he disposes unto us at
any time for the present, that is evermore the fittest and best for us at that
time. He gives us to see, that all things are guided and ordered by a most
just, and wise, and powerful providence. And although it be not fit for us to
be acquainted with the particular Reasons of such his wise and gracious
dispensations: yet we are assured in the general, that all things work together
for the best to those that love God: Romans 8. 28.
That he is a loving and careful Father of his children, and will neither bring
any thing upon them, nor keep back any thing from them, but for their Good;
That he is a most skilful and compassionate Physician, such an one as at all
times, and perfectly, understands the true state and temper of our hearts and
affections, and accordingly orders us, and dieteth us as he sees it most
behoofeful for us (in that present state) for the preservation or recovery of
our spiritual strength, or for the prevention of future maladies. And this
persuasion is one special means, whereby the Lord teaches us Contentment with
whatsoever he sends.

9. Secondly, whereas there are in the word scattered every where, many
gracious and precious promises, not only concerning the life to come, but also
concerning this present life: the spirit of grace in the heart of the Godly,
teaches them by faith to gather up all those scattered Promises, and to apply
them for their own comfort upon every needful occasion. They hear by the
outward preaching of the Word, and are assured of the truth thereof by the
inward teaching of the Spirit, That God will never fail them nor forsake them;
That he is Heb. 13. 5. Psalm. 23. 1, etc. Psalm. 33. 18, 9. Psalm. 84. 11.
their shepherd, and therefore they shall not want, but his goodness and mercy
shall follow them all the days of their lives; That his eye is upon them that
fear him, to deliver their souls from death, and to feed them in the time of
dearth; That he will give grace and Worship, and withold no good thing from
them that live a godly Psalm. 34. 11.
life; That though the Lions (the great and greedy Oppressors of the world)
may lack and suffer hunger, yet they which seek the Lord shall want no manner
of thing that is good: and a thousand other such like Promises they hear and
believe. The assurance whereof is another special means, by which the Lord
teaches his children to repose themselves in a quiet content, without fear of
want, or too much thoughtfulness for the future.

10. Thirdly, for our better learning, besides these Lectures of his Providence
and Promises, he does also both appoint us Exercises, and discipline us with
his Rod: By sending changes and afflictions, in our bodies, and in our names,
in our friends, in our estates, in the success of our affairs, and many other
ways; but always for our profit. And this his wise teaching of us brings on
our learning (...). Heb. 12. 10. Job 21. 9. Jer 48. 11. Prove. 1. 32.
wonderfully. As for those, whose houses are safe from fear, neither is the Rod
of God upon them (as Job speaks,) that are never emptied nor poured from
vessel to vessel: they settle upon their own dregs, and grow muddy and musty
with long ease, and their prosperity befooleth them to their own destruction,
When these come once to stirring, and trouble over-taketh them, (as sooner or
later they must look for it:) then the grumbles and mud of their impatience and
discontent begins to appear, and becomes unfavoury both to God and man. But
as for those, whom the Lord has taken into his own tuition and nurturing; he
will not suffer them either to wax wanton with too long ease, nor to be
depressed with too heavy troubles: but by frequent (...). Nazian Carm. de vita
sua. 1 Cor. 6. 7, etc.
changes he exercises them and inureth them to all estates. As a good Captain
traineth his Soldiers, and puts them out of one posture into another, that
they may be expert in all: so the Lord of hosts traineth up his Soldiers by
the armor of righteousness on the right hand and on the left, by honor and
dishonor, by evil Report and good Report; by health and sickness; by sometimes
raising new friends, and sometimes taking away the old; by sometimes suffering
their enemies to get the upper hand, and sometimes bringing them under again;
by sometimes giving success to their affairs, even beyond their expectation,
and sometimes dashing then hopes when they were almost come to full ripeness.
He turns them this way, and that way, and every way, till they know all their
postures, and can readily cast themselves into any form that he shall appoint.
They are often abased, and often exalted; now full, and anon hungry: one while
they abound, and they suffer need another while. Till, with our Apostle, they
know both how to be abased, and how to abound: Verse. 12.
Till every where and in all things they be instructed both to be full and to
be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need: Till they can (at least in some
weak, yet comfortable measure) do all things through Christ that strengthens
them. These -- 13.
Meditationes militares. (...). Heb. 12. 11.
exercises are indeed the most unpleasing part of this holy learning,
especially to a young Novice in the School of Christ (the Apostle says truly
of it, Heb, 12. that for the present it is not joyous, but grievous;) But yet
it is a very necessary part of the learning, and marvellously profitable after
a time: for (as it there also follows) Nevertheless afterward it yields
the quiet and peaceable fruit of righteousness (...).
unto them which are exercised thereby.

11. We have hitherto seen the point opened and proved, that true Christian
contentment springs not first from Nature, nor secondly from Morality, nor
thirdly from Outward things: but is taught only by God himself. Who first
persuades the hearts of his Children, out of the acknowledgment of his
fatherly providence, that that estate is ever presently best for them which
they have for the present: and assures them secondly, by faith in his Temporal
Promises, that they shall never want any thing that may be good for them for
the time to come; and thirdly, exercises and inureth them, by frequent
interchanging of prosperity and adversity, and sanctifying both estates unto
them, both to glorify him, and to satisfy themselves by, and with either.
(...) here, and in the next verse (...), I have learned, and have been
thereunto instructed, and as it were initiated into it as into an art or
mystery; in whatsoever state I am, therewithal to be content. Now for the Uses
and Inferences hence.

12. First, St. Paul's (...) here notably discovers, both the vanity of those
men, who boast as if they had minds richly content, when as yet they never knew
what grace and godliness meant: and withal the folly of those men, that seek
for, or promise to themselves contentment, but seek for it other where than
where alone it is to be found; that is to say, in the School of Christ, and of
his Holy spirit, In all learnings it is a point of special consequence to get a
good Master. He has half done his work, that has made a happy choice that
way: And the more needful the learning is, the greater care should be had in
the choice. Here is a piece of excellent learning every man will confess. Why
should any of us then trifle away our time to no purpose, and put our selves to
a great deal of fruitless pains, to learn contentment from those that cannot
teach it? Yet such is the folly of most of us: we seldom look farther than our
selves; seldom higher than these sublunary things for this learning. It is one
of our Vanities, that we love to be (...), and we glory not a little in that
knowledge, which we have hammered out by our own industry without a Teacher.
But that which we use to say in other learnings, is indeed most true in this;
Qui sibi magistrum se constituit, stulto se discipulum subdit. Bern. Epist. 87.
He that scorneth to be taught by any but himself, shall be sure to have a fool
to his Tutor. Cato, and Seneca, and other the wisest and learned among
Philosophers, ever shrunk when they came to the trial: and by their
timorousness and discontentedness sufficiently discovered the unusefulness (or
at least the unsufficiency) of their best Precepts, to effect that blessed
tranquillity of mind which they promised. Professing (...). Romans 1. 22.
themselves (in their speculations) to be wise (in their practice) they became
fools; and were confounded in the vanity of their own imaginations. It was a
vain brag of him that said it,

Hoc satis est orare Iovem, qui donat, and aufert, Horat. 1. Epist. 8.

Det vitam, det opes: animum mi aequum ipse parabo.
He would pray to Jupiter to give him health, and to give him wealth: but as
for Contentment, he would never put him to trouble for that. If he might have
health and wealth, he doubted not but he could carve out his own contentment
well enough without any of Jupiters help. Little did he know the cursed
corruption of his own heart: and that he stood rather in more need of God for
this than for those other things. A far wiser man than he has told us from his
own experience and observation, and that not in one or two, or a few
particulars, but he says, It is a common evil among men; A man to whom God
has given riches, wealth, and honor, so that he wants nothing for his soul
of all that he desires, yet gives him not power to eat thereof, Eccles. 6. 1,
2. But admit his brag had been as true, as it was vain; and that he could
indeed have wrought his own contentment if Jupiter should give him the things
he required: yet still he had come far short of St. Paul's learning in the Text.
For even by his own confession, he could not raise himself a contentment out of
nothing. He must have wealth and health to work upon, or else he could do
nothing. He had not yet attained to that high pitch of learning, as in
whatsoever state he should be, to be therewith content. Which yet every poor
simple Christian, that truly fears God, has in some measure attained unto:
who can find contentment also in sickness and in poverty, if the Lord be
pleased to send them, as well as in health and plenty; and bless his Name for
both in the words of holy Job, (The Job 21.
Lord has given, the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord.)

13. Secondly, since Contentment is a point of learning as we see, and we know
also where it is to be learned, or not at all: it were well we would all of us
be persuaded in the next place to be willing to learn it. St. Paul had never
had it, if he had never learned it: and you see what use he had of it, and how
mightily it did bestead him the whole course of his life, after he had learned
it. And the more to quicken you hereunto, take into your consideration amongst
other these inducements. Consider first, the excellency and difficulty of this
learning. Most Scholars will not satisfy themselves with the knowledge of
ordinary and obvious things, but are desirous to learn things that are beyond
the reach of the vulgar. Lo now, here is a Lesson worthy the ambition of every
Disciple in the School of Jesus Christ: such a Lesson as none of the Princes or
Philosophers of the World, by all their power or wisdom, could ever attain
unto. But that the difficulty discourage you not; Consider secondly, that (as
we use to say, so indeed) there is nothing hard to a willing mind. Isocr. ad
Demon.
(...), you know. But here is the misery of it, that as boys love play, so we
love the world: and this makes us, as that does them, truants in our learning.
And so we are long about a little, because we cannot abide to ply it. But if we
would once set our selves to this spiritual learning with all our might, and
buckle close to it, certainly we should in short time find our selves to have
profited in it wondefully. Consider thirdly, how willing our Master is to teach
us; ( Come ye children, I will teach you the fear of the Lord:) and let that
provoke in Psalm. 34. 11. 1 Samuel 3. 9.
us the like willingness to learn; ( speak Lord, for thy servant hears.)
Consider Fourthly, the usefulness of this learning. We desire all of us (and
good reason we have) to learn perfectly the Mysteries of those Trades and
Professions which we intend to exercise as our particular Callings, because
thereof we shall have continual use, in the whole course of our lives. This
learning we now speak of, is a holy mystery; ((...) is the Apostles word for it
in the next verse:) and it is a most useful and behoofeful, and necessary
mystery for us all in the whole practice of Christianity: there is indeed no
good to be done in our Christian Profession without it. See some benefits of
it, and then judge if it be not worth the learning. It sweetneth all the
bitterness of this present life. To labor and to be Sirac 40. 1^.
content with that a man has is a sweet life, says the Son of Sirac, in his
40th Chapter. It keeps the mind in a constant equal tranquillity, amidst all
the changes and chances of this mortal life. It makes us rich in despite of
the world: for what riches is like this, for a man to want nothing? He may be
without many things that others have, but he wants them not: even as the
Angels in heaven, that have neither meat, nor drink, nor clothes, nor houses,
nor lands, nor any of those bodily things, yet want none of them; because they
are well enough without them: And so the contented man, though having nothing,
yet is in the self-sufficiency of his mind as if he possessed all things. It
gives a wonderful 2 Cor. 6. 1^.
improvement unto the meanest of these outward things; and by disesteeming
them, sets a better value upon them. For he that has once well learned this
Art, is able by his learning to make a dinner of green herbs as serviceable, as
a stall-fed Ox; and a little Pulse and water as comfortable and savoury, as all
the Prove. 15. 1^.
delicacies in the Kingdom of Babylon. How should the consideration of these
Dan. 1. 12, etc.
things whet our desires and resolutions, not to suffer our eye to sleep, till
we had made some entrance into, and some fair proceedings in this so excellent
and profitable a learning?

14. A needful Exhortation, may some say, for those that are yet to learn: but
as for us, we have been long acquainted with it, and have as contented minds,
as any man would desire. The happier men they, if it prove so: but the heart of
man is very wicked and deceitful; and it were good for us not to think well
Jer. 17. 9. Romans 12. 3.
of our selves above what we ought to think. Sure I am, that in all Secular
learnings the old saying is most true, (...). There is no greater hinderance
unto proficiency, than is an (...). Naz. Orat. 1.
over* weening conceit in any man of that learning he has already. And not
unlikely but in this spiritual learning also, that man that (...). Ibid.
wants skill the most, may see his own want the least. That therefore we may
deal soundly in the trial of our own hearts, and not deceive our selves herein
upon false grounds, as we may soon do, and as too many do: it will be expedient
in the third place to lay down some rules for the examination of our
proficiency, if not rather for the conviction of our non-proficiency in this
kind of learning.

15. And first, if a man have once attained to a good mediocrity in this Art,
it will not suffer him to transgress the bounds of Justice and Charity, for the
getting of the things of this life. He knows very well, according to the
Principles Prove. 16. 8.
he has been taught: That a little with righteousness is better than great
revenues -- 10, 2.
of the ungodly; That the treasures of wickedness will do a man little -- 20.
21.
profit in the evil day, nor yield him any comfort (when he will most of all
stand in need thereof) upon his deathbed; That though an inheritance may be
gotten -- 20. 17.
hastily at the beginning, yet the end thereof shall not be blessed; And that
bread gotten by deceit, however it may be sweet in the mouth, will turn to
gravel in the belly. Abraham would not take to himself of the spoils of Sodom
to the value Genesis 14. 23.
of a shoo latchet; that it might never be said in aftertimes, that the King
of Sodom had made Abraham rich. So neither will any godly man, that has
learned the Art of Contentation, suffer a penny of the gain of Ungodliness to
mingle with the rest of his estate; that the Devil may not be able to upbraid
him with it afterward to his shame, as if he had contributed something toward
the increasing thereof. Try thy self now by this first Rule, thou that boastest
thy self so much of thy contented mind; but show not thy self
over-scrupulous, where gain is before thee. If thy resolutions have been, or
are, according to the common guise of the World, Hor. 1. Ep. 1. Unde habeat
quaerit nemo, sed oportet habere. Juvenal. Sat. 14. ex Eunio.
Quocunque modo rem; to gain and gather treasure, and to feather thy nest
whether by right or wrong; If thou have adventured to increase thy substance by
bribery, or forgery, by usury and extortion, by sacrilegiously detaining or
invading the Churches Patrimony, by griping and wringing excessive fees from
poor men, by delays of justice, by racking of Rents to an unreasonable
proportion, by false weights and measures, and lies, and oaths; If thou can
dispense with thy conscience, so as to take advantage of thy neighbors poverty
or simplicity, or to make advantage of thy own either power to oppress him, or
cunning to circumvent him: be not too confident of thy learning in this Art.
Injustice and Contentment cannot certainly stand together

16. Neither secondly has he attained to any good degree of knowledge herein,
whose thoughts are too intent upon, and whose desires too eager after the
things of this earth: although he should not attempt the compassing thereof by
any other than lawful means only. A greedy eye, and a craving heart,
importunately -- argenti (...) ^^^^^tuna (...) Hor. 1. (...). 18. Mat. 5. 6.
hungring and thirsting after the Mammon of unrighteousness, (whereas the
hunger and thirst of a through Christian should be after Christ and the
righteousness of his Kingdom) is a certain symptom of a mind not truly
contented. And so are those carking and disquieting cares likewise, which our
Savior so much condemns, Mat. 6. The Apostle therefore so speaks of
Covetousness and Contentment, as of things that stand in direct opposition
either to other: Let your conversation be without covetousness, says he, and
be content Heb. 13. 5.
with such things as ye have, Heb. 13. (...) and (...), a studious care to walk
faithfully and diligently in the duties of our Vocations; and a moderate desire
of bettering our Estates by our providence in a fair way without the injuring
of others: are not only lawful and expedient in themselves, but are also good
signs of a contented mind, yea, and good helps withal to the attainment of a
farther degree of Contentment. (...) and (...), a desire that will not be
confined within reasonable bounds; and a solicitous anxious care, whereby we
create to our selves a great deal of vexation to very little purpose, with
taking thought for the success of our affairs: are the rank weeds of an earthly
mind, and evident signs of the want of true Contentment.

17. And so is also thirdly, that pinching and penurious humor; which because
it is an Evidence of a heart wretchedly set upon the World, we commonly call
Miserableness, and the persons so affected Misers. When a man cannot find in
his heart to take part of that which God sends, for his own moderate comfort,
and for the convenient sustenance of his Family, and of those that belong to
him, in some measure of proportion, sutably both to his Estate and Rank.

Servorum ventres modio castigat iniquo, Juv. satyr. 14.

Ipse quoque esuriens --
For whereas the contented man, that which he has not he wants not; because
Avaro tam deest quod habet, quam quod non habet.
he can live without it: this wretch on the contrary wants even that which he
has; because he lives beside it. He that is truly contented with what God
has lent him for his portion, can be also well content to use it as becomes
him, and as his occasions require: because that which God intended it for, when
he lent it him, was (...). Anthol. 2. 50. Eccles. 5. 11.
the use, not the bare possission. Not that the owner should behold it with his
Eyes, and then neither receive farther good from it, not do farther good with
it: but that it should be used and employed to the glory of the Giver, and the
comfort of the Receiver, and others, with all Thankfulness, and Sobriety, and
Charity.

18. And do we not also fourthly too often and too evidently bewray the
discontentedness of our minds, by our murmuring and repining at the ways of
Gods providence in the dispensation of these outward things, when at any time
they fall out cross to our desires and expectations. The Israelites of old were
much to blame this way, and the Lord often plagued them for it: insomuch that
the Apostle proposes their punishment as a monitory Example for all others to
1 Cor. 10. 10.
take warning by, 1 Cor. 10. Neither murmur ye, as some of them murmured, and
were destroyed of the destroyer. In Egypt, where they had meat enough, they
murmured for want of liberty: and in the wilderness, where they had liberty
enough, they murmured for want of meat. There, by reason of the hard bondage
Exodus 1. 14.
they were in under Pharaoh, and his cruel Officers, they would have exchanged
their very Lives (had it been possible) for a little Liberty. Here, when they
wanted either bread, or water, or flesh, they would have exchanged their
liberty -16. 3. and Number. 11. 5.-
again for the Onions, and Garlic, and fleshpots of Egypt. Like wayward
children, that are never well, full nor fasting, but always wrangling; so were
they. And as they were then, so have ever since been, and still are, the
greatest part of mankind: and all for want of this holy learning. Whereas he
that is well versed in this Art of Contentation, is ever like himself; the same
full and fasting: always quiet, and always thankful.

19. Yea, and charitable too, in the dispensation of the temporals God has
bestowed upon him, for the comfortable relief of the poor distressed members of
Jesus Christ: which is another good sign of a Contented mind. For what should
make him sparing to them, who fears no want for himself? As the godly man is
described in Psalm 112. His heart is fixed, and established, and his Psalm. 112.
7, 8. -9.
trust is in the Lord: and thence it is that he is so cheerfully disposed to
disperse abroad, and to give to the poor. Some boast of their Contentedness, as
other some do of their Religiousness: and both upon much like slender grounds.
They, because they live of their own, and do no man wrong: these, because they
frequent the house of God, and the holy Assemblies. Good things they are both,
none doubts; and necessary Appendices (respectively) of those two great
Virtues: for certainly that man cannot be, either truly Contented, that does
not the one, or truly Religious, that neglects the other. But yet, as certain
it is, that no man has either more Contentment, or more Religion, than he has
Charity. You then that would be thought either contented or religious; now, if
ever, show the truth of your Contentation, and the power of your Religion, by
the works of Mercy and Compassion. The times are hard, by the just judgment of
God upon a thankless Nation: and thousands now are pinched with famine and
want, who were able in some measure, and in their low condition, to sustain
themselves heretofore. By this opportunity which he has put into your hands,
the Lord has put you to the Test and to the Trial: and he now expects (and
so does the World too) that if you have either of those Graces in you, which
you pretend to, you should manifest the fruits of them, by refreshing the
bowels of the needy. If now you draw back, and do not (according to your
Abilities and the Necessities of the times) seriously and seasonably bring
forth out of your treasures, and dispense out of your abundance, and that with
more than ordinary liberality, somewhat for the succor of those that stand in
extreme need: how dwells the love of God in you? How dare you talk of
Contentedness, or make semblance of Religion? Pure Religion, and undefiled
before God and the Father is this; to Jam. 1. 27.
visit the fatherless and widows in their Afflictions, and to keep ones self
unspotted of the world. The same will serve as one good (...) among others,
whereby to make trial of the truth of our Contentedness also.

20. Lastly, it is a good sign of Contentedness, when a man that has any while
enjoyed Gods blessings with comfort, can be content to part with them quietly
and with patience, when the Lord calls for them back again. The things we
have, are not (properly) data, but commodata. When God lent us the use of them,
he had no meaning to forgo the property too: and therefore they are his Goods
still, and he may require them at our hands, or take them from us when he will,
and dispose of them as he pleases. I will return, and take away my corn and my
wine in the season thereof, and will recover my wool and my flax Osea 2. 9.
Osea 2. What we have, we hold of him as our Creditor: and when he committed
these things to our trust, they were not made over to us by covenant for any
fixed term. Whenever therefore he shall think good to call in his debts; it
is our part to return them: with patience shall I say? yea, and with
thankfulness too, that he has suffered us to enjoy them so long; but without
the least grudging or repining (as too often we do) that we may not hold them
longer. Non contristor, quod recepisti: ago gratias, quod dedisti. Thus did
Job: when all Job ^. 21.
was taken from him, he blessed the Name of the Lord still; and to his Wife
tempting him to impatience, gave a sharp, but withal a most reasonable and
religious answer, Thou speak like a foolish woman: Shall we receive good
things at -2. 10.
the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil also? As who say, shall we make
earnest suit to him when we would borrow: and be offended with him when we are
called on to pay again? We account him (and so he is) an ill and unthankful
debtor, from whom the lender cannot ask his own, but he shall be like to lose a
friend by it. And yet how impatiently oftentimes do we take it at our Lords
hand, when he requires from us but some small part of that which he has so
freely, and so long lent us?

21. Try thy self then, Brother, by these and the like signs: and accordingly
judge what progress thou have made, in this so high and useful a part of
Christian learning. 1. If thou scornest to gain by any unlawful or unworthy
means; 2. If thy desires and cares for the things of this life be regular and
moderate; 3. If thou can find in thy heart to take thy portion, and to bestow
thereof for thine own comfort; 4. And to dispense (though but) the
superfluities for the charitable relief of thy poor Neighbor; 5. If thou can
want what thou desire without murmuring; 6. And lose what thou possessest
without impatience: then may thou with some confidence say with our Apostle
in the Text, (...), I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content. But if any one of these particular signs be wholly wanting in thee,
thou art then but a truant in this learning: and it will concern thee to set so
much the harder to it, and to apply thy self more seriously and diligently to
this study hereafter, than hitherto thou have done.

22. Wherein for the better guiding of those that are desirous of this
Learning; either to make entrance thereinto, if they be yet altogether to
learn, which may be the case of some of us; or to proceed farther therein, if
they be already entered, as the best-skilled of us all had need to do: (for so
long as we are in the flesh, and live in the world, the lusts both of flesh and
world will mingle with our best Graces, and hinder them from growing to a
fullness of perfection:) I shall crave leave, toward the close of this
discourse, to commend to the consideration and practice of all, whether Novices
or Proficients in this Art of Contentation, some useful Rules that may serve as
so many helps for their better attaining to some reasonable abilities therein.
The general means for the obtaining of this, as of every other particular
grace, we all know are fervent Prayer, and the sincere love of God and
goodness. Which because they are general, we will not now particularly insist
upon: it shall suffice, without farther opening, barely to have mentioned them.

23. But for the more special means; the first thing to be done is to labor
for a true and lively faith. For Faith is the very basis, the foundation,
whereupon (...). Heb. 11. 1.
our hearts and all our hearts-contents must rest: the whole frame of our
contentment, rising higher or lower, weaker or stronger, in proportion to that
foundation. And this Faith, as to our present purpose, has a double Object,
(as before was touched:) to wit, the Goodness of God, and the Truth of God. His
Goodness, in the dispensation of his special providence for the present: and
his Truth, in the performance of his Temporal Promises for the future. First
then, labor to have thy heart thoroughly persuaded of the goodness of God
toward thee; That he is thy Father, and that whether he* frown upon thee, or
correct thee, or howsoever otherwise he seem to deal with thee, he still
bears a Fatherly Affection toward thee; That what he gives thee, he gives
in love, because he sees it best for thee to have it; and what he denies
thee, he denies in love, because he sees it best for thee to want it. A sick
man in the extremity of his distemper, desires some of those that are about
him, and sit at his bedside, as they love him, to give him a draught of cold
water to allay his thirst: but cannot obtain it from his dearest Wife that
lies in his Bosom, nor from his nearest Friend that loves him as his own
soul. They consider, that if they should satisfy his desire, they should
destroy his life: they will therefore rather urge him, and even compel him, to
take what the Doctor has prescribed, how unpleasant and distasteful soever it
may seem unto him. And then if pain and the impotency of his desire will but
permit him the use of his reason; he yields to their persuasions: for then he
considers, that all this is done out of their love to him, and for his good,
both when he is denied what he most desires, and when he is pressed to take
what he vehemently abhors. Persuade thy self in like sort of all the Lords
dealings with thee. If at any time he do not answer thee in the desire of thy
heart: conclude, there is either some unworthiness in thy person, or some
inordinacy in thy desire, or some unfitness or unseasonableness in the thing
desired; something or other not right on thy part; but be sure not to impute it
to any defect of love in him.

24. And as thou art steadfastly to believe his goodness and love, in ordering
all things in such sort as he does for the Present: so ought thou with like
stedfastness to rest upon his truth and faithfulness, for the making good of
all those gracious Promises that he has made in his Word, concerning thy
temporal provision and preservation for the future. Only understand those
promises rightly, with their due conditions and limitations, and in that sense
wherein he intended them, when he made them: and then never doubt the
performance. For say in good sooth, art thou able to charge him with any breach
of promise hitherto? Have thou ever found, that he has dealt unfaithfully with
thee? Or did thou ever hear that he has dealt unfaithfully with any other?
There is no want of Power in him, that he should not be as big as his word;
there is no want of love in him, that he should not be as good as his word. He
is not as man that he should Number. 23. 9.
repent, or as the Son of man, that he should call back his word. There is no
lightness or inconstancy in him, that there should be Yea and Nay in his
Promises; 1 Cor. 1. 19, 20.
but they are all Yea and Amen. Thy heart can tell thee, thou have often broken
Vow and Promise with him, and dealt unfaithfully in his Covenant: but do not
offer him that indignity, in addition to all thy other injuries, as to measure
him by thy self, to judge of his dealings by thine, and to think him altogether
such a one as thy self, so false, so fickle, so uncertain, as thou art. Far be
Psalm. 50. 21.
all such Thoughts from every one of us. Though we deny him; yet he abides
faithful, and will not, cannot deny himself. We are fleeting and mutable, off 2 Timothy 2. 12. 13. Mal. 3. 9. Heb. 13. 8.
and on, to day not the same we were yesterday, and to morrow perhaps like
neither of the former days: yet ( Ego Deus and non mutor,) he continues
yesterday, to day, and the same for ever. Roll thy self then upon his
providence, and repose thy self with assured confidence upon his Promises: and
Contentment will follow. ''Upon this base the Apostle has bottomed
Contentation, Heb. 13. Be content Heb. 13. 5.
with such things as ye have: for he has said, I will never leave thee nor
forsake thee.

25. The next thing we are to look after in this business, is Humility, and
Poverty of Spirit. It is our pride most that undoeth us: much of our discontent
springs from it. We think highly of our selves: thence our Envy, fretting and
pining away, when we see others, who we think deserve not much better than we
do, to have yet much more than we have; Wealth, Honor, Power, Ease,
Reputation, any thing. Pride and Beggary fort ill together; even in our own
judgments; so hateful a thing is a proud beggar in the Opinion of the World,
that Proverbs have grown from it. We think he better deserves the Stocks or
the Whip, than an Alms, that beggeth at our doors, and yet takes scornfully
what is given him, if it be not of the best in the house. Can we hate this in
others toward our selves, and yet be so blinded with Pride and Self-love, as
not to discern the same hateful disposition in our selves toward our good God?
Extremely beggarly we are. Annon mendicus, qui panem petis? Are we not very
beggars, Job 1. 21. 1 Timothy 6. 7. Mat. 6. 11.
that came naked into the world, and must go naked out of it? That brought
nothing along with us at our coming, and it is certain we shall carry nothing
away with us at our departure? Are we not errant beggars, that must beg, and
that daily, for our daily bread? And yet are we also extremely Proud: and take
the Alms, that God thinks fit to bestow upon us, in great snuff, if it be not
every way to our liking. Alas! what could we look for, if God should give us
but what we deserve? Did we but well consider our own unworthiness; it would
enforce an acknowledgment from us, like that of Jacob, That we are far less
than the least Genesis 32. 10.
of his mercies, etc. We are not worthy so much as to gather the crumbs under
his Table, as our dogs do under ours; who far better deserve it at our hands,
than we do at his. Our hands did not make them nor fashion them: yet they love
us, and follow us, and guard our Houses, and do us pleasures and services many
other ways. But we, although we are his creatures, and the workmanship of his
hands, yet do nothing (as of our selves) but hate him, and dishonor him, and
rebel against him, and by most unworthy provocations daily and minutely tempt
his patience. And what good thing then can we deserve at his hands. Rather what
evil thing do we not deserve, if he should render to us according as we deal
with him? Why should we then be displeased with any of his dispensations?
Having deserved nothing, we may very well hold our selves content with any
thing.

26. A Third help unto Contentation is, to set a just Valuation upon the things
we have. We commonly have our Eye upon those things which we desire, and set so
great a price upon them; that the over-valuing of what we have in chase and
expectation, makes us as much under-value what we have in present possession.
An Infirmity, to which the best of the faithful ( the Father of the faithful
not Genesis 15. 2.
excepted) are subject. It was the speech of no worse a man than Abraham, O
Lord, says he, what will thou give me, seeing I go childless? As if he had
said, All this great increase of Cattle, and abundance of Treasure which thou
have given me, avail me nothing, so long as I have never a Child to leave it
to. It differs not much you see from the speech of discontented Haman, All
this avails Esther 5. 13.
me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai, etc. save that Abraham's speech
proceeded from the weakness of his Faith at that time, and under that
temptation; and Haman's from habitual infidelity, and a heart totally carnal.
It is the admirable goodness of a gracious God, that he accepts the faith, of
his poor servants, be it never so small; and passes by the defects thereof, be
they never so great: Only it should be our care, not to flatter our selves so
far, as to cherish those infirmities, or allow our selves therein; but rather
to strive against them with our utmost strength, that we may overcome the
Temptation. And that is best done, by casting our Eye, as well upon what we
have, and could not well be without; as upon what we fain would have, but might
want. The things the Lord has already lent thee: consider how useful they are
to thee; how beneficial, how comfortable; how ill thou could spare them; how
much worse thou should be than now thou art without them; how many men in the
world that want what thou enjoyest, would be glad with all their hearts to
exchange for it that which thou so much desire. And let these Considerations
prevail with thee, both to be thankful for what God has been pleased already
to give thee, and to be content to want what it is his pleasure yet to
withold from thee.

27. Another help for the same purpose fourthly is, to compare our selves and
our Estates rather with those that are below us, than with those that are above
us. We love Comparisons but too well, unless we could make better use of them.
We run over all our Neighbors in our Thoughts: and when we have so done, we
make our Comparisons so untowardly, that there is no Neighbor we have, but (as
we handle the matter) we are the worse for him: We find in him something or
other, that serves as fuel either to our Pride, or Uncharitableness, or other
corrupt lusts. We look at our poorer Neighbor: and because we are richer than
he, we cast a scornful Eye upon him, and in the pride of our hearts despise
him. We look at our richer Neighbor: and because we are not so full as he, we
cast an Envious Eye at him, and out of the uncharitableness of our hearts
malice him. Thus unhappily do we misplace our Thoughts, or misapply them; and
whatsoever the promises are, draw wretched conclusions from them: as the Spider
is said to suck poison out of every flower. Whereas sanctified wisdom, if it
might be heard, would rather teach us to make a holy advantage of such like
comparisons, for the increase of some precious Graces in us; and namely these
Two of Thankfulness and Contentedness: as the Be gathers honey out of every
weed. And the course is this. Observe thy present corruption, whatever it be,
when it begins to stir within thee; and then make the comparison so, as may
best serve to weaken the Temptation arising from that Lust. As for Example:
When thou find thy self apt to magnify and exalt thy self in thine own
greatness, and puffed up with the conceit of some Excellency (whether real or but
imaginary) in thy self, to swell above thy meaner brethren: then look upwards,
and thou shall see perhaps hundreds above thee, that have somewhat that thou
have not. It may be, the comparing of thy self with them may help to allay the
swelling, and reduce thee to a more sober and humble temper. But when on the
other side, thou find thy self apt to grudge at the prosperity of others,
and to murmur at the scantness of thine own portion: then look downwards, and
thou shall see perhaps ( neque se majori pauperiorum Turbae comparet: hunc
atque hunc superare laboret. Hor. 1. Ser. 1.
) thousands below thee, that want something that thou have. It may be, the
comparing thy self with them, may help to silence all those repining thoughts
and obmurmurations against the wise dispensations of Almighty God. For tell me,
why should one or two richer neighbors be such a grievous eyesore to thee, to
provoke thy discontent: rather than ten or twenty poorer ones a spur to quicken
thee to Thankfulness? If Reason by the instigation of corrupt Nature can teach
thee to argue thus, My house, my farm, my stock, my whole condition is naught;
many a man has better: why should not Reason heightened by Gods Grace teach
thee as well to argue thus, Mine are good enough; many a good man has worse?

28. Fifthly, for the getting of Contentment, it would not a little avail us,
to consider the unsufficiency of those things, the want whereof now
discontenteth us, to give us content if we should obtain them. Not only for
that Reason, that as the things increase, our desires also increase with them;
(which yet is most true, and of very important consideration too; as Solomon
says, He that loves silver, Eccles. 5. 10.
shall not be satisfied with silver:) but for a farther Reason also, because
with the best Conveniences of this life, there are interwoven sundry
inconveniences withal; which for the most part, the eagerness of our desires
will not suffer us to foresee, whilst we have them in chase, but we shall be
sure to find them at length in the possession and use. Whilst we are in the
pursuit of any thing, we think over and over how beneficial it may be to us,
and we promise to our selves much good from it: and our thoughts are so taken
up with such meditations, that we consider it abstractedly from those
discommodiousnesses and encumbrances, which yet inseparably cleave thereunto.
But when we have gotten what we so importunately desired, and think to enter
upon the Enjoyment; we then begin to find those discommodiousnesses and
encumbrances which before we never thought of, as well as those services and
advantages which we expected from it. Now if we could be so wise and provident
beforehand, as to forethink and forecast the inconveniences as well as the
usefulness of those things we seek after: it would certainly bring our desires
to better moderation; work in us a just dis-estimation of these earthly things
which we usually over-prize; and make us the better contented, if we go without
them, O miserum pannum! As he said of his Diadem. What a glorious luster does
the Imperial Crown make, to dazzle the eyes of the beholders, and to tempt
ambition to wade even through a sea of blood, and stretch it self beyond all
the lines of Justice and Religion to get within the reach of it? Yet did a man
but know what legions of fears and cares, like so many restless spirits are
incircled within that narrow round: he could not be excused from the Extremity
of Madness, if he should much envy him that wore it; much less if he should by
villainy or bloodshed aspire to it. When Damocles had ( -- fulgentem gladium
seta equina appensum Cic. 5. Tusc. quaest.
) the sword hanging over his head in a twine-thred, he had little stomach to
eat of those delicacies that stood before him upon the board, which a little
before he deemed ( -- negaret que unquam quenquam beatiorem fuisse. ibid.
) the greatest happiness the world could afford. There is nothing under the
Sun, but is full, not of Vanity only, but also of Vexation. Why then should we
not be well content to be without that thing (if it be the Lords will we should
want it) which we cannot have without much Vanity, and some Vexation withal?

29. In the sixth place, a notable help to Contentment is Sobriety: under which
Name I comprehend both Frugality and Temperance. Frugality is of very
serviceable use, partly to the acquiring, partly to the exercising, of every
man's graces and virtues; as Magnificence, Justice, Liberality, Thankfulness,
etc. and this of Contentation among the rest. Hardly can that man be, either
truly thankful unto God, or much helpful to his friends, or do any great
matters in the way of charity and to pious uses, or keep touch in his promises,
and pay every man his own, (as every honest man should do) nor live a contented
life, that is not frugal. We all cry out against Covetousness (and that justly)
as a base sin; the cause of many evils and mischiefs, and a main opposite to
Contentment. But truly, if things be rightly considered, we shall find
Prodigality to match it as in sundry other respects, so particularly for the
opposition it has to Contentedness. For Contentedness (as the very name gives
it, (...), a self-sufficiency) consists in the mutual and relative
Sufficiency, of the things unto the mind, and of the mind unto the things.
Where Covetousness reigns in the heart, the mind is too narrow for the
things: and where the estate is profusely wasted, the things must needs be too
scant for the mind. So that ( -- ille sinistrorsum, hic dextrorsum abit: un^s
utrique Error, sed variis illudit partibus. Horat. 2. satyr. 3.
) the disproportion is still the same, though it arise not from the same
principle. As in many other things we may observe an unhappy coincidence of
Extremes: contrary causes, for different reasons, producing one and the same
evil effect. ( -- brumae penetrabile frigu^ adurit. Virg. 1. Georg.
) Extreme cold parcheth the grass, as well as Extreme Heat: and Lines drawn
from the opposite parts of the Circumference meet in the Center. Although the
prodigal man therefore utterly disclaim Covetousness, and profess to hate it:
yet does he indeed by his wastfulness pull upon himself a necessity of being
Covetous; and transgresses the Commandment, which says, Thou shall not covet,
as much as the most covetous wretch in the whole world does. The difference is
but this: the one coveteth, that he may have it; the other coveteth, that he
may spend it; as St. James says, He coveteth that he may consume it upon his
lusts. He that will Jam. 4. 3*
fare deliciously every day; or carry a great part in the world, and maintain a
numerous family of idle and unnecessary dependents; or adventure great sums in
gaming or upon matches; or bring up his children too highly; or any other way
stretch himself in his expenses beyond the proportion of his revenues: it is
impossible but he should desire means, wherewithal to maintain the charges he
must be at for the aforesaid ends. Which since his proper revenues (according
to our supposition) will not reach to do: his wits are set on work how to
compass supplies, and to make it out, out of other men's Estates. Hence he is
driven to succor himself by frauds and oppressions, and all those other evils
that spring from the root of Covetousness, And when these also fail (as hold
they cannot long;) 1 Timothy 6. 10.
there is then no remedy, but he must live the remainder of his days upon
borrowing and shifting: whereby he casts himself into debts and dangers,
loses his Credit, or Liberty, or both, and creates to him a world of
discontents. He that would live a contented life, and bear a contented mind, it
stands him upon to be Frugal.

30. Temperance also is of right good use to the same end: that is to say, a
moderate use at all times, and now and then a voluntary forbearance of, and
abstinence from the Creatures, when we might lawfully use them. If we would
sometimes deny our appetites in the use of meats, and drinks, and sleep, and
sports, and other comforts and refreshments of this life; and exercise our
selves sometimes to fastings and wantings, and other hardnesses and austerities
(St. Paul (...), 1 Cor. 9. 27. 1 Timothy 4. 8.
and (...),) we should be the better able sure to undergo them stoutly, and
grudg and shrink less under them, if at any time hereafter by any accident or
affliction we should be hard put to it. We should, in all likelihood, be the
better content to want many things when we cannot have them* if we would now
and then inure our selves, to be as if we wanted them, whilst we have them.

31. Lastly, (for I may not enlarge) that meditation, which was so frequent
with the godly Fathers under both Testaments, (and whereof the more sober sort
among the Heathens had some glimmering light:) That we have here no abiding
Heb. 13. 14. 1 Pet. 2. 11.
City, but seek one to come; That we are here but as strangers and pilgrims in
a foreign land, heaven being our home; and that our continuance in this world,
is but as the lodging of a Traveller in an Inn for a night: this meditation, I
say, if followed home, would much further us in the present learning. The
Apostle seems to make use of it for this very purpose, 1 Timothy 6. We brought
nothing 1 Timothy 6. 7, 8.
into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out: and thence
infers in the very next words, Having food and raiment let us be therewith
content. We forget our selves very much, when we fancy to our selves a kind of
perpetuity here, as if our houses should continue for ever, and our dwelling
places should remain Psalm. 49 11.
from one Generation to another. We think it good being here; here we would
build us Tabernacles, set up our rest here. And that is it, that makes us so
greedy after the things that belong hither, and so sullen and discomposed, when
our Endeavors, in the pursuit of them, prove successless. Whereas if we would
rightly inform our selves, and seriously think of it, what the world is, and
what our selves are; the World, but an Inn, and our selves but passengers: it
would fashion us to more moderate desires, and better composed affections. In
our Inns we would be glad to have wholesome diet, clean lodging, diligent
attendance, and all other things with convenience, and to our liking. But yet
we will be wary what we call for; that we exceed not too much, lest the
Reckoning prove too sharp afterward: and if such things as we are to make use
of there, we find not altogether as we would wish, we do not much trouble our
selves at it, but pass it over; chearing our selves with these thoughts, that
our stay is but for a night; we shall be able sure to make shift with mean
accommodations for one night; we shall be at home ere it be long, where we can
mend our selves, and have things more to our own hearts content. Satiabor cum
apparuerit Gloria. The plenteousness of that house, when we shall arrive at our
own home, will fully satiate our largest desires. In the mean time let the
expectation of that fullness, and the approach of our departure out of this
sorry Inn, sustain our souls with comfort against all the Emptiness of this
world, and whatsoever we meet with in our passage through it, that is any way
apt to breed us vexation or discontent; that we may learn with St. Paul, in
whatsoever estate we are, to be therewith content. God vouchsafe this to us all
for his Dear Sons sake Jesus Christ, etc.

AD AULAM.
The Seventh Sermon.
GREENWICH, JULY, 1638.
Isaiah 52. 3. For thus says the Lord; Ye have sold your selves for naught:
and ye shall be redeemed without Money.
1. THe Speaker is God: that is plain ( For thus says the Lord.) And he
speaks to us: Not to the Jews only (as some perhaps might imagine) but to all
Mankind; And so to us, as well as them: if not in the Literal and immediate
sense (which to me seems so probable, that I make little doubt of it;) yet at
leastwise (which I find not gainsaid by any) in the Analogical, and Spiritual
Sense. The Speech it self presents to our view a Sale, and a Redemption: and
under those Metaphors, represents to our thoughts Man's inexcusable baseness
and Folly in the Sale, Gods admirable power and goodness in the Redemption. The
most wretched Sale that ever was; all passed away, and nothing coming in: But
the most blessed Redemption that ever was; all fetched back again, and nothing
laid out. A Sale, without any profit to us; it got us naught: in the former
part of the verse, (you have sold your selves for naught.) A Redemption without
any charge to us; it cost us naught: in the latter part, ( ye shall be redeemed
without money.) These are the two Points we are to hold us to at this time: the
Sale first, by Sin; and then the Redemption, by Christ.

2. You have sold your selves for naught.] Words not many in our Translations;
but in the Original (as also in the Greek) as few as can be to be a number, but
two: Yet do they fairly yield us these four particulars. 1. The Act: and that
is a bargain of Sale ( ye have sold.) 2. The Object of that Act; the Commodity,
or thing sold, and that is themselves, ( sold your selves.) 3. The
consideration, or Price; (if you will allow that name to a thing of no price;)
and that is nothing, or as good as nothing, ( sold for naught.) 4. The Agent,
the Merchant or Salesman; and that is themselves too, ( Ye have sold your
selves.) To sell, and that themselves, and that for naught; and to do all this
themselves: of these in order.

3. The Act is first; it is a Bargain of Sale: (Ye have sold your selves.) If
we had but deposited our selves with Satan, being so perfidious as he is; it
had been hazard enough, and but too much: for even among Men, if the party that
is trusted have but the Conscience to deny the trust, and the face to for swear
it: he that trusts him may soon come to lose all. But yet in point of right
and to common intendment, he that depositeth any thing in the hand of another,
does only commit it to his custody: both Rei deposita proprietas apud
deponentem manet. l. 17. F. depositi. vel contra.
property and use still reserved to himself. 2. In a Demise a man parts with
more of his interest; he transmitteth together with the possession, the use
also or fruit, of the thing letten or demised, so as the usu fructuarius or
tenant may during his Term use it at his pleasure, and (so far as he is not
limited by special Covenant) make benefit of it to his own most advantage. But
here is yet no Alienation: it is but jus utendi salva substantia. Still the
Property remains where it was: and the Possession too after a time, and when
the term is expired, reverteth to the first owner. 3. A mortgage indeed has in
it something of the Nature of an Alienation: inasmuch as it passes over
Alienatio est omnis actus, per quam dominium transfertur.
Dominium, as well as Rem, and Usumfructum; that is property, and (as you would
say) Ownership, as well as Possession, Use, and Benefit. Yet not absolutely any
of these, but with a defeisance, and under a Condition performable by himself,
so as the Mortgager is upon the point, the proprietary still, if he will
himself: because it is in his own power by performing the condition to make a
defeisance of his former act, and consequently to make the alienation void, and
then he is in statu quo.

4. But in a Bargain of Sale there is a great deal more than in all these.
There Venditio alienatio est rei sus, jurisque in ea sui in alium translatio.
Senec. 5. de benef. 10. (...) vov, (...) Suid. in (...) 1 King. 21. 25.
the Alienation is absolute, and the contract Peremptory: Wherein the Seller
transferreth and makes over to the Buyer, together with the Possession, Use,
and Profits, the very property also of the thing sold; with all his right,
title, claim, and interest therein for ever, without power of revocation, or
any other reservation whatsoever. And this is our Case: this the fact, whereof
we stand indicted in the Text. What the Scripture charge upon Ahab for his
particular, that he had sold himself to work wickedness: is (though not in the
same height of sense, yet) in some degree, more or less chargeable upon all
Mankind. We have all sold our selves to Sin and Satan. Venundati sub peccato,
says St. Paul; and he seems to speak it of the better sort of men too (in
the judgment of many good Interpreters) Romans 7. And then how much more is it
true of the rest? Romans 7. 14.
That they are Carnal, sold under sin.

5. The greater is our Misery, and the more our Presumption: which are the two
Inferences hence. Our Misery first, For by selling our selves over to Sin and
Satan, we have put our selves out of our own, into their Dominion: and (during
that state) remain wholly to be disposed at their pleasure. They are now become
our Lords; and it is not for us to refuse any drudgery, be it never so toytsom
or irksom, whereabout they shall list to employ us. How should it else be
possible for men endowed with reason, some to melt themselves away in Luxury
and brutish Sensuality, as the Voluptuous; othersome to pine themselves lean
with looking at the fatness of another portion, as the Envious; othersome to
run themselves out of breath, sometimes till they burst in the pursuit either
of shadows, as the Ambitious; or of smoke, as the Popular or vainglorious;
othersome, like those that in old time were damnati ad Metalla, to moil
perpetually in lading themselves with thick clay, whereof it would grieve them
to think that ever they should have use, as the Covetous? Were it not that they
are put upon such drudgeries, by their imperious Masters; Sin who reigns like
a Tyrant Romans 6. 12.
in their Mortal Bodies, and will have all his lust obeyed: and Satan who grown
great by this new Purchase (for by it it is, that he claims to be Prince of
the World) sits in the hearts of ungodly men, as in his Throne, and Joh. 11.
16.
there commands like an Emperor: and who may be so bold as to contradict, or
but to say, Domine our ita facis? Acti aginius, is a true saying, in this sense
howsoever. He must needs go, we say, whom the Devil drives: and St. Paul
says, he is the spirit that works in the Children of disobedience. It is but
an Ephesians. 2. 1.
empty flourish then, that licentious men sometimes stand so much upon their
liberty; Joh. 8. 33. Psalm. 12. 4.
saying with them, Ioh. 8. we were always free, and were never in bondage unto
any; or with them in Psalm. 12. Our lips are our own, who is Lord over us? Who
is Lord over you, do you say? No hard matter to tell you that: Even Satan. Your
lips and your tongues are his; your hearts and your hands his; your bodies and
your souls his; all you have, all you are, wholly and entirely his. You have
sold your selves to him, and Emptum cedit in jus emptoris. He has bought you,
and his you are, to have and to hold: he may now do what he will with you, (if
Non mi or Quod Diabolus istud po^ uit: sed quod Deus permisit. Bern. Epist. 141.
God suffer him) and you must abide it. This being the case of us all by reason
of Sin (till we be restored by Grace) I need say no more to let us see, what
misery we have pulled upon our selves by this Sale.

6. But there is another thing too in this Sale, besides our Misery, meet for
us to take knowledge of: and that is our high and intolerable Presumption,
joined with extreme injustice and unthankfulness. God made us to do him
service: and his we are, his Creatures, his Servants. Now then Quis tu? What
have Romans 14. 4.
thou to do to judge, says St. Paul? May not I say much more? What have thou
to do to sell another Servant? And that invito, nay, inconsulto Domino;
without any License of Alienation from the chief Lord, nay, without so much as
ever asking his consent. If God were pleased to leave us at first in manu
consilii, and to trust us so far as to commit the keeping of our selves to our
selves: he had no meaning therein to turn us loose, neither to quit his own
right to us and our services. Nay, may we not with great reason think, that he
meant to oblige us so much the more unto himself, by making us his depositories
in a trust of that nature? As if a King should commit to one of his meanest
Servants, the custody of some of his Royal houses or forts, he should by that
very trust lay a new obligation upon him of fealty over and above that common
allegiance which he owes him as a Subject. Now if such a Servant, so entrusted
by the King his Master, should then take upon him, of his own head, without his
Masters privity, to contract with a Stranger, perhaps a Rebel or Enemy, for the
passing over the said House or Fort into his hands: Who would not condemn such
a person, for such an act of ingratitude, injustice and presumption, in the
highest degree? Yet is our injustice, ingratitude and presumption, by so much
more infinitely heinous than his, in selling our selves from God, our Lord and
Master, into the hands of Satan a Rebel, and an Enemy to God and all goodness:
By how much the disparity is infinitely more betwixt the eternal God, and the
greatest of the Sons of Men, than betwixt the highest Monarch in the world, and
the lowest of his Subjects.

7. So much for the Act: the other particulars belong to it as circumstances
thereof. To a Sale they say three things are required, Res, Pretium, and
Consensus: a Commodity to be sold, a Price to be paid, and Consent of Parties.
Here they are all. And whereas I told you in the beginning, that in this Sale
was represented to us Man's inexcusable baseness and folly; You shall now
plainly see each Particle thereof made good, in the three several
circumstances. In the Commodity, our Baseness; that we should sell away our
very selves: in the Price, our folly; that we should do it for a thing of
naught: in the consent, our inexcusableness in both; that an act so base and
foolish should yet be our own voluntary act and deed. And first for the
Commodity, (you have sold your selves.)

8. Lands, Houses, Cattle, and other like possessions made for man's use, are
the proper subject matter of trade and commerce; and so are fit to pass from
man to man by Sales and other Contracts. But that Man, a Creature of such
excellency, stamped with the Image of God, endowed with a reasonable Soul, made
capable of Grace and Glory, should prostare in foro, become merchantable ware,
and be chaffered in the Markets and Fairs: I suppose had been a thing never
heard of in the World to this hour; had not the overflowings of Pride, and
Cruelty, and Covetousness, washed out of the hearts of Men, the very
impressions both of Religion and Humanity. It is well, and we are to bless God,
and under God to thank our Christian Religion and pious Governors for it; that
in these times and parts of the world, we scarce know what it means. But that
it was generally practiced all the world over in some former ages, and is at
this day in use among Turks and Pagans, to sell men: ancient Histories, and
modern Relations will not suffer us to be ignorant. We have mention of such
Sales even in Scripture; where we read of some that sold their own brother, as
Jacobs Sons Genesis 37. 28. Mat. 26. 15.
did Joseph; and of one that sold his own Master, as the Traitor Judas did
Christ. Basely and wretchedly both: Envy made them base; and Covetousness him.
Only in some cases of Necessity, as for the preservation of Life, or of liberty
o^ Conscience, when other means fail, God permitted to his own people to sell
themselves, or Children, into perpetual Bondage: and Moses from him gave Laws
and Ordinances touching that Matter, Lev. 25.

9. But between the Sale in the Text, and all those other, there are two main
differences: Both which does exceedingly aggravate our baseness. The first,
that no man could honestly sell another, nor would any man willingly sell
himself, unless enforced thereunto by some urgent necessity. But what
necessity, I pray you, that we should sell our selves out of Gods, and out of
our own hands, into the hands of Sin and Satan? Were we not well enough before?
Full enough, and safe enough? Was our Masters service so hard that it might not
be abiden? Might we not have lived? Lived? Yea, and that happily, and freely,
and plentifully: and that for ever in his service. What was it then? Even as it
is with many fickle servants abroad in the World, that being in a good service,
cannot tell when they are well, but must be ever and anon flitting, though many
times they change for the worse: so it was only our Pride and Folly, and a fond
conceit we had of bettering our condition thereby, that made us not only
without any apparent necessity, but even against all good reason and duty, thus
basely to desert our first service, and to sell our selves for bondslaves to
Sin and Satan.

10. The other difference makes the matter yet a great deal worse on our side.
For in selling of slaves, for so much as bodily service was the thing chiefly
looked after; therefore as the body, in respect of strength, health, age, and
other abilities, was deemed more or less fit for service, the price was
commonly proportioned thereafter. Hence by a customary speech among the
Graecians, (...), etc. Anthol. 1. 12.
slaves were called (...), that is, bodies: and they that traded in that kind
(...). Chrysostom. 1 Cor. ser. 40. V. Rad. 2 Rer. Forner. quorid. 26. and Casaub. in
Athen. 5. 10. Rev. 18. 13. Epiphan. in An^^rat. Plato
(...), as you would say merchants of bodies And so the Word (...) is rendered,
Rev. 18. Mancipia or slaves. Epiphanius gives us the reason of that use of the
word, (...) says he, etc. because all the command that a man can exercise over
his slaves, is terminated to the body, and cannot reach the soul. And the soul
is the better part of man; and that by so many degrees better, that in
comparison thereof the body has been scarce accounted a considerable part.
(...), could the Greek Philosopher say: and the Latin Orator: Cicer. in Somn.
Scip.
Men's cujusque is est quisque. The soul is in effect the whole man; -- corpus
quasi vas est, a^t aliquod animi receptaculum Cic. 1. Tuscul. (...). Chrysostom. in
Mat. ser. 34. Luke 9. 25.
The body but the shell of him: the body but the Casket, the soul the Jewel. It
is observable, that whereas we read, Mat. 16. ( What shall it profit a man, if
he gain the whole World and lose his own soul?) instead thereof we have it,
Luke 9. thus, ( if he gain the whole world and lose himself?) So that every
man's soul is himself: and the body but -- videt enim -- appendi^em animi esse
corpus. Cicer. apud Nonnium in Appendix.
an appurtenance of him. Yet such is our baseness, that we have thus trucked
away our selves with the appurtenances; that is, both our souls and our bodies.
We detest Witches and Conjurers (and that worthily) as wicked and base People;
because we suppose them to have made either an express, or at leastwise an
implicit contract with the Devil. Yet have our rebellions against God put us
in the same predicament with them. Verily Rebellion 1 Samuel 15. 23.
is as witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15. Ours is so: since by it we have made a Contract
with the Devil, and sold our selves to him, souls and all.

11. Yet are base-minded people most an end covetous enough: they will hardly
part with any thing, but they will know for what. Ecquid erit pretii? What will
you give me? is a ready Question in every man's mouth that offers to sell.
Joseph's Brethren, though they were desirous to be rid of him, yet would have
Genesis 37. 28. Mat. 26. 15.
somewhat for him: and Judas would not be a Traitor for naught. They got twenty
pieces of silver for their Brother; and he thirty for his Master. And those
oppressors in Amos 2. that sold the needy for a pair of shoes, would be
content Amos 2. 6.
with a small matter, so they might be on the taking hand. Esau had a very
sorry Heb. 12. 16.
recompense, a morsel of meat, and a mess of broth, for his own birthright,
and his fathers blessing: yet that was something ( jus pro jure) and something,
we say, has some savor. But to let all go, and to get nothing for it, this is
our singular folly: in the next circumstance, that of the Price ( Ye have sold
your selves for naught.)

12. A heavy charge, may some say! but is there any truth in it? or is there
indeed any sense in it? Examine that first. It is well known there can be no
buying and selling without the intervention of a Price: Nulla em^^io sine
pretio esse potest. Justin. 3. Justit. 24.
Pactio pretii is by the Learned put into the definition, and therefore is
conceived to be of the essence of this kind of contract. (...). Anth. 4. c. 12.
(...). Suid.
(...), is the old formula for buying and selling. So that if there be no price
paid, or to be paid, nothing given or to be given in compensation or exchange
for what is received; it may be a Contract of some other species, but it can be
no Sale. It seems then to be a mere implicat, a contradiction in adjecto, to
say that a thing is sold, and yet for nothing.

13. But here we have a double help to salve it, in either of the Terms one.
First, for the term of selling: True it is, in strict propriety of speech
buying and selling cannot be without a price. But Divine (especially
Prophetical) expressions, are not ever tied to such strictnesses. We read
therefore in the Scriptures, both of buying and selling, without a price; Of
buying without a price, ( Come buy Isa. 58. 1.
wine and milk without money, and without silver, Isa. 58.) And of selling
without Psalm. 44. 12.
a price; ( Thou sellest thy people for naught, and take no money for them,
Psalm. 44.) And likewise here in the Text. Nay more, that strictness of
propriety is not always observed in other Authors. Pratei. in lex. juris.
Vendendi verbum ad omnem alienationem pertinet, says a learned Civilian; The
word selling may be extended to every Contract, the effect whereof is an
alienation. And if so, then should we have given away our selves gratis (as it
is said of some, Ephesians. 4. that Ephesians. 4. 19.
they have given themselves over to lasciviousness, (...) is the word there:)
yet might we be said to have sold our selves in this construction; that is, to
have made over our selves to Satan by an absolute alienation: whereby
whatsoever right and interest we had in our selves before (were* it more or
less, were it any or none) is now conveyed unto, and settled upon him.

14. Another help we have in the other Term for naught. For (to say truth) we
do receive a price, such as it is. He is content to allow us something; he
knows we would not else bargain. Perhaps some little profit, or pleasure, or
ease, or honor, or applause, or revenge; some small trifle or other: which
being of very little worth or use, and so not to be taken for a valuable
consideration, may therefore be called naught or nothing: not simply or
absolutely nothing, but comparatively and respectively nothing, Even as in our
common speech, when a man would express that he has sold a thing much under
worth, the forms are ordinary: I have even given it away; I have parted with it
for a song; I have sold it for nothing. And this common usage of the Phrase, as
it well preserves the sense, so does it also (that I may stop two gaps with
one Bush) justify the truth of this charge in my Text ( you have sold your
selves for naught) for between mere nothing, and as good as nothing, the
difference is not great, in point of discretion.

15. Here then is our folly in this Sale, that on the one side we shamefully --
adeo nihil est cuique se vilius, Senec. Epist. 42.
underprised what we were to part with, and on the other side extremely
overvalued what we were to receive in exchange for it. Renowned is (...). Hom.
Il. z.
Glaucus for his folly in Homer, for changing armor with Diomedes with such
palpable disadvantage, that Proverbs came of it. And we laughed at the silliness
of the poor Indians, when the Portugals came first among them, for parting with
a massy lump of Gold-ore for a three-half penny knife. Yet is our folly far
beyond theirs; they had something, yea, and in the same kind too; he brass,
they Iron, for Gold: that is yet one Metal for another, though there be great
difference in the worth. But what sottishness possessed us, thus to barter away
Coelum pro coeno: Heaven for dung, Paradise for an apple, our selves for
nothing?

16. But flesh and blood is ready to justify its own Act, (as ever they that
are guiltiest of folly, are the shiest to own it) and thus will argue it. If we
have sold our selves to Satan; yet the advantage seems to be on our side. We
are sure we have got something from him, say it be but small, a vanity, a toy;
yet such a toy as we are pleased withal. But he has got a verier toy from us,
a very nothing. For we have but sold our selves, and we are but men: and what
is man, but like a thing of naught, Psalm. 144. Lay him in the balance with
Vanity it Psalm. 144. 4. -- 62. 9.
self, he will prove the verier Vanity of the two; that will overweigh him,
Psalm. 62. If any man should chance to think better of himself, and take himself
to be something, there is one will tell him that he mistaketh the matter, and
deceives himself, for he is nothing, Gal. 6. Nay, less than nothing, says our
Prophet, Gal. 6. 3. Isa. 40. 17.
Isa. 40. By all which it should seem we have rather cheated the Devil, than he
us; and have gotten the better end of him: and are so far from having parted
with something for nothing, as we are charged; as that quite contrary we have
rather gotten something for nothing. Or at leastwise, if we have but vanity
for vanity; we a thing of naught from him, he a thing of naught from us, (
fumum accepit, fumum vendidit) as it is in the Apothegm; Or in an Epigram I
have heard of two dunces and their disputation ( Attulit ille nihil, retulit
ille nihil;) we are yet upon even terms, and that can deserve no great
imputation of folly.

17. Indeed should we speak of our bodies only, these mortal, corruptible, vile
Romans 6. 12. 1 Cor. 15. 50. Phil. 3. 21.
bodies (as we find them termed by all those Epithets;) or look upon our whole
nature, as it is now embased by it; or even taken at the best, and set in
comparison against God; (in one of which three respects it must be understood,
wherever the Scriptures speak of our worthlesness or nothingness:) there might
then be some place for these Allegations. But take the whole man together, soul
as well as body, yea, chiefly that, and state as him he was before he was sold,
(as so we must do, if we will give a true judgment of the fact) and compare it
but with other Creatures (which is but reasonable;) and then all the
allegations aforesaid are quite beside the purpose. The Soul is a most rich,
indeed an inestimable commodity; Pretiosa anima, says Solomon, Prove. 6. the
precious Soul. So Prove* 6. 27.
he says, but that speech is somewhat too general, he does not tell us how
precious. Mic. 6. 7. Mat. 16. 26.
Indeed he does not; for in truth he could not: it is beyond his or any man's
skill, to give an exact praisement of it. There is somewhat bidden for it, Mic.
6. But such a contemptible price, that it is rejected with scorn; though it
seem to sound loud, ( thousands of Rams, and ten thousands of Rivers of Oil.)
He that alone knew the true worth of a soul, (both by his natural knowledge,
being the eternal wisdom of God; and by his experimental knowledge, having
bought so many, and paid a full price for them) our blessed Redeemer, the Lord
Jesus, assures us there is (...). Chrysostom ad Theodor. Laps^m. sermon. 1. 6. ed
it. Sav. 58.
no (...). All the universal world affords not a valuable compensation for
it, Mat. 16. we will rest upon his word for this, as well as we may, and spare
further proof.

18. And then the inference will be clear; that there never was in the World
any such folly as sin is; any such fools as sinners are (...), as he said: and
Solomon puts the fool upon the sinner, I am not able to say how often. That we
should thus sell and truck away these precious Souls of ours, the very* (...),
etc. Plato. -- divinae particulam aurae. Hor. 2. Sermon. 2. (...). Naz. Iamb. 18.
Col. 2. 22.
exhalations and arrachements (if I may so speak) of the breath of God; not
estimable with any other thing, than with the precious blood of God: and that
not for the whole world (which had been to our incomparable disadvantage) no
nor yet for any great portion thereof, but for a very small pittance of it,
whereof we can have no assurance neither that we should hold it an hour; and
which* even whilst we have it, and think to enjoy it, perishes in the using,
and deceives our expectations! Which of us laying the Premises to heart, can
do less than beshrew his own grievous folly for so doing; and beg pardon for it
at the hands of God, as David did after he had numbered the people, ( I have 1 Samuel 24. 10
sinned greatly in that I have done, and now I beseech thee, O Lord, take away
mine iniquity, for I have done very foolishly.)

19. And the more cause have we most bumbly to beg pardon for our baseness and
folly herein, by how much less we are any way able to excuse either of both, it
being our own voluntary act and deed. For so is the next particular, ( Ye have
sold your selves.) Naturally, what is blameworthy we had rather put off upon
any body else, light where it will, than take it home to our selves. V. Cic. 1.
ad Heren. Quintil. 4, etc.
Translatio criminis, the shifting of a fault, is by Rhetoricians made a branch
of* their Art. We need not go to their Schools to learn it: Nature and our
Motherwit will prompt us sufficiently thereunto: we brought it from the womb,
sucked it from the breasts of our mother Eve. This base and foolish act,
whereof we now Genesis 3.
speak, how loath are we to own it? How do we strive to lay the whole burden and
blame of it upon others: or if we cannot hope to get our selves quite off, yet
(as men use to do in common payments and taxes) we plead hard to have bearers
and partners, that may go a share with us, and ease us (if not a toto, yet) at
leastwise a tanto, and in some part. But it will not be. Still Perditio tua ex
te: Osea 13. 9.
it will fall all upon us at the last, when we have done what we can.

20. We have but one of these three ways to put it off; a fourth I cannot
imagine; By making it either Gods act, who is the original owner; or Adams act,
who was our Progenitor; or Satan's act, who is the Purchaser. If any of these
will hold, we are well enough; Let us try them all. It should seem the first
will: for is there not Text for it? How should one of them chase a thousand
Deuteronomy. 32. 30
(says Moses) except their rock had sold them, Deuteronomy. 32. and God was their
Psalm. 44. 12.
rock. So David, Psalm. 44. Thou have sold thy people for naught: and sundry
times Judge. 2. 14.
in the Book of Judges we read how God sold Israel, sometimes into the hands of
one enemy, and sometimes of another. Very right. But none of all this is spoken
of the Sale now in Question: it is meant of another manner of Sale, which is
consequent to this, and presupposes it. God indeed sells us over to
punishment, (which is the Sale meant in those places) but not till we have
first sold our selves over to sin, which is the sale in this place. We first
most unjustly sell away our souls, and then he most justly sells away our
bodies, and our liberty, and our peace, and our credit, and the rest.

21. Let us beware then, whatsoever we do, we do not charge God wrongfully, by
making him in the least degree the Author of our sins, or but so much as a
party, or an accessory to our follies; either directly or indirectly. Himself
disclaimeth it utterly, and casts it all upon us, Isa. 50. 1. Which of my
Creditors is it to whom I have sold you? If it were my deed, deal punctually,
tell me when, and where, and to whom; But if it were not, why do you lay it to
my charge? Behold for your iniquities have you sold your selves. It was merely
your own doing: and if you suffer for it, blame your selves, and not me.

22. Hac non successit: We must try another way, and see if we can leave it
upon Adam. For did not he sell us many a fair year before we were in reru^^
^atura? And if the Father sell away the inheritance from his ^nborn child, how
can he do with all? And if he cannot help it, why should he be blamed for it?
Must our teeth be set on edge with the Grapes our Grand father ate, and not we?
It must be confessed, the first Sale was his Personal Act, by which he passed
away both himself and all his Posterity; and so were we venditi antequam editi,
sold a long while before we were born. And that Sale is still of force against
us, (I mean that of Original sin till it be annulled by Baptism) inasmuch as
being virtually in his loins, when he made that Contract, we are presumed to
have given our virtual consent thereunto. But there is another part of the Sale
which lies most against us, whereto our own actual consent has passed in
confirmation, and for the further ratification of our forefathers act: when
for satisfaction of some ungodly lust or other, we condescended by committing
sin in our own persons, to strengthen Satan's title to us, whatever it was, as
much as lay in us. Like the unthrifty Heir of some unthrifty Father, who when
he comes at Age, for a little spending-money in hand, is ready to do any
further act that shall be required of him, for the confirmation of his Fathers
act, who had long before sold away the Lands from him. Whatever then we may
impute of the former, I mean of original guilt to Adam: yet we must take the
latter, I mean our actual transgressions, wholly and solely to our own selves.

23. Nor can we, thirdly, lay the blame upon Satan, or his Instruments; which
is our last and commonest refuge. Serpens decepit was Eves Plea; and Genesis 3. 13.
she pleaded but truth: for the Serpent had indeed beguiled her; St. Paul has
2 Cor. 11. 3.
said it after her twice over. Esau after he had sold his birthright his own
self, yet accused his brother for supplanting him. Aaron for making the Calf,
and 1 Timothy 2. 14. Exodus 32. 22. 1 Samuel 15. 21.
Saul for sparing the Cattle; both contrary to God's express Command, yet both
lay it upon the people. Others have done the like, and still do, and will do to
the Worlds end. But alas! these Fig Leaves are too thin to hide our nakedness:
all these excuses are insufficient to discharge us from being the authors of
our own destruction. Say Satan be a cunning Cheater, (as he is no less!) who
should have looked to that? Had not God endowed us with understanding, to
discern his most subtle snares, and with liberty of Will, to decline them? Say
he do tempt us perpetually; and by most sly insinuations seek to get within
us, and to steal away our hearts; That is the utmost he can do: a Tempter he
is: and that a shrewd one; (...) (he has his name from Mat. 4. 1.
it;) yet he is but a Tempter, he cannot enforce us to anything, without our
consent: and God has given us power, and God has given us charge too, not to
consent. Say ungodly men (who are his Agents) cease not by plausible
persuasions, importunities, and all the engagements they can pretend, to
solicit and entice us to evil: Yet, if we resolve and hold, not to consent,
Qui suo sine alieno impulsu, cadere potest, aliem^ abs^; suo cadere non potest,
Bern. ser. 85. Genesis 30. 37. -- 8.
they cannot hurt us. My son, if sinners entice thee consent thou not, Prove. 1.
10. Say they lay many a cursed example before us, as Jacob did, pilled rods in
the sheep troughs; or cast stones of offense in our way! Have we not a Rule to
walk by, by which we ought to guide our selves, and not by the examples of men?
And whereto serve our eyes in our heads, but to look to our feet, that we may
so order our steps, as not to dash our foot against a stone?

24. Certainly no man can take harm but from himself. Let no man then Jam. 1.
13.
when he is tempted, and yields, say he is tempted of God: for God tempts
no man, says St. James; that is, does not so much as endeavor to do it. Nay,
I may add further, Let no man when he is tempted, say he is tempted of Satan.
That is, let him not think to excuse himself by that: For even Satan infirmus
hostis est qui non potest vincere nisi volentem. Epist. Incerti ad Demetriad.
cap. 25. -- 14.
tempts no man in that sense and cum effectu. Though he endeavor it all he
can; yet, it cannot take effect, unless we will. St. James therefore concludes
positively, that every man's temptation, if it take effect, is merely from his
own lust. It is then our own act and deed, that we are Satan's Vassals:
Disclaim it we cannot: and whatsoever misery or mischief ensues thereupon, we
ought not to impute to any other than our selves alone. He could never have
laid any claim to us, if we had not consented to the bargain, and yielded to
sell our selves.

25. Of the Sale hitherto; I come now to the Redemption, the more Evangelical,
and comfortable part of the Text. And as in the Sale we have seen man's
inexcusable baseness and folly in the several circumstances: so we may now
behold Gods admirable power and grace in this Redemption. His Power, that he
does it so effectually. The thing shall be done, ( Ye shall be redeemed.) His
Grace* that he does it so freely, without any money of ours. ( Ye shall be
redeemed without money.)

26. First, the work to be effectually done. It is here spoken in the future (
Ye shall be Redeemed;) not only, nor perhaps so much, because it was a Prophecy
of a thing then to come, which now since Christ's coming in the flesh is
actually accomplished: but also, and especially, to give us to understand, that
when God is pleased to Redeem us, all the Powers on Earth, and in Hell, cannot,
shall not, hinder it. By the Levitical Law, if a man had sold himself for Lev.
25. 26.
a bondslave, his Brother, or some other near Friend, might redeem him: or if
ever God should make him able, he might redeem himself. If this had been all
our hope, we might have waited till our eyes had sunk in their holes, and yet
the work never the nearer to be done: for never would man have been found able,
either to redeem his own soul, or to make agreement for his brothers. Psalm. 49.
8.
It would cost more to redeem their souls, than any man had to lay down: so
that of necessity he must let that alone for ever. But when the Son of God 1
Cor. 1. 30.
himself sets in, and is content to be made of God to us Redemption: the
Isa. 53. 10.
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand, and the work shall go on
wondrous happily and successfully.

27. His Power, his Love, and his Right do all assure us thereof. First, his
Power. Our Redeemer is strong and mighty, even the Lord of Hosts. And he Jer.
50. 34.
had need be so: for he that has us in possession is strong and mighty; Vir
fortis armatus in the Parable, Luke 11. He buckleth his Armor about him, Luke
11. 21: -- 22.
and stands upon his guard with a resolution to maintain what he has
purchased, and to hold possession if he can. But then when a stronger than he
comes upon him, and overcomes him, breaks into his house, binds him, and
having bruised his head, takes away from him his armor wherein he trusted
(the Law, Sin, Death and Hell:) there is no remedy but he must yield perforce
Genesis 3. 15.
what he cannot hold, and suffer his house to be ransacked, and his goods and
possessions to be carried away. Greater is he that is in you (says St. John) 1 John 4. 6.
that is, Christ: than he that is in the world; that is, the Devil. Christ came
into the world on purpose to destroy the works of the Devil: and he did
atchieve 1 John 3. 8.
what he came for; he has destroyed them. And amongst his other works he has
destroyed this purchase also; wrung the evidences out of his hand, even the
Col. 2. 14.
handwriting that was against us; and having blotted, defaced, and cancelled
it, took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross.

28. Such was his Power: his Love secondly not less; which made him as willing
as he was able, to undertake this work of our redemption. In his love and in
his pity he redeemed them, Isa. 63. 9. There is such a height, and depth, and
Ephesians. 3. 18.
length, and breadth in that Love; such a (...) in every dimension of it, as
none but an infinite understanding can fathom. Sic Deus dilexit: So God loved
Joh. 3. 16.
the world; But how much that so contains, no tongue or wit of man can reach.
Nothing expresses it better to the life, than the work it self does. Joh. 1.
14. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Gal.* 3. 13.
That the Word should be made Flesh; that the holy One of God should be made
sin; that God blessed for ever should be made a curse; that the Lord of life
and glory should suffer an inglorious death, and pour out his own most precious
blood, to ransom such worthless, thankless, graceless Traitors, as we were,
that had so desperately made our selves away; and that into the hands of his
deadliest enemy, and that upon such poor and unworthy conditions! O altitudo!
Love incomprehensible: It swalloweth up the sense and understanding of Men and
Angels; fitter to be admired and adored with silence, than blemished with any
our weak Expressions.

29. I leave it therefore, and go on to the next, his Right. When de facto we
sold our selves to Satan, we had de jure, no power, or right at all so to do,
being we were not our own: and so in truth the title is naught, and the sale
void: Yet it is Diaboli in hominem jus, etsi non just acquisitum, just tamen
permissum. Bern. Epist. 190.
good against us however: we may not plead the invalidity of it: for so much as
in reason no man ought to make advantage of his own act. Our act then barreth
us: But yet it cannot bar the right owner from challenging his own wheresoever
he find it. And therefore we may be well assured, God will not suffer the
Devil, who is but malae fidei possessor, an intruder and a cheater, quietly to
enjoy what is Gods, and not his: but he will eject him (we have that word, Ioh.
12. 21. Ejicietur, now is the Prince of this world cast out) and recover out of
his possession that which he has no right at all to hold.

30. Sundry inferences we might raise hence, if we had time; I may not insist:
yet I cannot but touch at three duties which we owe to God for this Redemption;
because they answer so fitly, to these three last mentioned assurances. We owe
him Affiance, in respect of his Power; in requital of his Love, Thankfulness;
and in regard of his Right, Service. First, the consideration of his Power, in
our Redemption, may put a great deal of comfort and confidence into us: that,
having now redeemed us, if we do but cleave fast to him, and revolt not again,
he will protect us from Sin and Satan, and all other enemies and pretenders
whatsoever. O Israel fear not, for I have redeemed thee, Isa. 43. If then Isa.
43. 1.
the Devil shall seek by any of his wiles or suggestions at any time to get us
over to him again (as he is an unwearied solicitor, and will not lose his
claim by discontinuance:) Let us then look to that Cornu salutis, that horn of
salvation, Luke 1. 69.
that God has raised up for us in Christ our Redeemer, and fly thither for
succor as to the horns of the Altar, (saying with David, Psalm 119. I am Psalm.
119. 94.
thine, oh save me,) and we shall be safe. In all inward temptations, in all
outward distresses, at the hour of death, and in the day of judgment, we may
with great security commit the keeping our souls to him, both as a faithful
Creator, and as a powerful Redeemer: saying once more with David, (into thy
hands I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord thou God of
truth,) Psalm. 31. 6.

31. Secondly, The consideration of his love in our Redemption should quicken
us to a thankful acknowledgment of his great and undeserved goodness toward
us. Let them give thanks whom the Lord has redeemed, and delivered from the
Psalm. 107. 2.
hands of the enemy, Psalm. 107. Let all men, let all creatures do it: but let
them especially. If the blessings of corn, and wine, and oil, of health, and
peace, and plenty, of deliverance from sicknesses, pestilences, famines, and
other calamities, can so affect us, as to provoke at least some overly and
superficial forms of thanksgiving from us: how carnal are our minds, and our
thoughts earthly, if the contemplation of the depth of -- just ^^^ addictus,
sed misericorditer liberatus. Bernard. Epist. 19^. Luke 1. 68.
the riches of God mercy, poured our upon us in this great work of our
Redemption, do not even ravish our hearts with an ardent desire to pour them
out unto him again in Hymns, and Psalms, and Songs of Thanksgiving, with a
Benedictus in our mouths, ( Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has
visited and redeemed his people.)

32. Thirdly, The consideration of his Right should bind us to do him service.
We were his before, for he made us; and we ought him service for that. But
Psalm. 100. 3.
now we are his more than before, and by a new title; for he has bought us,
and paid for us: and we owe him more service for that. The Apostle therefore
urges it as a matter of great equity: you are not your own, but his; therefore
1 Cor. 6. 19. 20.
you are not to satisfy your selves by doing your own lusts, but to glorify
him by doing his will. When Christ redeemed us by his blood, his purpose was to
redeem us unto God, (Rev. 5. 9.) and not to our selves: and to redeem us from
our vain conversation, (1 Pet. 1. 18.) and not to it. And he therefore
delivered us out of the hands of our enemies, that we might the more freely,
and securely, and without fear serve him in holiness and righteousness all the
days of our lives, Luke 1. 74.
Luke 1. which being both our bounden duty, and the thing withal so very
reasonable; we have the more to answer for, i^ we do not make a conscience of
it to perform it accordingly. He has done his part (and that which he was no
way bound unto) in redeeming us; and he has done it to purpose, done it
effectually: Let it be our care to do our part (for which their lie so many
obligations upon us) in serving him; and let us also do it to purpose, do it
really, and thoroughly, and constantly,

33. Thus is our Redemption done effectually: it is also done freely; which is
the only point now remaining. Not for price, nor reward, Isa. 45. 13. but
freely and without money here in the Text. Nor need we here fear another
contradiction. For the meaning is not that there was no price paid at all; but
that there was none paid by us: we laid out nothing toward this great
Purchase, there went none of our money to it. But otherwise, that there was a
price paid, the Scriptures are clear: You are bought with a price, says St.
Paul, 1 Cor. 6. and he 1 Cor. 6. 20. -- 7. 23. Man. 20. 28. 1 Timothy 2. 6.
says it over again, Chap. 7. He that paid it calls it (...), a ransom, that
is as much as to say a price of Redemption: and his Apostle somewhat more,
(...), which implies a just and satisfactory price, full as much as the thing
can be worth. Yet not paid to Satan, in whose possession we were; for we have
found already, that he was but an Usurper, and his title naught. He had but
bought of us: and we by our sale could convey unto him no more right than we
had our selves: which was just none at all. Our Redeemer therefore would not
enter into any capitulation with him, or offer to him any Terms of composition:
But thought good rather in pursuance of his own right to use his power, And so
he vindicated us from him by main strength: with his own right hand, Psalm. 98.
2.
and with his holy arm he got himself the victory, and us liberty, without any
price or ransom paid him.

34. But then unto Almighty God his Father, and our Lord, under whose heavy
Curse we lay, and whose just vengeance would not be appeased toward us for our
grievous presumption, without a condign satisfaction: to him, I say, there was
a price paid by our Redeemer, and that the greatest that ever was paid for any
purchase since the world began. Not silver and gold, says St. Peter, 1 Pet. 1.
18.
which being corruptible things are not valuable against our immortal and
incorruptible souls; But even himself, in whom are absconditi thesauri, amassed
and hidden all the treasures of the wisdom of God, and even the whole riches of
his Col. 2. 3.
grace; treasure enough to redeem a whole world of sinners. Take it
collectively, or distributively; singula generum, or genera singulorum; this
way, or that way, Psalm. 130. 7.
or which way you will; in Christ there is copiosa redemptio, redemption
plenty, and enough for all if they will but accept it. Take all mankind singly
one by one; He gave himself for me, says St. Paul in one place. Take them
altogether Gal 2. 20. 1 Timothy 2. 6.
in the lump, He gave himself a ransom for all; in another.

35. Now for a man to give himself, what is it else, but to give his soul, (for
that is himself, as we heard before) and his life, for vita in anim^, the life
is in the soul: and these he gave. He gave up his soul (when thou shall make
his soul an offering for sin, Isa. 53. 10.) and he laid down his life (the Son
of man Mat. 10. 28.
came to give his life a ransom for many, Mat. 10.) More than this in love he
could Joh. 15. 13.
not give; for what greater love, than to lay down ones life? And less than
this Rom 6. 23.
in justice he might not give: for Death by the Law being the wages of sin,
there could be no Redemption from death so as to satisfy the Law, without the
death of the Redeemer.

36. Yea, and it must be a bloody death too: for anima in sanguine, the life is
Heb. 9. 22.
in the blood, and without shedding of blood there can be no remission, no
redemption. All those bloody sacrifices of Bulls and Goats, and Lambs in the
Old Testament: all those frequent sprinklings of blood, upon the door posts,
upon the book, upon the people, upon the tabernacle, and upon all the vessels
of ministry; and all those legal purifications in which blood was used (as
almost all things are by the Law purged with blood, Heb. 9.) they were all but
so many types and shadows Heb 9. 22. -- 12. 24.
prefiguring this blood of springling; which speaks so many good things for
us, pacifieth the fierce anger of God toward us, purges us from all sins, and
Col. 1. 20.
redeemeth us from hell and damnation. I mean the meritorious blood of the
Cross, the most precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, 1 Pet.
1. 18.

37. But can there be worth enough, may some say, in the blood of a Lamb, of
one single Lamb, to be a valuable compensation for the sins of the whole world?
First, this was agnus singularis, a Lamb of special note; not such another in
the whole flock, All we like sheep have gone astray: but so did this Lamb
never. All of us Isa. 53. 6. 1 Pet. 1. 19.
like the increase of Labans flock, speckled or ring-streaked, but this Lamb
(...), if Momus himself were set to search, he could not yet find the least
spot or blemish. A cunninger searcher than he has pried narrowly into every
corner of his life; who if there had been any thing amiss, would have been sure
to have spied it and proclaimed it, but could find nothing. The Prince of this
world Joh. 14. 30.
comes and has nothing in me. That is something; his Innocence. But if that
be not enough, (for the Angels are also innocent) behold then more. He is
secondly, Joh. 1. 29.
Agnus Dei, the Lamb of God; that is, the Lamb which God has appointed and set
apart for this service by special designation: so as either this party must do
it, or none. There is no other name given under heaven, no nor in heaven
neither, Acts 4. 12. Joh 6. 27.
nor above, by which we can be redeemed. Him, and him alone, has God the
Father sealed: and by virtue of that Seal authorized and enabled to undertake
this great work. Or if you have not yet enough, (for it may be said, what if it
had been the pleasure of God to have sealed one of the Angels?) Behold then
thirdly, that which is beyond all exception, and leaves no place for cavil or
scruple: He is Agnus Deus. The Lamb is God, the Son of God, very God of Acts
20. 28.
very God: and so the blood of this Lamb is the very blood of God, Act. 20. And
it is this dignity of his Nature especially (and not his innocence only, no nor
yet his deputation too, without this) that sets such a huge value upon his
blood, that it is an infinite price, of infinite merit, able to satisfy an
infinite justice, and to appease an infinite wrath.

31. You will now confess I doubt not, that this Redemption was not gratis,
came not for nothing, in respect of him: it cost him full dear, even his
dearest lifes-blood. But then in respect of us, it was a most free and gracious
Redemption. It was no charge at all to us; we disburs'd not a mite, not a doyt
toward it: Which is the very true reason why it is said in the Text, Ye shall
be redeemed without money. This work then is merely an act of grace, not a
fruit of merit; of grace, abundant grace on his part; no merit, not the least
merit at all on ours. And well it is for us, that we have to do with so
gracious a God. Go to an officer, and who can promise to himself any ordinary
favor from him without a fee? Go into the shops, and what can ye take up
without either money, credit, or security for it? Si nihil attuleris: bring
nothing, and have nothing. Only when we have to do with God, Poverty is no
impediment, but rather an advantage to us. (...) The Gospel belongs to none,
but the poor only. The Mat. 11. 5.
tidings of a Redeemer, most blessed and welcome news to those that are
sensible of their own poverty, and take it as of Grace. But whosoever thinks his
own penny good silver, and will be putting in and bidding for it; will stand
upon his terms as David did with Araunah, and will pay for it, or he will not
have it. Let that 2 Samuel 24. 24. Acts 8. 20. 21.
man beware lest his money and he perish together, and lest he get neither part
nor fellowship in this business.

39. Yet this I must tell you withal, there is something to be done on our
part, for the applying of this gracious redemption wrought by Christ to our own
souls, for their present comfort and future salvation. We must repent from dead
works, believe the Gospel, and endeavor to live godly, righteously and soberly
Tit. 2. 12.
in this present world. The grace of God is proclaimed, and (as it were)
exposed to sale in the preaching of the Gospel: there is an offer made us of it
there, and we are earnestly invited to buy it, ( Ho every one that thirsts,
come to the Isa. 55. 1.
waters and buy.) But he that comes to buy, must bring his manu precium with
him, or he were as good keep away. He that comes to this market without a
price in his hand (and the price is faith, repentance and godliness) it is a
sign he has no heart, and he is no better than a fool, says Solomon, Prove.
17. But still Prove. 17. 16.
we must remember, that this is but conditio, non causa: a condition which he
requires to be performed on our part, not any just cause of the performance on
his part. And he requires it rather as a testimony of our willingness to
embrace so fair an offer, than as a valuable consideration in any proportion at
all to the worth of the thing offered. What we bring, if it be tendered kindly,
and as it ought, in sincerity and humility, he kindly accepts of it. But if
we bring it either in Pride; or would have it taken for better than we know it
is, which is our Hypocrisy: we quite mar our own market, and shall be sent
away empty. Luke 1. 53.


40. The sum of all is this, and I have done. Let us take the whole shame of
our inexcusable baseness and folly in this Sale to our selves; and let us give
to God the whole glory of his admirable power and grace in our Redemption. Non
tibi, Domine, non tibi; not unto thee, O Lord, not unto thee, but unto us be
all the shame, that had thus wretchedly sold our selves for naught: Non nobis,
Domine, non nobis; not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be all
the glory, that thou have thus graciously redeemed us without money, Amen. So
be it.

AD AULAM.
The Eighth Sermon.
THEOBALDS, JULY, 1638.
Romans 15. 5. Now the God of Patience and Consolation grant you to be
like-minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus.
1.SAint Paul had much labored in the whole former Chapter, and in the
beginning of this, to make up that breach, which (by the mutual judgings of the
weak, and despisings of the strong) had been long kept open in the then Church
of Christ at Rome: and was likely, if not timely prevented, to grow wider and
wider, to the great dishonor of God, dis-service of his Church, and discomfort
of every good man. He had plied them with variety of Arguments and Persuasions;
spent a great deal of holy Logic and Rhetoric upon them: and now to set all
that home, and to drive the nail (as it were) to the head, that so he might at
length manum de tabula, he concludes his discourse about that argument, with
this votive Prayer or Benediction, [ Now the God of Patience and Consolation
grant you to be like-minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus:
That ye may with one mind, and with one mouth glorify God even the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. Wherein we may observe first, the formality of the Prayer, in those first
words [ Now the God of Patience and Consolation grant you:] And then the matter
or substance of it, in the rest. Wherein we have expressed, with their several
amplifications; first the Thing desired ( their unity) in the remainder of the
fifth verse: secondly, the End, for which it is desired [ Gods glory] in the
sixth verse. But that I shall not have time at this present to enter upon.
Confining our selves therefore to the fifth verse only, and therein, beginning
with the formality of the Prayer, observe first, the connection of this period
with the precedent discourse, in the Particle (...), Now, or But, [(...), Now
the God, etc.] Secondly, the party (whose help is implored, and from whom the
blessing must come; even God ((...), God grant.) Thirdly, the special
Attributes, whereby that party is here described: [(...), etc. The God of
Patience and Consolation.]

3. Of the Connection first. (...), Now God grant. In effect, as if he had said,
I have endeavored what in me lay to bring you to be of one mind and of one
heart. I have planted unity among you by my Doctrine, and watered it with my
Exhortations: using the best reasons and persuasions I could devise for that
end. What now remains, but that I second my labors with my prayers? And
commend what I have planted and watered to his blessing, who alone is able to
give the increase? I have shown you what are to do: (...), Now the God of
Patience and Consolation grant it may be done.

4. The Apostle saw it needful he should pray for the people of God, as well as
instruct them: and therefore he seals up the word of Exhortation with a word
of Benediction. He had spoken, written, expostulated, disputed, reproved,
besought, and whatever else was to be done in the way of Teaching: but he knew
there was yet something more to be done, to make the work complete; lest else
he should have run in vain, either labored in vain. That therefore he might
not give out in extremo actu; nor having brought his building to some
perfection, then to let it stand at a stay, and so decay and drop down, for
want of laying on the roof: he turns himself from them to God, is instant
with him another while, as hitherto he had been with them; in hope that some
good effect might follow. A course not unusual with him ( velut emblemate
vermiculato) to embellish Lucius apud Cic 3* de orat.
his Epistles upon fit occasions with supplications, prayers, intercessions,
and givings of thanks: breaking off the course of his speech, and that now and
then somewhat abruptly (witness, 2. Cor. 9. 10. and some other places) to lace
in a Prayer, a Blessing, a Thanksgiving.

5. Preachers by his example, to Pray for the people, as well as to instruct
them: So should their labors bring more comfort to themselves, more profit to
their hearers. The Kingdom of God must suffer violence, and our people will
Mat. 11. 12.
not ordinarily be brought unto it without some force: But let me tell you, it
is not so much the violence of the Pulpit, that does the deed, (it were many
times better, if there appeared less violence there) as the violence of the
Closet. Nor they only; but all Governors and Superiors in every other kind:
indeed generally all Christians whatsoever (in their proportion) to make use of
this Example. Think none of you, you have sufficiently discharged your parts
toward those that are under your charge; if you have instructed them in what
they are to do, admonished them to do thereafter, reproved, or corrected them
when they have done amiss, encouraged or rewarded them when they have done
well: so long as your faithful and servent prayers for them have been wanting.
In vain shall you wrestle with their stubbornnesses, and other corruptions,
though you put to all your strength, and wrestle with great wrestlings (as
Rachel said upon Genesis 30. 8.
the birth of Nephtali) so long as you do but wrestle with them only: for so
long you wrestle but with flesh and blood; and alas, what great matters can
thereof be done? Then, or not at all, shall you wrestle to purpose, when you
enter the lists with the father of spirits himself, as Jacob did: wrestling
with him by Heb. 12. 9.
your Importunate prayers, and not giving him over, till you have wrung a
blessing from him, either for your selves, or them, or both. For when you have
done what you can, the blessing must come from him, or it will never come.
(...). Which is the next point.

6. God grant.] As for himself, the Apostle well knew, by all those convincing
Reasons, and winning Insinuations he had used, he could but work upon the
outward sense, and by the sense represent fit motives to their understandings:
it was God only, that could bow and frame the heart to Peace and Unity. You may
wish peace, and do your good wills to persuade unto peace; and you ought to do
it: but unless God set in with you, it will not take effect. Non persuadebis,
etiamsi persuaseris. God shall persuade Iaphet to dwell in the tents of Sem,
Genesis 9. Genesis 9. 27.
Noah's persuasions will not do it, nor Sem's; though they should speak with
the Tongues of Men and Angels: but let God persuade Iaphet, and Iaphet will be
persuaded. He is not only a lover of Concord, (for such, by his grace are we
also;) Romans 15. 33. 1 These. 5. 23. 2 These. 2. 16.
but the Author of peace likewise. A thing so proper, and peculiar to him
alone, that he sundry times takes his style and denomination from it: The God
of Peace. The very God of Peace, etc.

7. For alas! without him, what can be expected from us? whose dispositions, by
reason of that Pride that abounds in us, are naturally turbulent and
selfwilled. The heart of man is a sour piece of Clay: wondrous stubborn and
churlish, and not to be kindly wrought upon, but by an Almighty Power. What man
is able to take down his own pride sufficiently? (Many a good man has more ado
with this one Viper, than with all his other Corruptions besides. But how much
less then is any man able to beat down and subdue the pride of another man's
spirit? Only God with the strength of his Arm is able to throw down every
exalting thought; and to lay the highest mountains level with the lower flats.
He can infuse a spirit into us, to eat out by degrees that cankered proud
flesh, that breeds us all these vexations. He can make us so vile in our own
Eyes: that Non sicut alii, Luke 18. 11.
whereas we are naturally prone to esteem better of our selves than of all
other men, we shall through lowliness of mind esteem every other man better
than our Phil. 2. 3.
selves.

8. But in the mean time never marvel to see so many scandals and divisions
every where in the world; (distractions and wranglings in the Church, factions
and convulsions in Commonwealths, sidings and censurings in your Towns,
jarrings Jam. 4. 1.
and partakings even in your private families:) so long as there is Pride and
Self-love in every man's own bosom, or indeed any other lust unsubdued. For all
these wars and fightings without, what other are they than the scum of the pot
that boils within? The Ebullitions of those Lusts that war in our members? And
the dictates of corrupt nature? St. Paul says, There must be heresies: even as
we 1 Cor. 11. 15.
use to say, That that will be must be. His meaning is, There will be heresies:
there is no help for it; the wit of man cannot hinder it. Nay it were well, if
the wit of man did not sometimes further it ^ Ingeniosi malo publico, is none
of the best commendations: yet such as it is, there are too many, that deserve
it but too well: That employ their Wit, Learning, Eloquence, Power and Parts,
(by the right use whereof they might do God and his Church excellent service)
to raise strifes, foment quarrels, and blow the coal of contention to make it
blaze afresh, when it lay in the Ashes, well nigh out. Our comfort is, the time
will come (but look not for it whilst this world lasts;) when the Son of man
will cause to be gathered Mat. 13. 41.
out of his Kingdom (...), all things that minister occasion of stumbling or
contention. But in the mean time Sinite crescere must have place. We must be
content to want that peace, which we desire, but cannot have without God; -- 30.
till he be pleased to grant it: and possess our selves in patience, if still
something or other be amiss, whereof we can see as yet no great likelihood that
it will be better. Luke 21. 19.


9. By which Patience yet I mean nothing less, than either in private men a
stoical (...), a dull phlegmatic stupidity, that is not sensible of the want of
so great a blessing; or much less in public persons or governors a wretchless
slothful connivence, whereby to suffer men to run wild into all kind of
irregularity without restraint. But such a well tempered Christian Patience, as
neither murmureth at the want, nor despaireth of a supply; but out of the sense
of want, is diligent to seek supply. Praying with the Church, Da Domine, Give
peace in our time, O Lord: and endeavoring ((...)) so far as is possible, and
to the Romans 12. 18.
uttermost of our power, to have peace with, and to make peace among all men.
For Almighty God uses not to cast away his choicest blessings upon those men,
that think them not well worthy their best both Prayers and Pains. He alone can
frame men's hearts to unity and peace: but we are vain and unreasonable, if we
expect he should do it for our sakes; so long as we continue, either silent
without seeking to him for it by our Prayers, or sluggish without employing our
best Endeavors about it to our powers.

10. But why is this God (to whom we are thus to make our addresses, that he
would be pleased to grant us this like-mindedness, and to give unto us and to
all his people the blessing of peace) here styled the God of Patience and
Consolation? The Enquiries are many. Why first, the God of Patience? And
secondly, why the God of Consolation? Taking the Two Attributes apart, either
by it self. Then taking them both together: First, for the choice; why these
Two rather than any other? Secondly, for the Conjunction; why these Two
together? Thirdly, for the order; why Patience first, and before Consolation.
Five in all: somewhat of each.

11. The former Title is, the God of Patience. Which may be understood, either
Formaliter, or Causaliter: either subjectively, or effectively, as they use to
distinguish. Or if these School-terms be too obscure; then in plain terms thus:
either of Gods patience or Ours. That is to say; either of that patience which
God uses toward us, or of that patience which God by his grace and holy
Spirit works in us. Of Gods patience and long-suffering to usward, besides
pregnant testimony of Scripture, we have daily and plentiful experience. How
slowly he proceeds to Vengeance, being so unworthily provoked: how he bears
with our Infirmities, (Infirmities? yea, and Negligences too; yea, and yet
higher, our very Presumptions and Rebellions:) how he spreads out his hand
all the day long, waiting day after day, year after year, for our conversion
and amendment, that Isa. 65 2.
he may have mercy upon us. And even thus understood ( Subjective) the Text
would bear a fair construction, and not altogether impertinent to the Apostles
scope. It might at least intimate to us this, that finding so much patience
from him, it would well become us also to show some patience to our brethren.
But yet I conceive it more proper here, to understand it effective: of that
Patience, which is indeed from God, as the Cause; but yet in us, as the
Subject. Even as a little after ( Verse 13.) he is called the God of Hope,
because it is he that makes us to abound in Hope, as the reason is there
expressed. And as here in the Text he is styled the God of Consolation; for no
other reason, but that it is he that puts comfort and cheerfulness into our
hearts.

12. It gives us clearly to see, what we are of our selves, and without God:
nothing but heat and impatience; ready to vex our selves, and to fly in the
faces of our brethren, for every trifle. You have need of Patience, says the
Apostle, Heb. 10. 36.
Heb. 10. We have indeed: God help us. 1. We live here in a vale of misery,
where we meet with a thousand petty crosses and vexations ( quotidianarum
molestiarum minutiae) in the common road of our lives; poor things in
themselves, and as rationally considered very trifles and Vanity, yet able to
bring Vexation upon our impatient spirits: we had need of patience to digest
them. 2. We are beset, surrounded with a world of temptations, assaulting us
within and without, and on every side, and on every turn: we had need of
Patience to withstand them. 3. We are exposed to manifold Injuries, Obloquies,
and Sufferings, many times without cause; it may be sometimes for a good cause:
we had need of Patience to bear them. 4. We have many rich and precious
Promises made us in the Word; of Grace, of Glory, of Outward things; of some of
which we find as yet but slender performance, and of other some (but that we
are sure the anchor of our hope is so well fixed, that it cannot fail) no
visible probability of their future performance: we had need of patience to
expect them. 5. We have many good duties required to be done of us in our
Christian Callings, and in our particular vocations; for the honor of God, and
the service of our brethren: we had need of patience to go through with them.
6. We have to converse with men of different Spirits and Tempers: some hot,
fiery, and furious; others flat, fullen, and sluggish; some unruly, some
ignorant, some proud and scornful, some peevish and obstinate, some toyish,
fickle, and humorous; all subject to passions and infirmities in one kind or
other: we had need of patience to frame our conversations to the weaknesses of
our brethren, and to tolerate what we cannot remedy: that by helping to bear
each others burdens, we may so fulfill the Law of Gal. 6. 2.
Christ.

13. Great need we have of Patience you see: and my Text lets us see, where
we have to serve our need. God is the God of patience: in him, and from him it
is to be had, but not elsewhere. Whenever then we find our selves ready to fret
at any cross occurent, to revenge every injury, to rage at every light
provocation, to droop at the delay of any promise, to slugg in our own
performances, to skew at the infirmities of others: take we notice first of the
impatience of our own spirits, and condemn it; then hie we to the fountain of
grace, there beg for patience and meekness, and he that is the God of patience
will not deny it us. That is the former Title, the God of Patience.

14. The other is, The God of Consolation. And the reason is (for this can be
understood no otherwise than Effective) because sound comfort is from God
alone. Isa. 51. 12. Psalm. 23. 4. Isa. 51. 3. Zach. 1. 17, etc. Joh. 14. 16. 15.
26, etc.
I, even I, am he that comfort you, says he himself, Isa. 51. Thy rod, and
thy staff they comfort me, says David, Psalm. 23. And the Prophets often, The
Lord shall comfort Sion. The Holy Ghost is therefore called as by his proper
Name (...), The Comforter. Yea perhaps, as one among many others; or (allowing
the Greek Article his Emphasis) as the chiefest of all the rest: which
hinders not but there may be other Comforters besides, though happily of less
Excellency. If there were no more in it but so, and the whole allegation should
be granted: it should be enough in wisdom to make us overlook all them, that we
might partake of his comforts, as the best. But in truth, the Scriptures so
speak of God, not as the chiefest, but as the only Comforter: admitting no
partnership in this prerogative. Blessed be God, etc. The Father of Mercies,
and the God of 2 Cor. 1. 3.
Consolation.

15. May we not then seek for comfort, may some say: nay, do we not sometimes
find comfort in Friends, Riches, Reputation, and such other regular pleasures
and delights, as the creatures afford? Verily under God we may always, and do
sometimes reap comfort from the creatures: But those Comforts issue still from
him, as from the first and only sufficient cause. Who is pleased to make use of
his Creatures as his instruments, either for comfort, correction, or
destruction, as seems good in his own Eyes. When they do supply us with any
comfort, it is but as the conduit-pipes, which serve the offices in a great
house with water; which yet springs not from them, but is only by them
conveyed thither from the foundation or springhead. Set them onc^ against God,
or do but take them without God: you may as soon squeeze water out of a
flint-stone, or suck nourishment out of a dry breast, as gain a drop of comfort
from any of the Creatures. Those supposed comforts, that men seek for, or think
they have sometimes found in the Creatures, are but titular and imaginary, not
substantial and real Comforts. And such, however we esteem of them onward, they
will appear to be at the last: for they will certainly fail us in the Evil day,
when our souls shall stand most of all in need of comfort. The Consolations of
God are first Pure; they run clear, without mud or mixture: secondly, Full,
satiating the appetites of the soul, and leaving no Vacuities: thirdly,
Permanent, such as (unless by our default) no Creature in the world can hinder
or deprive us of. In every of which three respects, all wordly comforts, as
they come but from the Creatures, fall infinitely short: as might easily be
shown, had we but time to compare them.

16. It is hard to say the whiles whether is greater our Misery, or Madness,
who forsake the Lord, the clear fountain of living waters, to dig to our selves
broken pits, that hold no water, in the mean time but puddle, and but a very
little of that Jer. 2. 13.
neither, and yet cannot hold that long neither. What fondness is in us, to lay
out our money for that which is not bread, and our labor for that which
satisfies not? To wear out our bodies with travel, and torture our souls with
Cares, in Isa. 55. 2.
the pursuit of these muddy, narrow, and fleeting Comforts? When we may have
Nectar and Ambrosia, the delicacies of the bread of life; and of the water of
life gratis, and without price. Only if we will but open our mouths to crave
it, and open our hands to receive it from him, who is so well stored of it, and
is withal so -- 1.
willing to impart it with all freedom and bounty, even the Father of Mercies,
and the God of Consolation.

17. Thus far of the two Titles severally: let us now put them together, and
see what we can make out* of them. The God of Patience and Consolation. Where
every man's first demand will be, why the Apostle should choose to enstile
Almighty God from these Two, of Patience and of Consolation, rather than from
some other of those Attributes, which occur (perhaps) more frequently in holy
Writ: as God of Wisdom, of Power, of Mercy, of Peace, of Hope, etc. Whatever
other Inducements the Apostle might have for so doing; Two are apparent: and
let them satisfy us. The one; the late mentioning of these two things in the
next former Verse [ That we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures
might have hope.] Having once named them both together there: it was neither
incongruous nor inelegant, to repeat them again both together here. 2. The
other; the fitness of these Titles, and their sutableness unto the matter of
the Prayer. For the most part you shall find in those forms of prayer, that are
left us registered in the Book of God, such Titles and Attributes given to God
in the prefaces of those prayers, as do best sort with the principle matter
contained therein: Which course the Church also has observed in her Liturgies.
The Apostle then, being to pray for Unity, might well make mention of Patience
and Consolation: of Patience, as a special Help thereunto; and of Consolation,
as a special Fruit and Effect thereof. As if he had said, If you could have
Patience, you would soon grow to be of one mind: and if you were once come to
that, you would find a great deal of comfort in it; (...). The God therefore of
Patience and Consolation grant it may be so with you.

18. First, Patience is a special help to Unity. For what is it but the pride
and heat of men's spirits, that both sets contentions a-foot at the first,
and afterward keeps them a-foot? Only by pride comes contention, said
Solomon, Prove. 13. Prove. 13. 10.
So long as men are impatient of the least Contradiction, cannot brook to have
their Opinions gainsaid, their Advices rejected, their apparent Excesses
reproved; will not pass by the smallest frailties in their brother without some
clamor, to scorn, or censure; but rather break out upon every slight occasion
into Words Quantulacunque adeo est occasio, sufficit irae. Juven, sat. 13.
or Actions of fury and distemper: it cannot be hoped, there should be that
blessed Unity among brethren, which our Apostle here wishes for, and every
good man heartily desires. No! Patience is the true Peacemaker. It is the
Prove. 15. 1. (...). Homer. Iliad. a. Eccl. 7. 8.
soft Answer that breaks wrath: (cross and thwarting language rather
strengthens it) As a flint is sooner broken with a gentle stroke upon a
Feather-bed, than stricken with all the might against a hard coggle. Better is
the end of a thing (Solomon again) than the beginning: and the patient in
spirit is better than the proud in spirit. The proud in spirit belike; he is
the boute^eu; he is the man that begins the fray: but the patient in spirit
is the man that must end it, if ever it be well ended; and that sure is the
better work, and the greater honor to him that does it.

19. And as Patience is a special help to Unity: so is Comfort a special fruit
and Effect thereof. St. Paul therefore conjureth the Philippians, by all the
hope Phil. 2. 1, 2.
they had of comfort in God to be at one among themselves. (...). If there be
any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love -- Fulfill ye my joy, that ye
be like-minded, etc. Ecce quam bonum, David in Psalm 133. Behold Psalm. 133. 1.
etc.
how good and pleasant a thing it is, brethren to dwell together in unity.
Utile Dulci: in saying both, he says all, Good and pleasant: that is, both
profitable (like the dew upon ^he mountains, that makes the grassspring;) and
comfortable (as the smell of a precious Ointment:) And what can the heart of
man desire more? That for the Choice.

20. For the Conjunction then; it may be demanded secondly, why the Apostle
should join these two together, Patience and Consolation: there seeming to be
no great affinity between them. They are things that differ toto genere: for
Patience is a Grace, or Virtue; and Consolation a Blessing, or reward. Is it
not, think you, to instruct us, that true Patience shall never go without
Consolation? He that will have Patience onward, shall be sure to have comfort
at the last: God will crown the grace of Patience with the blessing of
Consolation. The patient abiding Psalm. 9. 18. Jam. 5. 10.
of the meek shall not perish for ever, Psalm. 9. St. James would have us set
before our eyes the Prophets and Saints for a general example of suffering
afflictions, -- 11.
and of Patience: and he commends to us one particular Example there as by
way of instance, namely, that of Job. [You have heard, says he, of the
patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord: that the Lord is pitiful,
and of tender mercy.] Job held out in his patience under great trials unto the
last: and God out of pity, and in his tender mercy toward him, heaped Comforts
upon him at the last in great abundance. It would be well worthy our most
serious meditation, to consider, both what (by Gods grace) he did, and how (by
Gods mercy) he sped. His Example in the one would be a good Pattern for us of
Patience: and his Reward in the other a good Encouragement for Consolation.
This we may bide upon as a most certain truth; that if we do our part, God will
not fail on his. Be we first sure that we have Patience; (we must look to that,
for that is our part, though not solely, for we cannot have it without him, as
was already said:) but I say, be we first sure of that, and then we may be
confident, we shall have comfort sooner or later, in some kind or other; (trust
God with that) for that is solely his part, and he will take order for it
without our further care.

21. Lastly, for the Order. It may be demanded, why the Apostle joining both
together [ The God of Patience and Consolation] gives Patience the precedence:
of Patience first, and then of Consolation. Is not that also to teach us, that
as it is a vain and causless fear, if a man have patience, to doubt whether he
shall have comfort, yea or no: so on the contrary, it is a vain and groundless
hope, if a man want patience, to presume that yet he shall have comfort
howsoever? Certainly, no Patience, no Consolation. It is the Devils method, to
set the fairer side forwards, and to serve in the bestwi^e first, and then
after, that which is worse. He will not much put us upon the trial of our
Patience at the first; but rather till us on along with semblances and Promises
of I know not what comforts and contentments: but when once he has us fast,
then he turns in woe and misery upon us to overwhelm us, as a deluge. But God
in his dispensations commonly uses a quite contrary method, and deals
roughliest with us at the first. We hear of little other from him, than
self-denial, hatred from the World, taking up the Cross, and suffering
persecution, exercise enough for all the Patience we can get: But then, if we
hold out stoutly to the end, at last comes joy and comfort, flowing in upon us
both seasonably and plentifully, like a river. You have need of patience, says
the Apostle, that after you have done the Heb. 10. 36.
will of God, you may receive the Promise. Patience first, in doing, (yea, and
suffering too) according to the will of God: and then after that (but not
before) the enjoying of the Promise. Would you know then, whether the
Consolations of God belong unto you, yea or no? In short: if you can have
patience, never doubt of it: if you will not have patience, never hope for it.

22. Thus much concerning the formality of the Prayer in those former words of
the Verse [ Now the God of patience, and of Consolation grant you.] Proceed we
now to the Matter thereof in the remainder of the Verse [ To be like-minded one
toward another according to Christ Jesus.] Where the particulars are three*
First, the thing it self, or grace prayed for; which is Unity, or
Like-mindedness [ To be like-minded:] Secondly and Thirdly, Two Conditions or
Qualifications thereof: the one in respect of the Persons [One toward
another,] the other in respect of the Manner, [According to Christ Jesus.] Of
which in their order.

23. The thing first, [ To be like-minded] (...) in the Greek. A phrase of
speech, although (to my remembrace) not found elsewhere in holy Scripture, yet
often used by St. Paul in his Epistles: to the Romans, to the Corinthians, Romans
12. 16. 2 Cor. 13, 11. Phil. 2. 2, 3, 6. 4. 2. 1 Pet. 3. 8.
and especially to the Philippians more than once or twice. I spare the
quotations for brevity sake. St. Peter's compound word comes nearest it, (...)
[ Finally, be ye all of one mind] 1 Pet. 3. Now these words, both the Noun
(...) or (...), the mind, and the Verb (...), to mind this or that, or to be
thus or so minded: although often used with special reference, sometimes to the
understanding or judgment; sometimes to the inward disposition of the heart,
will and affections; and sometimes to the manifesting of that inward
disposition, by the outward carriage and behavior: yet are they also not
seldom taken at large for the whole soul, and all the powers thereof, together
with all the motions and operations of any, or each of them, whether in the
apprehensive, appetitive, or executive part. And I see nothing to the contrary,
but that it may very well be taken in that largest extent in this place. And
then the thing so earnestly begged at the hand of God, is, that he would so
frame the hearts of these Romans one toward another, as that there might be an
universal accord amongst them so far as was possible, both in their Opinions,
Affections, and Conversations. [Now the God of Patience and Consolation grant
you to be likeminded.]

24. Like-minded, first in Opinion and Judgment. It is a thing much to be
desired, and by all good means to be endeavored, that (according to our
Churches Prayer) God would give to all Nations unity, peace and concord: but
especially that all they that do confess his holy name, may also agree in the
truth of his holy 1 Cor. 1. 10.
word; at leastwise in the main and most substantial truths. I beseech you,
brethren, says St. Paul, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. That is
the first, Like-mindedness in Judgment.

25. Like-minded secondly in heart and affection. Men's understandings are not
all of one size and temper: and even they that have the largest and the
clearest understandings, yet know but in part, and are therefore subject to
Errors and 1 Cor. 13. 9.
Mis-apprehensions. And therefore it cannot be hoped, there should be such a
consonancy and uniformity of Judgment amongst all men, no not amongst wise and
godly men; but that in many things, yea, and those sometimes of great
importance, they may and will dissent one from another unto the worlds end. But
then good heed would be taken, lest by the cunning of Satan (who is very
forward and expert to work upon such advantages) difference in judgment should
in process of time first, (...). Naz. Orat. 25.
estrange by little and little, and at length quite alienate our Affections one
from another. It is one thing to dissent from, another to be at discord with,
our brethren. Ita dissensi ab illo (says Tully concerning himself and Cato) ut
in disjunctione sententiae, conjuncti tamen amicitia maneremus. It is probable
the whole multitude of them that believed were (but we are not sure they were,
and it is possible they might not be) all of one opinion in every point, even
in those first and primitive times: but St. Luke tells us for certain, that
they were all of one heart. Acts 4. 3.


26. Like-minded thirdly, in a fair and peaceable outward conversation. For
albeit through humane frailty, and amid so many scandals as are, and must be in
the world ((...)) there be not evermore that hearty entire affection, Luke 17.
1.
that ought to be between Christian men; especially when they stand divided one
from another in opinion: yet should they all bear this mind, and so be at least
thus far like-minded, as to resolve to forbear all scornful and insolent
speeches and behavior, of and toward one another; without jeering, without
censuring, without provoking, without causless vexing one another, or
disturbing the public peace of the Church. For the servant of God must not
strive, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25.
but be gentle unto all men, and patient. So gentle and patient, that he must
study to win them that oppose themselves; not by reviling, but instructing
them: and that not in a loud and lofty strain, (unless when there is left no
other remedy;) but first, (and if that will serve the turn, only) in love and
with meekness. Our conversation, where it cannot be all out so free and
familiar, should yet be fair and amiable. Gods holy truth we must stand for, I
grant, if it be opposed, to the utmost of our strength: neither may we betray
any part thereof by our silence or softness, for any man's pleasure or
displeasure; where we may help it, and where the defense of it appears to be
prudentially necessary. Yet even in that case ought we so to maintain the truth
of God, as not to despise the persons of Ephesians. 4. 15.
men. We are to follow the truth in love: which is then best done, when holding
us close to the truth, we are ready yet in love to our brethren to do them all
the rights, and to perform unto them all those respects, which (without
confirming them in their Errors) may any way fall due unto them.

27. It is a perfect and a blessed Unity when all the three meet together;
unity of true Doctrine, unity of loving Affection, and unity of peaceable
conversation: and this perfection ought to be both in our Aims, and in our
Endeavors. But if (through our own weakness, or the waywardness of others) we
cannot attain to the full perfection of the whole, having faithfully
endeavored it; pulchrum est Cic. in orat.
in secundis tertiisve, it will be some commendation and comfort to us, to have
attained so much as we could. (...), (Phil. 3.) Nevertheless whereunto we Phil.
3. 16.
have attained, let us mind the same thing.

28. To quicken us hereunto (the duty being so needful, and we withal so dull)
these few things following would be taken into consideration. Consider first,
that by our Christian Calling we are all made up into one mystical body, Ephesians.
3. 6.
(...): and that by such a real, (though mysterious) concorporation, as that we
become thereby (...), as all of us members of Christ, so every one of us one
another Romans 12. 5.
members. Now the sympathy and supply, that is between the members of the
natural body, for their mutual comfort and the good of the whole, the Apostle
elegantly sets forth, and applies it very fully to the mystical body of the
Church, in 1 Cor. 12. at large. It were a thing prodigiously unnatural, and to
every man's apprehension the effect of a frenzy at the least, to see one
member of the body fall a beating or tearing another. No! if any one member (be
it never so mean and despicable) be in Anguish, the rest are sensible of it. No
terms of betterness are then stood upon, ( I am better than thou, or I than
thou;) no terms of defiance heard, ( I have no need of thee, or I of thee:) But
they are all ready to contribute their several supplies, according to their
several abilities and measures, to give ease and relief to the grieved part;
(...), as the reason is given at Ver. 25. there, that so there might be no
rent, no schism, no division or disunion of parts in the body.

Consider secondly, That by our Condition we are all fellow-brethren, and
fellow servants in the same family; of the household of faith all: and these are
obliging Gal. 6. 10. 1 Timothy 3. 15. Gal. 4. 27.
relations. We ought therefore so to behave our selves in the house of God,
which is the Church of the living God, as becomes fellow-brethren that are
descended from the same Father, and fellow servants that live under the same
Master. 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4.
We all wear one livery: having all put on Christ, by solemn profession at our
holy Baptism. We are fed at one Table, eating the same spiritual meat, and
drinking the same spiritual drink, in the holy Communion. Every thing that
belongs to this House breaths Union. One body, one spirit, one calling, one
hope, Ephesians. 4. 3. -- 6.
one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all; as the Apostle
urges it, Ephesians. 4. concluding thence, that therefore we ought to be at one
among our selves, endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace. Any of us would think it a very disorderly house, and ill governed; if
coming in by chance we should find the Children and Servants all together by
the Ears, though but once. How much more then, if we should observe them to be
ever and anon snarling and quarrelling one with another, and beating and
kicking one another? Genesis 45. 24. Genesis 13. 8.
Joseph thought he need say no more to his brethren to prevent their falling
out by the way in their return homeward, than to remind them of this, that they
were all one man's children. And Abraham to procure an everlasting Amnesty and
utter cessation thenceforth of all debate between himself and his Nephew Lot
and their servants; made use of this one argument, as the most prevalent of all
other for that end, that they were Brethren. Ecce quam bonum (I cannot but
repeat it once more) Behold how good and joyful a thing it is, for brethren to
Psalm. 133. 1.
dwell together in unity.

30. Consider thirdly, how peace and unity forwardeth the work of God for the
building up of his Church; which faction and division on the other side
obstructeth, so as nothing more. When all the workmen intend the main business,
each in his place and office performing his appointed task with cheerfulness
and good agreement: the work goes on, and the building gets up apace. But
where one man draws one way, and another another way; one will have things
done after this fashion, and another after that; when one makes, and another
marreth; now one sets up, by and by comes another and plucketh all down
again, how is it possible, whilst things go thus, that ever the building should
be brought to any perfection, or handsomness? The Apostle well understood what
he said, Romans 14. 19.
when in the foregoing Chapter he joined Peace and Edification together, (...),
Let us follow after the things that make for peace, and things wherewith we may
edify one another. Where the Hearts and Tongues of Jam. 3. 16.
the builders are divided, the building will either come to nothing, or prove
but a Babel of Confusion. For where envying and strife is, there is confusion,
and every evil work Strife, you see, makes ill work: it builds up nothing,
unless it be the walls of Babel. It is peace and concord that builds up the
walls of Jerusalem: Psalm. 122. 3.
which, as it has its name from Peace, so has it its beauty also and
perfection from Peace. And then, but not before, shall Jerusalem be built as a
City that is at unity in it self; when they that build Jerusalem are at unity
first among themselves. Livi.


31. Consider fourthly, what heartning is given, and what advantage to the
Enemy abroad, whilst there are fractions and distractions at home. Per
discordias civiles externi tollunt animos, said the Historian once of old Rome.
And it was Gild. de excid. Brit.
the complaint of our Countryman Gildas, uttered long since with much grief
concerning the state of this Island, then embroiled in Civil Wars; Fortis ad
civilia bella, infirma ad retundenda hostium tela. That by how much more her
valor and strength was spent upon her self, in the managing of intestine and
domestic broils: the more she laid her self open to the incursions and
outrages of foreign Enemies. The common Enemies to the truth of Religion, are
chiefly Atheism and Superstition: Atheism opposing it in the forefront, and
Superstition on both hands. If either of which at any time get ground of us,
(as whilst we wrangle, God knows what they may do:) we may thank our own
contentions for it most. We may cherish causless jealousies, and frame
chimera's of other matters and causes out of our fancies or fears. But the very
truth is, there is no such scandal to enemies of all sorts, as are our home
differences, and chiefly those (which make it the sadder business) that are
about indifferent things, Alas, whereto serves all this ado about gestures,
and vestures, and other outward rites* and formalities: that for such things as
these are (things in their own nature indifferent, and never intended to be
otherwise imposed, than as matters of circumstance and order) men should
clamor against the times, desert their ministerial functions and charges, fly
out of their own Country as out of Babylon, stand at open defiance against
lawful authority, and sharpen their wits, and tongues, and pens, with so much
petulancy (that I say not virulency) as some have done, to maintain their
stiffness and obstinacy therein? I say, whereto serves all this, but to give
scandal to the Enemies of our Church and Religion?

32. Scandal first, to the Atheist. Who till all men be of one Religion, and
agreed in every point thereof too, (which I doubt will never be whilst the
world lasts:) thinks it the best wisdom to be of none; and makes it his
best pastime to jeer at all. Great scandal also secondly to the Romanist. Who
is not a little confirmed in his opinion of the Catholickness of the Roman
Faith; when he hears so many of the things, which have been, and still are
retained in the Church of England in common with the Church of Rome, as they
were transmitted both to them and us in a continued line of Succession, from
our godly and Orthodox forefathers, who lived in the Ages next after Christ and
his Apostles; to be now inveighed against and decryed as Popish and
Superstitious. And when he sees men pretending to piety, purity, and
reformation more than others, not contenting themselves with those just
exceptions, that had been formerly taken by the Church of England, and her
regular children, against some erroneous Doctrines and forms of worship taught
and practiced in the Church of Rome, and endeavored to be unduly and by her
sole Authority imposed upon other Churches; to be so far transported with a
spirit of Contradiction, as that they care not, so as they may but run far
enough from Rome, whither or how far they run, although they should run
themselves (as too often they do) quite beyond the bounds of Truth, Allegiance,
common reason, and even common humanity too.

33. But especially and thirdly, great scandal to those of the separation. Who
must needs think very jollily of themselves, and their own singular way, when
they shall find those very grounds, whereon they have raised their Schism, to
be so stoutly pleaded for by some, who are yet content to hold a kind of
communion with us. Truly I could wish it were sufficiently considered by those
whom it so nearly concerns: (for my own part, I must confess, I could never
be able to comprehend it) with what satisfaction to the conscience any man can
hold those principles, without the maintenance whereof there can be nothing
colourably pretended for inconformity in point of Ceremony and
Church Government; and yet not admit of such conclusions naturally issuing
thence, as will necessarily enforce an utter separation. Vae mundo, says our
Savior, Woe unto the world because Mat. 18. 7.
of offenses. It is one of the great trials, wherewith it is the good pleasure
of God to exercise the faith and patience of his servants whilst they live on
the earth; that there will be divisions and offenses: and they must abide it.
But vae homini though: without repentance woe to the man by whom the occasion
comes. Much have they to answer for the while, that cannot keep themselves
quiet, when they ought and might; but by restless provocations trouble both
themselves and others: to the great prejudice and grief of their brethren, but
advantage and rejoicing of the common Enemy.

34. Thus much for the Thing it self, Like-mindedness: The conditions or
Qualifications follow. The former whereof concerns the Persons: (...) [ one
toward another.] It notes such an agreement, as is both Universal, and Mutual.
Universal first. I doubt not, but in the then Roman Church, at the time when
this Epistle was written, the strong agreed well enough among themselves, and
were all alike-minded, and so the weak among themselves, all alike-minded too.
They all minded to despise these: these all minded to judge them. But that
agreement was with those only of their own party; and so a partial agreement:
which tended rather to the holding up of a Faction, than to the making up of an
Union. It was an Universal agreement the Apostle desired and prayed for: that
the strong would be more compassionate to the Weak, and the weak more
charitable toward the Strong; both Weak and Strong more patient and moderate,
and more respective either of other in all brotherly mutual condescensions.

35. It is our fault too most an end. We are partial to those on that (...)
Naz. orat. 14.
side we take to, beyond all reason: ready to justify those enterprises of
theirs that look very suspiciously, and to excuse, or at least to extenuate
their most palpable excesses; and as ready on the other side to misconstrue the
most justifiable actions of the adverse part, but to aggravate to the utmost
their smallest and most pardonable aberrations. Thus do we sometimes both at
once (either of which alone Prove. 17. 15.
is an abomination to the Lord) justify the guilty, and condemn the innocent.
Whilst partial affections corrupt our judgments, and will not suffer us to look
upon the actions of our brethren with an equal and indifferent eye. But let us
beware of it by all means: for so long as we give our selves to be carried away
with partialities and prejudices, we shall never rightly perform our duties
either to God or man. That therefore the agreement may be as it ought to be: we
must resolve to be patient (not toward some, but) toward all men, 1 These. 5.
1 These. 5. 24.
to be gentle (not unto some, but) unto all men, 2 Timothy 2. to show all meekness
2 Timothy 2. 24. Tit. 3. 2.
(not to some, but) to all men, Titus. 3. 2. The Concord should be Universal.

36. It should likewise be Mutual, (...) imports that also: (...).
Homer-Iliad. ^.
either part being ready for charity sake to contemperate and accomodate
themselves to other, so far as reason requires. But herein also, as in the
former, men's corrupt partiality bewrays it self extremely. The strong Romans
like enough could discern a censorious spirit in the weaker ones: and the weak
ones perhaps as easily a disdainful spirit in them. But neither of both (it is
to be -- id mani^ae quod in tergo.
doubted) were willing enough to look into the other end of the wallet, and to
examine thoroughly their own spirits. We use to say, If every man would mend
one, all would be well. Yea, would? How comes it to to pass then that all has
not been well even long ago? For where is the man, that is not ready to mend
one? One, said I? Yea, ten; yea, a hundred! why, here it is: every man would be
mending one, but not the right one. He would be mending his brother: but he
will not mend himself. Ut nemo in sese tentat descendere! O says the strong,
we should soon agree; but that he is so censorious: and yet himself ^louteth as
freely as ever he did. We should hit it very well says the weak, were not he
so scornful; and himself judges as deeply as ever he did. Oh the falseness and
hypocrisy of men's hearts blinded with self-love! how it abuses them with
strong delusions, and so fills the world with divisions and offenses!

37. For this our blessed Savior, who has best discovered the malady, has
also prescribed the best remedy. The Disease is Hypocrisy. The Symptoms are:
Luke 16. 41 -- 4^.
One, to be cat-eyed outward; in readily espying somewhat (the smallest mote
cannot escape) in a brothers eye: another, to be bat-eyed inward; in not
perceiving (be it never so great) a beam in a man's own eye: a third, a
forwardness to be tampering with his brothers eye, and offering his service to
help him out with the mote there, before he think a thought of doing any thing
toward the clearing of his own eye. The Remedy is, to begin at home: do but
put the things into their right order, and the business is done. Tu conversus;
confirma -- 22. 33.
fratres. Strengthen thy Brethren what thou can: it is a good office, and
would not be neglected. But there is something more needful to be done than
that; and to be done first and before that; and which if it be first done, thou will be able to do that much the better (then shall thou see clearly) and that
is to reform thy -- (...) Luke 6. 42.
self: be sure first thy self be converted, and then in Gods name deal with thy
weak Brother as thou see cause, and strengthen him.

38. Let them that are so forward to censure the actions of others, especially
of their Superiors, and are ever and anon complaining how ill things are
carried above; but never take notice of their own frauds, and oppressions, and
sacriledges, and insolences, and peevishnesses, and other enormities: let them
turn their eye homeward another while, observe how their own pulses beat, and
go learn what that is, Thou hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of thine own
eye. We Luke 6. 42.
deal not like Christians, no nor like reasonable men, if we expect all men
should come to our bent in every thing; and we our selves not relent from our
own stiffness in the least matter for their sakes. Believe it, we shall never
grow to Christian Unanimity in any tolerable measure, so long as every man
seeks but to please himself only, in following his own liking; and is not
desirous withal (according to our Apostles exhortation, ver. 2.) to please his
neighbor also, by condescending to his desires, where it may be for his good,
in any thing that is not either unlawful, or unreasonable. The inclinations to
agreement should be mutual, that so we might be like-minded (...).

39. And then all this must be (...); which is the other qualification in the
Text, and now only remains to be spoken of: According to Christ Jesus. Which
last clause is capable of a double interpretation, pertinent to the scope of
the Text, and useful for our direction in point of practice, both; and
therefore neither of both to be rejected. Some understand it, as a Limitation
of that Unity, which was prayed for in the former words: and not unfitly. For
lest it should be conceived, that all the Apostle desired in their behalf was,
that they should be like-minded one toward another: howsoever he might intend
by the addition of this clause to show, that it was not such an Unity as he
desired, unless it were according to Truth and Godliness in Christ Jesus. There
may be an agreement in falso; when men hold together for the maintenance of one
and the same Common Error: Such as is the agreement of Heretics, of
Schismatics, of Sect aries, among themselves. And there may be an agreement in
malo; when men combine together in a confederacy for the compassing of some
mischievous design: as did those forty and odd, that bound themselves with a
curse to destroy Acts 23. 12. -- 13.
Paul. Such is the agreement of -- (...).
Thieves, of Cheaters, of Rebels, among themselves. Such -- delicta fuere Nexus
amicitiae. Claud. li. 2. in Ruffin. Mat. 12. 26. Psalm. 55. 9. Acts 23. 6.
agreements as these, no man ought to pray for: indeed no man need to pray for.
The wisdom of the flesh, and cunning of the Devil, will bring men on fast
enough to those cursed agreements, without which he and his know well enough
his Kingdom cannot stand. The servants of God have rather bent themselves
evermore by their prayers and endeavors, to dissolve the glue, and to break
the confederacies of the ungodly. Destroy their tongues, O Lord, and divide
them, is holy David's prayer, Psalm. 55. And St. Paul, when he stood before the
Sanhedrim at Jerusalem, to take off his malicious accusers the better,
perceiving both the Judges and bystanders to be of two different factions,
some Pharisees, who believed a Resurrection, and other some Sadduces, who
denied it; did very wisely to cast a bone among them: When -- 7.
by proclaiming himself a Pharisee, and professing his belief of the
Resurrection, -- 10.
he raised such a dissension between the two factions, that the whole multitude
was divided; insomuch as the chief Captain was fain to use force to get Paul
from amid the uproar, and to carry him away: by which means all their intended
proceedings against him were stopped for that time.

40. But the Unity that is to be prayed for, and to be labored for in the
Christian Church, is a Christian Unity: that is to say, a happy concord in
walking lovingly together in the same path of Truth and Godliness. The word of
Christ is the word of truth: and the mystery of Christ, the mystery of
Godliness. Whatsoever Col. 1. 5. 1 Timothy 3. 16.
therefore is contrary to either of these ( Truth, or Godliness) cannot be
(...), according to Christ; but rather altogether against him. Here then we
have our bounds set us: our Ne plus ultra, beyond which if we pass, we
transgress and are exorbitant. Alas for us the while, when even our good
desires may deceive us, if they be inordinate, and the love of so lovely a
thing, as Peace is, mis-lead us. The more need have we to look narrowly to our
treadings, lest the Tempter should have laid a snare for us in a way wherein we
suspected it not, and so surprise us ere we be aware. Usque ad aras: The
Altar-stone that is the meer-stone. All bonds of friendship, all offices of
neighborhood, must give way, when the honor of God and his truth lie at the
stake. If peace will be had upon fair terms, or indeed upon any terms (salvis
veritate and pietate) without impeachment of either of these; it ought to be
embraced. But if it will not come but upon harder conditions; better let it go:
A man may buy Gold too Heb. 12. 14.
dear. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see
the Lord. The gender of the article there shows the meaning: not (...),
without which peace; but (...) without which holiness no man shall see the
Lord. Without peace some man may, having faithfully endeavored it, though he
cannot obtain it, (that is not his fault:) but without holiness (which if any
man want, it is through his own fault only) no man shall see the Lord. Our
likemindedness then must be according to Christ Jesus in this first sense; that
is, so far forth as may stand with Christian truth and godliness.

41. But very many Expositors do rather understand the phrase in another sense.
According to Christ; that is, according to the example of Christ: which seems
to have been the judgment of our last Translators, who have therefore so put it
into the margent of our Bibles. His Example the Apostle had reserved unto the
last place, as one of the weightiest and most effectual arguments in this
business: producing it a little before the Text, and repeating it again a
little after Verse. 3. -- 7.
the Text. So as this prayer may seem (according to this interpretation) to be
an illustration of that argument which was drawn from Christ's Example: as if he
had said, Christ sought not himself, but us. He laid aside his own glory,
divested himself of Majesty and Excellency, that he might condescend to our
baseness, and bear our infirmities: he did not despise us, but received us with
all -- 7.
meekness and compassion. Let not us therefore seek every man to please
himself, in going his own way, and setting up his own will; neither let us
despise any man's -- 1.
weakness, but rather, treading in the steps of our blessed Lord Jesus, let
every -- 2.
one of us strive to please his neighbor for his good unto edification;
bearing with the infirmities of our weaker brethren, and receiving one another
into our -- 1.
inwardest bosoms and bowels, even as Christ also received us to the Glory of
God. -- 7.


42. If the examples of the servants of Christ ought not to be lightly set by,
how much more ought the Example of the Master himself to sway with every Good
Christian? In 1 Cor. 10. St. Paul having delivered an exhortation in general,
the same in effect with that we are now in hand withal, ver. 24. Let no man
seek his own, but every man another wealth:) he does after propose to their
imitation in that point, his own particular practice and example in the last
verse of the Chapter, [ Even as I please all men in all things, says he, not
seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they might be saved:] But
then, lest he might be thought to cry up himself, and that he might know how
unsafe a thing it were to rest barely upon his, or any other man's example: in
the very next following words, the first words of the next Chapter. He leads
them higher, and to a more perject example, even that of Christ, [ Be ye
followers of me, says he, as I also am of Christ.] As if he had said, Although
my example, who am as nothing, be little considerable in it self: yet wherein
my example is guided by the example of Christ, you may not despise it. The
original record only is authentical, and not the transcript: yet may a
transcript be creditable, when it is signed and attested with a Concordat cum
originali under the hand of a public Notary, or other sworn Officer: I do not
therefore lay mine own example upon you, as a Rule; I only set it before you,
as a help or Encouragement: that you may the more cheerfully follow the Example
of Christ, when you shall see men subject, to the same sinful infirmities with
your selves, by the grace of God to have done the same before you. My example
only shows the thing to be feasible: it is Christ's Example only that can
render it warrantable. Be ye therefore followers of me, even as I also am of
Christ.

43. Here just occasion is offered me (but I may not take it, because of the
time) first and more generally of a very profitable Enquiry, in what things,
and how far forth we are astricted to follow the Example of Christ. And then
secondly, and more particularly, what especial directions to take from his
Example, for the ordering of our carriage toward our brethren, in order to the
more ready attaining to this Christian unanimity and like-mindedness one
toward another, of which we have hitherto spoken. But I remit you over for
both, to what our Apostle has written, Phil. 2. in the whole forepart of the
Chapter. The whole passage is very well worthy the pondering: and his discourse
therein may serve as a Commentary upon a good part of this Text. I therefore
commend it to your private meditation; and you, and what you have heard, to the
good blessing of Almighty God: and that with St. Paul's votive prayer or
benediction here; (for I know not where to fetch a better.)

Now the God of Patience and Consolation grant you to be like-minded one
toward another, according to Christ Jesus. That you may with one mind and one
mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom, etc. AD
AULAM.
The Ninth Sermon.
BERWICK, JULY 16. 1639.
1 Timothy 3. 16. And without all Controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness.
1.THe Ordination of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, being one of the principal
acts of the Episcopal power: our Apostle therefore instructs Timothy (whom he
had ordained See Hieron. in Catal. Cap. 11. Eusebius. 3. hist. Eccl. cap. 4.
Council. Chalced. Act. 11.
Bishop of Ephesus, the famous Metropolis of that part of Asia) somewhat fully,
what he was to do in that so weighty an affair. What manner of persons and how
qualified he should assume in partem curae, to assist him in his Pastoral
charge, for the service of Gods Church, and the propagation of the Gospel.
Which having done at large from the beginning of the Chapter unto the end of
ver. 13. he renders a reason at verse. 14. why he had insisted so long upon
that argument: even, lest the Church of God (in his absence) should be
destitute of sufficient help for the work of the Gospel. At Ephesus the hand of
God had opened a wide door (1 Cor, 16.) but withal Satan (as his manner 1 Cor.
16. 9.
is) had stirred up many adversaries: and some of them very mild ones, more
like savage beasts than men: (...) is the word for it, 1 Cor. 15. It was at
Ephesus, 1 Cor. 15. 32.
that he fought with beasts in the shape of men. Witness Demetrius the
Silver-smith; and that Bellua multorum capitum, the mad giddy multitude in a
tumultuous assembly, all in an uproar, and no man well wist for what, Acts 19.
Here was work enough to be done. The door must be held open, to let converts
in: but must be well manned and maintained too, to keep adversaries out. All
Acts 19. 32.
this not to be done, but with many hands: The harvest being great, the
laborers had not need be few.

2. The only thing, that might perhaps make Timothy put off Ordination somewhat
the longer, might be the expectation of the Apostles coming; to whom he might
think fit to reserve that honor: as to one able (by reason of his Apostolic
spirit) to make choice of meet persons for the Churches service with better
certainty than himself could do. The Apostle therefore tells him for that,
Ver. 14. and chap. 4. 13.
That true it is, he had an earnest desire of a long time, and still had a full
purpose (if God would) to be with him ere long: Yet because of the uncertainty
of future events; that was not a thing for him to rely upon so, as in
expectance thereof to delay the doing of any service needful for the Church of
Christ. For who could tell how it might please God t^ dispose of him? Or
whether the necessities of other Churches might not require his personal
presence and pains rather elsewhere? He would not therefore he should stay for
him: but go in hand with it himself with all convenient care and speed. All
this appears in the two verses next before the Text; [ These things* I wrote
unto thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly. But if I tarry long, that yet thou
may know how to behave thy self in the house of God, which is the Church of
the living God, the pillar and ground of Truth.]

3. This seems to be the Scope and Contexture of the whole foregoing part of
the Chapter, and then immediately fall in the words of the Text [And without
all controversy, great is the mystery of Godliness, etc.] Which seem to have
but a very slender dependence upon the foregoing discourse: and indeed no more
they have. For the Apostle having in the end of the fifteenth verse (and that
but incidentally neither) mentioned the word Truth: he thereupon takes
occasion in this sixteenth verse, a little and briefly to touch upon the Nature
and Substance of that holy Truth. The whole verse contains Evangelii
Encomium, and Compendium: A brief description of the Nature in the former part,
and a brief summary of the Doctrine of the Gospel in some remarkable heads
thereof in the latter part of the verse.

4. With that latter I shall not now meddle. In that former part, we may
observe Quid, Quantum, and Quale. First, Quid: what is Christianity? (...) It
is a mystery. But there are greater, and there are lesser Mysteries: Quantum
therefore? Of the bigger sort sure. (...), a great Mystery: (...) by all
confessions, and without all contradiction or controversy Great. But the
greater the worse, if it be not good as well as great. Quale therefore? What a
kind of Mystery is it ((...), It is a mystery of Piety or Godliness.
CHRISTIANITY IS THE GREAT MYSTERY OF GODLINESS: That is the Tota. Now to the
Parts: and first of the Quid; The Gospel a Mystery. But then first: What is a
Mystery? For the Quid Nominis: and then, why the Gospel a Mystery? For the Quid
Rei. The Word first, then the Thing.

5. For the Word (...), I find sundry conceits ready collected to my hand by V.
Casaubon. exercit. 16. 43. Martin. Lexic. philol. verb. Mysterium.
learned men, out of the writings of the Greek Fathers, and out of the
Commentaries of Grammarians and Critics, both ancient and modern: whereof I
spare the recital, because it would neither much conduce to my present purpose,
nor profit the present Auditory. The word is clearly of a Greek Original: from
(...), or (...), to shut the eye or mouth. Of all the mysterious rites used
among the Heathens the Eleusinia sacra were the most ceremonious and
mysterious: insomuch as that, when in their Writings, the word (...) is used by
it self, without any farther specification, it is ordinarily conceived to be
meant of those Eleusinian mysteries. These none might be present at, but they
that were solemnly initiated thereunto: who upon their first admission (which
yet was but to the outer and lesser mysteries) were called (...). And if after
a sufficient time of probation (a twelvemonth was the least) they were
adjudged meet to be admitted to the greater and more secret mysteries, they
were then called (...): Whereto there seems to be some -- (...) 2 Pet. 1. 16.
allusion (as there is frequently to sundry other customs and usages of the
Heathens) even in the holy Scriptures themselves. But whether they were
admitted to their lesser or the greater mysteries, strait order was evermore
taken with them, by Oaths, Penalties, and otherwise, as strong as could be
devised; that they should by no means reveal any of the passages or rites
thereunto belonging, to those that were (...) and not initiated: whom in that
respect they counted profane. To do otherwise, was reputed so heinous a crime,
that nothing could be imagined in their superstition more irreligious and
piacular than that.

Quis Cereris ritus audet vulgar profanis? Hor. 3. Carm. 2.
He knew not where to find a man, that durst presume so to do. Vetabo qui
Cereris sacrum vulg^rit arcanae, sub iisdem Sit trabibus -- He would be loath to
lodge under the same roof, or to put to Sea in the same vessel, with him that
were guilty of such an high provocation, as the divulging abroad of the sacred
mysteries: lest some vengeance from the offended Deities should overtake them
for their impiety (and him for company) to their destruction. It was in very
deed the Devils cunning, one of the depths of Satan, and one of the most
advantageous mysteries of his arts, by that secrecy to hold up a reverent and
religious Esteem of those mysteries, which were so replete with all filthy and
impious abominations: that, if they should have been made known to the world,
it must needs have exposed their whole religion to the contempt of the vulgar,
and to the detestation of the wiser sort.

6. Such, and no better, were those mysteria sacra among the Heathens: whence
the word Mystery had its birth and rise. Both the Name and Thing, being so
vilely abused by them: it yet pleased the holy Spirit of God to make choice of
that Word, whereby usually in the New Testament to express that holy Doctrine
of Truth and Salvation, which is revealed to us in the Gospel of grace. By the
warrant of whose example, the ancient Church, both Greek and Latin, took the
Liberty (as what hinders but they might?) to make use of sundry words and
phrases, fetched from the very dregs of Paganism, for the better explication of
sundry points of the Christian Faith; and to signify their notions of sundry
things of Ecclesiastical usage to the people. The Greek Church has constantly
used this word (...), a Heathenish superstitious word; and the Latin Church in
like manner the word Sacramentum, a Heathen military word, to signify thereby
the holy Sacraments of the Christian Church. I note it the rather; and I have
therefore stood upon it a little longer than was otherwise needful: to let you
know, that the godly and learned Christians of those Primitive times, were not
so fondly shy and scrupulous (as some of ours are) as to boggle at, much less
so rashly supercilious (I might say, and superstitious too) as to cry down and
condemn for evil, and even eo nomine utterly unlawful, the use of all such
whether names or things, as were invented, or have been abused, by Heathens or
Idolaters.

7. But this by the way. I return to the word (...) Which, being rarely found
in the Greek version of the Old Testament, (indeed not at all, so far as my
search serves me, save only some few times in Daniel) is frequently used in
the Dan. 2. 18. and 4. 9.
New: and that for the most part to signify (for now I come to the Quid Rei)
either the whole Doctrine of the Gospel, or some special branches thereof, or
the dispensations of Gods providence for the time or manner of revealing it. To
you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God, Mat. 13. We speak
the wisdom Mat. 13. 11. 1 Cor. 2. 7. Col. 4. 3.
of God in a mystery, 1 Cor. 2. So the Gospel is called the mystery of Christ,
Col. 4. mystery of Faith in this Chapter at the ninth verse; and here in the
Text, The mystery of Godliness.

8. But why a Mystery? That I shall now show you. First, when we see something,
good or bad, done plainly before our eyes, yet cannot imagine to what end or
purpose it should tend, nor can guess what should be the design or intention of
the doer: that we use to call a Mystery. The Counsels of Princes and affairs of
State (Regione di stato, as the Italians call it) when they are purposely
carried Arcana Imperii.
in a cloud of secrecy, that the reasons and ends of their actions may be
hidden from the eyes of men, are therefore called the Mystery of state: and
upon the same ground sundry manual crafts are called Mysteries: for that there
belong to the exercise of them some secrets, which they that have not been
trained up therein cannot so well understand, and they that have been trained
up therein, could like well that none but themselves should understand. In a
worser sense also it is not seldom used. If some crafty Companion, with whom we
have had little dealings formerly, should begin of a sudden to apply himself to
us in a more than ordinary manner, with great shows and proffers of kindness,
and we know no particular reason why he should so do: we presently conclude in
our thoughts, that sure there is some mystery or other in it; that is, that he
has some secret ends, some design upon us, which we understand not. Ioseph^s
writing of Antipater the Son of Herod, who was a most wicked mischievous
person, but withal a notable dissembler; very cunning and close, and one that
could carry matters mavelous smoothly and fairly to the outward appearance,
so that the most intelligent and cautious men could not escape, but he would
sometimes reach beyond them to their destruction: he says of him, and his
whole course of life, that it was (...). Joseph. de bell. Judaic. lib. 1.
(...), nothing but a very mystery of wickedness.

9. In this notion (in the better sense of it) may the great work of our
Redemption by Jesus Christ, which is the very pith and marrow of the Gospel, be
called a Mystery. Who that should have seen a child of a span long, to be born
in an Inn, of a mean parentage, coursely swadled up, and cradled in a manger,
and then afterward to be brought up under a Carpenter, and to live in a poor
and low condition, scarce worth a room where to rest his head; and after all
that to be bought and sold, buffe^ed, spit on, reviled, tortured, condemned,
and executed as a Malefactor, with as much ignominy and despightfulness, as the
malice of Men and Devils could devise: Who that should have seen all these
things, and the whole carriage thereof, could have imagined, that upon such
weak hinges should have moved the greatest act of Power, Wisdom, and Goodness,
that ever was, or ever shall be done in the world; that such Contemptible means
should serve to bring about the eternal good will and purpose of God toward
mankind? yet so it was whiles Judas was plotting his treason, and the Jews
contriving Christ's death, (he to satisfy his Covetousness, and they their
Malice;) and all those other, that had any hand in the business, were looking
every man but at his own private ends: all this while was this Mystery working.
Unawares indeed to them, (and therefore no thanks to them for it, nor benefit
to them from it) but yet by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God:
who most wisely Act 2. 23.
and powerfully ordered all those various and vicious motions of the creature,
for the effectuating of his own most glorious and gracious purposes. That is
one Reason.

10. Secondly, We use to call all such things Mysteries as cannot possibly come
to our knowledge, unless they be some way or other revealed unto us: whether
they have, or have not, otherwise any great difficulty in them.
Nebuchadnezzar's dream is so called (...). Dan. 2 18. Romans 11. 25.
a Mystery, Dan. 2. And St. Paul in one place speaking of the conversion of the
Jews, calls it a Mystery, (I would not Brethren, that you should be ignorant
of this Mystery, Romans 11.) and in another place, speaking of the change of
those that should be found alive at Christ's second coming, calls that a
Mystery too, ( Behold I show you a Mystery; we shall not all dye, etc. 1 Cor.
15.) In this notion also is the Gospel a Mystery: it being utterly impossible,
1 Cor. 15. 51.
that any wit of man, by the light of Nature, or strength of humane discourse,
should have been able to have found out that way, which Almighty God has
appointed for our salvation; if it had not pleased him to have made it known to
the world by supernatural revelation. The wisest Philosophers, and learned
Rabbis, nor did nor could ever have dreamt of any such thing; till God
revealed it to his Church by his Prophets and Apostles. This mystery was Col.
1. 26. 1 Cor. 2. 8. 10*
hid from Ages, and from Generations, nor did any of the Princes of this world
know it in any of those Ages or Generations; as it is now made manifest to us,
since God revealed it to us by his Spirit: As our Apostle elsewhere speaks.

11. The Philosophers indeed saw (a little dimly) some of those truths that are
more clearly revealed to us in the Scriptures. They found in all men a great
pro^livity to Evil, and an indisposition to Good: but knew nothing at all,
either of the true Causes, or of the right Remedies thereof. Some apprehensions
also they had of a Deity, of the Creation of the World, of a divine Providence,
of the Immortality of the Soul, of a final Retribution to be awarded to all men
by a divine justice according to the merit of their works; and some other
truths. But those more high and mysterious points, especially those two, that
of the Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, and that of the Incarnation of the
Son of God, ((...) and (...), as the Greek Fathers use to call them;) together
with those appendices of the latter, the Redemption of the World, the
Justification of a sinner, the Resurrection of the body, and the beatifical
Vision of God and Christ in the Kingdom of Heaven: not the least thought of any
of these deep things of God ever came within them; God not having revealed the
same unto them.

12. It is no thanks then to us, that very children among us do believe and
confess these high mysterious points, whereof Plato, and Aristotle, and all the
other grand Sophies among them were ignorant: since we owe our whole knowledge
herein, not to our own natural sagacity or industry (wherein they were beyond
most of us) but to divine and supernatural revelation. For flesh and blood has
not revealed them unto us, but our Father which is in Heaven. We see what Mat.
16. 17.
they saw not: not because our eyes are better than theirs, but because God
has vouchsafed to us a better light than he did to them. Which being an act of
special grace, ought therefore to be acknowledged with special thankfulness.
Our Savior has given us the example, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven
and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and
have revealed them unto babes, Mat. 11. 25.

13. Truly, much cause we have to bless the holy Name of God, that he has
given us to be born of Christian Parents, and to be bred up in the bosom of the
Christian Church: where we have been initiated into these Sacred Mysteries;
being catechized and instructed in the Doctrine of the Gospel out of the holy
Scriptures, even from our very Childhood, as Timothy was. But we are wretchedly
(...). 2 Timothy 3. 15.
unthankful to so good a God, and extremely unworthy of so great a blessing: if
we murmur against our Governors, and clamor against the Times, because every
thing is not point-wise just as we should have it, or as we have fancied to our
selves it should be. Whereas, were our hearts truly thankful, although things
should be really and in truth even ten times worse than now they are, but in
their conceit only: yet so long as we may enjoy the Gospel in any (though never
so scant a) measure, and with any (though never so hard) conditions, we should
account it a benefit and mercy invaluable. (...), so St. Paul esteemed it, the
very riches of the grace of God: for he writes, According to the riches of his
grace, wherein he has abounded toward us, in all wisdom and prudence having
made known to us the mystery of his will, Ephesians. 1.] If he had not Ephesians. 1. 7. --
9.
made it known to us, we had never known it: aad that is the second Reason why
a Mystery.

14. There is yet a Third: even because we are not able perfectly to comprehend
it, now it is revealed. And this Reason will se^ch in the Quantum too. For
herein especially it is that this Mystery does so far transcend all other
Mysteries. (...), a great, mavelous great Mystery. In the search whereof
Reason finding it self at a loss, is forced to give it over in the plain field,
and to cry out, O altitudo! as being unable to reach the unfathomed depth
thereof. We believe and know, and that with fullness of assurance, that all
these things are so as they are revealed in the holy Scriptures; because the
mouth of God (who is Truth it self, and cannot lie) has spoken them: and our
own Reason upon this ground teaches us to submit ourselves and it to the
obedience of Faith, for the (...), that so it is. But then for the (...), (
Nichodemus his question, How can these things be?) it is no more possible for
our weak understanding Joh. 3.
to comprehend that, than it is for the eyes of Bats or Owls to look steadfastly
upon the body of the Sun, when he shines forth in his greatest strength. The
very Angels, those holy and heavenly spirits, have a desire, says St. Peter,
(it is but a desire, not any perfect ability; and that but (...) neither) to
peep a little into those incomprehensible Mysteries, and then cover their faces
with their 1 Pet. 1. 10.
wings, and peep again, and cover again: as being not able to endure the
fullness of that glorious luster that shines therein.

15. God has revealed himself and his good pleasure toward us in his holy
Word sufficient to save our souls, if we will believe: but not to solve all our
doubts, if we will dispute. The Scriptures being written for our sakes; it was
needful they should be fitted to our capacities: and therefore the mysteries
contained therein are set forth by such resemblances as we are capable of; but
far short of the nature and excellency of the things themselves. The best
knowledge we can have of them here, is but per speculum, and in aenigmate, 1
Cor. 13. 1 Cor. 13. 12.
as it were in a glass, and by way of riddle: darkly both. God teaches us by
the eye in his Creatures. That is per speculum, as it were by a glass, and that
but a divine one neither: where we may read (...), some of the invisible things
of God; but written in small and out-worn Characters, scarce legible by Romans 1.
19. 23.
us. He teaches us also by the Ear, in the preaching of his holy Word: but
that in aenigmate, altogether by riddles, dark riddles. That there should be
three distinct Persons in one Essence, and two distinct Natures in one Person;
That Virginity should Conceive, Eternity be Born, Immortality Die, and
Mortality rise from Death to Life; That there should be a finite and mortal
God, or an infinite and immortal Man: What are all these, and many other more
of like intricacy, but so many Riddles?

16. In all which (that I may from the Premises infer something of Use) we
should but cum ratione insanire, should we go about to make our Reason the
measure of our Faith. We may as well think to grasp the Earth in our fists, or
to empty the Sea with a Pitcher; as to comprehend these heavenly Mysteries
within our narrow understanding. Puteus altus; the Well is deep, and our
Buckets (for want of Cordage) will not reach near the bottom. We have use of
our Reason (and they are unreasonable, that would deny us the use of it) in
Religion, as well as in other things. And that not only in Agendis, in matters
of D^ty and Morality, wherein it is of a more necessary and constant use, as
the standard to regulate our judgments in most cases: but even in Credendis
too, in such points as are more properly of Faith, in matters Doctrinal and
Dogmatical. But then she must be employed, only as an handmaid to Faith; and
learn to know her distance, Confer, and Infer; those are her proper tasks:
to confer one Scripture with another; and to infer Conclusions, and deduce
Instructions thence by clear Logical Discourse. Let her keep within these
bounds; and ^he may do very good service. But we mar all if we suffer the
handmaid to bear too great a sway, to grow petulant, and to perk above the
Mistress.

17. It has been the bane of the Church, and the Original of the most, and the
most pernicious, Errors and Heresies in all Ages: that men not contenting
themselves with the simplicity of believing, have doted too much upon their own
fancies; and made Reason the sole standard, whereby to measure both the
Principles and Conclusions of Faith. It is the very fundamental error of the
Socinians at this day. No less absurdly, than as if a man should take upon him
without Mathematical Instruments to take the just dimensions of the heavenly
bodies, and to pronounce of Altitudes, Magnitudes, Distances, Aspects, and
other appearances, only by the scantling of the Eye. Nor less dangerously, than
as if a Smith (it is St. Chrysostoms comparison) should lay by his tongs, and
take the Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. (...). 8.
Iron hot from the Forge to work it upon the Anvil with his bare hands.
Mysteries are not to be measured by Reason. That is the first Instruction.

18. The next is, That forasmuch as there are in the Mystery of Christianity so
many things incomprehensible; it would be safe for us (for the avoiding of
Errors and Contentions, and consequently in order to those two most precious
things, Truth and Peace) to contain our selves within the bounds of Sobriety,
without wading too far into abstruse, curious and useless speculations. The
most necessary Truths, and such as sufficed to bring our forefathers (in the
Primitive and succeeding times) to heaven, are so clearly revealed in
Scripture, and have been so universally and constantly consented unto by the
Christian Church in a continued succession of times; as that to doubt of them
must needs argue a spirit of Pride and Singularity at least, if not also of
Strife and Contradiction. But in things less evident (and therefore also less
necessary) no man ought to be either too stiff in his own private opinion, or
too peremptory in judging those that are otherwise minded. But as every man
would desire to be left to his own liberty of Judgment in such things; so
should he be willing to leave other men to their liberty also: at least, so
long as they keep themselves quiet, without raising quarrels, or disturbing the
peace of the Church thereabouts.

19. As for example. Concerning the Entrance and Propagation of Original sin;
the Nature, Orders and Offices of Angels; The Time, Place and Antecedents of
the last judgment; The Consistency both of Gods immutable decrees, with the
contingency of second Causes, and of the efficacy of Gods grace, with the
freedom of Manswill, etc. In which and other like difficult points, they that
have traveled farthest, with desire to satisfy their own curiosity, have
either dashed upon pernicious Errors, or involved themselves in inextricable
difficulties; or by Gods mercy (which is the happiest loose from such fruitless
studies) have been thereby brought to a deeper sense of their own ignorance,
and an higher admiration of the infinite Majesty and wisdom of our great God,
who has set his Counsels so high above our reach, made his ways so impossible
for us to find out. That is our second Instruction.

20. There is yet another, arising from the consideration of the greatness of
this Mystery. That therefore no man ought to take offense at the discrepancy of
opinions, that is in the Churches of Christ amongst Divines, in matters of
Religion. There are men in the world (who think themselves no babes neither) so
deeply possessed with a spirit of Atheism; that though they will be of any
Religion (in show) to serve their turns, and comply with the Times: yet they
are resolved to be (indeed) of none, till all men be agreed of one: which yet
never was, nor is ever like to be. A resolution no less desperate for the soul,
if not rather much more, than it would be for the body, if a man should vow he
would never eat till all the Clocks in the City should strike Twelve together.
If we look into the large Volumes that have been written by Philosophers,
Lawyers, and Phisicians we shall find the greatest part of them spent in
Disputations, and in the reciting and confuting of one another opinions. And
we allow them so to do, without prejudice to their respective professions:
albeit they be conversant about things measurable by Sense, or Reason. Only in
Divinity, great offense is taken at the multitude of Controversies: wherein yet
difference of opinions is by so much more tolerable than in other Sciences; by
how much the things about which we are conversant are of a more sublime,
mysterious and incomprehensible nature, than are those of other Sciences.

21. Truly it would make a religious heart bleed, to consider the many and
great distractions that are all over the Christian world at this day. The
lamentable effects whereof scarce any part of Christendom but feels more or
less: either in open wars, or dangerous seditions, or (at the best) in
uncharitable censures and ungrounded jealousies. Yet the infinite variety of
men's dispositions, inclinations, and aims considered; together with the great
obscurity that is in the things of God, and the strength of corruption that is
in us: it is to be acknowledged the admirable work of God, that these
distractions are not even much more, and greater, and wider than they are; and
that amid so many Sects as are in the world, there should be yet such an
universal concurrence of judgment as there is, in the main fundamental points
of the Christian Faith. And if we were so wise, as we might and should be, to
make the right use of it: it would not stumble us a whit in the belief of our
Religion, that Christians differ so much as they do in many things; but rather
mightily confirm us in the assurances thereof, that they agree so well as they
do almost in any thing. And it may be a great comfort to every well meaning
soul, that the simple belief of those certain truths, whereon all parties are
in a manner agreed, may be, and (ordinarily) is sufficient for the salvation of
all them, who are sincerely careful (according to that measure of light and
means that God has vouchsafed them) to actuate their Faith with Piety, Charity
and good Works: so making this great Mystery to become unto them (as it is in
its self) Mysterium Pietatis, a Mystery of Godliness. Which is the last point
proposed: the Quale, to which I now pass.

22. As the corrupt Doctrine of Antichrist is not only a Doctrine of Error, but
of Impiety too; called therefore (...), The mystery of iniquity, 2 These. 2 These
2. 7.
2. So the wholesome doctrine of Christ, is not only a doctrine of Truth, but of
Piety too; and is therefore termed here (...), The Mystery of Godliness. Which
(...), or Godliness; since there appears not any great necessity in the
Context to restrain it to that more peculiar sense, wherein both the Greek and
English word are sometimes used; namely, to signify the right manner of Gods
Worship according to his word, in opposition to all idolatrous, superstitious,
or false Worships practiced among the Heathens: I am the rather inclined to
understand it here, as many Interpreters have done, in the fuller Latitude, as
it comprehenderh the whole duty of a Christian man, which he stands bound, by
the command of God in his Law, or of Christ in his Gospel, to perform.

23. Verum and Bonum, we know, are near of kin the one to the other: And the
spirit of God, who is both the Author and the Revealer of this Mystery; as he
is the spirit of truth, Joh. 14. so is he also the spirit of holiness, Romans 1.
And Joh. 14. 17. Romans 1. 4.
it is part of his work to sanctific the heart with grace, as well as to
enlighten the mind with knowledge. Our Apostle therefore sometimes mentions
Truth and Godliness together: teaching us thereby, that we should take them
both into our care together. If any man consent not to the words of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is after Godliness, 1 Timothy 6. And Tit.
1. -- according to 1 Timothy 6. 3. T^t. 1. 1.
the Faith of Gods Elect, and acknowledging of the Truth which is after
Godliness. And here in express terms, The Mystery of Godliness. And that most
rightly: whether we consider it in the Scope, Parts or Conservation of it.

24. First, the general Scope and aim of Christianity is, by the mercy of God
founded on the merits of Christ, to bring men on through Faith and Godliness to
Salvation. It was not in the purpose of God in publishing the Gospel, and
thereby freeing us from the personal obligation, rigor and curse of the Law,
so to turn us loose and lawless, to do whatsoever should seem good in our own
eyes, follow our own crooked wills, or gratify any corrupt lust: but to oblige
us rather the faster by these new benefits, and to incite us the more
effectually by Evangelical promises, to the earnest study and pursuit of
Godliness. The Gospel, Romans 12. 1, 2. Cor. 7. 1, etc.
though upon quite different grounds, binds us yet to our good behavior in
every respect, as deep as ever the Law did, if not in some respects deeper:
allowing no liberty to the flesh for the fulfilling of the lusts thereof in any
thing, but exacting entire sanctity and purity, both of inward affection, and
outward conversation in all those that embrace it. The grace of God, appearing
in the revelation Tit. 2. 11. 12
of this mystery, as it brings along with it an offer of salvation to all
men: so it teaches all men, that have any real purpose to lay hold on so
gracious an offer, to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
righteously, and soberly, and godly in this present world.

25. It is not to be wondered at, if all false Religions give allowance to some
dare morbo, exemplo divin^tatis, excusatam licentiam. Senec. de brevit. vit. c.
16. Exprimunt impudicam Venerem, adulterum Martem, Iovem illum suum non magis
regnis quam vitiis principem. Cyprian. Epist. 2.
ungodliness or other: when the very Gods whom they worship give such
encouragements thereunto by their lewd examples. The Gods of the Pagans were
renowned for nothing so much, most of them, as for their vices. Mars, a bloody
God; Bacchus, a drunken God; Mercury, a cheating God; and so proportionably in
their several kinds all the rest. Their great Capital God Jupiter, guilty of
almost all the Capital vices. And where the Gods are naught, who can imagine
the Religion should be good? Their very mysteria sacra (as they called them)
were so full of all wickedness and filthy abominations (as was already in part
touched) but is fully discovered by Clemens Alexandrinus, Lactantius, Arnobius,
Tertullian, (and other of the Ancients of our Religion) that it was the wisest
point in all their Religion, to take such strict order as they did, for the
keeping of them secret.

26. But it is the honor and prerogative of the Christian Religion, that it
alone allows of no wickedness: But as God himself is holy, so he requires an
holy Worship, and holy Worshippers. He exacteth the mortification of all evil
lusts: 1 These. 5. 23.
and the sanctification of the whole man, body, soul, and spirit, and that in
each of these throughout. Every one that names himself from the name of
Christ, (...). 2 Timothy 12. 9.
does ipso facto by the very taking of that blessed name upon him, and daring
to style himself Christian, virtually bind himself to depart from all iniquity:
nor so only, but to endeavor also (after the example of him, whose name
otherwise he unworthily usurpeth) to be just, merciful, temperate, humble,
meek, patient, charitable; to get the habits, and to exercise the acts of these
and all other holy graces and virtues. Nay more; the Gospel imposes upon us
some moral strictnesses, which the Stoics themselves, or whoever else were the
most rigid Masters of Morality, never so much as thought of. Nay yet more; it
exalts the Moral Law of God himself, given by Moses to the People of Israel,
to a higher pitch, than they (at least as they commonly understood the Law)
took themselves thereby obliged unto. That a man should forsake all his dearest
Luke 18. 19. Man. 16. 24.
friends, yea, and deny his own dearest self too, for Christ's sake; and yet for
Christ's sake at the same time love his deadliest enemies: That he should take
Mat. 5. 44. 1 John 3. 16.
up his Cross, and (if need were) lay down his life, not only for his great
Master, but even for the meanest of his fellow servants too: That he should
exult with joy, and abound in hope, in the midst of tribulations, of
persecutions, of death it self! Surely the Mystery that drives at all this,
must needs be (...) in the highest degree, the great mystery of Godliness. That
for the scope.

27. Look now secondly at the parts and parcels, the several pieces (as it
were) whereof this mystery is made up; those mentioned in this verse, and the
rest: and you shall find, that from each of them severally, but how much more
then from them altogether jointly, may be deduced sundry strong motives and
perswasives unto Godliness. Take the material parts of this Mystery: the
Incarnation, Nativity, Circumcision, Baptism, Temptation, Preaching, Life,
Death, Burial, Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession, and Second coming of
Christ. Or take (if I may so call them) the formal parts thereof: our eternal
Election before the World was, our Vocation by the Preaching of the Gospel, our
Justification by Faith in the merits of Christ, our Sanctification by the
Spirit of grace, the steadfast Promises we have, and hopes of future Glory, and
the rest. It would be too long to vouch Texts for each particular; but this I
say of them all in general: There is not one link in either of those two golden
chains, which does not straightly tie up our hands, tongues and hearts from doing
evil; draw us up effectually unto God and Christ; and strongly oblige us to
show forth the power of his Grace upon our souls, by expressing the power of
Godliness in our lives and conversations. That for the parts.

28. Thirdly, Christian Religion may be called the Mystery of Godliness, in
regard of its Conversation: because Godliness is the best preserver of
Christianity. Roots, and Fruits, and Herbs, which let alone and left to
themselves would soon corrupt and putri^ie, may, being well condited with Sugar
by a skilful Confectioner, be preserved to continue for many years, and be
serviceable all the while. So the best and surest means to preserve
Christianity in its proper integrity and power, from corrupting into Atheism or
Heresy, is to season it well with Grace, (as we do fresh meats with salt to
keep them sweet;) and to be sure to keep the Conscience upright. Holding the
mysteries of faith in a pure Conscience, says our Apostle a little after, at
verse 9. of this Chapter: and in the first Chapter of this Epistle verse. 19.
Holding faith and a good Conscience, which (latter) some having put away,
concerning faith have made shipwreck. Apostasy from the faith springs most
an end from Apostasy in manners: And he that has but a very little care how
he lives, can have no very fast hold of what he believes. For when men grow
once regardless of their Consciences, good affections will soon languish: and
then will noysom lusts gather strength, and cast up mud into the soul, that the
judgment cannot run clear. Seldom is the head right, where the heart is amiss.
A rotten heart will be ever and anon sending up evil thoughts into the mind, as
marish and fenny grounds do foggy mists into the air, that both darken and
corrupt it. As a man's taste, when some malignant humor affects the organ,
savoureth nothing aright, but deemeth sweet things bitter, and sour things
pleasant: So where Avarice, Ambition, Malice, Voluptuousness, Vainglory,
Sedition, or any other domineering lust has made it self master of the heart:
it will so blind and corrupt the judgment, that it shall not be able to discern
(at any certainty) good from evil, or truth from falsehood. Wholesome Isa. 5. 20.
2 Pet. 1. 5.
therefore is St. Peter's advice, to add unto faith Virtue. Virtue will not only
keep it in life, but at such a height of vigor also, that it shall not easily
either degenerate into Heresy, or languish into Atheism.

29. We see now three Reasons, for which the Doctrine of Christianity may be
called The mystery of Godliness: because it first exacteth Godliness; and
secondly exciteth unto Godliness; and is thirdly best preserved by Godliness.
From these Premises, I shall desire (for our nearer instruction) to infer but
two things only: the one, for the trial of Doctrines; the other, for the
bettering of our lives. For the first: St. John would not have us over-forward
to believe every spirit. Every 1 John 4. 1.
spirit, does he say? Truly, it is impossible we should; unless we should
believe flat contradictions. Whilst one Spirit says, It is; another Spirit
says, It is not: can a man believe the one* and not disbelieve the other, if
he hear both? Believe not every spirit then, is as much (in St. John's meaning)
as if he had said, Be not too hasty to Believe any Spirit (especially where
there appears some just cause of Suspicion) but try it first, whether it be a
true spirit or a false. Even as St. Paul bids us prove all things, that
having so done, we may 1 Th^s. 5. 21.
hold fast what upon trial proves good, and let the rest go.

30. Now holy Scripture is certainly that Lapis Lydius, that Test whereby this
trial is to be made. Ad legem, and ad testimonium: when we have wrangled as
Isa. 8. 20.
long as we can, hitherto we must come at last. But since all Sectaries pretend
to Scripture; Papists, Anabaptists, Disciplinarians, All; yea, the Devil
himself can vouch Texts to drive on a Temptation: It were good therefore we
knew how to make right applications of Scripture, for the Trial of Doctrines,
that we do not mistake a false one for a true one. Many profitable Rules for
this purpose our Apostle affords us in sundry places. One very good one we
may gather from the words immediately before the Text, wherein the Church of
God is said to be the pillar and ground of truth. The Collection thence is
obvious, that it would very much conduce to the guiding of our judgments
aright, in the examining of men's doctrines concerning either Faith or Manners,
wherein the Letter of Scripture is obscure, or the meaning doubtful, to inform
our selves as well as we can, in credendis, what the received sense; and in
agendis, what the constant usage and practice of the Church (especially in the
ancient times) has been concerning those matters: and that to consider what
conformity the Doctrines under trial hold with the principles, upon which that
their sense or practice in the Premises was grounded. The Judgment and
Practice of the Church, ought to sway very much with every sober and wise man:
either of which whosoever neglects, or but slighteth (as too many do, upon a
very poor pretense, that the mystery of iniquity began to work betimes) runs
a great hazard of falling into many errors and Absurdities. If he do not; he
may thank his good fortune, more than his forecast: and if he do, he may thank
none but himself for neglecting so good a guide.

31. But this now mentioned Rule, although it be of excellent use, if it be
rightly understood, and prudently applied, and therefore growing so near the
Text, I could not wholly baulk it, without some notice taken of it; it being
not within the Text, I press it no farther; but come to another, that springs
out of the very Text it self: And it is this: a very good one too, viz. That
when we are to try the Doctrines, we should duly examine them whether they be
according unto Godliness, yea, or no. Our Saviors direction for the discovery
of false Prophets, Mat. 7. is to this very purpose; Ex fructibus, Ye shall know
them Mat. 7. 16, 20.
by their fruits. Means he it, trow you, of the fruits of their lives in
their outward Conversation? Verily no: not only; no, nor principally neither:
perhaps not at all. For Falsehood is commonly set off by Hypocrisy: (...) in
the next following verse here. Shows of Sanctity and Purity, pretensions of
Religion and Reformation, is the wool that the woolf wrappeth about him, when
he means to do most mischief with least suspicion. The Old Serpent sure is
never so silly, as to think his Ministers ( the Ministers of darkness) should
be able to draw in a considerable party into their communion, should they
appear in their dismal colors: therefore he puts them into a new dress
before he sends them abroad, disguising and transforming them as if they were
the Ministers of 2 Cor. 11. 13. -- 15.
righteousness and of the light. Our Savior therefore cannot mean the fruits
of their lives so much (if at all) as the fruits of their Doctrines: that is to
say, the necessary consequents of their Doctrines; such Conclusions, as
naturally and by good and evident discourse do issue from their Doctrines. And
so understood, it is a very useful Rule; even in the Affirmative, (taking in
other requisite conditions withal:) but in the Negative, taken even alone and
by it self, it holds infallibly. If what is spoken seem to be according to
Godliness; it is the better to like onward, and the more likely to be true: yet
may it possibly be false for all that, and therefore it will be needful to try
it farther, and to make use of other Criterions withal. But if what is spoken,
upon examination, appear to have any repugnancy with Godliness, in any one
branch or duty thereunto belonging: we may be sure the words cannot be wholesome
words. It can be no heavenly Doctrine, that teaches men to be Earthly,
Sensual, or Devilish: or that tends to make men unjust in their dealings,
uncharitable in their censures, undutiful to their superiors, or any other way,
superstitious, licentious, or profane.

32. I note it, not without much rejoicing and gratulating to us of this
Church. There are, God knows, a-foot in the Christian World, Controversies
more than a good many: Decads, Centuries, Chiliads of novel Tenants, brought in
in this last Age (which were never believed, many of them scarce ever heard of,
in the Ancient Church) by Sectaries of all sorts. Now it is our great comfort
(blessed be God for it) that the Doctrine established in the Church of England
(I mean the public Doctrine, for that is it we are to hold us to, passing by
private Opinions;) I say, the public Doctrine of our Church is such, as is not
justly chargeable with any Impiety, contrarious to any part of that Duty we owe
either to God or Man. Oh that our Conversations were as free from exception, as
our Religion is! Oh that we were sufficiently careful to preserve the honor
and luster of the Truth we profess, by the correspondency of our lives and
actions thereunto!

33. And upon this point we dare boldly join issue, with our clamourous
adversaries on either hand, Papists I mean, and Disciplinarians. Who do both so
loudly (but unjustly) accuse us and our Religion: they, as carnal and
licentious; 1 King. 18. 24.
these, as Popish and superstitious. As Elijah once said to the Baalites, that
God that answers by fire, let him be God: so may we say to either of both:
and when we have said it, not fear to put it to a fair trial; That Church,
whose Dostrine, Confession, and Worship is most according to Godliness, let
that be the Church. As for our Accusers, if there were no more to be instanced
in but that one cursed position alone, wherein (notwithstanding their
disagreements otherwise) they both consent; That lawful Sovereigns may be by
their Subjects resisted, and Arms taken up against them, for the cause of
Religion: it were enough to make good the Challenge against them both. Which is
such a notorious piece of Ungodliness, as no man, that either fears God or
King, as he ought to do, can speak of, or think of, without detestation; and is
certainly (if either St. Peter or St. Paul, those two great Apostles,
understood themselves) a branch rather of that other great mystery (2 These. 2.)
the mystery of Iniquity, than of the great mystery here in the Text, the
mystery of Godliness. There is not that point in Popery besides, (to my
understanding) that makes it savor so strongly of Antichrist; as this one
dangerous and desperate point of Iesuitism does. Wherein yet those men, that
are ever bawling against our Ceremonies and Service, as Antichristian, do so
deeply and wretchedly symbolize with them. The Lord be judge between them and
us: whether our Service, or their Doctrine, be the more Antichristian.

34. I have done with the former Inference, for the trial of Doctrines: there
is another yet behind, for the bettering of our lives. For since Christianity is
a mystery of Godliness: it concerns every Christian man, so to take the
mystery along with him, that he leave not Godliness behind. That is, whatsoever
becomes of doubtful Controversies; to look well to his life, and to make
conscience of practicing that which without all Controversy, is his Duty. I
know, Controversies must be looked into: and it were well, if it were done by
them (and by them only) whose Gifts and Callings serve for it. For Truths must
be maintained, Errors must be refuted, and the Mouths of gainsayers must be
stopped. All this must be done, it is true: but it is as true, when all this is
done, still the shortest cut to heaven is Faith and Godliness.

35. I know not how better to draw my Sermon toward a conclusion, than by
observing how the great Preacher concludes his, Eccles. last. After he had
taken a large and exact survey of all the travels that are done under the Sun,
and found nothing in them but Vanity and Vexation of Spirit: he tells us at
length, that in multitude of Books and much reading we may sooner meet with
weariness than satisfaction. But, says he, if you will hear the end of all,
here it is; this is the Conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God and keep his
Commandments; for this is the whole business of man, upon which all his care
and employment in this world should be spent. So I say, we may puzzle our
selves in the pursuit of knowledge, dive into the mysteries of all Arts and
Sciences, especially ingulph our selves deep in the studies of those three
highest Professions of Physic, Law and Divinity: For Physic, search into the
Writings of Hippocrates, Galen, and the Methodists, of Avicen and the
Empyricks, of Paracelsus and the Chemists; for Law, wrestle through the large
bodies of both Laws, Civil and Canon, with the vast Tomes of Glosses,
Repertories, Responses and Commentaries thereon, and take in the Reports and
year-books of our Common Law to boot; for Divinity, get through a course of
Councils, Fathers, School men, Casuists, Expositors, Controversers of all sorts
and Sects. When all is done, after much weariness to the flesh, and (in
comparison thereof) little satisfaction to the mind (for the more knowledge we
gain by all this travel, the more we discern our own Ignorance, and thereby but
increase our own sorrow:) the short of all is this; and when I have said it, I
have done. You shall evermore find, try it when you will,

Temperance, the best Physic; Patience, the best Law; and A good Conscience,
the best Divinity.
I have done. Now to God, etc.

AD AULAM.
The Tenth Sermon.
WHITE HALL, at a public Fast, JULY 8. 1640.
Psalm. 119. 75. I know, O Lord, that thy Judgments are right: and that thou of
very faithfulness have caused me to be troubled.
1. IN which words the holy Prophet in two several Conclusions gives unto God
the Glory of those two his great Attributes, that shine forth with so much
luster in all the Works of his Providence: his Justice and his Mercy. The glory
of his Justice in the former conclusion, I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are
right: the glory of his Mercy in the latter, And that thou of very faithfulness
have caused me to be troubled. And to secure us the better of the truth of both
Conclusions, because flesh and blood will be ready to stumble at both: We have
his Scio prefixed, expressly to the former only, but (the speech being
copulative) intended to both. I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right: and
I know also that thou of very faithfulness have caused me to be troubled. Our
order must be to begin with the Conclusions first, as they lie in the Text; and
after that to proceed to David's knowledge of them, although that stand first in
the order of the words. In the former Conclusion we have to consider of Two
things. First, what these judgments of God are that David here speaks of, as
the Subject: and then of the righteousness thereof, as the Praedicate. I know,
O Lord, that thy judgments are right.

2. What Judgments first? There are judicia oris, and there are judici^ operis:
the judgments of Gods mouth, and the judgments of Gods hands. Of the former
there is mention at Verse 13. [ With my lips have I been telling of all the
judgments of thy mouth.] And by these Judgments are meant nothing else but the
holy Law of God, and his whole written Word; which every where in this Psalm
are indifferently called his Statutes, his Commandments, his Precepts, his
Testimonies, his Judgments. And the Laws of God are therefore (amongst other
reasons) called by the name of (...) Justin Martyr. respons. ad orthod. qu. 92.
Romans 7. 7.
Judgments; because by them we come to have a right judgment, whereby to
discern between Good and Evil. We could not otherwise with any certainty judge,
what was meet for us to do, and what was needful for us to shun. A lege tua
intellexi, at verse 104. By thy Law have I gotten understanding. St. Paul
confesses, Romans 7. that he had never rightly known what sin was, if it had not
been for the Law: and he instanceth in that of lust, which he had not known to
be a sin, if the Law had not said, Thou shall not covet. And no question but
these judgments, these judicia oris, are all right too; for it were
unreasonable to think, that God should make that a rule of right to us, which
were it self not right. We have both the name, (that of judgments;) and the
thing too, (that they are right) in the 19th Psalm: Where having highly
commended the Law of God, under the several appellations of Law, Testimonies,
Statutes and Commandments, ver. 7, and 8. the Prophet then concludes under
this name of Judgments, ver. 9. The judgments of the Lord are true and
righteous altogether.

3. Besides these Iudicia Oris, which are Gods judgments of directions: there
are also Iudicia Operis, which are his judgments for correction. And these do
ever include aliquid poenale, something inflicted upon us by Almighty God, as
it were by way of punishment; something that breeds us Trouble or Grief: The
Apostle says, Heb. 12. that every chastening is grievous: and so it is more or
less; Heb. 12. 11.
or else it could be to us no punishment. And these again are of two sorts: yet
not distinguished so much by the things themselves that are inflicted, as by
the condition of the persons on whom they are inflicted, and especially by the
Affection, and Intention of God that inflicteth them. For all, whether public
calamities, that light upon whole Nations, Cities, or other greater or lesser
Societies of men (such as are Pestilences, Famine, War, Inundations,
unseasonable Weather, and the like;) or private Afflictions that light upon
particular Families or Persons, (as sickness, poverty, disgraces, injuries,
death of friends, and the like:) All these, and whatsoever other of either
kind, may undergo a twofold consideration: in either of both which, they may
not unfitly be termed the Judgments of God; though in different respects.

4. For either these things are sent by Almighty God in his heavy displeasure,
as Plagues upon his Enemies, intending therein their destruction: Such as were
those public judgments, upon the Old World, swept away with the flood; upon
Sodom and the other Cities, consumed with fire from Heaven; upon Pharaoh, and
his Host, overwhelmed in the Red Sea; upon the Canaanites, spewed out of the
Land for their abominations; upon Jerusalem, at the final destruction thereof
by the Romans. And those private judgments also, that befell sundry particular
persons, as Cain, Absolon, Senacherib, Herod, and others. Or else they are laid
by Almighty God as gentle Corrections upon his own Children, in his Fatherly
love toward them, and for their good; to chastise them for their strayings, to
bring them to repentance for their sins, to make them more observant and
careful of their duty thence-forward, to exercise their Faith, and Patience,
and other Graces, and the like. Such as were those distresses that befell the
whole people of Israel sundry times under Moses, and in the days of their
Judges and Kings; and those particular Trials and Afflictions wherewith
Abraham, and Joseph, and Job, and David, and Paul, and other the holy Saints
and Servants of God were exercised in their times.

5. Both the one sort and the other are called Judgments: but (as I said) in
different respects, and for different reasons. Those former Plagues are called
Gods Judgments; because they come from God, not as a loving and merciful
Father, but as a just and severe Judge: who proceeding according to course of
Law gives sentence against a malefactor to cut him off. And therefore this
kind Psalm. 143. 2.
of judgment David earnestly deprecateth, Psalm. 143. [ Enter not into judgment
with thy servant:] for then neither can I, nor any flesh living be justified in
thy sight. These latter Corrections also, or chastenings of our heavenly
Father, are called Judgments too, [ When we are judged, we are chastened of the
Lord:] but 1 Cor. 11. 32.
in a quite different notion. Because God proceeds therein, not with Violence
and Fury, as men that are in passion use to do: but coolly, and advisedly, and
with judgment. And therefore, whereas David deprecated Gods judgment (as we
heard) in that former notion, and as judgment is opposed to Favor: Jeremy on
the other side desires Gods judgment in this latter notion, and as it is
opposed to Fury [Correct me, O Lord! yet in thy judgment, not in thy fury,]
Jer. Jer. 10. 24.
10.

6. Now we see the several sorts of Gods judgments: which of all these may we
think is here meant? If we should take them all in, the Conclusion would hold
them, and hold true too. Iudicia Oris, and judicia Operis; public and private
judgments; those Plagues wherewith in fury he punishes his Enemies, and those
rods wherewith in mercy he corrects his children: most certain it is, they
are all right. But yet I conceive those judicia oris not to be so properly
meant in this place: for the Exegesis in the latter part of the verse (wherein
what are here called judgments, are there expounded by troubles) seems to
exclude them, and to confine the Text in the proper intent thereof to these
judicia operis only: but yet to all them of what sort soever; public or
private, Plagues or Corrections. Of all which he pronounces that they are
right: which is the Predicate of the Conclusion; and comes next to be
considered. I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right.

7. And we may know it too, if we will but care to know either God or Our
selves. First, for God; though we be not -- incomprehensibilis dispositio and
irreprehensibilis. Bern. sermon. 103. Psalm. 145. 17. Isa. 26. 8.
able to comprehend the reasons of his dispensations, the (...): yet for (...),
that the judgments are right, it may satisfy us if we do but know that they
are his. Tua will infer recta strongly enough: for the Lord, who is righteous
in all his ways, must needs be so in the way of his judgments too. 1. Men's
judgments are sometimes not right through misinformations, and sundry other
mistakings and defects; for which the Laws therefore allow Writs of Error,
Appeals, and other remedies: But as for God, Psalm. 139. 3. Prove. 21. 2.
he not only spieth out the goings, but also searches into the hearts of all
men; he pondereth their spirits, and by him all their actions are weighed. 2.
Men's judgments are sometimes not right, because themselves are partial and
unjust; awed with Fear, blinded with Gifts, transported with Passion, carried
away with Favor or Dis affection, or wearied with Importunity. But as for God,
with him Romans 2. 11. Genesis 18. 25.
is no respect of Persons, nor possibility of being corrupted. Abraham took
that for granted, that the judge of all the world must needs do right, Genesis 18.
And the Apostle rejects all suspicion to the contrary with an Absit, (What
shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid, Romans 9.) 3.
Men's judgments Romans 9. 14.
are sometimes not right, merely for want of zeal to justice: They lay not the
causes of poor men to heart, nor are willing to put themselves to the pains or
trouble of sifting a cause to the bottom, nor care much which way it go, so as
they may but be at rest, and enjoy their ease. But as for God, he is zealous of
doing justice: he loves it himself; he requires it in others; punishing the
neglect of it, and rewarding the administration of it in them to whom it
belongs. ( The righteous Lord loves righteousness, Psalm. 11.)

8. And then secondly in our selves we may find (if we will but look) enough to
satisfy us even for the (...) too, so far as is meet for us to expect
satisfaction. The judgments of God indeed are Abyssus multa: his ways are in
the Sea, and his Psalm. 11. ult. Psalm 77. 19. (...). Romans 11. 33.
paths are in the deep waters, and his footsteps are not known; (...), Soon may
we lose our selves in the search, but never find them out. Yet even there,
where the judgments of God are like a great deep, unfathomable by any finite
understanding: his righteousness yet stands like the high mountains (as it is
in Psalm. 36. 6.
Psalm. 36.) visible to every eye. If any of us shall search well into his own
heart, and weigh his own carriage and deservings: if he shall not then find
enough in himself to justify God in all his proceedings; I forbid him not to
say (which yet I tremble but to rehearse) that God is unrighteous.

9. The holy Saints of God therefore have ever acquitted him by condemning
themselves. The Prophet Jeremy in the behalf of himself and the whole Church
Lam. 1. 18.
of God, ( The Lord is righteous: for I have rebelled against his Commandments,
Lam. 1.) So did Daniel in that his solemn Confession, when he set his face to
seek the Lord God by prayer and supplications, with fasting and sackcloth and
ashes, Dan. 9. ( O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee; but unto us
confusion of face, as it is this day, to our Kings, to our Princes, and to our
Fathers, because we have sinned against thee, ver. 7.) and again after at verse
14. ( Therefore has the Lord watched upon the evil, and brought it upon us;
for the Lord our God is righteous in all his works which he does: for we obeyed
not his Voice.) Yea, so illustrious many times is the righteousness of God in
his judicial proceedings, that it has extorted an acknowledgment from men
obstinately wicked. Pharaoh, who sometimes in the pride of his heart had said,
Who is the Lord? was afterward by the Exodus 5. 2. Exodus 9. 27.
evidence of the fact it self forced to this confession, I have sinned: the
Lord is righteous, but I and my people are wicked, Exodus 9.

10. They are then (at least in that respect) worse than wicked Pharaoh, that
to justify themselves, will not stick to repine either at God himself, or his
judgments; as if he were cruel, and they unrighteous: like the slothful Servant
in ^at. 25. 24.
the Parable, that did his Master no service at all; and yet as lazy as he was,
could blame his Master for being an hard man. Cain, when he had slain his
righteous brother, and God had laid a judgment upon him for it; complained of
the burden Genesis 4. 13.
of it, as if the Lord had dealt hardly with him, in laying more upon him than
he was able to bear: never considering the weight of the sin, which God in
justice could not bear. Solomon notes it as a fault common among men, when by
their own sinful folly they have pulled misery upon themselves, then to murmur
against God, and complain of his providence: The folly of a man perverteth his
Prove. 19. 3.
ways, and his heart fretteth against the Lord, Prove. 19.] As the Israelites in
their passage through the Wilderness, were ever and anon murmuring and
complaining at somewhat or other; either against God, or (which comes much to
one) against Moses and Aaron, and that upon every occasion, and for every
trifle: so do we. Every small Disgrace, Injury, Affront or Loss, that happens
to us from the forwardnes^ of our Betters, the unkindness of our Neighbors,
the undutifulness of our Children, the unfaithfulness of our Servants, the
unsuccessfulness of our Attempts, or by any other means whatsoever; any sorry
thing will serve to put us quite out of patience: as Jonas took pet at the
withering Jonas 4, 8.
of the Gourd. And as he was ready to justify his impatience even to God
himself [ Do thou well to be angry, Jonas? Yea, marry do I; I do well to be
angry -- Ver. 9.
even to the death:] so are we ready, in all our murmurings against the Lords
corrections, to flatter our selves as if we did not complain without cause;
especially where we are able to charge those men that trouble us, with
unrighteous dealing.

11. This is, I confess a strong temptation to flesh and blood; and many of
Gods holy Servants have had much ado to overcome it, whilst they looked a
little too much outward. But yet we have by the help of God a very present
reme^^y there-against, if blind Self-love will but suffer us to be so wise as
to make use E^ si proxi(...)
o^ it: and that is no more but this, to turn our eye inward; and to examine
our (...) not how well we have dealt with other men, who now requite us so ill?
(...) we our selves have requited God, who has dealt so graciously and
^^^^^tifully with us. If we thus look back into our selves and sins, we shall
soon perceive that God is (...)
just even in those things wherein men are unjust; and that we most righteously
deserved at his hands to suffer all those things, which yet we have no ways
deserved at their hands by whom we suffer. It will well become us therefore,
whatsoever judgments God shall please at any time to lay upon us, or to
threaten us withal; either public or private, either by his own immediate
hand, or by such instruments as he shall employ; without all murmurings or
Phil. 2. 14.
disputings to submit to his good will and pleasure, and to accept the
punishment of our iniquity, (as the Phrase is, Lev. 26.) by humbling our
selves, and confessing Lev. 26. 41. 43.
that the Lord is righteous: as Rehoboam and the Princes of Judah did, 2 Chronicles.
12. The sense of our own wickedness in rebelling, and the acknowledgment 2 Chronicles 12. ^
of Gods justice in punishing (which are the very first acts of true
humiliation, and the first steps unto true repentance;) we shall find by the
mercy of God to be of great efficacy, not only for the averting of Gods
judgments after they are come, but also (if used timely enough, and thoroughly
enough) for the preventing thereof before they become. For if we would judge
our selves, we should not 1 Cor. 11
be judged of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. But because we neglect it, (and yet it is a
thing that must be done, or we are undone;) God in great love and mercy toward
us, sets in for our good; and does it himself, rather than it should be left
undone, and we perish: even as it there follows, When we are judged, we --
are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with ^he world. And
it is that faithfulness of God which David acknowledges in the latter
Conclusion: whereunto I now pass.

12. And that thou of very faithfulness have caused me to be troubled. In which
words we have these three points: First, David was troubled: Next, God caused
him to be so troubled: Last, and God did so out of very faithfulness. No great
news, when we hear of David, to hear of trouble withal; ( Lord remember Psalm. 1.
David and all his troubles, Psalm. 132.) Consider him which way you will, in
his condition natural, spiritual or civil; that is, either as a man, or as a
godly man, or as a King: and he had his portion of troubles in every of those
conditions. First, troubles he must have as a man. Hae^ est conditio nascendi.
Every mothers child that comes into the world, -- (...) thag. Job 1 John Psalm.
Eccl.
has a child's part of those troubles the world affords. Man that is born of
a woman, those few days that he has to live he shall be sure to have them full
of trouble howsoever. In mundo pressuram, says our Savior, In the world ye
shall have tribulation. Never think it can be otherwise, so long as you live
here below in the vale of misery, where at every turn you shall meet with
nothing but very vanity and vexation of spirit.

13. Then he was a Godly man and his troubles were somewhat the more for
(...)o. 23.
that too. For all that will live godly must suffer persecution: and however it
is 2 Timothy Psalm. 3^
with other men, certainly many are the troubles of the righteous. It is the
common lot of the true Children of God, because they have many out-flyings,
wherewith Neb. 12.
their holy Father is not well-pleased, to come under the scourge oftener than
the Bastards do. If they do amiss (and amiss they do) they must smart for it
either here, or hereafter: Now God means them no condemnation hereafter, 1
Cor. 11. 32.
and therefore he gives them the more chastening here.

14. But was not David a King? And would not that exempt him from troubles? He
was so indeed: but I ween his troubles were neither the fewer, nor the lesser
for that. There are sundry passages in this Psalm, that induce me to believe
Verse. 9. 99, 100, etc.
(with great probability) that David made it, while he lived a young man in the
Court of Saul, long before his coming to the Crown. But yet he was even then
unct us in Regem, anointed and designed for the Kingdom: and he met even then
with many troubles the more for that very respect. And after he came to enjoy
the Crown, if God had not been the joy and crown of his heart, he should have
had little joy of it: so full of trouble and unrest was the greatest part of
his Reign. I noteit, not with a purpose to enter into a set discourse how many
and great the troubles are that attend the Crown and Scepters of Princes; which
I easily believe to be far both more and greater than we that stand below are
capable to imagine: but for two other reasons a great deal more useful, and
therefore so much the more needful to be thought on, both by them and us. It
should first w^rk in all them that sit aloft, and so are exposed to more and
stronger blasts, the gr^ater care to provide a safe resting place for their
souls: that whenever they shall meet with trouble and sorrow in the flesh,
(and that they shall be sure to do oftener than they look for) they may retire
thither, there to repose and solace themselves in the goodness of their God;
saying eftsoons with our Prophet, ( Return unto thy rest, O my soul.) It was
well for him that he had such a ^^al. 116. 10.
a rest for his soul: for he had rest little enough otherwise from continual
troubles and cares in his civil affairs and estate. And it should in all reason
secondly quicken the hearts of all loyal and well-affected Subjects, by their
prayers, counsels, services, aids, and cheerful obedience respectively; rather
to afford Princes their best assistance, for the comfortable support of that
their weighty and troublesome charge, than out of ambition, discontent,
popularity, envy, or any other cross or peevish humor, add unto their cares,
and create unto them more troubles.

15. David, you see, had troubles; as a man, as a godly man, as a King. But
Exodus Exodus
who caused them? Sure in those his first times, when (as I conjecture) he
wrote this Psalm; Saul with his Princes and followers was the chiefest cause of
most of his troubles: and afterward crafty Achitophel caused him much trouble,
and railing Shimei some, and seditious Sheba not a little; but his rebellious
Son Absolon most of all. He complains of many troubles raised by the means of
that Son A^at. 25.
in Psalm. 3. Domine quam multiplicati! Lord, how are: they increased that
trouble me! Yet here, you see, he over-looketh them all, and all other second
causes; and ascribes his troubles wholly unto God. So he did also afterward
in the particular of Shimei's railing: Let him alone, says he to Abishai, Let
him curse on, Genesis 16. 10.
for God has bidden him. Even as Job had done before him: when the Sabeans and
the Chaldeans had taken away his Cattle and Goods, he scarce took notice of
them (he knew they were but Instruments) but looked at the hand of God only, as
the chief and principal cause, Dominus abstulit, The Lord has given, and Prove.
19.
the Lord has taken away. Neither did David any injury at all to Almighty God
in ascribing it to him: for God also himself takes it all upon himself; I will
2. 11.
raise him evil out of his own house: and I will do it before the sun, 2 Samuel
12.

16. How all those things (wherein wicked men, serving their own lusts only in
their own purpose, do yet unwittingly do service to God Almighty in furthering
^(...)9. 20. 5. 5.
his wise and holy designs) can have their efficiency from causes of such
contrary quality, and looking at such contrary ends, to the producing of one
and the same effect: is a speculation more curious than profitable. It is
enough for us to Jona
know, that it neither casts any blemish at all upon him, that he makes such
use of them; nor gives any excuse at all to them, that they do such service to
him: but that all this notwithstanding, he shall still have the whole glory of
his own wisdom and holiness; and they shall still bear the whole burden of
their own folly and wickedness. But there is another, and that a far better use
to be made hereof, than to trouble ourselves about a mystery, that we shall
never be able in this life to comprehend; and that is this: that seeing all the
troubles that befall us in any kind whatsoever, or by what instruments soever,
come yet from the hand of God; we should not therefore, when at any time we
meet with trouble, rage against the second causes, or seek to vent our spleen
upon them, as of our selves we are very apt to do: but laying our hands upon
our hearts and upon our mouths, compose our selves to a holy patience and
silence; considering it is Placeat homini, quicquid Deo placuit. Senec. Epist.
75.
his will and pleasure to have it so, to whom it is both our duty and wisdom
wholly to submit.

17. We may learn it of holy Job. His wife moved his patience not a little, by
Job 2. 10.
moving him to impatience: Thou talkest like a foolish woman, says he, shall
we receive good things at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil also?
Or we may learn it of good old Eli. When he received a message from the Lord,
by the mouth of young Samuel, of a right heavy judgment shortly to fall upon
him and his house, for his fond indulgence to his ungracious Children; he made
no more reply, but said only, It is the Lord: let him do what seems him good.
Or, 1 Samuel 3. 18.
to go on further than our Prophet David, we may learn it sufficiently from
him, I was dumb, says he, and opened not my mouth, Quoniam tu fecisti, for it
was Psalm. 39. 9.
thy doing. This consideration alone, Quoniam tu fecisti, is enough to silence
all tumultuous thoughts, and to cut off all farther disputing and debating the
matter: that it is God that causes us to be troubled. All whose judgments are
not only done in righteousness, as we have hitherto heard: but toward his
children also out of much love and faithfulness, as we are next to hear, [ I
know that of very faithfulness thou have caused me to be troubled.

18. In the former part of the verse, where he spoke of the righteousness of
God, he did it indefinitely, without mentioning either himself, or any other
person: not particularly, Thy judgments upon me; but indefinitely, I know, O
Lord, that thy judgments are right. But now in this latter part of the verse
where he comes to speak of the faithfulness of God, he names himself; And
that thou of very faithfulness have caused me to be troubled. For as earthly
Princes must do justice to all men, (for Justice is (...), every man may
challenge it, and there must be no respect had, no difference made of Persons
therein;) but their favors they may bestow upon whom they think good: so God
will have his justice to appear in all his dealings with all men generally, be
they good or bad, that none of them all shall be able to say he has done them
the least wrong; but yet his tender mercies and loving kindnesses, those he
reserveth for the Godly only, who are in special favor with him, and toward
whom he bears a special respect. For by faithfulness here, as in sundry other
places of Scripture is meant nothing else but the spe^ial love and favor of
God, toward those that love and fear him, whereby he orders and disposes
all things so, as may make most for their good.

19. And it is not unfitly so called; whether we respect the gracious promises,
that God has made unto them, or those sundry mutual relations, that are
between him and them. First, faithfulness rela^eth to a promise: (He is
faithful Heb. 10. 23.
that has promised, Heb. 10.) Truly, God is a debtor to no man: that he does
for us any thing at all; it is ex mero motu, of his own grace and goodness
merely; we can challenge nothing at his hands. But yet so desirous is he to
manifest his gracious love to us, that he has freely bound himself, and so
made himself a voluntary debtor, by his promises, (for promise is due debt:)
insomuch as he gives us the leave, and allows us the boldness to remind him
of his promises, to urge him with them, and as it were to adjure him by all his
truth and faithfulness to make them good. But what a kind of promise is this
may some say; to promise a man to trouble him? It seems a threatening this:
not a promise. If these be his promises, God may keep his promises to himself;
we shall not be very forward to challenge him or his faithfulness about them.
Yet so it is: the afflictions and troubles wherewith God in his love chasteneth
his children for their good, are indeed part of his promise, and that a
gracious part too. In Mar. 10. you shall find persecutions (and persecutions
are troubles) expressly named there among other things, as part of the promise
or reward; ( No man that has left Mar. 10. 30.
house, or brethren, etc. for my sake and the Gospels, but he shall receive an
hundred fold now in this time, houses, and brethren, etc. with persecutions,
and in the world to come eternal life.) There it is expressed: but where it is
not so, it must ever be understood in all the promises that concern this life.
It is a received rule among Divines; that all temporal promises are to be
understood cum exceptione crucis: that is to say, not absolutely, but with this
reservation, unless the Lord in his holy wisdom shall see it good for us to
have it otherwise. So that if at any time he see it good for us to be troubled
(as many times he does; David confesses it but four verses higher, Bonum mihi
quod humiliasti, It is good for Psalm. 119. 71.
me that I have been in trouble;) he does then in great love to us cause us to
be troubled: and that out of very faithfulness, and in regard of his Promise.

20. There are also sundry mutual relations, wherein God and his people stand
tied either to other; all which require faithfulness. He is their Creator, and
they are the work of his hands: and St. Peter styles him a faithful Creator.
He is their shepherd, and they the sheep of his pasture: and a faithful
shepherd he 1 Pet. 4. 19. Psalm. 23. 1. Joh. 10. 11.
is, a good shepherd, Joh. 10. To omit these, and sundry other, as of Father,
Master, Husband, and the rest: take but this one relation only of Friendship;
whereto (as every man knows) faithfulness is so necessary, as nothing can be
more. Now as for those that believe God and keep his Commandments, God enters
into a League and Covenant of Inter bonos viros and Deum amicitia est,
conciliante virtute. Senec. de Provid* cap. 1. Jam. 2. 23. Joh. 15. 14.
friendship with them: for Faith and Obedience are those very things that
qualify us for his friendship. (Abraham believed God, and it was counted to
him for righteousness, and he was called the friend of God. Jam. 2.) There is
Faith. Ye are my friends, if ye keep my commandments says our Savior, Ioh.
15. There is Obedience. Such a League of friendship there was betwixt God and
David in this particular: and as strongly tied and confirmed, as any other we
read of; the parties swearing fidelity either to other. God to him: The Lord
has made a faithful Oath unto David, and he shall not Psalm. 32. 11. Psalm. 119.
106.
shrink from it. And he to God: I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed, to
keep thy righteous judgments. The misery is; we hold not touch perfectly with
God, but break with him oftentimes through humane frailty and subreption, and
sometimes also in a more desperate and provoking manner, when we sin
presumptuously and with a high hand. David himself, notwithstanding his Oath,
and the stedfastness of his purpose to perform it, yet held not out; but failed
sundry times through infirmity: but he shrank most shamefully and foully in the
matter of Uriah. But here is our comfort then on the other side; that though we
are 1 King. 15. 5.
wavering and loose, off and on, and no hold to be taken of us; yet he is still
the same, he remains a fast and constant friend to us. Though we sometimes so
far forget our selves and our faithful promise, as to deny him; yet he
continues 2 Timothy 2. 13.
faithful, and will not deny himself: no nor us neither, if we will but seek to
him in any time by true repentance, confessing our unfaithfulness, and asking
pardon thereof, and not wholly and finally renounce the Covenant we made with
him. It makes well for us, that he is not forward to take (no not all just)
exceptions he might: if he should be any whit extreme to mark what we do amiss,
Psalm. 130. 3.
not a man of us all should long abide in his friendship. It is not our
faithfulness then to him, but his faithfulness to us, that holds us in.

21. But you will say, This is scarce a friendly part: will any friend cause
his friend to be troubled; especially having the power in himself to prevent
it? As Absolon said to Hushai, Is this thy kindness to thy friend? Call you
this faithfulness? 2 Samuel 16. 17.
Yes indeed: and very faithfulness too. For a true friend aims at his friends
Id pactum est ab illo mundi conditore, -- ut salvi essen^^s, non delicati.
Senec. Epist. 119.
good in every thing he does; and in comparison of that, regards not at any
time the satisfying of any his inordinate or unreasonable desires. And
therefore he will freely reprove him, when he sees him to do otherwise than
well: and sometimes anger him by doing some things quite contrary to his mind,
but yet for his good. Yea, and if the inequality and condition of the person be
such as will bear it, he will give him also such punishments or other
correction, as shall be needful, according to the merit of his fault. And all
this he may do salva amicitia, and without breach of friendship: nay, he is so
far tied by the rules of true friendship to do all this, and out of -- Ergo
amicum hodie meum concastigabo -- invitus, ni me id invitet ut faciam fides.
Plaut. in Trinum. 1. 1. Prove. 3. 12.
very faithfulness, that he should transgress those rules, and prove
unfaithful, if he should neglect so to do, where the cause requires it. Does
not a Father scourge the Son in whom he delights? And sometimes give him
sharp correction, when the fault deserves it? And no friend can love his
friend more dearly and faithfully, than a Father does his Child. Nay, this
chastening is so far from being any argument of the Fathers dis-affection, that
it is rather one of the strongest evidences of his faithful love toward him:
and he should not love him faithfully, but foolishly, if he should out of fond
indulgence let him go on in an evil way without due correction. He that spares
the rod, hates his Child, says Solomon: he means Prove. 13. 24.
it interpretative; that is, he does his child as much hurt out of his fond
love, as he could not do him more harm, if he were his enemies child whom he
hates. Will not a mother, that loves her child with all tenderness, if it
have got some hurt with a fall, lay on a plaster to heal it, though it smart?
And though the child cry and struggle against it all it can, yet will she lay
it on for all that, yea, and bind it too to keep it on: and all out of very
love and faithfulness, because she knows it must be so, or the child will be
the worse for it. I use these Comparisons the rather, not only because they are
familiar, (and the more familiar ever the better, if they be fit:) but because
the Lord himself also delights Psalm. 103. 13. Isa. 49. 15.
to set forth his (...), and love to us by the love of a discreet Father, and
the affection of a tender Mother, toward the fruit of their own loins and
womb: And the Apostle at large prosecuteth the resemblance (and that in this
very matter, whereof we now speak, of our heavenly Fathers correcting his
children in love, and for their good) most accurately and comfortably in Heb.
12.

22. But to return back to the relation of friendship (from which yet I have
not digressed: for can we have any better friends than our Parents?) If any of
us have a friend that is lethargick or lunatic: will we not put the one from
his drousie seat, and shake him up, and make him stir about, whether he will or
no; and tie the other in his bed, hamper him with cords, yea, and with blows
too, if need be, to keep him quiet; though it be death to the one to be
stirred, and to the other to be tied. Or if we have some near friend or
kinsman, that we wish well to, and partly depends upon us for his livelihood,
that will not be advised by us, but will fly out into bad company, drink, and
quarrel, and game: will we not pinch him in his allowance; refuse to give him
entertainment; set some underhand to beat him when he quarrels in his drink, or
to cheat him when he gameth too deep; and if he will not be reclaimed
otherwise, get him arrested and laid up, and then let him lie by it, till shame
and want give him some better sight and sense of his former follies? Can any
man now charge us truly with unfaithfulness to our friend for so doing? Or is
it not rather a good proof of our love and faithfulness to him? Doubtless it
is. You know the old saying, Non quod odio habeam, sed quod amem: it has some
reason in it. For the love and faithfulness of a friend is not to be measured
by the things done, but by the affection and intention of the doer. A thing may
be done, that carries the show of much friendship with it, yet with an intent
to do the party a mischief:

Eutrapelus cuicunque nocere volebat -- etc. Hor. 1. Ep. 18.
As if he should put his friend upon some employment he were unmeet for, of
purpose to disgrace him; or feed him with money in a riotous course, to get a 1 Samuel 18. 21
hanck over his Estate: like Saul's friendship to David, in giving him his
Daughter to wife, that she might be a snare to him, to put him into the hands
of the Philistines. This is the basest unfaithfulness of all other, sub amici
fallere nomen; and by many degrees worse than open hostility. Let not their
precious balms break Psalm. 141. 5.
my head: Let the righteous rather smite me friendly, says David. There may be
smiting, it should seem by him, without violation of friendship. And his wise
Son Solomon prefers the wounds of a Friend, before the kisses of an Enemy.
Prove. 27. 6.
These may be pleasanter, but those will prove wholsomer: there is treachery in
these kisses, but in those wounds faithfulness.

23. You may perceive by what has been said, that God may cause his servants
to be troubled, and yet continue his love and faithfulness to them
nevertheless: yea, moreover that he brings those troubles upon them out of
his great love and faithfulness toward them. It should make us the more
willing, whether God inflict or threaten, whether we feel or fear, any either
public calamity or personal affliction, any thing that is like to breed us any
grief or trouble; to submit our selves to the hand of God, not only with
patience, because he is righteous, but even with thankfulness too, because he
is faithful therein. Very meet we should apprehend the wrath of God, and his
just indignation against us when he strikes; for he is righteous, and will not
correct us but for our sin: Acts 2. 37. Joel 2. 13.
Which should prick our hearts with sorrow, nay, rend them in pieces with
through- contrition, that we should so unworthily provoke so gracious a God to
punish us. But then we must apprehend his wrath, that we doubt not of his
favor; nor despair of staying his hand, if we will but stay the course of our
sins by godly repentance and reformation: for he is faithful, and corrects us
ever for our good. Does he take any pleasure, think you, in our destruction?
Heb. 12. 10. Ezekiel. 33. 11.
He has sworn the contrary; and dare you not believe him? Doubt ye not
therefore, but that humility and confidence, fear and hope, may consist
together, as well as justice and mercy may in God, or repentance and faith in
us. Presume not then to continue in sin, but fear his judgments: for he is
righteous, and will Exodus 34. 7.
not acquit the guilty. Neither yet despair of finding pardon, but hope in his
mercy: Psalm. 51. 17.
for he is faithful, and will not despise the pe^itent. I forbid no man, but
charge him rather, as he means to build his after comforts upon a firm base,
to lay a good foundation of repentance and godly sorrow, by looking first upon
Gods justice and his own sins: that he may be cast down, and humbled under the
1 Pet. 5. 6.
mighty hand of God, before he presume to lay hold of any actual mercy. But
after he has by this means assured the foundation; let him then in Gods name
proceed with his work, and bring it on more and more to perfection, by sweet
meditations of the great love and gracious promises of our good God, and his
undoubted sted fastness and faithfulness therein. Never giving it over, till it
come to that perfection of art and skill, that he can spy love even in the very
wrath of God; Mel de petra, suck honey out of the stony rock; gather grapes
Deus qu^s amat, indurat, recognoscit, exercet. Senec. de Provid. cap. 4.
of thorns, and figs of thistles. Till we attain to this; I say not but we may
have true hope and comfort in God, which by his mercy may bring us to
salvation: but we have not yet that fullness of joy and peace, which (because by
Gods grace, if our own endeavors be not wanting, it is attainable in this
life) we should press hard after; of rejoicing in tribulation, and counting it
all joy, when Romans 5. 3. Jam. 1. 2.
we fall into diverse temptations.

24. Somewhat a hard lesson I grant; yet if we can but learn some of David's
knowledge, it will be much the easier. He speaks not here you see, out of a
vain hope, because he would fain have it so; nor out of some uncertain
conjecture, as if perhaps it might be so: but out of certain knowledge, gotten
by diligent and attentive study in the Word of God, and by his own experience
and observation. I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that thou of
very faithfulness have caused me to be troubled. For the former branch of this
knowledge, that concerns the righteousness of Gods judgments; it is a thing
soon learned: I have showed you the course already. There is no more to be
done, but to examine our own carriage and deserving; and we shall find enough I
doubt not to satisfy fully in that point: and therefore there need no more be
said of it. All the skill is about the latter branch; how we may know that it
is done out of very love and faithfulness, whensover God causes us to be
troubled.

25. For which purpose the best help I can commend unto you for the present is,
to observe how variously Almighty God manifests his love and faithfulness to
his children in all their tribulations: especially in three respects; every one
of which marvellously sets forth his gracious goodness toward us. First,
the End that he aims at in them: Secondly, the Proportion that he holds
under them: and thirdly, the Issues that he gives out of them.

26. For the End first; He aims always at our good. Our earthly friends do
not ever so: no not our Parents, that love us best. The Apostle tells us, and
experience proves it, that they chasten us sometimes for their own pleasure.
He Heb. 12. 10.
means, that sometimes when they are distempered with passion, and in an
outrageous mood, they beat the poor child, either without cause, or more than
there is cause, rather to satisfy their own fury, than to benefit the child.
But he does it always (...) Naz. Orat 3.
for our profit; says he, Heb. 12. If I should enter here into the Common
place de bono afflictionis, I should not well know either where to begin, or
when to make an end. In the whole course of Divinity, I find not a field of
larger scope than that is. I shall therefore bring you but into one corner of
it, and show you, how God out of very faithfulness makes use of these
troubles, for the better draining out of some of those evil corruptions, that
would otherwise so abound in us, like noysom humors in the body, that they
would endanger a plethory in our souls: especially these four, Pride, Security,
Worldlymindedness, and Incompassion.

27. Pride must be first, else is it not right. And we have store of that in
us. Any toy puffs us up like a bladder, and fills us full of our selves.
Take the instance but in our knowledge: A sorry thing, God knows: he that
has most, what he knows is not the thousandth part of what he knows not:
and yet how strangly are some over leavened with a very small pittance of it;
Scientia inflat, the Apostle might well say; knowledge puffs up. So do
riches, 1 Cor. 8. 1.
and honor, and praise, and valor, and beauty, and wit; or indeed any thing.
A bush of hair will do it, where it grows; yea, and where it grows not. Now
prosperity cherishes this corruption wonderfully, (as ill-humours abound most
in full bodies; and ill weeds grow rankest in a fat earth;) and sets a man
so far from God, and above himself, that he neither well knows the one nor
the other. Our Lord then when he sees us thus high set, sends afflictions
and troubles to take down these unkindly swellings, to prick the bladder of our
pride, and let out some of the wind: and so he brings us into some --
adversisqu^ in rebus noscere qui sint. Lucret. lib. 3. Psalm. 9. 20.
better acquaintance with our selves again. King Philip had a Crier to put him
daily in remembrance, that he was but a man: lest he should forget it, and
think himself a little God, as his Son Alexander did soon after. But there is
no remembrancer can do this office better than affiictions can. Put them in
fear, O Lord, that the Heathen may know themselves to be but men, Psalm. 9. If
afflictions were not, would not even that be soon forgotten?

28. Security is next. Ease and prosperity fatteneth the heart, and makes us
drousie and heavy in Gods service. It casts us into a spiritual Lethargy;
makes us settle upon our lees, and flatter our selves, as if we were out of
gunshot, Jer. 48. 11. Luke 12. 19.
and no evil could reach us. Soul take thine ease; eat, and drink; thou have
provision laid up beforehand for many years yet to come. Marvel not to hear
ungodly men vaunt it so in a vapouring manner, (Psalm, 10, Tush, I shall never
be Psalm. 10. 6. Psalm. 30. 6.
removed, there shall no harm happen unto me:) when holy David, upon some
little longer continuance of prosperity than usual, did almost say even as
they; he thought his hill so strong, that he should never be removed, Psalm. 30.
When God sees us thus settling upon our lees, he thinks it high time to pour
us Jer. 48. 11.
from vessel to vessel, to keep us from growing musty. He lays his hand upon
us, and shakes us out of our dead sleep, and by laying trouble upon our loins
drives us to seek to him for remedy and succor. He dealt so with David: when
in Psalm. 66. 11.
his prosperity he had said, he should never be removed, as we heard but now
out of Psalm. 30. the next news we hear of him is, He was removed: God, out of
very faithfulness caused him to be troubled, and he was the better for it. (
Thou Psalm. 30. 7. -- 8.
did turn away thy face from me, and I was troubled: Then cried I unto thee,
O Lord; and gat me to my Lord right humbly; as it there follows in that
Psalm.) In the time of my trouble I sought the Lord, says he elsewhere: Belike
Psalm. 77. 2.
in the time of his ease, he either sought him not, or not so carefully. In
their afflictions they will seek me diligently, Hosea 5. but negligently enough
out of Hos. 5. 15. 2 Samuel 14. 29. -- 31.
affliction. Absolon had a mind to speak with Ioab, but Ioab had no mind to
speak with him. Absolon sends for him, one messenger after another: still
Ioab comes not. Well, thinks Absolon, he will not come, but I will fetch
him: and so he sends some of his people to fire his cornfieldsd; and that
fetches him: then he comes running in all haste, to know what the matter was.
So God sends for us messenger after messenger, one Sermon after another, to
bring us in: we little regard it, but sit it out, and will not come in, till he
fire our corn, or do us some displeasure; and that, if any thing, will bring us.

29. Thirdly, we are full of worldly-mindedness. Adhaesit pavimento, as David
speaks in this Psalm; so may we say, but quite in another sense, Our soul
Psalm. 119. 25.
cleaves to the dust. We all complain, the world is naught, and so it is, God
mend it; ( tot us in maligno) nothing but vanity and wickedness: and yet as bad
as it 1* Joh. 5. 19.
is, our hearts hanker after it out of all measure. And the more we prosper in
it: the more we grow in love with it: the faster riches, or honors, or any of
these other vanities increase, the more eagerly do we pursue them, and the more
fondly set our hearts upon them. Only afflictions do now and then take us off
somewhat, and a little embitter the lusciousness of them to our taste. That we
have any apprehension at all of the vanity of the world, we may thank for it
those vexations Eccles. 2. 11.
of spirit, that are interwoven therewithal. Loving it as we do, being so full
of those vexations as it is; how absurdly should we dote upon it, if we should
meet with nothing in it to vex us?

30. Lastly, we are full of Incompassion. Our brethren that are in distress,
though they be our fellow members, yet have we little fellow-feeling of their
griefs: but either we insult over them, or censure them, or at best neglect
them; especially when our selves are at ease. When we stretch our selves upon
Ivory Amos 5. 4. -- 6.
beds, eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and chaunt it to the Viols, live merry
and full; it is great odds the afflictions of Joseph will be but slenderly
remembered: no more than Lazarus was at the rich man's gates, where he found no
pity: but Luke 16. 21.
what the dogs showed him. But then when it comes to be our own case, when we
fall into sicknesses, disgraces, or other distresses our selves:

Non ignara mali -- Virgil.
Then do our bowels, which before were crusted up, begin to relent a little
toward our poorer brethren; and our own misery makes us the more charitable.
Heb. 13. 2. Genesis 4. 23.
Then we remember those that are in bonds, (whom we forgot before, as Pharaohs
Butler forgot Joseph) when we our selves are bound with them; and those that
are in adversity, when we find and feel that we our selves are but flesh. Thus
God out of very faithfulness causes us to be troubled: as for our good many
other ways: so particularly in purging out thereby some of that Pride, and
Security, and Worlidiness, and Incompassion, (besides sundry other Corruptions)
that abound in us.

31. That for the End. Next God manifests his faithfulness to his servants in
their troubles, by the proportion he holds therein: whether we compare
therewith their deservings, their strength or their comforts: very measurably
in all. First, our sufferings are far short of our deservings. He does ever
chasten us citra condignum: (He deals not with us after our sins, neither
rewards us Psalm. 103. 10.
after our iniquities, Psalm. 103.) After what then? Even after his own loving
kindness, and fatherly affection toward us: Even as a father pitieth his own
Ibid. ver. 13.
children, as it there follows. And how that is, every father can tell you:
Pro magna culpa parum supplicii satis est patri. When we for drinking in
iniquity like water, had deserved to drink off the cup of fury to the bottom,
dregs and all, he makes us but sip a little overly of the very brim. And when
he might in justice lash us with Scorpions, he does but scourge us with rushes.
The Lord promised his people, Ier. 30. that though he could not in justice, nor
would, leave them Jer. 30. 11.
altogether unpunished; yet he would correct them in measure, and not make a
full end of them. And he did indeed according to his promise: they found his
faithfulness therein, and acknowledged it; ( -- seeing that our God has
punished Ezra 9. 13. Genesis 32. 10.
less than our iniquities deserve, Ezra. 9.) Jacob confessed that he was less
than the least of Gods mercies: and we must confess, that we are more than the
greatest of his corrections.

32. Secondly, he proportioneth our sufferings to our strength. As a discreet
Physician considers, as well as the malignity of the disease, the strength of
the Patient: and prescribes for him accordingly, both for the ingredients, and
dose. Abraham, and Job, and David, and St. Paul, the Lord put them to great
Trials: because he had endowed them with great strength. But as for most of us,
God is careful to lay but common troubles upon us; because we have no more but
common strength: as Jacob had a good care not to over-drive the weaker cattle.
If Genesis 33. 13. 2 Cor. 12. 7. 9.
he shall hereafter think good to send such a messenger of Satan against us, as
shall buffet us with stronger blows; doubtless if we be his friends, and do but
seek to him for it, he will give us such an addition of strength and grace, as
shall be sufficient for our safety. The Apostle both observes God's thus
dealing with us, and imputes it also to his faithfulness, 1 Cor. 10. God is
faithful, who will not 1 Cor. 10. 13.
suffer you to be tempted above what you are able. Either Cain said not truly;
or if he did, the fault was in himself, not in God: when he complained, that
his Genesis 4. 13.
punishment was greater than he could bear. God is not so hard a Master to us;
(for all we are so slack and untoward in our service) as either to require that
of us which he will not enable us to do, or lay that upon us which he will not
enable us to bear: if we will but lay our hands and our shoulders thereunto,
and put out our strength and endeavors to the utmost.

33. Thirdly, he proportioneth us out also comforts suitable to our afflictions:
every whit as large as they, and more effectual; to preserve us from drooping;
and to sustain our souls in the midst of our greatest sufferings. For as the
smallest temptation would foil us, if God should withold his grace from us;
but if he vouchsafe us the assistance of that, we are able to withstand the
greatest: so the least afflictions would over-whelm our spirits, if he should
withold his comforts from us; but if he afford us them, we are able to bear
up under the greatest. And God does afford unto his children in all their
distresses, though not perhaps always such comforts as they desire, yet ever
such as he knows and they find to be both meet and sufficient. Spiritual
comforts first; and they are the chiefest: the testimony of a good Conscience
from within; and the light of God's Psalm. 4. 6, 7.
favorable Countenance from above. These put more true joy into the heart,
than the want of Corn, or Wine, or Oil, or any outward thing, can sorrow; And
by these our inner man is so renewed and strengthened, that yet we faint not,
whatsoever 2 Cor. 4. 16. Psalm. 94. 19.
becomes of our outward man; no, not though it should perish. David had
troubles, multitude of troubles, troubles that touched him at the very heart:
but the comforts of God in his soul gave him more refreshing than all those
troubles could work him vexation, Psalm. 94. And St. Paul found, that still as
his sufferings increased, his comforts had withal such a proportionable rise,
that where 2 Cor. 1. 5.
those abounded, these did rather superabound, 2 Cor. 1.

34. These inward comforts are sufficient even alone. Yet God knows our frame
so well, and so far tendereth our weakness, that he does also afford us such
outward comforts, as he sees convenient for us. A small matter perhaps in
bulk, and to the eye; but yet such as by his mercy gives us mighty refreshing.
For as any little affliction, scarce considerable in it self, is yet able to
work us much sorrow, if God mean to make a rod of it: so any otherwise
inconsiderable accident, when God is pleased to make a comfort of it, is able
to cheer us up beyond belief. The coming of Titus out of Achaia into Macedonia,
seemed to be a matter of no great consequence: yet coming at such a time, and
in the nick as it were, St. Paul remembers it as a great mercy from God, and a
great comfort to him, in 2 Cor. 7. He was much distressed, it seems, at that
time with fightings without, and fears within; insomuch as he was troubled on
every side, and his flesh had no rest; at the fifth verse there. Nevertheless,
says he, God that comfort those that are cast down, comforted us by the
coming of Titus, at verse. 6.

35. Thirdly, God manifests his love and faithfulness to his children in
their troubles, by the issues, that he gives out of them; Deliverance, and
Honor. Deliverance first. That God has often promised, ( Call upon me in the
time of trouble, and I will hear thee, Psalm. 50.) And he has faithfully
performed it; Psalm. 50. 15. Psalm. 34. 19.
( Many, or great, are the troubles of the Righteous, but the Lord delivers
them out of all, Psalm. 34.) And he delivers him safe and sound, many times
without -- Ibid. v. 20.
the breaking of a bone, yea, sometimes without so much as the loss of a hair
of his head. How often do we hear it repeated in one Psalm, and made good by
Psalm. 107. 6. 13, 19, 28.
sundry instances; So when they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, he
delivered them from their distress.

36. Some evidence it is of his love and faithfulness, that he delivered them
at all: but much more that he does it with the addition of honor. Yet has he
bound himself by his gracious promise to that also: ( He shall call upon me,
and I Psalm. 91. 15.
will hear him; yea, I am with him in trouble: I will deliver him and bring him
to honor, Psalm. 91.) As gold cast into the furnace, receives there a new
luster, and shines brighter when it comes forth than it did before: so are
the Saints of God more glorious after their great afflictions; their graces
ever more resplendent, and many times even their outward estate also more
honorable. We may see in the examples of Joseph, of Job, of David himself, and
others (if we had time to produce them) that of Psalm. 113. verified: He raises
the poor out of the dust, Psalm. 113 7, 8.
and lifts the needy out of the mire, and from the dunghill, that he may set
him with Princes, even with the Princes of his people. But we have an example
beyond all example, even our blessed Savior Jesus Christ. Never any sufferings
so grievous as his: never man so emptied, and trodden down, and made a man of
sorrows, Isa. 53. 3. Ph^l. 2 9 -- 11.
as he: never any issues so honorable as his, (...) God has highly exalted
him, and given him a name above every name, that at the name of Jesus every
knee should bow, and every tongue should confess to his honor. And what has
befallen him the head, concerns us also his members: not only by way of
merit, but by way of conformity also. Si compatimur, conregnabimus. If we be
partakers of his 2 Timothy 2. 12.
sufferings, we shall be also of his glory. God, as out of very faithfulness he
does cause us to be troubled, so will he out of the very same faithfulness give
an honorable issue also to all our troubles; if we cleave unto him by steadfast
faith and constant obedience: possibly in this life, if he see it useful for
us; but undoubtedly in the life to come. Whereunto, etc.

AD AULAM.
The Eleventh Sermon.
WHITEHALL, JULY 5. 1640.
1 Cor. 10. 23. All things are lawful for me; But all things are not expedient:
All things are lawful for me; But all things edify not.
1. IN which words the Apostle with much holy wisdom, by setting just bounds
unto our Christian Liberty, in the Power first, and then in the exercise of
that power; excellently preventeth both the Error of those that would shrink it
in, and the Presumption of those that would stretch it out, more than they
ought. He extends our Liberty in the Power, but restrains it in the Use.
Would you know what a large power God has permitted unto you in indifferent
things; and what may be done ex plenitudine potestatis, and without scruple of
conscience? For that you have, Omnia licent, All things are lawful. But would
you know withal with what caution you ought to use that power; and what at all
times is fit to be done ex intuitu charitatis, and for the avoiding of offense?
You have for that too, Non omnia expediunt, All things are not expedient, All
things edify not. If we will sail by this Card, regulate our judgment and
practice by our Apostles rule and example in the Text; we shall neither dash
against the Rock of Superstition on the right hand, nor fall into the Gulf of
Profaneness on the left; we shall neither betray our Christian Liberty, nor
abuse it.

2. In the words themselves are apparently observable, concerning that Liberty,
two things: the Extension first, and then the Limitation of it. The extension
is in the former clause: Wherein we have the Things, and the Persons. (...),
All things lawful, and All lawful for me. The Limitation is in the latter
clauses: wherein is declared first, what it is must limit us; and that is the
reason of Expediency; [But all things are not expedient.] And secondly, one
special means whereby to judge of that Expediency; which is the usefulness of
it unto Edification, [But all things edify not.] I am to begin with the
Extension: of which only at this time; And first and chiefly in respect of the
things, (...) -- All things are lawful.

3. What? All things? Simply and without exception All? What meant Mat. 14. 4.
John Baptist then to come in with his Non licet to Herod about his Brothers
Wife; [ It is not lawful for thee to have her, Mat. 14.] Or if John were an
austere man, and had too much of Elias's spirit in him: Yet how is it, that our
Mat. 19. 3. -- 6.
blessed Savior, the very pattern of love and meekness, when the Pharisees put
a question to him, Whether it were lawful for a man to put away his Wife for
every cause; resolves it in effect, as if he had said, No, it is not lawful.
St. Peter 2 Pet. 2. 8.
says, the wicked Sodomites vexed the righteous soul of Lot daily with their
unlawful deeds. And who (that hearkneth to the holy Law of God, or but to the
dictates of natural conscience) will not acknowledge Blasphemy, Idolatry,
Sacrilege, Perjury, Oppression, Incest, Parricide, Treason, etc. to be things
altogether unlawful? And does St. Paul now dissent so far from the judgment of
his Master, of his Fellow-Apostle, of the whole world besides, as to pronounce
of all these things, that they are lawful?

4. Here the rule of Logicians must help; Signa distributiva sunt intelligenda
accommodate ad subjectam materiam. Notes of Universality are not ever to be
understood in that fullness of latitude, which the words seem to import; but
most often with such convenient restrictions, as Memento distributionis
accommode. Cajet. in 1 Cor. 6.
the matter in hand will require. Now the Apostle, by mentioning Expediency in
the Text, gives us clearly to understand, that by All things he intends all
such things only, whose Expediency or Inexpediency are meet to be taken into
consideration: as much as to say, All indifferent things, and none other. For
things absolutely necessary, (although it may truly be said of them, that they
also are lawful) yet are they quite beside the Apostles intention in this
place. Both for that their lawfulness is not ad utrumlibet; it holds but the
one way only, (for though it be lawful to do them, yet is it not lawful to
leave them undone:) as also, because expedient or inexpedient, done they must
be howsoever; for I must do my bounden duty, though all the World should take
offense thereat. And on the other side things absolutely forbidden, such as
those before mentioned, and sundry others, are of themselves utterly unlawful,
and may not in any case be done, seem they never so expedient: for I may not do
any evil, for any good that may Romans 3. 8.
ensue thereof. But then there are Quae in medio sunt, and a Gracis tum (...)
tum (...) appellantur, -- per se ipsa neque honesta neque turpia. A Gel. 2.
noct. Atti^. 7.
(...) (as they call them) things of a middle nature, that are neither
absolutely commanded, nor absolutely forbidden; but are left to every man's
choice either to do, or to leave undone, as he shall see cause: Indifferent
things. Of these the Apostle speaks freely, and universally, and without
exception, that they are all lawful. Chrysostom. Hom. 17. in 1 Cor.
(...), says St. Chrysostom; and Heming.
de medio genere rerum, others; and to the same effect most Interpreters.

5. Somewhat we have gained toward the better understanding of the Text; yet
not much, unless it may withal certainly appear, what things are Indifferent,
and what not: for all the wrangling will be about that. For that therefore (not
to hold you with a long discourse, but to come up close to the point) take it
briefly thus. Every action or thing whatsoever, that cannot by just and logical
deduction, either from the light of Nature, or from the written Word of God, be
shown to be either absolutely necessary, or simply unlawful; I say, every such
action or thing is in its own nature indifferent; and consequently permitted by
our gracious Lord God to our free liberty and choice, from time to time, either
to do or to leave undone, either to use, or to forbear the use, as in godly
wisdom and charity (according to the just exigence of circumstances) we shall
see it expedient.

6. Hitherto appertain those sundry passages of our Apostle to the Romans; I
know and am persuaded that there is nothing unclean of it self: and again, All
things Romans 14. 14. Ibid. 20. Tit. 1. 15.
indeed are pure. To Titus; To the pure all things are pure. To these
Corinthians once before, he has words in part the same with these of the Text;
All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient: All things are
lawful for 1 Cor. 6. 12.
me, but I will not be brought under the power of any. He repeateth it there
twice, as he does also here ( All things are lawful, and again, All things are
lawful:) no doubt of purpose that we should take the more notice of it. To
Timothy lastly, (for I quote but such places only as have The note of
Universality expressed) Every creature of God is good, and nothing to be
refused. 1 Timothy 4. 4.


7. From all which places it is evident, that we have a free and universal
liberty allowed us by our gracious Lord and Master to every Creature in the
World. So as that, whatsoever natural faculties or properties he has endowed
any of them withal; or whatsoever benefit or improvement we can raise out of
any such their faculties, or properties by any our art, skill, or industry, we
may serve our selves of them both for our necessity and comfort: provided ever,
that we keep our selves within the bounds of sobriety, charity, and other
requisite conditions. And then it will also follow farther, and no less
certainly ( our selves being in the number of those creatures) that we have the
like liberty to exercise all those several faculties, abilities, and
endowments, whether of soul, or body, or outward things, which it has pleased
God to allot us: and consequently to build, and plant, and alter; to buy and
sell, and exchange; to obey Laws, to observe Rites, and Fashions, and Customs;
to use Recreations, and generally to perform all the actions of common life, as
occasions shall require; still provided, as before, that all due conditions be
duly observed.

8. Injurious then are all they to true Christian liberty, and adversaries to
the truth of God, as it is constantly taught by this blessed Apostle; who
either impose any of those things as necessary, or else condemn any of them as
unlawful, which it was the gracious pleasure of our good God, to leave free,
arbitrary, and indifferent. Both extremes are superstitious; both derogatory to
the honor of God, and the liberty of his people: both strong symptoms of that
great pride that cleaves to the spirit of corrupt man, in daring to piece out
the holy Word of God, by tacking thereunto his own devices.

9. Extremely faulty this way, especially in the former branch, in laying a
necessity where there should not, are they of the Romish party. For after that
the Bishops of Rome had begun, by the advantages of the times, to lift
themselves toward that superlative height of greatness, whereto at length they
attained; they began withal, for the better support of that greatness, to
exercise a grievous tyranny over the consciences of men, by obtruding upon them
their own inventions, both in points of faith and manners; and those to be
received, believed and obeyed* Abutuntur sua potestate, qui quicquid ordinant,
volunt id robur habere per obligationem ad poenam ^ternam. Gerson. part. 3. de
vit. spirit. lect. 4.
under pain of damnation: whereby they became the Authors, and still are the
Continuers, of the widest Schism, that ever was in the Church of Christ, from
the very first infancy thereof. The Anabaptists also and Separatists, by
striving to run so far as they can from Popery, have run themselves unawares
even as deep as they, and that in the very same fault, (I mean as to the
general of Superstition;) though quite on the other hand, and upon quite
different grounds: for they offend more in the latter branch, in laying an
unlawfulness where they should not.

10. But I shall not meddle much with either sort, though they are deeply
guilty both: because professedly abhorring all communion with us, I presume
none of them will hear; and then what booteth it to speak? There be others, who
for that they live in the same visible communion with us, do even therefore
deserve far better respect from us than either of the former; and are also even
therefore more capable of better information from us than they. Who yet by
their unnecessary and unwarrantable strictness in sundry particulars, and by
casting impurity upon many things both of Ecclesiastical and civil usage, which
are not in their own nature, unlawful, though some of them (I doubt not) in
their practice much abused, have done, and still do, a world of mischief in the
Church of Christ. A great deal more, I am verily persuaded, than themselves are
aware of, or than themselves (I hope) intend: but I fear withal a great deal
more, than either any of us can imagine, or all of us can well tell how to
help. That therefore both they and we may see, how needful a thing it is for
every of us, to have a right judgment concerning indifferent things, and their
lawfulness: I shall endeavor to show you, both how unrighteous a thing it is
in it self, and of how noysom and perilous Consequence many ways, to condemn
any thing as simply unlawful, without very clear evidence to lead us thereunto.

11. First, it is a very unrighteous thing. For as in Civil Judicatories, the
Judge that should make no more ado, but presently adjudge to death all such
persons as should be brought before him, upon light surmises and slender
presumptions, without any due enquiry into the cause, or expecting clearer
evidence, must needs pass many an unjust Sentence, and be in great jeopardy at
some time or other of shedding innocent blood: so he that is very forward, when
the lawfulness of any thing is called in question, upon some colorable
exceptions thereagainst, straightways to cry it down, and to pronounce it
unlawful; can hardly avoid the falling oftentimes into Error, and sometimes
into Uncharitableness. Pilate, though he did Jesus much wrong afterward, yet he
did him some right onward, when the Jews cried out ^^ucifige, Away with him,
crucify him; in replying for him, (...), Why, what evil has he done? Does our
Law judge Mat. 27. 22, 23. Joh. 7. 51.
a man before it hear him, and know what he does? Was Nicodemus his Plea, Ioh.
7. I wonder then by what Law those men proceed, who judge so deeply, and yet
examine so overly: speaking evil of those things they know not, as St. Jude;
Jude v. 10.
and answering a matter before they hear it, as Solomon speaks. Which in his
Prove. 18. 13.
judgment is both folly and shame to them: as who say, there is neither Wit nor
Honesty in it. The Prophet Isaiah, to show the righteousness and equity of
Christ in the exercise of his Kingly Office, describes it thus, Isa. 11. He
shall not Isa. 11. 3, 4.
judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his
ears: but with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity:
Implying that where there is had a just regard of righteousness and equity,
there will be had also a due care not to proceed (...), according to our first
apprehension of things, as they are suddenly represented to our eyes or ears,
without further examination. A fault which our Savior reproves in the Jews,
as an unrighteous thing, when they censured him as a Sabbath-breaker without
cause; Judge not according to the outward appearance, but judge righteous
Judgment, Ioh. 7. Joh. 7. 24.


12. All this will easily be granted, may some say, where the case is plain.
But suppose when the Lawfulness of something is called in question, that there
be probable Arguments on both sides, so as it is not easy to resolve, whether
way rather to incline: Is it not, at leastwise in that case, better to suspect
it may be unlawful, than to presume it to be lawful? For in doubtful cases via
tutior, it is best ever to take the safer way. Now because there is in most men
a wondrous aptness to stretch their liberty to the utmost extent, many times
even to a licentiousness; and so there may be more danger in the enlargement,
than there can be in the restraint of our liberty: it seems therefore to be
the safer error, in doubtful cases to judge the things unlawful, say that
should prove an error; rather than to allow them lawful, and yet that prove an
error.

13. True it is, that in hypothesi, and in point of practice, and in things not
enjoined by Superior Authority, either Divine or Humane; it is the saferway
(if we have any doubts that trouble us) to forbear the doing of them, for fear
they should prove unlawful, rather than to adventure to do them, before we be
well satisfied that they are lawful. As for example, if any man should doubt of
the lawfulness of playing at Cards, or of Dancing either single or mixed,
(although I know no just cause why any man should doubt of either, severed from
the abuses and accidental consequents;) yet if any man shall think he has just
cause so todo: that man ought by all means to forbear such playing or dancing,
till he can be satisfied in his own mind, that he may lawfully use the same.
The Apostle has clearly resolved the case, Romans 14. that be the thing what it
can be in it self, yet his very doubting makes it unlawful to him, so long as
he remains doubtful: because it cannot be of faith; and whatsoever is not of
faith Romans 14. 23.
is sin. Thus far therefore the former allegation may hold good; so long as we
consider things but in hypothesi; that is to say, only so far forth as
concerns our own particular in point of practice: that in these doubtful
cases, it is safer to be too scrupulous than too adventurous.

14. But then, if we will speak of things in thesi (that is to say, taken in
their general nature, and considered in themselves, and as they stand divested
of all circumstances:) and in point of judgment, so as to give a positive and
determinate Sentence either with them, or against them: there I take it the
former allegation of Via tutior, is so far from being of force, that it holds
rather the clean contrary way. For in bivio dextra: in doubtful cases, it is
safer erring (...). Naz orat. 25. Inter dispares sententias initior vincat.
Sen. 1. controv. 5.
the more charitable way. As a Judge upon the Bench had better Satius est
impunitum relinqui facinus nocent is quam innocentem condemnari. ^. absentem.
ff. de poenis.
acquit ten Malefactors if there be no full proof brought against them, than
condemn but one innocent person upon mere presumptions. And this seems to be
very reasonable. For as in the Courts of Civil Justice, men are not ordinarily
put to prove themselves honest men, but the proof lies on Actori incumbit
probatio.
the accusers part; and it is sufficient for the acquitting of any man in foro
externo, that there is nothing of moment proved against him: (for in the
construction of the Law every man is presumed to be an honest man, till he be
proved otherwise:) But to the condemning of a man there is more requisite than
so: bare suspicions are not enough, no nor strong presumptions neither; but
there must be a clear and full evidence, especially if the trial concern life.
So in these moral trials also in foro interno, when enquiry is made into the
lawfulness, or unlawfulness of Humane Acts in their several kinds: it is
sufficient to warrant any Act in the kind to be Certe verum est, permissum esse
quicquid non prohibetur. Chamier. 1 panstrar. Cathol. lib. 9. Cep. 20. 11.
Licita sunt, quae nullo praecepto Dei prohibentur. Aug. de adulter. conjug.
cap. 14. Omnia non prohibita licent. Cajetan. in 1 Cor. 6.
lawful, that there can be nothing produced from Scripture or sound Reason to
prove it unlawful. For so much the words of my Text do manifestly import, All
things are lawful for me. But to condemn any act as simply and utterly unlawful
in the kind; remote consequences and weak deductions from Scripture-Text should
not serve the turn: neither yet reasons of inconveniency or inexpediency,
though carrying with them great shows of probablity. But it is requisite that
the unlawfulness thereof should be (...). Chrysostom. in Genesin hom. 24.
sufficiently demonstrated, either from express and undeniable testimony of
Scripture, or from the clear light of natural reason; or at leastwise from some
Conclusions, properly, directly, and evidently deduced therefrom. If we condemn
it before this be done, our judgment therein is rash and unrighteous.

15. Nor is that all: I told you, besides the unrighteousness of it in it self,
that it is also of very noisome and perilous consequence many ways. Sundry the
evil and pernicious effects whereof, I desire you to take notice of: being many
I shall do little more than name them; howbeit they well deserve a larger
discovery. And first it produces much Uncharitableness. For although
difference of judgment should not alienate our affections one from another: yet
daily experience shows it does. By reason of that self-love, and envy, and
other corruptions that abound in us; it is rarely seen that those men are of
one heart, that are of two minds. St. Paul found it so with the Romans in his
time: whilst some condemned that as unlawful, which others practiced as
lawful; they judged one another, and despised one another, perpetually. And I
doubt not, but any of us, that is any-whit-like acquainted with the wretched
deceitfulness Jer. 17. 9.
of man's heart, may easily conclude how hard a thing it is (if at all possible)
not to think somewhat hardly of those men, that take the liberty to do such
things as we judge unlawful. As for example: If we shall judge all walking into
the fields, discoursing occasionally on the occurrency of the times, dressing
of meat for dinner or supper, or even moderate recreations on the Lords day, to
be grievous prophanations of the Sabbath; how can we choose but judge those men
that use them to be grievous prophaners of Gods Sabbath? And if such our
judgment concerning the things should after prove to be erroneous: then can it
not be avoided, but that such our judgment also concerning the persons must
needs be uncharitable.

16. Secondly, this mis-judging of things fills the world with endless
niceties and disputes; to the great disturbance of the Churches peace, which to
every good man ought to be precious. The multiplying of Books and Writings pro
and con, and pursuing of Arguments with heat and opposition, does rather
lengthen than decide Controversies; and instead of destroying the old,
begets new ones: whiles they that are in the wrong out of obstinacy will
not, and they that stand for the truth out of conscience dare not, may not
yield; and so still the War goes on.

17. And as to the public peace of the Church, so is there also thirdly by
this means great prejudice done to the peace and tranquillity of private men's
consciences: when by the peremptory Dostrines of some strict and rigid Masters,
the souls of many a well-meaning man are miserably disquieted with a thousand
unnecessary scruples, and driven sometimes into very woeful perplexities. Surely
it can be no light matter, thus to lay heavy burdens upon other men's shoulders,
Mat. 23. 3. 2 Cor. 7. 35. Mat. 7. 14.
and to cast a snare upon their consciences, by making the narrow way to heaven
(...). Naz. orat. 26.
narrower than ever God meant it.

18. Fourthly, hereby Christian Governors come to be robbed of a great part of
that honor that is due unto them from their people; both in their Affections,
and Subjection. For when they shall see cause to exercise over us that power
that God has left them in indifferent things, by commanding such or such
things to be done; as namely, wearing of a Surplice, kneeling at the Communion,
and the like: if now we in our own thoughts have already prejudged any of the
things so commanded to be unlawful; it cannot be but our hearts will be sowred
toward our Superiors, in whom we ought to rejoice: 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
and instead of blessing God for them, (as we are bound to do, and that with
hearty cheerfulness; we shall be ready to speak evil of them, even with open
Jude ver. 8.
mouth, so far as we dare for fear of being shent. Or if out of that fear we do
it but indirectly and obliquely; yet we will be sure to do it in such a manner,
as if we were willing to be understood with as much reflection upon authority
as may be. But then as for our Obedience, we think our selves clearly
discharged of that: it being granted on all hands (as it ought) that Superiors
commanding unlawful things, are not therein to be obeyed.

19. And then (as ever one evil brings on another) since it is against all
reason that our Error should deprive our Superiors of that right they have to
our obedience, (for why should any man reap or challenge benefit from his own
act?) we do by this means fifthly exasperate those that are in authority, and
make the spirit of the Ruler rise against us, which may hap to fall right heavy
on Eccles. 10. 4.
us in the end. All power we know, whether Natural or Civil, striveth to
maintain it self at the height, for the better preserving of it self: the
Natural from decay; and the Civil from contempt. When we therefore withdraw
from the higher powers our due obedience, what do we other than pull upon our
selves their just displeasure; and put into their hands the opportunity (if
they shall but be as ready to take it, as we are to give it) rather to extend
their power. Whereby if we suffer in the conclusion, (as not unlike we may; (
a) (...) --) Homer Iliad. (...).
whom may we thank for it but our selves?

20. Sixthly, by this means we cast our selves upon such sufferings, as (the
cause being naught) we can have no sound comfort in. -- cum martyrem faciat,
non poena, sed causa. Aug. Ep. 61. and ep. 167.
Causa, non passio, we know: it is the cause makes a true Martyr or Confessor,
and not barely the suffering. He that suffers for the Truth, and a good
cause, suffers as a Christian; and he need not be ashamed, but may exult in
the midst of his greatest sufferings; chearing up his own heart, and glorifying
God on that behalf. But he 1 Pet. 4. 16.
that suffers for his Error, or Disobedience, or other rashness, builds his
comfort upon a sandy foundation: and cannot better glorify God, and discharge
a good conscience, than by being ashamed of his fault, and retracting it.

21. Seventhly, hereby we expose not our selves only (which yet is something;)
but sometimes also (which is a far greater matter) the whole Reformed Religion
by our default, to the insolent jeers of Atheists, and Papists, and other
profane and scornful spirits. For men that have Wit enough, and to spare, but
no more Religion than will serve to keep them out of the reach of the Laws;
when they see such men as pretend most to holiness to run into such extravagant
opinions and practices, as in the judgment of any understanding man are
manifestly ridiculous: they cannot hold but their Wits will be working; and
whilst they play upon them, and make themselves sport enough therewithal, it
shall go hard but they will have one fling among, even at the power of Religion
too. Even as the Stoics of old, though they stood mainly for virtue; yet
because they did it in such an uncouth and rigid way, as seemed to be repugnant
not only to Sensus cujusque, and natura rerum, atque ipsa veritas clamat. Cic.
4. de finib. Sensus moresque repugnant. Hor. 1. Sat. 3.
the manners of men, but almost to common sense also: they gave occasion to the
Wits of those times, under a color of making themselves merry with the
Paradoxes of the Stoics, to laugh even true virtue it self out of countenance.

22. Lastly, (for why should I trouble you with any more? These are enough:) by
condemning sundry indifferent things, and namely, Church Ceremonies as
unlawful; we give great scandal to those of the Separation, to their farther
confirming in that their unjust Schism. For why should these men, will they
say, (and for ought I know; they speak but reason;) why should they who agree
so well with us in our Principles, hold off from our Conclusions? Why do they
yet hold communion with, or remain in the bosom of that Church, that imposes
such unlawful things upon them? How are they not guilty themselves of that
lukewarm Laodicean temper, wherewith they so often, and so deeply charge
others? Rev. 3. 16.
Why do they halt so shamefully between two opinions? if Baal be God, and the
Ceremonies lawful: why do not they yield obedience, cheerful obedience, 1 King.
18. 21.
to their Governors, so long as they command but lawful things? But if Baal be
an Idol, and the Ceremonies unlawful, as they and we consent: Why do they not
either set them packing, or (if they cannot get that done) pack themselves away
from them as fast as they can, either to Amsterdam, or to some other place? The
Objection is so strong: that I must confess for my own part, If I could see
cause to admit of those principles, whereon most of our Non-Conformers, and
such as favor them, ground their dislike of our Church-Orders and Ceremonies,
I should hold my self in all conscience bound (for any thing I yet ever read or
heard to the contrary) to forsake the Church of England, and to fly out of
Babylon, before I were many weeks older.

23. Truly, Brethren, if these unhappy fruits were but accidental events only,
occasioned rather than caused, by such our opinions; I should have thought the
time misspent in but naming them: since the very best things that are, may by
accident produce evil effects. But being they do in very truth naturally and
unavoidably issue therefrom, as from their true and proper cause: I cannot but
earnestly beseech all such as are otherwise minded, in the bowels and in the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by all the love they bear to Gods* holy
truth, which they seem so much to stand for; to take these things into their
due consideration, and to lay them close to their consciences. And as for those
my brethren of the Clergy, that have most authority in the hearts of such as
bias too much that way, (for they only may have some hope to prevail with
them; the rest are shut out by prejudice:) if I were in place where, I should
require and charge them, as they will answer the contrary to God, the Church,
and their own Consciences; that they would approve their faithfulness in their
Ministry; by giving their best diligence to inform the judgments of Gods people
aright, as concerning the nature and use of indifferent things: and (as in love
to their souls they are bound) that they would not humor them in these their
Lev. 19. 17.
pernicious errors, nor suffer them to continue therein for want of their
rebuke, either in their public teaching, or otherwise as they shall have
opportunity thereunto in private discourses.

24. But you will say, if these things were so, how should it then come to
pass, that so many men, pretending to Godliness, (and thousands of them
doubtless such as they pretend; for it were an uncharitable thing to charge
them all with hypocrisy:) should so often and so grievously offend this way?
To omit those two more universal causes; Almighty God's Permission first, whose
good pleasure it is, for sundry wise and gracious ends, to exercise his Church,
during her warfare here, with Heresies, and Schisms, and Scandals: And then the
wiliness 1 Cor. 11. 19. Luke 17. 1.
of Satan, who cunningly observes, whether way our hearts incline most, to
looseness, or to strictness; and then frames his Temptations thereafter: So he
can but put us cut of the way; it is no great matter to him, on whether hand it
be: he has his end howsoever. Nor to insist upon sundry more particular
causes: as namely, a natural proneness in all men to superstition: in many an
affectation of singularity, to go beyond the ordinary sort of people in
something or other; the difficulty of shunning one, without running into the
contrary extreme; the great force of Education and Custom; besides manifold
abuses, offenses and provocations, arising from the carriage of others; and the
rest: I shall note but these two only, as the two great fountains of Error, (to
which also most of the other may be reduced) Ignorance and Partiality: from
neither of which Gods dearest Servants and Children are in this life wholly
exempted.

25. Ignorance first is a fruitful mother of Errors. (Ye err, not knowing the
Mat. 22. 29.
Scriptures, Mat. 22.) Yet not so much Gross Ignorance neither: I mean not
that. For your mere Ignaro's, what they err, they err for company: they judge
not at all; neither according to the appearance, nor yet righteous judgment.
They only run on with the herd, and follow as they are led, be it right or
wrong; and never trouble themselves farther. But by Ignorance I mean -- hominum
leviter creditorum Cic. 3. de orator.
weakness of judgment, which consists in a disproportion between the
affections, and the understanding: when a man is very (...) Naz. orat. 2^. Ephesians.
5. 6.
earnest, but withal very shallow: reads much and hears much, and thinks
that he knows much, but has not the judgment to sever truth from falsehood,
nor to discern between a sound Argument and a captious Fallacy. And so for want
of ability to examine the soundness and strength of those principles, from
whence he fetches his Conclusions; he is easily carried away (...), as our
Apostle elsewhere speaks, with vain words, and empty arguments. As St.
Augustine said of Donatus, Augustine 4. de bapt. contra* Donat. 6.
Rations irripuit, he catches hold of some reasons, (as wranglers will catch
at a small thing, rather than yield from their opinions) quas consider antes,
verisimiles esse potius quam veras invenimus; which says he, we found to have
more show of probability at the first appearance, than substance of truth after
they were well considered of.

26. And I dare say, whosoever shall peruse with a judicious and unpartial eye
most of those Pamphlets, that in this daring age have been thrust into the
World, against the Ceremonies of the Church, against Episcopal Government; (to
pass by things of lesser regard and usefulness, and more open to exception and
abuse, yet so far as I can understand, unjustly condemned as things utterly
unlawful; such as are lusorious lots, dancing, Stage Plays, and some other
things of like nature;) When he shall have drained out the bitter invectives,
unmannerly jeers, petulant girding at those that are in authority, impertinent
digressions, but above all those most bold and perverse wrestings of holy
Scripture, wherewith such books are infinitely stuffed; he shall find that
little poor remainder that is left behind, to contain nothing but (...), vain
words and empty arguments. For when these great undertakers have snatched up the
bucklers as if they would make it good against all comers, that such and such
things are utterly unlawful; and therefore ought in all reason and conscience,
to bring* such proofs as will come up to that conclusion: Quid dignum tanto?
Very seldom shall you hear from them any other arguments, than such as will
conclude but an Inexpediency at the most. As, that they are apt to give
Scandal; that they carry with them an appearance of evil; that they are often
occasions of sin; that they are not commanded in the Word; and such like. Which
Objections, even where they are just, are not of force, (no not taken all
together, much less any of them singly) to prove a thing to be utterly
unlawful. And yet are they glad many times rather than sit out, to play very
small game, and to make use of Arguments yet weaker than these, and such as
will not reach so far as to prove a bare inexpediency. As, that they are
invented by Heathens; that they have been abused in Popery; and other such
like. Which to my understanding is a very strong presumption, that they have
taken a very weak cause in hand, and such as is holy destitute of sound proof:
For if they had any better Arguments, think ye we should not besure to hear of
them.

27. Marvel not therefore, if* I charge them with Ignorance: although in their
Writings some of them may show much variety of reading, and other (As Parker,
Dioclavius, etc.)
pieces of learning and knowledge. For if their knowledge were even much more
than it is, yet if it should not hold pace with their zeal, but suffer that to
outrun it: there should be still in them that disproportion that before I
spoke of: and they might so far forth be ranked with those silly women our
Apostle speaks of, (for such disproportion is very incident to the weaker
Sex) that are ever learning, but are never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth. And 2 Timothy 3. 7.
this kind of ignorance is evermore very troublesome; and has been the raiser
of most of those stirs, that so much disquiet either whole Churches, or
particular Congregations: as the lame horse ever raises the most dust; and
Zelius absque scientia, quo vehementius irruit, and gravius corruit. Bern
deverbis Isa. Sermon. 4.
the faster he puts on still the more dust. Have you observed any men to be
fuller of molestation in the places where they live; than those that have been
somewhat toward the Law, or having some little smattering therein, think
themselves for that a great deal wiser than the rest of their Neighbors?
Although such busy spirits for the most part make it appear to the World
before they have done, that they had but just so much Law, as would serve them
to vex their neighbors withal in the mean time, and undo themselves in the
end. Zeal is a kind of fire. An excellent creature Fire, as it may be used; but
yet may do a great deal of mischief too, as it may be used; as we use to say of
it, that it is a good Servant, but an ill Master. A right zeal, grounded upon
certain knowledge, and guided with godly discretion, like fire on the hearth,
is very comfortable and serviceable: but blind or undiscreet zeal, like fire in
the thatch, will soon set all the house in a combustion.

28. So much for Ignorance, the first great Fountain of Error: the other is
Partiality. And this is causa causarum: much of that ignorance and ill-governed
zeal, from which so many other errors spring, does it self spring from this
corrupt Fountain of Partiality. Which makes the Error so much the worse; and
the judgment so much the more unrighteous. For where an Error proceeds merely
from weakness, though it cannot be therefore excused, much less ought to be
therefore cherished; yet may it be even therefore pitied, Juvenal. Satyr. 2.
horum simplicitas miserabilis -- and the rather born with for a time. But if
it shall once appear, that partiality runs along with it, or especially that
it proceeds from partiality; this renders it odious both to God and Man. St.
Paul therefore, well knowing what mischiefs would come of it, if Church
Governors in the administration of their weighty callings should be swayed
with partial affections, either for or against any, lays a great charge upon
Timotheus Ephesiorum Episcopus ordinatus a B. Paulo. Hieron. de Script. Ec.
cles. cap. 11. 1 Timothy 5. 21.
Timothy, whom he had ordained Bishop of Ephesus, and that with a most deep and
solemn obtestation, by all means to beware of Partiality. ( I charge thee
before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, that thou observe
these things, without preferring one before another, doing nothing by
partiality, 1 Timothy 5.)

29. And reason good; there being scarce any thing more directly contrarious to
the Rules of Charity, Equity and Justice, than Partiality is: as might be
easily shown, if we had time for it. And yet as unjust, unequal, and
uncharitable as it is, the world abounds with it for all that. Not to
instance in the writing of Histories, handling of Controversies, distribution
of Rewards and Punishments, and other particulars: Take but a general view of
the ordinary passages of most men's lives, either in the carriage of their own,
or in the censuring of other men's actions; and you shall find partiality to
bear no little sway, in most of the things that are done under the Sun. The
truth is, we are Nemo non est benignus sui judex Senec. 2. de Benef. 26.
all partial: and shall be as long as we live here, more or less. For
Partiality is the Daughter of Pride and Hypocrisy: both which are as
universally spread, and as deeply and inseparably rooted in our nature, as any
other corruptions whatsoever. Pride ever makes a man to look at himself and
(...). Naz. orat. 27.
his own party with favor; and at the opposites either with envy, if they be
above him; or if below him, with scorn: and how can such a man choose but be
partial? And Hypocrisy ever leans on a nail: it will make a man halt before
his best friends, and when fainest he would be thought to go upright. The
spying of motes in our brothers eye, and baulking of beams in our own (which is
Partiality) our Savior therefore charge with Hypocrisy, (Thou Hypocrite,
first cast the beam out of thine own eye, Luke 6. 42.
Luke 6.) And St. James coupleth them together, as things that seldom go
asunder; Jam. 1. 17.
(...), without partiality and without Hypocrisy.

30. Besides these two internal causes (Pride and Hypocrisy) from within,
which first breed it; there are sundry other external causes of Partiality from
without, which after it is bred, help to feed it and increase it. One whereof
is the great force of Education and Custom; which commonly lays such strong
anticipations upon the judgment, that it is a matter of great difficulty to
work out those Id sapit u^^squisque quod didicit. Senec. (...) Naz. Orat. 1.
Jude v. 16.
first impressions afterward by any strength of reason; or but so much as to
bring us to suspect there can be any error in those things, whereto our ears
have been so long enured. Another is, that which the Apostle calls the having
of men's persons in admiration: when we have such a high opinion of some men, as
to receive whatsoever they deliver, as the undoubted Oracles of God, though
wanting both partiality and proof; and such a prejudice again on the other side
against some others, though perhaps of better worth and sounder judgment than
the former, as to suspect every thing that comes from them (especially if it
do not sapere ad palatum) be it laid down never so clearly, proved never so
substantially. But I must omit both these, and the rest: only one I cannot
choose but name, because it so much concerns this point of lawfulness, whereof
we now speak; and it belongs also to this last mentioned branch of admiring
men's persons. And that is, the great credit that is usually given to such
Divines, as in their Expositions of the Commandments, or other Treatises
concerning Cases of Conscience, have set a Non licet upon very many things, and
that with very much confidence, and yet upon very weak grounds. Yea, so
corruptibly or slightly, is that useful part of Divinity handled by most that
have traveled therein, either in the Romish or Reformed Churches; that scarce
is to be found one just volume in that kind, able to give satisfaction to a
Reader, that is both rational and conscientious, in sundry weighty points: and
namely in those two, than which there are few of more general use in our daily
conversation; to wit, the point of Christian Liberty, and the point of
Christian Subjection. By means whereof, many of them that should teach others
better, are many times themselves mis-taught: and so the blind leading the
blind, both Teachers and People are plunged deep either in Superstition, or
Disobedience, or both, before they ever so much as mistrust themselves to have
stepped awry. But of this enough.

31. In this former clause of my Text, besides the things whereof we have
hithereto spoken ((...), All things:) the Apostle expressing of his own person
(...) not only all these lawful, but all lawful for me; though I will not press
it much, yet may not be wholly neglected. There is an opinion taken up in this
last age, that has passed for current amongst many, grounded upon one
misunderstood passage in this Epistle; but is indeed both false in it self, and
dangerous 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23.
in the consequents: namely this, that the godly regenerate have a full right
to all the creatures; but wicked and unregenerate men have right to none, but
are malae fidei possessores, intruders and usurpers of those things they have,
and shall at the day of judgment be answerable, not only for their abusing of
them, but even for their very possessing of them. Possibly some may imagine
(yet none but they whose judgments are fore-stalled with that fancy) that these
words of our Apostle look that way; and that there lies an Emphasis in the
Pronoun, to this sense: All things are lawful for me; but not so for every man.
Being a godly and regenerate man, and engraffed into Christ by faith, I have a
right and liberty to all the Creatures, which every man has not.

32. But to feign such a sense to these words, besides, that it seems
apparently to offer force to the Text, it does indeed quite overthrow the
Apostles main purpose in this part of his discourse: which is, to teach the
Corinthians, and all others, to yield something from their lawful liberty for
their brethrens sakes, when they shall see it needful so to do, either for the
avoiding of private scandal, or for the preservation of the public peace. So
that the Apostle certainly here intended to extend our liberty to the
Creatures, as far and wide, in respect of the persons, as of the things: as if
he had said, All things are lawful for all men. The interlinear Gloss is right
here, Quod sibi dicit licere, innuit and de aliis. We know it is an usual
thing, as in our ordinary speech, so in the Scriptures too; in framing
objections, in putting cases, and the like, to make the instance personal,
where the aim is general. As Romans 3. If the truth of God have abounded Romans 3.
7.
through my lie unto his glory, why am I also judged as a sinner? That is,
through my lie, or any man's else: Why either I, or any man else? So after in
this Chapter; Why is my liberty judged -- and why am I evil spoken of --? Mine
or any 1 Cor. 10. 29. -- ibid. 30.
man's else? I, or any man else? And so in a hundred places more.

33. There is no great necessity therefore, for ought I see, that we should
place any Emprhasis at all in the Pronoun (...). Or if we do, it must then be
understood, as if the Apostle intended thereby, not to exclude others: (Thus
All things are lawful for me, that is, for me rather than for some others:) but
only to include himself; as thus, All things are lawful for me, that is, for me
also as well as for others. He did not conceive, that his Apostolical Calling
did any whit either infringe his Christian liberty, or abridge it: but that
notwithstanding he was set apart for the service of Christ in the work of the
Ministry, he had Romans 1. 1. (...).
still the same fullness of power and right that ever he had, or that any other
person had to all the good Creatures of God. St. Paul was content to forbear
his power in some things: But he would not forgo it though in any thing. He
used his liberty indeed very sparingly, but yet he maintained it most stoutly.
Am I not 1 Cor. 9. 1, etc.
an Apostle? Am I not free? Have we not power to eat and drink as well as
others? To lead about a Sister, a Wife as well as others? To forbear working as
well as others? In the Chapter before this.

34. I find not any where in Scripture, that the Priesthood of the Gospel does
render a man incapable of any thing, whereunto he has either a natural, or
civil liberty: but that whatsoever is lawful for any other man to do, is lawful
for a Churchman to do, notwithstanding his Ministerial Office and Calling.
What is decent and expedient for a Minister of the Gospel to do, that is quite
another business: I speak now only of lawfulness, which respects the things
themselves only, considered in their own nature, and in the general, without
relation either to the opinions and fashions of times and places, which is the
measure of decency; or to such particular circumstances, as attend particular
actions, which ought to be the measure of Expediency.

35. For a grave Clergyman to wear a green suit, a Cap and Feather, and a long
Lock on the one side; or to work journey-work in some mechanic or manual
trade, as with a Mason, Carpenter, or Shoemaker: as things are now settled among
us, no wise man can think it either decent or expedient. Yet that decency and
expediency set aside, no man can truly say, that the doing of any of this is
simply unlawful. For why might not an English Minister, if he were Prisoner in
Turkey, to make an escape, disguise himself in such a habit as aforesaid; which
if it were simply unlawful, rather than to do it, he should dye a thousand
deaths. And why it should not be as lawful now for a Minister, as it was once
for an Apostle, to work journey-work, to make Shoes now, as then to make Tents,
(if it might stand with decency and expediency now, as well as then:) let him
that can, show a reason. Let them look how they Acts 18. 3.
will answer it therefore, that make it unlawful for Priests, either to marry,
as some do: or to be in commission of the peace, as some others do: as if
either the state of Wedlock, or the exercise of Temporal Jurisdiction, were
inconsistent with holy Orders. When the maintainers of either Opinion shall
show good Text for what they teach, the cause shall be yielded: but till that
be done, they must pardon us if we appeal them both of Pharisaism, in teaching
for Doctrine men's Precepts. So long as this Text stands in the Bible Mat. 15. 9.
unexpunged, All things are lawful for me: if any man either from Rome, or
elsewhere, nay, if an Angel from Heaven, should teach either of those things to
be unlawful, and bring no better proof for it than yet has been done, he must
excuse me if I should not be very forward to believe him.

36. Well, you see the Apostle here extends our liberty very far in
indifferent things; without exception either of things or persons: All things
lawful, and lawful for all men. In the asserting of which liberty, if in any
thing I have spoken at this time, I may seem to any man to have set open a wide
gap to carnal licentiousness: I must entreat at his hands one of these three
things; and the request is but reasonable. Either First, that all prejudice and
partiality laid aside, he would not judge (...), according to the appearance,
but according Joh. 7. 24.
to right and truth; and then I doubt not but all shall be well enough. Or
Secondly, that he would consider, whether these words of our Apostle, taken by
themselves alone, do not seem to set open the gap as wide, as I or any man else
can stretch it; Omnia licent, All things are lawful for me. Or that Thirdly, he
would at leastwise suspend his judgment, till I shall have handled the latter
clauses of my Text also, wherein our liberty is restrained, as it is here
extended. Then (which may be ere long, if God will) he shall possibly find the
gap, if any such be, sufficiently stopped up again, to keep out all carnal
licentiousness, and other abuse of Christian Liberty whatsoever. In the mean
time, and at all times, God grant us all to have a right judgment, and to keep
a good conscience in all things.

AD AULAM.
Sermon XII.
HAMPTON COURT, JULY 26. 1640.
1 Cor. 10. 23. -- But all things are not expedient -- But all things edify
not.
THe former Clause of the Verse, here twice repeated ( All things are lawful
for me) contains the Extension; as these latter Clauses do the Limitation of
that Liberty that God has left us to things of indifferent Nature. That
Extension I have already handled; and set our Christian Liberty there (where
according to the constant Doctrine of our Apostle) I think it should stand.
From what I then delivered, (which I now repeat not) plain it was, that the
Apostle extends our Liberty very far, without exception either of Things or
Persons. All Things lawful, and lawful for all men. All the fear was, lest by
so asserting our liberty, we might seem to set open a gap to carnal
licentiousness. Although there be no great cause for it in respect of the thing
it self; yet is not that fear altogether needless, in regard of our Corruption:
who are apt to turn* the very best things into abuse, and Liberty as much as
any thing. Yet that fear need not much trouble us, if we will but take these
latter Clauses of the Verse also along with us, as we ought to do. Where we
shall find the gap* (if any such were) sufficiently made up again, to keep out
all carnal licentiousness, and other abuse of Christian Liberty whatsoever.

2. Of those Clauses we are now to speak; But all things are not expedient. But
all things edify not. Wherein the Apostle having before extended our liberty
in the power, now restrains it in the use and exercise of that power.
Concerning which I shall comprehend all I have to say in three Observations*
grounded all upon the Text. First, That the Apostle establishes the point of
lawfulness, before he meddle with that of expediency. Secondly, That he
requires we should have an eye to the expediency also of the things we do, not
resting upon their lawfulness alone. And thirdly, that he measures the
expediency of lawful things by their usefulness unto edification. Of which in
their order.

3. And first, Expediency in St. Paul's method supposes lawfulness. He takes
that for granted, that the thing is lawful; before he enter into any Enquiry
whether it be expedient, yea, or no. For expediency is here brought in, as a
thing that must restrain and limit us in the exercise of that liberty, which
God has otherwise allowed us: but God has not allowed us any liberty unto
unlawful things. And this Observation is of right good use: for thence it will
follow, that when the unlawfulness of any thing is once made sufficiently to
appear, all farther enquiry into the expediency or inexpediency thereof must
thenceforth utterly cease and determine. No conjuncture of Circumstances
whatsoever, can make that expedient to be done at any time, that is of it self
and in the kind (...). Eurip. Phoeniss. Act. 3.
unlawful. For a man to blaspheme the holy Name of God, to sacrifice to Idols,
to give wrong sentence in Judgment, by his power to oppress those that are not
able to withstand him, by subtilty to overreach others in bargaining, to take
up arms (offensive or defensive) against a lawful Sovereign: none of these and
sundry other things of like nature, being all of them simply and de toto genere
unlawful, may be done by any man, at any time, in any case, upon any color or
pretension whatsoever; the express Command of God himself only excepted, as in
the case of Abraham for sacrificing his Son. Not for the avoiding of scandal,
Genesis 22. 2.
not at the instance of any Friend, or command of any Power upon earth; nor for
the maintenance of the Lives or Liberties either of our selves or others; nor
for the defense of Religion; not for the preservation of a Church or State: no
nor yet, if that could be imagined possible, for the salvation of a Soul, no
not for the redemption of the whole world.

4. I remember to have read long since a Story of one of the Popes (but who the
Man was, and what the particular Occasion, I cannot now recall to mind) that
having in a Consultation with some of his Cardinals proposed unto them the
course himself had thought of, for the settling of some present Affairs to his
most advantage: when one of the Cardinals told him he might not go that way,
because it was not according to Justice; he made answer again, that though it
might not be done per viam Iustitiae, yet it was to be done per viam
Expedientiae. A distinction which it seems the High Priest of Rome had
learned of his Predecessor at Jerusalem, the High Priest Caiaphas, in a solemn
consultation held there, Ioh. 11. There the chief Priests and Pharisees call a
Council; and the business Joh. 11. 47, -- 50.
was, what they should do with Jesus. If they should let him alone so, the
people would all run after him because of his miracles: and then would the
Romans (who did but wait for such an opportunity) make that a pretense to
invade their Country, and to destroy both their Religion and Nation. If they
should take away his life, that were indeed a sure course; but Nicodemus had
stammered them all, for that a good while before, in a former Council at
Jerusalem, Ioh. 7. John 7. 51.
when he told them that they could not do it by Law; being they had nothing to
lay to his charge that could touch his life. Up stands Caiaphas then, and
tells them, they were but too scrpulous to stand so much upon the nice point
of legality at that time: they should let the matter of justice go for once,
and consider what was now expedient to be done, for the preserving of their
Nation, and to prevent the incursions of the Romans. (You know nothing at all,
says he, nor consider that it is expedient for us, that one man should die for
the People, and that the whole Nation perishnot.)

5. Whatever Infallibility either of these High Priests might challenge to
themselves, or their flatterers ascribe to them: it is sure far safer for us to
rest our judgments upon that never-failing Rule of St. Paul, Romans 3. ( Romans 3.
8. Nunquam virtus vitio adjuvanda est. Sen. 1. de ira, 9.
We may not do evil, that good may come thereof, than to follow them in their
wild resolutions. But if we desire Examples rather; we cannot have for the
purpose in one man, a more proper Example on the one side for our imitation,
nor a more fearful Example on the other side for our admonition, than are those
two so unlike Actions of David in the matter of Saul, and in the matter of
Uriah.

6. As for Saul, two several times it was in the power of his hands to have
slain him, if he would. In the Cave, he might as easily have cut the Thread of
his 1 Samuel 24. 4.
Life, as the skirt of his Garment: and in the Trench, as easily have taken his
Head 1 Samuel 26. 12.
from off his shoulders, as the Spear from beside his Boulster. And much might
have been said for the expediency of it too. Saul was his professed, his
implacable Enemy; hunted him from place to place like a Partridge upon the
mountains, 1 Samuel 26. 20.
set snares and traps for him in every corner to destroy him; and all this
without cause. Nor was David ignorant of what God had promised, and Samuel had
foretold, concerning the rending of the Kingdom from Saul, and settling it upon
him; and now, if ever, might seem to be a fair opportunity to bring all that
about, now he had him in his hands; by taking away his Life, and setting the
Crown upon his own Head: besides the accomplishment of Gods promises, he might
so provide for his own safety, quiet the distractions in the State, turn all
the Forces against the common Enemy, advance Religion, in adding honorable
Solemnities to the public Worship, and settle the Kingdom in a more just,
moderate and peaceable Government than now it was. Plausible inducements all,
and probable: and his Captains and Servants about him did not forget to urge
them, and to press the Expediency. But David rightly apprehended 1 Samuel 24. 4.
and 26. 8.
the thing it self, to offer violence to the Lord's anointed, to be utterly
unlawful; and that was it that staid his hand. That unlawfulness alone he
opposes against all these, and whatsoever other seeming Expediencies could be
pretended, as a sufficient Answer to them all. The Lord forbid that I should 1 Samuel 24. 6. 1 Samuel 26. 9.
stretch forth my hand against the Lords anointed: and, who can stretch out his
hand against the Lords Anointed and be guiltless? Thus is David in the matter
of Saul, a worthy Example for our limitation.

7. See him now another while in the Matter of Uriah, and how he behaved
himself there. Quantum mutatus! Could you think it were the same man? He had
lain with the Wife, when the Husband was abroad, and in his Service, 2 Samuel 11.
4. -- Ibid. 5.
and she proved with Child. If this should be famed abroad, it could not but
tend much to the Kings Dishonor; yea, and to the scandal of Religion too. It
seemed therefore very expedient the matter should be smothered; and David
sets all his Wits on work how to do that handsomely. Many Fetches and Devices
he had in his Head, and sundry of them he put to trial, this way and that way;
but none of them would take. God meant him a shame for his sin* and therefore
blasted all those his Attempts, and made them unsuccessful. When he saw he
could not bring his purpose to pass any other way, at last he entertaineth
black Thoughts, and falls upon a desperate resolution; to blear the eyes of
the World, Uriah must die: so shall the Widow be his, and the Child born in
lawful Wedlock be thought to be Legitimate, and all shall be well. A hard Case,
to take away the Life of an innocent Person, a man of Renown, Valiant and
Religious, whose Name stood 2 Samuel 23. 39. 2 Samuel 11. 13. -- Ibid. 25.
in the List, enrolled among his chiefest Worthies; and that in a most base and
treacherous fashion too, not without a great deal of daubing and hypocrisy
withal. The Circumstances aggravate much. No doubt David's Heart, that was 1 Samuel 24. 5.
so ready to smite him at other times upon very small occasions in comparison,
would now buffet him with stronger Checks; and not suffer him to be ignorant of
the wickedness and unlawfulness of his ^oul intentions. But all is one for
that: Iacta est alea. He was in, and he must on: so it must be now, thinks
he, or else we are shamed for ever. This is David in the matter of Uriah: a
fearful Example for our Admonition.

8. Heaven and Hell are not at more distance, nor Light and Darkness more
unlike; than David's carriage in the one case, and in the other. Of which so
great difference and unlikeness, if we examine what was the true cause; we
shall find it to have been none other but this; that in the former he looked
chiefly at the unlawfulness of the thing, and in the latter at the expediency
only. In the matter of Saul, he saw the thing was utterly unlawful to be done,
as being repugnant to the Ordinance of God, and the duty of a Subject; and
therefore, expedient or inexpedient, he resolves he will not do it for a world;
and that was certainly the right way. In the matter of Uriah, he saw the thing
was expedient to be done, as conducing to his ends, for the saving of his
credit at that time; and therefore lawful or unlawful, he resolves he will do
it, whatsoever come of it: and that was certainly the wrong way.

9. Take we warning by his example (it is the cheapest learning to profit by
another harm) not Facere aliquid, quod sci as non licere. Cic. pro Balbo. Romans
16. 18. Psalm. 50. 17.
to adventure the doing of any thing we know to be unlawful; seem it never so
expedient, and conducible to such ends as we intend. Alas! why should any of us
for the serving of our own bellies, cast the Commandments of God behind our
backs; or violate his holy Laws, to satisfy our own impure Lusts? Can the
compassing of any thing we can desire in this world; Profit, Pleasure,
Preferment, Glory, Revenge, or any thing else, be to us of so great advantage:
that for the attainment thereof, we should so far dishonor God, and quench the
Light that is in us; as to lie, and for swear, and flatter, and slander, and
supplant, and cheat, and oppress, or do any other unjust or unlawful Act,
against the Light of our own Reason, or contrary to the Checks of own
Consciences.

10. Nor ought we to be careful hereof then only, when in our ends we look
merely at our selves, and our own private conveniences in any of the
forementioned respects of Profit, Pleasure, and the rest: but even then also
when our intentions are more noble and honorable; the honor of God, the
edification of our Brethren, the peace of the Church, and the common Good. For
neither pious intentions alone, nor reasons of expediency alone, nor yet both
together, will either warrant us beforehand to the choice, nor excuse us
afterward for the use of unlawful means. Whatever Readiness intention was, in
sparing the fatter Cattle, 1 Samuel 15. 15.
I make no question but that Uzzah's very intention was pious, in reaching
forth his hands to stay the Ark from falling, when it tottered in the Cart. The
things ^ Sam. 6. 6.
themselves, both the one and the other, seemed to be very expedient: But God's
special Command to Saul that all should be destroyed, and his Law given by
Moses 1 Samuel 15. 3.
concerning that sacred and mysterious Utensil, having made both those things
Number. 4. 15.
unlawful, did thereby also make both the facts inexcusable: And Almighty God
to win reverence and honor to his own Ordinances, punished with great severity
both the disobedience of the one, and the rash presumption of the other.

11. Be our Ends and Aims therefore what they will; unless we arm our selves
with strong Resolutions beforehand, not to do any thing we know to be unlawful
upon any terms, seem it otherwise never so expedient; and then afterward use
all our best Prayers and Endeavors by God's Grace to hold our Resolutions: We
are gone. Satan is cunning, and we but weak: and he will be too hard for us, if
he do but find us any whit staggering in our Resolutions, for doing nothing but
what is lawful; or lending an ear to any Persuasions, for the doing of any
thing that is unlawful. By this very means he got within our Grandmother Eve;
and prevailed with her to taste Genesis 3. 5.
of the forbidden Fruit, though it were unlawful, by persuading her that it was
expedient. This one is a sure ground for us to build upon: To a good Christan,
that desires to make conscience of his ways, nothing can be truly Quicquid non
licet, certe non oportet. Cic. pro Balbo. Potest aliquid licere, and non
expedire: expedire autem quod non licet, non potest. Aug. de adult. Conjug.
cap. 15. Constat in Christiana Philosophia, non decere nisi quod licet, nec
expedire, nisi quod and decet and licet. Bern. de consid. lib. 3. Sin a sumus
qui profecto esse debemus, ut nihil arbitremur expedire nisi quod rectum
honestumque sit. Cic. 4. sam. Epist. 3. Universa Concio, quod aequnm non
videretur, ne expedire quidem proclamavit. Valor. Max. 6. 5. Chap. 11 and 14.
expedient that is apparently unlawful. And so much for the first Observation.

12. The Apostle first supposes the thing to be lawful: else it may not be
done howsoever. But if it be lawful; then we hope we may use it at our
pleasure; without either scruple in our selves, or blame from others: Indeed,
that is the common guise of the World. Have but the Opinion of some Divine of
Note, concerning any thing we have a mind to, that is lawful: and then we think
we need take no more care, nor trouble our selves about Circumstances. But
there is a great deal more belongs to it than so. Lawfulness alone will not
bear us out in the use of a thing, unless there be care had withal to use it
lawfully: lest otherwise our liberty degenerate into a carnal licentiousness;
as easily it may do. For preventing whereof, the Apostle here requires, that
we consider as well what is expedient to be done, as what is lawful. Which was
our second Observation. [All things are lawful for me, but all things are not
expedient.]

13. St. Bernard to Eugenius requires trinam considerationem, a threefold
consideration or enquiry to precede the doing of any Action of moment, and
worthy our deliberation; An liceat, an deceat, an expediat. Whether it be
lawful or no; whether comely or no; whether expedient or no: lawful in it self,
comely for us, expedient in respect of others. He makes there that of decency,
and that of expediency, two different considerations the one from the other;
yet both necessary. And as well the difference that is between them, as the
necessity of both, arises from those two grand Virtues, which must have a
special influence into every Action morally and spiritually good; to wit,
Discretion and Charity: of which two, Discretion is the proper Judge of
Decency, and Charity of Expediency, though both do in some sort belong to both;
but as for Decency, it may be the Apostle intended not to speak of it at all;
as being not so very pertinent to his present Argument; and having besides a
purpose to mention it more seasonably afterward. Or if he did, he then takes
Expediency in a larger sense; so as to comprehend under that Name, all that
which Bernard means by Decency and Expediency both. And so taken, (that we
may understand what it is we speak of) the difference that is between
Lawfulness and Expediency consists in this; that Lawfulness looks but at
the Nature and Quality of the thing in it self, considered in the kind, and
abstractedly both from the End and Circumstances: but Expediency takes in the
End also, and such other Circumstances as attend particular Actions.

14. That Expediency ever relates to the End, we may gather from the very
notion of the Words. (...) in the Greek, is as much as to confer or contribute
something, to bring in some Help or Furtherance toward the attainment of the
desired End. And Expedire in the Latin, is properly to speed a Business: as
the contrary thereof ( Impedire) is to hinder it. The Word Expedition comes
thence; and so does this also of Expediency. That thing then may not unfitly be
said to be expedient to any End, that does expedire, give any furtherance or
avail toward the attaining of that End: and that on the contrary to be
inexpedient, that does impedire, cast in any Let, Rub, or Impediment to hinder
the same. It must be man's first care to propose to himself in all his Actions
some right End: and then he is to judge of the Expediency of the Means by their
serviceableness thereunto.

15. It is (no doubt) lawful for a Christian (being that God has tied him to
live out his time in the World) therefore to propose to himself in sundry
particular actions of this Life, worldly Ends; (Gain, Preferment, Reputation,
Delight;) so as he desire nothing but what is meet for him; and that his
desires thereof be also moderate. And he may consequently apply himself to such
Means as are expedient, and conducing to those Ends. But those Ends and Means
are but the Bye of a Christian, not the Main. He lives in the World; and so
must, and therefore also may use it: But woe unto him, if he have not far higher
and nobler Ends than these, to which all his Actions must refer, and whereto
all those worldly both Means and Ends must be subordinate. And those are to
seek the Glory of God, and the Salvation of his own Soul, by discharging a good
Conscience, and advancing the common Good. In the use therefore and choice of
such things, as are in themselves lawful (as all indifferent things are) we are
to judge those Means, that may any way further us toward the attainment of any
of those Ends, to be so far forth expedient; and those that any way hinder the
same, to be so far forth inexpedient: and by how much more or less they so
either further or hinder, to be by so much more or less either expedient, or
inexpedient.

16. Besides the End, the reason of Expediency depends also very much upon
such other particular Circumstances, as do attend humane Actions: as Times,
Places, Persons, Measure, Manner, and the rest. By reason of the infinite
variety and uncertainty whereof, it is utterly impossible to give such general
Rules of Expediency* as shall serve to all particular Cases: so that there is
no remedy, but the weighing of particular Circumstances in particular actions,
must be left to (...) Arist. 2. Ethic. 6.
the Discretion and Charity of particular men. Wherein every man that desires
to walk conscionably, must endeavor at all times, and in all his actions to
lay things together as well as he can; and taking one thing with another,
according to that measure of Wisdom and Charity wherewith God has endowed him,
to resolve ever to do that, which seems to him most convenient to be done, --
utra sit harum via utilior, cum materia deliberabimus. Quin. 3. Instit. 7.
Consillum in arena. Adag.
as things then stand. Only let him be sure still his Eye and Aim be upon the
right End in the main, and that then all things be ordered with reference
thereunto.

17. This discovery of the Nature of Expediency, what it is, and what
dependence it has upon, and relation unto the End and Circumstances of men's
actions; discovers unto us withal sundry material differences between
Lawfulness and Expediency; and thence also the very true reason, why in the
exercise of our Christian Liberty it should be needful for us to have regard,
as well to the Expediency, as to the Lawfulness of those things we are to do.
Some of those Differences are; First, that as the Natures of things are
unchangeable, but their Ends and Circumstances various and variable; so their
Lawfulness, which is rooted in their Nature, is also constant, and permanent,
and ever the same; but their Expediency, which hangs upon so many Quorum usus
coercetur certis circumstantiis, ea dicuntur non expedire, non dicuntur non
licere. Chamier. 3. panstr. 21. 75.
turning hinges, is ever and anon changing. What is (...) Arist. 1. Mou. Mon.
35. (...). Arist. 2. Ethic. 3.
expedient to day, may be inexpedient to morrow: but once lawful, and ever
lawful. Secondly, That a thing may be at the same time expedient in one
respect, and inexpedient in another: but no respects can make the same thing to
be at once hoth lawful and unlawful. Because respects cannot alter the Natures
of things, from which their Lawfulness, or Unlawfulness arises. Thirdly, That
the Lawfulness and Unlawfulness of things consists in puncto indivisibili (as
they use to speak) even as the Nature and Essence of every thing does; and so
are not capable either of them of the degrees of more or less: all lawful
things being equally lawful, and all unlawful things equally unlawful. But
there is a latitude of expediency and inexpediency: they do both suspicere
magis and minus: so as one thing may be more or less expedient than another,
and more or less inexpedient than another. And that therefore fourthly, It is a
harder thing to judge rightly of Quil rectum sit, apparet; quid expediat,
obscurum est. Cic. 5. Ep. 19.
the Expediency of things to be done, than of their lawfulness. For to judge
whether a thing be lawful or no, there need no more to be done, but to consider
the nature of it in general, and therein what conformity it has with the
principles of Reason, and the written Word of God: And universalia certiora; a
man of competent judgment, and not forestalled with prejudice will not easily
mistake in such generalities, because they are neither many, nor subject to
much uncertainty. But (...). Arist. 1. Poster. anal. 13. 15.
descendendo contingit errare; the more we descend to Particulars, in the more
danger are we of being mistaken therein; because we have both far more things
to consider of, and those also far more uncertain than before. And it may fall
out, and not seldom does, that when we have laid things together in the
Balance, weighing one Circumstance with another as carefully as we could; and
thereupon have resolved to do this or that as in our judgment the most
expedient for that time: some Circumstance or other may come into our minds
afterward, which we did not forethink, or some casual intervening Accident may
happen, which we could not foresee; that may turn the scales quite the other
way, and render the thing, which seemed expedient but now, now altogether
inexpedient.

18. From these and other like Differences, we may gather the true reason, why
the Apostle so much and so often presses the Point of Expediency as meet to be
taken into our Consideration and Practice, as well as that of Lawfulness. Even
because things lawful in themselves, and in the kind, may for want of -- etsi
officio videtur bonum, ipso non recto fine peccatum est. Aug. 4. contra Jul. 3.
a right End, or through a neglect of due Circumstances, become sinful in the
doer. Not as if an Act of ours could change the nature of the things from what
they are: for it is beyond the power of any Creature in the world to do that.
God only is Dominus Naturae; to him it belongs only as chief Lord, to change
either the Physical or Moral Nature of things at his pleasure. Things in their
own nature indifferent, God by commanding, can make necessary, and by
forbidding, unlawful: as he made Circumcision necessary, and eating of Pork
unlawful to the Jews under the old Law. But no Scruple of Conscience, no
Command of the higher Powers, no Opinions or Consent of Men, no Scandal or
Abuse whatsoever, can make any indifferent thing to become either necessary or
unlawful, universally, and perpetually, and in the nature of it: but it still
remains indifferent as it was before, any act of ours notwithstanding. Yet
may such an indifferent thing, remaining still in the nature of it indifferent
as before, by some act of ours, or otherwise, become in the use of it, and by
accident, either necessary or unlawful, pro hic and nunc, to some men, and at
some times, and with some circumstances. As the Command of lawful Authority,
may make an indifferent thing to us necessary for the time: and the just fear
of Scandal may make an indifferent thing to us unlawful for the time. Therefore
it behooveth us in all our deliberations de rebus agendis, to consider well not
only of the nature of the thing we would do, whether it be lawful or no in the
kind; but of the end also, and all present circumstances, especially the most
material: lest, through some default there, it become so inexpedient, that it
cannot be then done by us without sin. For as we may sin, by doing that which
is unlawful; so may we also by doing even that, which is lawful, in an undue
manner.

19. And it will much concern us, to use all possible circumspection herein,
the rather for two great Reasons: for that by this means (I mean the supposed
lawfulness of things) we are both very easily drawn on unto Sin, and when we
are in, very hardly fetched off again. First, we are easily drawn on. The very
name and opinion of Lawfulness many times carries us along, whilst we suspect
no evil, and puts our foot into the snare, ere we be aware of it. The
Conscience of many a good man, that would keep a strait watch over himself
against grosser offenses, will sometimes set it self very loose, when he
finds himself able to plead, that he does nothing but what is lawful. In
things simply evil Sin cannot lurk so close, but that a godly wise man that
has his eyes in his head, may spy it and avoid it: as a wild beast or Thief
may easily Eccles. 2. 4.
be descried in the open Champain. But if it can once shroud it self under the
covert of Lawfulness, it is the more dangerous; like a wild beast or Thief in
the woods, or behind the thickets, where he may lurk unseen, and assault us on
a sudden, if we do not look the better about us. And the greater our danger is,
the greater should be our circumspection also.

20. And as we are easily inveigled and drawn in, to sins of this kind; so when
we are in, we get off again very hardly. If we chance through humane frailty,
or the strength of temptations, to fall into some gross offense, by doing
something that is manifestly unlawful (although such gross sins are of
themselves apt to waste the conscience, to beat back the offers of Grace, and
to harden the heart wonderfully against repentance:) yet have we in sundry
other respects more and better helps and advantages toward Repentance for such
sins, than when we transgress by abusing our liberty in lawful things. 1. It is
no hard matter to convince our understandings of those grosser transgressions;
their obliquity is so palpable. 2. They often lie cold and heavy at the heart:
where the burden of them is so pressing and afflictive, that it will force us
to seek abroad for ease. 3. We shall scarce read a Chapter, or hear a Sermon,
but we shall meet with something or other that seems to rub upon that gaul.
4. The World will cry shame on us. 5. And our Enemies triumph that they have
gotten something to lay in our Dish. 6. Our Friends will have a just occasion
to give us a sharp Rebuke. 7. And the guiltiness of the Fact will so stop our
mouths, that we shall have nothing to answer for our selves. All which may be
so many good preparations unto repentance.

21. But when we are able to plead a lawfulness in the substance of the thing
done: 1. Seldom do we take notice of our failings in some Circumstances. 2. Nor
do our Hearts smite us with much Remorse thereat. 3. The edge of God's holy
Word slideth over us, without cutting or piercing at all, or not deep. 4. We
lie not so open to the upbraidings either of Friends or Foes, but that if any
thing be objected by either, we can yet say something in our defense. All which
are so many impediments unto Repentance. Not but that whoever truly fears
God, and repents unfeignedly, repents even of the smallest sins, as well as
of the greatest; but that he does it not so feelingly, nor so particularly, for
these smaller, as for those greater ones; because he is not so apprehensive of
these, as he is of those. For the most part his Repentance for such like sins
is but in a general form; wrapped up in the lump of his unknown sins: like that
in Psalm. 19. Who can tell how often he offends? O cleanse thou me from my
secret Psalm. 19. 12.
faults! Only our hope and comfort is, that our merciful Lord God will
graciously accept this general Repentance for current; without requiring of us
a more particular sense of those sins, whereof he has not given us a more
particular sight.

22. By what has been said you may perceive how unsafe a thing it is to rest
upon the bare lawfulness of a thing alone, without regard to expediency. For
this is indeed the ready way to turn our liberty into a licentiousness: since
even lawful things become unlawful when they grow inexpedient. Lawful in
themselves, but unlawful to us: lawful in their nature, but unlawful in their
use. But then the Question will be, how we shall know from time to time, and at
all times, what is expedient to be done, and what not? Which leads us to the
third and last Observation from the Text, viz That the expediency of lawful
things is to be measured by their usefulness unto edification. For if we shall
ask, Why are not all lawful things always expedient? The Apostle's Answer is,
Because they do not always edify. When they do edify, they are not only
lawful, but expedient too; and we may do them: But when they edify not, but
destroy, though they be lawful still, yet they are not expedient; and we may
not do them: All things are lawful; but all things edify not.

23. To this edification it appears St. Paul had a great respect in all his
actions and affairs: ( We do all things, Brethren, for your edifying (2 Cor.
12.) 2 Cor. 12. 19.
And he desires that all other men would do so too; ( Let every man please his
Neighbor for his good unto edification, Rom 15. 2.) and that in all the
actions of Romans 15. 2.
their lives, ( Let all things be done to edifying, 1. Cor. 14.) It is the very
end for 1 Cor. 14. 26.
which God ordained the Ministry of the Gospel; ( the edifying of the body of
Christ, Ephesians. 4.) and for which he endowed his servants with power and with Ephesians.
4. 12.
gifts to enable them for the work; ( the power which God has given us for
edification, 2 Cor. 10. 8. and 13. 10.
2 Cor. 13.) Whatsoever our Callings are: whatsoever our power or gifts: if we
direct them not to Edification, when we use them, we abuse them.

24. But then what is Edification? For that we are yet to learn. The Word is
Metaphorical, taken from material Buildings: but is often used by our Apostle
in his Epistles, with application ever to the Church of God, and the spiritual
Building thereof. The Church is the House of the living God. All Christians, 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Members of this Church, are so many Stones of the Building, whereof the House
is made up. The bringing in of Unbelievers into the Church, by converting them
to the Christian Faith, is as the fetching of more Stones from the Quarries to
be laid in the Building. The Building it self (and that is Edification) is the
well and orderly joining together of Christian men, as living Stones, in truth
and love; that they may grow together (as it were) into one entire frame of
Building, to make up the House strong and comely for the Master's 1 Pet. 2. 5.
Use and Honor.

25. I know not how it is come to pass in these later times, that in the
popular and common Notion of this Word, in the Mouths and Apprehensions of most
men generally, Edification is in a manner confined wholly to the Understanding.
Which is an Error, perhaps not of much consequence, yet an Error though, and
such as has done some hurt too. For thereon is grounded that Objection, which
some have stood much upon (though there be little cause why) against
instrumental Music in the Service of God, and some other things used in the
Church; that they tend not to edification, but rather hinder it, because there
comes no instruction, nor other fruit to the understanding thereby: And
therefore ought such things, say they, to be cast out of the Church, as things
unlawful. A Conclusion (by the way) which will by no means follow, though all
the Premises should be granted: for it is clear both from the Words and Drift
of the Text, that Edification is put as a mere (...) indeed of Expediency, but
not so of Lawfulness: And therefore from the Unserviceableness of any thing to
Edification, we cannot reasonably infer the Unlawfulness thereof, but the
Inexpediency only. But to let go the inconsequence, that which is supposed in
the Premises, and laid as the ground of the Objection (viz. that where the
Understanding is not benefited, there is no Edification;) is not true. The
Objectors should consider, that whatsover thing any way advances the Service
of God, or furthereth the growth of his Church, or conduces to the increasing
of any Spiritual Grace, or enlivening of any holy Affection in us; or serves
to the outward Exercise, or but Expression of any such Grace or Affection, as
Joy, Fear, Thankfulness, Cheerfulness, Reverence, or any other; doubtless every
such thing so far forth serves more or less unto Edification.

26. The building up of the People in the right knowledge of God, and of his
most holy Truth, is, I confess, a necessary part of the Work; and no man that
wishes well to the Work, will either despise it in his heart, or speak
contemptibly of it with his mouth: yet it is not the whole Work though, no nor
yet the chiefest part thereof. Our Apostle expressly gives Charity the
pre-eminence before it: Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifieth. And for 1
Cor. 8. 1.
once he speaks of Edification in his Epistles with reference to Knowledge; I
dare say he speaks of it thrice with reference to Peace and brotherly Charity
or Condescension. The Truth is, that Edification he so much urges, is the
promoting and furthering of our selves, and others in Truth, Godliness and
Peace, or any Grace accompanying Salvation, for the common good of the whole
Body. St. Jude speaks of building up our selves; and St. Paul of Jude ver.
20. 1 These. 5. 11.
edifying one another. And this should be our daily and mutual study, to build
up our selves and others in the knowledge of the Truth, and in the practice of
Godliness: but especially to the utmost of our powers, within our several
Spheres, and in those Stations wherein God has set us, to advance the Common
Good, by preserving Peace, and Love, and Unity in the Church.

27. The Instructions, Corrections, or Admonitions we bestow upon our private
Brethren; the good Examples we set before them; our bearing with their
Infirmities; our yielding and condescending from our own power and liberty, to
the desires even of private and particular men; is as the chipping, and hewing,
and squaring of the several Stones, to make them fitter for the Building. But
when we do withal promote the public Good of the Church, and do something
toward the procuring and conserving the Peace and Unity thereof, according to
our measure: that is as the laying of the Stones together, by making them couch
close one together, and binding them with Fillings and Cement, to make them
hold. Now whatsoever we shall find, according to the present state of the
Times, Places, and Persons with whom we have to do, to conduce to the Good
either of the whole Church, or of any greater or lesser portion thereof, or but
of any single Member belonging thereunto, (so as no prejudice or wrong be
thereby done to any other:) that we may be sure is expedient for that time.

28. To enter into Particulars, when and how far forth we are bound to forbear
the exercise of our lawful Liberty in indifferent things for our Brother's
sake, would be endless. When all is said and written in this Argument that can
be thought of; yet still (as was said) much must be left to men's Discretion and
Charity. Discretion first will tell us in the general, that as the
Circumstances alter, so the Expediency and Inexpediency of things may alter
accordingly. Senec. 9. Controv. 2. Eccles. 3. 1.
Quaedam quae licent, tempore and loco mutato non licent, says Seneca. There
is a time for every thing, says Solomon, and a season for every purpose under
Heaven. Momentis quaedam grata and ingrata sunt. Senec. 1. de Benef. 12.
Hit that time right, and whatever we do is Eccl. 3. 11. 2 Samuel 17. 7.
beautiful: but there is no Beauty in any thing we do, if it be unseasonable.
As Hushai said of Ahitophel's Advice, The Counsel of Ahitophel is not good Est
utilitatis and in tempore quaestio. Expedit, sed non nunc. Quin. 3. Instit.
orat. 8.
at this time. And as he said to his Friend, that cited some Verses out of
Homer not altogether to his liking, and commended them, (...), says he again,
(...), wholesome counsel, but not for all men, nor at all times. If any man
should now in these times endeavor to bring back into the Church postliminio,
and after so many years cessation thereof, either the severity of the ancient
Canons for public Penances, or the enjoining of private Confessions before
Easter or some other things now long disused; he should attempt a thing of
great Inexpediency. Not in regard of the things themselves, which severed from
those Abuses which in tract of time had, through men's corruption, grown
thereunto) are certainly lawful; and might be, as in some former times, so now
also, profitable, if the times would bear them. But in regard of Quaedam justa
natura sed condition temporum inutilia. Quintil. 12. 1. Acts 16. 3. Gal. 2. 2.
-- 5.
the condition of the times, and the general aversness of men's minds therefrom:
who having been so long accustomed to so much indulgence and liberty in that
kind, could not now brook those severer impositions, but would cry out against
them (as they do against some other things with very little reason) as
Antichristian and Superstitious. Paul thought fit to circumcise Timothy at one
time, when he saw it expedient so to do: But would by no means yield that Titus
should be circumcised at another time when he saw it inexpedient.

29. Since then the difference of Tempore commutatur officium, ut non semper sit
idem, Cicer. 1. offic.
times may make such a difference in the expediency and inexpediency of things,
otherwise and in themselves lawful and indifferent; and so may the other
Circumstances also of -- Et in loco, Non hic; and in personis; Non nobis, etc.
Quin. 3. instit. orat. 8. (...). Ad. ap. Suid.
places, persons, and the rest: wise men therefore must be content Romans 12. 11.
(...), if you will allow that reading, Romans 12. Yea, to be downright
time-servers, you will say! No such matter: but to suffer themselves now and
then to be overruled by Circumstances; and Tempori cedere, i. e. necessitati
parere* semper sapientis habitum est. Cicer. 4. epist. fam. 9. Non est turpe
cum re mutare consilium, Sen. 4. de benet. 38.
to yield to the sway of the times, and other occasions in sundry things,
though perhaps somewhat against their own liking and judgment otherwise: so
long as they be not enforced thereby, either to do any dishonest or unlawful
thing, or to omit any part of their necessary duty. As Ut in navigando,
tempestati obsequi, artis est. Cic. 1. ep. sam. 9. -- sententiam, tanquam
aliquod navigium ex Reip. tempestate moderari. Cic. 4. Barb. (...), Pythag.
apud Stob. Ser. 1.
a skilful Pilot must of necessity hold that course, that the wind and weather
will suffer him: winning upon them by little and little what he can by his
skill, and making his advantage even of a side-wind, if he can but get it, to
bring his Bark with as much safety and speed as may be to the intended Haven.
For to (...), Phocyl.
tug against wind and tide, besides the toil, he knows would be both
bootless, and dangerous. It is an easy matter for a Workman upon his bed to
frame to himself in his own fancy an exact idea of some goodly Fabric that he
is to raise: and he may (...). Naz. orat. 5.
please himself not a little with an imagination that all shall be done just
according to that Platform. But when he comes ad practicandum, and to lay his
hand to the work indeed, he shall be forced, do what he can, in many things to
vary from his former speculations, if (...). Theophra.
the matter he has to work upon, will not serve thereunto, as like enough a
good part of it will not. (...). Arist. apud Stob. ser. 1.
Velis quodpossis, is the old Saying: it must be our wisdom, when we cannot
hope to bring all things to our own votes and desires, (for that is more than
yet ever any man could do since the World began) to frame our selves to the
present occasions; and taking things as they are, when they will be no better,
to (...). Non licet hominem esse saepe ita ut vult, si res non sinit. Terent.
Heaut. 4. 1.
make the best of them we can for our own, and others, and the common good.
Nothing doubting, but that if so we do, we shall do that that is expedient;
although possibly we may see some inconveniences likely to ensue thereupon. For
if we shall suspend our resolutions, till we can bethink our selves of
something that is free from all inconveniences, in most of our deliberations we
shall never resolve upon any thing at all: as Solomon says, Eccles. 11. 4.
Rusticus expectat dum defluat amnis. Horat. Epist. 2. -- dum omnia timent, nil
conantur, Quintil. 2. instit. 4.
He that observes the wind shall not sow, and he that regards the clouds
shall not reap. God has so tempered the things of this World, that every
commodity has some incommodiousness, and every convenience some inconvenience
attending the same: which many times all the wit and industry of man is not
able to sever. If therefore out of the whole bunch we can cull out that, which
may prevent the most and greatest inconveniences, and be it self subject to
(...). Arist. 3. top. 2. 1.
the least and fewest, we shall not have much cause to repent us of our choice.
And all this our Discretion will teach us.

30. Charity also will tell us in the general, that we must bear with the
weakness of our brethren and forbear our own liberty in some cases; where we
may see hope that any good will come of it. For as the stones in a building, if
they be well laid together, do give mutual strength and support one to another:
So it is our duty to bear one another burdens, that so we may fulfill the Gal.
6. 2. 1 Cor. 13. 5.
Law of Christ. Charity seeks not her own, 1 Cor. 13. She stands not ever
upon the tip* toe, with those high terms, [ This I may do, and this I will do,
whosoever says nay. I may eat flesh, and I will eat flesh, take offense at it
who list:] but where she may hope to do good, comes down so low, as to resolve
never to eat flesh while the world stands, rather than give offense thereby.
Our Apostle 1 Cor. 8. 13.
professes in the last verse of this Chapter, that he sought to please all men
in all things, not seeking his own profit, but the profit of many. And it was
no flourish neither: St. Paul was a real man, no bragger: what she said, he
did. He became as a Jew to the Jews, as a Gentile to the Gentiles; not to humor
1 Cor. 9. 20. -- 22.
either, but to win both. And at Corinth he maintained himself along while
together with his own hand-labour, when he might have challenged maintenance
from them, as the Apostle of Christ: But he would not, only to cut off occasion
from those that slandered him, as if he went about to wake a prey of them, and
2 Cor. 11. 11.
would have been glad to find any occasion against him, to give credit to that
slander.

31. But what is St. Paul now all on a sudden become a man-pleaser? Or how is
there not yea and nay with him; that he should here profess it so largely; 2
Cor. 1. 18.
and yet elsewhere protest against it so deeply; Do I seek to please men? No,
Gal. 1. 10.
says he, I scorn it: such baseness will better become their own slaves; I am
the servant of Christ, Gal. 1. Worthy resolutions both, both savouring of an
Apostolic spirit: and no contrariety at all between them. Rather that seeming
contrariety yields excellent instruction to us, how to behave our selves in
this matter pleasing. Not to please men, be they never so many or great, out of
flatness of spirit: so as for the pleasing of them, either first to neglect any
part of our duty toward God and Christ; or secondly, to go against our own
consciences, by doing any dishonest or unlawful thing; or thirdly, to do them
harm whom we would please, by confirming them in their errors, flattering them
in their sins, humouring them in their peevishness, or but even cherishing
their weakness: (for weakness though it may be born with, yet it must not be
cherished.) Thus did not he, thus should not we, seek to please any man. But
then by yielding to their infirmities for a time, in hope to win them; by
patiently Romans 15. 1.
expecting their conversion or strengthening; by restoring them with the spirit
1 These. 5. 14. Gal. 6. 1. Gal. 5. 26. 2 Timothy 2. 25. 1 Cor. 10. 33. Romans 15. 2.
of meekness, when they had fallen; by forbearing all scornful, jeering,
provoking, or exasperating, language and behavior toward them, but rather
with meekness instructing them that opposed themselves: so did he, so should we
seek to please all men; for their* profit, and for their good. For that is
Charity.

32. Alas, it is not the pleasing, or displeasing of men, that Charity looks
after, but their good: And therefore as it seeks to please them, if that be
for their good; so it cares not to displease them, if that also be for their
good. St. Paul was ad utrumque paratus; he could use both, as occasion
required, 1 Cor. 4. 21. 1 Cor. 3. 10.
either the rod, or the spirit of meekness: and he would make choice ever of
that which he saw to be for the present the more expedient. He was a wise
Master builder; and knew how to lay his work, to make the building rise both
Heb. 3. 4. Wisd. 8. 1.
fair and strong. He took his model from the great Arch-architect, the builder
and maker of all things, which is God. Suaviter and fortiter (in the book of
Wisdom:) all Gods works go on so. He does whatsoever he does fortiter;
effectually, and withour fail in respect of the end: that is to build strong:
But yet suaviter; sweetly and without violence in the use of the means: that is
to build fair.

33. Can any Governor, any Minister, any private man, that desires to do so
much as falls to his share in this Building, desire a better pattern to work
by? A Governor, that has advisedly resolved upon a just course (for that must
still be supposed: if justice do not lie at the bottom, the frame cannot
stand;) let him go through-stich with it in Gods name; do it fortiter (as is
said of David, Psalm. 78. He ruled them prudently with all his power:) so as his
Psalm. 78. 72.
commands may be obeyed, his authority feared, his enemies quelled. But then he
must do it suaviter too, (that must not be forgotten) with such equity, lenity,
and moderation; that they may be left without excuse in their undutifulness,
that will not both acknowledge his justice and clemency. A Minister also of
the Gospel, who has a great part in the work, both for the pulling down of
error and sin, and for the setting up of truth and godliness, he must do his
part* fortiter: instruct, exhort, reprove, correct, with full demonstration of
the Jer. 1. 10. 1 Cor. 2. 4.
spirit and power, and with clear evidence of truth and reason, that he may
build strong. Yet suaviter too with all sweetness and meekness, with much
beseeching and brotherly language, that he, may build fair: approving himself
both ways a Workman that needs not be ashamed. But if he either put in ill 2.
Tim. 2. 15.
stuff, or lay it ill; that is, if either he prove with bad arguments, or
reprove with bad words: he may then be ashamed of his work; he does but blunder
and bungle, and not build. Yea, every private man, that has in his hand the
managing of any good cause, wherein he meets with opposition, cannot give
better proof both of his wisdom and charity, than by doing it fortiter and
suaviter: to the uttermost of his power and skill, effectually; but yet fairly
withal.

34. I have now done with all my three observations: and should draw to a
conclusion, but that for the preventing of a foul mistake in this affair, it is
needful I should first put in one caution of some importance; and it is this,
That in weighing the decency, and expediency of things, we ought to make a
difference between those lawful things, wherein superior authority has
interposed, and determined our liberty either way; and those things wherein we
are left wholly to our selves. What has been said concerning the yielding to
the weaknesses of our brethren for the avoiding of their offense, and the
forbearing of lawful things sometimes, when they grow inexpedient: is to be
understood of such things only, as are wholly in our own power; no superior
authority, either divine or humane, having limited us therein. But where lawful
Authority has determined our choice, we must hold to their determination; any
seeming inexpediency to the contrary notwithstanding.

35. Whiles things are in agitation; private men may, if any thing seem to them
inexpedient, modestly tender their thoughts, together with the reasons thereof,
to the consideration of those that are in authority: to whose care and wisdom
it belongs, in prescribing any thing concerning indifferent things, to
proceed with all just advisedness and moderation: that so the subject may be
encouraged to perform that Remissius imperanti, melius paretur. Sen. 1. de
Clem. 24.
obedience with cheerfulness, which of necessity he must perform howsoever. It
concerns Superiors therefore to look well to the expediency, and
inexpediency of what they enjoin in indifferent things. Wherein if there be a
fault, it must lie upon their account: the necessity of obedience is to us a
sufficient discharge in that behalf. Only it were good we did remember, that
they are to give up that account to God only, and not to us. But after that
things are once concluded and established by public Authority, Acts passed,
and constitutions made concerning the same, and the will and pleasure of the
higher powers sufficiently made known therein: then for private men to put in
their vye, and with unseasonable diligence to call in question the decency or
expediency of the things so established, yea, with intolerable pride to refuse
obedience thereunto, merely upon this pretension, That they are undecent or
inexpedient, is it self indeed the most indecent and inexpedient thing that can
be imagined.

36. For that the fear of offending a private brother, is a thing not
considerable in comparison of the duty of obedience to a public Governor;
might be shown so apparently by sundry arguments, if we had time to enlarge and
illustrate them, as must sufficiently convince the judgment of any man not
wilfully obstinate in that point. I shall only crave leave briefly to touch at
some of them. First then, when Governors shall have appointed what seemed to
them expedient; and private men shall refuse to observe the same, pretending it
to be inexpedient: who shall judge thereof? Either they themselves that take
the exceptions must be judges; which is both unreasonable and preposterous: or
else every man must be his own judge, which were to overthrow all Government,
Judge. 21. 25.
and to bring in a confusion, every man to do what is good in his own eyes: or
else the known Governors must judge; and then you know what will follow, even
to submit and obey.

37. Secondly, to allow men under the pretense of inexpediency, and because of
some offense that may be taken thereat, to disobey Laws and Constitutions made
by those that are in authority; were the next way to cut the sinews of all
authority, and to bring both Magistrates and Laws into contempt. For what Law
ever was made, or can be made, so just and reasonable, but some man or other
either did, or might take offense thereat? And what man that is disposed to
disobey, but may pretend some inexpediency or other, wherewith to countenance
out such his disobedience.

38. Thirdly, It is agreed by consent of all that handle the matter of Scandal,
that we may not commit any sin whatsoever, be it never so small, for the
avoiding of any scandal, be it never so great. But to disobey lawful authority
in lawful things, is a sin against the fifth Commandment. Therefore we may not
redeem a scandal by such our disobedience; nor refuse to do the thing commanded
by such authority, whosoever should take offense thereat.

39. Fourthly, though lawfulness and unlawfulness be not, yet expediency and
inexpediency are (as we heard) capable of the degrees of more and less* and
then in all reason, of two inexpedient things we are to do that which is --
(...). Arist. 5. Ethic. 2. (...). Naz. orat 40.
less inexpedient, for the avoiding of that which is more inexpedient. Say then
there be an inexpediency in doing the thing commanded by authority, when a
brother is thereby offended; is there not a greater inexpediency in not doing
it, when the Magistrate is thereby disobeyed? Is it not more expedient, and
conducing to the common good, that a public Magistrate should be obeyed in a
just command, than that a private person should be gratified in a causless
scruple?

40. Fifthly, when by refusing obedience to the lawful commands of our
Superiors, we think to shun the offending of one or two weak brethren; we do
in truth incur thereby a far Advertat, scandalum scandalo non been emendari.
Bern. de praec. and disp.
more grievous scandal, by giving offense to hundreds of others: whose
consciences by our Disobedience will be emboldened to that, where to corrupt
nature is but too too prone, to affront the Magistrate, and despise Authority.

41. Lastly, where we are not able to discharge both; Iustitiae officia sunt
priorae, and strictior is obligationis quam illa quae sunt charit atis. Ames.
2. Medul. Theol. 16. 62.
debts of Justice are to be paid, before debts of Charity. Now the duty of
obedience is debitum Iustitiae, and a matter of right: my Superior may
challenge it at my hands as his due; and I do him wrong if I withold it from
him. But the care of not giving offense is but debitum Charitatis, and a matter
but of courtesy. I am to perform it to my brother in love, when I see cause:
but he cannot challenge it from me as his right; nor can justly say I do him
wrong, if I neglect it. It is therefore no more lawful for me, to disobey the
lawful command of a Superior, to prevent thereby the offense of one or a few
brethren: than it is lawful for me to do one man Quis est qui dicat, ut
habeamus quod demus ^auperibus, fa^iamus furta di^^tibus? August. cont. mendac.
Cap. 7.
wrong; to do another man a courtesy withal; or then it is lawful for me to
rob the Exchequer, to relieve an Hospital.

24. I see not yet how any of these six Reasons can fairly be avoided: and yet
(which would be considered) if but any one of them hold good, it is enough to
carry the Cause: and therefore I hope there need be no more said in this
matter. To conclude then, for the point of Practice (which is the main thing I
aimed at in the choice of this Text, and my whole meditations thereon) we may
take our direction in these three Rules; easy to be understood and remembered,
and not hard to be observed in our Practice, if we will but put our good wills
thereunto. First, if God command, we must Audaciam existimo de bono praecepti
divini disputare. Tert. de poenit. cap. 4 Genesis 22.
submit without any more ado; and not trouble our selves about the expediency,
or so much as about the lawfulness of the thing commanded. His very Quid
revolvis? Deus praecepit. Tertul. ibid.
Command is warrant enough for both. Abraham never disputed whether it were
expedient for him, nor yet whether it were lawful for him to sacrifice his Son
or no, when once it appeared to him that God would have it so.

43. Secondly, if our Superiors, endued with lawful authority thereunto,
command us any thing; we may and (where we have Ubi suspicio, ibi discussio
necessaria. Bern. Epist. 7.
just cause of doubt) we ought, to enquire into the lawfulness thereof. Yet not
with such anxious curiosity, as if we desired to find out some loop* hole
whereby to evade; but with such modest ingenuity, as may witness to God and the
world the unfeigned sincerity of our desires, both to fear God, and to honor
those that he has set over 1 Pet. 2. 17.
us. And if having used ordinary moral diligence bona fide to inform our selves
the best we can, there appear no unlawfulness in it; we are then also to Ille
vice Dei tibi dicit, quid expedit, and quid decet. Gers. de relig. perf. pr. 3.
submit and obey without any more ado, never troubling our selves farther to
enwhether it be expedient yea or no. Let them that command us look to that: for
it is they must answer for it, not we.

44. But then thirdly, where Authority has left us free, no Command, either of
God, or of those that are set over us under God, having prescribed any thing to
us in that behalf: there it is at our own liberty and choice, to do as we shall
think good. Yet are we not left so loose, as that we may do what we list, so as
the thing be but lawful; (for that were licentiousness, and not liberty:) but
we must ever do that, which according to the exigence of present Circumstances,
(so far as all the Wisdom and Charity we have will serve us to judge) shall
seem to us most expedient and profitable to mutual Edification. This is the
way: God give us all Grace to walk in it. So shall we bring Glory to him, and
to our selves Comfort: so shall we further his Work onward, and our own Account
at the last.

AD AULAM.
Sermon XIII.
WHITE HALL, JULY 1641.
Romans 15. 6. -- That ye may with one mind, and with one mouth glorify God,
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
THe sense hangs unperfect, unless we take in the former verse too. Both
together contain a Votive Prayer or Benediction; wherewith the Apostle, for the
better speeding of all the pains he had taken in the whole former Chapter, and
in the beginning of this, (to make the Romans more charitably affected one
toward another without Romans 14. 3. 10.
despising the weakness, or judging the liberty one of another) concludes his
whole discourse concerning that Argument. His Exhortations will do the better,
he thinks, if he second them with his Devotions; I have showed you, says he,
what you are to do: (...), Now God grant it may be done. Now the God of
patience, and of Consolation grant you to be like-minded one toward another
according to Christ Jesus; that ye may with one, etc.

2. In the matter or substance of which Prayer, (besides the formality thereof
in those first words, Now the God of Patience and Consolation grant you:) St.
Paul expresses, both the thing he desired; even their unity, in the residue of
the fifth verse [ To be like-minded one toward another according to Christ
Jesus:] and the end for which he desired it; even Gods glory, in this sixth
verse [ That ye may with one mind, and with one mouth, glorify God, even the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.] Of that I have heretofore spoken, now, some
years past: of this I desire by Gods grace presently to speak. And like as in
that former part we then considered three particulars: First, the thing it
self, Unity or like-mindedness [to be like-minded;] and then two amplifications
thereof; one in respect of the Persons, that it should be universal and mutual
[one toward another;] the other in respect of the manner, that it should be
according ( to Christ Jesus:) So are we at this time, in this latter part to
consider of the like three particulars. First, the End it self, the glory of
God [ that ye may glorify God.] And then two Amplifications thereof: the one,
respecting the person whom they were to glorify, thus described [ God, even
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ:] the other respecting the manner how, or
the means whereby they were to glorify him [ with one mind, and with one
mouth.] Of which in their order: the End first, and then the Amplifications.

3. (...), That ye may glorify God. We must a little search into the words,
that we may the more fully understand them. The first word (...), though but a
Particle, has its use: It points us out to some end or final cause. Would
St. Paul have so bestirred himself as he does, spent so much breath, so much
oratory, so many arguments; been so copious and so earnest as he is, by his
best both persuasions and prayers, to draw all parts to unity: if he had not
conceived it conducible to some good end? He that does not propose to himself
some (...). Aristot. 1. Ethic. 1. (...). Arist. 1. Eudem. 2. Phil. 2. 21.
main end in all his Actions, especially those that are of moment, and such as
he will make a business of; is not like either to go on with any good
certainty, or to come off with any sound comfort. There would be ever some fixed
end or other thought of in all our undertakings and endeavors.

4. And so there is most an end; ( Nature it self prompting us thereunto:) but
for the most part ( our Nature being so foully depraved) a wrong one. Omnes
quae sua: he speaks of it complainingly, as of an error that is common among
men, and in a manner universal. All seek their own; seldom look beyond
themselves: but make their own profit, their own pleasure, their own glory,
their own safety, or other their own personal contentment, the utmost end of
all their thoughts. Which upon the point is no better than very Quis ^ nim est
bonus qui facit nihil nisi sui causa? Cic. 7. Epist. 12. Psalm. 10. 4. 1 Cor.
10. 23. Acts 20. 24.
Atheism, or at the best (and that but a very little better) Idolatry. He that
does all for himself, and has no farther End: make an Idol of himself, and
has no other God [The ungodly is so proud, that he cares not for God, neither
is God in all his thoughts, Psalm. 10.] He is so full of himself, his thoughts
are so wholly taken up with himself, that there is no room there for God, or
any thing else but himself. But this self-seeking, St. Paul every where
disclaimeth: Not seeking his own profit, 1 Cor. 10. Nor counting his life dear
unto himself, so as he might do God and his Church any acceptable service,
either with it or without it, Act. 20. If he had looked but at himself and his
own things, what need the dissension of the Romans Romans 14. 3, 10. Gal. 5. 15.
have troubled him any thing at all: If they be so minded, let them go to it
hardly; judge on, and despise on; tug it out among themselves as well as they
can; bite and devour one another; till they had wearied and worried one
another: what is that to him? It would be much more for his ease, and possibly
he should have as much thanks from them too, (for to part a fray is most what a
thankless office) to sit him down, let them alone, and say nothing. This is all
true, and this he knew well enough too. But there was a farther matter in 1
These. 3. 1, 5.
it: he saw his Lord and Master had had an Interest; his honor suffered in
their dissentions: and then he could not hold off. (...), (as his Phrase is 2
Cor. 5. 14.
twice in one Chapter) he could not for his life forbear, but he must put in:
for the love of Christ constrained him. We are by his example to make God our
chiefest good, and the utmost end of all our actions and intentions. Not merely
seeking our own credit, or profit, or ease, or advancement; nor determining our
aims in our selves, or in any other Creature: But raising our thoughts to an
higher pitch, to look beyond all these at God as the chief delight of our
hearts, and Psalm. 16. 8.
scope of our desires; That we may be able to say with David, Psalm. 16. I have
set the Lord always before me. That is a second Point.

5. And if we do so; the third will fall in of it self, to wit, his Glory; for
he and it are inseparable. The greatest glory on earth is that of a mighty
King, when he appears in state: his robes glorious, his attendants glorious,
every thing about him ordered to be as glorious as may be, ( Solomon in all his
glory, Mat. 6. 19.
Mat. 6.) There is, I grant no proportion here: ( finiti ad infinitum.) But
because we are acquainted with no higher; it is the best resemblance we have,
whereby to take some scantling of the infinite glory of our heavenly King. And
therefore the Scriptures fitted to our capacity, speak of it to us mostly in
that key, [ The Lord is King, and has put on glorious apparel, Psalm. 93. O
Lord my God Psalm. 93. 1. -- 104. 1.
thou art become exceeding glorious: thou art clothed with Majesty and honor,
Psalm. 104.] But as I said before, it holds no proportion. So that we may not
unfitly take up our Apostles words elsewhere, (though spoken to another
purpose;) Even that which is most glorious here has no glory in this respect,
by reason of the glory that excels, 2 Cor. 3. 10. And the force of the
Argument he uses at the next verse there, holds full out as strongly here:
For, says he, if that which is done away be glorious, much more that which
remains is glorious. The glory of the greatest Monarch in the world, when it
is at the fullest, is but (...), ( the word fitteth the thing very well:) a
matter rather of show and opinion than of substance; and has in it more of
fancy than reality: ((...), is St. Luke's expression, Acts 25.) Yet as empty a
thing as it is: if it Act. 25. 23.
were of any permanency, it were worthy the better regard. But that that makes
it the verier vanity is, that it is a thing so transitory: it shall and must be
done away. But the glory of the great King of Heaven remains, and shall not
(cannot) be done away for ever. The glorious Majesty of the Lord endures Psalm.
104. 31.
for ever, Psalm. 104. If then that be glorious, much more this: but how much
more, is more than any tongue can utter, or heart conceive. So that if we look
at God, we cannot leave out Glory.

6. Neither, if we speak of Glory, may we leave out God, and that is a fourth
Point. For as no other thing belongs so properly to God as Glory: so neither
does Glory belong so properly to any other person as to God. The holy Martyr
St. Stephen therefore calls* him, The God of Glory. And the holy Apostles,
Acts 7. 2.
when they speak of giving him glory, do it sometimes with the exclusive
Particle (...), to the only wise God, or (as the words will equally bear it)
Romans 16. 27. 1 Timothy 1. 17.
only to the wise God be Glory: to him, and only to him. Yea, and the holy
Angels in that Anthem they sang upon our Saviors birth, when they shared
heaven and earth their several portions, alloted us our part in peace, and the
good will of God, but with reservation of the whole glory to him. [Glory be to
God on Luke 2. 14.
high, and in earth peace, and toward men good will.] It is Tibi Domine, tibi
maneat gloria illibata: mecum been agitur, si pacem habuero. Bern. in Cant.
ser. 13. 1 Timothy 6. 17.
well and happy for us, if we may enjoy our own peace, and his good will, (full
little have we deserved either of both, but much rather the contrary) but we
were best take heed how we meddle with his glory. All other things he gives us
richly to enjoy; many a good gift and perfect giving. He has not withheld
from us any thing that was his, and useful for us, no not his only begotten Son
excepted: the best gift that ever was given, and a pledge of all the rest. Yea,
and Jam. 1. 17. Psalm. 84. 12.
he will give us a kind of glory too; ( the Lord will give grace and glory,
Psalm. 84.) and that not a light one neither, nor fading away: but such as
neither eye, nor ear, nor heart of man can comprehend; so massy, and so
durable (an eternal 2 Cor. 4. 17.
and exceeding weight of glory.) But that divine, infinite, incomprehensible
glory, that belongs to him as supreme King of kings, as his peculiar
Prerogative, and the choicest flower in his Crown: of that he is most jealous;
in that he will brook no sharer. And he has made known to us his royal
pleasure in that point, Isa. 42. My glory will I not give to another. Isa. 42.
8.


7. He will part with none, you see: it seems rather fifthly, (by the form of
the Verb (...)) that he looks for some from us. For what else is it to
glorify, but to make one glorious by conferring some glory upon him, which he
had not (or not in that degree) before. And to God how can that be done? whose
-- (...), etc. Naz. orat. 34.
glory is perfect, essential, and infinite: and to what is perfect, much less
to what is infinite, can nothing be added. What a Macrob. 1. Saturn. 24.
great admirer of Virgil said of him ( tanta Maronis gloria, ut nullius
laudibus crescat, nullius vituperatione minuatur) was but a flaunting
hyperbole, far beyond the merit of the party he meant it to. But the like
speech would be most exquisitely true of him, of whom we now speak; (indeed a
(...) rather than an hyperbole:) Whose Glory is truly such, as all the
creatures in the world, should they join their whole forces together to do it,
could not make it either more or less than it is.

8. We must therefore of necessity forsake the proper signification of the word
Glorify (which is to add some glory to another; either in specie, or in gradu,
which before he had not:) and understand it in such a* sense, as that the thing
meant thereby may be feasible. And so Dominum magnificat qui domini
magnificentiam praedicat. Eusebius. Emis. hom. 6. Psalm. 66. 1.
to glorify God, is no more than to show forth his glory: and to manifest to
our own consciences, and to the world, how highly we praise and esteem his
glory; and how earnestly we desire, and, as much as in us lies, endeavor it,
that all other men would also with us acknowledge and admire the same, Sing
praise to the honor of his name; make his praise glorious, Psalm. 66. Not make
his essence to be more glorious than it is in it self: but make his praise to
be more and more glorious in the eye and esteem of men; That so his power, his
glory, and mightiness of his Kingdom -- 145. 12. -- 96. 8. 138. 5.
might be known unto men; and that men might ascribe unto the Lord the honor
due unto his name; and that men might sing in the way of the Lord, that great
is the glory of the Lord. To endeavor by our thanksgivings, confessions,
faith, charity, obedience, goodworks, and perseverance in all these, to bring
Gods true Religion and Worship into request; to win a due reverence to his holy
name and word; to beget in others more high and honorable thoughts concerning
God in all those his most eminent Attributes of Wisdom, Power, Justice, Mercy,
and the rest: that is in Scripture language to glorify God.

9. One thing more from the Person of the Verb: and then you have all. It is
not (...), That God may be glorified; and so leave it indefinite, and uncertain
by whom it should be done: but (...), that ye may glorify him. The thing to be
done: and they to do it. One would think the glorious Angels and Saints in
heaven were fitter instruments for such an employment, than we poor sinful
worms upon earth. Very true, they in heaven are fitter to do it, and it is best
done there: but there is more need of it upon earth; and if it be done here (in
truth and singleness of heart) it is very well accepted. Poor things, God
knows, our best services are, if God should value them but according to their
weight and worth. But in his mercy (and that through Christ) he graciously
accepts our unfeigned desires, and faithful endeavors according to that
truth we have, be it never so little: and not according to that perfection we
want, be it never so much. Alas, what is the tinkling of two little bells in a
Country-steeple, or the peoples running to the Towns end, and crying God save
the King; to add any honor or greatness to the Majesty of a Potent Monarch?
Yet will a gracious Prince take those mean expressions of his subjects love, as
an honor done him: because he reads therein their hearty affections toward
him, and he knows, that if they knew how to express themselves better, they
would. So it is here: It is not the thing done, that is looked at so much, as
the heart. Set that right first: and then be the performance what it can be,
God is both pleased and honored therewithal. Whosoever offers praise glorifieth
me, Psalm. 50. That is; so he intends it, and so I accept Psalm. 50. 23.
it.

10. You have now all I would say by way of explication, from these words. The
particulars are six. First, we should propose to our selves some end: Therein
Secondly, look at God: Thirdly, that God may have glory: and that he alone may
have it, Fourthly: Fifthly, that something be done for the advancement of his
glory: and Lastly, that it be done by us. The result from the whole six taken
together is; That the Glory of God ought to be the chiefest end, and main scope
of all our desires and endeavors. In whatever we think, say, do, or suffer in
the whole course of our Lives and Actions, we should refer all to this, look at
this as the main: Whatsoever become of us and our affairs, that yet God may be
glorified. Whether ye eat or drink, says St. Paul, or whatsoever else 1 Cor.
10. 31.
ye do, let all be done to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. He would have us, not
only in the performance of good works and of necessary duties, to intend the
Glory of God, (according to that of our Savior; Let your light so shine before
men, that they way see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
heaven:) but Matthew. 5. 16.
even in the use of the Creatures, and of all indifferent things; in eating,
and drinking, in buying and selling, and in all the like actions of common
life. In that most absolute Form of Prayer, taught us by Christ himself as the
Pattern and Canon of all our Prayers, the Glory of God stands at both ends.
When we begin, the first Petition we are to put up, is, that the Name of God
may be hallowed and glorified: and when we have done, we are to wrap up all in
the Conclusion with this acknowledgment, that to him alone belongs all the
kingdom, the power and the glory for ever and ever.

11. The Glory of God, you see, is to be the Alpha and the Omega of all our
votes and desires. Infinitely therefore to be preferred, not only before
Riches, Honor, Pleasures, Friends, and all the comforts and contentments the
World can afford us in this life, but even before life it self. The blessed Son
of God so valued it; who laid down his life for his Fathers Glory: and so did
many holy Martyrs and faithful Servants of God value it too; who laid down
their lives for their Masters Glory. Nay, let me go yet higher: infinitely to
be preferred, even before the unspeakable joys of the life to come, before the
everlasting salvation of our own souls. It was not merely a strain of his
Rhetoric, to give his brethren (by that hyperbolical expression) the better
assurance of his exceeding great love toward them, that our Apostle said
before at Chap. 9. of this Epistle, Romans 9. 3.
that he could wish himself to be accursed, to be made an Anathema, to be
separated and cut off from Christ, for their sakes. Neither yet was it a hasty
inconsiderate speech, that fell suddenly from him as he was writing ( fervente
calamo;) and as the abortive fruit of a precipitate over-passionate zeal,
before he had sufficiently consulted his reason, whether he should suffer it to
pass in that form or not, for then doubtless he would have corrected himself,
and retracted it upon his second thoughts, as he did Acts 23. when he had
inconsiderately Acts 23. 5.
reviled the High Priest sitting then in the place of Judicature. But he spoke
it advisedly, and upon good deliberation, yea, and that upon his conscience,
yea, and upon his Oath too, and as in the presence of God: as you may see it
ushered in there with a most solemn Asseveration, as the true, real, and
earnest desire of his heart; I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not, my
conscience Romans 9. 1.
bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost. Not that St. Paul wished their salvation
more than his own; (understand it not so:) for such a desire neither was
possible, nor could be regular. Not possible, by the Law of Nature, which
cannot but begin at home, Teren. Andr. (...).
Omnes sibi melius esse malunt quam alteri:) Nor regular, by the course of
Charity; which is not orderly, if he do not so too. That is not it then, but
this: That he preferred the Glory of God before both his own salvation, and
theirs. Insomuch that if Gods Glory should so require ( hoc impossibili
supposito) he could be content with all his heart, rather to lose his own part
in the joys of heaven, that God might be the more Glorified, than that God
should lose any part of his Glory, for his salvation.

12. And great reason there is, that as his was, so every Christian man's heart
should be disposed in like manner: that the bent of his whole desires and
endeavors (all other things set apart, otherwise than as they serve
thereunto*) should be the Glory of God. For first, all men consent in this as
an undoubted verity, That that which is the chiefest good, ought also to be the
uttermost end. And that must needs be the chiefest good, which Almighty God
(who is goodness it self, and best knows what is good) proposes to himself
as the End of all his Actions: and that is merely his own glory. All those his
high and unconceiveable acts ad intra, being immanent in himself, must needs
also be terminated in himself. And as for all those his powerful and
providential acts ad extra, those I mean which are exercised upon and about the
creatures, and (by reason of that their efflux and emanation) are made better
known to us than the former: if we follow them to their last period, we shall
find that they all determine and concentre there. He made them, he preserves
them, he forgiveth them, he destroys them, he punishes them, he rewards
them, every other way he orders them, and disposes of them according to the
good pleasure of his Will, for his own names sake, and for his one glories
sake. That so his Wisdom, and Power, and Truth, and Justice, and Mercy, and all
those other his divine excellencies, which we are to believe and admire, (but
may not seek to comprehend) might be acknowledged, reverenced, and magnified.
Those two great acts of his most secret and unsearchable council; than the one
whereof there is not any one act more gracious, the Destination of those that
persevere in Faith and Godliness to eternal happiness; nor any one act more
full of terror and astonishment than the other, the designation of such as
live and die in Sin and Infidelity without repentance, to eternal destruction:
the Scriptures in the last resolution refer them wholly to his Glory, as the
last End. The glory of his rich mercy being most resplendent in the one: and
the glory of his just severity in the other. Concerning the one, the Scripture
says, that he predestined us to the praise of Ephesians. 5. 6.
the Glory of his grace. Ephesians. 1. Concerning the other; The Lord made all things
for himself, yea, even the wicked for the day of evil, Prove. 16. He makes it
his End: Prove. 16. 4.
we should make it ours too, if but by way of Conformity.

13. But he requires it of us secondly, as our bounden Duty, and by way of
Thankfulness; in acknowledgement of those many favors we have received from
him. Whatever we have, nay, whatever we are; as at first we had it all from
him, so we still holdit all of him: and that jure beneficiario, as feudataries;
with reservation of services out of the same, to be performed for the honor of
the Donor. Our Apostle therefore in our Lords behalf presses us with the
nature of our tenure, and challenges this duty from us by a claim of right. Ye
have them of God, says he, and ye are not your own: therefore glorify God in
your 1 Cor. 6. 19. 29.
body and in your Spirit, which are Gods. Glorify him in both, because both
are his. As the rivers return again to the place whence they came, Eccl. 1.
they all Eccles. 1. 7.
come from the Sea, and they all run into the Sea again: So all our store, as
it issued at first from the fountain of his grace, so should it all fall at
last into the Ocean of his Glory. For of him, and through him, and to him are
all things: to him be glory for ever and ever, Amen. Romans 11. 36.


14. But say there lay no such Obligation upon us, yet thirdly, in point of
Wisdom it would concern us to seek our Masters Glory, the benefit whereof would
so abundantly redound upon our selves. For (as was touched before) there
accrueth no advantage to him thereby: the gain is solely ours. By seeking his
glory, we promote our own: and so by doing him service, we do upon the point
but serve our selves. Does Job, does any man, serve God for naught? I Job 1. 9.
speak it not for this purpose, as if we should aim at Gods Glory, with a
further aim therein at our own benefit. For that could be but a mercenary
service at the best: neither worthy of him, nor becoming us. And besides, the
reason should contradict it self: for how could Gods Glory be our farthest end,
if we should have another end beyond it, for our selves? I note it only, to let
us see the exceeding goodness of our gracious Lord and Master, and for our
better heartening, that we faint not in his Service, who does so infallibly
procure our Glory, whilst we unfeignedly seek his. And whereof we have a fair
and full assurance, and that from his own mouth, and that in as plain and
express terms, as it is possible for a promise to be made, 1 Samuel 2. Them that
honor me, I will honor. 1 Samuel 2. 30.


15. From the point thus confirmed will arise sundry profitable Inferences:
some whereof I shall propose to you, and those all by way of admonition. Since
our chief aim ought to be that in every thing, God may have the Glory due to
his name: beware we first, that we do not by base flattery, or other too much
reverence or obsequiousness give unto any mortal Man, or other finite Creature
any part of that Honor, which is due to the infinite and immortal God alone.
Not the glory of Omnipotency, unto any Power upon Earth, be it never so great (
God spoke once, twice have I heard the same, that power belongs unto God.
Psalm. 62.) Psalm. 62. 11.
Experience shows there is impotency in them all. Not the Glory of
infallibility, to any judgment, be it never so clear; not to any Iudicatory, be
it never so solemn. ( Let God be true, and every Man a Liar, Romans 3.)
Experience shows Romans 3. 3.
there is Error and Partiality in them all. Not the Glory of Religious Worship,
to any Image, Saint, Angel, or other Creature, though never so blessed and
glorious: For God is extremely jealous in that particular above all other, ( My
glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven Images, Isa. 42.)
Experience Isa. 42. 8.
and reason shows, there is some deficiency or other in them all.

16. Beware we secondly, that we do not sacrilegus invasor gloriae tuae Bern.
in Cant. ser. 13.
sacrilegiously rob God of his honor, (...). Chrysostom. in. 1 Timothy ser. 3. Acts 5.
3.
by deriving the least part of it upon our selves. As Ananias kept back for his
proper use part of the price of his land, when he should have brought in all
for the Churches use. Like Et qui dispensat, frangit sibi Juven. satyr. 7.
Psalm. 115. 1.
crafty Stewards, that enrich themselves by lessening their Lords fines: or
untrusty Servants, that turn some of their Masters goods into Money, and then
put the Money into their own purses. Non nobis Domine, non nobis, says David,
Psalm. 115. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy name be the praise. He
repeateth it twice, that he might disclaim it wholly; and wash his hands of it
so clearly, that not any of it might fidelis famulus es, si de multa gloria
domini tui -- transeunte per te nil tuis manibus adhaerere contingat. Bern. in
Cant. Sermon. 13. Heb. 5. 3. Phil. 2. 6, 7. Heb. 5. 5. Joh. 8. 50. Prove. 25. 27.
stick to his Fingers: as who say, By no means to us. Our blessed Lord himself
Christ Jesus, who was the very brightness and express Image of his Fathers
Glory, and ( without robbery) of equal and coeternal Glory with him: yet, as he
was man he did not glorify himself; nay, (let me say more) having taken upon
him the form of a Servant, he durst not seek his own Glory, but the glory of
his Father that sent him. We use to call it vainglory, when a man seeks his
own glory unduly or inordinately; and rightly we so term it: for Vanity is next
akin to nothing: and such glory is no better, if Solomon may be judge, For to
men seek their own glory, is not glory, Prove. 25.

17. But, though we may not seek to pull any glory upon our selves: yet if
others will needs put it upon us unsought for, may we not admit it? May we not
take it, when it is given us? No, that you may not neither. Beware of that
therefore thirdly. It is a Forte grave non est, gloriam and honorem non petere;
sed valde grave est non eum suscipere cum offertur. Greg. hom. in Evang.
strong temptation, I grant, to our proud minds, but that makes it nothing the
less, it renders it rather the more dangerous. For what has any man to do, to
bestow what is none of his? And if we know they have no right to give it, sure
we are greatly to blame, if we non modo non ipse sibi accipere gloriam -- sed
nec ab alio quidem recipere oblatam, Bern. in Qui habet, Sermon. 1.
take it. -- (...). He that receives stolen goods, is not much less guilty
than he that stole them. It did not any thing at all either excuse Herod from
guilt, or exempt him from punishment, that he did no more but admit those
shouts and acclamations, wherewith the people so magnified his eloquence ( It
is the voice of God, and not of man.) Great ones had need take heed how they
listen too much to those that magnify them too much. Because he did not some
way or other show himself displeased with those flatterers, (not chastening
them so much as with a frown) nor transmit the glory they cast upon him higher,
and where it was of right due: he stands convicted and condemned upon record,
for not giving God the glory, Acts 12. Marvel not that one of God's holy Act.
12. 22, 23.
Angels was so ready to do Execution upon him there for that fault: when you
find another of those holy Angels so very shy in a case of that nature. Who,
when John fell at his Feet, with the intent to worship him, timely and severely
Rev. 22. 8, 9.
forhad him. (...), see thou do it not at any hand; I am but thy
fellow servants: that honor belongs to our Master only, and not to me;
worship God. And how did Paul and Barnabas bestir themselves at Lystra, when
the people began to deifie them, and were preparing Oxen and Garlands to
sacrifice to them? As Act. 14. 11. 15.
soon as ever they heard of it, in token of grief and detestation, they rent
their clothes, and in all haste ran in among the people, crying out, Sirs, what
do you mean? Why do you thus? Mistake not your selves nor us. Neither are we
Jupiter and Mercury, as you suppose: neither, if we were, are Jupiter and
Mercury Gods: but we men, subject to like passions (both of sin and misery)
with you; and they but Idols and Vanity.

18. There is yet a fourth thing, whereof I cannot but entreat you to be
exceeding wary, above all the rest. Not that it is worse, (nor perhaps simply
so ill) as some of those aforementioned: but that is in some respects more
dangerous: as being for the most part less suspected than they, are not
altogether so easy to be discerned as they. And that is this, that we beware
by all means we do not indeed manage our own quarrels, whilst we pretend to
stand for the glory of God. Is it not enough for us, to dote upon out own wild
fancies, as Pigmalion did upon the Image himself had carved? Enough, when we
have embraced some fond conceit upon weak grounds through ignorance or
prejudice, to contend with some acrimony for it? Enough, having perhaps
overshot our selves in some speech or action rashly, to set our selves to
maintain it for our credits sake, when our hearts can tell us all was not
right? But we must needs draw in God, and make him a party in the business: as
if the cause were his, as if in all we had said or done, we had sought nothing
more than him and his glory, nothing less than our selves and our own interest?
Alas! what a pity it is, nay, what a shame, that Conscience, Religion, the
honor of God, and the vindicating of his glory, should be made a stale to
disloyalty, sacrilege, sedition, faction or private revenge? Yet so it is
daily: and so it ever was, and so it ever will be, more or less, whilst the
World stands. In nomine Domini, you know the old saying: and what a world of
errors and mischiefs men have been led into, under that notion. Those words are
used pro forma, and set in the beginning of the instrument: when all that
follows after in the whole writing, contain nothing but our own Wills. Time
was, when they that killed the Apostles, ^oh. 16. 2.
thought they did God a piece of good service in it: and when our Apostle
before his conversion made havoc of the Church, it was the zeal of Gods Glory
that so bemadded him: Concerning zeal persecuting the Church. And neither of
these, Phil. 3. 6.
I take it, a pretended zeal, but true and real: that is to say, not
counterfeit, though erroneous.

19. But as in all Monopolies, there is a pretention of some common good held
forth to make them passable: when as in most of them it may be there is no good
at all intended to the public, but private lucre only, or at the best,
together with some little good to the public, such an appearance withal of
private interest over-balancing it, as that wise men justly fear, they will
prove rather mischievous, than beneficial, taken in the whole lump. So
doubtless many times zeal of Gods Glory is unconscionably pretended: where
either it is not at all, but in show; or at leastwise mingled with such a
strong infusion of corrupt partiality and self-seeking, as sowreth it
extremely, and renders it very inexcusable. How did the Pharisees and other
Jews juggle with the poor man that had been born blind, Ioh. 9. seeking to work
upon him with fair words and pretenses, Joh. 9. 25.
( Give God the praise, etc.) when at the same instant they did most wickedly
endeavor to obscure the Glory of that miraculous cure, which Christ had
wrought upon him, in giving him his sight.

20. It were no hard matter, if the time would suffer, (or indeed if the times
would suffer) to set before you variety of instances, even unto the satiety.
But I shall only give you a taste in two; both concerning matters
Ecclesiastical: the one in point of Government, the other of Worship. For
Church Government, who knows not on the one side, how in some former Ages one
man, taking the advantage of every opportunity (whereof the ambitions and
factions of Princes and Bishops in every age afforded good store) to lift up
himself still higher and higher, has perked himself up at length in the Temple
of God, there bearing himself as God, or a vice-god at least; stretching his
Diocese over the whole World, and challenging a Monarchial superintendency over
the universal Church of Christ, as Ecumenical Pastor, or Christ's
Vicar General upon earth? And who sees not on the other side, how busy some
spirits have been in this last Age, and a very little before, to draw all down
to such a Democratical parity, (for such indeed it is, and not Aristocratical,
as they would fain have the world believe it to be) as was never practiced,
nor, (for any thing appears in the ancient Histories and Monuments of the
Church) ever so much as heard of, in any settled Church in Asia, Europe or
Africa, for fifteen hundred years together? Both sides pretend from Scripture;
and for the glory of God, both: and that with equal confidence, and (for ought
I know) upon equal Grounds; that is, to speak plain, no grounds at all for
either. For no man yet on either side has been able to make it sufficiently
appear from clear evidence of Scripture or Reason, that it is the pleasure of
God to be glorified by either of those new devices.

21. Likewise in point of Public Worship. How just the blame is on either
side, I dispute not: that is not now the business. But some have been blamed
for bringing into the Church new Forms and Ceremonies; or ( which is all one in
the apprehensions of men that consider not much, and so is liable to the same
censure) for reviving old ones, but long disused and forgotten: and other-some
have been blamed for seeking to strip her both of old and new, and to leave her
stark naked of all her Ornaments and Formalities. In this case also, as in the
former, the glory of God is pretended on both sides. Those thinking their way
makes most for the honor of God, as adding decency and solemnity to his
service: and these theirs, as better suiting with the simplicity of the Gospel.

22. Methinks ( dust and ashes that we are) we should tremble to make so bold
with the glory of the great God of Heaven and Earth, which is the most sacred
thing in the world, as to engage it in our quarrels, and to make it serve to
our humors or ends, when and how we list. Were it not a lamentable case, if it
should ever come to that, that Religion should lie at the top, where Avarice,
Ambition, or Sacrilege lie at the bottom, and perhaps Malice, Partiality,
Oppression, Murder, some wicked Lust or other in the midst? Yet is not any of
this impossible to be: yea, rather scarce possible to be avoided, so long as we
dare take upon us, out of the furiousness of our spirits, and the rashness of a
distempered Zeal, to be wiser and holier than God would have us: I mean in the
determining of his glory according to our fancies; where we have no clear Texts
of Scripture to assure us, that the glory of God is so much concerned in these
or those particulars, that we so eagerly contend for. Nay, when there seem to
be clear Texts of Scripture, to assure us rather of the contrary, and that the
Romans 14. 17.
Glory of God does not consist therein, but in things of a higher nature. For
the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, says the Apostle in the next former
Chapter. It consists not in this, whether such or such meats may he eaten or
not: for neither if we eat, nor if we eat not, are we much either the better or
2 Cor. 8. 8.
the worse for that. But the Kingdom of God is righteousness, and peace, and
joy in the holy Ghost. It consists in the exercise of holy graces, and the
conscionble performance of unquestioned duties. Sincere confession of sin
proceeding from an humble and contrite heart; constancy in professing the true
faith of Christ; patience in suffering adversity; exemplary obedience to the
holy Laws of God; fruitfulness in good works, these, these are things wherein
God expects to be glorified by us* But as for meats and drinks, and all other
indifferent things, inasmuch as they have no intrinsecal moral, either good or
evil in them, but are good or evil only according as they are used well or ill;
the glory of God is not at all concerned in the using or not using of them,
otherwise than as our Faith, or Temperance, or Obedience, or Charity, or other
like Christian grace or virtue is exercised, or evidenced thereby.

23. I have now done with the first thing, and of the most important
consideration, proposed from the Text: to wit, the end it self, the Glory of
God. The Amplifications follow: the former whereof contains a description of
the party to be glorified. That ye may glorify God. If it be demanded, Which
God? For there be Gods many, and Lords many. It is answered in the Text, ( God
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.) Of which Title there may be sundry
reasons 1 Cor. 8. 5.
given; some more general, why it is used at all: some more special, why it
should be used here. First, this is Stilo novo: never found in the Old
Testament; but very often in the New. (For this cause I bow my knees to the
Father of our Ephesians. 3. 14. 2 Cor. 11. 31. 1 Pet. 1.
Lord Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 3. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ knows
that I lie not, 2 Cor. 11. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 1.) As the Old Covenant ceased upon the bringing in of a new and
better Covenant: so there was cessation of the old Style, upon the bringing in
of this new and better Style. The old ran thus, The God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, Exodus 3. 15.
and the God of Jacob: proclaimed by God himself, when he was about to deliver
the posterity of those three godly Patriarchs from the Bondage of Egypt. But
having now vouchsafed unto his people a far more glorious deliverance than
that, from a far more grievious Bondage than that, (from under Sin, Satan,
Death, Hell, and the Law) whereof that of Egypt was but a shadow and type; he
has quitted that Style and now expects to be glorified by this most sweet
and blessed Name, The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Exchanging the name of
God, a name of greater distance and terror; into the Name of Father, a name of
more nearness and indulgence: And taking the additional title or denomination,
not from the parties delivered (as before) who were his faithful servants
indeed, yet but servants: but from the person delivering, his only begotten and
only beloved Son. It is first the evangelical Style.

24. Secondly, this Style puts a difference between the true God of Heaven
and Earth, whom only we are to glorify: and all other false and imaginary
titular Gods, to whom we owe nothing but scorn and detestation. The Pagans had
scores, hundreds, (some have reckoned thousands) of Gods; all of their own
making. Every Nation, every City, yea, almost every House had their several
Gods or Godlings: Deos topicos; Gods many, and Lords many. But to us, says our
Apostle, (to us Christians) there is but one God the Father, and one Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 8. 6.
his Son. This is Deus Christianorum. If either you hope as Christians to
receive grace from that God, that alone can give it; or mean as Christians to
give glory to that God, that alone ought to have it: this, this is he, and none
other; God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is a Style of
distinction.

25. These two Reasons are general. There are two other more special; for the
use of it here: in respect of some congruity it has with the matter or method
of the Apostles present discourse. For First, it might be done with reverence
to that Argument, which he had so lately pressed, and whereof also he had given
a touch immediately before in the next former verse, and which he also resumed
again, in the next following verse; drawn from the example of Christ. That
since Christ, in receiving us, and condescending to our weaknesses, did aim at
his Fathers glory: so we also should aim at the same end, by treading in the
same steps. We cannot better glorify God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
than by receiving one another into our charity, care, and mutual support, as
Jesus Christ also received us to the glory of his heavenly Father.

26. Secondly, since we cannot rightly glorify God, unless we so conceive him
as our Father ( -- -- If I be a Father, where is mine honor? Mal. 1. -- That
they Mal. 1. 6. Mat. 5. 16.
may see your good works, and glorify your Father, which is in heaven, Mat.
5.) it may be the Apostle would have us take knowledge how we came to have a
right to our Sonship; and for that end might use the title here given, to
intimate to us upon what ground it is, that we have leave to make so bold with
our great Lord and Master, as to call him our Father: even no other but this,
because he is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ is the only Son
of God by nature and generation: and through him only it is, that we are made
the Sons of God by grace and adoption. (As many as received him, to them he
gave John 1. 12.
power to be made the Sons of God, Joh. 1.) If we be the Sons of God, we are
Athanas. in Symbolo. Joh. 20. 17.
made so: but he is the Son of God, not made, nor created, but begotten. I go
to my Father, and to your Father, says he himself, Ioh. 20. mine first: and
then, and therefore, yours also. He is medium unionis: like the corner stone,
wherein both sides of the building unite; or like the ladder, whereon Jacob saw
Angels ascending and descending. All intercourse, 'twixt Heaven and Earth, God
and Genesis 28. 12.
Man, is in and through him. If any grace come from God to us, it is by Christ:
If any glory come from us to God, it is by Christ too. ( Unto him be glory in
the Ephesians. 3. 21.
Church by Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 3.) And this shall suffice to have spoken
concerning the former Amplification: briefly, because it seems not to conduce
so much* nor so nearly to the Apostles main scope here, as does that other,
which now follows; respecting the manner, [with one mind, and with one mouth.]

27. Wherein, omitting (for brevities sake such advantages, as from the words
(...) and (...), might be raised, for farther enlargement: observe first, that
whereas he names two instruments wherewith we are to glorify God, the one
inward ( the mind;) the other outward ( the mouth;) he names the inward first.
The mind must be first, and before the mouth, in this service. Else we shall
incur that reproof in the Prophet Isaiah, as well as the Pharisees Isa. 29. 13.
Mat. 15. 8.
did, to whom our Savior applies it in the Gospel ( This people draws near
me with their mouth, and honors me with their lips: but their hearts have
they removed far from me.) Or that other in Ier. 12. in words not much unlike,
Thou Jer. 12. 2.
art near in their mouth, but far from their reins. David calls his tongue
his glory, Psalm. 108. for this reason (as I conceive) among others, because the
chiefest employment he had for it, was to glorify God with it. But if when his
tongue was so employed, his mind had not gone with it; if he had not roused up
himself, that is, his heart and mind (for (...). Plato. Psalm. 108. 2.
the mind, that is the man) as well as his tongue, (Awake my glory, awake Lute
and Harp, I my self will awake early:) the best music of his tongue, with Lute
and Harp to boot, had been no better, than sounding brass, or a tinkling
Cymbal. God is (...), an exact Heb. 4. 12.
critic in spelling and examining the thoughts of our hearts most accurately.
He minds us, how we mind him in all our services: And will no more take
himself to be honored by us, when we cry Lord, Lord, or (as the Pharisee) God
I Mat. 7. 21. Luke 18. 11.
thank thee; if our minds the while be aloof off, hankering after the World, or
our own base Lusts: than Christ took himself to be honored by the soldiers,
that put a reed into his hand instead of a Scepter, and bowed the knee before
Mat. 27. 29, 30.
him, saying, Hail King of the Jews, and then presently spat upon him, and
smote him on the head. Let us be sure then, if we mean God should have any
glory from us, in all our addresses and services to take our minds along with
us.

28. But then observe secondly, that though the mind is to go first, yet the
mouth must bear a part too. We may not think we glorify God sufficiently, if
with the heart we believe in him, unless with the mouth also we be ready to
confess Romans 10. 10.
him. David therefore professes very often in the Psalms, that he would
perform his services to God with his mouth and lips. (Open thou my lips, and my
mouth Psalm. 51. 15. -- 63. 5.
shall show forth thy praise. My soul shall be satisfied as it were with marrow
and fatness, whilst my tongue praises thee with joyful lips,) and in many
other places. Nor indeed can it be otherwise: for if the inward part be right
set, the outward will follow of themselves. A full heart cannot but overflow,
when time serves, out of its own abundance: and if there be much heat there,
it will break out at the lips. My heart was hot within, says David, and while
I was musing the Psalm. 39. 4.
fire kindled, and at last I spoke with my tongue, Psalm. 39. And in another
Psalm, -- 45. 1.
as his heart was bufie enditing of a good matter, his tongue was as the Pen of
a ready Writer, to take it as fast as his heart could dictate it. Heart and
Tongue, Mind and Mouth, both must join together, and if there be any thing else
in us besides, that can contribute any furtherance to the work, it must in too:
and all little enough to glorify our Maker.

29. Observe thirdly and principally (for the weight of the amplification leith
most there) that God is much glorified by unity, peace and concord. This
Observation arises clearly from the main scope of the words. He had exhorted
them at large, to study to be like-minded: and he prays in the verse next
before, that God would grant them so to be. Why so, might one say, or to what
end all this? Even for this end, says he, that ye may with one mind, and with
one mouth 1 Cor. 12. 4, 6.
glorify God. Which argument were of very little force, if unanimity and
likemindedness were not a thing very subservient to Gods Glory. What an honor
is it to the God of Israel, when all Israel comes in as one man to do him
worship? God has bestowed gifts upon his Church, and disposed the persons
therein into several ranks, administrations, and offices, with admirable
variety. Not that they should jar and clash one against another, and pull every
one from other what they can for themselves: for that would soon bring all to
confusion first, and then to destruction. But that each should sustain other,
and mutually supply out of their several stores the wants each of other, for
the better preservation of the whole, and the more comfort of the several
parts. As the variety of instruments and voices, is so far from hindering the
musiek, that it makes it up: (for what else is musical harmony, but concordia
discors, variety in consort?) The music could not be either so full, or
delightful without some variety. But then care must be had of two things,
first, that the instruments be well in tune (not only each within it self, but
well tuned also one to another:) and then that the Minstrels agree to play the
same Lesson.

30. If either of these be wanting, all the music is marred. For the tuning;
if any one single string, of any one single instrument in the whole consort
should be out of tune, though but a little (say it be no more difference than a
flat and a sharp) aures eruditae far non possent. Any thing that is tolerable
will pass among country people: but the least discord in the world will offend
a choice and delicate ear. But if it should be very much out of tune; it would
be harsh, and grate even a thick and vulgar ear. But say all the instrument
should be perfectly well tuned; yet if the men should not agree what to play,
but one would have a grave Pavane, another a nimbler Galliard* a third some
frisking toy or Iigg, and then all of them should be wilful, none yield to his
fellow, but every one scrape on his own tune as loud as he could: what a
hideous hateful noise may you imagine would such a mess of music be? No less
odious to God, and equally grievous to every godly man it is, when such voices
as these are heard in the Church; I am of Paul, and I of Cephas, and I of
Apollo. When (as it is now grown with us) one Pamphleter must have the Church
governed after this ^ Cor. 1. 12*
fashion, another after that. Twenty several models and platforms of
Geovernment: just as one of our own Spenser in Fairy Queen. Discolor
(Superstitio) sed ubique decolor. Lips. 1. Monit. and Ex. Pol. 3.
Poets (of good note in his time) has long since described Errors Children; a
numerous brood, but never a one like other; saving only in this, that they were
all ill-favored alike. And these Models Printed, and published to the world,
and dispersed through all parts of the Kingdom, and echoed in the pulpits; to
the manifest dishonor of God, the deep scandal of the reformed Religion, and
eternal infamy both of our Church and State, and God knows what other sad and
desperate consequents in future; if some speedy and effectual course be not
taken to repress the unsufferable licentiousness both of our Presses and
Pulpits.

31. But I will repress my self howsoever. Indignation, though just, may carry
a man into a digression, ere he be aware: though I do not perceive, that I have
yet digressed very much. To return therefore; As I have heard those words of
the last Psalm read monthly in our Churches, ( Praise him upon the well-tuned
Psalm. 150. 5.
Cymbals, praise himupon the loud Cymbals:) it has often come into my
thoughts, that when we intend to glorify God with our Cymbals, it should not
be our only care to have them loud enough; but our first care should be to have
them welltuned: else, the louder, the worse. Zeal does very well: there is
great, yea, necessary use of it, in every part of Gods service. The Cymbal will
be flat; it will have no life, nor spirit in it: it will not be loud enough
without it. But if meekness, peaceableness, and moderation, do not first put
the Cymbal into good tune: the loudness will but make it the more ungrateful in
the player, the more ungrateful to the hearer.

32. But I will pursue this Metaphor no further. There is another Metaphor also
much used by our Apostle: that of Edification. He would have all things in 1
Cor. 14. 25.
the Church done to edifiying. And if you will take the pains to examine it,
you shall find that most times where he speaks of glorifying God, he does it
with reference to Edification; and most times where he speaks of Edifying, he
does it with reference to those mutual respects and charitable offices, whereby
we apply our selves to our brethren for the maintenance of peace and unity.
That passage (for example:) before mentioned, and of all other the most obvious
in this argument ( Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever else ye do, let all
be done to the 1 Cor. 10. 31.
Glory of God) is meant especially in the case of brotherly condescension, in
yielding somewhat to the infirmities of our brethren for charities sake, where
in godly wisdom we shall see it expedient so to do, for theirs, our own, or the
common good: as it is evident from the whole frame of his discourse there. And
so it is here also: He speaks of bearing the infirmities of our weaker
brethren, verse. 1. of not pleasing our selves, but each man pleasing his
brother for his good unto edification, verse. 2. of receiving one another, by
Christ's example, verse. 7. And he comes in among with this votive prayer, that
God would grant them to be like-minded one unto another; that so by their
unanimity they might Glorify God. That is, that their like-mindedness might
serve to Gods glory, in the edification of their brethren.

33. Now if that which best edifieth the Church, do also most glorify God (as
these and the like passages seem to import;) then certainly not by many things
is God more glorified than by Peace, Love, and Concord: since few things edify
more than these do. As to the use of Edification, Knowledge (that seems to be
all in all with some) is very little or nothing in comparison; or but a puff to
Charity. 1 Cor. 8. 1.
It may swell, look big, and make a show: but Charity does the deed. St. Paul
was a wise Master builder, and knew what belonged to the work as well as
another: -- 1. 10.
and he when he speaks of compacting the Church into a building, mentions
the edifying of it selfin love, Ephesians. 4. It has been my hap heretofore more
than Ephesians. 4. 16.
once, yet both times led thereunto by the Texts, to insist somewhat upon this
Metaphor: which makes me the unwillinger to dwell upon it the third time. Yet
since it appears to have been of so frequent and familiar use with our
Apostle, and is withal so pertinent both to the process of his discourse in
this place, and to the business now in hand: I cannot but desire to press it a
little farther, and that in two respects especially, and both of them very
considerable in building: to wit, Dispatch and Strength.

34. For Dispatch first. No man that goes about a building, but would
willingly get it up as fast as he can, without any delay or let, more than
needs must. Now where the workmen, and laborers ( layers, fillers, servers,
and the rest) agree fairly, first to do every man what belongs to him in his
own office, and then to further every one another in theirs: the work goes on,
and gets up a pace. But if they once begin to fallout one with another, then
are they ready to hinder and to cross one another: and then the work stands.
When one of them has laid a course* in the wall, up steppeth another, and
pulls the stones all asunder, and throws them down: One says, it shall be
thus; another starteth up and swears, it shall not be so, but thus; and then
they go to hot words, and from words to blows, and so instead of pointing the
wall, fall a thrusting their trowels in one another faces: How should the work
go on and end now, think you, with any good expedition? When one builds, and
another pulls Sirac 34. 23.
down, what profit have they then but labor? says the wise Son of Sirac,
Eccles. 34. A great deal of noise, and a great deal of bustle: but little work
done. It is even so in all other things: distraction ever hinders business.
The vessel must needs move slowly, when some of them that sweat at the Oar, ply
with all the strength they have to thrust in Eastward, and other some of them,
ply as hard to drive her Westward.

35. Nor is it otherwise in the Church and Commonwealth. When -- Humiliter
subesse, and utiliter praeesse: obedire sponte: and imperare discrete. Bern.
Par. ser. 56.
Superiors rule with moderation, Inferiors obey with cheerfulness, all men
(keeping themselves within their own ranks and stations) bend themselves with
their utmost diligence to advance the public welfare: the work commonly rises
apace, and prospers in their hands. But if they that work above, shall strive
only how to extend their Power, and they that work below shall strive as much
how to enlarge their Liberty; the one to impose, the other to refuse, what they
list: If those shall hold them stiffly at this point, We may do it, and
therefore we will do it; and these as stiffly at this; We may choose, and
therefore we will not do it; when shall they meet? Where is that (...), that
yielding and condescension the Apostle so often requires? It were a blessed
thing, (and till it be so in some measure, the building will never rise to
purpose) if men would look, not so much at their power, what they may do; or at
their liberty, what they may not do, so to serve their own turns, humors or
ends: as how to use both power, liberty, with all due sobriety and charity, to
the glory of God in the good of others. If we could once grow to that, not to
look every one on his own things, but every man also on the things of others,
as St. Paul elsewhere exhorts: then should we also agree Phis. 2. 4.
with one mind and heart to follow the work close, till we had got it up. That
for dispatch.

36. But haste makes waste, we say. It does so: and in building as much as in
any thing. It were good wisdom therefore to bring on the work so, as to make it
strong withal: lest if we make false work for quicker dispatch, we repent our
overhasty building by leisure. To rid us of that fear; know secondly, that
unity and concord serves for strength too, as well as dispatch. Ever more vis
unita fortior: but division weakeneth. A house divided against it self cannot
stand: and Mat. 12. 25.
the wall must needs be hollow and loose, where the stones stand off one from
another and couch not close. Now brotherly love and unity is it that binds
all fast; so making of loose heaps one entire piece. I beseech you brethren
(says the Apostle) 1 Cor. 1. 10.
that there be no divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly joined together
in the same mind, and in the same judgment, 1 Cor. 1. Like-mindedness, you see,
is the thing that joineth all together: and in the well-joining consists the
strength of structure. In Ephesians. 4. therefore he speaks of the bond of peace:
and in Col. 3. he Ephesians* 4. 3. Col. 3. 14.
calls love the bond of perfectness.

37. In Phil. 1. he has another expression, which also notably confirms the
Phil. 1. 27.
same truth. That I may hear, says he, of your affairs, that ye stand fast in
one spirit, with one mind. They never stand so fast, as when they are of one
mind. There is a Greek word sometimes used in the New Testament ((...) is the
word) which is commonly translated confusion, and sometimes tumult. Not unfitly
for the sense, either: but in the literal notation it improveth a kind of
unstableness rather, or unsettledness; when a thing does not stand fast, but
shakes and tottereth, and is in danger of falling. And this St. Paul opposes
to peace, 1 Cor. 14. God is not the author ((...)) of confusion, or
unstableness, 1 Cor. 14 33.
but of peace: By that very opposition intimating, that it is mostly for want
of peace that things do not stand fast, but are ready to fall into disorder and
confusion. St. James speaks out, what St. Paul but intimates, and tells us
plainly, that this (...) is the effect of discord, and that contention is the
mother of confusion. For where envying and strife is, says he, there is,
(...), inconstancy, Jam. 3. 16.
unsettledness, confusion and every evil work. The builders make very ill work,
where the building is not like to stand, but threatens ruin, and is ready to
drop down again by that it be well up. And yet such ill work does envying and
strife ever make: it is concord only and unity that makes good work, and
builds strong. Let Jerusalem be built, as a City at unity in it self: and
Jerusalem Psalm. 122. 3.
will be like to stand the faster, and to stand up the longer.

38. For a conclusion of all, I cannot but once again admonish, and earnestly
entreat all those, that in contending with much earnestness for matters of no
great consequence, have the glory of God ever and anon in their mouths: that
they would take heed of embarquing God and his glory so deep in every trifling
business, and such as wherein there is not dignus vindice nodus. But since it
clearly appears from this and sundry other Texts of holy Scripture, that
peace and love are of those things, whereby our gracious Lord God takes
himself to be chiefly glorified: that they would rather faithfully endeavor by
their peaceable, charitable, and amiable carriage toward others, especially in
such things, as they cannot but know to be (in the judgment of sundry men both
learned and godly) accounted but of inferior and indifferent nature, to
approve to God, the World, and their own Consciences, that they do sincerely
desire to glorify God, by pleasing their brethren for their good unto
edification. Which that we all unfeignedly may do, I commend us, and what we
have heard, to the grace and blessing of Almighty God, dismissing you once
again, as I did heretofore, with the Apostles Benediction in the Text; (for I
know not where to fit my self better.)

Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be like-minded one
toward another, according unto Christ; That ye may with one mind, and with one
mouth, glorify God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. To which God the
Father, and his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, and the blessed Spirit of them both;
three Persons, etc.

AD AULAM.
Sermon XIV.
WOBURNE. 1647. AUGUST.
Psalm. 27. 10. When my Father and my Mother forsake me, the Lord takes me up.
1. THings that have a natural weakness, in them to bear up themselves, do by a
natural instinct lean toward, and (if they can find it) clasp about, something
that may sufficiently support them: but in default of such, will catch and
twine about whatsoever is next them, that may be any little stay to them for
any little time. So a Hop, for want of a strong Pole, will wind it self about a
Thistle or Nettle, or any sorry weed, The heart of man, whilst it seeks
abroad for somewhat without it self, to rest it self upon; does even thereby
sufficiently bewray a secret consciousness in it self, of its own insufficiency
to stand without something to support it. If it find not that which is the only
true support indeed; it will stay it self as long as it can upon a weak staff,
rather than none. Chariots, and Horses, and Riches, and Friends, etc. any thing
will serve to trust in; whilst no better appears.

2. But that our hearts [ deceitful as they are] delude us not with vain
confidences, we may learn from the Text, where it is, and where alone, that we
may repose our selves with full assurance of hope not to fail. David affirms
positively, what he had found true by much experience: that when all others
from whom we expect help, either will not, or cannot; God both can and will
help us, so far as he sees it good for us, if we put our trust in him. When my
Father and Mother forsake me, the Lord will take me up. The words import,
First, a possibility of failing in all inferior helps. It is supposed Fathers
and Mothers and proportionally all other friends and helps) may forsake us, and
leave us succourless: [ When my Father and my Mother forsake me.] Secondly, a
never-failing sufficiency of help and relief from God. though all other helps
should fail us: [ Then the Lord will take me up.] The two points we are to
speak to.

3. Father and Mother. First, who are they? Properly and chiefly, our natural
Parents, of whom we were begotten and born; to whom (under God) we owe our
being and breeding. Yet here, not they only; but by Synecdoche all other
kinsfolks, neighbors, friends, acquaintance; or indeed more generally yet, all
wordly comforts, stays, and helps whatsoever. 2. But then, why these named the
rarest; and the rest to be included in these? Because we promise to our selves
more help from them than from any of the other. We have a nearer relation to,
and a greater interest in them than any other: and they, of all other, are the
unlikest to forsake us. The very brute Creatures forsake not their young ones.
A Hen will not desert her Chickens: nor a Bear endure to be robbed Mat. 23. 37.
Prove. 17. 12.
of her Whelps. 3. But then Thirdly, why both named; Father, and Mother too?
Partly, because it can hardly be imagined, that both of them should forsake
their child, though one should hap to be unkind. Partly, because (...). Naz.
orat. 16.
the Fathers love being commonly with more providence, the Mothers with more
tenderness; both together do better express, than alone either would do, the
abundant love of God toward us: who is infinitely dear over us; beyond the
care of the most provident Father, beyond the affection of the tenderest
Mother. 4. But then Fourthly, When may they be said to forsake us? When at any
time they leave us destitute of such help as we stand in need of. Whether it be
out of Choice, when they list not to help us, though they might if they would:
or out of necessity, when they cannot help us, though they would if they could.

4. The meaning of the words in the former part of the verse thus opened: the
result thereof is, that There is a possibility of failing in all inferior
helps. Fathers and Mothers; our nearest and dearest friends; all earthly
visible helps and comforts, always may fail us, sometimes will fail us, and at
last must fail us, leaving us destitute and succourless. The truth whereof will
the better appear, if, instancing especially in our natural Parents (as the
Text leads us) we take a view of sundry particular causes of their so failing
us, under the two general heads but now mentioned: to wit, Choice and
Necessity. Under either kind three. Sometimes they forsake us voluntarily, aad
of their own accord, and through their own default; when it is in their power
to help us, if they were so pleased: which kind of forsaking may arise from
three several Causes.

5. First, Natural Parents may prove unnatural, merely out of the naughtiness
of their own hard and incompassionate hearts. For although God has imprinted
this natural affection toward their own offspring in the hearts of men, in as
(...).
deep and indelible characters, as almost any other branch of the Law of Nature
( O nimium potens, Quanto parents sanguinis vinculo tenes, Natura!) yet so
desperately wicked is the heart of man, that if it should be left to the
wildness of its own corruption, without any other bridle than the light of
natural principles only, it would eftsoons shake off that also: and quite raze
out all impressions of the Law of Nature; at least so blur and confound the
Characters, that the Conscience should be able to spell very little (or nothing
at all) of Duty out of them. Else what needed the Apostle, among other sins, to
have listed this (...), this want of natural affection, in two several
Catalogues, Romans 1. and Romans 1. 31. 2 Timothy 3. 3. Tit. 2. 4.
2 Timothy 3. Or to have charged Titus, that young women should be taught among
other things, to be (...), to love their Children? If he had not observed some
to have neglected their duty in that particular; whereof Histories and
experience afford us many examples. Can a woman forget her sucking Child, that
she should not have compassion of the Son of her womb? Says the Lord by the
Prophet. He speaks of it, as of a monstrous thing, and (...). Eurip. in
Phoenis. Act. 2. (...). Id. in Iphig. in Aul. Act.
scarce credible of any; Can she forget? (she in the single number:) But withal
in the same words implyedly confessing it possible in more than one: Yea, they
may forget: (They, in the plural number) Isa. 49. 15.

6. Secondly, Parents, not altogether void of natural affection, may yet have
their affections so alienated from their children upon some personal dislike,
as to forsake them. Of which dislike I deny not but there may be just cause. As
among the Hebrews in the case of Blasphemy, the Fathers hand was to be first in
the execution of his Son, Deuteronomy. 13. And both Civilians and Casuists allow the
Father Deuteronomy. 13. 7.
jus abdicationis, a right of abdication in some cases. But such cases are not
much pertinent here, or considerable as to our purpose. For they that give
their earthly Parents, just cause to forsake them, can have little confidence
that God as their heavenly Father should take them up. But when Parents shall
withdraw their love and help from their Children upon some small oversights, or
venial miscarriages; or take distaste at them either without cause, or more
than there is cause; upon some wrong, either surmise of their own, or
suggestion of others; (as Saul reviled Jonathan, and threw a Iavelin at him to
smite him; interpreting 1 Samuel 20. 30. 33. -- 22. 8.
his friendship with David, as it had been a plotted Conspiracy between his Son
and his Servant, to take his Crown and his life from him:) Or when they shall
disinherit their Children for some. deformity of Body, or defect of parts, or
the like: As reason shows it to be a great sin, and not to be excused by any
pretense: so it is an observation grounded upon manifold experience, that where
the right heirs have been disinherited upon almost whatsoever pretense; the
blessing of God has not usually followed upon the persons, and seldom has the
estate prospered in the hands of those that have succeeded in their rooms.

7. Thirdly, Parents, whose affection toward their Children has not been
sowred by any personal dislike, may yet have their affection so overpowered by
some stronger lust, as to become cruel to their children, and forsake them. For
as in the World, Might oftentimes over-beareth Right: so in the soul of man,
the violence of a stronger passion or affection, (which in the case in hand may
happen sundry ways) bears down the weaker. It may happen, as sometimes
Euripid. in Iphig. and alii.
it has done, out of Superstition. So Agamemnon sacrificed his Daughter
Iphigenia. The Heathens, generally, deceived by their cheating Oracles, and
some Psalm. 106. 37. Jer. 32. 35.
of the Jews led by their example, sacrificed their sons and daughters unto
devils, and caused their children to pass through the fire to Moloch. Sometimes
out of revenge. As Medea, to be revenged of Jason for leaving her, and placing
his affection elsewhere, slew her own two Sons, begotten by him, in his sight.
Virg. eclog. 8.
Saevus amor docuit natorum sanguine matres Commaculasse manus.) Sometimes out
of fear. So the Parents of the blind man owned their Son indeed, Ioh. 9. but
Joh 9. 21. -- 13. Josephus.
for fear of being cast out of the Synagogue durst not speak a word in his just
defense; but left him to shift as well as he could for himself. And Herod the
great, for no other cause than his own causeless fears and jealousies,
destroyed many of his own Sons. Sometimes out of the extremity and impatience
of hunger. As in the sad story of the two mothers, who in the great Famine at
the siege of Samaria 2 King. 6. 28, 29. Deuteronomy. 28. 53.
had covenanted to dress their Children by turns, and to eat them: so
fulfilling, even to the letter, that heavy curse which God had long before
threatened against Israel in case of their disobedience. Sometimes out of
voluptuousness and sensuality. As do thousands of prodigal ding-thrifts every
where in the World; who by gaming, drinking, luxury, and other riot and
intemperance vainly wasting their estate, (out of which, by St. Paul's rule,
they ought to provide and 2 Cor. 12, 14.
lay up for their Children) bring themselves to penury, and leave their
children to beggary.

8. And if by all these, and sundry other ways besides, it may happen fathers
and mothers so often to forsake their children: the less are we to marvel, if
our brethren, kinsfolks and neighbors; if our familiar acquaintance,
companions and friends, prove unfaithful, and shrink from us when we stand in
need of them: dealing deceitfully as a Brook. It is Jobs comparison, Job 6. The
Brooks in Winter, Job. ^. 15, etc.
when the Springs below are open, and the bottles of heaven pour down water
from above, overflow the banks and the meadows all about, and look like a
little Sea: but when the heat of Summer is come, and the season dry, vanish; so
as the weary Traveller can find no refreshing, nor the Cattle quench their
thirst thereat. Such is the common friendship of the World. Whilst we are full
and stand in no need of them, they are also full of kindness, and overflow with
protestations of love and service, Amici divitis multi; every friend will say,
I am Prove. 14. 20. Sirac 37. 1.
his friend also, Yet they talk but vanity all this while, every one with his
neighbor: they do but flatter with their lips, and dissemble with their double
heart* Psalm. 12. 2.
When we seek to them (...). Eurip. in Phoenis. act. 2. (...). Id. in Here,
fur. act. 2. -- Diffugiunt ^adis cum faece siccatis amici. Horat. Od. 1. 3.
Luke 10. 32. Psalm. 41. 9. (...). Naz.
in our need, they look upon us stightly, and at a distance; at the most, let
fall some overly expressions, that they wish us well, and pity our case ( Good
words are good cheap:) but do little or nothing for us. It may be, while we are
up and aloft, they will crouch under us, apply themselves to us, lend a
shoulder, yea, and sweat, to lift us up yet higher. But if we be going down;
then at the best (as the Priest and Levite in the Parable) they will see and
not see, but pass by, without so much as offering a hand to help us up: nay, it
is well if they lift not up the heel against us, and help to tread us yet lower.

9. As then, first, Natural Parents many times want natural affection: so
common friends many times want common honesty, and fail those that trust to
them. And as they secondly sometimes withdraw their love from their Children
upon slender dislikes: so these many times take toy at a trifle, ( actum est de
amicitia!) and pick quarrels to desert us, when we have not done any thing that
may justly deserve it at their hands. And as they lastly too much forget their
Children, whilst they too eagerly pursue their own lusts: so these to serve
their own ends, lay aside all relations, and break through all obligations of
friendship: and if our occasions require something should be done for us, that
may chance put them to some little trouble, hazard, or charge, or otherwise
stands not with their liking; put us off, as they did their fellow-virgins,
Ne non sufficiat, Provide for Mat. 25. 9.
yourselves; we cannot help you. This is the first kind, a voluntary forsaking;
wherein the fault is theirs: when our fathers, and mothers, and friends might
help us, but do not.

10. The other kind is an enforced forsaking, and without their fault: when
they cannot help us if they would. Which also arises from three other causes;
Ignorance, Impotency, Mortality. First, there is in the understandings of men a
great deal of darkness, for the discerning of Truth and falsehood, even in
speculativis, matters which stand at a certain stay, and alter not: but much
more for the discerning of Good and Evil in Practicis; matters, which by reason
of the multiplicity of uncertain and mutable Circumstances are infinitely
various. Whereby it becomes a matter of greater difficulty, to avoid folly in
practice, than Error in judgment. No wonder then if the carefullest Parents,
and faithfullest Friends be many times wanting in their help to those they wish
well to: when either can find no way at all, whereby to to do them good; or
else pitch upon a wrong one, whereby unawares they do them harm.

Her. 2. Ep. 1.
Sedulitas autem stulte quem diligit, urget.
-- Nil moror officium, quod me gravat.
The body of a Patient may be in such a condition of distemper, that the
learned Doctor may be at a stand, not knowing perfectly what to make of it:
and so must either let it alone, and do nothing; or else adventure upon such
probabilities, as may lead him to mistake the Cause, and so the Disease, and so
the Cure; and so in fine to destroy the Patient by those very means, whereby he
intended his recovery. So Parents and others that love their children or
friends well, and desire nothing more than to do them good; may be so puzzled
sometimes by the unhappy conjunctures of some cross Circumstances, as that they
cannot resolve upon any certain course how to dispose of them, deal with them,
or undertake for them with any assurance, or but likely hope of a good effect:
but they must either leave them to wrestle with their own burdens, as well as
they can; or else fall upon some course at all adventure, (intending their good
thereby) which may perhaps in the event turn to their undoing.

11. And as we may fail of needful help from our best friend for lack of skill:
so may we also secondly for want of Power. Verily all sufficiency is not to be
found but in the Almighty Creator alone. No Creature can yield out of his own
sufficiency, a salve for every sore, a supply for every want, a help for every
defect: but there is some impotency, some vacuity, some deficiency, in the
best. Agar loved Genesis 21* 15, 16.
her Infant well enough, and knew too well enough what would save his life for
that time, if she could tell how to get it. But all the water in the bottle
being spent, and no more to be had in that dry wilderness, no help but she must
forsake him, and (for ought she knew, and relating but to ordinary means) he
must perish. All she could do was, to cast the poor child under a shrub, and
get her a good way off, that she might not see him die, and to lift up her own
voice, that she might not hear his, Genesis 21. And Moses his Parents, when they
had hid him as long as they could or durst, at last forsook him, and left him
in the flags Exodus 2. 5. 1 King. 17. 12.
by the brink of the River Nilus, Exodus 2. The widow of Sarepta also, 1 King.
17. in the long drought and famine, being stored of provision but for one
single repast for her self and her son, saw no possibility of further relief
for her self and him; nor knew how to show her love to him otherwise, than by
dying with him for company. By fire, water, long sickness, suits, plunderings,
and a thousand casualties, our distresses may be such; as that our dearest and
greatest friends may not be able to relieve us.

12. Nor only are all men subject to Ignorance and Impotency; whereby they may
forsake us whilst they are: but they are also thirdly under a state of
mortality; and so must needs forsake us, when they shall be no more. Put not
your trust in Princes, nor in any child of man: for there is no help in them,
Psalm. 146. Psalm. 146. 2.
No, is? Sure some help there is, some little help in them, whilst they live,
and are in power? But the meaning is, there is no certain help in them; none
for a man to trust to: because there is no certainty how long they shall enjoy
that life and power, For so the reason there follows: For when the breath of
man goes -- 3.
forth, he shall turn again to his earth, and then all his thoughts perish. The
Prophets accordingly, Isa. 2. Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his
nostrils: for Isa. 2. 22.
wherein is he to be accounted of? The Soul and Body (in whose conjunction life
consists) are tied together by no stronger a thread, than the breath that
passes in and out by the Nostrils. Cut that thread, stop that breath, down
falls the tallest, and the stoutest, and the proudest of the sons of men; and
when he falls, all his wealth, and all his pomp, and all his thoughts and
devices, and projects and contrivances fall with him. And this the end of every
man; the utmost period of the race, the last act upon the stage: neither has
he any more a portion Eccl. 9. 6.
for ever in any thing that is done under the Sun. And how should they then
help others, that can no longer sustain themselves? Needs must they forsake us,
when breath and life forsakes them. So it is with all other earthly comforts
whatsoever; pleasures, riches, honors, and the rest. When their time is come,
they vanish; make themselves wings, and away they hie: and when they are upon
Prove. 23. 5.
the wing, look after them we may a little while, and to little purpose, but
reclaim them we cannot. They soon get out of sight leaving us behind to grieve
for the loss (as Rachel for her children) mourning, and refusing to be
comforted, because Jer. 3. 15.
we are and they are not.

13. The more unwise we, to raise to our selves such vast hopes, as sometimes
we do, upon so narrow, so frail a bottom. Would any wise man when he might have
a staff, lean the weight of his body upon a crutch of reed? Or trust to a
gutter-spout to quench his thirst, when he might go to a spring? Yet so is he
that puts his trust in any earthly Father or Friend, or in any Child of man,
or in Jer. 2. 13.
any other creature or thing, besides God: That forsaking the fountain of
living waters, which runs clear, and can never be drawn dry, diggeth to
himself broken pits, that can hold but a little water, and that but muddy at
the best, and yet cannot hold that long neither. You shall find set down in
Psalm. 20. the different confidences of the worldling and the true believer, and
their different successes. Their confidences, Ver. 7. Some put their trust in
Chariots and some in horses: (and some in other things) but we will remember
the name of the Lord our God. Their Successes, Ver. 8. They are cast down and
fallen: but we are risen and stand upright. David and Goliath met upon these
very terms. He came out against David, trusting in the arm of flesh: David went
out against him in the 1 Samuel 17. 45.
name of the Lord of Hosts. And they prospered accordingly. Behold Goliath is
brought down; David rises: Goliath falls; David stands upright. Fallax
Psalm. 33. 17.
equus; A horse is counted but a vain thing (and a vain thing it is to count
otherwise of him, for he is truly but a vain thing) to save a man. So are
Chariots, and Forts, and Armies, and Navies, and all earthly reliances. He that
rests upon them, down come they, and then down comes he too. The horse and
the Exodus 15. 1. Isa. 31. 1. -- 3.
rider, both thrust into the Sea together. Exodus 15. Woe unto them then that
stay on horses, or trust in Chariots: when the Lord shall stretch out his hand
both he that helps shall fall, and he that is helped shall fall down, and
they shall all fail together, Isa. 31.

14. It were good wisdom for us therefore to deal safely; ((...) has ever been
held a wholesome politic Aphorism by the wise ones of the world:) never to rely
on those that may deceive us; to esteem all outward helps but as they are, and
to use them, and to trust to them accordingly. That is to say, as blessed means
of our good and comfort, so long as God is pleased to lend them us, and to
sanctify them to us: but such as we can have no hold of, neither any assurance
that they shall not fail us. To honor our Fathers and Mothers; to love our
Friends and Allies; to pray for the lives and prosperity of Kings and Princes:
Again, to gather wealth by fair and just means; to raise our selves to honors
by faithful services and virtuous endeavors; to take our portion of lawful and
regular pleasures: These we may do; those we must do. But take we heed we place
not our felicity in the enjoyment, or please our selves too much in the
confidence, or allow our selves overmuch freedom in the use of any creature.
Lest as Jonas was over-joyed when the Gourd sprang up, and over-vexed when it
Jon. 4. 6, 8.
withered: so the loss of what we over-valued whiles we had it, over-whelm us
with grief and impatience, when we must part from it. Quem res plus nimio
delectavere Horat. 1. Epist. 10.
secundae, Mutatae quatient.

15. If we would seriously consider, what defects the things of this world are
subject unto, and what Casualties, and frailties: we should reap (at least)
this threefold benefit thereby* It would make us first, receive these outward
things with more thankfulness; secondly, use them with more moderation;
thirdly, forgo them with more patience than usually we do. Hor. 3. od. 29.
Laudo manentem: si celeres quatit Pennas, resigno quoe dedit; as he said of
Fortune. Whilst we have them it will become us to bless God for them, and to
make our best of them: But if they will be gone, farewell they: let them go; but
let us bear up notwithstanding, since we are neither hopeless, nor helpless.
When all fails, we have yet one string left, which we are sure will hold:
even the name of the Lord our God; who stands ever by us, ready to take us
up, when all others have forsaken us. Which is the other Point in those latter
words of the verse. The Lord takes me up. (...)


16. The primary signification of the Hebrew Verb here used, is, together: and
so it might allude to that, whereunto our Savior in the Gospel resembles his
compassion toward the Jews, of a Hen gathering her Chickens under her wings.
Mat. 23. 37.
But it is here rather translated by taking up, as the word very usually
signifies. 1. And it seems to resemble the state of young infants, by the
unnatural Parents exposed to the wide world, (as we read Cyrus, and Romulus,
and some others, both in Fables and Histories to have been) where they must
have perished, if some good body had not taken pity of them, and taken them up.
2. Or the state of some impotent neglected Cripple, like him that lay before
the Pool of Joh. 5. 5. -- 7.
Bethesda, and had neither limbs to put himself into the water, nor any friend
to help him in. 3. Or the traveller in the Parable, Luke 10. that lay in the
highway Luke 10. 30. -- 35.
wounded by thieves half dead, where he must have died outright, if the
Samaritan Passenger had not taken him up, and taken order for his tending and
recovery.

17. The plain meaning is, that though our Fathers and Mothers forsake us,
though all other friends and comforts fail us; because they either cannot, or
will not help us: yet our heavenly Father never does, nor will fail or forsake
those that put their trust in him, Yea rather, then is his providence nearest,
and his help readiest, when we are most forsaken of others, and left most
destitute of all worldly succor. Whence it is, that so often in the Psalms, to
procure readier help from God, David alleges it as a forcible argument, that
he was a desolate Psalm. 10. 14. -- 22. 11.
and forsaken man. The poor commits himself to thee, for thou art a helper
of the friendless. O go not far from me; for trouble is nigh at hand, and there
is none to help me. O be thou our help in trouble, for vain is the help of man,
and many -- 108. 12.
the like. And how often does the Lord himself (whose general providence
watches over all men, yea, even all creatures) profess himself yet in a more
special manner to be the father of the Fatherless; and to have a special care
of the Psalm. 68. 5. -- 146. 9.
widow, the poor, and the stranger above others: as being more destitute of
worldly succor and friends, than others are? In three Psalms together you have
passages -- 145. 14. -- 146. 8. 9.
to this purpose: In the 145th. The Lord upholdeth all those that fall, and
lifts up all those that be down. In the 146th. The Lord helps them that are
fallen; the Lord cares for the stranger, he defends the Fatherless and
Widow. In the 147th. he feeds the young ravens that call upon him. The
observation is common, that -- 147. 9.
he instanceth in Job 38. 41. Mat. 6. 26. Luke 12. 24.
the raven rather than in any other bird: because of all other birds the ravens
are observes (...). Arist. 6. Hist. animal. 6. See Aelian. 49. plin. 10. 12.
soonest to forsake their young ones. Whether the observation hold or no, it
serves to my purpose howsoever: for if God so sufficiently provide for the
young ravens, when the dams forsake them: will he not much more take care of
us, when our Father and Mothers forsake us? Are not we (stamped with his own
image) much more valuable with him than many ravens?

18. But dictum factum: These are but words: are there producible any deeds to
make it good? Verily there are: and that to the very Letter. When Ishmaels Genesis
21. 19.
Mother despairing of his life had forsaken him, and laid him down gasping (his
last, for ought she knew, or could do to help it) in the wilderness; the Lord
took him up: He opened a new spring of water, and opened her eyes to see it:
and so the child was preserved, Genesis 21. When Moses his Parents also had
forsaken Exodus 2. 6.
him (for they durst not stand by him any longer) and laid him down among the
rushy flags; the Lord took him up too. He provided him of a Savior, the Kings
own Daughter; and of a Nurse, the Child's own Mother: and so he was preserved
too.* Take but two Examples more, out of either Testament one; -- 9.
David and St. Paul: both forsaken of men, both taken up of God. How was David
forsaken in Psalm. 142. 5. when he had looked upon his right hand, and saw no
man that would know him, he had no place to fly unto; and no man cared for his
soul. But all the while Dominus a dextris: there was one at his right hand
(though at first he was not aware of him) ready to take him up: As it there
follows, ver. 6. I cried unto thee, O Lord, and said, thou art my hope and my
portion in the land of the living. And how St. Paul was forsaken, take it from
himself, 2 Timothy 4. 16. At my first answer no man stood with me, but all forsook
me. A heavy case: and had been heavier, had there not been one ready to take
his part, at the next verse, Nevertheless the Lord stood by me and strengthened
me, etc. What need we any more witnesses: In ore duorum, In the mouth of two
such witnesses, the Point is sufficiently established.

19. But you will yet say, These two might testify what they had already found
post-factum. But David in the Text pronounces de futuro, beforehand, and that
somewhat confidently. The Lord will take me up. As he does also elsewhere; Sure
I am that the Lord will avenge the poor, and maintain the cause of the Psalm.
140. 12.
helpless, Psalm. 140. But is there any ground for that? Doubtless there is: a
double ground; one in the nature, another in the promise of God. In his Nature
four Qualities there are, (we take leave so to speak, sutably our own low
apprehensions; for in the Godhead there are properly no Qualities:) but call
them Qualities, or Attributes, or what else you will; there are four
perfections in God, opposite to those defects, which in our earthly Parents we
have found to be the chief causes why they do so often forsake us: which give us
full assurance that he will not fail to take us up, when all other succors
fail us. Those are his Love, his Wisdom, his Power, his Eternity: all in his
Nature. To which four add his Promise; and you have the fullness of all the
assurance that can be desired.

20. First, the Love of our heavenly Father toward all mankind in general, but
especially toward those that are his Children by adoption and grace; is
infinitely Tam pater nemo: tam pius nemo. Tertul. de poenit. cap. 9. 1 John 4.
16.
beyond the love of earthly Parents toward their Children. They may prove
unnatural, (...), their bowels may be crusted up against the fruit of their own
body. But the Lord cannot but love his people. He can as well cease to be, as
to love: for he is love. If he should deny that, he should deny himself: and
that he will not do, because he cannot; and that he cannot do, because he will
not. Potenier non potest. It is impossible for him, to whom all things are
possible, to deny himself. The Church indeed, out of the sense of her
pressures, lets all 2 Timothy 2. 13.
complaints sometimes as if she were forsaken: (But Sion said, the Lord has
forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me, Isa. 49. 14.) But she complains
without cause; it is a weakness in her, to which during her warfare she is
subject by fits: but she is checked for it immediately, in the very next verse
there, Can a woman forget her sucking Child, etc. Yea, they may forget: yet
will not I forget thee.

21. Again, their Love may be alienated by needless jealousies, or false
suggestions, and so lost. But his Love is durable; he loves his own unto the
End. He Joh. 13. 1.
knows the singleness of their hearts, and will receive no accusation against
them. Quis accusabit? Who dare lay any thing to the charge of his Elect, when
Romans 8. 33.
he stands up for their Justification? They alas are negligent enough;
unthankful undutiful children: nay (confessed it must be) other while stubborn
and rebellious. But as David's heart longed after Absalom, because he was his
Son, though 2 Samuel 14. 1.
a very ungracious one: so his bowels yearn after those that are no ways worthy
Luke 15. 21.
(but by his dignation only) to be called his Sons. Forgiving all their bypast
miscariages upon their true repentance; receiving them with gladness. though
they have squandered away all their portion with riotous living, if they return
to -- 13.
him in any time with humble, obedient, and perfect hearts; and in the mean
time using very many admonitions entreaties, and other artifices to win them to
repentance; and forbearing them with much patience; that they may have space
Apoc. 2. 21.
enough to repent in. And if upon such indulgences and insinuations they shall
come in; he will not only welcome them with kind embraces, but do his part also
to hold them in, when they are even ready to fly out again, and were it not for
that hold, would in all likelihood so do. So as unless by a total wilful
renouncing him they break from him, and cut themselves off, nothing in the
world shall be able to separate them from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. Romans 8. 39.


22. Yet again, Parents affections may be so strongly biased another way, (as
we heard) that in the pursuit of other delights, they may either quite forget
or very much disregard their Children. But no such thing can befall our heavenly
Psalm. 149. 4. -- 35. 27. Mich. 7. 18. Deuteronomy. 10 15.
Father; who takes pleasure in his People, and in their Prosperity: whose
chiefest delight is in showing mercy to his children, and doing them good. [
The Lord had a delight in thy Fathers to love them, Deuteronomy. 10.] And whereas the
Church (as we also heard) is apt to complain, that she is forsaken and
desolate: The Lord by the Prophet gives her a most comfortable assurance to
the contrary, Isa. 62. Thou shall no more be called forsaken, -- etc. But thou
shall be called Hephzibah. -- (It Isa. 49. 14. -- 62. 4.
is a compound word, and signifies as much as My delight is in her: and so the
reason of that appellation is there given) For the Lord delights in thee.
That for his Love; the first Attribute.

23. His Wisdom is the next. Fathers and Mothers (through humane ignorance)
cannot perfectly understand the griefs of their Children, nor infallibly know
how to remedy them, if they did. But God, who dwells in light, nay, who is
light, knows the in most recesses, the darkest thoughts and secrets of all
men's 1 Timothy 6. 16. 1 John 1. 5.
hearts, better than themselves do. He perfectly understands all their wants,
and what supplies are fittest in their respective conditions, with all the
least circumstances thereunto belonging. When all the wits and devices of men
are at a loss, and know not which way in the world to turn them, to avoid this
danger, to prevent that mischief, to effectuate any design: the Lord by his
infinite wisdom can manage the business with all advantage for the good of his
children, if he see it behoveful for them; bringing it about suaviter and
fortiter, sweetly and without violence in ordering the means, but effectually
and without fail in accomplishing the end.

24. Which wisdom of his, observable in all the dispensations of his gracious
providence toward his children; we may behold as by way of instance in his
fatherly corrections: As the Apostle, Heb. 12. makes the comparison between
the different proceedings of the fathers of our flesh, and the Father of
Spirits, in Heb. 12. 9. -- 10.
their chastisements. They do it after their own pleasure, says he: that is,
not always with judgment, and according to the merit of the fault; but after
the present disposition of their own passions, either through a fond indulgence
sparing the Rod too much, or in a frantic rage laying it on without mercy or
measure. But it is not so with him: who in all his chastisements has an eye,
as to our former faults, (such is his Justice;) so also and especially to our
future profit, (such is his mercy:) and orders all accordingly. His blessings
are our daily food: his corrections our Physic. Our frequent surfeiting on
that food brings on such distempers, that we must be often and sometimes
soundly physickt, or we are but lost men. As therefore a skilful Physician
attempereth and applies his remedies with such due regard to the present state
of the Patient, as may be likeliest to restore him to a good habit of body and
consistency of health: so deals our heavenly Father with us. But with this
remarkable difference. The other may err in judging of the state of the body,
or the nature of the ingredients; in his proportions of mixture; in the dose,
and many other ways: But the Lord perfectly knows how it is with us, and what
will do us good, and how much, and when, and how long to continue, etc. and
proceeds in every respect thereafter.

25. Thirdly, whereas our earthly Parents have a limited, and that a very
narrow power, and cannot therefore do their children the good they would: our
heavenly Fathers power is (as his wisdom) infinite. Not limited by any thing,
Psalm. 147. 5.
but his own blessed will: ( quicquid voluit fecit; as for our God he is in
heaven, he has done whatsoever pleased him.) Not hindered by any resistance, or
retarded Psalm. 135. 6. -- 115. 3. Romans 9. 19*
by any impediments: ( Quis restitit? Who has resisted his will? Romans 9.) Not
disabled by any casualities, occurrences, or straitness of time: ( adjutor in
opportunitatibus, Psalm. 9.) Even a refuge in due time of trouble. That is his
due time Psalm. 9. 9. Genesis 22. 14.
commonly ( dominus in monte) when it seems too late to us, and when things
are grown in the eye of reason almost desperate and remediless. The most proper
Psalm. 119. 116.
time for him to lay to his hand, is, when (to our apprehensions) his Law is
even quite destroyed, when Men have fallen upon most cursed designs, trampled
all Laws of God and Men under their feet, and prospered. And here indeed is the
Romans 18. -- 20.
right trial of our faith, and whether we be the true children of faithful
Abraham: If we can hope beyond and against hope: That is, if we can rest our
faith entirely upon the power and providence of God; not staggering (through
unbelief) at any promise, seem it never so unlikely: and continue steadfast in
our holy obedience to the will of God, not staggering (through disobedience) at
any command, seem it never so unreasonable. Abraham did both: and out of this
reason, as the Apostle renders it, Romans 4. because he was firmly grounded in
this persuasion -- 21.
of the power of God, that what he had promised he was able also to perform.
Zach. 1. 5.


26. The last attribute proposed is Gods Eternity. Our Fathers and Mothers
where are they? And do Prophets, or Princes, or any sort of men live for ever?
They all pass like a shadow, wither as grass, and are driven away as the
Grasshopper. When they must go, they cannot help themselves: and when they are
gone, they cannot help us. They are mortal men; he the immortal God: they are
dying men; he the living God. Life is one of his Prerogatives Royal. All other
things that partake of life in any degree, have but a derived life, and such as
either shall have an end, or at least had a beginning. God alone has life in
and of himself: and his life alone is measured, not by Time, but Eternity. He
is therefore said to Psalm. 57. 15. Deuteronomy. 32. 40. Psalm. 102. 12. -- 27.
inhabit Eternity. He lifts up his hand, when he swears by himself, having
no greater to swear by) and says, Behold I live for ever. His remembrance
endures throughout all generations; and his years fail not.

27. And therefore when our Fathers, and Mothers, and friends forsake us*
because either their Love fails, or their skill fails, or their power
failleth, or their life fails: our heavenly Father, who wants neither love,
nor wisdom, nor power, nor life, but is infinite in all; we may rest assured is
every way accomplished to succor us at all assays, and to take us up. And that
he will engage all these for our relief, if we will but cast our selves wholly
upon him; we have his gracious promise in the last place, to fill up the
measure of our assurance. Whereby he has obliged himself, not only to give us
all spiritual Graces and comforts, necessary for the everlasting salvation of
our souls; but also to provide and furnish us with all the good things, and to
preserve and deliver us from all the evils of this life; so far as in his
excellent wisdom he shall see it conducing to 1 Timothy 4. 8.
his glory the weal of his Church, and the salvation of his chosen.

28. The particular promises are many, and lie scattered every where in the
holy Scriptures: whence every man may gather them for his own use, as his
occasions require. I shall mention but that one general Promise, which though
Deuteronomy. 31. 8. Josh. 1. 5. Heb. 13. 5.
delivered first to Joshua in particular, yet was afterward applied to other
persons also, and alleged, Heb. 13. as a ground of such general duties as are
common to all Christians; and fitteth as properly as any other to the present
argument: namely this, I will not fail thee, nor forsake the. He promises,
that whosoever else fails us, yet he will not: all one with what is here
presumed in the Text by David. And having promised it, we were very Infidels,
if we should doubt whether he will perform it or no. It were to question his
wisdom, as if he had not considered what he promised when he passed his word:
to question his Love; as if he would not be as good as his word: to question
his Power, as if she could not be as big as his word.

29. Having therefore such promises, dearly beloved, it behooves us to be very
wary, when troubles lie long and heavy upon us, that we complain not too
distrustfully, as if God had quite forsaken us. And the rather, because it is
an infirmity incident to very good men: but yet an infirmity, and so confessed by
them. Has God forgotten to be gracious? etc. David's complaint in Psalm. 77. But
presently Psalm. 77. 7.-9.
acknowledging it an Error, he corrected himself for it, in the immediate
following words, And I said, it is mine infirmity. We by his example, early to
-- 10.
silence all tumultuous thoughts, and secret murmurings of our evil hearts,
which are so ready to charge God foolishly, and to break out into unseasonable
complaints Job. 1. 22.
against his most wise and holy dispensations: and that by meditating
effectually upon the Attributes and Promises aforesaid. Whosoever confidently
professes himself to trust in God, (as almost all do;) and yet repiningly
complains as if God had forsaken him, (as very many do:) either makes God a
liar, or bewrays himself (in some degree) an Hypocrite. He makes God a liar,
if he say God has forsaken him, when he has not: and he bewrays some
Hypocrisy in himself, if he say he puts his trust in God, when he does not.

30. And as it becomes us not to be too querulous for (...) present; so
neither secondly, to be too sollicitous for the future. I forbid not to any,
but require rather in every man a moderate provident care for the getting,
keeping and disposing of the things of this life, in an industrious and
conscionable use of lawful means; still leaving the success entirely to the
good pleasure of our heavenly Father. But sure, did we firmly believe that his
care over us is no whit lesser, but rather infinitely greater than that of our
earthly Parents: we would not suffer our selves to be disquieted with perplexed
thoughts, nor our spirits to be vexed with distrustful anxieties about the
future success of our affairs. Children, whilst they are in their Fathers
house, and at their finding, use not to trouble themselves with such thoughts
as these, What shall we eat? Or what shall we drink? Or wherewith Mat. 6. 31.
shall we be clothed? But leave that wholly to their Father, to whose care it
properly belongs. We are very meanly persuaded of our heavenly Fathers
affection toward us, and of his care over us, if we dare not trust him as
securely for our daily provisions; who knows that we stand in need of all
these things, 32.
about which we so needlessly trouble our selves. Enough it is for us, in all
things by Supplications and Prayers for what we want, and thanksgiving for what
we Phil. 4. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 7. Psalm. 55. 22.
have, to let our requests be made known unto him; and then to be careful for
nothing any farther, but to cast all our care and our burden upon him: and
doubtless he will not suffer us to lie and perish; but will take us up, take
care of us, and nourish us.

31. Neither, thirdly, let us droop, or be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow,
as if some strange thing had befallen us; upon the fail of any earthly helps or
hopes whatsoever. If our Fathers and Mothers affection be not toward us, as we
think it should; if they have entertained worse thoughts of us than we deserve:
if they have not discretion and foresight to give us meet and orderly
education, and to provide us means sortable thereunto: if they be fallen into
want, or otherwise disabled from doing for us what formerly they intended, or
we expected* if they be taken from us before we be grown up: If our friends,
whom we trusted have proved unfaithful, and shrunk from us when we had use of
them; if those proportions of Wealth, Honor, Reputation, Liberty, or
whatsoever other worldly conveniences and contentments, we have formerly
enjoyed, be pared away to very little, or even to nothing: we have yet one
reserve, that we dare rest surely upon; one anchor of hope that will hold in
despite of all the World; Heb. 6. 19.
even the goodness and faithfulness of our gracious Lord God. To him have we
been left ever since we were born: and he has not hitherto failed nor forsaken
us, Psalm. 22. 10.
but has preserved us in being; in such a being; as he who best knows what
is fit, has thought fit for us. It is our fault, if the experience of the time
past do not breed in us hope for the time to come, and that a lively hope, a
hope that Romans 5. 4. 5. Psalm. 48. 14.
will never shame either him or us: even this, That he Will also be our guide
unto death; that he will not fail or forsake us henceforth for ever; but will
preserve us still in such a condition as he shall see good for us. Persecuted
we may be and 2 Cor. 4. 9.
afflicted, but forsaken we shall not be.

32. We ought therefore to possess our souls in patience, whatsoever shall
betide Luke 21. 19.
us in the World: and not to consult with flesh and blood, in seeking to
relieve our selves in our distresses, by engaging in any unworthy or
unwarrantable practice; or by siding, partaking, or but basely complying with
the workers of wickedness, that we may eat of their dainties. Is it possible we
should be so ill advised, Psalm. 141. 4. Jon. 2. 8.
as to think to escape the storm when it approaches toward us, by making
shipwreck of a good Conscience? If we go after lying vanities, (and such are
all Creatures, all men liars, all things vanity:) do we not ipso facto forsake
our own mercy, and wilfully bring ruin upon us? The short and sure way is,
when any danger, any distress, is upon us, or makes toward us, to run to our
heavenly Psalm. 91. 4. -- 37. 5.
Father, as young birds do to their Dam, for succor. He will gather us under
his wings, and we shall be safe under his Feathers: his faithfulness and truth
shall be our shield and buckler. If we commit our ways to him; cast our selves
upon him by a thorough reliance; resign all our desires, wills and interests
into his hands: he will certainly bring to pass, aut quod volumus, aut quod
malumus, either what we like best, or what he knows is best.

33. Only let us resolve to perform our part; do faithfully what he commands,
shun carefully what he forbids, suffer patiently what he inflicteth, and we
may then be confident he will perform his part to the uttermost. That when all
the World forsakes us, he will take us up: take us into his care and
protection Romans 2. 7.
here; and, if by patient continuance in well-doing we seek it, take us up at
the last into the fellowship of that glory, and honor, and immortality, and
eternal life, which his only beloved Son has purchased, and his ever blessed
Spirit consigned to all them that love him, and put their trust in his mercy.
To that only beloved Son, and ever-blessed Spirit, together with the eternal
Father, three Persons, and one undivided Trinity, be rendered by us, and the
whole Church, all the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
AD AULAM.
Sermon XV.
STOKE POGEYS. 1647.
Luke 16. 8. -- For the Children of this World are in their Generation wiser
than the Children of Light.
1. THe foregoing verses contain a Parable: this, the Application of it. The
Parable that of the unjust Steward: a Verse 1.
faithless, and a thriftless man. He had wronged his Master, without any
benefit to himself: as prodigals are wont, to do other men harm, and themselves
no good. The Master, coming (at length, and -- Dedecus ille domus sciet
ultimus. Juven. Satyr. 10. Verse 2.
with the last) to have some knowledge of his false dealing, discharges him
his office, and calls on him to give in his accounts. The Steward, awakened
with that short and unexpected warning, began now to think in good earnest,
what before he never thought of to purpose, what should become of him and his
for the future: he knew not which way in the world to Verse 3.
turn himself to get a living, when he should be turned out of service. He had
not been so provident an husband, as to have any thing beforehand to live
upon: He could not frame to handle a spade, he had not been brought up with
painstaking: And for him that had so long born sway in such a house, (and like
enough with insolence enough) now to run craving a small piece of Money of
every Traveller by the highway, or stand at another man's door begging a morsel
of bread: shame, and a stout heart would not suffer him to think of that. Well,
something he must do, and that speedily too, or starve. He therefore casts
about this way, and that way, and every way: and at last bethinketh himself
Verse 4. Verse 5. -- 7.
of a course, and resolves upon it; to show his Master a trick at the loose,
that should make amends for all, and do his whole business. He therefore
sends for his Masters Debtors forthwith; Dominicos debitores diminutis
cautionibus relevat in subsidium sibi Tert. 4. adv. Marcion. cap. 33.
abateth them of their several Sums, and makes the Books agree: in hope that
having gratified so many* Persons by such large abatements; some of them would
remember it sure, (though others should prove ungrateful) and make him some
part of requital for the same. The Master vexed to see himself so palpably
cheated, and knew not how to help it (for he could require no more of the
Debtors than was upon the foot of their Bills:) could not yet but commend the
man's wit howsoever. And the Lord commended the unjust Steward, because he had
done wisely, in the former part of this verse.

2. Having thus framed the body of the Parable; our Savior now gives it a
soul in this latter part of the verse: breaths into it the breath of life, by
applying it. Application is the life of a Parable. The commending of the
Stewards wisdom, was with the purpose to recommend the example to us: that we
might from it learn to provide against the time to come, as he did; and that
also by such like means, as he did. So that the Application has two parts. The
one more general, respecting the End: that as he was careful to provide
maintenance for the preservation of his natural life; so we should be careful
to make provision for our souls, that we may attain to everlasting life. The
other more special, respecting the Means: that as he provided for himself out
of his Masters goods, by disposing the same into other hands, and upon several
persons: so we should lay up for our selves a good foundation toward the
attainment of everlasting life, out 1 Timothy 6. 18, 19.
of the unrighteous Mammon wherewith God has entrusted us; by being rich in
good works, communicating and distributing some of that in our hands toward
the necessities of others. Of the temporals we here enjoy, we are not to
account ourselves Proprietaries, but Stewards, and such as must be accountable.
It should be our wisdom therefore (as it will be our happiness) to dispose them
into other hands by Alms-deeds, and other charitable works, and so to improve
these Temporals (which we cannot properly call our own) to our own spiritual
and eternal advantage. That latter and more special application is in the next
verse, [ Make you friends of the unrighteous Mammon, etc.] The words proposed
contain the more general application, (our business at this time) delivered
here by way of comparison; a way more effectual (ordinarily) to provoke
endeavor than bare Exhortations are. For the children of this world are in
their Generation wiser, than the children of Light.

3. In which comparison, there are observable; first and secondly, as the terms
of the comparison, two sorts of persons distinguished either from other by
their several Appellations, and compared the one with the other in the point of
wisdom: The children of this world, on the one part; and the children of light,
on the other: between these the question is, whether sort is wiser. Thirdly,
the sentence or judgment given upon the question; clearly on behalf of the
former sort: they are pronounced the wiser ( -- The children of this world
wiser than the children of light.) Lastly, the limitation of the sentence, how
far forth it is to be understood. They wiser; true: but then you must take it
right; wiser in their generation, not simply and absolutely wiser. Of which in
order.

4. The persons are, children of this world, and children of light: (...) both,
sons or children. That is terminus convenientiae: as opposites have always
something wherein they agree. Men of some special Country, Profession, Quality,
or Condition, are by an usual Hebraism in the Scriptures expressed by this word
Children with some addition thereunto: as Children of Edom, Children of the
Prophets, Children of death. From the Hebrews, other Languages have by
derivation entertained the same Pleonasm: as (...), so frequent in Homer; filii
medicorum, and the like. In the Scriptures it is very usual, both in the good
Joh. 8. 39. Mat. 11. 19. Romans 9. 26. 1 Samuel 10. 27. Ephesians. 5. 6. Mat. 23. 15.
part, and in the bad. In the good part, you have children of Abraham, children
of Wisdom, children of God: in the evil part, children of Belial, children of
Disobedience, children of Hell. Here are both: Children of the World, and
Children of Light.

5. For the World first; the Greeks have two words for it, (...) and (...), the
one importing more properly the frame of the creatures; the other, some space
or duration of time rather. That propriety is not always observed by Writers;
yet here it is: for the word is (...), and has respect unto Time. Next whereas
it is said [ this World] that implies there is another; set oppositely against
this: distinguished Luke 20. by (...) and (...), this world and that Luke 10.
34. 35. Ephesians. 1. 20. Mat. 12. 32.
world: otherwhere by (...), and (...) or by (...) and (...), the world that
now is, and the world to come. Again, this world so taken (to wit, as it
stands distinguished from that world, or the world to come) is yet capable to
be understood in a double notion. For it may be taken either in a more general
sense, with respect to the common affairs of this life, without difference of
good or bad: as it is taken in that place of Luke now mentioned ( The children
of this world marry, and are given in marriage: but they that shall be counte'd
worthy of that world. etc.) The children of this world, that is, men that live
here on earth, whilst here they live: and the children of that world, they
that hereafter shall live for ever in heaven. Or it may be taken in a narrower
and more restrained sense, as the world is opposed an contradistinguished to
the Church. And the opposition of the children of this world to the children of
light, shows it must be so taken here: in effect as if he had said, the
children of darkness. Those 1 These. 5. 5.
then are the children of this world here meant, who as subjects serve under
the Prince of darkness, the God of this world; live in the works of darkness,
the employment 2 Cor. 4. 4. Romans 13. 12.
of this world; and when they die (unless God in special mercy deal otherwise
with them, and that will not be done but upon the condition supposed, that of
their repentance) shall be cast into utter darkness at the end of the Mat. 25.
30.
world.

6. And this title we may conceive to belong unto them in a threefold respect:
in as much as 1. Their affections are bent upon this world; 2. Their
conversations are conformed to this world; and 3. There portion is allotted
them in this world. First, children of this world, for that their affections
are wholly set upon the world. The Godly are in this world tanquam in alieno,
as strangers and pilgrims 1 Pet. 2. 11.
in a foreign (yea, in the enemies) country: and they look upon the world, and
are looked upon by it as strangers; and are used by it accordingly. If they
were of the world, the world would own them, and love them, as her Joh. 15. 19.
own party: and they would also love the world again, as their own home. But
because they are not of the world, though they be in it;) but are denizons of
heaven, ((...). Phil. 3.) therefore the world hates them: and they on Phil. 3.
20.
the other side are weary of the world, and long after heaven, (their own
country) where their treasure is laid up, and where their hearts and
affections also Mat. 6. 20, 21.
are. Like an English Factor in Turkey, that has some dealings there; if not
rather like an English Captive, that is held Prisoner there: but still
professes himself a Subject of England, and his heart and desires are here:
But the Children, spoken of here in the Text, are in the World tanquam in
proprio, as in their own Country, at their own homes, where (if they might)
they would willingly set up their rest for ever. As Socrates being asked what
Countryman he was, answered that he was (...), that is, a Citizen of the
world: so (but in another, and a worse sense) are they, No marvel then if they
dote so much upon the world, as bad as it is, and settle their hearts and
affections so entirely thereupon: saying as St. Peter did, when he said he knew
not what bonum est esse Mat. 9. 6.
hic, It is good being here. Their souls cleave to the world: and it is death
to them to part from it.

7. And as for their Affections: so secondly, children of this world in respect
of their Conversation. (...), says the Apostle: fashion not your self, Romans
12. 2.
after this present world. The Godly being changed in the renewing of their
minds: do not fashion themselves according to this present evil world: But as
at their Baptism they renounced the world, with all the Pomps, Lusts, and
Vanities of it: so they take themselves bound in the whole course of their
lives to be as unlike the evil world, as they can, by walking in all holiness
and purity of conversation. So long as they continue in this Vale of misery,
and live here in the world, they must have to do in the world, (and the world
will have to do with them;) and daily occasion they shall have for the
necessities of this life, to use the things of this world. But then they are
careful so to use them, as neither to abuse themselves, nor them. Going through
the vale of misery, they use it for a Psalm. 84. 6.
Well, drawing out thence a little water (as occasions require) for their
needful refreshing: but they will take care withal, to drain it well from the
mud; to keep themselves (so far as is possible) unspotted with the World, and
to escape Jam. 1. 27.
the manifold pollutions and defilements that are in the World through lust.
But the children here spoken of, immerse and ingulf themselves in the affairs
of this world with all greediness: walking (as the Apostle expresses it, Ephesians.
2.) after Ephesians. 2. 2, 3.
the course of this world, according to the Prince of the power of the air in
the lusts of the flesh, doing the will of the flesh and of the mind. There is a
combination (you see) of our three great Spiritual Enemies, The Devil, the
Flesh, and the World, against us; and these three agree in one, to undo us, and
to destroy us. Now he that yields to the temptations of the Devil, or makes
provision for the Flesh to fulfill it in the lusts thereof, or suffers himself
to be carried with the sway of the world to shape his course thereafter;
preferring his own will before Romans 13. 14.
the known will of God: is a child of this world in respect of his Conversation.

8. Thirdly, The Children of this World are so called in regard their Portion
is in this World. The children of Light content themselves with any small
pittance which it pleases their heavenly Father to allow them here: being
assured they shall be provided for with so much as shall be sufficient for them
to maintain them during this their minority with a kind of subsistence. But the
main of their portion, their full childs-part, their rich and precious
inheritance, they expect not in this world. They well know it is laid up for
them ((...), there is laid up 1 Timothy 4. 6. 1 Pet. 1. 4, 5.
for me the Crown of righteousness:) and that in a safe place, ( reserved in
the heavens) and that in safe hands ( kept by the power of God) till they be
grown up to it. As Joseph gave his brethren Provision for their Journey; but
the full sacks Genesis 42. 25. Psalm. 16. 5. 119. 57.
were tied up, not to be opened till they were gotten home. Indeed rather, God
himself is their portion: both here in part, and hereafter in full, But the
Children we now speak of, if there be any natural or moral goodness, or
usefulness in them, by the superabundant bountifulness of a gracious God in any
respect or degree rewardable: habent mercedem. They have all they are like to
have in Mat. 6. 2, etc.
hand: there is nothing for them, neither (for the most part) do they expect
any thing in reversion, which have the portion in this life, says David, Psalm.
17. Psalm. 17. 14.
If they have done him any small piece of service though unwittingly; they
shall have their wages for it paid them to the uttermost: as Nebuchadnezzar had
Ezekiel. 29. 18, 19.
Egypt assigned him, as his wages for the service he did against Tyrus. If
they be but bastard-sons, they shall yet have their portion set out for them;
far beyond what they can either challenge as of right, or pretend to as by
desert. But yet in this world only: The heavenly inheritance in the world to
come, which is to descend unto the right heir when he comes to age, is
preserved for the legitimate Gal. 3. 26.
Children only, such as are become the Sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus. As
Abraham gave gifts to the Sons of his Concubines, and sent them away; and so
Genesis 25. 5, 6.
we hear no more of them, nor of any thing their father did for them
afterward: but Isaac in fine carried the inheritance, though he had not so
much as the other had in present.

9. Those are the children of this World: but the Children of Light, who are
they? I should enter into a very spacious field if I should undertake to
declare the sundry significations of the word Light, as it is metaphorically
used in the Scriptures; or pursue the resemblances between the metaphorical and
spiritual Light, and the natural. To our purpose briefly; Light is either
spoken of God, or of the things of God. First, God himself is light: a most
pure, clear, and simple light; without the least allay or mixture of darkness.
God is light, and in him is no darkness, says St. John. The Father of lights,
without so much as the 1 John 1. 5. Jam. 1. 17.
least shadow of turning, says St. James. And if God be rightly styled (...),
the father of lights: it cannot be unproper, that his children be styled (...),
the children of light.

10. Next the Word of God, that is a light too. Thy Word is a light unto my
Psalm. 119. 105. -- 130.
feet, Psalm. 119. so called from the effect: because when it goes forth it
gives light and understanding to the simple. The Law, which is but a darker
part of that word, enlightneth yet the eyes, Psalm. 19. Lex lux. The Prophecies,
the -- 19. 8. Prove. 6. 23.
darkest part of all, yet are not without some degree of luster: they shine,
says St. Peter, though but as a candle in a dark place. But then the light of
the Gospel, 2 Pet. 1. 19. 2 Cor. 4. 4.
that is a most glorious light, shining forth as the Sun when he is in his
greatest strength at noon day in Summer.

11. Hence also arises (as one light commonly begets another) a third
light: the light of grace and saving knowledge, wrought in the hearts of men by
the holy word of God, (set on by his holy Spirit withal accompanying it.) God,
2 Cor. 4. 6.
who brings light out of darkness, has shined in your hearts, to give the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor.
4.

12. And where the light of grace is, there is another light also fourthly,
that always attends thereupon, the light of comfort. For Grace and Comfort
are Twins: the blessed inseparable effects of one and the same blessed Spirit.
Lux orta est justo: there is sprung up (or as some translate it, there is sown)
a light for the righteous, and joyful gladness for such as be true hearted.
Psalm. 97. The true heart, Psalm. 97. 11.
that is the light heart indeed. Light in both significations: light, without
darkness; and light without sadness, or heaviness.

13. There is yet remaining a fifth light; the light of Glory. Darkness is an
Emblem of horror. We have not a fitter similitude, whereby to express the
miseries of the hell within us, (that of an evil conscience) or of the hell
without us (that of eternal torments) than by inner and outer darkness. But
light is a most glorious creature: than which, none fitter to express to our
capacities, either the infinite incomprehensible Glory and Majesty of God, ( He
clotheth himself with Psalm. 104. 2. 1 Timothy 6. 16.
light as with a garment; and dwells in the light that no man can approach
unto;) or that endless glory and happiness which the holy Angels do now, and
all the Saints in their due time shall enjoy in heaven ( -- Who has made us
meet to be Col. 1. 12.
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1.)

14. In these respects, he that has the honor to be styled a Christian in any
degree, has also a title so far forth to be styled a child of light. Whether
it be by the outward profession of the Christian faith only: or by the inward
sanctification of the Spirit also. Those are nomine tenus Christiani,
Christians but in name and show; equivocal Christians: these only are
Christians indeed, and in truth. Of these is made up the Church of Gods Elect,
otherwise called the invisible Church of Christ, and not unfitly; because the
persons appertaining to that Church as members thereof, are not distinguishable
from others by any outward infallible Character visible to us, but by such
secret and inward impresses as come not within the cognizance of any creature,
nor can be known by any creature otherwise than conjecturally only, without
special revelation from God. The 2 Timothy 2. 19.
foundation of God stands firm, having this seal, (Dominus novit) The Lord
knows who are his. Should we take these here meant; the opposition between
the children of this world, and the children of light, would be most perfect.
Those who remain in the state of depraved nature, and so under the dominion of
Sin and Satan, being the children of this world in the strictest notion: and
those whom God has called out of darkness into his mavelous light; that is,
brought out of the state of Nature into the state of Grace, and translated into
the Kingdom of his Son Jesus Christ, being the children of light in the
stricter notion also.

15. But forasmuch as we, who cannot look beyond the outside, are no competent
judges of such matters: It will best become us to make use of that judgment,
which alone God has allowed us; I mean that of Charity. And then it will be no
hard business for us to pronounce determinately, (applying the sentence even to
particular persons) who are to be esteemed the children of light. Even all
those, that by outwardly professing the name and faith of Christ, are within
the pale of the visible Church of Christ. The holy Apostle so pronounces of
them all, 1 These. 5. Ye are all the Children of the light, and of the day. And
Ephesians. 1 These. 5. 5. Ephesians. 5. 8.
5. Yea were sometimes darkness, but now are light in the Lord. Our very
Baptism entitleth is hereunto, which is the Sacrament of our initiation:
whereby we put Gal. 3. 27.
on Christ, and are made members of Christ, and Children of God. Whence it is,
that in the Greek Fathers Baptism is usually called (...), that is, an
enlightening; and persons newly baptized (...) and (...) ( an Officer in the
Greek Church) to whom it belonged to hear the confessions of the Catechumeni,
and after they were approved to present them to Baptism: with many other
phrases and expressions borrowed from the same metaphor of light, and applied
in like manner to Baptism.

16. Now to bring all this long (and, as I fear, tedious) discourse home to the
Text: the question here resolved seems, in the right stating thereof, to come
to this issue: whether natural and worldly men, in the managery of their
worldly affairs to the best temporal advantage; or they that profess themselves
Christians, in the business of their souls, and pursuit of everlasting
salvation; do proceed the more rationally and prudentially in their several
ways, toward the attainment of their several ends? How the question is
resolved, we shall consider by and by. In the mean time, from this very
consideration alone, that the children of light, and the children of this world
stand in mutual opposition one to the other, we may learn something that may be
of use to us. We would all be thought (what I hope most of us are) not nomine
tenus only, by outward profession, and at large, but in very deed and truth
(...), good Christians, and children of light in the stricter and nobler
notion. Yet were it but the other only; our very Baptism and profession of
Christianity would oblige us to a holy walking, suitable to our holy calling and
Profession, and to the solemn vow we took upon us at our Baptism. It were a
base, yea, a very absurd thing for us to jumble and confound, what we find here
not only distinguished from, but even opposed against the one the other.
Children of God and of the Church by profession: and yet children of Satan, and
of the world in our conversation? Children Ephesians. 5. 11. 2 Cor. 6. 14.
of light, and yet hold fellowship with, and take delight in, the unfruitful
works of darkness? Quae communio? says St. Paul. It astonished him, that any
man could think to bring things so contrary as Light and Darkness, to any good
accord, or but tolerable compliance. When we were the children of this world
(and such we were as soon as we were born into the world:) by taking
Christendom upon us at our Baptism, we did ipso facto renounce the world, with
all the sinful pomps and vanities thereof, and profess our selves children of
the God of light. If now being made the children of God, and of the light, we
shall again cast back a longing eye after the world, as Lots wife did after
Sodom, or Demas-like embrace this Genesis 19. 26. 1 Timothy 4. 10.
present world, clasping our hearts and our affections about it: how do we not
ipso facto renounce our very Christendom, with all the blessed comforts and
benefits thereof; return with the dog to lick up our old vomit, and reduce our
selves to that our former wretched condition of darkness, from which we had so
happily escaped? Can any of us be so silly, as to think the Father of lights
will own him for his child, and reserve for him an inheritance in light, who
flies out from under his wing, and quite forsakes him, to run after the
Prince of darkness? The Apostles motion seems very reasonable, Ephesians. 5. that,
whereas whilst we were Ephesians. 5. 8.
darkness, we walked as children of darkness; now we are become light in the
Lord, we should walk as children of the light. The children of the world
perfectly hate the light: why should not the children of light as perfectly
scorn the world? We have not so much spirit in us, as we should have, if we do
not; nor so much wisdom neither, as we should have, if we do not; no, nor so
much wisdom, as they have neither, if we do not: and even hereby justify our
Saviors doom in the comparison, and yield, The children of this world wiser in
their generations than we are. Which is the next Point.

17. The justice of the sentence cannot be questioned, where the Judge that
gives it is beyond exception. Here he is so: so wise that he cannot be
deceived; so good, that he will not deceive. Mistaken he cannot be, (through
ignorance, Col. 2. 3.
or misinformation) in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge. If Solomon were able in a very intricate case to judge between the
two mothers: shall not a greater than Soloman be able in a case of less
difficulty, to give a clear judgment between these two sorts of Children? Nor
was there any such correspondence between our blessed Savior (the Judge that
pronounces sentence in the Text) and* the world; that we should suspect him at
all inclinable to favor that side. The world hated him: and a great part of
the business he came about, was to condemn the world. If it could have stood
with the integrity of so righteous a Judge, to have favored either side: he
that pronounced of himself, Joh. 8 12.
Ego sum lux, I am the light; would sure have leaned rather toward his own
side, than toward the contrary party, and so have pronounced sentence for the
children of light, and not against them. And that he should be awed with fear
(as Judges too often are) to transgress in judgment; there is of all other the
least fear of that: since he has not only vanquished the world in his own
person, ( Ego vici mundum, Joh. 16.) but has also enabled the meanest person
that belongs Joh. 16. 33.
to him, and believes in him, to do so too, [ This is the victory that
overcomes the world even your faith, 1 John 5.] 1 John 5. 4.


18. It was not then either ignorance, or favor, or fear, or any thing else
imaginable, other than the truth and evidence of the thing it self, that could
induce him to give sentence on that side. Of the truth whereof, every days
experience ministers proof enough. For do we not see daily, how worldly men in
temporal matters, show their wisdom, infinitely beyond what Christians usually
do in spiritual things? Very many ways, handling their affairs, such as they
are, for the compassing of their own ends, such as they are (to omit other
particulars) with greater sagacity, greater industry, greater cunning, greater
unity (ordinarily) than these do. Which particulars when we shall have a little
considered for the (...), to show the truth of the observation, and that so it
is: we shall for the (...), enquire into the reasons thereof, and how it comes
to be so.

19. First, they are very sagacious and provident, to forethink what they have
to do, and to forecast how it may be done: very wary and circumspect in their
projects and contrivances, to weigh all probable, (as far as is possible) all
possible inconveniences, or whatsoever might impede or obstruct their designs,
and to provide remedies there-against. All Histories afford us strange examples
in their several kinds, of voluptuous beasts, who for the satisfying of their
raging lusts; of ambitious spirits, who for the grasping of a vast and unjust
power; of malicious and cruel men, who to glut themselves with blood and
revenge, have adventured upon very desperate and almost impossible attempts:
and yet by the strength of their wits have so laid the Scene beforehand, and
so carried on the design all along; that they have very many times; either
wholly accomplished what they intended, or brought their conceptions so near to
the birth, that nothing but a visible hand of an overruling providence from
above, could render them abortive. But omitting these (because I have yet much
to go through) I chose rather to instance in the worldling; of the lowest
sphere indeed, but best known by the name of a worldling; I mean the covetous
wretch. It were almost a wonder to consider, but that by common experience we
find it so, that a man otherwise of very mean parts and breeding, is of so
thick a nostril that he can hardly be brought by any discourse to be sensible
of any thing that savoureth of Religion, Reason, or Ingenuity, should yet be so
quick scented where there is a likelihood of gain toward, to smell it as
speedily, and at as great a distance, as a Vultur does a piece of Carrion.
Strange to see, what strange fetches and devices he can have (the eagerness of
his desires after the world sharpning his wits, and quickening his invention) to
hook in a good bargain: to enveigle and entangle his necessitous neighbor, by
some seeming kindness toward him in supplying his present needs till he have
got a hank over his estate: to watch the opportunities for the taking up, and
putting off commodities to the most advantage; to trench so near upon the Laws
by engrossing, enhaunsings, extortions, depopulations, and I know not how many
other frauds and oppressions, and yet to keep himself so out of reach, that the
Law cannot take hold of him.

20. Secondly, the children of this world, as they are very provident and
subtle in forecasting; so are they very industrious and diligent in pursuing
what they have designed. Wicked men are therefore in the Scriptures usually
called Operarii iniquitatis, Workers of iniquity: because they do hoc agere,
make it their work, and their business, and follow it as their trade.

Horat. 1. Epist. 2.
Ut jugulent homines, surgunt de nocte -- Whilst honest men lay them down in
peace, and take their rest, suspecting no harm because they mean none; thieves
and robbers are up and abroad, spreading their nets for the prey, and watching
to do mischievously. They that were against Christ were stirring in the dead
time of the night, and marched with Swords and Joh. 18. 3. Mat. 26. 47. 38, etc.
staves to apprehend him: when they that were about him, though bidden and
chidden too, could not hold from sleeping two or three hours before. Alacrius
currunt ad mortem, quam nos advitam. Bernard. Mat. 7. 13.
Martyrs Diaboli: How slack we are to do God any service, how backward to
suffer any thing for him! and how they on the other side can bestir them to
serve the Devil, and be content to suffer a kind of martyrdom in his service.
The way sure is broad enough, and easy enough that leads to destruction: yet
so much pains is there taken to find it, that I verily believe half the pains
many a man takes to go to Hell, if it had been well bestowed, would have
brought him to Heaven.

21. Thirdly, the children of this world are mavelous cunning and close, to
carry things fair in outward show, so far as to hold up their credit with the
abused multitude, and to give a color to the cause they manage, be it never so
bad. Partly, by aspersing those that are otherwise minded than themselves are,
and dare not partake with them in their sins, in what reproachful manner they
please: wresting their most innocent speeches and actions to an evil
construction; and taking up any slanders or accusations against them, whether
true or false they matter not, so they can but thereby render them odious to
the World. Partly by their hypocrisy, stealing away the hearts of well-meaning
people from those to whom they owe honor or subjection, and gaining reputation
to themselves and their own party (...) and (...), (as it is Romans 16.) with
fair speeches Romans 16. 18.
and specious pretenses; the glory of God, the asserting of liberty, the
propagation of the Gospel, the reformation of abuses, and the like. Right
Pharisees: by their Mar. 12. 40.
long-winded prayers winding themselves into the opinions of some, and estates
of others. The main of their care is (...), to set the fairest side forward, to
enoil Gal. 6. 12. Mat. 23. 25.
a rotten post with a glistering varnish; and to make bright the outside of the
vessel, whatsoever nastiness there remains within. Thus the grand rebel
Absalom, by discrediting his Fathers Government, pretending to a great zeal of
Justice, and 2 Samuel 15. 3. -- 6.
making shows and promises of great matters to be done by way of reformation
therein, if the Supreme Power were settled upon him: did by little and little
ingratiate himself with the people (ever easily cheated into rebellion by such
smooth pretenses;) insensibly loosen them from the conscience of their bounden
allegiance, and having gotten together a strong Party, engaged them in a most
unjust and unnatural war, against his own Father, and their undoubted Sovereign.

22. Lastly, the children of this world, the better to effectuate what they
have resolved upon, are at a mavelous great unity among themselves, They hold
all Psalm. 56. 6.
together, and keep themselves close, Psalm. 56. They stick together like burs:
close as the scales of Leviathan. And although they be not always all of one
piece, but Job 41. 15. -- 17.
have their several aims, and act upon different particular principles: yet
Satan well knowing that if his kingdom should be too much divided it could not
stand, Luke 11. 18.
makes a shift to patch them up so, ^as to make them Conciliant inter se
inimicissima^ amicitias. Bern. sermon. 24. Luke 23. 12. Mat. 16. 1. Acts 17. 18.
hang together to serve his turn, and to do mischief. Herod and Pilate, at some
odds before, must now be made friends: Pharisees and Sadduces, Sectaries of
contrary opinions, and notoriously factious either against other, will yet
conspire to tempt Christ. The Epicureans and the Stoics, two Sects of
Philosophers of all other the most extremely distant and opposite in their
Tenants and Doctrines; came with their joint forces at Athens to encounter
Paul, and discountenance Christianity. And to molest and make havoc of the
people of God; the Tabernacles of the Edomites and Ismaelites, the Moabites and
the Agarens, Gebal and Ammon Psalm. 8^ 5. -- 8.
and Amalek; with the rest of them (a Cento and a Rhapsody of uncircumcised
nations) could lay their heads together with one consent, and combine
themselves in confederacies and associations, Psalm. 83. Faciunt unitatem contra
unitatem. To destroy the happy unity that should be among brethren, they that
were strangers and enemies to one another before, grow to an unhappy cursed
unity among themselves.

23. Thus, whilst Christian men, who profess themselves children of light, by
their improvidence, sloth, simplicity, and disunion, too often suffer
themselves to be surprised by every weak as^ault, and so to become a prey both
to their spiritual and temporal enemies: the children of this world the while,
by their subtilty, industry, hypocrisy, and unity, do show themselves so much
beyond the other in all points of wisdom and prudence in their way: that we
cannot but subscribe to the (...), the truth of the sentence here pronounced by
our Savior; that certainly the children of this world are wiser (in their
generations) than the children of light.

24. But then for the (...); if we be not satisfied how it should come to pass,
that they are judged the wiser: For that, First, they have a very able Tutor to
direct them; the Old Serpent Wisdom belongs to the Serpent by kind; he has
Rev. 12. 9. Genesis 3. 1. Mat. 10. 16.
it by nature. ( Be ye wise as Serpents.) And that wisdom, improved by the
experience of some thousands of years, must needs increase, and rise to a great
proportion. Now this Old subtle Serpent infuseth into the children of this
world Genesis 3. 15.
(who are in very deed his own children also, semen serpentis, the seed of the
serpent) some of his own spirit (is not that it think you, which in 1 Cor. 2.
is called 1 Cor. 2. 12.
Spiritus Mundi, the Spirit of the World, and is there opposed to the Spirit of
God?) I mean, some of his own serpentine wisdom. Not that wisdom which is from
above; that is from another alloy, and is the only true wisdom indeed: but that
which is from beneath, which St. James affirms to be earthly, sensual, Jam.
3. 15.
devilish. From this infusion it is, that they do patrissare so right: having
his example withal to instruct them in all the Premises. Their providence in
forecasting to do mischief they learn from him: he has his (...); and his
(...), and his (...), his devices, and his methods, his sundry subtle
artifices, in ordering 2 Cor. 2. 11. Ephesians. 6. 11. 2 Cor. 11. 3.
his temptations with the most advantage to ensnare us. Their unwearied
diligence from him: who never rests compassing the earth, and going to and
fro Job. 1. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
in it, as a hungry Lion hunting after prey. Their double cunning, both in
slandering others, and disguising themselves, from him: who is such a malicious
accuser of others, to make them seem worse than they are, that he has his very
name from it, (...), (which in the primary signification of the word Rev. 12.
10.
is no more than an Accuser;) and withal such a perfect Dissembler, that to
make himself seem better than he is, he can (if need be) transform himself into
an Angel of light. Their unanimous accord, from him: who though 2 Cor. 11. 14.
he have so many legions of cursed Angels under him, yet keeps them together
all at such unity among themselves, that they never divide into factions and
parties. By this infusion (to give you one instance) he taught Judas to be so
much wiser (as the world accounts wisdom, and according to the notion wherein
we now speak of it) than his fellow-Apostles: that whereas they rather lost by
their Master than gained, having left all to follow him, who had not Mar. 10.
28.
so much as a house of his own wherein to harbor them; he played his game so
well, that he made benefit of him. He first got the keeping of the bag, and out
Joh. 12. 6.
of that he got what he could by pilfering and playing the thief: but because
his gettings there could not amount to much, his Masters store being not great,
he thought he were as good make a handsome bargain once for all, to bring him
in a pretty lump together, and so sold his Master outright for present money.
Silly fellows, the Eleven: this Puny, you see, outwitted them all. But let him
not impute it wholly to himself, or his own Mother-wit: Joh. 13. 2.
that it may appear to whom he was beholding for it, the Story says, the Devil
put it into the heart of Judas to betray his Master. And the infusion of that
spirit of Satan was so strong in him, that it did after a sort transform him
into the same image: insomuch as he is called by his name, ( Have not I chosen
you twelve, and one of you is a devil?) Let all Iudas-like traitors know (lest
they be too proud, and sacrifice to their own wits) to whom they owe their
wisdom. Joh. 6. 70.


25. But perhaps you will say, this consideration can weigh but little. For as
Satan by his spirit infuseth wisdom into the children of this world; so God by
his Spirit infuseth wisdom into the children of light: and then, since the
spirit of God is stronger than the spirit of Satan, it should rather follow on
the contrary, that the wisdom of the children of light should exceed the wisdom
of the children of this world. The fullest answer hereunto would depend upon
the prosecution of the next point, ( the limitation) which I shall have
occasion to speak something unto anon: to wit, that the wisdom of the children
of this world, being but of a very base metal in comparison, though it be more
in bulk, is yet far less in value; as a little Diamond may be more worth than a
whole quarry of ragge.

26. But I answer rather, which is sufficient for the present, because it
leads us also to a second reason of the difference: That the spirit of God in
the children of light does not act ad ultimum sui posse, according to the
utmost of his Almighty power; but according to the condition of the subject in
whom he works ( leaving him as rational Creature, to the freedom of his will;
and as a child of Adam, obnoxious to the carnal motions of original
concupiscence) and after the good pleasure of his own will withal. When Satan
therefore infuseth of his spirit into a man, he has this advantage, that he
has all the wisdom of the flesh to join with him readily, and to assist him,
without any thing within to make opposition there-against, and to counter-work
the working of that spirit, that it should not take effect: and so the work,
meeting with some help, and no resistance, is soon done. Facilis descensus: as
a stone, when it is set a going, tumbleth down the hill apace; or as a Boat
that (having wind and tide with it) runs glib and merrily down the stream.
But when God infuseth his spirit into a man, though that spirit (once entered)
makes him partly Willing: yet is there in every child of Adam, so long as he
lives here, another inward principle still, which the Scripture use to call by
the name of flesh, which lusts against the good Spirit of God, and opposes
it, and much weakneth the working of it. From whence Gal. 5. 17.
it comes to pass, that the Spirit of God works so slowly, and so
imperfectly in us: like a ship adverso flumine; much ado to tug it along
against the current; or the stone which made Sisyphus Saxum sudat versandonec
proficit nihilum.
sweat to roll up the hill, although it tumbled down again always of it self.

27. Thirdly, since it is natural to most men (out of self-love) to make their
(...). Naz. Orat. 3.
own dispositions and thoughts, the measure whereby to judge of other men's:
hence it comes to pass, that honest plain-dealing men, are not very apt,
unless they see apparent reason for it, to (...). Id. Orat. 21.
suspect ill of others. Because they mean well themselves, they are inclinable
to believe that all other men do so too. But men that have little truth or
honesty themselves, think all men to have as little: and so are full of fears
and jealousies, and suspicions of every body; Terent. Andr.
Mala men's, malus animus.) Now this makes them stir up their own wits the
more, and bestir themselves with the greater endeavors; because they dare
trust no body else: and so they become the more cautelous and circumspect, the
more vigilant, industrious and active, in all their enterprises, and worldly
concernments: and consequently do the seldomer miscarry. Whereas on the
contrary, those that (...). Naz. orat. 3. (...). Id. Orat. 19.
out of the simplicity of their own heart suspect no double-dealing by others,
are the more secure and credulous; by so much less solicitous to prevent
dangers and injuries, by how much less they fear them: and consequently are
often deceived by those they did not mistrust. Which very thing (the world
being apt withal to judge well or ill of men's counsels by their events) has
brought simplicity it self, though a most commendable virtue, under the
reproach of folly, (we call those simple fellows whom we count fools:) and has
won to craft and dissimulation the reputation of wisdom.

28. Lastly, the consciousness of an ill cause unable to support it self by the
strength of its own goodness, drives the worldling to seek to hold it up by
his wit, industry, and such like other assistances: like a ruinous house, ready
to drop down, if it be not shored up with props, or stayed with buttresses. You
may observe it in Lawsuits: the worse cause ever the better solicited. An
honest man, that defireth but to keep his own, trusts to the equity of his
cause, hops that will carry when it comes to hearing: and so he retains
counsel, gives them information and instructions in the case, gets his
witnesses ready, and then thinks he need trouble himself no farther. But a
crafty companion, that thinks to put another beside his right, will not rest
so content: but he will be dealing with the Jury (perhaps get one packt for his
turn) tampering with the witnesses, tempting the Judge himself (it may be) with
a Letter, or a Bribe; he will leave no stone unmoved, no likely means (how
indirect soever) unattempted, to get the better of the day, and to cast his
Adversary. You may observe it likewise in Church affairs. A regular Minister
sits quietly at home, follows his study, does his duty in his own Cure,
and teaches his people truly and faithfully to do theirs; keeps himself
within his own station, and medleth no further: But schismatical spirits are
more pragmatical: they will not be contained within their own Circle, but must
be flying out; (...), they must have an Oar in every Boat; offering (yea,
thrusting) themselves into every Pulpit, before they be sent for; 1 Pet. 4. 15.
running from Town to Town, from House to House, that they may scatter the
seeds of Sedition, and Superstition, at every table, and in every corner. And
all this (so wise are they in their generation) to serve their own belly, and
to make a prey of Romans 16. 18.
their poor seduced Proselytes: for by this means the people fall unto them,
and thereout suck they no small advantage. You may observe it also in most
other things: but these instances may suffice.

29. The point thus proved and cleared, that the children of this world are
wiser than the children of light: that we may make some use of it briefly,
First, let me say with St. Peter (...). Marvel not my brethren, when you see 1
Pet. 4. 12.
an evil cause prosper (it may be for a long time together) and the better side
go down; as if some strange thing had happened unto you, and such as never had
been heard of in the World before: neither be troubled or scandalized at it.
Fret not Psalm. 37. 7.
thy self (says David) at him whose way does prosper, against the man that
does after evil counsels. If you would but well consider how solicitous, how
industrious, how smooth and cunning, how unanimous they are on the one side;
how far short they on the other side are in all these and all other like
advantageous respects: you would soon find, that in the saddest events that
ever your eyes beheld, there is no matter of wonderment at all. Yea, did not
the powerful hand of Gods overruling providence sometimes interpose, giving
the enemy now and then a sudden stop, when they are in their full career, in
the height of their pride and jollity; and making good his promises to his poor
distressed Church, by sending unexpected help and deliverance, when they are
brought very low both in their estates and hopes: we might rather wonder, that
it is not even much worse with the people of God than it is; and how they
should be able at all to subsist, their enemies having all the advantages in
the world against them.

30. Let not their successes therefore trouble us. Rather (in the second place)
let their wisdom quicken us to a holy emulation. Not to imitate their ways, nor
to join with them in their wicked enterprises: God forbid! no nor so much as to
encourage them therein by any unworthy compliances. It was not the Stewards
injustice, but his wisdom, that his Master commended him for in the Parable:
and that our Master in the application of the Parable intended to commend to us
for our imitation. His example should kindle a holy zeal in us, and an
endeavor, to be as wise for spirituals, and in the business of our souls, as
he was, and as the children of this world usually are, for temporals, and in
the affairs of the world. It is no shame at all for us, to learn wisdom of any
whomsoever. 1. Of Prove. 6. 6.
a poor irrational contemptible Creature. [Vade ad formicam, Go to the Pismire,
O sluggard, and learn her ways;] learn wisdom of her. 2. Of an enemy: Books
have been written by Moralists Plutarch. Ipsa nos excitet hostium malitia
pervigil.] Bern. sermon. 108.
de utilitate ab inimicis capienda. We curse our Enemies many times
unchristianly: whereas did we seriously consider, how much we are beholding to
them, for the greatest part of that wisdom and circumspection we show in the
managery of our affairs; we would not only bless them (as we are in Christian
Charity bound) but heartily bless God for them also by way of Gratitude for the
great benefit we reap by them. 3. Yea, of the Devil himself. Watch, says St.
Peter, for your adversary the Devil goes about, etc. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
As if he should say, He watches for your destruction; watch you therefore for
your own security and preservation. Thus may we from the worldlings wisdom
learn something that may be of use to us; and that in each of the
forementioned particulars.

31. From their Sagacity; 1. Learn to forecast how to please God; to forearm
our selves against all assaults and wiles of Satan; to fore-think, and to be in
some measure provided beforehand of needful and proper expedients, for any
exigent or cross accident that may probably befall us. 2. From their Industry;
learn Romans 12. 11. Heb. 12. 1.
not to be slothful in doing service, not to slack the time of our repentance
and turning to God; to run with constancy and courage the race that is set
before us; to think no pains, no travel too much, that may bring us to heaven;
to work out Phil. 1. 12.
our salvation to the uttermost with fear and trembling. 3. From their
Hypocrisy and outward seeming* Holiness, learn, to have our conversations
honest toward 1 Pet. 2. 12.
them that are without, not giving the least scandal in any thing that may
bring reproach upon the Gospel; to shun the very appearances of evil; and
having first 1 These. 5. 22.
cleansed the inside well, to keep the outside handsome too: that by our piety,
devotion, meekness, patience, obedience, justice, charity, humility, and all
holy graces, we may not only stop up the mouth of the Adversary from speaking
evil of us, but may also win glory to God, and honor and reputation to our
Christian profession thereby. 4. From their Unity; learn to follow the truth in
love: Ephesians. 4. 15. 1 Timothy 6. 20.
to lay aside vain janglings, and opposition of science falsely so called; to
make up the breaches that are in the Church of Christ, by moderating and
reconciling differences, rather than to widen them by multiplying
controversies, and maintaining hot disputes; to follow the things that make for
peace, and whereby we may edify Romans 14. 9.
one another. This doing, we may gather grapes of thorns; make oil of
Scorpions; extract all the medicinal virtue out of the Serpent, and yet leave
all the poisonous and malignant quality behind.

32. Emulate them then we may: nay, we ought. It is the very main scope of the
Parable, to provoke us to that. But sure envy them we must not; indeed we need
not: if we will but take the Limitation along with us, which now only remains
to be considered: and that (the time so requiring) very briefly. How much wiser
soever these worldly-wise men seem to be, (or indeed are, as we have now heard)
it is but quadrantenus, and in some few respects* Take them super totam
materiam, and they are (...). Arist. Ethic. 13 Neminem malum esse, nisi stultum
eundem, non modo a sapientibus dicitur, sed vulgo quoque semper est creditum.
Quint. 121.
stark fools for all that; Very Naturals, if they have no Grace. The Limitation
here in the Text, (...) is terminus diminuens: and must be understood
accordingly. The Children of this world are said to be wiser than the Children
of light. But how wiser? Not in genere; simply, and absolutely, and in every
respect wiser: but (...) put for (...).
in genere suo: wiser in some respect, wiser in their kind of wisdom, such as
it is, (in worldly things, and for (...) taken properly.
worldly ends;) a very mean kind of wisdom in comparison. For such kind of
limiting and diminuent terms, are for the most part destructive of that
whereunto they are annexed; and contain in them (as we use to say) oppositum in
opposito. He that says, a dead man, or a painted Lion, by saying more, says
less, than if he had said but a man or a Lion only, without those additions: it
is all one upon the point, as if he had said, no man, no Lion. For a dead man
is not a man, neither is a painted Lion a Lion. So that our Savior here
pronouncing of the Children of this world that they are wiser, but thus
limited, wiser in their Generation; implies that otherwise, and save in that
respect only, they are not wiser.

33. The truth is; simply and absolutely considered, the child of light, if he
be truly and really such, and not titular, and by a naked profession only,
whatsoever he is taken for, is clearly the wiser man. And he that is no more
than worldly or carnally wise, is in very deed, and in Gods estimation, no
better than a very fool. [Where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the
disputer of this World? 1 Cor. 1. 20.
Has not God made foolish the wisdom of the World? says the Apostle.] That
Interrogative form of speech is more emphatical than the bare Categorical had
been: it signifies as if it were so clear a truth, that no man could
reasonably deny it. What Solomon says in one place of the covetous rich man,
and in another place of Prove. 28. 11. -- 26. 16.
the sluggard, that he is wise in his own conceit; is true also of every
vicious person in every other kind. Their wisdom is a wisdom; but in conceit,
not in truth: and that but in their own conceit neither, and of some few others
perhaps, that have their judgments corrupted with the same lusts, wherewith
theirs also are.

Chrysippus non dicit idem -- Juven. Sat. 13
Solomon sure had not that conceit of their wisdom, (and Solomon knew what
belonged to wisdom as well as another man:) who puts the fool upon the
sinner I need not tell you, (indeed I cannot tell you) how often in his writings.

34. His judgment then is clear in the point: though it be a Paradox to the
most, and therefore would have a little farther proof: for it is not enough
barely to affirm Paradoxes, but we must prove them too. First then, true saving
wisdom is not to be learned but from the Word of God. ( A lege tua intellexi,
By thy Commandments have I gotten understanding, Psalm. 119.) it is that word,
Psalm. 119. 104. 2 Timothy 3. 15,
and that alone, that is able to make us wise unto salvation. How then can they
be truly wise, who regard not that word, but cast it behind their backs, and
despise it? They have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in
them? Jer. 8. 9.
says Jeremy. Again, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom: and a
good understanding have they that do thereafter, Psalm. 111. How then can we
allow Psalm. 111. 10. -- 36. 1. -- 82. 5.
them to pass for wise men, and good understanding men, that have no fear of
God before their eyes, that have no mind nor heart to do thereafter, that will
not be learned nor understand, but are resolvedly bent to walk on still in
darkness, and wilfully shut their eyes that they may not see the light?

35. Since every man is desirous to have some reputation of wisdom, and
accounts it the greatest scorn and reproach in the world to be called, or
made, a fool: it would be very well worth the labor (but that it would
require, as it well deserves, a great deal more labor and time than we dare
now take) to illustrate and enlarge this point: which, though it seem a very
Paradox, (as was now said) to the most, is yet a most certain and demonstrable
truth; That godliness is the best of wisdom, and that there is no fool to the
sinner. I shall but barely give you some of the heads of proof; and refer the
enlargement to each man's private meditation. He that first is all for the
present, and never considers 1.
what mischiefs or inconveniences will follow thereupon afterward; that
secondly, 2.
when both are permitted to his choice, has not the wit to prefer that which
is eminently better, but chooses that which is extremely worse; that thirdly
proposes to himself base and unworthy ends; that fourthly, for the attaining 3.
even of those poor ends, makes choice of such means, as are neither proper 4.
nor probable thereunto; that fifthly, goes on in bold enterprises with great
5.
confidence of success, upon very slender grounds of assurance; and that
lastly, 6.
where his own wit will not serve him, refuses to be advised by those that are
wiser than himself, what he wants in wit making it up in will: no wise man I
think can take a person of this character for any other than a fool. And every
worldly or ungodly man is all this, and more: and every godly man, the
contrary. Let not the worldly-wise man therefore glory in his wisdom: that it
turn not to his greater shame, when his folly shall be discovered to all the
world. Let no man deceive himself, says St. Paul, but if any among you seem to
be wise in this world, let 1 Cor. 3. 18.
him become a fool, that he may be wise. That is, let him lay aside all vain
conceit of his own wisdom, and learn to account that seeming wisdom of the
world, to be (as indeed it is) no better than folly: that so he may find that
true wisdom which is of God. The God of light and of wisdom so enlighten our
understandings with the saving knowledge of his truth, and so inflame our
hearts with a holy love and fear of his Name, that we may be wise unto
salvation: and so assist us with the grace of his holy Spirit, that the light
of our good works and holy conversation may so shine forth both before God and
men in the mean time, that in the end by his mercy who is the Father of lights,
we may be made partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in the light of
everlasting life and glory: and that for the merits sake of Jesus Christ his
only Son our Lord. To whom, etc.

AD AULAM.
Sermon XVI.
Newport, in the Isle of Wight, November. 1648.
Heb. 12. 3. -- Consider him that endured such contradictions of sinners
against himself: that ye be not wearied and faint in your minds.
1. THere is scarce any other provocation to the performance of any duty so
prevalent with men, as are -- acuelos subdunt exempla nobilia. Sen. de.
tranquil. cap. 1.
the examples of such as have performed the same before them with glory and
success. Because, besides that the same stirs up in them an emulation of
their glory, and cheereth them on with hopes of like success: it also clean
takes off that, which is the common excuse of sloth and neglect of duty, the
pretension of Impossibility. The Apostle therefore, being to confirm the minds
of these Hebrews with constancy and patience in their Christian course, against
all discouragements whatsoever*; sets before them (in the whole former
Chapter) a multitude of examples of the famous worthies of former times: who by
the strength of their faith had both done and suffered great things with
admirable patience and constancy, to their immortal honor upon earth, and
eternal happiness in heaven. To the end, that compassed with such a cloud of
Witnesses, they might think it a shame for them to hang back, and not to dare
(especially having w^ithal so rich a Crown, laid ready at the Goal for them, to
invite them thereunto) to run with all possible cheerfulness that race, when
they had seen so many so happily to have run before them, verse. 1. of this
Chapter.

2. Yet this great cloud of examples they were but to look through, (as the
Medium) at another and higher Example; that of the bright Son of righteousness
himself, Jesus Christ: whom they are to look upon, as the proper object, to
terminate their thoughts; and whereon finally to fix their meditations. Looking
unto Jesus. etc. verse 2. Which example, recommended to them first from the
compleatness of the person, (who is at both ends of the race, the Alpha and the
Omega; the (...), and the (...) too; he that gives the Law at the start, and
he that gives the prize at the goal; the author and the finisher of our faith)
is there also further amplified. First, from the things he suffered. Such, as
than which none more grievous to flesh and blood; Torture, and Ignominy; the
Cross, and the shame. Secondly, from the manner of his suffering. Not patiently
only, enduring; but stoutly too, despising them: He endured ^^e Cross and Luke
24. 26. 2 Timothy 2. 13.
despised the shame. Thirdly, from the issue and consequents of his sufferings,
which were in lieu of the pain, Joy; of the shame, Glory. To intimate to these
Hebrews, that as it behoved Christ, first to suffer, and then after to enter
into his glory: So, if they desire to come to the same end he did, and to reign
with him; they must resolve to take the same way he did, and to suffer with him.

3. Having used so strong a motive, and pressed it so high; you would think the
Apostle needed not (as to this particular) to say any more. But for all this he
cannot yet manum de tabula: he insisteth still, and in this verse urges the
due and frequent consideration of it, as a matter not only of great benefit,
but of some kind of necessity also. Considering the strong oppositions and
contradictions that a Christian man, after he has entered the lists, is like to
meet withal before he come to the goal; all which he must encounter with, and
overcome, or else he loses his labor, and the prize: it is but needful he
should muster up all his strength, summon and recollect all the arguments he
can think of, that may put courage into him, and a resolution to go on
undauntedly notwithstanding, and not to faint. Against which fainting under the
cross, there being no other Cordial of so powerful and present operation,
toward the relieving of the drooping spirits of a weak Christian; as is the
meditation of Christ and his sufferings: (...), Therefore consider him, says
the Apostle, that endured such contradictions of sinners against himself, that
ye be not wearied and faint in your minds.

4. In which words, the Apostle, out of his great care of their souls health,
deals with these Hebrews, as a faithful and skilful Physician should do. He
shows them the danger they are in, and the means how to prevent it. The
danger, a spiritual (...), fainting and weariness of soul under the Cross. The
means of prevention, frequent and effectual meditation of the Cross of Christ.
The parts then of the Text are two: (answerable to those two main parts,
whereunto the whole method of Physic is after a sort reducible) (...), and
(...), the one whereof treats of the disease, the other of the remedy. We
begin with the former, the disease: the former I mean, in the nature of the
things (though not so in the placing of the words;) and so first to be handled,
in these words (...), etc. That ye be not wearied and faint in your minds. The
full importance whereof we shall the better understand, by the explication of
these four things: 1. The Malady; 2. The inward Cause thereof; 3. The Part
affected; and 4. The Subject, Person, or Patient.

5. For the Malady, (...): that is Weariness, as we translate it. There is no
burden, but a man would be willing to be eased of it, if he might: and all
afflictions are burdens. But such a degree of Weariness, as implies no more
than the bare desire of rest and ease, falls short of the notion of the word
(...). It imports such an extreme lassitude, as bereaveth a man of all his
strength; puts him beyond his patience, and takes him quite off his work.
When he is so overcome with the pressure of the burden that lies sad upon him,
that he does succumbere oneri, is not able to bear it any longer, but would be
rid of it, if he could, at any rate: that is (...). Or when he is so enfeebled
by sickness, that he cannot in any wise brook to do the offices of his vocation
as formerly he has done, nor is able to stir out of his bed at all, nor well
able to stir himself in it: that is (...) too. The word is by St. James applied
to the state of a sick person, Jam. 5. 15.
brought very low, and in some extremity of sickness, under small hope of
recovery. The Prayer of Faith, when other remedies f^il, (...), shall save the
sick, says he there.

6. So that the danger here feared by the Apostle was, lest these Hebrews
meeting with such terrible difficulties, as Lions in the way, ( not such Lions
as Prove. 26. 13.
Solomon's sluggard only fancieth to himself without cause, or perhaps but
pretends to excuse his sloth thereby; Bug-bears indeed rather than Lions; but
very Lions indeed, strong temptations, and lasting afflictions and
persecutions:) lest I say meeting with such affronts and encounters in their
Christian race, they should be quite beaten out of the field, ere they came to
the end of their course. Lest being terrified by their adversaries, they should
not be able to hold out in their holy profession to the end; nor to maintain
faith and a good conscience with that courage, constancy, and perseverance they
ought: but lose the Goal and the Crown, for want of finishing the course, they
had so happily begun.

7. But then Secondly it may be demanded; Of this malady what might be the true
Cause? (The inward Cause I mean: for what is the outward cause is apparent
enough; to wit, the Cross.) Or whence should this (...), this spiritual
weariness proceed? That is answered in the Text too, in the word (...) (The
translations express it most what by faintness of mind:) the same word being
again used a little after at verse. 5. and there also translated after the same
manner; (...), My Son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord: neither
faint, when thou art corrected of him. The word properly imports the
loosening, slackening or dissolving of something that before was well knit
together, fast and strong. The strength and firmness of a body, whether natural
or artificial, consists much in the union of the parts, well (...) Ephesians. 4. 16.
compacted and knit together, and all the joints strung fast one to another. By
the slackning, loosening, or disjoynting whereof, the body on the other side
comes to be as much weakened. A House, Ship, Wagon, Plough, or other artificial
body, be the materials never so strong: yet if it be loose in the joints, when
it is put to any stress (as we call it) to any use where the strength of it is
like to be tried, it will not endure it, but be ready to fall one piece from
another.

8. Much of a man's strength, whereby he is enabled to travel and to work, lies
in his loins and knees, and in his arms and hands. Whence it is that by an
usual Trope in most Languages, and so in the Scriptures too, those parts are
very often used ( Genua, and Lacerti, etc.) to signify strength: and weakness
on the contrary usually described by the luxation of those parts. The phrase is
very frequent in Homer; when one of the Grecian or Trojan Chieftains had given
his adversary some deadly or desperate wound, that he was not able to stand,
but fell on the ground; to express it thus, -- -- (...), as much as to say, He
loosened his knees. Even as it is said of Belshazzar, Dan. 5. See Ezekiel. 7. 17.
Nahum. 2. 10.
when he was sore affrighted with the handwriting upon the wall; that the
joints (bindings or ligatures) of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote
one against another. So for the hands and arms: we meet in the Scripture often
with such like phrases as these: that by such or such means (as the occasion
required) such or such men's hands were either strengthened, or weakened. So it
is said of Ish-bosheth, 2 Samuel 4. when he heard of the death of Abner, General
of his Army, his hands were weakened. The like we find in many other places, as
namely, in Ier. 38. 4. where, in the Greek Translation, the word (...), the
same See Ezekiel. 21. 7.
with this in the Text, is used. Not to seek far, a little after in this very
Chapter, we have both the Metaphors together in one verse [ Wherefore lift up
the hands that hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees] (...), verse 12.
which is another compound word from the same Theme. As if he should say,
Support the hands that hang loose, and have not strength enough to lift up
themselves: and bind up the palsy knees, that are not well knit up in the
joints, and so are unable to bear up the body.

9. There is another Metaphor likewise often used by David, and sometimes
elsewhere: which, as it very well fitteth with the word (...), so it serves
very well to express that feebleness or faintness of Spirit, (arising from fear
and consternation of mind, when great troubles come upon us) whereof we now
speak: namely, the melting of the heart, or soul.

10. In Psalm. 107. They that go down to the sea in ships, when the stormy wind
Psalm. 107. 6.
arises and lifts up the waves, so as the vessel is tossed up and down, and
the men reel to and fro, and stagger like drunkards, and are at their wits
ends: he says of them, that their very soul melts away because of the
trouble. My soul melts away Psalm. 119. 28.
for very heaviness: in another Psalm, speaking of himself, and his own
troubles. In Psalm 22. he joyneth this and the other Metaphor both together; I
am Psalm. 22. 14.
poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint: my heart also in the
midst of my body is even like melting wax. And so does the Prophet Isaiah also:
describing the great miseries and terrors that should be at the destruction of
Babylon, Isa. 13. 6. See also Nahum 2. 12.
by the Medes and Persians, he says, that by reason thereof all hands shall be
weakened ((...) again in the Greek) and all hearts shall melt. See also Ezekiel.
21. 7. to omit sundry other like.

11. For even as wax, which while it is hard will abide hard pressing, and not
yield or take impression, when it is chafed or melted has no strength at all
to make resistance: And as the Ice, when the waters are congealed in a hard
frost is of that firmness, that it will bear a laden cart uncrackt; but as
soon as a warm thaw has fretted and loosened it, dissolveth into water, and
becomes one of the weakest things in the world (it is a common Proverb among
us, As weak as water:) so is the spirit of a man. So long as it stands firmly
knit to Psalm. 86. 11. Hora^. 2. Sat. 7.
God by a steadfast faith, (as David says, O knit my heart unto thee, that I
may fear thy name!) and true to it self ( in seipso totus teres atque rotundus)
by adhering to honest, virtuous, and religious Principles: it is of impregnable
strength against all outward attempts whatsoever. Si fractus illabatur orbis:
if the Horat. 3. Ca^. 3.
weight of all the calamities in the world should come rushing upon him at
once, it would be able to bear up under them all, and stand unruined amidst all
those ruins. The spirit of a man is of strength enough to sustain all his
infirmities. Prove. 18. 14.


12. But if the strength that is in us be weakness; oh how great is that
weakness? If our spirits within us, which should be as our lifeguard to secure
us against all attempts from without, be shattered and dis-joynted, through
distrust in God; or by entertaining fears and irresolutions so enfeebled, that
it is not able to stand out when it is fiercely assaulted, but yields the
Fort to Satan and his temptations: that is to say in plain terms, if when any
persecution or tribulation arises, we be scandalized and fall away either from
our Christian faith or duty, forsake our standing, and shrink from the rules of
true Religion, or a good conscience: this is the (...) and the (...), the
weakness and faintness ofmind spoken of in the Text.

13. We now see the Malady, both in the Nature, and in the Cause: both what it
is, and whence it grows. We are in the next place to consider the part
affected. That the word (...) discovers: the mind, or the soul; (That ye be
not wearied and faint in your minds, or souls.) And this occasioneth another
doubt: how it should be possible that worlaly tribulations, which cannot reach
beyond the outer-man, (in his possessions, in his liberty, in his good name, in
his bodily health or life) should have such an operation upon his nobler part
the soul, as to cause a faintness there. Our Apostle speaks of resisting unto
blood in the next verse, as the highest suffering that can be^al a man in this
world. And our Savior tells his friends, Luke 12. that when their enemies
have killed their bodies, Luke 12 4.
(and from suffering so much, his very best friends, it seems, are not
exempted;) they have then done their worst: they can proceed no farther; they
have no power at all over their souls.

14. It is most true: they have not. And happy it is for us, and one singular
comfort to us, that they have not. Yet our own reason, and every days
experience* can teach us, that outward bodily afflictions, and tribulations, do
(by consequent, and by way of sympathy and consent, and by reason of union;
though not immediately and directly) work even upon the soul also. As we see
the fancy quick and roving, when the blood i^ in^lamed with choler; the memory
and apprehension dull in a Lethargy: and other notable changes and effects in
the faculties of the soul very easily disce^n^ble, upon any sudden change or
distemper in the body. David often con^esseth, that the troubles he met withal,
went sometimes to the very heart and soul of him. The sorrows of my heart are
Psalm. 25. -- 94. -- 55. -- 42. 143. 2, 3.
enlarged. In the multitude of the troubles (or sorrows) that I have in my
heart. My heart is disquieted within me. Why art thou so vexed, O my soul, and
why art thou so disquieted within me? etc, Take but that one, in Psalm, 143 The
enemy has persecuted my soul -- etc. Therefore is my spirit vexed within me,
and my heart within me is d^solate.

15. For the Soul then (or Mind) to be affected with such things as happen to
the body, is natural: and such affections (if not vitiated with excess, or
other inordina^y) blameless and without sin. But experience shows us farther
(too oft^n, God knows) that persecutions, ^fflictions* and such other sad
casualties as befall the body ( nay the very shadow^ thereof, the bare fears of
such things and ap^rehensions of their approach, yea, even many times when it
is causeless) may produce worse effects in the souls; and be the causes of such
vicious weariness and faintness of mi^d, as the Apostle here forewarneth the
Hebrews to beware of. No^ to speak of the Laps^, and Traditores, and others
that we read of in former times; and of whom there is such mention in the
ancient Councils, and in the writings of the Fathers of the first Ages, and the
Histories of the Church: How many have we seen even in our times; who having
^eemed to stand fast in the profession of Truth, and in the performance of the
offices of Virtue, and duties of Pi^ty Allegia^ce, and Justice before trial;
have yet when they have been hard put to it (yea, and sometimes not very hard
neither) fallen away, starting aside like Psalm. 78. 57.
a broken ^o^? and by flinching at the last, discovered themselves to have been
but very weak Christiens at the best, if not rather very deep Hypocrites.

16. It will sufficiently answer the doubt, to tell you, That persecutions and
all occurrences from without, are not the chief causes, (nor indeed in true
propriety of speech, any causes at all) but the occasions only of the souls
fainting under them. Temptations they are I grant; yet are they but temptation:
and it is not the temptation, but the consenting to the temptation, that
induces guilt. If at any time any temptation, either on the one hand, or the
other, prevail against us: St. James teaches us where to lay the fault* Not
upon God by any Jam. 1. 13, 14.
means: for God tempts no man. No nor upon the Devil neither, (let me add
that too; it were a sin to belie the Devil in this:) for though he be a
tempter, and that a busy one, (...), the Tempter, yet that is the worse he can
do: he can but tempt us, he cannot compel us. When he has plied us with all
his utmost Mat. 4 3.
strength, and tried us with all the engines and artifices he can devise: the
will has its natural liberty still, and it is at our choice whether we will
yield or no. But every man when he is tempted, says he, (tempted cum affectu,
that is his meaning; so tempted as to be overcome by the temptation) is tempted
of his own l^st, (...), dra^n away and enticed. Drawn away by injuries and
affrightments from doing good: or enticed by delights and allurements to do
evil. It is with temptations on the left hand (for such are those of which we
now speak) even as it is with those on the right: yield not, and good enough.
My Son, says Solomon, if sinners entice thee consent not, Prove. 1. It may be
said Prove. 1. 10.
also proportionably, and by the same reason; My Son, if sinners affright thee,
comply not. The Common saying, if in any other, holds most true in the case
of Temptations: No man takes harm but from himself.

17. And verily in the particular we are now upon, of fainting under the Cross:
it is nothing but our own fears, and the falseness of a misgiving heart, that
betrayeth us to the Tempter, and undoeth us. Epictet. enchir. cap. 5.
(...) etc. as he said. It is not any reality in the things themselves so much
that troubles the mind, as our Opinio est, quae nos cruciet. Senec. ad
Marciam. c. 19. Prove. 21. 25. Joh. 14. 27.
over-deep apprehensions of them. All passions of the mind, if immoderate, are
perturbations and may bring a snare: but none more or sooner than fear. The
fear of man brings a snare, says Solomon. And our Savior, Let not your
hearts be troubled, neither fear: as if fear were the greatest troubler of the
heart. And truly so it is: No passion ( not Love, no nor yet Anger if self,
though great obstructers of Reason both) being so irrational, as Fear is. It
makes us many times do things quite otherwise than our own reason tells us
we should do. It is an excellent description, that a wise man has given of it,
Wisdom 17. Fear, says he, is nothing else, but the betraying of the Wisd. 17.
11.
succors which reason offers. He that lets go his courage, forfeiteth his
reason withal: and what good can you reasonably expect from an unreasonable man?

18. See thou then a man faint-hearted? Suspect him (I had almost said,
Conclude him) false-hearted too. It is certainly a very hard thing, if at all
possible, for a Coward to be an honest man: or a true friend either to God or
man. He is at the best but (...), a double-minded man: but God requires
simplicity Jam. 1. 8.
and singleness of heart. He has a good mind perhaps to be honest, and to
serve God and the King, and to love his neighbor and his friend; and if he
would hold him there, and be of that mind always, all would be well. But his
double mind will not suffer him so to do. He has a mind withal to sleep in a
whole skin, and to save his estate, if he can, howsoever. And so he becomes
(...), fickle and unstable in his ways; turns as the tide turns: There is
no relying upon him; no trusting of him. Iethro well considered this, when he
Exodus 18. 21.
advised Moses to make choice of such for Magistrates as he knew to be men of
courage, they that were otherwise, he knew could not discharge their duty as
they ought, nor continue upright. And when our Savior said to his Disciples,
Luke 12. Isay unto you my friends, Fear not them which kill the body: He does
Luke 12. 4.
more than intimate that such base worldly fear cannot well consist with the
Laws of true friendship.

19. I insist somewhat the more upon this point, because men are generally so
apt to pretend, to their own failings in this kind, the outward force offered
by others: supposing they have said enough, to excuse what they have done, when
they have said, they did it by compulsion. As if any man could be master of
another will, or enforce a consent from him without his consent: which
carries before it a manifest contradiction. Indeed, if we suffer what we
should not, without any our provocation; that is not our fault, because it is
not (...) it is Malum quod fit in nos, sive de nobis, non est imput andum
nobis: caerum quod sit and a nobis, jam non sine culpa est voluntatis. Bern. de
great. and lib. arb.
not in our power to help it. But if we do what we should not, upon what
inducement so ever we do it, we must bear the greatest part of the blame our
selves: because it is our doing still.

20. For a man then, when he has been frighted out of his conscience and his
duty, and done amiss, to say, I was compelled to do it against my mind, I could
neither will nor choose, and thelike: are, as the most common, so the most vain
and frivolous excuses in the world. Not only false, but ridiculously false, and
such as carry their confutation along with them: fig leaves so thin, that any
body may see through them. For tell me, thou that say thou wast compelled to
do it Velle plane convincimur, quod non fierit si nollomus. Bern. ibid.
against thy mind: If thou had been minded to have withstood the pretended
compulsion, and had continued in that mind; whether such compulsion could
have taken effect or no? Thou that say, thou could neither will nor choose?
was it not left to the choice of thine own will, whether thou would do that
which was required, or suffer that which was threatened? And did not thou
then, when thou might have chosen, if thou would, to suffer the one,
rather choose to do the other? Qui mavult, vult. Sure it is the Will evermore,
that determines the choice in every deliberation. It is manifestly absurd
therefore, for any man to pretend that thing to have been done by him against
his will; which (how hard soever the choice was) he yet chose to do.

21. If these Allegations would serve the turn, or that we had any good warrant
to decline suffering evil by doing evil: those glorious Martyrs and Confessors,
so much renowned through the Christian world for their patience and constancy
in suffering persecution, and laying down their lives for the testimony of
faith and a good conscience, were a generation of very silly men. Who never had
the wit to save their lives, when they might have done it with some little
compliances with the times; and if their consciences had smitten them for so
doing, licked themselves whole again by pleading Compulsion.

22. Unless then we will condemn those blessed souls, whose memories we have
hitherto honored, not only of extreme folly; but of foul self-murder too, in
being prodigal of their lives to no purpose, and casting away themselves
wilfully when they needed not: we must needs acknowledge, That therelieth a
necessity upon us, if we will be Christ's Disciples and Friends, to deny our
selves, Mat. 16. 24.
our lusts, our interests, our fortunes, our liberties, our lives, or if there
be any thing else that can be dearer to us: rather than for fear of any thing
that can befall us in any of these, consent to the least wilful violation of our
bounden duty either to God or our Neighbor; That no force or violence from
without, no straits we can be driven into by any conjuncture of whatsoever
circumstances, can make it either necessary for us to sin, or excusable in us
to have sinned; That we are bound by virtue of Christ's both example and
command, to take up any cross that it is his good pleasure to lay before us,
and to bear it as long as he pleases, with patience, cheerfulness, and
courage; That if we grow weary of it, and faint in our minds, so as to cast
about how we may work our selves from under it by such means, as we have no
clear warrant from him for: we must answer wholly for it our selves, and cannot
justly charge it upon any other person or thing, than upon our own selves, and
our own base cowardice. That for us.

23. To return now to these Hebrews: the Persons in the Text; and the last of
the four particulars proposed from that part of the Text. It may be demanded,
with what reason the Apostle could entertain the least suspicion of such men's
shrinking and fainting under the Cross: who had already given such good proof
of their constancy and courage, in some former, and those no small conflicts
neither? Nay, of whose Christian patience and magnanimity himself had given a
very ample testimony a little before in this very Epistle: how they Heb. 10.
32. -- -- 4.
had endured a great fight of afflictions, and had been made a gazing stock
both by reproaches and afflictions, suffered the spoiling of their goods; and
not only suffered it, (patience perforce) but suffered it joyfully. Yet you see
for all this, how urgent he is upon them still, in the remainder of that tenth
Chapter, in the whole next, and in a great part of this, both before, in, and
after the Text; by admonitions, exhortations, examples, and other topiques,
artifices, and insinuations of great variety: not to cast away their
confidence; to hold fast their profession without wavering; to run with
patience the race that was set before them; to take heed they be not wearied,
and faint in their minds.

24. Not to say positively, that he had of late observed something in some of
them, that might perhaps give him some particular cause of suspicion more than
ordinary: although there be some passages in his discourse (especially at the
fifth verse) that seem to carry a sound, as if something were not right with
them. If we do but look upon some general considerations only: we shall see
reasons enough, why the Apostle (notwithstanding his approving of their former
carriage) might yet be jealous over them with a godly jealousy in this matter.

25. First, he knew not ( persecutions ever attending the Church as her lot)
but they might; and (Christ having foretold great tribulations shortly to come
upon that Nation) it was very like they should meet with more and stronger
trials, than they had ever yet done. It was indeed, and by the Apostles
confession, a great trial of afflictions they had undergone already; and they
had received the charge bravely, and were come off with honor and victory: so
that that brunt was happily over. But who could tell what trials were yet
behind? These might be, for ought they knew, (or he either) but the beginnings
of greater evils to ensue. You have not resisted unto blood, says he, in the
very next words after the Text: as if he had said, You have fought one good
fight already, and quit your selves like men: I commend you for it, and I bless
God for it. Yet be not high-minded, but fear: you have not yet done all your
work; your warfare is not yet at an end. What if God should call you to suffer
the shedding of your blood for Christ, as Christ shed his blood for you? You
have not been put to that yet: but you know not what you may be. If you be not
in some measure prepared even for that also, and resolved (by Gods assistance)
to strive against sin, and to withstand all sinful temptations, even to the
shedding of the last drop of blood in your bodies, if God call you to it: you
have done nothing. He that hates not his life, as well as his House and Lands,
for Christ and his Kingdom, is not worthy of either. Luke 14. 36.
Sharp or long assaults may tire out him that has endured shorter and easier.
But he that sets forth for the goal, if he will obtain, must resolve to
devour all difficulties, and to run it out: and not to faint or slug, till he
have finished his course to the end; though he should meet with never so many
Lions in the way.

26. Secondly, so great is the natural frailty of man, so utterly averse from
conforming it self entirely to the good will or pleasure of Almighty God,
either in doing or suffering: that if he be not the better principled within
(strengthened with grace in the inner man) he will not be able to hold out in
either; but every sorry temptation from without will foil him, and beat him
off. Be not weary of well-doing, says the Apostle, Gal. 6. for in due time we
shall reap if Gal. 6. 9.
we faint not, (...), (the same word again.) Weariness and faintness of mind we
are subject to (you see) in the point of well-doing: But how much more then in
the point of suffering; which is of the two much the sorer trial?

27. Marvel not, if ordinary Christians, such as these Hebrews were, might be
in danger of fainting under the Cross: when the most holy and eminent of Gods
servants, whose Faith, and Patience, and Piety are recorded in the Scriptures
as exemplary to all posterity, have in their failings in this kind bewrayed
themselves to be but men, (...), subject to passions of fear and distrust, even
as others. Abraham the Father of the Faithful, of so strong Faith and
Obedience, that he neither staggered at the promise of having a Son (though it
were a very unlikely one, at that age) through unbelief; nor stumbled at the
command of sacrificing that Son (though it were a very hard one, having no
more) through disobedience: yet coming among strangers, upon some apprehensions
that his life might be endangered if he should own Sarah to be his wife, his
heart so far misgave him through humane frailty, that he showed some
distrustfulness of God, by his doubting and dissimulation with Pharaoh first,
and after with Abimelech, Genesis 13. and 20.

28. And David also so full of courage sometimes, that he would not fear, Psalm.
3. 6. -- 27. 3.
though ten thousands of people, whole Armies of men, should rise up against
him, and encompass him round about; though the opposers were so strong and
numerous, that the earth should be moved and the mountains* shake at the noise
-- 46. 2, 3.
thereof: yet at some other times, when he saw no end of his troubles, but that
he was hunted like a partridge upon the mountains day after day, and chased 1 Samuel 26. 20.
from place to place perpetually, that he could rest no where; his heart began
to melt and to faint within him. And although he had a promise from God of
succeeding in the Kingdom, and an anointing also (as an earnest) to confirm the
promise: yet it ran strongly in his thoughts nevertheless, that he should
perish 1 Samuel 27. 1.
one day by the hands of Saul. Insomuch that in a kind of distrust of Gods
truth and protection, he ventured so far upon his own head, (never so much as
asking counsel at the mouth of God) as to expose himself to great
inconveniences, hazards, and temptations, in the midst of an hostile and
idolatrous people. The good man was sensible of the imperfection, acknowledges
it an infirmity and Psalm. 77. 6. -- 12.
striveth against it, Psalm. 77.

29. But of all the rest, St. Peter ((...) as Chrysostom often styles him) a
man of great boldness and fervency of spirit, betrayed the greatest weakness.
Who, after so fair warning so lately given him, and his own so confident
profession of laying down his life in his Masters quarrel: yet within not many
hours after, when he began to be questioned about his Master, and saw (by the
malicious and partial proceedings against the Master) how it was like to go
with him, if he were known to have such a near dependence upon him; became so
faint-hearted, that (contrary to his former resolutions and engagement) he not
only disowned him, but with Oaths and Imprecations forswore Mar. 14. 71.
him. Such weakness is there in the flesh, where there is yet left some
willingness in the spirit: that without a continual supply of grace, and actual
influence of strength from above, there is no absolute stedfastness to be found
in the best of the Sons of men.

30. Yet is not our natural inability to resist temptations (though very great)
the cause of our actual faintings so much (because of the ready assistance of
Gods grace to relieve us, if we would but be as ready to make use of it) as a
third thing is: To wit, our supine negligence; that we do not stand upon our
guard as it concerns us to do, nor provide for the encounter in time: but
have our -- In pace, ut sapiens, pararet idonea bello. Hor. 2. sat. 2.
Arms to seek when the Enemy is upon us. As Joseph in the years of plenty laid
in Provision against the years of dearth: so should we, whilst it is Calm,
provide for a Storm; and whilst we are at ease, against the evil day. It is
such an ordinary point of wisdom in the common affairs of life, for men to be
provided of all necessaries befitting their several occasions, before the time
they should use them: that he is rather derided than pitied, that having time
and means for it, neglects so to do. The Grasshopper in the Fable had the
merry Summer: but the Pismire fared better in Winter. If in our prosperity we
grow secure, flattering our selves in our own thoughts, as if our hill were so
strong that we should never be removed: if then God do but turn his Psalm. 30.
6, etc.
face from us, yea, but a little, and send any little change upon us; we shall
be so much the more troubled at the affliction when it comes, by how much the
less we expected it before. Our unpreparedness makes a very little affliction
sometimes fall very heavy upon us; and then it foileth us miserably, and soon
tireth us out: and so we suffer by our own negligence.

31. To which add in the fourth place, that which many times follows upon
such our neglect; Gods deserting of us, and withdrawing the ordinary support of
his grace from us. And then as the Philistines over-mastered Samson, when his
strength was departed from him: so will temptations us, when we are left to
wrestle with them by our own strength alone, without the special grace of God
to assist. It is by Faith that we stand, if we do stand; ( This is the victory
that overcomes the world, even our Faith:) But it is by 2 Cor. 1. 24 1 John 5.
4.
the grace and power of God, that our Faith it self stands. Take that grace
away, and our faith fails; and then our hearts fail: and then there is
neither courage, nor patience, nor obedience, nor any thing else that good is
in us. At least, not in that measure, as to render our ways (during that
estate) either acceptable to God, or comfortable to our selves: until it shall
please him to renew Psalm. 51. 10. -- 12.
us unto repentance, to give us the comfort of his help again; and to establish
us afresh with his free spirit and grace.

32. Of whose most holy and wise dispensations, although we be neither able nor
worthy to apprehend any other reason, than his own will, nor to comprehend
that: (for his spirit breaths where and when it lists, and we know Joh. 3.
8.
not ( antecedently) either why, or how: yet are we well assured in the
general, Psalm. 145. 17.
that the Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. Yea,
and we find by the blessed consequents many times, that the very withdrawing of
his grace, is it self a special act of his grace. 1. As, when he has thereby 2
Chro. 32. 31.
humbled us to a better sight and sense of our own frailty: so was Hezekiah
left to himself in the matter of the Ambassadors that came from the King of
Babel. 2. Or checked us for our overmuch self-confidence, as Peter's denial was a
real rebuke for his over-bold protestation. 3. Or brought us to acknowledge
with thankfulness and humility, by whose (...). Homer. Il. ^. Psalm. 59. 9. Gal.
6. 1.
strength it is that we have hitherto stood. ( My strength will I ascribe unto
thee, Psalm. 59.) 4. Or taught us to bear more compassion toward our brethren
and their infirmities, if they hap to be overtaken with a fault, and to restore
them with the spirit of meekness: considering, that even we our selves are not
such as cannot be tempted. Or wrought some other good effect upon us some other
way,

33. Since then great and lasting afflictions are strong trials of men's patience
and courage; and their inability to bear them, great, through the frailty of
nature, is yet by their own personal default and supine negligence, much
greater; and without the support of Gods grace, (which as he is no ways bound
to give them, so he may, and does, when it pleases him, take from them) their
spirits are not able to bear up under the least temptation: you will grant the
Apostle had great reason to fear, lest these Hebrews, notwithstanding the good
proof they had given of their Christian constancy in some former trials, should
yet be weary and faint in their minds under greater sufferings. And
consequently how it concerns every one of us, whatsoever comforts we may have
of our former sufferings and patience (whereof, unless God have the whole
glory, our comfort sure will be the less;) yet to be very jealous of our own
treacherous hearts, and to keep a constant watch over them that they deceive us
not: not to be too high-minded or jolly for any thing that is past: nor too
unmerciful censurers of our weaker brethren for their faintings and failings;
nor too confident of our own future standing.

34. It ought to be our care rather at all times, especially in such times as
threaten persecution to all those that will not recede from such Principles of
Religion, Justice, and Loyalty, as they have hitherto held themselves obliged
to walk by: to live in a continual expectancy of greater trials and temptations
daily to assault us than we have yet wrestled withal. And to give all
diligence, by our faithful prayers and utmost endeavors to arm and prepare our
selves for the better bearing them, with such calm patience and moderation on
the one side, and yet with such undaunted courage and resolution on the other
side; as may evidence at once our humble submission to whatsoever it shall
please God to lay upon us, and our high contempt of the utmost despite the
world can do us.

35. For since every affliction ( Ianus-like) has two faces; and looks two
ways; we should do well to make our use of both. It looks backward, as it
comes from God: who lays it upon us, as a correction for some past sin. And
it looks forward, as it comes from Satan and the World: who lay it before
us, as a temptation to some new sin. Accordingly are we to entertain it. As it
is Gods Correction; by no means to despise it, ( My Son despise not thou the
chastening of the Lord, the next verse but one:) but to take it up with joy,
and to bear it with patience, and to profit by it to repentance. But as it is
Satan's temptation; by all means to resist it with courage, yea, and with
disdain too. Resist it I say; but in that sense wherein such resistance is to
be understood in the very next verse after Text. That is to say, so to resist
the temptation, by striving against that sin whatever it be, which the Tempter
seeks to drive us into by the affliction; that we should fight it out in
blood. resolving rather to lose it all, were it to the last drop, than consent
to the committing of that. Thus to lose our blood, is to win the day: And the
failing so to do, is that weariness and faininess of mind and soul, of which
our Apostle here speaks and upon which we have hitherto thus long insisted.

36. Yet dare I not for all that leave it thus, without adding a necessary
caution: lest what has been said be mis-understood, as if, when we are bidden
not to faint* under the Cross, we were forbidden to use any means or endeavors
to remove it. No such matter. True it is, where no more is left to our choice,
but one of the two, either Sin or Suffer; a right Christian should not (for
shame) so much as take it into deliberation. Never demur upon it; it is a plain
case: we must suffer. But where there is a Medium, or third thing (as an
outlet, or (...). Pythag. aur. carm.
expedient*) between both, as many times there is: nothing hinders but we may,
and reason would we should make choice of that; and so neither sin, nor suffer.
Lay that first as a sure ground: We must avoid sin, though we suffer for it:
But that once laid, if we can then avoid suffering too, without sinning, why
may we not; nay, why ought we not, to avoid both?

37. No man doubts, but we may pray to be delivered from troubles: David does
it an hundred times: and if we do it not daily too, even as often as we beg our
daily bread (our Savior having contrived both Petitions into the same Prayer)
we are to blame. And if we may pray for it, then no doubt but we may endeavor
it also. Though they look something alike in someother respects, yet in this
one (at least) Wishes and Prayers are much unlike. Many things we may lawfully
wish for, which we may not endeavor after: but sure, whatsoever we may
lawfully pray for, we not only lawfully may; but are in conscience bound to use
our best endeavors toward the effecting thereof. We do indeed but mock God,
and prevaricate in our Prayers; if we be not in some measure careful to second
them with our Endeavors.

38. Christ bids us deny our selves, and take up the Cross. True: deny our
selves rather than deny him; and take up the Cross, when he lays it before
us, so (...). Naz. orat. 20.
as we cannot step beside it without sin. But he does not bid us undo our
selves when his service requires it not; nor make our selves Crosses, when we
need not.

39. Afflictions are useful things, and many ways beneficial to Gods children.
True: blessed be God, but no thanks to them, that they are so. That much good
sometimes comes from them, it is but merely by accident, as to them: the true
cause of those blessed effects is that overruling power, wisdom, and goodness
of God; whereby he is able to bring light out of darkness, and can turn any
evil (even sin it self) to the good of his Children. But take afflictions
precisely, as they are in themselves, and in their pure naturals, as we say;
and there is no such loveliness in them, that any man should court them: Nor
(...) Naz.
are they productive of any the least good, by any proper inherent virtue of
their own. Nor are therefore such desirable things, as that any man can
reasonably promise to himself any good effect from them, or any sound comfort
under them, that shall wilfully draw them upon himself, when he might without
sin avoid them.

40. We must not count life, liberty, or livelihood dear to us: but despise
them all, yea, even hate them for Christ's sake and the Gospels. True: where any
of those stand in opposition against, or but in competition with Christ, or his
Gospel, or any duty therein contained. In case of competition, despise them: in
case of opposition hate them. Do so, and spare not. But otherwise, and out of
those cases, these are the good blessings of God, wherewith he has entrusted
us, and for the expense whereof we are to be responsible: and ought not
therefore to be so vile in our eyes, as that we should think we may trifle them
away as we list, no necessity so requiring.

41. It is the most proper act of Fortitude to endure hardship. True: To endure
Abunde fortes sumus, si excipimus, non etiam incurrimus in discrimen. Lips.
Epist.
it: but not to provoke it. We shall be like to find in the world hardship
enough, whereon to exercise our manhood; without seeking. It is a foolhardy
madness (better beseeming such a Knight Errant as is described in the Romances,
than a true Soldier of Christ, such as the Gospel sets forth) to roam
abroad to seek adventures. Afflictions are Temptations, as was said: and it is
a presumption both rash and absurd, having prayed to God not to lead us into
temptations, to go and cast our selves into them, when we have done. Fortitude
is an excellent virtue doubtless: but so is Prudence too, as well as it; and
Justice, no less than either. And therefore the offices of different Virtues
are so to be exercised, as not to hinder or destroy one another (for between
Omnibus inter se virtutibus amicitia. Sen. Epist. 110. -- virtutum est
inhonesta contentio. Bern. in Annunc. ser. 1. 2 Timothy 3. 2.
virtuous acts there must be, there can be, no clashing) a man may without
disparagement to his Fortitude, decline dangers, according to the dictates of
Prudence: provided withal, that nothing be done, but what is according to the
rules of Justice.

42. St. Paul says of some that he had to deal with, that they were
unreasonable men. Possibly it may be our case, to have to do with such men:
Reason will not satisfy them; and it is not lawful for us to do, or to consent
to the doing of, any thing, but what is agreeable to reason. True: but this
very thing is agreeable to reason, that to live at quiet among unreasonable
men, we should sometimes yield to their unreasonable demands. But usque ad aras
still: that must evermore be understood. In the pursuance of peace with our
neighbors, where it is not to be had upon better terms, we may and ought by
all seasonable Compliances and condescensions to become omnia omnibus, all
things to all men: even as Christ to make peace for us, condescended to be made
like unto us in all things. And as his condescension for us had yet one, and
but one, exception (made like unto us in all things, yet without sin:) so
should our condescension Heb. 4. 1^.
to them be likewise, sin (and sin only) excepted, though upon conditions
otherwise hard and unequal enough.

43. The sum is. For the obtaining of peace, the preventing of mischiefs, the
ridding of our selves and others from troubles; we may with a good conscience
and without sin yield to the doing of any thing that may stand with a good
conscience, and be done without sin. Nor is it to be interpreted, either as an
effect of faint-heartedness, or as a defect of Christian patience and courage,
so to do: but is rather to be esteemed an act of Christian Wisdom and duty. But
so to faint under the Cross, as to deny the Faith, to forsake our Religion, to
violate the dictates of natural Conscience, to do any thing contrary to any of
the rules of Justice or Charity; or which we either know or suspect to be a
sin; though it be for the shunning of any danger, or under the pretension of
any necessity whatsoever; cannot consist with that nobleness of spirit and
magnanimity, which becomes a worthy Disciple of Christ.

44. I should have proceeded, according to my first intendment when I pitched
upon this Scripture, (had their been room for it) to have discoursed somewhat
also, from the other part of the Text, concerning that which is therein
prescribed as an especial Remedy of, or rather Preservative against, this
faint-heartedness we have been all this while in hand with; to wit, the
Meditation of Christ and his sufferings. But all I shall have time now to do,
will be to give you the heads of those most useful and observable points, which
I conceive to arise without much enforcement from the words.

45. First the act in the Verb here used, discovers an excellent piece of
Art, a rare secret in this Mystery, a short and compendious, but withal a very
effectual way, how to lighten such afflictions as lie sad upon us, to our
apprehensions, thereby to make them the more portable: for afflictions are
lighter or heavier according to our apprehensions of them.

-- leve fit, quod been fertur, onus. O^id.
The original word is of more pregnant signification to this purpose than
Translators can render it, (...). It imports, not the bare consideration of a
thing by it self alone; but the considering of it by weighing and comparing it
with some other things of like kind or nature, and observing the analogies and
proportions between it and them. Certainly it would be of mavelous use to us,
for the rectifying our judgments concerning those pressures, which at any time
are upon us, to render them less ponderous in our estimation of them: if we
would duly compare them, either first, with the intolerable weight of our sins,
whereby we have deserved them; or secondly, with the weight of those
everlasting grievous pains in Hell, which by the sharpness of our short
sufferings here (if we make the right use of them, to be thereby humbled unto
repentance) by the mercy of God we shall escape; or thirdly, with that so
exceeding and eternal weight of glory and joy in the Kingdom of Heaven, which
by the free goodness of our God we expect in compensation of our light and
momentany afflictions here; or fourthly, with the weight of those far greater
and heavier trials, which other our brethren and fellow- servants, either of
our own or former times, have undergone before us, and gone through them all
with admirable patience and courage.

46. (...). None of all these singly, but are of singular virtue toward the
desired effect: but all of them together, if aptly applied, can hardly fail the
cure. Especially if you add thereunto that one Ingredient more, which is alone
here expressed (indeed the most sovereign of all the rest) as the object of
this analogy or consideration in the Text: to wit, the incomparable bitter
sufferings of our ever blessed Lord and Master Jesus Christ.

47. Then farther, in this Objection, as it is amplified in this short Text
only, there are sundry particulars considerable. As namely, First, Who it was
that suffered. Consider him: his Greatness, his Innocence, his Goodness.
Secondly, how he suffered. (...). he endured also; not suffered it only.
Consider him that endured such contradiction: endured it so willingly, so
patiently, so cheerfully. Thirdly, from whom he suffered it. (...), From
sinners. Sinners, in their nature; sinful men: Sinners, in the Jews esteem;
Heathen men: Sinners in the inward constitution of their own hearts; Hypocrites
and Malignants: Sinners, in their outward carriage toward him, and their undue
and illegal proceedings against him; no just cause, no just proofs, but
clamours and outcries, rai^ing, and spitting, and buffeting, and insulting, and
all manner of contumelious and despiseful usage. Fourthly, what he suffered.
(...), such opposition and contradiction of sinners against himself.
Contradictions manifold: of all sorts. and in all respects. To his person:
denied to be the Son of God. To his Office: not received as the promised
Messiah. To his Doctrine: given out as a deceiver. To his Miracles: disgraced
as if he had been a Conjuror, and dealt with the Devil. To his Conversation:
defamed as a glutton and a wine-bibber, a profane fellow and a
Sabbath-breaker, a companion of Publicans and Sinners. To his very life and
being: Not him but Barabbas; Away with him, Crucify him, Crucify him.

48. These are the heads. Many they are, you see; and of worthier consideration
than to be crowded into the latter end of a Sermon. Therefore I must of
necessity forbear the enlargement of them at this present: leaving that for
every man to do in his private meditations. For a conclusion then, let us all
(I beseech you) first consider (actually and thoroughly consider) him that
endured such contradictions of sinners against himself: and having so done,
applyingly (...). Naz. tetrast.
consider, whether it can be reasonable, or almost possible, for any of us to
faint under our petty sufferings. What are we, the best of us, the greatest of
us, to him? Or what our sufferings, the worst of them, the greatest of them, to
his? I have done.

AD AULAM.
Sermon XVII.
Newport, in the Isle of Wight, October. 1648.
Gal. 5. 22, 23. But the Fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance: against such
there is no Law.
1. HE that shall impartially look upon former and the present times, shall
find that of Solomon exactly true, There Eccl. 1. 9.
is no new thing under the Sun. Vetus fabula, novi histriones. The things we
see done are but Nihil novi video, nihil novi facio. Senec.
the same things that have been done: only acted over again by new Persons, and
with a few new circumstances. It was in the Apostles times, and the Churches of
Galatia, even as it is with us in these days. False Teachers had crept in among
them: who by their hypocrisy and pretensions of the Spirit, had so corrupted
their Faith, that they were removed after a fort unto another Gospel; Gal. 1.
6. -- 5. 26. -- 5. 15.
and so extremely sowred their Charity, that from provoking and envying, they
were now grown to biting and devouring one another.

2. The Apostle wondering at this so unexpected a change, ( I marvel you are so
soon removed, Gal. 1. 6.) to see them so befooled in their understandings, and
bewitched in their affections, as to suffer so sore and sudden a decay, in the
two most essential parts of Christian Religion, Faith and Charity: thought it
high time for him, after he had first well schooled them ( O foolish Galatians,
who Gal. 3. 1.
has bewitched you?) to offer his advice toward the allaying of those heats
and distempers, that were the causes of this so sad and dangerous an alteration.

3. The remedy he prescribes for that end ( verse. 16.) is short, but very
sure, if they will but follow it. Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill
the lusts of the flesh. As if he had said, You talk much of the Spirit: but you
make it little appear in the fruit of your lives, that you are led by the
spirit. The Spirit, and the Flesh, are contraries: and they lust contrary
things, verse. 17. If you were as careful to walk in the Spirit, as you are to
boast of it, you would not be so forward, as now you are, by cherishing
unbrotherly contentions, and sundry other ways to fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

4. A hard thing it is, to bring an overweening Hypocrite to a true
understanding of himself: for Pride and Hypocrisy are two such things as few
men are willing to own. That they might therefore with better certainty be able
to discern whether they were indeed Spiritual, or but yet Carnal: the Apostle
proceeds to describe the Flesh and the Spirit by sundry their different
effects. A Catalogue we have for that purpose of the works of the Flesh, in
seventeen particulars, in the three next verses before the Text; and then
another Catalogue of the Fruits of the spirit, in nine particulars, in the Text
it self. Wherein we may observe three things: First, the Notion, or general
description of Spiritual Graces, as they are here proposed: they go under this
name, The fruit of the spirit. Secondly, the particular Species given under
that Name or Notion: they are these nine; Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, and Temperance. Thirdly, a special
privilege belonging to all and every the aforesaid particulars: to wit,
Exemption from the Law; Against such there is no Law

5. In the general description (which is like to be our only business at this
time) the thing we are to take notice of is, the differences that may be
observed, between the Titles under which St. Paul has entered the several
particulars of both sorts: as they are set down, the one in the beginning of
verse 19. [ The works of the Flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery,
etc.] the other in the beginning of verse. 22. [ But the fruit of the Spirit is
Love, etc.] And those differences are four. First, those effects of the former
sort proceed originally from the Flesh; these from the Spirit. Secondly, those
are rather styled by the name of Works, these by the name of Fruit: the Works
of the Flesh, but the Fruit of the Spirit. Thirdly, those are set forth as many
and apart, Works, in the Plural: These as many, but united into one, Fruit in
the Singular. Fourthly, those are expressly said to be manifest: of these no
such thing at all mentioned.

6. The first difference, which arises from the nature of the things
themselves, as they relate to their several proper causes, is of the four the
most obvious and important: and it is this. That whereas the vicious habits and
sinful actions catalogued in the former verses, are the production of the
Flesh: the Graces and Virtues specified in the Text, are ascribed to the
Spirit, as to their proper and original cause. They are not the works of the
Flesh, as the former, but the fruit of the Spirit.

7. Where the first Question, that every man will be ready to ask, is, What is
here meant by the Spirit? The necessity of expressing supernatural and divine
things, by words taken from natural or humane affairs, has produced another
necessity of enlarging the significations of sundry of those words to a very
great Latitude. Which is one special cause of the obscurity, which is found in
sundry places of holy Scripture, and consequently of the difficulty of giving
the proper and genuine sense of such places: and consequently to that (amidst
so many interpretations of one and the same place, whilst each contendeth for
that sense which himself has pitched upon) of infinite disputes and
controversies in point of Religion. Among which words, three especially I have
observed, all of them of very frequent use in the New Testament: which, as they
are subject to greater variety of signification than most other words are; so
have they ever yet been, and are like to be to the Worlds end, the matter and
fuel of very many, and very fierce contentions in the Church. Those three are,
Faith, Grace, and Spirit. Truly I am persuaded, if it were possible all men
could agree in what signification each of those three words were to be
understood in each place where any of them are found; three full parts at least
of four, of those unhappy Controversies that have been held up in the Christian
Church would vanish.

8. And of the three this of Spirit has yet the greatest variety of
Significations. God in his Essence; the Person of the Holy Ghost; good Angels;
evil Angels; extraordinary gifts, wherewith the Apostles and others in the
Primitive times were endowed; the several faculties of the Soul, as
Understanding, Affections, and Conscience; the whole Soul of man; supernatural
Grace, besides many others not needful now to be remembered; all come under this
appellation of Spirit. Much of the ambiguity of the World (I confess) is cut
off, when it is opposed to Flesh: yet even then also it wants no variety. The
Divine and Humane Nature in the Person of Christ; the literal and mystical
sense of Scripture; the Ordinances of the Old and New Testament; the Body and
the Soul; Sensuality and Reason; the corruption of Nature, and the Grace of
God: all these may, according to the peculiar exigence of several places, be
understood by the terms of Flesh and Spirit.

9. Generally, the word Spirit in the common notion of it imports a thing of
subtle parts, but of an operative quality. So that the less any thing has of
matter, and the more of virtue, the nearer it comes to the nature of a Spirit:
as the Wind, and the Quintessences of Vegetables or Minerals extracted by
Chemical operation. We use to say of a man, that is of a sad, sluggish and
phlegmatic temper, that he has no Spirit; but if he belively, active, quick,
and vigorous, we then say, he has spirit in him. It is said of the Queen of
Sheba, 1 King. 10. 5.
when she saw the wisdom and royal state of King of Solomon* that there was no
more spirit left in her: that is, she stood mute and amazed at it, as if she
had had no life, speech, sense, or motion in her. The Soul is therefore called
a Spirit, because being it self no bodily substance, it yet actuateth and
enliveneth the body; and is the inward principle of life thereunto: called
therefore, The Spirit Genesis 2. 7. Jam. 2. 26.
of life; and St. James says, The body without the Spirit is dead: that is, it
is a liveless Iump of flesh without the Soul. So that whatsoever is principium
agendi internum, the fountain of action or operation, as an inward principle
thereof, may in that respect and so far forth borrow the name of a Spirit.
Insomuch as the very flesh it self, so far forth as it is the fountain of all
those evil works, mentioned in the foregoing verses, may in that respect be
called a Spirit: and so is by St. James, The Spirit that is in us lusts after
Envy, says he; that is in Jam. 4. 5.
very deed, the Flesh that is in us: for among the lusts and work of the flesh
is envy reckoned in the very next verse before the Text.

10. To come up close to the Point, (for I fear I have kept off too long) as
they stand here opposed; by Flesh I take to be clearly meant, (...). Chrysostom.
hic. Joh. 3. 6.
the Natural Corruption of Man; and by Spirit, the Supernatural Grace of God.
Even as the same words are also taken in some other places: as namely in that
saying of our Savior, Ioh. 3. That which is born of the Flesh, is Flesh; and
that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit. Which words may serve as a good
Commentary upon this part of the Text: for they do not only warrant the
interpretation, but afford us also the reason of it, under the analogy of a
twofold Birth or Generation. The Generation, whether of Plants or living
Creatures, is effectual by that prolifical virtue which is in the seed.
Answerable therefore unto the twofold Birth, spoken of in the Scriptures, there
is also a twofold seed. The first Birth, is that of the Old man, by natural
generation, whereby we are born the sons of Adam: The second Birth, is that of
the New man, by spiritual regeneration, whereby we are born the Sons of God.
Answerably whereunto the first seed is Semen Adae, the seed of old Adam,
derived unto us by carnal propagation from our natural Parents, who are
therefore called, The Fathers of our Flesh, together Heb. 12. 9.
wherewith is also derived that uncleanness or corruption: which upon our first
birth cleaves so inseparably to our nature, and is the inward principle, from
which all the works of the flesh have their emanation. But then there is
another seed, Semen Dei, as St. John calls it, the seed of the second Adam,
Jesus Christ, 1 John 3. 9.
God blessed for ever, derived unto us by the communication of his holy Spirit
inwardly renewing us; together wherewith is also derived a measure of inherent
supernatural grace, as the inward principle, whence all these choice fruits of
the Spirit do flow.

11. So that upon the whole matter, these two Points are clear. First, clear it
is, that all the wicked practices recited and condemned in the foregoing
verses, with all other of like quality, do proceed merely from (...). Chrysostom.
the corruption that is in us, from our own depraved minds and wills, without
any the least cooperation of the holy Spirit of God therein. It cannot stand
with the goodness of God to be the principal, and neither with his goodness nor
greatness, to be an Accessory in any sinful action. He cannot be either the
Author, or the Abettor of any thing that is evil. Whosoever therefore has
committed any sin, let him take heed he do not add another and a worser to it,
by charging God with it: rather let him give God and his Spirit the glory, by
taking all the blame and shame of it to himself and his own Flesh. All sinful
works are works of the Flesh.

12. Secondly, it is clear also, that all the holy affections and performances
here mentioned, with all other Christian virtues and graces, accompanying
Salvation not here mentioned, though wrought immediately by us, and with the
free consent of our own wills, are yet the fruit of Gods Spirit working in us.
That is to say. They do not proceed originally from any strength of nature, or
any inherent power in man's free will; nor are they acquired by the culture of
Philosophy, the advantages of Education, or any improvement whatsoever of
natural abilities by the helps of Art or Industry: but are in truth the proper
effects of that supernatural grace, which is given unto us by the good pleasure
of God the Father, merited for us by the precious blood of God the Son, and
conveyed into our hearts by the sweet and secret inspirations of God the holy
Ghost. Love, Joy, Peace, etc. are fruits, not at all of the Flesh, but merely
and entirely of the Spirit.

13. All those very many passages in the New Testament, which either set forth
the unframeableness of our nature to the doing of any thing that is good, [ Not
that we are sufficient of our selves to think a good thought. In me, that is in
2 Cor. 3. 5. Romans 7. 18.
my flesh, there dwells no good thing; and the like] or else ascribe our best
performances to the glory of the grace of God, [ Without me you can do nothing.
Joh. 15. 7. 2 Cor. 3. 5. Ephesians. 2. 8. Phil. 2. 13.
All our sufficiency is of God. Not of your selves; it is the gift of God. It
is God that works in you both the will and the deed; and the like] are so
many clear confirmations of the Truth. Upon the evidence of which truth it is,
that our mother the Church has taught us in the Public Service to beg at the
hands of Almighty God, that he would ^ndue us with the grace of his holy
Spirit, to amend our lives according to his holy Word: And again (consonantly
to the matter we are how in hand with, almost in terminis) that he would give
to all men increase of grace to hear meekly his word, and to receive it with
pure affection, and to bring forth the fruits of the Spirit. As without which
grace it were not possible for us to amend our lives, or to bring forth such
fruits, according as God requires in his holy Word,

14. And the Reason is clear: because as the tree is, such must the fruit be.
Do men look to gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Or can they expect
Mat. 7. 16.
from a salt Fountain other than brackish water? Certainly, what is born of
Flesh, can be no better than Flesh. Who can bring a clean thing out of that
which Job 14. 4.
is unclean? Or how can any thing that good is proceed from a heart, all the
imaginations of the thoughts whereof are only and continually evil? If we would
Genesis 6.
have the Fruit good, reason will (and our Savior prescribes the same method)
that order be taken, first to make the tree good.

15. But you will say, It is as impossible, so to alter the nature of the
Flesh, as to make it bring forth good spiritual fruit: as it is to alter the
Nature of a Crab or Thorn, so as to make it bring forth a pleasant Apple. Truly
and so it is: if you shall endeavor to mend the fruit by altering the stock,
you shall find the labor altogether fruitless. A Crab will be a Crab still,
when you have done what you can: and you may as well hope to wash an Ethiopian
white, as to purge the Flesh from sinful pollution.

16. The work therefore must be done quite another way: not by alteration, but
addition. That is, leaving the old principle to remain as it was, by
superinducing, ab extra a new principle, of a different and more kindly
quality. We see the experiment of it daily in the graffing of trees. A
Crab-stock, if it have a Cyen of some delicate apple artly grafted in it: look
what branches are suffered to grow out of the stock it self, they will all
follow the nature of the stock, and if they bring forth any fruit at all, it
will be sour and stiptick. But the fruit that grows from the graft, will be
pleasant to the taste, because it follows the nature of the Graft. We read of
(...), an engrafted word, Jam. 1. Jam. 1. 21.
Our carnal hearts are the old stock; which, before the Word of God be grafted
in it, cannot bring forth any spiritual fruit, acceptable to God: But when by
the powerful operation of his holy Spirit, the Word which we hear with our
outward ears is inwardly grafted therein, it then brings forth the fruit of
good living. So that all the bad fruits that appear in our lives come from the
old stock, the Flesh: and if there be any good fruit of the Spirit in us* it is
from the virtue of that word of grace that is grafted in us.

17. It should be our care then, since the Scriptures call so hard upon us for
fruits ( to be fruitful in good works, to bring forth fruits meet for
repentance, Col. 1. 10. Mat. 3. 8, 10.
etc.) and threaten us with excision and fire if we do not bring forth fruit,
and that good fruit too: it should be our care, I say, to bestow (at least) as
much diligence about our hearts, as good husbands do about their fruit trees.
They will not suffer any suckers or luxuriant branches to grow from the stock:
but as soon as they begin to appear, or at least before they come to any
bigness, cut them off, and cast them away. By so doing, the grafts thrive the
better, and bring forth fruit both sooner and fairer. God has entrusted us
with the custody and culture of our own hearts, as Adam was put into ^he Garden
to keep it and Genesis 2. 15.
to dress it: and besides the charge given us in that behalf it behooves us
much for our own good, to keep them with all diligence. If we husband them
well, Prove. 4. 23.
the benefit will be ours: he looks for no more but his rent (and that an
easy rent) the Glory, and the Thanks; the fruits wholly accure to us, as
Usufructuaries. But if we be such ill husbands, so careless and improvident, as
to let them sylvescere, overgrow with wild and superfluous branches, to hinder
the thriving of the grafts, whereby they become ill-liking and unfruitful: we
shall neither answer the trust committed to us, nor be able to pay our rent (we
shall bring him in no glory) nor do our selves any good: but run behind hand
continually, and come to naught at last.

18. It will behove us therefore, if we will have our fruit in holiness, and
the Romans 6. 22. Heb. 12. 15.
end everlasting life, to look to it betimes: lest some root of bitterness
springing up, put us to more trouble than we are aware of for the present, or
can be well able to deal withal afterward. The Flesh will find us work enough
to be sure: it is ever and anon putting forth spurns of Avarice, Ambition,
Envy, Revenge, Pride, Luxury, some noisome lust or other: like a rotten dunghill,
that is rank of weeds. If we neglect them but a little, out of a thought that
they can do no great harm yet, or that we shall have time enough to snub them
hereafter, we do it to our own certain disadvantage, if not utter undoing: we
shall either never be able to overcome them, or not without very much more
labor and difficulty than we might have done at the first.

19. In the mean time, whilst these superfluous excrescencies ((...), I know
not how to call them) are suffered, they draw away the sap to their own
nourishment, and so pine and starve the grafts that they never come to good.
(...), says St. James; we translate it, wherefore laying aside: Jam. 1. 21.
perhaps it may import a little more. The whole verse is well worth the further
considering, if we had time to insist upon it: it seems to allude throughout
to the lopping off of those suckers or superfluous branches that hinder the
prospering of grafts. As if he had said, If you desire that the holy Word of
God, which is to be grafted in your hearts, should bring forth fruit to the
saving of your souls; suffer not these filthy and naughty superfluities of
fleshly lusts to hinder the growth thereof, but off with them, away with them;
and the sooner, the better. That is (...).

20. I should from this Point before I had left it (but that I have other
things to speak to, and may not insist) have pressed two things more. First,
the necessity of our Prayers. It is true, our endeavors are necessary: God
that does our* work for us, will not do it without us. But without the
assistance of his Spirit, all our endeavors are bootless: and we have no
reason to persume of his assistance, if we think our selves too good to ask it.
We may not think, we have done all our part toward fruit-bearing, when we have
planted and watered; until we have earnestly solicited him to do his part too,
in giving the increase, and crowning our endeavors with success.

21. Secondly, a duty of Thankfulness. If by his good blessing upon our prayers
and endeavors we have been enabled to bring forth any fruit, such as he will
graciously accept: take we heed we do not withdraw the least part of the glory
of it from him, to derive it upon our selves, or our own endeavors. Non Psalm.
115. 1.
nobis, Domine, non Nobis: Not unto us, O Lord, by no means to us, but to thy
Name be the glory. Enough it is for us, that we have the comfort onward, and
shall have an unmeasurable reward at the last, for the good we have done
(either of both which, is infinitely more than we deserve:) but far be it from
us to claim any share in the glory: let all that be to him alone. Whatsoever
fruit therefore we bear, or how much soever, let us not be high-minded
thereupon, or take too much upon us: For we bear not the root, but the root
bears us; Romans 11. 18.
and when we have done our utmost endeavors, the fruit we bear is still the
fruit of the Spirit, not the fruit of our endeavors.

22. I have dwelt long upon this first difference, not so much because it was
the first (though that sometimes falls out to be the best excuse we are able
to make for such prolixities;) as because it is the most ma^erial, as arising
from the different nature of the things spoken of: whereas the three that
follow are rather verbal, arising but from the different manner of the Apostles
expressions in respect of the words. The first whereof ( the second of the
whole four) is* that the evil effects proceeding from the flesh, are called by
the name of Works; and the good effects proceeding from the Spirit are called
by the name of Fruits. The Quaery is, Why those and these being both effects
alike, they are not either both alike called Works, or both alike called
Fruits; but the one Works, the othere Fruit, The works of the Flesh there; here
the fruit of the Spirit?

23. For answer whereunto, I shall propose to your choice two Conjectures. The
one more Theological, or rather Metaphysical, which is almost as new to me, as
perhaps it will seem to you, for it came not into my thoughts till I was upon
it:) the other more moral and popular. For the former, take it thus: Where the
immediate Agent produces a work or effect, virtue propria, by his own power,
and not in the virtue of a superior Agent: both the work it self produced, and
the efficacy of the operation whereby it is produced, are to be ascribed to him
alone; so as it may be said properly and precisely to be his work. But where
the immediate Agent operateth virtute ali^na, in the strength and virtue of
some higher Agent, without which he were not able to produce the effect: tho
the work done may even there also be attributed in some so^^ to the inferior
and subordinate Agent, as the immediate cause; yet the efficacy* whereby it was
wrought, cannot be so properly imputed to him, but ought rather to be ascribed
to that higher Agent, in whose virtue he did operate.

24. The Application will make it somewhat plainer. In all humane actions,
whether good or bad, the will of Man is the immediate Agent: so that whether we
commit a sin, or do a good work, inasmuch as it proceeds from our free Wills,
the work is still our work howsoever. But herein is the difference between good
and evil actions; The Will (which is naturally in this depraved estate conrupt,
and fleshly) operateth by its own power alone for the producing of a sinful
action, without any cooperation at all (as was said already) of God or his
holy Spirit: and therefore the sin so produced, is to be ascribed to the
fleshly Will, as to the sole and proper cause thereof, and may therefore very
rightly be said to be the work of the flesh. But in the producing of any action
that is spiritually good, the Will operateth only as a subordinate Agent to the
grace of the holy Spirit, and in the power and virtue thereof: and therefore
although Haec cum certum sit omnino in nobis actitari spiritu, Dei sunt munira:
quia vero cum nostrae volunta^is assensu, nostra sunt merita. Bern. de great.
and lib. ^rb. 1 Cor. 1^. 10.
the good work may in some sort be said to be our work, because immediately
produced by our Wills; yet it is in truth the fruit of that Spirit, and not of
our Wills, because it is wrought by the power of that Spirit, and not by any
power of our Wills; [Nevertheless, not I, but the grace of God with me, 1 Cor.
15.]

25. If this seem but a subtilty, and satisfy not, let it go: the other I
presume will, being it is so plain and popular. The word Fruit most what
relates to some Labor going before. Terent. Adelph. 5. 4. Phil. 1. 22. 2 Timothy
2. 6.
Hoc fructus pro labor ab his fero, in the Poet. So in the Scriptures,
Nevertheless this is the fruit of my labor. The husbandman that first
labors, must be partaker of the fruit: Labor first, and then Fruit. That
which David calls the labor of the hands, ( Thou shall eat the labor of thy
Psalm. 128. 2. Prove. 31. 31.
hands) Psalm. 128. Solomon calls the fruit of the hands, ( Give her of the
fruit of her hands) Prove. 31.

26. The reason is, because no Man would willingly undergo any toil or labor
to no end: he would have something or other in his eye that might in some
measure recompense his pains; and that is called the fruit of his labor. Tully
therefore joineth -- praemium and fructum officii repetere. Cic antequam ire^
in exilium. 1 Cor. 9. 7.
proemium and fructum together, as importing the same thing. Who planteth a
Vineyard, but in hope to eat of the fruit of it? Or what Husbandman would plow
and sow, and plant and prune, and dig and dung, if he did not hope to find it
all answered again, when he comes to inn the Fruits? Horat. 2. Epist. 1.
Spe fructus dura ferentes. The first question in every Man's thoughts, when he
is importuned to any thing of labor and business, is, Ennius.
Ecquid erit pretii? Will it be worth my labor? What Quae tamen inde seges?
Quis terrae fructus apertae? Juv. Sat. 7.
benefit shall I reap by it? What will be the fruit of my pains?

27. In all deliberations, where two ways are offered to our choice; Wisdom
would that we should first weigh, as advisedly and exactly as we can, the
labor and the fruit of the one against the other: and as we find those
(rightly compared) to be more or less, to make our (...). Homer. I^liad. 9.
resolutions accordingly. We are called on hard on both sides: God commands
us to serve him; Satan and the World solicit us to the service of sin.
Promises there are, or Intimations, of Fruit, on both sides: Salvation to our
Souls on the one side, Satisfaction to our Lusts on the other. Here then is our
business and our wisdom, to compare what is required, and what is offered on
both sides: to examine on the one side first, and then on the other, whether
the Work exceed the Fruit, or the Fruit the Work.

28. Now the Apostle by the very choice of his words here, has after a sort
done the business, and determined the Controversy to our hands. In the service
of sin, the toil is so great, that in comparison thereof the benefit is as
nothing: and in the Service of God the benefit so great, that in comparison
thereof the pains is as nothing. Where the Flesh rules all, the Work exceeds
the Fruit: and therefore without ever mentioning the Fruit, they are called the
Works of the Flesh. But where the Spirit of God rules, the Fruit exceeds the
Work: and therefore without ever mentioning the Work, it is called the Fruit of
the Spirit.

29. If in this passage only this different manner of speaking had been used by
the Apostle, it might perhaps have been taken for a casual expression,
unsufficient to ground any collection upon. But look into Ephesians. 5. and you
cannot doubt but it was done of choice, and with this very meaning. Speaking
there of the Duties of Holiness, even as here; without any mention of work, he
calls them by the name of Fruit, (The fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness,
and righteousness, and truth, verse. 9.) But by and by, verse. 11. speaking of
sinful actions, he does not only call them Works, as he does here, but
positively and expressly pronounces them fruitless; (Have no fellowship with
the unfruitful works of darkness): Works, but without Fruit; unfruitful works
of darkness. This justifies the collection to be evident, and natural, and
without enforcement. The ways of sin are very toilsom, yet withal unfruitful:
but in all spiritual labor there is profit. The fruit will countervail the
pains, and recompense it abundantly. We may not unfitly apply to these two his
words in the Comedy, Terent. Phorm. 2. 2.
In his fructus est, in his opera luditur.

30. The paths of sin seem indeed at the first hand, and in the entrance, to be
very pleasant and even. The Devil to draw Men in, goes before like a leveller
and smootheth the way for them; but when they are in, he drives them along,
and on they must. Be the way never so dark and slippery, never so crooked or
craggy, never so intricate and perplexed: being once engaged, they must go
through it per saxa, per ignes; stick at nothing (be it never so contrary to
the Laws of God or Men, to all natural, civil, or religious obligations, yea,
even to the principles of common humanity and reason) that avarice, ambition,
revenge, or any other vicious lust puts them upon. Ambulavimus vias
difficiles: they confess it at last, when it is too late, and befool themselves
for it; ( We have wearied our selves in the way of wickedness and destruction,
we have gone through dangerous ways, etc.) Wisd. 5. They have wearied
themselves to work Wisd. 5. 7. Jer. 9. 5. Hab. 2. 13.
iniquity, says the Prophet Jeremiah: and the Prophet Habakkuk, The people
labor in the very fire. The Greek word, that signifies wickedness, comes of
another that signifies labor, (...) of (...). And how often in the Scriptures
do we meet with suchlike Phrases as those, to work wickedness, workers of
iniquity, etc. St. Chrysostom's eloquence enlarges it self, and triumphs in
this argument more frequently, and with greater variety of invention and
amplification, than in almost any other: and he clears it often and beyond
all exception, both by Scripture and Reason, that the life of a wicked or
worldly Man, is a very druggery infinitely more toilsom, vexatious and
unpleasant, than a godly life is.

31. Now if, after all this droyling, the fruit would (tho but in a scant
proportion) answer the pains, it were the more tolerable. But there is no such
matter: the Sinner has but his labor for his pains. Nay, I may say, it were
happy for him, if he had but his labor for his pains; and that there were not
a worse matter yet behind. The best they can hope in the mean time is nothing
but vanity; and vanity is nothing. Man walks in a vain shadow, and
disquieteth Psalm. 39. 6.
himself in vain, says David. The work disquietness; the fruit vanity. The
Hab. 2. 13.
people labor in the very fire, you heard but now from the Prophet: his very
next words are, they weary themselves for very vanity. St. Peter therefore
calls the conversation of sinners, a vain conversation. And St. Paul puts
the question 1 Pet. 1. 18.
home to their Consciences; after a sort challenging them to answer directly to
it, if they could, What fruit had you then in those things? Romans 6. Romans 6. 21.


32. No great reason then, if we well consider it, why we should envy sinners,
tho they prosper never so much in wicked designs, and seem to reap the fruit of
their labors, in the success of their affairs. All temporal advantages of
Wealth, Honor, Power, Pleasure, and the like, which are the utmost fruit that
a sinner can fancy to himself of all his labor, have but a show and semblance,
not the truth and reality of Fruit. Both because in the mean time they give not
that satisfaction in the enjoyment, which was desired and expected from them in
the pursuit: as they write of the Apples of Sodom, that look very fair and
full, and tempt the eye, but as soon as touched Solin. cap. 38. -- contacta
cinerescunt. Tert. Apol. c. 40.
fatiscunt in vagum pulverem; like a fuss-ball, resolve all into dust and
smoke. As also because they have a very ill farewell with them at the last.
Honey in the mouth perhaps, (and that but perhaps neither) but Gall certainly
in the stomach* if not rather rank Poison. Know they not it will be bitterness
in the end? Shame, Sorrow, and bitter Repentance? And that is the best end
imaginable of such bad beginnings. But without repentance, eternal death and
damnation not to be avoided: for the Romans 6. 21.
end of those things (used and continued in) is death.

33. Let us not therefore either envy their prosperity, or yet follow their
example. Wherefore should we lay out our money for that which is not bread, or
Isa. 55. 1.
our labor for that which satisfies not? When we may drive a far easier trade
with far more profit another way: have less toil, and yet reap more fruit. And
that is, by walking in the holy ways of God, and taking upon us the yoke of
Christ. That, we are told, is an easy yoke, at least in comparison of the
other, (that of Mat. 11. 30.
Satan) and a light burden: and we have no reason to disbelieve it, Truth it
self having told us so. Especially considering, that he puts under the
shoulder himself also, and, by helping to bear with us, bears off in a manner
the whole weight from us, leaving no more for us to carry, than by the strength
he gives us he knows we are well able to bear, if we will but put to our
good 1 Cor. 10. 13.
wills, and use that strength. Nay, do but compare the works themselves, and
you must conclude, that his Commandments are more equitable, and less grievous
1 John 5. 3.
than are the imperious commands of our own raging and exorbitant lusts. Will
not any reasonable Man, upon the hearing of the names of the things only,
presently yield that Love, and Joy, and Peace, and Gentleness, (for example)
which are fruits of the Spirit, are far more lovely and desirable, more easy
and delightful, fuller of sweetness and calmness, less toilsome and vexatious,
than are Hatreds, and Debates, and Emulations, and Seditions, and Murders, and
those other Works of the Flesh.

34. Now if, as the task is easier, so the benefit be greater: what can excuse
our folly, if we do not give up our selves to be ordered by the guidance of the
Spirit in every thing, rather than yield to satisfy the lust's of the flesh in
any thing? And the benefit is greater. A sure reward, says Solomon: For God is
not unrighteous Prove. 11. 18. Heb. 6. 10. Psalm. 19. 11. Mat. 10. 42.
to forget your labor of Faith and Love. A great reward, says David; and that
many times for a very little work done; the giving of a cup of cold water to
refresh a thirsty Soul, shall not want its reward. It is our Apostle's advice
elsewhere, that we should always abound in the work of the Lord: and that upon
this 1 Cor. 15. ult.
very ground, forasmuch as you know, says he, that your labor is not in vain
in the Lord. If we labor in his work, we shall find the fruit of it in time.

35. Only let us be content to stay the time: and not to be thrusting in the
sickle before the corn be half ripe. The Husbandman, when he has done his work
in earing and sowing, does not look to receive the precious fruits of the earth
into his Garners again the next day, or the next month; but he has long
patience for it; Jam. 5. 7.
and whether it chance to be an early harvest, or a late harvest, he waits
still, and takes the season as it falls. Even so have we need of patience,
that Heb. 10. 36.
after we have done the will of God, and suffered according to the will of God,
we may receive the promised reward: for in due time we shall reap, if we faint
not. Gal. 6. 9.
The final reward is sure, veniens veniet, it will come at last, and not fail
us: and it is so great withal (copiosa nimis) that when it comes, it will
abundantly Heb. 10. 37.
recompense all our work, yea, and our patience too.

36. Nay, let me say, if that reward were not, nor any other world to come, yet
the fruit we reap in the mean, even in this world from a godly life, is
incomparably greater than any that the works of the flesh can yield us. Even in
the judgment of heathen men, Virtue ever carries its reward with it, as being
bonum propter se expetendum, a thing to be desired and embraced for its own
worth, without respect to any farther reward. And certainly the evenness of the
mind, and vacuity from those secret lashes, those horrors and fears that haunt
a guilty Conscience; and the sweet comfort and complacency that a righteous
Soul finds in the sincere performance of his bounden duty to God and Man, in
eschewing evil and doing good, is a fruit infinitely more valuable than all the
pleasures and sensualities of a wicked life. How happy then is he, that truly
Romans 6. 22. Mar. 10. 30.
serves God; who both has his fruit in holiness onward, (that is the
hundredfold in this life, Mark 10.) and shall in the end have everlasting life
to boot.

37. There are of the four differences proposed, two more yet behind: which I
must dispatch in few words. The third is, that the Works of the Flesh are
spoken of as many, (...), Works, in the Plural: but the fruit of the Spirit is
spoken of as one, (...), Fruit, in the Singular. Many Works, but one Fruit.
There is such a -- ita copulatae connexaeque sunt, ut omnes omnium participes
sint, nec alia ab alia possit separari. Cic. 5. de finib. -- conspiratio,
consensusque virtutum. Ibid. -- omnes inter se nexae and conjugatae sunt. Id.
qu. Tusc. 3. Romans 2. 22.
connection of Virtues and Graces, that albeit they differ in their Objects and
Natures, yet they are inseparable in the Subject. As when many links make up
one chain; pull one, and pull all: So he that has any one spiritual grace in
any degree of truth and eminency, cannot be utterly destitute of any other. But
as for sins and vices, it is not so with them: They are not only distinct in
their kinds, natures, and definitions (for so are virtues too;) but they may
also be divided from one another, and parted asunder in respect of the subject
wherein they are. We are told, Romans 2. (and if we were not told it, we could
not but see reason enough in these times to believe it) that a Man may hate
Idolatry, a work of the flesh; and yet love Sacrilege well enough, a work of
the flesh too. There is no necessity that a Swearer should be an Adulterer, or
an Adulterer a Slanderer, or a Slanderer an Oppressor, or an Oppressor a
Drunkard, or a Drunkard a Seditious Person; and so of many other.

38. The reason of the difference is, because all spiritual graces look one
way: they all run to the same indivisible point, wherein they concenter; to
wit, Almighty God, who is bonum incommutabile, unchangeable and one: Even as
all moral virtues concenter in the same common point of right reason. But Sins,
which turn from God to follow the Creature; and Vices, which are so many
deviations from the rule of right reason; do not all necessarily run toward
the same point, but may have their several tendencies different one from
another. Because though God be one, yet the Creatures are manifold; and
although the straight way from one place to another can be but one, yet there
may be many croaked turnings, bypath and deviations. Even as Truth is but one
and certain, but Errors are manifold and endless.

39. The Spirit of God whose fruits these are, is first a renewing Spirit. It
1. Psalm. 51. 10. Gal. 6. 15.
creates a new heart in a Man, whereby he becomes a kind of new Creature: it
disposes him to Obedience. And true obedience is copulative: it submits to
the Commanders will entirely; it does not pick and choose. The Spirit of God is
secondly a holy Spirit, (the holy Spirit of Discipline): and such a holy Spirit
2. Wisd. 1. 4, 5.
will not brook to dwell in a Soul that is subject to sin. It will endure no
such intimate: they can no more dwell together, than Light can fellow with
darkness. But where any Grace is wanting, there must needs be the contrary sin
to fill up the Vacuity: and therefore where that Holy Spirit is, there cannot
be a total defect of any holy grace. The Spirit of God is also a loving Spirit;
and 3. Romans 5. 5.
sheddeth abroad the love of God in every heart it takes possession of. And
Love is so comprehensive a Grace, that it includes all the rest; and so is in
effect the fulfilling of the whole Law. There is a thread of Love that runs
through all Romans 13. 10.
the particular duties and offices of Christian life, and stringeth them like
so many rich Pearls into one Chain. See 1 Cor. 13. throughout.

40. A consideration not unuseful, to quicken our care for the subduing of
every sinful lust, and our endeavor to have every grace of the Spirit
habituated in us. Knowing that so long as we allow our selves in any one sin,
suffer any one lust of the Flesh to remain in us unsubdued (at least in respect
of desire and endeavor) there cannot be any one true grace of God in us. There
are certain common graces of Illumination, which are the effects also of God
Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 1. and 14. 1.
and are therefore called (...) spiritual gifts: and those indeed are given by
dole ( Aliu^ sic, aliu^ vero sic) Knowledge to one, to another Tongues, 1 Cor.
12. 8. -- 10.
to another Healings, Miracles, etc. all by the same Spirit, manifesting
himself to sundry persons in sundry kinds and measures, and dividing to every
on severally as ^e will. But it is nothing so in the special graces of
Sanctification: there is no distribution, or division here. Either all, or
none. He that certainly wants any one (at least in the desire and endeavor)
may justly suspect, that all those he seems to have, are but so many
counterfeits. All this variety of Graces makes but one Fruit.

41. The last difference is, That the works of the Flesh are expressly said to
be manifest, Verse. 19. but no such thing affirmed of the Fruit of the Spirit.
The most probable reasons of which difference are, to my seeming, one of these
two following* First, the commonness and frequency of those above these
everywhere abroad in the World. The Works of the Flesh, Adultry, Fornication,
U^oleanness, Wantonness, Idolatry, Witchoraft, Hatreds, Emulation, Debate,
Wrath, Strifes, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders, Gluttony, Drunkenness,
and such like (I name them, because the bare re^ital of them will save me the
labor of farther proof) do so abound in all places, that you can scarce look
beside them. Turn your eyes which way you will, ye shall see cursed examples of
some or other of these every day, and in every street, and every corner. Alas,
the Works of the Flesh are but too manifest!

42. But the fruits of the Spirit are not so. Love, Peace, Gentleness, Faith,
Meekness, Temperance and the rest: these are very thin grown in the World; they
are rarities not every where to be met withal. Insomuch as David complainingly
cries out, There is not one godly Man left, Psalm. 12. and Psalm. 14. There is
none that does good, no not one. And the Prophet Jeremy, when he had run to
Jer. 5. 1, etc.
and fro in the streets of Jerusalem for the purpose, to find a Man that
executed judgment, and sought after truth, when he had employed his legs, and
his eyes, and his tongue in search; he could not yet find the Man he looked
for. Hepps and H^ws grow in every hedge; when choicer fruits are but in some
few gardens: and every soil almost yields stones and rubbish; but gold and
precious stones are found in very few places.

43. Secondly, the Works of the Flesh may be said to be manifest, and the (...)
of the Spirit not so; with respect to our judgments of them, and the easiness
of discerning the one sort more than the other. The works of the Flesh are so
manifestly evil, that no man of common sense can lightly be mistaken in them.
Murder, Sedition, Drunkenness, Adultery; it is not possible any Man should be
of such gross understanding, as to imagine they should be the Fruits of God's
holy Spirit: they are udoubtedly, and manifestly, to every Man's apprehension,
the Works of the Flesh. But as for the fruits of the Spirit, they are not so
manifest, but that a Man* who has not his senses very well exercised to Heb.
5. 14.
the descerning of good and evil, may be easily deceived therein. Hypocrisy is
spun oftentimes of a very fine thread: and the heart of Man abounding with so
much hypocrisy as it does, and so much self-love and uncharitableness withal,
is the Jer. 17. 9.
most deceitful thing (yea, and the most decevibable too; actively, and
passively both) of any thing in the world. There are on the one side* so many
Mock-Graces, and specious counter feits, that carry a semblance of spiritual
fruit, but are not the things they seem to be: And on the other side,
inordinate love of our selves partly, and partly, want of Charity toward our
brethren, have so disposed us to a capacity of being deceived; that it is no
wonder, if in passing our judgments (especially where our selves are concerned)
we be very much and very often mistaken* It might rather be a wonder, if we
should not be sometimes mistaken.

44. As most Errors claim to be a little akin to some Truths: so most Vices
challenge a kind of affinity to some Virtue. Not so much from any proper
intrinsecal true resemblance they have with such virtues; as by reason of the
common opposition they both have to one and the same contrary Vice. As
Prodigality has some overly likeness with Liberality, and so may hap to be
Decipimur specie recti. Horat. de art. Fallit enim vitium specie virtutis and
umbra. Juven. Sat. 14.
mistaken for it: for no other cause but this only, that they are both contrary
to Covetousness. (...), says Arist. in Elench.
Aristotle truly: fallacy and deception, for the most part, arise from the
appearance of some likeness o^ similitude; when things that are like, but not
the same* are taken to be (...). Arist. de insom. cap. 3.
the same, because they are like. They that have given us marks of sincerity
for the trial of our Graces, have not been able to give us any certain Rules or
infallible Characters, whereby to try the sincerity of those Marks; so as to
remove all doubtings and possibility of erring.

45. Whence I supose I may safely infer, that the certainty of a Man's present
standing in grace, but much more then of his eternal future salvation (although
I doubt not but by the mercy of God it may be attainable in this life, and that
without extraordinary revelation, in such a measure as may sustain the soul of
an honest Christian with comfort) is not yet either so absolutely necessary,
nor so void of fears and doubtings, as some perhaps have imagined.

46. Not so necessary, but that a Man may be saved without it. Many a good
soul, no doubt, there is in the world, that out of the experience of the
falseness of his own heart, and the fear of self-deceit* and the sense of his
own unworthiness, could never yet attain to be so well persuaded of the
sincerity of his own Repentance, Faith, and Obedience, as to think that God
would approve of it, and accept it. The censure were very hard, and a great
violation it would be of Charity I am sure, (and I think of Truth also) to
pronounce such a Man to be out of the State of Salvation; or to call such his
dis-persuasion by the name of Despair, and under that name to condemn it. There
is a common, but a great mistake in this matter: Despair is far another manner
of thing than many take it for. When a Man thinks himself so incapable of
God's pardon, that he grows thereupon -- desperatione meliorum, haerere
prioribus. Hier. Epist. 46. -- ne men's incredula -- desperet, and semel
perditioni animus destinatus, non adhibeat vulneri curationem: quod nequaquam
existimat posse curari. Ibid.
regardless of all duties, and neither cares what he does, nor what shall
become of him; when he is once come to this resolution, Over shoes, over boots;
I know God will never forgive me, and therefore I will never trouble my self to
seek his favor in vain: this is to run a deseperate course indeed; this is
properly the sin of Despair. But when the fear that God has not yet pardoned
him, prompteth him, to better resolutions, and exciteth him to a greater care
of repentance and newness of life, and makes him more diligent in the
performance of all holy duties, that so he may be the more capable of pardon:
it is so far from being any way prejudical to his eternal salvation, that it is
the readiest way to secure it.

47. But where the greatest certainty is, that can be attained to in this life,
by ordinary means, it is not ordinarily (unless perhaps to some few persons at
the very hour of death) so perfect, as to exclude all doubtings. The fruits of
the Spirit, where they are true and sincere, being but imperfect in this life;
and the truth and sincerity of them being not always so manifest, but that a
Man may sometimes be deceived in his judgment concerning the same; it can
hardly be, what between the one and the other, (the imperfection of the thing,
and the difficulty of judging) but that the Assurance, which is wholly grounded
thereupon, and can therefore have no more strength than they can give it, must
be subject to Fears, Iealonsies, and Doubtings.

48. I speak not this to shake any Man's comfort (God forbid) but to stir up
every Man's care to abound and increase so much the more in all godliness, 2
Pet. 1. 5.
and in the fruits of the Spirit; by giving all diligence, by walking in the
Spirit, and subduing the Lusts of the Flesh, to make his Calling and Election
sure: Sure in it self, that he fail not of Salvation in the end; and sure to
him also, as far as he can, that his comfort may be the greater and sounder in
the mean time.

Now the God of all Grace and Glory, send the Spirit of his Son plentifully
into our Hearts; that we may abound in the Fruits of godly living, to the
praise of his Grace, our present comfort in this Life, and the eternal
salvation of our Souls in the Day of our Lord Jesus Christ. AD MAGISTRATUM.
The First. Sermon.
At the Assizes at Lincoln, in the Year 1690* at* the Request of Sir DANIEL
D^IGN^ Knight, then High Sheriff of that Co^^^y.
Prove. 24. 10; 12. 10. If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is
small. 11. If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death* and those
that are ready to be s^ain: 12. If thou say, Behold we know it not: does not
he that pondereth the heart, consider it? and he that keeps thy soul, does
not he know it? and shall not he render to every man according to his works?
1. AS in most other things, so in the performance of that duty which this Text
aims at; we are neither careful beforehand (such is the uncharitableness of
our incompassionate hearts) to do well: nor yet willing afterward, (through
the pride of our Spirits) to acknowledge we have done ill. The holy Spirit of
God therefore has directed Solomon, in this Scripture, wherein he would incite
us to the performance of the duty, to frame his words in such sort, as to meet
with us in both these corruptions: and to let us see, that as the duty is
necessary, and may not be neglected; so the neglect is damnable, and cannot be
excused. In the handling whereof, I shall not need to bestow much labor,
either in searching into the contexture of the words, or examining the
differences of translations: Because the sentence (as in the rest of this Book
for the most part) has a complete sense within it self, without any necessary
either dependence upon any thing going before, or reference to any thing coming
after: and the differences that are in the translations, are neither many in
number, nor of any great weight, for altering the meaning of the words. Nor is
it my purpose to insist upon such inferior observations, as might be raised
from some expressions or circumstances in the Text, otherwise than as they
shall occasionally fall in our way, in the prosecution of those main points,
which to the apprehension of ev^r^ understanding hearer* do at the very first
view appear to have been chiefly intended therein.

2. And they but two. First, The supposal of a duty: tho for the most part, and
by most Men, very slackly regarded; and that is the delivering of the
oppressed: In the two former verses, [ If thou faint in the day of adversity;
If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death, and those that are
ready to be slain.] Secondly, The removal of the common pretensions which Men
usually plead by way of excuse, or extenuation at least, when they have failed
in the former duty: In the last verse, [ If thou say, Behold, we knew it
not: does not he that pondereth the heart, consider it? etc.] So that if we
will speak any thing to the purpose of the Text, we must of necessity speak to
those two points, that do therefrom so readily offer themselves to our
consideration: to wit, the necessity of the Duty first, and then the vanity of
the Excuses.

3. The Duty is contained, and the necessity of it gathered, in and from the
tenth and eleventh verses, in these words; If thou faint in the day of
adversity, thy strength is small: If thou forbear to deliver them that are
drawn unto death, and those that are ready to be slain. Wherein the particulars
considerable are; First, The persons to whom the duty is to be performed, as
the proper object of our justice and charity; Them that are drawn unto death,
and those that are ready to be slain: They especially, but (...), also all
others that are in their condition in any kind or degree; those that are
injured or oppressed, or in danger to be injured or oppressed by any manner,
way, or means. 2ly, An act of Charity and Justice to be performed toward those
that are in such a condition, by such, as (by reason of the power, and
opportunities, and other advantages that God has put into their hands) are in
a capacity to do it; which is the very duty it self; viz. to look upon them in
the day of their adversity, and to deliver them out of the hand of their
oppressors. 3ly, A possibility of the neglect or nonperformance of this so
just and charitable a duty, by those that might (and therefore ought) to do it;
expressed here by the name of forbearance: If thou forbear to deliver. 4ly, The
true immediate cause of that neglect, wheresoever it is found, viz. the want of
spirit and courage in the heart, faint-heartedness: from whatsoever former or
remoter cause thht faintness may proceed, whether a pusillanimous fear of the
displeasure, or a desire to wind himself into the favor of some great person;
or the expectation of a reward; or a lothness to interpose in other Men's
affairs; or mere sloth, and a kind of unwillingness of putting himself to so
much trouble; or whatever other reason or inducement can be supposed. If thou
faint in the day of adversity. Lastly, The censure of that neglect: it is an
evident demonstration ( a posteriori, and as all other visible effects are of
their more inward and secret causes) a certain Token and Argument of a sinful
weakness of mind; If thou faintest, etc. thy strength is small.

4. The result of these particulars amount in the whole to this. Every Man,
according to his place and power, but especially those that being in place of
Magistracy and Judicature, are armed with public authority for it, are both in
Charity and Justice obliged to use the utmost of their power, and to lay hold
on all fit opportunities, by all lawful means, to help those to right that
suffer wrong; to stand by their poorer Brethren and Neighbors in the day of
calamity and distress; and to set in for them thoroughly and stoutly in their
righteous causes; to protect them from injuries, and to deliver them out of the
hands of such as are too mighty, or too crafty for them, and as seek (either by
violence or cunning) to deprive them either of their lives or livelihoods.
Briefly thus, and according to the language of the Text; It is our duty, every
one of us, to use our best strength to deliver the oppressed: but our sin, if
we faint, and forbear so to do. And the making good, and the pressing of this
duty, is like to be all our business at this time.

5. A point of such clear and certain truth, that the very Heathen Philosophers
and Law givers have owned it as a beam of the light of Nature: insomuch as even
in their account he that Injustitiae du^ genera: alterum eorum, qui cum
possunt, non prop^lsant injuriam, etc. Cic. 3. offic.
abstaineth from doing injuries, has done but the one half of that which is
required to complete Justice; if he do not withal defend others from injuries,
when it is in his power so to do. But of all other Men, our Solomon could least
be ignorant of this truth; not only for that reason, because God had filled his
heart with a large measure of wisdom beyond other Men; but even for this reason
also; that being born of wise and godly Parents, and born to a Kingdom too, (in
which high calling he should be sure to meet with occasions enough whereon to
exercise all the strength he had;) he had this truth (considering the great
usefulness of it to him in the whole time of his future Government) early
distilled into him by both his Parents, and was seasoned thereinto from his
childhood in his education. His father David, in Psalm. 72. which he penned of
purpose as a prophetical benediction and instruction for his Son, (as appears
by the Inscription it bears in the Title of it, a Psalm for Solomon)
begins the Psalm with a Prayer to God, both for himself and him, [ Give the
King thy judgments, O God, and thy righteousness unto the King's Son.] And then
after shows for what end he made that Prayer, and what should be the effect,
in order to the Public, if God should be pleased to grant it. [ Then shall he
judge the people according unto right, and defend the poor, verse. 2. He shall
keep the simple folk by their right, defend the children of the poor, and
punish the wrong doer]; or (as it is in the last Translation) break in pieces
the oppressor, verse. 4. and after at the 12, 13, and 14 verses, ( although perhaps
the passages there might principally look at Christ, the true Solomon, and
Prince of Peace, a greater than Solomon, and of whom Solomon was but a Figure;
yet I believe they were also literally intended for Solomon himself) He shall
deliver the poor when he cries, the needy also, and him that has no helper.
He shall be favorable to the simple and needy, and shall preserve the souls of
the poor. He shall deliver their souls from falsehood and wrong; and dear shall
their blood be in his sight. And the like instructions to those of his Father,
he received also from his Mother Bathsheba, in the Prophecy which she taught
him, with much holy wisdom for the matter, and with much tenderness of motherly
affection for the manner, (What? my Son! and what, the Son of my Womb! and
what, the Son of my Vows!) Prove. 31. where she gives him this in charge, verse.
8, 9. Open thy mouth for the dumb, in the cause of all such as are appointed to
destruction: Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and plead the cause of the poor
and needy.

6. For the further evidencing of the necessity of which Duty, that so we may
be the more effectually quickened to the cheerful and conscionable performance
of it: there are sundry important, whether reasons or inducements, or both (for
we shall not now stand so much upon any nice distinguishing of the terms; but
take them togetherward, the one sort with the other:) very well worthy our
Christian consideration. Some in respect of God, some in respect of our selves;
some in respect of our Brethren, and some in respect of the thing it self in
the effects thereof.

7. To being with the most High: we have his Command first, and then his
Example, to the same purpose. First, His Command: and that very frequently
repeated both in the Law of Moses, and in the Psalms, and in the Prophets. I
shall the less need to cite particular places, since that general and
fundamental Law, which is the ground of them all, is so well known to us; even
that, which our Savior makes Mat. 22. 39.
the second great Commandment, that Jam. 2. 8.
(...), as St. James calls it, that Royal Law, Thou shall love thy neighbor
as thy self. Oh, how we can stickle in our own Cause^! and solicit our own
business with unwearied diligence! How active, and provident, and vigilant we
can be, in things wherein our selves are concerned, or when our own lives or
livelihoods are in jeopardy! Not giving sleep to our eyes, or slumber to our
eyelids, till we have delivered our selves from the snare of the Oppressor,
Prove. 6. 5.
As a Roe from the hand of the hunter, or as the Bird from the snare of the
fowler! Now if we can be thus fiery and stirring when it is for our selves, but
frozen and remiss when we should help our neighbor: how do we fulfill the royal
Law according to the Scripture, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self?

8. Let no Man think to put off this duty, with the Lawyers question, Luke 10.
But who is my neighbor? Or with the Pharisees evading Gloss, Mat. 5. Thou Luke
10. 19. Mat. 5. 43.
shall love thy neighbor: My neighbor? True; but not mine enemy. Or with
Nabal's churlish reasoning, 1 Samuel 25. Shall I put my self to pains and
trouble, 1 Samuel 25. 11.
for Men whom I know not whence they be? For in all the cases wherein the
offices, whether of Justice or Charity are to be exercised, every Man is every
other Man's neighbor. All Men being by the Ordinance of God so linked
together, and concorporated one into another: that they are not only all 1 Cor.
12. 12.
members of the same body, (of the same civil Body, as they are Men; and of the
same mystical Body too, if they be Christians;) but even members also one of
another, Ephesians. 4. yea, even every one, one another members, Romans 12. So that if
any Ephesians. 4. 25. Romans 12. 5.
Man stand in need of thy help, and it be in the power of thy hand to do him
good: whether he be known to thee, or a stranger, whether thy friend, or thy
foe; he is a limb of thee, and thou a limb of him. He may challenge an interest
and a propriety in thee; as thy poor and thy needy, Deuteronomy. 15. Yea, more, as
thine Deat. 15. 11.
own flesh, Isa. 58. Thou may not therefore hide thy self from him, because
Isa. 58. 7.
he is thine own flesh. For thy flesh, thou art bound, tho not to pamper, yet
to nourish and to cherish it; by affording all convenient succor and supply to
the necessities of it.

9. God then has laid upon us his Royal Command in this behalf. Nor so only,
but he has also laid before us a Royal Precedent in his own blessed example.
Lord, thou have heard the desire of the poor! to help the fatherless and poor
Psalm. 10. 17, 18.
unto their right, that the Man of the earth be no more exalted against them,
Psalm. 10. says David for the time past: and for the time to come, Psalm. 140.
Sure -- 140. 12.
I am, that the Lord will avenge the poor, and maintain the cause of the
helpless. If you would hear it rather from his own mouth; take it from Psalm.
12. Now for -- 12. 5.
the comfortless troubles* sake of the needy, and because of the deep sighing
of the poor, I will up, says the Lord, and will help every one from him that
swells against him, and will set them at rest. You see which way your
heavenly Father goes before you: Now Ephesians. 5. 1.
be ye followers of God as dear children. It is the hope of every good
Christian, that he shall hereafter be like unto God in glory and happiness: it
should therefore be his care in the mean time to be like unto God in grace and
goodness; in being Luke 6. 36.
merciful, as his heavenly Father is merciful; in Psalm. 146. 8, 9.
caring for the strangers, and defending the fatherless and widow; in helping
those to right that suffer wrong; and in doing works of Piety, and Charity, and
Mercy. The duty concerns all in general.

10. But Princes, Judges, Magistrates, and all that are in authority, are more
specially engaged to follow the example of God herein: since God has been
pleased to set a special mark of honor upon them, in vouchsafing to put his
own Name upon them, and so to make them a kind of Petty Gods upon earth, Psalm.
82. 6.
Dixi Dii, I have said ye are Gods, Psalm. 82. Not so much (be sure) for the
exalting of their Power, and to procure them due honor, esteem, and obedience
from those that are under them, (though that also no doubt was intended
thereby: as to instruct them in their Duty, and estsoons to remember them, that
they are very unworthy the glorious title they bear of being Gods, if they do
not imitate the great and true God, by exercising their Godships (if I may so
speak) in doing good, and protecting innocence. Flatterers will be ready enough
to tell you, You are Gods: but it is to evil and pernicious purposes; to swell
you up with conceits of I know not what omnipotency. You are Gods, and
therefore may do what you will* without fear in your selves, or control from
any other. They that tell you so with such an intention, are liers: and you
should not give them any countenance, or credit, or so much as the hearing. But
when the God of Truth tells you* Ye are Gods; he tells you withal in the
same place (and, as it were, with the same breath) what you are to do
answearably to that Title, and by what evidence you must approve your selves,
to be Gods. -- 3, 4.
Defend the poor and fatherless, says he in that Psalm; See that such as be in
need and necessity have right. Deliver the outcast and poor: Save them from
the hand of the ungodly. This premised, it then follows (one verse only
interse^^ed) -- 6.
I have said, Ye are Gods. As if he had said; So do, and then you are Gods
indeed: but without this care, you are Idols, and not Gods. Much like the
Idol-Gods of the Heathen, Psalm. 115. ^* 6.
that have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, mouths and speak ^^ot* that
have a great deal of worship from the people, and much reverence, but are good
for nothing. By this very Argument in Baruc 6. are such Idols disproved to be
Gods. They can save no Man from Baruc. 6. 36. -- -- 40.
death, neither deliver the weak from the mighty. They cannot restore a blind
Man to his sight, nor help any Man in his distress. They can show no mercy to
the widow, nor do good to the fatherless. How should a Man then think, and say,
that they are Gods?

11. I hope the greatest upon earth need think it no disparagement to their
greatness, to look down upon the afflictions of their meanest brethren, and to
stoop to their necessities: when the great God of Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 113.
5. -- 7.
who has his dwelling so high, yet humbles himself to behold the simple that
lie as low as the dust, and to li^t up the poor that sticks fast in the mire.
-- 102. 19, 20
The Lord looks down from his Sanctuary: from the Heaven did the Lord behold
the Earth; That he might hear the mournings of such as be in captivity, and
deliver the children appointed unto death. So then for the performance of this
duty, thou have God's Commandment upon thee, and thou have God's Example before
thee. If there be in thee any true fear of God, thou will obey his Command: and
if any true hope in God, follow his Example.

12. If from God we look downward in the next place upon our selves; and duly
consider* either what power we have, or what need we may have: from both
considerations we may discover yet farther the necessity of this duty. And
first from our Power. There is no power but of God: and God bestows no power
upon Man (nor indeed upon any Creature whatsoever) to no purpose. The natural
powers and faculties, as well of our reasonable souls, as of our organical
bodies, they have all of them their several uses and operations, unto which
they are designed: And by the Principles of all good Philosophy, we cannot
conceive of Power, but in order and with reference to Act. Look then what power
God has put into any of our hands in any kind, and in any measure, it lies us
upon, to employ it to the best advantage we can, for the good of our brethren:
for to this very end God has given us that power, whatever it be, that we
might do good therewithal. The Lord has in his wise providence so disposed the
things of this World, that there should ever be some rich, to relieve the
necessities of the poor; and some poor, to exercise the charity of the rich. So
likewise he has laid distresses upon some, that they might be succored by the
power of others: and lent -- (...) Eurip. Hecub. Act. 5. Psalm. 62. 11. -- 12.
-- 79. 12.
power to some, that they might be able to succor the distresses of others.
Now as God himself to whom all power properly and originally belongs,
delights to manifest his power rather in showing mercy, than in works of
destruction ( -- God spoke once, Twice have I heard the same, that power
belongs unto God, and that thou, Lord, art merciful, Psalm. 62. -- O let the
sorrowful sighing of the prisoners come before thee: according to the greatness
of thy power, preserve thou those that are appointed to die, Psalm. 79.) So all
those upon whom God has derived any part of that power, should consider that
God gave it them for edification, not for destruction; to do good withal, 2
Cor. 13. 10.
and to help the distressed, and to save the innocent: not to trample upon the
poor, and oppress those that are unable to resist. Pestifera vis est, valere ad
nocendum. Senec.
It is in truth a great weakness in any Man, rather than a demonstration of
power, to stretch his power for the doing of mischief. An evident Argument
whereof is that observation of Solomon, in Prove. 28. confirmed also by daily
Prove. 28. 3.
experience; that a poor Man, that oppresses the poor, is ever the most
merciless oppressor. It is in matter of Power many times, as it is in matter of
Learning. They that have but a smattering in Scholarship, you shall ever
observe to be the forwardest to make -- quicquid illi possunt, statim
ostendunt. Quin. 1. Inst. 3. (...). Arist. de mundo c. 1.
ostentation of those few ends they have: because they fear there would be
little notice taken of their Learning, if they should not now show it when they
can. And yet (you may observe that withal) it oftentimes falls out very
unluckily with them: that when they think most of all to show their
Scholarship, they then most of all (by some gross mistake or other) betray
their Ignorance. It is even so in this case; Men of base spirit and condition,
when they have gotten the advantage of a little power, conceive that the World
would not know what Senties qui vir siem. Terent.
goodly Men they are, if they should not do some Act or other whereby to show
forth their power to the World. And then, their minds being too narrow to
comprehend any brave and generous way whereby to do it, they cannot frame to do
it any other way, than by trampling upon those that are below them: and that
they do beyond all reason, and without all mercy.

13. This Argument, taken from the end of that power that God gives us, was
wisely and to good purpose pressed by Mordecai, Esth. 1. to Queen Esther; when
she made difficulty to go into the Presence, to intercede for the people of the
Jews, after that Haman had plotted their destruction: Who knows, says Esther
4. 14.
he there, whether thou art come to the Kingdom for such a time as this? As if
he had said, Consider the mavelous and gracious providence of God, in raising
thee, who were of a despised nation and kindred, to be partaker with the most
potent Monarch in the World, in the Royal Grown and Bed. Think not but the Lord
therein certainly intended some great work to be done by thy hand and power,
for his poor distressed Church. Now the hour is come (now if ever) will it be
seasonable for thee, to make use of those great fortunes God has advanced thee
to, and to try how far (by that power and interest thou have in the King's
favor) thou can prevail for the reversing of Haman's bloody. Decree, and the
preserving our whole Nation from utter destruction. And of this Argument there
seems to be some intimation in the very Text, as those words in the 12th
verse may (and that not unfitly) be understood; He that keeps thy soul, does
not he know it? that is, He that has preserved thee from falling into that
trouble and misery, whereinto he has suffered thy distressed brother to fall;
and has kept thee in safety and prosperity for this end, that thou might
the better be able to succor those that are helpless; does not he take
knowledge, what use thou make of that Power, and whether thou art mindful to
employ it for thy brother's good, or no?

14. Neither yet only look at the Power thou now have: but consider withal,
what need thou may have of the help of others hereafter. The World is full
of (...). Arist. 4. Phys.
changes and chances: and all things under the Sun are subject to rouling. Thou
who by reason of thy present power art now sought and sued to by others; by a
thousand casualties, more than thou can imagine, may be brought to crave
help from others. Now the Rule of equity is, Do as thou would be done to. As
thou would expect help from those that are able to succor thee, if thy self
stoodest in need: so be ready, now it is in thy power to do it, to succor
those that stand in need of thy help, and expect it from thee. Learn by that
speech of Joseph's brethren, when they were distressed in Egypt, Genesis 42. ( We
were verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish Genesis 42.
ah.
of his soul, when he sought us, and we would not hear: therefore is this
distress come upon us.) Learn, I say, from that speech of theirs, what a
dreadful pang, and torture, and corrosive it will be to thy conscience
hereafter in the day of thy calamity, when thou shall sue to others, and find
but cold comfort from them: if thy heart can then tell thee, that though Men be
hard, yet God is just; and that with what measure thou metedst to others
before, it is now measured back again (with advantage perhaps) into thine own
bosom. To prevent which misery; learn wisdom of the unjust Steward: even to
make thee friends of thy Mammon, and of thy power, and of all those blessed
opportunities and advantages thou enjoyest, by doing good with them whilst thou
have time. That when the tide shall turn, thou may also find friends to help
in time of need, to stand by thee in the day of adversity, and to deliver thy
soul from unrighteous Judges. He that would readily find help, it is but meet
and right he should readily lend help.

15. Pass we now from our selves, in the third place, to those poor oppressed
ones, to whom (as a fit object for our justice and charity, to be exercised
upon) we owe this duty of succor and subvention. From whose condition we may
find sundry farther excitements to the preformance of this duty, if we shall
consider the greatness of their distress, the scarcity of their friends, and
the righteousness of their Cause. Whereof the first proceeds from the
Cruelty, the second from the Potency, the third from the avarice, ambition, or
other iniquities of their Oppressors. First, Many times the distresses of poor
Men under the hand of their Oppressors are grievous, beyond the imagination of
those that never felt them. They are expressed in the Text (whether by way of
Synecdoche, one special kind being put to include all the rest; or by an
hyperbolical amplification for the fuller expressing of the grievousness
thereof:) by the terms of Death and Slaughter. [If thou forbear to deliver them
that are drawn to death, and those that are ready to be slain.] Verily
Oppressors are covetous: and they that are coveteous, are cruel too. For though
their aim be the spoil, and not the blood: yet rather than fail of the spoil,
they will not stick at the blood too. Come let us lay wait for blood. -- We
shall fill our houses with spoil, Prove. 1. And so the Prove. 1. 11. -- 13.
Oppressor proves both a thief and a murderer: a thief, in the end he aims
at; and a murderer, in the means whereby to obtain it: as, Ahab took away 1
King. 21. 15.
Naboth's life, that he might enjoy his Vineyard. Now surely that Man has very
little compassion in his bowels, that will not set forward a foot, nor reach
out a hand, nor open a lip, to save the precious life of his poor Brother, when
Deuteronomy. 22. 4.
he may so easily do it. Were it but an Ox, or an Ass, or some beast of less
value, that lay weltred in a ditch, common humanity will require we should lend
our hand, and put to our best strength to draw him out. Xenocrates (...). Lact.
l. 4. c. 2.
made scruple of hurting the Sparrow that flew into his lap, when a Hawk
pursued it. And ought not we then much more to set our selves with that power
we have by all lawful means to deliver our brother from the snare, and from the
pit of destruction?

16. Yea, you will say, If it were to save a Man's life, much might be: we
would then strain our selves a little to speak, or to do for him. But that is a
case seldom happens in a settled Government, such as (blessed be God for it) we
live under. The common oppressions of these times are of a lower nature: and we
are not bound by the Text to set in, but in the case of life. In petty
grievances may we not leave Men to the course of the Law, and to shift as well
as they can for themselves? We would be loath to get the displeasure of some
great ones we live near, and hold fair correspondency with, when we need not,
and -- Cur ^go amicum Offendam in nugis? Horat. in Art. Mat. 5. 21, 27.
for trifles. For answer, first, although the Text speaks expressly only of
Death: yet by a Synecdoche membri, usual in the Scriptures, all other
violencies and injuries are intended. As in the Law, under the name of Murder,
all malice and revenge; and under the name of Adultery, Fornication, and all
other uncleanness are fordidden. Secondly, though oppressions should not be
directly intended in the Text: yet might they be inferred from it by the rule
of proportion and for the reason of equity. For where there is the same reason
of equity, (as in the present case) although with some difference of proportion
or degree; there is also the same obligation of duty, the said difference of
proportion or degree still observed. But indeed, thirdly, I take it, that all
oppressions are not only intended, but also expressed under the names of death
and slaughter. Because to take away a Man's substance, whereby he should
maintain his life, is interpretative, and to common intendment, all one as to
take away the Gen 4. 10. Jam. 5. 4. Isa. 3. 15.
very life it self. Therefore as Abels blood cries; so the laborers wages
cries. And the Scriptures so speak of Oppressors, as of those that grind the
faces of the poor, that eat them up by morsels; or that (to save the labor of
chewing) swallow them up whole, as the greater Fishes do the small ones: by
which means they make the poor of the land to fail, as the Prophet speaks.
That Amos 8. 4.
which maintains life, is not only according to the phrase of the world in
most Languages, but even in holy Scriptures themselves, sometimes so mentioned,
as if it were the (...). Luke 15. 12. (...). Luke 21. 4. Sirac 34. 21, 22.
very life it self, the substance, essence, or being of a Man. And he that
should violenty take away that from another, if the wise Son of Sirac were of
the Inquest, would certainly be found guilty of no less than Murder. Hear his
verdict in the case, and the reason of it; The bread of the needy is their
life: he that defraudeth him thereof, is a Man of blood. He that takes away
his neighbors living, slays him: and he that defraudeth the labourer of his
hire, is a bloodshedder. Ecclus. 34.

17. And as these poor ones deserve our pity, and our help, in regard of the
grievousness of their distresses: so are we, secondly, bound so much the more
to endeavor to succor them, by how much the more they are destitute of
friends, or other means, whereby to relieve or help themselves. The Scriptures
therefore especially commend to our care and protection, the stranger, the
fatherless, and the widow: for these are of all others the most exposed to the
injuries and opressions of their potent Adversaries, because they have few or
no friends to take their part: so that if Men of Place and Power shall not
stick close to them in their righteous causes, they will be overborn and
undone. This Solomon saw with much grief and indignation; insomuch as out of
that very consideration he praises the dead that were already dead, more than
the living that were yet alive, Eccles. 4. when viewing all the oppressions
that are done under the Sun, Eccl. 4. 1, 2.
he beheld the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no comforter: and
on the side of their Oppressors there was power; but they had no comforter.
Power, and might, and friends, and part-taking on the one side: no power, no
strength, no friends, no comforter on the other side. When things are thus,
(and thus they have ever been, and thus will they ever be, more or less, whilst
the world continues:) there is then a rich opportunity for every great and
good Man, especially for every conscionable Magistrate, to set in for God's
cause, and in God's stead, and by the greatness of his power to stop the course
of violence, and oppression; and to rescue out of the hands of the Mighty those
that are marked out to destruction or undoing. Then is it a fit time for him to
buckle on his armor with Job, to gird himself with zeal and righteousness as
with a Job. 29. 14.
breast plate, to close with the giant oppressor, and not to give over the
combat till he have broken the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the prey out of
his teeth. A -- 17.
good Magistrate should be, as he was, eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, a
husband to the widow, a father to the orphan, a brother to the stranger: in a
word, as St. Paul was (but in another sense) Omnia omnibus, all things to all
Men, according to their several necessities and occasions, that by all means he
might at least save some from oppression and wrong.

18. But that which above all other considerations should stir up our
compassion to those that are in distress and make us bestir our selves in their
behalf, is that which I mentioned in the third place; The equity of their
Cause: when, by the power and iniquity of an unjust Adversary, they are in
danger to be overborn in arighteous matter. For unless their matters be good
and right; be they never so poor, their distresses never so great, we should
not pity them: I mean, not so to pity them, as to be assistant to them therein.
For as in God, Psalm. 85. 10.
so in every Minister of God (every Magistrate) and in every Child of God
(every good Man) Justice and Mercy should meet together, and kiss each other.
Justice without Mercy, and Mercy without Justice, are both alike hateful to
God: both alike to be shuned of every good Man and Magistrate. Lest therefore
any Man should deceive himself, by thinking it a glorious or a charitable act,
to help a poor Man howsoever: the Lord has given an express prohibition to the
contrary, Exodus 23. Thou shall not countenance a poor Man in his Cause; Exodus
23. 3.
that is, in a good cause shrink not from him: but if his cause be naught, let
his poverty be what it will be, thou may not countenance him in it. He that
has respect of persons in judgment, cannot but transgress: and he that
respects a Prove. 24. 23.
Man for his poverty, is no less a respecter of persons, than he that
respects a Man for friendship, or neighborhood, or greatness, or a bribe.
In this case, the Magistrate cannot propose to himself a fitter or safer
example, than that of God himself: who as he often professes to have a special
care over the stranger, and fatherless, and widow, and needy; so does he often
declare his proceedings to be evermore without respect of persons.

19. That therefore, whilst we avoid the one extreme (that of incompassion) we
may not fall into the other (that of foolish pity:) it will be needful that we
rightly understand Solomon's purpose in the Text. For it may perhaps seem to
some to be here intended, that every Man should do his utmost to save the life
of every other Man, that is in danger to lose it. And accordingly many Men are
forward (more than any good subject has cause to con them thanks for) to
deprecate the favor of the Judge for the saving of some hanious Malefactor; or
to sue out a Pardon for a wilful Murderer; or say it be, but to help some busy
crafty compaion to come fair off in a fould business. And when they have so
done, as if they had deserved Civica corona -- servati civis decus. Tacit. 3.
Annal. vid. A. Gell. 5. Noct. Attic. 6. Plin. 16. not. hist. 4. Valor. Max. ^.
3.
a Garland for their service: so do they glory among their neighbors at their
return from these great Assemblies, that their journey was well bestowed; for
they had saved a proper Man from the Gallows, or helped a good fellow out of
the Briers. Alas, little do such Men consider, that they glory in that, which
ought rather to be their shame: such glorying is not good. For albeit in the
Text it be not expressedly so set down: yet must Solomon of necessity be
understood to speak of the delivering of such only, as are unjustly drawn to
the slaughter; and not of such Malefactors as by Robberies, Rapes, Murders,
Treasons, and other guiltinesses, have justly deserved the sentence of death by
the Law. For we must so understand him here, as not to make him contradict
himself: who elsewhere tells us, that it is the part and property of a wise
King, to scatter the wicked, and to bring the wheel over them; and that Prove.
20. 26.
he that has done violence to the blood of any person, should fly to the pit,
and no Prove. 28. 17.
man should stay him. Against Murder the Lord provided by an early Law, Genesis 9.
enacted and published before him, out of whose loins the whole World after the
flood was to be repeopled (to show it was not meant for a national and
temporary ordinance, but for an universal and perpetual Law) Whosoever sheddeth
Genesis 9. 6.
Man's blood, by Man shall his blood be shed. And that Judges should be very
shy and tender how they grant Pardons or Reprievals in that case; he
established it afterward among his own people by a most severe sanction, Number.
35. Ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a Murderer, which is guilty
of death: but he shall Numb. 35. 31.
surely be put to death. And there is a reason of it there given also, For
blood, says he, defiles the land: and the land cannot be cleansed from the
blood that is shed therein, but by he blood of him that shed it. Read that
passage with attention: and if both forehead and conscience be not harder than
the neither millstone thou can not have either the heart or the face to glory
in it as a brave exploit, whoever thou art that have been the instrument to
save the life of a Murderer.

20. Indeed all offenses are not of that hanious nature that Murder is: nor do
they cry so loud for vengeance, as Murder does. And therefore to procure
undeserved favor for a smaller offender, is not so great a sin, as to do it
for a Murderer. But yet, so far as the proportion holds, it is a sin still.
Especially where favor cannot be shown to one Man, but to the wrong and
grievance of some other: as it happens usually in those judicial controversies
that are betwixt party and party for trial of right: Or where favor cannot be
shown to an offender, but with wrong and grievance to the public; as it most
times falls out in criminal causes, wherein the King and Commonwealth are
parties. Solomon has taught us, that as well he that justifies the wicked, as
he that condemns Prove. 17. 15.
the just, are an abomination to the Lord. Yea, and that for any thing that
appears to the contrary from the Text, and in thesi (for circumstances may
make a difference either way in hypothesi) they are both equally abominable. In
doubtful cases, it is doubtlesly better and safer, to incline to Semper
quicquid dubium est, humanitas inclinat in melius. Sen. ep. 81.
Mercy than to Severity: Better ten offenders should escape, than one innocent
person suffer. But that is to be conceived only when things are doubtful, so as
the truth cannot be made appear: but where things are notorious and evident,
there to justify the guilty, and to condemn the innocent, are still equal
abominations.

21. That which you are to do then in the behalf of the poor, is this: First,
to be rightly informed, and (so far as morally you can) well assured, that
their cause be just. For mean and poor people are nothing less (but ordinarily
much more) unreasonable, than the great ones are: and if they find the ear of
the Magistrate open to hear their grievances (as is very meet it should be)
they will be often clamorous and importunate, without either cause or measure.
And if the Magistrate be not very wary and wise in receiving informations; the
Country swain may chance prove too cunning for him, and make him but a stale,
whereby for himself to get the start of his Adversary; and so the Magistrate
may (in fine and unwares) become the instrument of oppression, even then when
his intention was to vindicate another from it. The Truth of the matter
therefore is to be first thoroughly sifted out, the circumstances duly weighed,
and as well as the legal, the equitable right examined and compared: and this
to be done with all requisite diligence and prudence, before you engage in the
poor Man's behalf.

22. But if, when this is done, you then find that there is much right and
equity on his side; and that yet for want of skill, or friends, or means to
manage his affairs, he is in danger to be foiled in his righteous cause: Or if
you find that his Adversary has a legal advantage of him; or that he has ( de
rigore) incurred the penalty of some dis-used statute, yet did not offend
wilfully out of the neglect of his known duty, or a greedy covetous mind, or
other sinister and evil intention, but merely out of his ignorance and
inexperience, and in the simplicity of his heart; (as those two hundred
Israelites that followed after Absalom when he called them, not knowing any
thing of his conspiracy, 2 Samuel 15. 11.
had done an act of treason, yet were not formally traitors:) In either of
these cases I say, you may not forsake the poor Man, or despise him, because he
is poor or simple. But you ought so much the rather to stick by him, and to
stand his friend to the utmost of your power. You ought to give him your
counsel, and your countenance; to speak for him, and write for him, and ride
for him, and do for him: to procure him right against his Adversary in the
former case, and in the latter case favor from the Judge. In either case to
hold back your hand, to draw back your help from him, if it be in the power of
your hand to do him any help; is that sin, for which, in the judgment of
Solomon in the Text, the Lord will admit no excuse.

23. Come we now in the last place to some reasons or motives taken from the
effects of the duty it self. If carefully and conscionably performed, it will
gain honor and estimation both to our persons and places; purchase for us the
prayers and blessings of the poor; yea, and bring down a blessing from God, not
upon us, and ours only, but upon the State and Commonwealth also: But where the
duty is neglected, the effects are quite contrary. First, do you know any other
thing, that will bring a Man more glory and renown in the common opinion of the
World, than to show forth at once both justice and mercy, by doing good, and
protecting the Innocent? Let not mercy and truth forsake thee, Prove. 3. 3, 4.
bind them about thy neck, write them upon the table of thine heart: so shall
thou find favor and good understanding (or acceptance) in the sight of God and
Man, Prove. 3. As a rich sparkling Diamond adds both value and luster to a
golden Ring, so do these virtues of justice and mercy, well attempered, bring a
rich addition of glory to the Crowns of the greatest Monarchs. Hoc reges habent
magnificum Senec.
and ingens, Prodesse miseris, supplices fido lare Protegere, etc. Every Man is
bound by the Law of God and of Charity, as to give to every other Man his due
honor, so to preserve the honor that belongs to his own person and place:
for Charity, in performing the duties of every Commandment, begins at home.
Now here is a fair, and honest, and sure way, for all you that are in place of
authority and judicature, or sustain the persons of Magistrates, to hold up the
reputation both of your Persons and Places, and to preserve them from scorn and
contempt. Execute judgment and justice with wisdom and diligence: take
knowledge of the vexations of those that are brought into the Courts, or
otherwise troubled without cause: be sensible of the groans and pressures of
poor Men in the day of their adversity: protect the innocent from such as are
too mighty or too crafty for him: hew in pieces the snares, and break the jaws
of the cunning and cruel oppressor: and deliver those that are drawn either to
death, or undoing.

24. The course is preposterous and vain, which some Men ambitious of honor
and reputation take, to get themselves put into the place of Magistracy and
Authority, having neither head nor heart for it. I mean, when they have neither
knowledge and experience in any measure of competency to understand what
belongs to such places: nor yet any care or purpose at all to do God, their
King, and Country good service therein. The wise Son of Sirac checketh such
ambitious spirits for their unseasonable forwardness that way: Sirac 7. Seek
not Sirac 7. 4.
of the Lord preeminence, neither of the King the seat of honor. Think not he
has any meaning to dissuade or dishearten Men of quality and parts for meddling
with such employments: for then the service should be neglected. No: Men that
are gifted for it, although the service cannot be attended without some both
trouble and charge; yet should not for the avoiding either of charge or trouble
(indeed they cannot without sin) seek either to keep themselves out of the
Commission, or to get themselves off again being on. His meaning clearly is,
only to repress the ambition of those that look after the Title, because they
think it would be some glory to them: but are not able, for want either of
skill or spirit, or through sloth, nor willing to perform the duties. And so he
declares Sirac. 7. 6.
himself a little after there; Seek not to be a Judge, being not able to take
away iniquity: lest at any time thou fear the person of the mighty, and lay a
stumbling block in the way of thy uprightness.

25. Did honor indeed consist (which is the ambitious Man's error) either only
or chiefly in the empty Title: we might well wish him good luck with his
honor. But since true Honor has a dependence upon virtue (being the wages,
as some; or, as others have rather chosen to call it, the shadow of it;) it is
a very vanity to expect the one without some care had of the other. Would any
Man not forsaken of his senses, look for a shadow, where there is no solid body
to cast it? Or not of his reason, demand wages, where he has done no service?
Yet such is the perverseness of our corrupt nature, through sloth and self-love;
that what God would have go together, the Honor and the Burden, we would
willingly put asunder. Every Man almost would draw to himself as much of the
honor as he can: if it be a matter of credit or gain; then, Why should not I
be respected in my place, as well as another? But yet withal, would every Man
almost put off from himself as much of the burden as he can* If it be a matter
of business and trouble; then, Why may not another Man do it as well as I? Like
lazy servants, so are we; that love to be beforehand with their wages, and
behind-hand with their work.

26. The truth is, there is an Outward, and there is an Inward Honor. The
Outward honor belongs immediately to the Place; and the place casts it up
on the Person; so that whatsoever person holds the place, it is meet he
should have the honor due to the place whether he deserve it or not. But the
Inward honor pitcheth immediately upon the Person, and but reflecteth upon the
Place; and that Honor will never be had without desert. What the Apostle said
of the Ministry, is, in some sense also true of the Migistracy: they that
labor faithfully in either, are worthy of double Honor. Labor, or labor
not; there is a single honor due to them: and yet not so much to them, as to
their Places 1 Timothy 5. 17.
and Callings; but yet to them too for the places sake: and we are unjust if we
withold it from them, though they should be most unworthy of it. But the
double Honor, that inward Honor of the heart to accompany the outward, will
not be had, where there is not worth and industry in some tolerable measure to
deserve it. The knee-worship, and the cap-worship, and the lip-worship, they
may have, that are in worshipful places and callings, though they do little
good in them: but the Heart-worship they shall never have, unless they be ready
to do Justice, and to show Mercy, and be diligent and faithful in their
Callings.

27. Another fruit and effect of this duty where it is honestly performed, are
the hearty prayers and blessings of the poor: as on the contrary, their bitter
curses and imprecations, where it is slighted or neglected. We need not look so
far to find the truth hereof asserted in both the branches: we have a Text for
it in this very Chapter, Prove. 24. He that says unto the wicked, Thou art
righteous, him Prove. 24. 25, 26.
shall the people curse, nations shall abhor him. But to them that rebuke him
shall be delight, and a good blessing shall come upon them. Every Man shall
kiss his lips, that gives a right answer. As he that withholds corn in the
time of dearth, having his Garners full, pulls upon himself deservedly the
curses of the poor: but they will pour out blessings abundantly upon the head
of him, that, in compassion to them, will let them have it for their money; (
Prove. 11.) So he that by his place having power and means to succor those that
are distressed, and to free them from wrongs and oppressions, will seasonably
put forth himself and his power to do them right; shall have many a blessing
from their mouths, and many a good wish from their hearts: but many more (...).
Homer. Od. 4 -- 26. 2.
bitter curses both from the mouth -- 28. 27.
and heart (by how much men are more sensible of discourtesies than of
benefits, and readier to curse than to bless) if they find themselves
neglected. And the blessings and cursings of the poor are things not to be
wholly disregarded. Indeed, the curse causless shall not come: neither is the
Magistrate to regard the curses of bad people so far, as either to be deterred
thereby from punishing them according to their desert, or to think he shall
fare ever the worse (doing but his duty) for such curses. For such words are
but wind; and, as Solomon says elsewhere, He that observes the wind, shall
not sow; so he that regards Eccl. 11. 4.
the speeches of vain persons, shall never do his duty as he ought to do. In
such cases, that of David must be their meditation and comfort, Though they
curse, Psalm. 106. 28.
yet bless thou. And as there is little terror in the causless curses; so
there is as little comfort in the causless blessings of vain evil Men. But yet
where there is cause given, although he cannot be excused from sin that curses
(for we ought Romans 12. 14.
to bless and to pray for, not to curse, even those that wrong us, and
persecute us:) yet vae homini withal, woe to the Man from whom the provocation
comes. Such curses, as they proceed from the bitterness of the soul of the
grieved person in the mean time: so they will be in the end bitterness to the
soul of him that gave cause of grievance. And if there were not on the other
side some comfort in the deserved blessings of the poor; it had been no wisdom
for Job to comfort himself with it: as we see he did in the day of his great
distress, Job. 29. 13.
The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I caused the
widows heart to sing for joy, Job. 29.

28. But say these poor ones should be so charitable (as very seldom they be)
as not to curse us, when we have despised them; or so unthankful (as seldom
they are otherwise) as not to bless us when we have relieved them: yet the
Lord, who has given every Man a charge concerning his brother, and committed
the distresses of the poor to our care and trust, will take district knowledge
how we deal with them, and impartially recompense us thereafter. Does not he
consider? And shall not he render to every Man according to his works? The last
words of the Text. If therefore you have done your duty faithfully, let it
never discourage you, that unrighteous and unthankful Men forget it. They do
but their kind: the comfort is, that yet God will both remember it, and requite
it. God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love, says the
Heb. 5. 10. Psalm. 41. 1.
Apostle, Heb. 5. He will remember it, you see. And then says David, Psalm. 41.
Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy: the Lord shall deliver him
in the time of trouble. He will requite it too. He that for God's sake helps
his poor brother to right that suffers wrong, he does therein at once, first,
an act of mercy, because it is done in the behalf of a distressed Man; and an
act, secondly, of Justice, because it is done in a righteous cause; and
thirdly, (being done for the Lord's sake) an act of Religion also ( Pure
Religion and undefiled before God even the father, is this, to visit the
fatherless and widow in their afflictions. Jam. 1.) Jam. 1. 27.
And is it possible that God, who delights in the exercise of every one of
them singly, should suffer an act to pass unrewarded, wherein there is a happy
concurrence of three such excellent virtues together, as are Justice, Mercy,
and Religion? The Prophet Jeremy, to reprove Iehoiachin's tyranny and
oppression, upbraideth him with his good father Iosiah's care and conscience,
to do justice, and to show mercy, after this manner: Did not thy father eat and
drink, and do Jer. 22. 15, 16.
judgment and justice, and then it was well with him? He judged the cause of
the poor and needy, then it was well with him: was not this to know me, says
the Lord* But now on the contrary, He shall have judment without mercy, that
Jam. 2. 13.
shows no mercy, He that stops his ears against the cry of the poor, he
shall also Prove. 21. 13.
cry himself, but shall not he heard, etc. Many other like passages there are
in the Scriptures to the same effect.

29. Nay moreover, the general neglect of this duty pulls down the wrath of
God, not only upon those particular persons that neglect it, but also upon the
whole nation where it is in such general sort neglected. O house of David, thus
says the Lord, execute judgment in the morning, and deliver him that is Jer.
21. 12.
spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor: lest my fury go out like fire, and
burn that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings, Jer. 21.
Brethren, we of this nation have cause to look to it in time; against whom the
Lord has of late manifested his just wrath (though tempered, as we must all
confess, with much clemency;) yea, and his hand is streched out against us
still, in the heavy plagues both of dearth and death. Though the Land be full
of all manner of sins and lewdness, and so the Lord might have a controversy
with us for any of them: yet I am verily persuaded, there are no other kinds of
sins, that have overspread the face of the whole Land with such an universal
contagion (as it were of a Leprosy) as the sins of Riot and Oppression have
done. Which two sins are, not only the provoking causes (as any kind of sins
may be) in regard of the justice of God; but also the sensible instrumental
causes in the eye of reason and experience, of much penury and mortality among
us.

30. Surely then, as to quench the fire, we use to withdraw the fuel; so to
turn away the heavy wrath of God from us, we should all put to our
helpinghands, each in his place and calling, but especially the Minister and
the Magistrate, the one to cry down, the other to beat down, as all sins in
general, so especially these of Riot and Oppression. Never think it will be
well with us, or that it will be much better with us than now it is, or that it
will not be rather every day much worse with us than it is; never look that
disorders in the Church, distempers in the State, distractions in our
judgments, diseases in our bodies, should be remedied or removed, and not
rather more and more increased: if we hold on as we do, in pampering every Man
his own Flesh, and despising every Man his poor brother. So long as we think no
pleasures too much for our selves, no pressures too heavy for our brethren;
stretch our selves along and at ease upon our Couches, eat of the fat, and
drink of the sweet, without Amos 7. 4. -- 6.
any touch of compassion in our bowels for the afflictions of others, we can
expect no other, but that the rod of God should abide upon us, either in
dearths of pestilences; or if they be removed (for God loves sometimes to
shift his rods) in greater and heavier judgments in some other kind.

31. But as to the particular of Oppression (for that of Riot and Intemperance,
being beside the Text, I shall no farther press:) my humble request to those
that are in place of authority, and all others that have any office or
attendance about the Courts, is this; For the love of God, and of your selves,
and your Country, be not so indulgent to your own appetites and affections,
either of Ease, as to reject the complaints; or of Partiality, as to despise
the persons; or of filthy Lucre, as to betray the cause of the fatherless and
friendless. Suffer not, when his cause is good, a simple Man to be circumvented
by the wiliness; or a mean Man to be over powered by the greatness, of a crafty
or mighty Adversary. Favor not a known Sycophant; nor open your lips to speak
in a cause to pervert judgment, Exodus 23. 2. Amos 5. 7. Isa. 29. 21.
or to procure favor for a mischievous person. Turn not judgment into
wormwood, by making him that meant no hurt, an offender for a word. Wrangle not
in the behalf of a contentious person, to the prejudice of those that desire to
live quiet in the land. Devise not dilatory shifts to tug men on along in a
tedious course of Law to their great charge and vexation; but ripen their
causes with all seasonable expedition for a speedy hearing. In a word, do what
lies in your power to the utmost, for the curbing of Sycophants and
Oppressors, and the protecting of the peaceable and innocent: use the Sword
that God (by his Deputy) has put into your hands, for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise and safety of those that do well. So shall the hearts
of every good Man be enlarged Romans 13. 4, 8. 1 Pet. 2. 16.
toward you, and their tongues to honor you, and to bless you, and to pray
for you. Then shall God pour out his blessings abundantly upon you and yours:
yea, it may be upon others too, upon the whole Land, by your means, and for
your sakes. The Lord by his Prophet, more than once, has given us some
comfortable assurance of such blessed effects to follow upon such premises.
The words are worthy to be taken notice of: If thou thoroughly execute judgment
between Jer. 7. 5. -- 7.
a man and his neighbor; if thou oppress not the stranger, the fatherless, and
the widow, and shed not innocent blood in this place; Then will I cause you to
dwell in this place for ever and ever, Jer. 7. And in Ier. 22. Execute ye
judgment and Jer. 22. 3. -- 5.
righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor: and
do no wrong, do no violence to the stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow,
neither shed innocent blood in this place. For if ye do this thing indeed, then
shall there enter in by the gates of this house, Kings sitting upon the throne,
etc. But if ye will not hear these words, I swear by my self, faith the Lord,
etc.

32. Concerning which, and other-like passages frequent in the holy Prophets, I
see what may be readily opposed. True it is, will some say, where these things
are constantly and generally performed, a national Judgment may thereby be
removed, or a Blessing procured. But what are two or three of us, if we should
set our selves to it with all our strength, able to do toward the turning away
of God's Judgments, if there be otherwise a general neglect of the Duty in the
Land? There is something of truth, I confess, in this Objection; for doubtless
those passages in the Prophets, aim at a general reformation. But yet consider,
first, we have to deal with a wonderful, gracious, and merciful God, slow to
anger, Joel 2. 13.
and of great kindness, and such a one as will easily be induced to repent him
of the evil. And who can tell, but he may return, and repent, and leave a
blessing behind him; where but two or three in a whole Nation do (in conscience
of their duty, and in compassion of the State) set themselves unfeignedly to do
justice, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with their God, though the
generality should be corrupt? Especially, since we have in the second place
such excellent precedents of the riches of his Grace and Goodness in this kind,
upon record: that we might not be without hope, if we do our part, tho we were
left even alone. God was ready to have spared the five Cities of old, Genesis 18.
if there Genesis 18. 32.
had been in them to be found but twice so many righteous Men. But he did
actually spare Israel, by instantly calling in a great plague, which he had a
little before sent among them for their sin, upon one single act of Justice,
done by one single Man. Phineas, moved with an holy zeal, did but stand up and
execute Psalm. 106. 3.
judgment upon two shameless offenders, and the plague was stayed, Psalm. 106.
Add hereunto that most gracious Proclamation published, Ier. 5. and you cannot
want encouragement to do every Man his own part, whatsoever the rest do: Run to
and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now and know, and seek Jer.
5. 1.
in the broad places thereof, if you can find a Man, if there be any that
executes Judgment, that seeks the Truth, and I will pardon it. Or say,
thirdly, that the sins of a Nation should be grown to that ripeness, that the
few righteous that are in it, could not any longer adjourn the Judgment, (for
as there is a time of Mercy, wherein the righteousness of one, or a few, may
reprieve a whole Nation from destruction; so when the appointed time of their
fatal stroke is Ezekiel. 14. 14, 20.
come, tho Noah, Job, and Daniel should be in the midst of it, they could
prevail no farther than the delivery of their own souls;) yet even there those
that have been faithful shall have this benefit, that they shall be able to say
with comfort (either in the one sense or in the other) Liberavi animam meam.
Ezekiel. 3. 19.
That is, They shall either be preserved from being overwhelmed in the common
destruction, having their life given them for a prey, and as a brand Jer. 39.
18. -- -- 45. 5. Zach. 3. 2.
snatched out of the fire; as Noah escaped when all the World was drowned, and
Lot from the deflagration of Sodom: or if God suffer them to be involved in the
public calamities, have this comfort to sustain their Souls withal, that they
were not wanting to do their part toward the preventing thereof. But howsoever,
why should any Man, fourthly, to shift off his duty, unseasonably obtrude upon
us a new piece of Metaphysics, which our Philosophers hitherto never owned, in
abstracting the general reformation from the particulars? For what is the
general other than the particulars together? And if ever there be a general
reformation wrought, the particulars must make it up. Do not thou then vainly
talk of Castles in the air, and of I know not what general reformation: but if
thou truly desire such a thing, put to thy hand, and lay the first stone in
thine own particular; and see what thy example can do. If other particulars
move with thee, and so a general reformation follow in some good mediocrity;
thou have whereof to rejoice, that thou had thy part ( a leading part) in so
good a work. But if others will not come on end cheerfully, so as the work do
not rise to any perfection; thou have yet wherewithal to comfort thee, that the
fault was not thine.

33. Thus have you heard sundry reasons and inducements to stir you up to the
cheerful performance of the duty contained in the Text, of doing justice, and
showing mercy in delivering the oppressed. Some in respect of God; who has
given us, first, his express command, to which our obedience; and, secondly,
his own blessed example, to which our conformity is expected. Some in respect
of our selves: because, first, whatsoever power we have for the present, it was
given us for this end, that we might therewithal be helpful to others; and we
know not, secondly, in what need we may stand hereafter of like help from
others. Some in respect of our poor distressed brethren, who deserve our pity
and best furtherance: considering, first, the grievousness of their pressures;
secondly, the paucity of their friends; but especially, and, thirdly, the
equity and righteousness of their cause, when they are in danger to be spoiled
by the cruelty, potency, and iniquity of their Adversaries. Some in respect of
the duty it self; the fruits and effects whereof ordinarily are, first, honor
and renown in the World; secondly, the blessings and prayers of the poor;
thirdly, the blessing of God upon us and ours; fourthly, the continuance of
God's Mercies unto, and the reversing of God's Judgments from the Land.

34. In the opening of which reasons, I have purposely pressed the duty all
along somewhat the more largely, that I might not trouble you with any farther
application at the close, and therefore I hope it will not be expected. I
presume you would rather expect, if we had time for it, that I should proceed
to examine the usual excuses and pretensions that are made in this case, when
the duty has been neglected: which Solomon has comprehended in those few
words in verse 12. Behold, we knew it not; and withal referred them over, for
the trial of what validity they are, to the judgment of every Man's own heart,
as the deputy-Iudg under God; but (because that may be faulty and partial) in
subordination to a higher tribunal, even that of God himself, from whose
sentence there lies no farther appeal. This I aimed at in the choice of the
Text, as well as the pressing of the duty. But having enlarged my self already
upon the former point, beyond my first intention, I may not proceed any farther
at this time; nor will it be much needful I should, if what has been already
delivered be well laid to heart. Which God of his Mercy vouchsafe, etc.

AD MAGISTRATUM.
The Second Sermon.
At the Assizes at Lincoln, in the Year 1630. at the Request of Sir WILLIAM
THOROLD Knight, then High Sheriff of that County.
Prove. 24. 10, -- 12. 10. If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength
is small. 11. If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death, and
those that are ready to be slain: 12. If thou say, Behold, we know it not:
does not he that pondereth the heart, consider it? and he that keeps thy
soul, does not he know it? and shall not he render to every man according to
his works?
1. WE want Charity; but abound with Self-love. Our defect in that, appears
by our backwardness to perform our duties to our brethren: and our excess in
this, by our readiness to frame excuses for our selves. Solomon, intending in
that particular whereat the Text aims, to meet with us in both these
corruptions, frames his speech in such sort, as may serve best both to set on
the Duty, and to take off the Excuses. And so the words consist of two main
parts: The supposal of a Duty, which all Men ought to perform, in the 10 and 11
Verses; and the removal of those Excuses, which most Men pretend for
nonperformance, in the 12th Verse. Our Duty, is to stand by our distressed
Brethren in the day of their adversity, and to do our best endeavor, by all
lawful ways, to protect them from oppressions and wrongs, and to rescue them
out of the hands of those that go about either by might or cunning to take from
them either their lives or livelihoods. [If thou faint in the day of adversity,
thy strength is small: If thou forbear to deliver those that are drawn to
death, and those that are ready to be slain:] From which words I have
heretofore (upon occasion of the like meeting as this is) spoken of the Duty in
this place; showing the necessity, and enforcing the performance of it, from
sundry important considerations; both in respect of God, and of our selves, and
of our poor brethren, and of the Thing it self, in the blessed effects thereof:
which I shall not trouble my self or you to repeat.

2. Taking that therefore now for granted, which was then proved; to wit, that
it is our bounden duty to do as has been said; but our great sin if it be
neglected: I shall at this time (by God's assistance, and with your patience)
proceed as the Text leads me; to consider of the Excuses, in the remaining
words, verse. 12. [ If thou say, Behold we knew it not: does not he that
pondereth the heart, consider it? And he that keeps thy soul, does not he
know it? And shall not he reward every Man according to his works?] For the
better understanding, and wore fruitful applying of which words, we are to
enquire of two things; first, what the Excuses are, which Solomon here points
at: and then of what value and sufficiency they are.

3. Many Excuses Men have, to put by this and every other duty: whereof some
are apparently frivolous, and carry their confutation with them. Solomon
strikes at the fairest: whereof three (the most principal, and the most usual
of all) he seems to have comprehended in these few words; 1. [ Behold, we knew
it not.] As thus. Either first we knew it not; that is, we never heard of their
matters; they never made their grievances known to us. Or, secondly, we knew it
not; that is, we had no clear evidence to give us full assurance that their
cause was right and good. Or, thirdly, we knew it not; that is, tho to our
apprehension they had wrong done them, yet as the case stood with them, we saw
not by what ways we could possibly relieve them; we knew not how to help it.

4. These are the main Excuses: which of what value they are, is our next
Enquiry. Wherein Solomon's manner of rejecting them will be our best guide: Who
neither absolutely condemns them, because they may be sometimes just: nor yet
promiscuously allows of them, because they are many times pretended without
cause; but refers them over for their more particular and due trial, to a
double judicature: that is to say, to the judgment of every man's heart and
conscience first, as a deputy Judge under God: and if that fail in giving
sentence, (as being subject to so many errors, and so much partiality, like
enough it may) then to the judgment of God himself, as the supreme unerring and
impartial Judge, from whose Sentence there lies no appeal. Which judgment of
God is in the Text amplified by three several degrees, or as it were steps of
his proceeding therein: grounded upon so many divine attributes or properties;
and each fitted to other in so many several Propositions. Yet those not
delivered Categorically and positively: but (to add the greater strength and
Emphasis to them) put into the form of Negative Interrogations or Questions.
Does not he consider? Does not he know? And, shall not he render? That is, most
certainly and without all peradventure, he does consider, and he does know, and
he will render.

5. The first step of God's judicial proceedings, is for Inquisition; and that
grounded upon his Wisdom: 1. [ Does not he that pondereth the heart, consider
it?] As if he had said, The Lord is a God of admirable Wisdom, by whom are
weighed Prove. 16. 2. -- 21. 2.
not only the actions, but also the spirits of Men, and their very hearts
pondered: neither is there any thing, that may escape his Enquiry. Trust not
therefore to vain excuses; for certainly thy heart shall be thoroughly sifted,
and thy pretensions narrowly looked into, when he takes the matter into his
consideration. Does not he that pondereth the heart, consider it? The next step
is for Deprehension, or Conviction: and that grounded upon his knowledge or
Omniscience, [And he that keeps thy soul, does not he know it?] As if he had
said, Thou may by colorable pretenses delude Men, who are strangers to thy
soul: and cannot discern the thoughts and intents of the heart. But there is no
dissembling before him, unto whose eyes all things are naked and open, nor is
there any creature that Heb. 4. 12, 13.
is not manifest in his sight. He that made thy soul at the first, and has
ever since kept it, and still keeps it, observing every motion and
inclinatinon of it, he perfectly knows all that is in it: and if there be any
hidden guile in any secret corner of it, tho obscured from Man's search by
never so many windings and labyrinths, yet he will undoubtedly find it out. He
that keeps thy soul, does not he know it? 3. The last step is for
Retribution, and that grounded upon his justice; [And shall not he render to
every Man according to his Works?] As if he had said, If mortal Man was to
decide the Matter, thou might have some hope, that time, and other means
that might be used, might frame him to thine own bent; either to connive at a
gross fault, or to admit of a slender excuse. But God is a most righteous Judge,
not to be wrought upon by any artifice to do iniquity, or to accept the persons
of Men. According therefore as thy works are, so without all question shall thy
doom be. Shall not the Judge of Genesis 18. 25.
all the World do right? And, shall not he render to every Man according to his
Works?

6. Thus you see the Text opened, and therewithal opened a large field of
matter, if we should beat out every particular. But that we may keep within
some reasonable bounds, and within the time, we will hold us to these three
principal points or conclusions. First, That the several excuses before
mentioned, as supposed to be pointed at in the Text, may be sometimes pleaded
justly and reasonably; and in such case are to be admitted and allowed.
Secondly, That they may be also all of them, and are (God knows) too often
pretended, where there is no just cause for it. Thirdly, That where they are
causlesly pretended, tho they may blear the eyes of Men, yet will they be of
little avail in the sight of God. Of each of these in the order as I have now
proposed them: and first of the first, [ If thou say, Behold, we know it
not.]

7. Questionless, if that Allegation could never be just, Solomon would wholly
and absolutely have rejected it. Which since he has not done, but referred it
to judgment: we may conclude, there are times and cases, wherein it will be
allowed as a good and sufficient plea, if it shall be said, Behold, we knew it
not. We esteem it the Fool's Buckler (and it is no better, as it is many times
used) to say, Non putaram. Yet may a right honest and wise Man, without the
least blemish to his reputation, be sometimes driven to take up the very same
buckler, and to use his own just defense. When he is charged with it as his
crime, that his brother has been oppressed, and he has not delivered him: be
he a private Man, or be he a public Minister of Justice, it will sufficiently
acquit him both in the Judgment of God, and of his own heart, and of all
reasonable Men, if he can say bona fide, as it is in the Text, Behold, I knew
it not. The truth whereof I shall endeavor to make appear to you in each of
the three forementioned respects. First, Men may want due information for
matter of Fact: or, secondly, Their judgments may be in suspense for point of
right: or, Thirdly, Where they perfectly comprehend both the whole business,
and the equity of it, there may lie such rubs in the way, as all the power and
skill they have, will not be able to avoid; so that tho the cause be good, they
cannot tell for their lives which way to do good in it. In any of which cases,
may they not well say, Behold, we knew it not?

8. First, They may want information for matter of Fact. Not to speak of things
farther off, which therefore less concern us: of those things that are done
amongst them that live under us or near us, how many passages are there, that
never come to our knowledge? Much talk there is indeed in all our meetings, and
much bold censuring of the actions of those that are above us, at every table:
Yet much of this we take up but upon trust, and the credit of flying reports,
which are ever full of uncertainty, and not seldom of malice: and so we run
descant upon a false ground. But as for the affairs of them that are below us,
whereon especially, the Duty of the Text is to be exercised, other than what we
chance to hear of obiter, and by imperfect or partial relations, very little
thereof is brought to our ears by way of just complaint, or according to pure
truth. And of all Men, the greatest are sure evermore to know the least. It is
one of the unhappinesses of Princes and Magistrates, and all that are in high
place, that whereas all their speeches and actions are upon the public Stage,
exposed to the view and censure of the very meanest; as a Beacon on the top of
a hill, open to every eye, and bleak to every wind; themselves, on the
contrary, can have very little true information of those abuses and disorders
in their Inferiors, which it properly belongs to them both to punish and
reform. If in private Families* which being of a narrow compass, are therefore
easily looked into, L. Syllae Metella conjux, palam erat impudica: id Athenis
cantabatur, and Sylla ignorabat. Hier. 1. cont. Jovin.
the Masters commonly be the last that shall hear of what is amiss therein, (
Juven. sat. 10.
Dedecus ille domus sciet ultimus:) how much more then is it improbable in a
great Township, in a spacious County, in a vast Kingdom, but that manifold
^usances and injuries should escape the knowledge of the most vigilant and
conscionable Governors? When both Court, and City, and the whole Empire rang of
wanton Livia's impudent lasciviousness, and Messalina's audacious courtings of
Silius: the Emperors themselves, Augustus Father to the one, and Claudius
Husband to the other, heard nothing of either, till the news was stale every
where else. Principes omnia facilius, quam sua cognoscunt, says the Historian
concerning the one: and the Satyrist concerning the other, Juvenal. ubi supra.
Dum res Nota urbi and populo contigat Caesaris aures. And no doubt but many
pious and gracious Princes, many grave and severe Magistrates, are better
persuaded of the faithfulness of those Officers they employ under them, and of
the honesty of those Servants they keep about them, than possibly they may
deserve; because they hear no complaints of them to the contrary: whereas, if
they had sufficient information, or but seasonable intimation, what oppressions
and exactions many times are either done by them, or at least commonly
suspected and rumoured among the people to have been done by them; we cannot
with charity think, but that they would soon make some diligent enquiry into
their dealings, and either displace them, or otherwise duly chastise them, if
they should be found faulty.

9. Now of this Ignorance in Governors and great ones, of the wrongs done to
poor Men, there may be rendered sundry particular reasons, which yet all refer
to two heads. For poor Men many times when they have a good mind to complain,
want a fit opportunity: and many times again having the opportunity, they have
no great mind so to do. For the first, they that do wrong, commonly are Men of
power (on the side of their Oppressors there was power, Eccles. 4.) and Eccl.
4. 1. Jam. 2. 6.
Men of estate (do not the rich Men oppress you? Jam. 2.) Now Men of power and
estate, by reason of their greatness, are fittest to converse with great ones,
and Men of place: so that these hear little but what they hear from those;
because they have little communication (at leastwise not in any free and
familiar manner) with any but such as they are. And I ween such Men have not so
little discretion, as to tell tales against themselves. Whereas meaner Men
cannot have the like opportunities, neither can be admitted into the presence
of those that are in authority at their own pleasures, to present their
grievances to them: neither indeed is it altogether fit they should. For if
mean Men should have the like free access to the higher Powers, that great Ones
have: it would create such molestation to the Magistrate, and breed such
insolency in the Peasant, as could not be suffered. The Magistrate would soon
grow weary of his life; when he should be quite overwhelmed with multitudes of
unmannerly and importunate suitors, and that many times for very trifles, not
worth the speaking of. And the People would grow insolent with it beyond
measure. For the meaner ones are (to their power) nothing less unjust than the
greater ones are: but much more clamorous than they, and not to be satisfied
with any reason, if they might be heard when they would, and suffered to speak
as long as they would. Which seems to me to be one special reason, why there
are in well-ordered Commonwealths, set Courts and Circuits appointed for the
administration of Justice: That so, neither on the one side the Magistrate be
overcumbred, as he must needs be, if all suitors might have free access at all
times; nor yet on the other side poor Men that sustain wrong, should be left
without remedy, as they must needs be if it were not at some times or other
free for them to make their just complaints.

10. But then you would think at such times as these, wherein it is free for
any Man that will to signify and to prosecute his grievances, either by open
plea in the Court, or by private petition to the Judge; that every Man that is
oppressed, should make his case known: so as no Magistrate could pretend want
of information. But yet it is not so; for many times (which is the other
reason) they that are wronged, though they have liberty to complain, are yet
held off from so doing, upon other considerations. 1. Either they distrust
themselves, being but simple Men, unskilled in the quillets of the Law; such as
neither are able to tell their own tale handsomely, nor have any Friend whom
they may trust to do it heartily for them. And therefore as good fit still,
think they, as stir in a business, and mar it in the handling. 2. Or perhaps
some of their neighbors have told them, what themselves have learned by dear
experience, that the Law is both costly and hazardous. There are so many
devices to adjourn a hearing, when all things are ready prepared and ripe for
it; to fetch about a business again, when a Man would think he had brought it
to an end; to weary out a weak adversary with torturing delays, especially if
-- (...). Eurip. in Orest. Act. 5.
a poor Man contend with a rich, or a plain-dealing Man with a crafty
Companion; (not to mention those fouler Corruptions, suborned Witnesses, packt
Iuries, and otherlike Enormities) that they think it better to be quiet, and to
bear their pressures and griefs as well as they can, than to enter into a
tedious course of Law, whereof the charge is certain, ( certain I mean to be
great, tho how great it will be, is uncertain enough) but the issue altogether
uncertain. 3. Or, it may be, they dare not complain, for fear of incurring the
farther displeasure of their potent or subtle Adversaries: who perhaps, if
further provoked by meeting with opposition from them, might sit closer upon
their skirts than formerly, and do them a shrewder turn for it another day. And
therefore if they look for any favor from them hereafter, (and from some
persons it must be looked upon as -- gloriantur latrones, iis se vitam dedisse,
quibus non ademerunt. Cicer. pro Milon.
a favor, by those that are not big enough to wrestle with them, that they do
them no farther harm) they must resolve to sit down with the present loss,
suffer all, and say nothing. Out of those and many other-like Considerations,
(more than I can think of, or if I could, than the time would suffer me to
present before you) the grieved party often forbeareth to complain. And then
the Magistrate being not made acquainted with the business, may justly say,
Behold, we knew it not.

11. And as he may be ignorant in matter of fact, for want of due information;
so may he, secondly, be doubtful in point of right, for want of clear and full
evidence. Whereof also there may be diverse reasons; and among the rest these
which I shall now propose. First, The great diversity, yea, sometimes flat
repugnancy and contrariety, that is between the informations on the one side,
and on the other. For Men are extremely partial, and will not tell their own
tales with such sincerity and indifferency as they ought, but as much in favor
of themselves, and to the prejudice of their Adversaries, as they can devise to
do with any show of Probability. We use to say, One tale is good, till another
be told: And the Proverb is true, in that sense wherein it was first meant, and
is commonly understood. Solomon has a Proverb much to the same purpose, [ He
that is first in his own tale, seems righteous: but then his neighbor comes
and searches him out, Prove. 18] The meaning is plain, One tale is good; that
is, whether it be Prove. 18. 17.
so or not, it seems so at the first hearing. But if we will speak of things,
not after the appearance, but according to truth, and pronounce of them as they
are, and not as they seem; may we not much rather invert the Proverb, and say,
One tale cannot be good, till the other be told? that is, whether it be good or
not: the Judge may not give credit to either, till he has heard both. Nay, may
we not many times farther say, when both tales are told, that neither is good?
Because there is most-what in every Man's tale a mixture of some falsehoods with
some truths: whereby it may so happen sometimes, that he which has in truth
the more equity on his side, by the mingling in some easily discoverable
falsehoods, in telling his tale, may render his cause the more suspicious to him
that hears it, to think the whole tale naught; and he that has indeed, and
upon the whole matter, the worst cause, may yet, by the weaving in some evident
truths, or pregnant probabilities, in the telling of his tale, gain such credit
with him that hears it, that he will be very inclinable to believe the whole
tale to be good. Or howsoever, they may be both so equally false, or at least
both so equally doubtful; as no one that hears them, can well tell whether of
both to give credit to. It was so in the famous case of the two inmate Harlots,
1 King. 3. 16, etc.
whereof King Solomon had the hearing; The living Child is mine, the dead one
thine, faith the one: No, faith the other, The dead Child is thine, and the
living mine. Here were presumptions on both sides, (for why should any Woman
challenge another Woman's Child?) but proofs on neither; (for being there were
none in the house but they two, neither of them could produce any witnesses.)
The case hung thus even; no more evidence on the one side than on the other; no
less confidence on the one side than on the other. Solomon indeed, by that
wisdom wherewith God had endowed him in a transcendent measure, found out a
means whereby to turn the scales, to unty that hard knot, and to discover the
hidden truth. But what could a Judge, or a Jury, of no more than ordinary
wisdom, then have been able to have said or done in such a case, but even to
have left it as they found it? And truly, for any thing I know, Ignorance must
have been their best excuse.

12. And as first in the Information, so there may be a defect, secondly, in
the Proofs. He that has the better cause in veritate rei, may yet fail in his
proofs, and not be able to make it judicially appear that he has the better
cause. In which case the old Axiom holds, Idem est non esse and non apparere:
it is all one, in foro externo, (and as to the determination Quod probari non
potest, mihi infectum est. Bern. de Praecept. and disspens.
of a Judge upon the Bench, who is to pronounce secundum allegata and probata;)
for a Man not to have a right, and not to be able to make it appear in a legal
way, and by such evidence as is requisite in a judicial proceeding, that he
has such a right. Or he may be out-sworn by the depositions of the witnesses
produced on the behalf of the adverse part; tho (it may be) utterly false, yet
direct and punctual against him, and so, strong enough howsoever to cast him in
his Suit. For what Judge, but the great Judge of Heaven and Earth, can certainly
and infallibly know, when two or three Men swear directly to a point, and agree
in one, whether yet they swear a falsehood or no? Or, what should induce a
mortal Judge not to believe them? especially, if withal he see the proofs on the
other side to fall short? And if in such a case following the evidence in the
simplicity of his heart, he gave away an honst Man's right from him to a knave:
he is not to be charged with it, as a perverter of justice, but has his
Apology here ready fitted for him in the Text, Behold, we knew it not.

13. Add hereunto, in the third place, the great advantage or disadvantage that
may be given to a cause in the pleading, by the artificial insinuations of a
powerful Orator. That same flaxanimis Pitho, and Suadae medulla, as some of the
old Heathens termed it, that winning and persuasive faculty which dwells in
the tongues of some men; whereby they are able not only to work strongly upon
the affections of Men, but to arrest their judgments also, and to incline them
whether way they please, is an excellent endowment of nature, or rather (to
speak more properly) an excellent gift of God. Which whosoever has received,
is by so much the more bound to be truly thankful to him that gave it, and to
do him the best service he can with it, by how much he is enabled thereby to
gain more glory to God, and to do more good to human Society than most of his
brethren are. And the good blessing of God be upon the heads of all those, be
they few or many, that use their eloquence aright; and employ their Talent in
that kind for the advancement of justice, the quelling of opression, the
repressing and discountenancing of insolency, and the encouraging and
protecting of innocence. But what shall I say then of those, be they many or
few, that abuse the gracefulness of their elocution ( good speakers, but to ill
purposes) to enchant the ears of an easy Magistrate with the charms of a
fluent tongue; or to cast a mist before the eyes of a weak Jury, as Juglers may
sport with Country people, to make white seem black, or black seem white; so
setting a fair varnish upon a rotten post, and a smooth gloss upon a course
cloth: as Protagoras sometimes boasted that he could make a bad cause good,
when he listed. By which means judgment is perverted, the hands of violence and
robbery strengthened, the edge of the sword of justice abated, great offenders
acquitted, gracious and virtuous Men molested and injured. I know not what
fitter reward to wish them for their pernicious eloquence, as their best
deserved Fee, than to remit them over or what David has assigned them in Psalm.
120. What Psalm. 120.
reward shall be given, or done unto thee, O thou false tongue? Even mighty and
sharp arrows, with hot burning coals. I might add to those, how that sometimes
by the subtilty and cunning of a sly Commissioner; sometimes by the wilful
misprision of a corrupt, or the slip of a negligent, or the oversight of an
ignorant Clerk; and by sundry other means (which in regard of their number, and
my inexperience, I am not able to recite) it may come to pass, that the light
of Truth may be so clouded, and the beams thereof intercepted from the eyes of
the most circumspect Magistrate, that he cannot at all times clearly discern
the Equity of those Causes that are brought before him. In all which cases, the
only Apology that is left him, is still the same as before; even this, Behold,
we knew it not.

14. But when he perfectly understands the whole business, and sees the
Equity of it, so as he cannot plead Ignorance of either: there may yet be,
thirdly, place for his just excuse, if he have not sufficient means wherewith
to relieve and to right his wronged brother. A mere private Man, that is not in
place of authority, may bemoan his poor brother in the day of his adversity,
and give him his best advice (to the measure of his understanding) what to do:
but can otherwise do very little toward the delivering of him from the
mischief that is intended him. Unless perhaps by mediating for him, as well as
he can with that little power or interest he has either with the Adversary, or
with the Magistrate, that they would be good to him. And that is ordinarily the
utmost that such a person can do for his poor friend: for he may not endeavor
beyond the warrant of his calling, and the sphere of his power. Nay, he cannot
do even that, with any great confidence of success, unless he have some special
interest either in the Magistrate, or Adversary: especially if the Adversary be
either a faithless, or a fickle, or a captious, or a wilful Man, (as few of
those that molest others wrongfully, but fall under some part of this
Character:) yea, he may rather in that case fear, lest possibly by his
intervention he should but provoke the Adversary the more, and then he should
by his Sedulitas illum, quem stulte diligit, urget. Hor 2. Epist. 1.
officiousness do his friend more harm than good.

15. Not to speak of infinite other impediments, and discouragements, that may
frustrate the good desires and endeavors of a mere privateman concerning this
duty: let us consider how it is with more public persons; for they are the
Men, upon whom especially I am now to press this duty. Such persons I mean, as
either are endued with public authority by virtue of their Callings, being
seated in the place of Magistracy and Government: or else in regard of the
eminency of their condition in the places where they live, have some power
among their tenants and neighbors, to sway something with them. Even these
also, both the one sort and the other, many may times be destitute of requisite
means and abilities, to vindicate those, whom they see and know to be
wrongfully oppressed, out of the hands of their Oppressors. Whereof there are,
besides diverse other, these apparent Reasons.

16. First, the Laws of Men cannot foresee all the mischiefs that may be done
in a Land: nor can they prevent all those they do foresee. Wherein is
observable a singular pre-eminence of the holy Law of God, above all humane
Laws in the World. The Law of the Lord is perfect, Psalm. 19. absolutely
perfect, to meet with all sinful aberrations whatsoever. But the best Laws,
that ever were devised by the wit of Man, were imperfect; neither could provide
against all emergent abuses and inconveniences. I have seen an end of all
perfection, says David Psalm. 119. 96. Quam angusta innocentia est, ad legem
bonum esse? quanto latius officiorum patet, quam juris regula? Sen. 2. de ira.
27.
again, Psalm. 119. but thy Commandment is exceeding broad. The Laws of Men are
but narrow things in comparison, and must of necessity leave out more than they
can take in: God's Commandment only is broad enough to take in all. For
instance, I shall name you but one or two of ten thousand. The unconscionable
racking of Rents; the selling of Cattle to poor husbandmen, that have not their
money ready to buy in the Markets, upon a years day for almost double the price;
the underbuying of Commodities far below the worth, for disbursing a little
money beforehand to supply the present necessity of such an one as might very
ill afford such a peny-worth, and the like; which are all very grievous
oppressions in themselves, and by the Magistrate known so to be. Yet what can
he do to help it, so long as the Laws have provided no remedy there against?
True it is, the Law of God reaches them all: and therefore if any Man go
beyond 1 These. 4. 6.
or defraud his brother in any matter, or in any manner, he must not think to
escape unpunished, because the Laws of the State, under which he lives, take
no conusance of any such matter. God, who governs according to his own Law,
but not according to man's Law, will undoubtedly be the avenger of all such:
But the Magistrate, who is to govern according to the established Laws of his
Country, must not stretch himself beyond his Rule; but leave those evils that
are without the reach of his authority, to the just vengeance of him to whom
Psalm. 94. 1.
all vengeance belongs.

17. Secondly, Men's Laws are subject (besides that imperfection) to another
great impotency, in this; That they cannot effectually provide against those
general inconveniences, for the preventing whereof they are especially devised:
without leaving a possibility for particular mischiefs to fall, and that right
heavily, sometimes upon, and much to the prejudice of some honest
well-deserving Men. Now where a good subject, that means nothing but well, is
thus unhappily fallen under the heavy pressure of the Law; ( Quis est iste, qui
se profitetur omnibus legibus, innocentem? Sen. 2. de ira. 27.
and that may be any bodies case) a just and compassionate Magistrate may be
heartily sorry for him, and if it lie in his power to procure for him from an
higher power some mitigation of the Law, he will do his best to effect it. But
for the most part, especially where things are prosecuted eagerly and with
malice against the poor Man; he cannot devise any means that may be effectual
to deliver him, without danger of bringing both himself into trouble, and the
Laws into contempt, and of opening a wide gap to the exercising of an arbitrary
power by the Judge (than which there is scarce imaginable any evil of more
mischievous consequence in a Commonwealth) and to any other mighty
inconveniences.

18. There is yet a third vanity, whereunto ( the Law of God only excepted) all
other Laws are subject; That when they are made with as much advised
delibertation, and drawn up into a form of words with as much fullness,
perspicuity, and caution, as the wisdom of the best heads could possibly
contrive; yet the nimble wit of Man, within the compass of a few months or
years, will find out some hole or other to creep out at; some slight evasion,
whereby to slacken the sinews, and to elude the force and intention of the
same. By which means many times crafty companions are set without the danger,
and honest wellmeaning Men put beside the benefit of those Laws, which were
really intended for the curbing of the one sort, and protecting of the other;
and the Magistrate cannot do withal.

19. These three reasons are taken from the quality of the Laws: I add but a
fourth, taken from the condition of the Times. A good Magistrate may have the
hap to fall into such evil Times; that if he should attempt to do that service
to the public, by partaking with righteous, and opposing against unrighteous
Men and causes, with that fredom that would well become him to do, if the times
were better, he should not only be sure to lose his labor, but be in danger
also to lose his place, by striving against the current to no purpose. Now in
such times, if he do not always lend his help to those that are hardly dealt
withal, in that measure which perhaps they expect; his inability to do them
good may be a reasonable excuse for him. But is not this to teach the
Magistrate to temporize? or may be slug in his office, or desert his bounden
duty, for fear of Bugbears, or by pretending there is a Lion in the way?
Nothing less. God forbid Prove. 26. 12.
any Man that occupies the place of the Lords Messenger should utter a
syllable of encouragement to any Magistrate, to make himself a slave to the
Times; either by running with a multitude to do any evil action for the winning
of their Exodus 23. 2.
favor, or by forbearing (out of a base fear and a faint heart) to do any
good, whereunto his power and opportunity will serve him.

20. But the thing I say is this: It is a point of Christian wisdom for a
Magistrate, or any other Man, if the Lord cast him upon evil times, to yield to
the sway of the times so far (provided ever that it be done without sin) as not
wilfully to deprive himself of the power and opportunities of doing the good he
can, by striving unseasonably to do more good than he can. The reason whereof
is grounded upon that well known Maxim, so generally allowed of by all Divines;
That affirmative precepts (such as this of delivering the oppressed, is) do not
oblige ad semper, at all times, and in all places, and with all circumstances,
as negative precepts do. But for exercising the offices of such ( affirmative)
precepts, there must be a due consideration had of the end, and of all
requisite Circumstances, to be laid together one against another in the
balance of prudence: and according to the exigence thereof, the duty is for
that time to be either performed or omitted. Solomon tells us, Eccles. 3.
Eccl. 3. 1. -- 11.
that there is a time for every thing; and that every thing is beautiful in its
Time: implying withal, that taken out of the right time, nothing is beautiful.
He faith there also, that there is a time to keep silence, and a time to speak.
And surely the evil time is the proper time for keeping silence. Therefore the
prudent shall -- -- 7. Amos 5. 13.
keep silence in that time, for it is an evil time.

21. Now seeing that by so many several ways, as these which I have already
mentioned, most of which do frequently happen (besides infinite more which may
happen, according to the infinite variety of particular occurrents) Magistrates
and others may be excused for not helping those to right that suffer wrong: it
should make us all very watchful over our speeches, and sparing in our
censures, (wherein yet for the most part we take to our selves a mavelous
Liberty, a great deal more than becomes us) concerning the actions and
dealings of our Governors. It is no wonder to hear lightheaded people, and
such as can look but a little way into the affairs of the world, clamourous: as
shallowest brooks run with the greatest noise, and the emptiest vessels give
the loudest sound. Nor is it a new thing, to see such men, as by their own
unconscionable dealings help to make the times as bad as they are, to set their
mouths wide open in bitter invectives against their betters, and to be evermore
declaiming against the iniquites of the times. But it grieveth my very soul,
when I see Men, otherwise discreet, and such as are in some reputation for
virtue and godlinss, sometimes to forget themselves so much as they do, and to
be so far transported beyond the bounds of sobriety and duty, as to speak their
pleasure of those that are in place either of supreme, or of high (though
subordinate) authority: as if all were naught; every Man looked only after his
own ease, or his own gain, or his own advancement; but none regarded to amend
any thing amiss, or took to heart the wrongs and sufferings of poor Men.

22. To see the manifold oppressions that are done under the Sun even in the
Eccl. 4. 1. and 5. 8.
best times, (Solomon's Reign was a time blessed with peace and plenty; yet did
he complain of the oppressions of the poor in his days, but for all that large
measure both of power and wisdom wherewith God had endowed him, he could not
remedy all) will stir up in every Man that has any holy warmth in him, a just
indignation there-against. But commonly (such is our selfishness) we are most
fiery, when the mischief lights upon our selves, or upon those that stand in
some near relation to us. Therefore I cannot in charity but impute the excesses
of such Men, not to their zeal of justice, and indignation against those that
either pervert it, or but neglect it; but, heightened through the violence of
the perturbation, to the distemper of Fury. Which makes me now and then to
think of those words of Solomon: which perhaps have another meaning, yet are
very fitly applied this way, in Eccles. 7. Surely oppression Eccles. 7. 7.
makes a wise Man mad. For as a Man, who whilst he was master of his reason
was quiet and companiable, fallen afterward raging mad, raileth, and strikes,
and flingeth stones about him, sparing none that comes within his reach, be he
never so good: little otherwise does a Wiseman mis-behave himself (in his
language) toward his betters, when he is but a little, as it were out of his
right wits through the distemper of some violent perturbation of mind, (by a
misnomer) called zeal.

23. It would be some bridle both to our tongues and passions, seriously to
consider; that it becomes not the servant of God to speak evil of Governments,
2 Pet. 2. 10.
or Goverours openly, though some things should be much amiss in the Land, and
little done in order to the amending thereof: for that is a kind of blasphemy;
for so the Apostles word is. Openly did I say? I did so, because too often Men
do so: But the truth is, the servant of God is not allowed by his Master to
speak evil of dignities; no not in his private chamber; more yet; not so Eccl.
10. 20.
much as in his private thoughts. Much less, to proclaim the infirmities of his
Governors to the wide world, for fear Cham's curse should light upon him: over
which he ought rather with blessed Sem and Iaphet to cast the mantle of
Charity, to hide their nakedness from the eyes of Scorners. Least of all to
sinite Genesis 9. 22, etc. Prove. 17. 26.
Princes for Equity, and to cry out upon them as Men that make no conscience of
the discharge of their duty in that their high calling, so long as they are
careful in the generality to promote the execution of justice within their
territories: only for suffering those evils, which they cannot so easily remedy
as we can observe; and for not doing that good, which is not altogether in
their power to do. So long as God is pleased to suffer noisome corruptions to
remain in the hearts of the best, and strong lusts to reign in the hearts of
the most; (which will be so long as the world lasts:) it cannot be but
oftentimes offenses will come, disorders and abuses will grow, right will be
overborn by might, the plain-dealing will become a prey to the crafty, wrongs
and indignities will be offered; which the wisest and greatest and godliest
Magistrates shall never be able wholly either to prevent, or remedy.

24. Let it suffice thee, for the possessing thine own soul in patience, to
know; that all shall de righted one day. God will set all straight at the last:
but that day is not yet. It is thy duty, in the mean time, to pity thy
Superiors, rather than to envy them, that have so much work to do, and yet are
exposed to censure and obloquy, as if they did nothing because they do not that
which never yet any mortal Man clould do, in suppressing all opressions. It is
thy duty, whatsoever actions of theirs may be capable of a just excuse, or of a
fair interpretation, to allow it them: and for what cannot be excused, to mourn
for them 1 Samuel 15. 39.
in secret, but not to make a noise about them openly; when neither thy calling
will warrant thee, nor the hope of any good effect to follow upon it can
encourage thee so to do. If they say, Behold, we knew it not: whether they say
it truly or untruly, what is that to thee? The judgment of that, I find in my
Text referred to God, and to their own hearts, but no where to thee. Thou must
take it for a good excuse however, and rest content therewithal.

25. Secondly. It may be some comfort to the soul of every godly Man and
Magistrate, amidst all the oppressions and disorders that are done or suffered
in the Land without redress; if his heart can tell him that he has not bin
willingly accessory thereunto, but that he can truly say, Behold, we knew it
not: that God will admit that his just excuse. God is not (and happy it is for
us that he is not) so hard in his righteous judgments, as we are too often in
our rash censures. He looks not to reap where he has not sown: nor will he
demand an account of a talent where none was disbursed, nor require of any Man
above the proportion of that power wherewith he has entrusted him; and of
those means and opportunities which he has vouchsafed him. If there be but a
willing mind, and a faithful endeavor, according to power, and as occasions
serve, to do his duty cheerfully in this, or any other kind; the Lord will
graciously accept it, according to that a Man has, and not according to that
he has not. Thrice blessed therefore is that Magistrate, or other Man whoever
he be, that has considered the poor and needy with a compassionate heart, and
-- prosilire libet in forum; commodare alt^ri vocem, alt^ri operam: etsi nihil
prosuturam, tamen conaturam prodesse. Sen. de tranquil. c. 1.
bent himself Psalm. 41. 1.
with all his strength to deliver them out of their oppressions and troubles;
although he has not been able to accomplish it to the full of his desires; for
he shall reap the reward of that which is done; and that which is not done
shall never be laid to his charge. Only, that he do not flatter himself with a
false comfort: let him be well assured first, that his Excuse will hold water,
and that his heart condemn him not as a liar, when he says, Behold, we knew it
not. For this Excuse, though sometimes just, as we have now heard at large; yet
many times is pretended without cause: which is our next point, now to be
considered with more brevity.

26. If to pretend an excuse were sufficient to discharge a Man from a fault:
among so many offenses as are in the world, we should have much ado to find an
offender. Those Men that are almost ever behind with their work, are yet seldom
to seek for an excuse. The disease is Epidemical; I may say, Ecumenical too.
We have it by kind, derived in a perpetual line of succession from the loins of
our first Parents. As Adam and Eve were not without their excuse, ( The woman
gave me; and, The Serpent beguiled me) so neither was bloody Genesis 3. 12. -- --
3. Genesis 4. 9. 1 Samuel 15. 15. 1 Samuel 25. 11.
Cain, their firstborn, without his, ( Am I my brothers keeper?) Nor
disobedient Saul without his, ( The people took of the chief things to
sacrifice to the Lord:) Nor churlish Nabal without his, ( Shall I take my
provision, killed for my Shearers, and give it to Men I know not whence they
be?) Nor (that I may spare the particulars, and take a world of them together)
will the whole crew of cursed Reprobates be without their excuse too, even then
when the last sentence is ready to be pronounced upon them, ( Lord, we never
saw thee hungry, Mat. 25. 44.
or thirsty, etc.) From Adam the first sinner, who was then presently turned
out of Paradise, unto the last damned wretches, who shall be then presently
turned into hell: no sinful Man but has at some time or other bewrayed the
leaven of his natural hypocrisy, by excusing his transgressions. Such a
proneness there is in all the Sons of Adam, Ad excusandum excusationes in
peccatis: that it may be said of all mankind, what is written of the guests
that were bidden to the great Supper, Luke 14. They all began with one consent
to make excuses. Luke 14. 18.


27. The true Reason whereof is, that wretched pride, vainglory, and
hypocrisy, (from which we had all need to pray, Good Lord deliver us) which
cleaves so fast and inseparably to our corrupt natures. Whence it is, that
many Men, who pass so little for their consciences, yet stand so much upon
their credit: As Saul, who using no diligence to regain the favor of God, was
yet very solicitous, that his honor might be preserved in the opinion of the
people. 1 Samuel 15. 30.
Indeed, we are neither careful to do well, nor willing to hear ill: Loath are
we to leave our sins; and we are as loath to own them. And therefore we throw
cloaks over them, that the outside may look comely howsoever, and the
dishonesty that is underneath may not be seen. Our Savior speaks of the
Pharisees Joh. 15. 22. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 16.
cloak of hypocrisy; and St. Paul of a cloak of covetousness; and St. Peter of
a cloak of maliciousness. They write of Plutarch. in Lucul.
Lucullus, that out of his private wardrobe he furnished the Praetor (his
friend) for the adorning of a popular Show with more than two hundred Cloaks.
Horace plays the Poet, and makes it up Sibi millia quinq. esse domi
chlamydum. Horat. 1. ep. 6.
five thousand. Every one of us has the wardrobe of his heart plentifully
furnished with these cloaks; even beyond what the Poet could feign of him:
Cloaks of all sizes, and for all purposes, and to fit all occasions. But as old
Bartimaeus cast away his Cloak to follow Christ: so must we, if we will be Mar.
10. 50.
Christ's Disciples, cast away from about us all these cloaks of vain
pretensions and excuses. But that we shall never do to purpose, unless we first
cast out from within us that pride and self-love, whose Liveries those Cloaks
are. The better we shall learn that first great lesson of self-denial, the less
will we seek to excuse our errors with vain pretentions.

28. But the more apt we are by nature to justify our selves by causeless
excuses: the greater ought to be the care of every good man (the only use I
shall now make of this point) to examine the truth and the weight of those
excuses which he pretends in his own defense. Whether they have justae
excusationis instar, and will bear a good and sufficient plea: or be but rather
(...). Eurip.
shifts, devised to serve a present turn, more for outward show, than real
satisfaction within. Which is that judicium cordis, the judgment of the heart,
whereunto Solomon, as I told you, refers over this pretention ( Behold we
knew it not) to receive its first and most immediate trial. Does not he that
pondereth the heart, consider it? What the tongue pleads, is not a thing so
considerable with God, as how the heart stands affected.

29. For the approving his heart therefore in this business, before him that
knows it perfectly, and is able to ponder it exactly: let every Magistrate,
and other Officer of justice, consider in the fear of God; First, Whether he
has been willing (so far as his leisure amidst the throng of other his weighty
employments would permit) to receive the petitions, and with patience to hear
the complaints of those poor Men, that have fled to him as to a Sanctuary for
refuge and succor? Job professes himself to have been a father to the poor:
and Job. 29. 16.
he is a very unnatural father, that stops his ears against the cries of his
children; or so terrifieth them with his angry countenance, that they dare not
speak to him. Solomon in the twenty ninth of this book, distinguishes a
righteous Man from a wicked by this; that the righteous considers the cause
of the poor, but Prove. 29. 7.
the wicked regards not to know it. He that rejects their complaints, or
beats them off with bug-words, and terror in his looks, either out of the
hardness of his heart, or the love of ease, or for whatsoever other respect,
when he might have liesture to give them audience, (if he were so minded) and
to take notice of their grievances; cannot justly excuse himself, by pleading,
Behold, we knew it not. But I must hasten. Let him consider, secondly, Whether
he have kept his ear, and his affection equally free to both parties, without
suffering himself to be possessed with prejudices against, or to be carried
away with favorable inclinations toward, the one side more than the other. He
is too little a judge, that is too much either a friend, or an enemy. Thirdly,
Whether he has used all requisite diligence, patience, and wisdom in the
examination of those causes that have been brought before him, for the better
finding out of the truth, (as Job Job. 29. 17.
searched out the cause which he knew not) without shuffling over business in
posthaste; not caring which way causes go, so he can but dispatch them out of
the way quickly, and rid his hands of them. Fourthly, Whether he has indeed
endeavored to his power to repress or discountenance those that do ill offices
in any kind, tending to the perverting of justice: as namely, Those that lay
traps for honest Men, to fetch them into trouble without desert; Those that sow
discord among neighbors, and stir up suits for petty trespasses, and trifles
of no value; Those that abet contentious persons, by opening their mouths in
their behalf in evil causes; Those that devise new shifts to elude good Laws.
Lastly, whether he has gone on stoutly in a righteous way, to break the
jaw-bones of the Lions in their mouths, and to pluck the spoil from between
their teeth, by delivering them that were ready to be slain, or destinated to
utter undoing by their powerful oppressors: without fearing the faces of Men,
or fainting in the day of their brothers adversity. He that has done all this
in a good mediocrity, so far as his understanding upon power would serve, tho
he have not been able to remedy all the evils, and to do all the good he
desired, may yet say, with a good Conscience, and with comfort, Behold, we knew
it not: and his excuse will be taken, in the judgment both of his own heart,
and of God who knows his heart; whatsoever other Men think of him, or
howsoever they censure him. But if he have failed in all, or any the premises;
though he may blear the eyes of Men with colorable pretenses, he cannot so
secure his own conscience; much less escape the judgment of God, before whose
eyes causeless excuses are of no avail. Which is the last of the three points
proposed: whereunto I now proceed.

30. The judgment of a Man's own heart, is of greater regard, in utramque
partem, than the censures of all the Men in the world besides. Better the world
should condemn us, if our own hearts acquit us, than that our hearts should
condemn us, and all the world acquit us. This is our rejoicing, the testimony
of our 2 Cor. 1. 12.
Conscience, says St. Paul. The approbation of Men may give some accession to
the rejoicing, (the other being first supposed) but the main of it lies in the
testimony of the Conscience. This is the biggest Tribunal under Heaven: but not
absolutely the highest: there is one in Heaven above it. St. Paul, who thought
it safe for him to appeal hither, from the unjust censures of Men; yet durst
not think it safe for him to rest here, but appealeth from it to a higher
Court, and to the judgment of the great God, 1 Cor. 4. It was a very small
thing with him to be 1 Cor. 4. 3. -- -- 4.
judged of man's judgment. So long as he knew nothing by himself, so long as
his own heart condemned him not, he passed not much for the censures of Men.
Yet durst not justify himself upon the acquittal of his own heart. He knew
there was much blindness and deceitfulness in the heart of every sinful Man:
and it were no wisdom to trust to that that might fail. He would up therefore
to a higher and an unerring Judge; that neither would deceive, nor could be
deceived: and that was the Lord. I judge not mine own self, says he, but he
that judges me is the Lord. Even so here; Solomon remitteth us over, for the
trial of our pretended excuses, from our mouths to our hearts; and from our
hearts unto God. If thou say, Behold, we knew it not: does not he that
pondereth the heart, consider it? etc. As if he had said, No matter for the
words: look to thy heart. If thou pretendest one thing without, and thy
conscience tell thee another thing within: thou art (...), cast and condemned
by the sentence of thine own heart. But if thy heart condemn thee not; the more
indeed is thy comfort, and the stronger thy hope; yet be not too confident upon
it. There is an abyssus, a depth in thy heart which thou can not fathom with
all the line thou have. Thou have not a just balance, wherein to weigh and to
ponder thy own heart. That must be left therefore wholly to the Lord, who alone
can do it perfectly; and to whose judgment alone every man shall finally stand
or fall; and if he deserve to fall, all his vain excuses shall not be able to
hold him up.

31. Which of how little avail they are in his sight, let us see in some few
examples. What gained Adam by his thin fig leaves, and thinner Apology? Genesis 3.
24.
St. Bernard thinks his latter sin in excusing, was in some respects rather
greater than his first sin in eating. I dare not say so: yet questionless that
excuse of his added a new guilt to the former, and aggravated his fault, to the
farther provoking of God's displeasure. All he could do or say, could neither
hide his nakedness, or hold him in Paradise. And was not Cain condemned to be a
perpetual Genesis 4. 12. 1 Samuel 15. 26. Luke 14. 24.
runagate, for all his excuse? And Saul cast both out of Gods favor and the
Kingdom, for all his? And so of all the rest. The unworthy guests, as they all
made excuses together for company, so were they all excluded from the great
supper together for company. And the damned Reprobates at the last day shall
not with all their Allegations procure either any stay of judgment before
sentence be pronounced, or the least mitigation thereof after. Mat. 25. 46.


32. If it were with Almighty God, as it is with Men, we might conceive some
hope, or possibility at least, that a mere pretended excuse might be of some
use to us. 1. Possibly, he might take it as it is, and never search farther
into it: 2. Or he may search into it, and not find out the vanity and
slightness of it: 3. Or he might find it out, and yet let it go unpunished. But
the Text here assures us, that it is quite otherwise with him, in each of
these respects. 1. The Lord will both search it out: for does not he that
pondereth the heart, consider it? And find it out: 2. for he that keeps thy
soul, does not he know it? And punish it: 3. for shall not he render to every
Man according to his works? Each of which interrogations virtually contain a
several reason of the point: to let us see how impossible it is that causeless
Excuses should do us any good before the judgment seat of God.

33. First, They will not avail us, because they cannot escape his search. Does
not he that pondereth the heart, consider it? Men are credulous and
inconsiderate both ways: easily induced by a credible accusation, to condemn
the innocent; and as easily by a credible Apology, to accquit an offender. But
the righteous Lord evermore takes the matter into his due consideration, and
pondereth every thing diligently, (for in suchlike Phrases the Scriptures,
fitted to our capacities, speak of him:) before he proceed to give sentence. If
the cry of the sins of Sodom be grievous, and call importunately upon him for
vengeance: yet before he will Genesis 18. 21.
power it down upon them in fire and brimstone, he will pause upon it (as it
were) a little first; he will go down and see if their doings be altogether
according to that cry, and if not, that he may know it. Neither will he give
Belshazzar's Kingdom Dan. 5. 27, 28.
from him to the Medes and Persians, before he have weighed him in the
balance, and found him too light. And as he will not take an accusation to the
condemning, so neither will he take an excuse to the acquitting of any Person,
without sifting it well first, and searching into the truth of it. In which
search he is most exact and punctual* For he enters into the reins and
kidneys, and pierces even to the dividing a^^nder of the joints and marrow;
and prieth into the most secret Heb. 4. 12.
inwards, and that with a most curious eye, till he discern the most close and
hidden thoughts and intents of the heart. And to make sure work, that nothing
may escape his search, by lurking unspied in some remote corner or dark cranny
of the heart, he takes Quant ascunq^e tenebras sactis tuis superstru^eris,
Deus lumen est. Tertul. de poeni^. c. 6.
a light with him; he Zeph. 1. 12. Prove. 16. 2.
searches it with candles, as the Prophet speaks. To omit those other
metaphorical but significant expressions, here and there scattered in the holy
Scriptures, to this purpose: this very phrase used in the Text of pondering the
heart, and that other like it in Prove. 16. of weighing the spirits, if there
were no other, would sufficiently show forth the exactness of his proceedings
in this trial. It is taken from the curios^ty that Men use in weighing Gold, or
precious quintessences for medicine. It imports, that if in any thing we
pretend a scruple, or but so much as the least grain be wanting of the due
weight it should have; it will not pass current with him, but shall be turned
upon us again, both to our shame and loss.

34. Secondly. Vain excuses will not help us, because the vanity of them cannot
escape his knowledge. [He that keeps thy soul, does not he know it?] Men are
easily deluded with false shows, because they cannot always spy the falseness
and emptiness of them: as children are easily made believe that a piece of
Brass is Gold, when they see it glister. And the reason is evident, because Men
have nothing to judge by but the outward appearance; and that can let them in
but a very 1 Samuel 16. 17.
little way into the heart. So that what the Preacher says, Eccl. 8. in
respect of other things, holds no less in respect of the sincerity of Men's
hearts, and likewise of their speeches and allegations; Tho a Man labor to
seek it out, yea, Eccl. 8. 17.
further, tho a wise Man think to know it, yet he shall not be able to find it.
Only the Lord, in whose hands, and before whose eyes our hearts and all our
ways are, he that keeps our souls, as it is here, ( Servat and observat too,
the word may import either) he spieth out all our paths, and observes all our
haltings. (...)
We deceive ourselves, if we think to mock him, or to hide any thing out of his
sight. Shall not God search it out? says David, Psalm. 44. for he knows the
very Psalm. 44. 21.
secrets of the heart. Men may search for a thing, and be never the nearer,
because they cannot search it out: As Laban tumbled over all Jacob's stuff,
searching for Genesis 31. 34.
his Idols, but found them not. But where God searches, he does it
effectually. Shall not God search it out?

35. Thirdly. Vain excuses will not help us, because they cannot exempt us from
punishment, and the just vengeance of God; for shall not he render to every Man
according to his works? Men are sometimes swayed with partial affections, to
connive at such things as they might redress, if they were so disposed; and are
content to take any sorry excuse for a sufficient answer, when it is so thin
and transparent, that they cannot choose but see quite through it; especially if
it be tendered by such persons as they desire to show some respect unto. But
with the Lord, there is no respect of persons. He hates sin with a perfect
hatred, and punishes it wheresoever he finds it, with severe chastisements
in his own dearest servants and children; but with fiery vengeance and fury
poured out upon his Adversaries. Where he enjoineth a duty, he looks for
obedience; and therefore where the duty is unperformed, the disobedience is
sure to be punished, let the offender pretend and allege never so largely to
excuse it. Quid verba audiam, factacum videam? It is the work he looks at in
all his retributions: and where the work is not done, vain words will not ward
off the blows that are to be inflicted for the neglect; nor any whit lessen
them, either in their number or weight. Will they not rather provoke the Lord
in his just indignation, to lay on both more and heavier strokes? For where a
Duty is ill neglected, and the neglect ill excused, the Offender deserves to
be doubly punished; once for the omission of the Duty, and once more for the
vanity of the Excuse.

36. Let me beseech you therefore (dearly beloved brethren) for the love of
God, and your own safety, to deal clearly and impartially betwixt God and your
own Souls in this Affair, without shuffling or dawbing; and to make straight
paths to your feet; lest that which is lame be turned out of the way. Remember
Heb. 12. 13.
that they that trust to lying vanities (and false pretenses are no better)
forsake Jonah 2. 8.
their own mercy. And that feigned excuses are but as a staff of Reed; a very
weak stay for a heavy body to trust to for support: which will not only crack
under the weight, but the sharp splinters thereof will also run up into the
hand 2 King. 18. 2^.
of him that leans upon it. You see what God looks at; It is the heart that
he pondereth, and the Soul that he observes, and the work that he
recompenseth. Look therefore that your hearts be true, and your souls upright,
and your works perfect: that you may never stand in need of such poor and
beggarly shifts, as forged pretenses are; nor be driven to fly for refuge to
that which will nothing at all profit you in the day of wrath, and of trial.
Let your desires be unfeigned, and your endeavors faithful, to the utmost of
your power to do Justice, and to show Mercy to your Brethren; and to discharge
a good Conscience in the performance of all those duties that lie upon you by
virtue, either of your general Callings as Christians, or of your particular
Vocations, whatever they be, with all diligence and godly wisdom, that you may
be able to stand before the Iudgment-seat of the great God with comfort; and
out of an humble and wellgrounded confidence of his gracious acceptance of your
(imperfect, but sincere) desires and endeavors in Christ, not fear to put your
selves upon the trial; each of you in the words of holy David, Psalm. 139. Try
me, O God, and seek Psalm. 139.
the ground of my heart: prove me, and examine my thoughts. Look well if there
be any way of wickedness in me; and lead me in the way everlasting; in the way
that leads to everlasting life. Which great Mercy, the Lord of his infinite
goodness vouchsafe unto us all, for his dear Son's sake, Jesus Christ our
blessed Savior. To whom, etc.

AD MAGISTRATUM.
The Third Sermon.
At the Assizes at Notingham, in the Year 1634. at the Request of ROBERT
MELLISH Esquire then High Sheriff of that County.
1 Samuel 12. 3. Behold, here I am, witness against me before the Lord, and
before his Anointed: Whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken? or whom
have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any
bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? And I will restore it you.
1. ABold and just challenge of an old Judge, made before all the People, upon
his resignal of the Government into the hands of a new King. Samuel was the
Man. Who, having continued (whilst Eli lived) in the Service of the Tabernacle,
as a Levite, and a private Man, was (after his death) to undergo a new
business; in the exercise of Public 1 Samuel 7. 6. and 19.
Judicature. For that phanatical Opinion, which has possessed some in these
later times, That no Ecclesiastical Person might lawfully exercise any Secular
Power, was in those days unheard of in the World. Eli, though a a Priest, was a
Judge also; and so was Samuel, though a Levite, after -- 4. 18.
him: And we find not, that either the People made any question at all, or that
themselves made any scruple at all, of the lawfulness of those concurrent
Powers. Samuel was now (as it is collected by those that have traveled in the
Chronology) aged about five and thirty Years, and so in his full strength, when
he was first Judge: Which so long as it continued in any measure, he little
respected his own case in comparison of the common Good; but took his 1 Samuel 7.
16, 17.
yearly Circuits about the Country, keeping Courts in the most -- per loca ad
judicandum opportuna. Lyra.
convenient places abroad; besides his constant sittings at Rama, where his
dwelling was, for the hearing and determining of Causes; to the great ease of
all, and content (no doubt) of the most or best.

2. But by that he had spent about 30 years more in his Countries Service, he
could not but find such decays in his Body, as would call upon him in his now
declining Age, to provide for some ease under that Aetate and curis gravatus.
Gloss. interl. (...). Joseph. l. 6. Antiq. 3. 1 Samuel 8. 1. -- -- 3.
great burden of Years and Business. Which that he might so do, as that yet the
public Service should not be neglected; he thought good to join his two Sons
in commission with him. He therefore makes them Judges in Israel, in hope that
they would frame themselves by his example to judge the people with suchlike
diligence and uprightness as himself had done. But the young Men, as they had
far other aims than the good old Father had, so they took quite (...). Joseph.
ib. -- -- 4.
other ways than he did. Their care was not to advance Justice, but to fill
their own Coffers; which made them soon to turn aside after lucre, to take
bribes, and to pervert judgment. This fell out right for the Elders of Israel,
who now had (by their miscarriage) a fair opportunity opened, to move at length
for that they had long thirsted after, viz. the change of the Government. They
gather themselves therefore together, that the cry might be the fuller; and to
Ramah they come to Samuel, with many complaints and alledgments in their
mouths. But the short of the business was, a King they must have, and a King
they will have, or they will -- 5.
not rest satisfied. It troubled Samuel not a little, both to hear of the
misdemeanour of his sons, of whom he had hoped better; and to see the
wilfulness of a discontented people, bent upon an Innovation. Yet he would
consult with God before he would give them their answer. And then he answers
them, not by peremptorily denying them the thing they so much desired; but by
-- placide salubri oratine ab insana voluntate detorquet plebe^. Sulpit. lib. 1.
earnestly dissuading them from so inordinate a desire. But they persisting
obstinately in their first resolution; by farther direction from the Lord,
Samuel condescendeth to them, and dismisseth them, with a promise that it
should be done to them as they desired, and a King they should have ere it were
long.

3. And within a while he made good his promise. The Lord had designed Saul to
be their King, and had secretly revealed the same to Samuel. Who did also, by
God's appointment, first anoint him very privately, no Man being by, but they
two alone; and after in a full Assembly of the people at Mispeth, evidenced him
to be the Man whom God had chosen, by the determination of a Lot. Whereupon the
most part of the people accepted Saul for their King elect; testifying their
acceptance by their joyful acclamations, and by sending him Presents. Yet did
not Saul then immediately enter upon his full Regalities, (whether by reason of
some contradiction made to his Election, or for whatsoever other cause) but
that Samuel still continued in the Government; till upon occasion of the 1 Samuel
11. 1, etc.
Ammonites invading the Land, and laying siege against Iabesh Gilead, Saul made
such proof of his valor by relieving the Town, and destroying the enemy, that
no Man had the forehead to oppose against him any more. Samuel therefore took
the hint of that Victory to establish Saul completely in the Kingdom, by
calling the people to Gilgal, where the Tabernacle then was; where he once --
-- 24, etc.
more anointed Saul before the Lord, and in a full Congregation, investing him
into the Kingdom with great solemnity, Sacrifices of Peace Offerings, and all
manner of rejoycings.

4. Now had the people, according to their desire, a King; and now was Samuel,
who had long governed in chief, again become a private Man. Yet was he still
the Lord's Prophet: and by virtue of that Calling, took himself bound to make
the people sensible of the greatness of their sin, in being so forward to ask a
King, before they had first asked to know the Lord's pleasure therein. And this
is in a manner the business of the whole Chapter. Yet before he begin to fall
upon them, he does wisely, first, to clear himself; and for the purpose he
challenges all and every of them, if they could accuse him of any injustice,
or corruption in the whole time of his Government, then and there to speak it
out, and they should receive satisfaction, or else for ever after to hold their
tongues; in the three first verses of this Chapter, but especially in this
third verse, [ Behold, here I am; witness against me before the Lord, etc.]

5. In which words are observable, both the Matter and Form of Samuel's
Challenge. The Matter of it, (to wit, the thing whereof he would clear himself)
is set down, first, in general terms: that he had not wrongfully taken to
himself that which was another, [ Whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I
taken?] And then more particularly, by a perfect enumeration of the several
species or kinds thereof: which being but three in all, are all expressed in
this Challenge. All wrongful taking of any thing from another Man, is done
either with or without the parties consent. If without the parties consent,
then either by cunning or violence, fraud or oppression, overreaching another
by wit, or over-bearing him by might. If with the parties consent, then it is
by contracting with him for some Fee, Reward, or Gratification. Samuel here
disclaimeth them all, [ Whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of
whose hand have I received a bribe, to blind mine eyes therewith? That is the
matter of the Challenge.

6. In the form, we may observe concerning Samuel three other things. First,
his great forwardness in the business, in putting himself upon the trial by his
own voluntary offer, before he was called thereunto by others. [ Behold, here I
am.] Secondly, his great Confidence, upon the conscience of his own integrity;
in that he durst put himself upon his trial before God and the World. [ Witness
against me before the Lord, and before his Anointed.] Thirdly, his great
Equity, in offering to make real satisfaction to the full, in case any thing
should be justly proved against him in any of the premises, [ Whose Ox, or
whose Ass, etc. and I will restore it you.]

7. The particulars are many: and I may not take time to give them all their
due enlargements. We will therefore pass through them lightly; insisting
perhaps somewhat more upon those things that shall seem more material or useful
for this Assembly, than upon some of the rest, yet not much upon any. Neither
do I mean, in the handling thereof, to tie my self precisely to the method of
my former division; but following the course of the Text, to take the words in
the same order, as I find them here laid to my hand. Behold, here I am; witness
against me, etc.

8. Behold, here I am. More haste than needs, may some say: It savoureth not
well, that Samuel is so forward to justify himself, before any Man accuse him.
Voluntary purgations commonly carry with them strong suspicions of guilt. We
presume there is a fault, when a Man swears to put off a crime, before it be
laid to his charge. True; and well we may presume it, where there appears not
some reasonable cause otherwise for so doing. But there occur sundry reasons,
some apparent, and the rest at least probable, why Samuel should here do as he
did,

9. First, He was presently to convince the people of their great sin, in
asking a King, and to chastise them for it with a severe reprehension. It might
therefore seem to him expedient, before he did charge them with innovating the
Government, to discharge himself first from having abused it. He that is either
to Omnia quae vindicaris in altero, tibi ipsi vehementer fugienda sunt. Cic. in
Ver. 3.
rebuke or to punish others for their faults, had need stand clear, both in his
own conscience, and in the eye of the World, of those faults he should censure,
and of all other crimes as foul as they, lest he be choked with that bitter
Proverb, retorted upon him to his great reproach; Luke 4. 23. (...). Iamb. apud
Plut. de dignosc. adul.
Physician, heal thy self. Juven. sat. 2.
Vitia ultima fictos contemnunt Scauros, and castigata remordent. How Nihil est
quod minus ferendum sit, quam rationem ab altero vitae exposcers eum, qui non
possit suae reddere. Cic. Divin. in Qu. Caecil.
unequal a thing is it, and incongruous, that he who wants no ill conditions
himself, should bind his neighbor to the good behavior? That a Homicidae
tyrannus irascitur, and punit furta sacailegus. Senec. 2. de ira. 28 Luke 6. 42.
sacrilegious Church-robber should make a Mittimus for a poor Sheep-stealer?
Or, (as he complained of old) that great Thieves should hang up little ones?
How can thou say to thy brother, Brother, let me pull out the mote that is in
thine eye, when behold there is a beam in thine own eye? That is, with what
conscience, nay, with what face can thou offer it? Turpe est doctori, every
Schoolboy can tell you. See to it all you, who by the condition of your
Callings are bound to take notice of the actions and demeanors of others, and
to censure them; that you Sic agitur censura, and sic exempla parantur: Cum
judex alios quod monet, ipse facit* Ovid. 6. fastor.
walk orderly and unreproveably your selves. It is only the sincerity and
unblameableness of your conversations, that will best add weight to your words,
win awe and esteem to your persons, preserve the authority of your places, put
life into your spirits, and enable you to do the works of your Callings with
courage and freedom.

10. Secondly. Samuel here justifies himself; for their greater conviction,
and for the more aggravating of their sin. If his Government had been
tyrannous, or corrupt, it had been somewhat the more excusable in them to have
attempted a change, (tho I cannot say, that the greatest tyranny or corruption
in a Governor imaginable, could have warranted such an attempt in toto): Yet,
whatsoever fault there had been in them for so doing; had he been liable to any
just exceptions in that kind, he must have born his share also of the blame, as
well as they; they, for that their seditious attempt; and he, for giving them
the occasion. Whereas his innocence puts off all the blame from him, and
leaves it wholly upon them: who now can no more excuse themselves than they
can accuse him. They had rejected him with a Nolumus hunc regnare: rather they
had rejected (...) Joseph. 1 Samuel 8. 7.
God in him, [ They have not rejected thee; but they have rejected me, that I
should not reign over them, Chap. 8.] It stood him therefore upon to clear
himself from all sinister surmises and suspicions of injustice; that it might
appear to them, and to all the World, that he had given them no cause why they
should so reject him; and that therefore they must thank themselves for it, and
not him, if in any aftertimes they should have cause to repent it. It is a
brave thing for a Magistrate, or indeed for any Man, to walk with (...). Gal.
2. 14.
an even foot, and in an upright course: that when bad people shall go about to
disparage him, or to speak, or but think unworthily of him, he may be able to
contest with them for the maintenance of his innocence, and to stand upon his
own justification; as St. Paul did, I have cove^ed no Man's silver, or gold, or
apparel. And as Moses did, I have not taken an Ass from them, neither have I
hurt one of them. And Acts 20. 33. Number. 16. 33.
as our blessed Savior himself did, I have done many good works among you; for
which of those works do you stone me? And as Samuel here does, Behold, here I
Joh. 10. 32.
am; witness against me, whose Ox, etc.

11. Thirdly. Samuel had now surrendered the administration into the hands of
the new King: and so having given up his Office, he thought it meet to render
Ultro me sisto, at administratae a me Reip. rationem reddam. Jun. annot.
an account how he has carried himself therein. It goes sore with an evil
steward, to hear of a reckoning: whereas he that has been faithful, desires
nothing more. Whatsoever our Callings are, we are but stewards over some part
of God's Household: and it were good for us estsoons to remember, that our
Master will require of us an account of our stewardships. The time will come,
when we must Luke 16. 3. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Mat. 12. 36. Wisd. 1. 9.
all appear before the Iudgment-seat of Christ, to give in our accounts: And we
must look to have them examined most strictly, even ad ultimum quadrante^i, to
the very utmost Farthing. Not an idle word, nor a vain thought, but must then
be -- ut ne minimae quidem cogitationes, ac verba minutessima, ejus judicio
indiscuss^ reman^ant. Gregor. Rev. 6. 16.
accounted for. They that judge others now, shall then be re-judged; and all
their proceedings re-examined and re-viewed with a most curious, unerring, and
unpartial eye. O happy, thrice happy that servant, who conscious to his own
faithfulness, shall not need to seek to the Hills and Rocks to hide him from
the face of the great Judge; or to run to the Thickets as Adam did, till he be
fetched out with that terrible process, ( Adam, where art thou?) but shall
readily Genesis 3. 8, 9.
present himself, with much assurance and comfort before him, as Samuel here
did before the King and the People, and say, Behold, here I am.

12. And why might not Samuel do this, fourthly, even in wisdom, for the timely
preventing of future cavil and danger? There were some pretensions against his
Sons, of Injustice and Corruption: and if matters should come to public
scanning, like enough much might be proved against them. Which how far they
might be stretched to the Father's prejudice in aftertimes, who could tell?
Little reason had he howsoever to trust a giddy people, (so unthankful, and so
newfangled, as he had found them to be) and to suffer either his safety, or
credit to lie at their courtesy. So long as these things should hang upon the
file, or lie in the desk, he might perhaps be safe, but he could not be secure.
That therefore the miscarriages of others might not fall on his neck, he might
think it safest for him toget his Quietus est betimes. And therefore he
requires them all, if any Man had ought to object against him, that they would
now produce it in open Court; if they had not, Reason would they should
forthwith acquit him by their general Suffrages. By which means having obtained
a public Testimony from them, as we see in the Verses following, and so being
(as it were) quit by Proclamation, he is thenceforth safe against all evil
calumniations, and fearless of after-claps. It is a base and unmanly thing, to
use indirect and underhand dealing to shift off a just Trial: but a point of
honest and Christian wisdom, in a fair and open way handsomely to prevent an
unjust Accusation. No fault for a Man to use the Serpent's wisdom, so it be not
tainted with the Serpent's poison too; but rightly tempered with a due mixture
of Dove-like simplicity Mat. 10. 16.
and innocence.

13. Lastly; To dissuade the people formerly from asking a King, Samuel had
told them what a King might do Ius Regis, 1 Samuel 8. 11.
de Iure, if he should use his absolute Power; and what if a King should do it
de Facto? no remedy but submit, they might not at any hand resist. And he knew,
that by their obstinacy in asking a King, they had so highly displeased the
Lord, that it were but just with him, if he should suffer their new King to
rule over them with rigor and tyranny. It might very well be, that out of this
very consideration Samuel was the rather induced at this time to declare his
own integrity; that so he might propose unto the new King now in the entrance
of his Reign a pattern of Equity and Justice in his own Example. Even as St.
Paul oftentimes proposes his own example to the Churches for their imitation.
( I beseech you, Brethren, to be followers of me. 1 Cor. 4. 16. Phil. 4. 9.
Those things which ye have heard and seen in me, do, etc.) We see the World is
much given to be led by -- nec ad rationem, sed ad similitudinem vivimus. Sen.
de vit. beat. cap. 1.
example. Whatever the attempt be, usually one of the first enquiries is; not
whether there be any Law, or any Reason, or any Conscience; but whether there
be any Precedent for it, yea, or no? And if any such be to be found, it seldom
sticks; it helps out many an ill matter, it gives a fair color to many
foul proceedings; when Men have this yet to plead for themselves, that they do
but as others have done before them, and continue things as they found them.
Terent. in Eunuch.
Hoc olim factitavit Pyrrhus, seemed to him plea enough in the Comedy. It so
much the more concerns every good and wise Man, especially those that are in
place of Authority, (whose actions are most looked upon, and soonest drawn into
Example) so to order themselves in their whole conversations, that such as come
after them may be rather provoked by their good example to do well, than
encouraged by their evil example to do amiss. If at any time hereafter Saul
should take any Man's Ox or Ass from him by any manner of fraud, oppression, or
bribery; the constant practice of his immediate Predecessor for sundry Years
together shall stand up, and give evidence against him, and cast him. Samuel's
integrity shall condemn him, both at the Bar of his own Conscience, and in the
mouths of all Men; at leastwise he shall have no cause to vouch Samuel for his
Precedent; no color to shroud his miscarriages under the authority of Samuel's
Example.

14. We cannot now marvel, that Samuel should thus offer himself to the trial,
when as no Man urged him to it; since there may be rendered so many congruous
reasons for it. Especially being withal so conscious to himself, of having
dealt uprightly, that he knew all the World could not touch him with any wilful
violation of justice. He does not therefore decline the trial, but seek it; and
puts himself upon it with mavelous confidence, challenging all Comers, and
craving no favor, [ Behold, here I am; witness against me before the Lord, and
before his Anointed.] Here is no excepting against any Witness, nor refusal of
any Judge, either God or Man. He had a good cause, and therefore he had also a
good heart. All Virtues are connext; among the rest, so are Justice and
Fortitude. The righteous are bold as a Lion. The Merchant that knows his
Prove. 28. 1.
Wares to be faulty, is glad of the dark Shop, and false Light; whereas he that
will uphold them right and good, wills his Customers to view them in the Joh.
3. 20, 21.
open Sun. Qui male agit, odit lucem. He that does evil, loves to skulk in the
dark, and will not abide the light, (which is to him as the terrors of the
shadow of Job 24. 17.
death) lest his evil deeds should be found out and laid open to his shame.
Even as Adam hid his head in a bush, when he heard the Voice of God, because
his Conscience told him he had transgressed.

15. A corrupt Magistrate or Officer may sometimes set a face upon it, and in a
kind of bravery bid defiance to all the World; but it is then when he is sure
he has power on his side to bear him out; when he is so backed with his great
friends, that no Man dare, mutire contra, once open his lips against him for
fear of being shent. Even as a rank Coward may take up the Bucklers, and brave
it like a stout Champion, when he is sure the Coast is clear, and no body near
to enter the Lists with him. And yet all this but a mere flourish, a faint and
feigned bravado; his heart the while in the midst of his belly is as cold as
lead, and he means nothing less than what he makes show of. If the offer
should be indeed accepted, and that his actions were like to be brought upon
the public stage, there to receive a due and impartial hearing and doom; how
would he then Nescis tu quam meticulosa res sit ire ad judicium. Plaut. in
Mostell. 5. 1.
shrink and hold off trow ye? then what crouching, and fawning, and bribing,
and dawbing, to have the matter taken up in a private Chamber; and the wound of
his credit a little overly-salved, tho upon never so hard and base conditions?
His best wits shall be tried, and his best friends to the utmost, if it be
possible by any means to decline a public trial.

16. Be just then, Fathers and Brethren, and ye may be bold: So long as you
stand right, you stand upon your own legs, and not at the mercy of others. But
turn aside once to defrauding, oppressing, or receiving rewards, and you make
your selves slaves for ever. Intus pugnae, foris timores: Horrors and gripes
within, because you have knowingly done what you ought not: Terrors and fears
within, lest your wicked dealings should come to light, whereby you might
receive the due shame and punishment thereof. Possibly you may bear up, if the
times favor you, and by your greatness outface your Crimes for a while: but
that is not a thing to trust to, [ O trust not in wrong and robbery, says
David, Psalm. 62.] The wind and the tide may turn against you, when you Psalm.
62. 10.
little think it: and when once you begin to -- Sejanus ducitur unco
Spectandus: gaudent omnes. Juven. Sat. 10.
go down the wind, every base and busy Companion will have one puff at you, to
drive you the faster and farther down.

17. Yet mistake not, as if I did exact from Magistrates an absolute immunity
from those common frailties and infirmities, whereunto the whole race of
mankind is subject: The imposition were unreasonable. It is one of the
unhappinesses that attends both your Calling and ours (Magistracy and Ministry)
that every ignorant Artisan, that perhaps knows little, and practices less
of his own duty, can yet instruct us in ours; and upon every small oversight
make grievous outcries, by objecting to you your place, to us our cloth, (a
Man of his place, a Man of his cloth, to do thus or thus!) As if any Christian
Man, of what place, or of what cloth soever, had the liberty to do otherwise
than well: or as if either we or you were in truth that in respect of our
natures, which in respect of our Offices we are sometimes called; we Angels,
and you Gods. Truly, however it pleases the Lord (for our greater honor) thus
to style us, yet Rev. 1. 20.
we find it in our selves (but too well) and we make it seen by us (alas, but
too Psalm. 82. 6.
often) that we are Men, (...), subject to the like passions, ignorances and
Act. 14. 15.
sinful aberrations that other Men are. And I doubt not but Samuel,
notwithstanding all this great confidence in his own integrity, had yet among
so many causes, as in so many years space had gone through his hands, sundry
times erred in judgment, either in the substance of the sentence, or at least
in some circumstances of the proceedings. By mis-informations, or
mis-apprehensions, or by other passions or prejudices, no doubt but he might be
carried, and like enough sometimes was, to show either more lenity, or more
rigor, than was in every respect expedient.

18. But this is the thing that made him stand so clear, both in his own
Conscience, and in the sight of God and the World, that he had not wittingly
and purposely perverted judgment, nor done wrong to any Man with an evil or
corrupt intention; but had used all faithfulness and good Conscience in those
things he did rightly apprehend, and all requisite care and diligence (so far
as humane frailty would suffer) to find out the truth and the right in those
things whereof he could not know the certainty. This do, exercising your selves
(with St. Paul) to have always a Conscience void of offense toward God, and
toward Men; Act. 24. 16.
and then you may (with him also) be bold to call both God and Man to bear
witness to your Integrity, ( Ye are Witnesses, and God also, how holily, and
justly, 1 These. 2. 10.
and unblameably we have behaved our selves among you, 1 Thessalonians. 2.) and with
good Samuel here, to put your selves for the trial of your uprightness, upon
your God, King, and Country, [Behold, here I am: witness against me before the
Lord, and before his Anointed.]

19. Thus much of Samuel's confidence. See we next, what the things are he does
with so much confidence disclaim, as the matter of the Challenge. It is in the
general, Injury or Wrong: the particular kinds whereof in the Text specified,
are Fraud, Oppression, and Bribery. Against all and every of these he expressly
protests: Whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I
defrauded? Whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe,
to blind mine eyes therewith? To begin with the general, Whose Ox have I taken?
or, whose Ass have I taken? These two Creatures, the Ox and the Ass, are here
mentioned, because of their great usefulness; the strength of the Ox, and the
patience of the Ass, enabling them, the one for labor, the other for carriage.
For in those times and Countries, they used Asses altogether for journeys and
for burdens, as we now adays, and in these parts of the World, do Horses:
Whereof in old time we find very little speech of any other use than for the
services of War only. Whence it is that the Ox and the Ass are in the
Scriptures See Deuteronomy. 17. 16. Psalm. 20. 7. Prove. 21. 31. See Genesis 32. 5. Exodus
13. 4. 12. Joh. 1. 3. Luke 13. 15. Exodus 20. 17.
so frequently mentioned together, and so reckoned together as a principal part
of a Man's wealth; and also both here and elsewhere, by way of Synechdoche, put
for a Man's whole substance or estate. In the last Commandment of the Ten,
after those words, Thou shall not covet thy neighbor's Ox, nor his Ass, it is
added, nor any thing that is thy neighbors. What is there expressed, the same
is here to be understood, as if Samuel had said, I have neither taken any Man's
Ox, nor Ass, nor any thing else that was another Man's.

20. And then by Taking he must needs mean (...). Diphil. apud Stobae. Ser. 8.
wrongful taking; the words will else bear no reasonable construction. For to
deny the lawfulness of commerce and civil contracts, such as are buying,
selling, giving, exchanging, and the like, wherein the right and property of
things is transferred from one Man to another, by delivering and taking ((...))
what were it else, but to overthrow all humane Society, and utterly to destroy
all the Offices of Commutative Justice, which is wholly conversant about
Contracts of that nature? His meaning clearly is, contenting himself with his
own portion, he had not sought to enrich himself by the spoil of others, or to
gain any thing to himself, to his neighbors hurt, by any unjust or
unconscionable means. It is the first and principal office of justice, suum
cuique, to let every Man have his own. And the holy Law of God binds our very
thoughts and desires from coveting (but how much more then our hands from
taking?) that which of right belongs not to us. That, (...) therefore in the
Law, Thou shall not covet that Exodus 20. 17.
which is another; is by our Savior himself, the best Interpreter of the Law,
rendered by (...) in the Gospel, Thou shall not take that which is another. To
teach us, that whosoever will allow himself the liberty to desire it, will not deny
himself the liberty (if opportunity serve) to take it: And that therefore
whosoever would hold his hands, must first learn to subdue his covetous lusts.

21. It is verily nothing so much as our Inde sere sceterum causa: nec plura --
etc. Juven. Sat. 14. 1 Timothy 6. 10.
Covetousness, that makes us unjust: which St. Paul affirms to be the root
of all evil; but is most manifestly the root of this evil of injustice.
Aristotle shows it out of the native signification of the Greek word (...);
as much as to say, a desire of having more; more than is our due, more than
falls to our part and share. As if a Man that were to divide something
betwixt himself and his fellow by even portions, should share the biggest part
to himself, whereby to make himself a gainer, and his partner a loser. This is
(...); and it is indeed quite contrary to that (...), Jam. 2. 8.
as St. James calls it, that Royal Law, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as they
self; and to that great fundamental Rule of Equity, by which, as by the
Standard, we ought to mete out all our dealings toward our brethren, Quod tibi
fiere non vis, etc. Whatsoever you would that Men should do unto you, do you
Mat. 7. 12.
even the same to them.

22. If all Men would first look back into the most suspected passages of their
former dealings, impartially trying them but by this one Rule, (and by this one
Rule they shall all be tried at the last day) and then would, secondly, resolve
to lay this Rule ever before their eyes, for the levelling of their future
Conversations: what a world of injustice might they find out by the one, keep
out by the other? which, because that Rule is so much neglected, are therefore
now so little regarded. Say, thou that by thy cunning over-reachest thy brother
in buying, selling, or bargaining; or deceivest the trust reposed in thee by
thy friend; could thou brook to be in like sort cheated thy self? Thou that,
Ahab-like, wringest thy poor neighbors Vineyard from him; driv'st him by
continual molestations to this strait, that either he must forsake the Town,
(if thou have a mind to enclose it) or else consent to his own and most of his
neighbors undoing, or any other way enforcest him to come to thy bent for fear
of a worse displeasure; could thou think it reasonable, if his case were
thine, to be so plagued and oppressed thy self? Thou that bribest a corrupt
Officer, subornest a perjured Witness, procurest a packt Jury, and (where thou
can conceive any hope that it will be taken) offerest to conveigh a reward
into the bosom even of the Judge himself; to pervert Judgment, and to get the
day of thine Adversary, when his Cause is more righteous than thine: could
thou be patient thy self to be wrested out of thy own apparent right by such
engines? In a word, thou that take thy Brother's Ox, or his Ass, or any thing
that is his, from him wrongfully; would thou be content thy brother should
wrongfully take thine? Whosoever thou art that do another wrong, do but
(...). Isoc. in Nicos.
turn the tables; imagine thy neighbor were now playing thy game, and thou
his: and then deal but squarely in this one point, and if thine own heart
condemn thee not, go on and prosper.

23. But Men that are resolved of their End, (if this be their End, to make
themselves great and rich -- quocunqu^ modo rem. Horat. 1. Epist. 1.
howsoever) are not much moved with arguments of this nature. The evidence of
God's Law, and conscience of their own duty, work little upon them: Gain is the
thing they look after; as for Equity, they little regard it. Let me tell them
then, that unjust gain, is not gain, but loss. Nor is this a Paradox: when a
mere heathen Man could say Hesiod. (...). Plaut. 1 Timothy 6. 6. Mark 8. 36.
(...); and another Lucrum puta lucrum, si justum fiet. St. Paul places gain
in godliness, not in wealth: and our Savior teaches, that he that should gain
the whole world, if he should for that lose his own soul, should have little
cause to boast of his peniworth. Lucrum in arca, damnum inconscientia: the gain
will no ways countervail the loss. All this is most certain truth; but still we
hit not upon the right string. The Worldling has his portion in this present
life, and Psalm. 17. 4.
in these outward things; and therefore what losses befall him therein, he can
feel as soon as another Man, and value them as well; But he is not much
sensible either of a spiritual, or an eternal loss. To come home to him then;
let him know, that the gain of unrighteousness shall not long prosper with him
and his. Treasures of wickedness profit little, says Solomon, Prove. 10. His
meaning is, take Prove. 10. 2.
them a primo ad ultimum, and they profit nothing. A Man may seem to profit by
them, and to come up wonderfully for a time; but time and experience thew, that
they moulder away again at the last, and crumble to nothing; and that for the
most part within the compass of an age. Seldom shall you see them hold so long:
but very rarely beyond the next Generation. An inheritance may be gotten Prove.
20. 21.
hastily at the beginning: but the end thereof shall not be blessed; the same
Solomon, Prove. 20. The morsels of deceit (and violence) that were so pleasant
in the -- 17.
chewing, the time will come when they shall be vomited up again with sorrow
Job 20. 15.
and bitterness: What gained Ahab by it, when he had made himself Master of 1
King. 21. 10.
Naboth's Vineyard, but the hastening of his own destruction? And what was
Gehazi 2 King. 5. 27.
the better for the gifts he received from Naaman? which brought an hereditary
Leprosy with them? And what was Achan the richer for the golden Wedg Josh. 7.
24.
he had saved out of the spoils, and hidden in his Tent, which brought
destruction upon him, and all that appertained to him?

24. Brethren, let us be wise and wary, and not deceive our selves. These
gobbets are but Sa^ans baits: which when we swallow, we swallow a hook with
them, wherewith he will strike us through at the last, though he suffer us a
while to play upon the line, and to please our selves with those new morsels.
Let Deuteronomy. 13. 17. Josh. 7. 11.
us therefore beware that we suffer not the least portion of unjust gain to
cleave to our fingers, or to mingle with our other substance. There is a secret
poison in it, which in time will diffuse it self through the whole heap, and
seize upon every part; and like Mercury-water, or Aquafortis, eat out all: as
some write of the Ostriches feather, that it will in time moult and consume all
the feathers in the tub wherein it is put. Know you not, that a small handful
of leaven, if it be Mat. 13. 33. and 1 Cor. 5. 6.
hidden in a great trough full of meal, will work it self into every part of
it, sour the whole lump? And that a single rood of Capite-land, will bring the
whole estate into wardship, though containing many thousand Acres of never so
free a Tenure? It was wisely done therefore of Samuel, as well as justly, not
to meddle with the taking of any Man's Ox or Ass.

25. It ought to be the care of every private Man, thus far to follow Samuel's
example, that he keep himself from doing any Man wrong. But Men that are in
place of Government, as Samuel was, have yet a further charge lying upon them,
over and besides the former; and that is, to preserve others from wrong; and
being wronged, to relieve them to the utmost of their power. A Magistrate
should be so far from taking any Man's Ox or Ass from him, that, so far as he
can hinder it, he should not suffer any other Man so to do. Where Commutative
Justice is by private persons violated, through fraud, oppression, or bribery,
there it behooves the Magistrate to set in, and do his part in the
administration of Distributive Justice, for the rectifying and redressing
thereof. It is the very end for which principally Laws, and Courts, and
Magistrates, were ordained.

26. The more have they to answer for, that abuse any part of this so sacred an
Ordinance, for the abetting, countenancing, or strengthening of any injurious
act. They that have skill in the Laws, by giving dangerous ^onus vir non agit
nisi bonas ca^sas. Quint. 12. inst. 1.
counsel in the Chamber, or pleading smoothly at the Bar. They that attend
about the Courts, by keeping back just complaints, or doing other casts of
their office in favor of an evil person or cause; but especially the
Magistrates themselves, by a perfunctory or partial hearing, by pressing the
Laws with rigor, or qualifying them with some mitigation where they ought not.
Where others do wrong, if they know it, and can help it, their very connivance
makes them Accessaries; and then the greatness and eminency of their places,
enhanceth the crime yet further, and makes them Principals. Qui non prohibet
peccare, cum potest, jubet. He that suffers another to take any Man's Ox or
Ass from him; or his house, or land, or common from him; or his tithe or glebe
from him; or his liberty or good name from him; or his life, or any part of his
livelihood from him being able to remedy it; it is all one as if he should bid
him do it. -- Me nemo ministro Juv. Sat. 3.
Fur erit, is a fit Motto for every good Magistrate.

27. I have now done with the Genus, the Species follow; which I shall dispatch
with more brevity. The particulars are three; Fraud, Oppression, and Bribery.
[Whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? Or, of whose hand have I
received a bribe, to blind mine eyes therewith?] Most Injuries are reduced to
the two first heads; Cic. de offic. (...). Homer.
Fraus and Vis. Sometimes a Man is wronged, and perceives it not till
afterward, which, if he had known in time, he might have prevented; this is
Defrauding. Sometimes he sees and feels how and wherein he is wronged, but
knows not which way in the world to avoid it; this is Oppression. There he
met with a Fox, here with a Lion: In that, he is overwrought by Craft; in this,
overborn by Might. Both are joined together in the Psalm, [ He shall redeem
their soul from falsehood and violence, Psalm. 72.] And Psalm. 72. 14.
in the Prophet, [ I will punish those that leap on the threshold, which fill
their Masters houses with violence and deceit, Zeph. 1.] and they are sometimes
joined together in practice. As Pharaoh said, consulting the destruction of the
Israelites, Opprimamus sapienter, let us deal wisely with them, and destroy
them. And as Exodus 1. 10.
Lysander was wont to say, that where the (...). Plut. in 1. ysandr.
Lion's skin would not reach to do the business, it should be eeked out with
the Foxes. Both are hateful both to God and Man: Cic. lib. 1. de Ossic.
Sed fraus odio digna majore, says the Orator; of the two, Deceit is the baser
and more hateful. Because men had rather be thought to want strength (for that
begets pity) than to want wit (which does but expose them to scorn:) thence
it is, that usually they complain more of treachery, than they do of open
hostility; and take it deeper to heart to be defrauded, than to be oppressed.
The loss troubles them not so much, they say, but they cannot endure to be
cozened. Samuel, you see, disclaimeth this in the first place, Whom have I
defrauded?

28. He knew the Law of God, and the Law of Equity, (the written, and the
unwritten Law both) were altogether against it. Thou shall not defraud thy
Levit. 19. 13. -- -- 35.
neighbor, Levit. 19. and after in the same Chapter, Ye shall do no
uurighteousness in judgment, in mete-yard, in weight, or in measure. In the
sixth Chapter of the same book it is declared, that he that commits a
trespass by deceiving his Levit. 5. 2, etc.
neighbor, sins therein, and the Law there enjoyneth an offering to be made
for the expiating of that sin. How often does Solomon condemn false weights,
Prove. 11. 1. 20. 10, 23.
and false balances, as foul abominations? And how frequently do the Prophets
object it, as a main provocation of God's heavy judgments upon the Land, Jer.
5. 26, 27.
That they set traps, and laid snares for men; That their houses were full of
deceit, as a cage is full of birds; That they were as crafty Merchants, in
whose Hos. 12. 7. Amos 8. 5.
hands are the balances of deceit; That they made the Ephah (whereby they
measured out the Commodities they sold) small, and the Shekel (wherewith they
weighed the money they were to receive for that they sold) great, and falsified
the balances; and the like? St. Paul also (if the translations speak his sense
aright) lays a charge upon the Thessalonians, That no man go beyond, or
defraud his brother in any matter: both because it is the will of God
sufficiently revealed in his Word, that men should not do so, and because God
will be a sure and severe avenger of those that do so, 1 These. 4. And he
chideth the Corinthians 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3, 6. 1 Cor. 6. 8.
for doing wrong, and defrauding one another, 1 Cor. 6. And le^t in what he
either forbids to, or reproves in others, himself should prove guilty, he
protests against all such dealings more than once: [ Receive us, we 2 Cor. 7.
2.
have wronged no Man, we have defrauded no Man, 2 Cor. 7. And again, 2 Cor. 12.
-- 12. 17.
Be it, I did not burden you, (as the false Apostles for filthy lucre, and to
serve Romans 16. 18.
their own bellies did) nevertheless, it may be you will think I was crafty,
and caught you with guile* No such matter, says he, I abhor it; I never made
gain of you, either by my self, or by my Agents, Titus or any other that I sent
unto you. Much like Samuel's challenge here. Whom have I defraud?

29. A very grievous thing it is to think of, but a thing merely impossible to
reckon up (how much less then to remedy and reform?) all the several kinds of
frauds and deceits that are used in the World. Wherein men are grown wondrous
expert, and so shameless withal, that they think it rather a credit to them, as
an argument of their perfect understanding in their several mysteries, and
particular professions, than any blemish to them in their Christian Profession,
to cheat and cozen they care not whom, nor whom, so they may get ^ersidiam,
frauds, and ab omni crimine lucrum Quaesitum. Juv. Sat. 3. Prove. 20. 14.
gain, and gather wealth by it. In the way of trade, in buying, selling, and
other bargaining; what lying, dessembling, and deceiving? It is stark naught,
says the buyer: It is perfect good, says the seller: when many times neither
of both speaks, either as he thinks, or as the truth of the thing is. False
weights, false measures, false thumbs, false lights, false marks, false wares,
falfe oaths, In the Markets and Shops. In the common offices of neighborhood,
friendship, service or trust: false glosses, false promises, false tales, false
cracks, false shows, false reckonings. In the Courts of Law, and all juridical
proceedings; false Bills, false answers, false suggestions, false counsels,
false accusations, false pleas, false testimonies, false records, false
motions, false verdicts, false judgments. The hour would fail me to mention but
the chief heads of those falsehoods, that are common and notorious; but no Man's
experience would serve him to comprehend, no Man's breath to declare the
infinite variety of those more secret and subtle falsehoods, that are daily
invented and exercised every where under the Sun.

30. Yet are they all, in the mean time, abominable to God that beholds them,
( The Lord will abhor both the blood-thirsty and deceitful Man) and will Psalm.
5. 6.
prove in the end unprofitable to those that use them, and (without repentance)
damnable. He that beguileth another, howsoever he may please himself
therewithal onward, yet shall find at length that he has most of all beguiled
himself; deceiving and being deceived, as the Apostles words (though spoken to
another 2 Timothy 3. 13. Prove. 11. 18.
purpose) are. According to that of Solomon, The wicked works a deceitful
work; but to him that sows righteousness, shall be a sure reward. Blessed is
the Man then, in whose heart, and tongue, and hands, there is found no deceit;
That walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks the Truth from
Psalm. 15. 2* etc.
his heart; That has not streched his wits to hurt his neighbor; nor made
advantage of any Man's unskilfulness, simplicity or credulity, to gain from him
wrongfully; That can stand upon it, as Samuel here does, and his heart not give
his tongue the lie, that he has defrauded no Man.

31. The other kind of Injury, here next mentioned, is Oppression: wherein a
Man makes use of his power to the doing of wrong, as he did of his wits in
defrauding. Which is for the most part the fault of rich and great Men; because
they have the greatest power so to do, and are not so easily resisted in what
they will have done. Do not the rich Men oppress you? Jam. 2. For riches and
worldly Jam. 2. 6.
greatness list up the hearts of Men, and swell them with pride, (Charge them 1 Timothy 6. 17.
that are rich in this world, that they be not high minded, says St. Paul) and
Pride brings on Oppression, ( Let not the proud oppress me, says David, Ps.
119.) Psalm. 119. 122.
They are the large fat kine of Basan, (that is, the Princes and Nobles, and
great ones of the Land) those that dwell in the mountains of Samaria, that
oppress the Amos 4. 1.
poor, and crush the needy, Amos 4. Yet not they only, for even poor and mean
Men also are in their dispositions as proud, and as merciless, as the greatest;
if their powers were answerable to their wills, and their horns to their
curstness: and they are as ready to show it too, so often as their power will
serve them so to do. Now this also Samuel disclaimeth, as well as the former.
Although he had a large power, having been chief Governor for many years
together, and so (...)
not bound to render an account of his Actions to any, yet he doubts not but
to acquit himself, before the whole Congregation, from having any ways in all
that so long a time abused his so vast power unto oppression. [ Whom have I
oppressed?]

32. He well knew, that Oppression, though it were a common, yet was withal a
grievous and a base sin. A very common sin it is. Elihu speaks of multitudes
of Oppressions, Job 35. How do the wealthy every where swallow up the Job 35.
8. Amos 8. 4.
needy; as in the Forests, As the wild Ass is the Lion's Prey in the
Wilderness; so the Rich eat up the Poor. Sirac. 13. 19.
the greater beasts prey upon the lesser: and in the ponds (...). Bafil. in
Hexam. Hom. 7. Isa. 3. 15. Psalm. 14. 4. Levit. 25. 14. -- -- 17.
the larger fishes eat up the smaller fry? Grinding the faces of the poor
first, and then eating them up like bread: racking their Rents, taking in their
Commons, overthrowing their Tenures, diminishing their wages, increasing their
boons. In a word, (for it would be endless to run through particulars) taking
advantage of their inability to help themselves, or other their necessities in
any kind what soever, to work their own wills upon them, and to get somewhat
from them for their own enriching.

33. Yet is it indeed a very grievous sin, forbidden by God himself in express
terms, Lev. 25. If thou sell ought unto they neighbor, or buyest ought of thy
neighbors hand, ye shall not oppress one another: and so going on, concludes,
Ye shall not therefore oppress one another, but thou shall fear thy God;
Implying, that it is from want of the fear of God that Men oppress one another.
Solomon therefore says, that he that oppresses the poor, reproacheth (or
despises) his Maker, Prove. 14. 31.
Prove. 14. And indeed so he does, more ways than one. First, He despises his
Maker's Commandment, who has (as you heard) peremptorily forbidden him to
oppress. Secondly, He despises his Maker's Creature: the poor Man whom he so
oppresses being God's Workmanship as well as himself. Thirdly, He despises
his Maker's Example; who looks upon the distresses of the poor and oppressed,
to provide for them, and to relieve them. Fourthly, He despises his Makers
Ordinance; in perverting that power and wealth, which God lent him purposely to
do good therewithal, and turning it to a quite contrary use, to the hurt and
damage of others. And he that goes on to reproach his Maker (without
repentance) must needs do it to his own confusion. He that made him, can mar
him when he pleases; and the greatest Oppressors shall be no more able to
stand before him then, than their poorer brethren are now able to stand out
against them.

34. Add to the grievousness of this sin, the baseness of it also: and that
methinks should work much upon every noble and generous spirit to abhor it.
Alas! who are they you thus trample upon, and insult over, but these poor Worms
of the Earth? Who when they are trodden on, dare scarce so much as turn again:
( Forasmuch as your treading is upon the poor: Amos 5.) and it is a Amos. 5. 11.
poor and inglorious conquest, that is gotten by the foil of such an Adversary.
Rob not the poor, says Solomon, because he is poor: neither oppress the
afflicted, etc. Prove. 22. 22.
Prove. 22. These first words are capable of a double construction, First, Rob
not the poor, because he is poor: that is, Let not his poverty and inability to
withstand thee, encourage thee the rather to rob him. Which construction
agrees very well with the reason given in the next Verse, [ For the Lord will
plead their -- 23.
cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoiled them.] As if he had said, Be
well advised what you do: weak though they be, and can do little for
themselves; yet they have a strong one to take their part, who will see that
such as do them wrong, shall not go unpunished. Yet is there another sense to
be made of those words also, neither unfitly, nor unprofitably; as thus, Rob
not the poor, because he is poor: that is, let the consideration of his poverty
keep thee off from meddling with him. 1. A little loss would be his undoing;
because he is poor. 2. And if thou should wring all he has from him, it
could make no great addition to thee, because he is poor. 3. Or if it could,
yet he is no fit match for thee to exercise thy strength upon, if thou art
rich, because he is poor.

35. But herein especially may you behold the baseness of Oppression; that the
basest people, Men of the lowest rank and spirit, are evermore the most
insolent, and consequently (according to the proportion of their power) the
most oppressive.

Claudian.
Asperius nihil est humili -- in the Poet. But take it from Solomon rather; who
compares a poor Man, when he has the Prove. 28. 3.
opportunity to oppress another poor Man, to a sweeping rain that leaves no
food, Pro. 28. How roughly did that Servant in the Parable deal with his
fellow servants, Mat. 18. 28.
when he took him by the throat for a small debt, after his master had but
newly remitted to him a Sum incomparably greater? The reason of the difference
was; the master dealt nobly, and freely, and like himself, and had compassion;
but the servant, being of a low and narrow spirit, must insult: -- -- 17.
Terent.
Senties qui vir siem. If a mean man, in any of our Towns or Hamlets, be a
little gotten up, to overtop most of his neighbors in Wealth, or be put into
some little, authority, to deal under some great Man for the disposing of his
Farms or Grounds; or have something to sell to his necessitous Neighbor, that
must buy upon day; or have a little Money lying by him to furnish another, that
for the supply of his present necessities must sell off somewhat of that little
he has, though at an under*rate, or the like, it is scarce credible (did not
every days experience make proof of it) how such a man will screw up the poor
Man that falls into his hands, without all mercy, and beyond all reason.
Conclude hence, all ye that are of generous births or spirits, how unworthy
that practice would be in you, wherein Men of the lowest minds and conditions
can (in their proportion) not equal only, but even exceed you. Which should
make you, not only to hate Oppression, because it is wicked, but even to scorn
it, because it is base, and to despise it. [He that despises the gain of
Oppressions, Isa. 33.] Isa. 33. 15.
This for the second particular, whom have I oppressed?

35. There is yet a third behind, against which Samuel protests as a branch
of Injustice also; which also concerned him more properly as a Judge; to wit,
Bribery. [Or of whose hands have I received a bribe, that I might blind mine
eyes therewith?] In the place now last cited, the Prophet Isaiah, speaking of
an upright just Man, describes him amongst other things by this, that he
shakes Isa. 33. 15.
his hands from holding of Bribes; as a Man would shake off a Viper, or other
venomous beast, that should offer to fasten upon his hand, as Paul did at
Malta, Acts 28. The word that here in the Text is rendered Munus, a Gift, or
Act. 28. 15.
a Bribe ((...)) the Targum there renders (...) (Mammon dishquar) whereunto
that Mammon of unrighteousness, mentioned Luke 16. and wherewith Luke 16. 9.
our Savior would have rich Men make themselves friends, may very well seem to
have reference. Although, I confess, that phrase there may not improbably be
conceived in another notion, somewhat different from this, to note the
falseness, deceitfulness, and uncertainty of these worldly riches, in
opposition to spiritual riches, a little after there called the true riches,
for so the words Mammon dishquar do properly import; as who say, the false or
lying riches, or (in comparison of the true and durable) riches falsely so
called. However, the phrase -- -- 11.
seems to be proverbial, and (taken in the former sense) to bear this meaning
in that place. As worldly wise Men, that have Suits depending in the Courts,
will attempt, by bestowing gifts upon him or his servants, to make the Judge
their friend, that so the cause may be carried on their side when it comes to
an hearing: with the like wisdom should Christian Men make themselves friends
of the poor (who are God's favorites) by giving Alms to them out of their
worldly goods, that so they may find favor with him at the day of judgment.
The proverbial use of that phrase (which made me the rather observe it) shows
what was the common opinion Men held of gifts bestowed to procure favor in
judgment; to wit, that they were the Mammon of unrighteousness. And that in a
double respect: first, As the price of an unrighteous sentence, in the
intention of the giver; and then as a piece of unjust and unrighteous gain in
the receiver; prohibited by the Lord in the Law, as well as the other two
branches of Injustice Exodus 23. 8. Deuteronomy. 16. 19.
were; and that both frequently and expressly, and taxed by the Prophet as a sin
of a very high nature, a mighty sin, [I know your manifold transgressions, and
your Amos 5. 12. Forrtia peccata, Vulg.
mighty sins: they afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside the
poor in the gate from their right, Amos 5.]

36. But it may be said, Since we have aready comprehended all injuries under
the two former heads, Fraud and Oppression; how comes it to be here mentioned
as a third thing, and distinct from them both? Either we must free it from
being injurious, or reduce it to one of the two, Fraud, or Oppression. I answer
in short, that Bribery is properly a branch of Oppression. For if the bribe be
exacted, or but expected, yet so, as that there can be little hope of a
favorable, or but so much as a fair hearing without it; then is it a manifest
oppression in the receiver, because he makes an advantage of that power,
wherewith he is entrusted for the administration of justice, to his own proper
benefit, which ought not to be, and is clearly an oppression. But if it proceed
rather from the voluntary offer of the giver, for the compassing of his own
ends, then is it an oppression in him; because thereby he gets an advantage
in the favor of the Court against his adversary, and to his prejudice. For,
observe it, the greatest oppressors are ever the greatest bribers, and freest
of their gifts to those that may bestead them in their suits. Which is one
manifest cause (besides the secret and just judgment of God upon them) why
oppressors seldom thrive in their estates, near the proportion of their
gettings. Even because so much of what comes in by their oppressions, goes
out again for the upholding of their oppressions. It was not for nothing, you
may well think, that Solomon so yoked these two things together; oppressing the
poor, and giving to the rich, in Prove. 22. [ He that oppresses the poor to
increase his riches; and he that gives to the rich, shall surely come to
want.] As he has a spring one way, so he has a drain another way, which
keeps him from rising to that excess or height he aims at.

37. Bribery then is a branch of Oppression: That we have cleared. But yet one
part of the doubt remains: why, if it belong to one of the two, is it here
mentioned as a third species, different from both? For this, I say; First, It
might be specially mentioned, as a corruption more particularly incident to the
Office of Judicature, in respect whereof especially Samuel now stood upon his
justification: whereas Frauds, and most other Oppressions, are of a larger and
more comprehensive extent. And secondly, Because it has a peculiar formality
by it self, whereby it differs from other injuries of either sort, in this;
that whereas all other, whether Frauds and Oppressions, are involuntary on one
part, (for Volenti non fit injuria, no Man is willing to be either defrauded or
oppressed, if he knew it, and knew how to help it) this of Bribery is done with
the mutual knowledge and consent both of the Giver and Receiver.

38. Which circumstance makes it (at least in this one respect) somewhat worse
than either of the former; that whereas in other frauds and oppressions, the
one party only is guilty, because they are done without the consent of the
other party; in this of Bribery both parties are guilty, because both consent.
Neither does this joint consent of both parties hinder, but that it is still
injurious; Because the injury that is hereby done, is not done to either of the
parties thereunto consenting, (supposing the consent on both parts free and
spontaneous) but it is done by them both to a third party, namely, to the
adversary of him that gives the bribe: whose consent you will easily suppose
never to have been asked in the business. So that the injury is still done non
volenti.

39. Of the commonness of which sin, especially in inferior Officers, who are
ever and anon trucking for expedition: it would be impertinent to speak from
this Text, wherein Samuel speaks of it only as it might concern himself who
was a Judge. Of the heinousness of it in the sight of God, and the mischief it
does to the Commonwealth, when it is found in Judges and Magistrates, I shall
forbear to speak, (the time being withal now well-nigh spent) because, out of
the confidence I have of the sincernity of those that now hear me, I deem the
labor needless. Only I cannot ( the Text offering it) but touch somewhat Prove.
21. 14. -- -- 18. 16. -- -- 17. 8.
at that property, which Samuel here ascribes to a bribe, of blinding the
eyes. Solomon speaks much of the powerful operation of gifts and bribes; how
they pacify anger, procure access into the presence of great persons, and
favor from them, and sundry the like, which are all of easy understanding,
and the truth of them (as well as the meaning) obvious. But the effect here
mentioned, of blinding the eyes, though somewhat more obscure, is yet oftener
found in the Scriptures, than of the other. Samuel undoubtedly learned it from
Moses, who Exodus 23. 8. Deuteronomy. 16. 19.
has it twice; once in Exodus, and again repeated in Deuteronomy, in the
selfsame words, ( Thou shall take no gift: for a gift blinds the eyes of the
wise, and perverteth (...).
the words of the righteous.) A mavelous power sure there is in them that can
work upon Men so strongly, (yea, sometimes upon (...). Pindar.
wise and righteous Men, as Moses his words express) as to stop their mouths,
and bind their hands, and blind their eyes; that they can neither speak, nor
do, nor see, what is right. Euripid. in Media act. 4.
(...), as it is in Euripides: They say that even the Gods may be tempted with
gifts. Very like, if applied to such gods as are spoken of in the Psalm, ( Dixi
Dii, I have said, ye are gods.) Psalm. 82. 6.


40. But then, what is it to blind the eyes? Or, how can bribes do it? Justice
is not unfitly pourtrayed in the form of a Man with his right eye open, to look
at the Cause; and his left eye shut or muffled, that he may not look at the
Person. Now a gift puts all this out of order, and sets it the quite
contrary way. It gives the left eye liberty but too much, to look asquint upon
the person; but puts the right eye quite out, that it cannot discern the
Cause. Even as in the next foregoing Chapter, Nahash the Ammonite would have
covenanted with the 1 Samuel 11. 2*
Inhabitants of Iabesh-Gilead, upon condition he might thrust out all their
right eyes. From this property of hood-winking and muffling up the eyes it is,
that a Bribe is in the Hebrew ( the Text-word here) called (...) Copher, of
(...) Caphar, to cover, to dawb up, or to draw over with lime, plaster, or the
like. Whereunto our English word, to cover, has such near affinity in the
sound, that (were it not apparently taken from the French Couvrir, and that
from the Latin Cooperire) it might with some probability be thought to owe its
Original to the Hebrew. But however it be for the word, the thing is clear
enough: this Copher does so cover and plaster up the eyes, that they cannot
see to do their office aright, and as they ought.

41. And the reason of all this is; because gifts, if they be handsomely
conveyed, Rejecit alto dona nocentium vultu. Hor. 4. Carm. 9. Isa. 33. 15.
and not tendered in the name, nor appearing in the likeness of Bribes, (for
then wise and righteous Men will reject them with disdain, and shake their
hands and laps from receiving them); but I say, if they come as presents only,
and by way of kindness and respect; they are sometimes well accepted, and that
deservedly, even of wise and righteous Men, as testimonies of the love and
observance of the givers. And then the nature of ingenuous persons is such,
that they cannot but entertain a good opinion of those that show good respect
unto them; and are glad when any opportunity is offered them, whereby to
manifest such their good opinion, and to requite one courtesy with another.
Whereby it comes (...). Antiphon. (...). Plat. 5. de legib.
to pass, that gifts, by little and little, and by insensible degrees, win upon
the affections of such Men, as are yet just in their intentions, and would not
willingly be corrupted, and at the last over-master them; and the affections
once thoroughly possessed, it is then no great mastery to do the rest, and to
surprise the judgment. The good Magistrate therefore, that would save his eyes,
and preserve their sight, had need, not only to hate bribes, but to be very
jealous of presents; lest some of those things which he receives but as gifts,
be yet meant him for bribes. But especially to suspect those gifts, as so
meant, where the quantity and proportion of the gift, considered and compared
with the quality and condition of the giver, may cast any just cause of
suspicion upon them; but to conclude them absolutely so meant, if they be sent
from persons that have business in the Courts.

42. The only thing now remaining to be spoken to from the Text, and that but
in a word or two, is Samuel's Equity, in offering, in case any thing should be
truly charged against him in any the premises, to make the wronged parties
restitution, [Whose Ox have I taken? Or, etc. And I will restore it you.]
Samuel was confident he had not wittingly done any Man wrong, either by Fraud,
Oppression or Bribery; whereby he should be bound to make, or should need to
offer Restitution. Yet, partly, to show what was fit to be done in such cases,
and his own readiness so to do, if there should be cause; and partly, for that
it was possible, in so long time of his Government, and amid so many causes as
passed through his hands, that he might through misinformation, precipitancy,
negligence, prejudice, or other humane frailty, have committed some oversight
in Judgment, for which it might be reasonable for him to make some kind of
compensation to the parties thereby damnified, he here offers Restitution; A
duty, in case of Injury, most necessary, both for quieting the Conscience
within, and to give satisfaction to the World; and for the more assurance of
the Truth and Sincerity of our Si res aliena non redditur, non agitur
poenitentia, sed fingitur. Aug. Epist. 54.
repentance in the sight of God for the wrongs we have done. Without which (at
least in the desire and endeavor) there can be no true repentance for the sin,
and consequently no security of the remission of the guilt. That of Augustine,
Ibid.
Non dimittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum, is a famous received
Aphorism in this case; well known to all, but little considered, and less
practiced by most.

43. There is an enforced Restitution, whereof perhaps Zophar speaks in Job
20. [ That which he labored for, he shall restore, and not swallow it down;
according Job 20. 18.
to his substance shall the restitution be, and he shall not rejoice therein];
and such as the Law imposed upon thefts, and other manifest wrongs; which although
not much worth, is yet better than none. But as Samuel's offer here was
voluntary; so it is the voluntary restitution that best pleases God, pacifieth
the Conscience, and in some measure satisfies the World. Such was that of
Zacheus, Luke 19. 8.
Luke 19. in restoring fourfold to every Man from whom he had gained any thing
wrongfully. It may be feared, if every Officer that has to do in or about the
Courts of Justice, should be tied to that proportion, many one would have but a
very small surplusage remaining, whereout to bestow the one moity to pious
uses, as Zacheus there did.

44. There is scarce any one point in the whole body of Moral Divinity, that
sounds so harsh to the ear, or relisheth so harsh in the palate of a
worldling, as this of Restitution does. To such a Man this is durus sermo
indeed, a hard, very hard saying; yet as hard as it seems to be, it is full
of Reason and Equity. So full, that I dare confidently say, whoever he be, that
complains of it as a hard imposition, when he is required to restore to the
right owner that which he has unjustly taken from him, that Man is (...);
there needs no other testimony nor evidence against him, than his own
Conscience to condemn him. Nay, I may say yet more, There needs not so much
as that; his own mouth will do it. Ex ore tuo, thou unjust Man! I bid thee not
answer me; do but answer thy self this one question, and it shall suffice. If
it go hard with thee to restore it back to him that has a true right in it;
did it not go as hard (think thou) with him to part with it before to thee,
who had not the same right thereunto that he had? I say no more: consider it
well, and then remember the grand Rule, never to be forgotten, Do as you would
be done to.

45. Concerning the manner of Restitution, and the measure, the time, place,
persons, and other circumstances thereunto belonging; many things there are of
considerable moment, and very needful to be understood of all Men that love to
deal justly; which I may not now enter into. Whole Volumes have bin written of
this Subject; and the Casuists are large in their discourses thereof. But for
the thing it self in general, thus much is clear from the Judicial Law of God,
given by Moses to the people of Israel; from the Letter whereof, tho Christians
be free, ( positive Laws binding none but those to whom they were given) yet
the Equity thereof still binds us as a branch of the unchangeable Law of
Nature. That whosoever shall have wronged his Neighbor in any thing committed
to his custody, or in fellowship, or in any thing taken away by violence, or by
fraud, or in detaining any found thing, or the like, is bound to restore it;
and that in integrum, to the utmost farthing of what he has taken, if he be
able. Nor so only, but beside the Principal, to offer some little overplus also
by way of compensation for the damage; if at least the wronged party have
sustained any damage thereby, and unless he shall be willing freely to remit
it. Moses his Law speaks of a fifth part more, as if he had wronged his
Neighbor to the value of twenty sheckels, the restitution was to be after the
rate of four and twenty. See the 6th of Leviticus, in the beginning of the
Chapter. The assignment of that proportion belonged to the Jewish people, and
the obligation thereof therefore expired, together with that policy; but yet
still reason and equity require that something be done. The Lord give us all
hearts to do that which is equal and right, and in all our dealings with
others, to have evermore the fear of God before our eyes; knowing that of the
Lord the righteous Judge, we shall in our souls, receive at the last great
Assize, according to that we have done in our bodies here, whether it be good
or evil. Now, to God the Father, etc.

AD POPULUM.
The Eighth Sermon.
Prove. 19. 21. There are many devices in a Man's heart: nevertheless the
counsel of the Lord, that shall stand.
1. IT being impossible for us to know God absolutely, and as he is, (his
essence being infinite, and so altogether incomprehensible by any but himself)
the highest degree of knowledge we can hope to attain unto, (at least in this
life) is by way of comparison with our selves, and other Creatures. Whereby it
is possible for us, making the comparison right, and remembering ever the
infinite disproportion of the things compared, to come to some little kind of
glimmering guess what he is; by finding, and well considering, what he is not.

2. But even in this way of Learning, we are oftentimes very much at a loss:
Because we fall, for the most part, either short, or over in that, from which
we are to take our first rise toward the right knowledge of God; to wit, the
right knowledge of our selves. We do not only see very imperfectly at the best,
because we see but in a glass, as says the Apostle; but we mistake 1 Cor. 13.
12.
also most an end very grossly, because we are apt to make use of a false glass.
We think foolishly, (yea, and wickedly too sometimes, as it is Psalm. 50.) Psalm.
50 21.
that God is even such an one as our selves; and yet (God knows) little do we
know what our selves are. There is so much deceitfulness in our hearts, Jer.
17. 9. Psalm. 94. 11.
so much vanity in our thoughts, so much pride in our spirits, that, tho we
hear daily with our ears, that Man is like a thing of naught, that he is
altogether Psalm. 144. 4. -- -- 39. 5. -- -- 62. 9.
vanity, yea, lighter than vanity it self; and see daily before our eyes,
experiments enough to convince us, that all this is true: yet we are willing to
betray our selves into a belief, that, sure we are something, when indeed we
are nothing; and to please our selves but too much in our own ways and Gal. 3.
6.
imaginations.

3. To rectify this so absurd and dangerous an Error in us, (absurd in the
ground, and dangerous in the consequents) and withal to bring us, by a righter
understanding of our selves, to a better knowledge of God; useful (amongst other
things) it is, to consider the wide difference that is betwixt God's ways and
ours, betwixt our purposes and his. For my thoughts are not your thoughts,
says Isa. 55. 8, 9.
the Lord by the Prophet, neither are your ways my ways. For as the heavens are
higher than the Earth, so (but much more than so too) are my ways higher than
your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. Weigh them the one against the
other in the balance of the Sanctuary; or but even by the beam of your own
reason and experience, so it be done impartially; and you will easily
acknowledge both the vanity and uncertainty of ours, and the certainty and
stability of his thoughts and purposes.

4. We have a Proverb common amongst us, that yields the conclusion; Man
purposes, but God disposes. And this Proverb of Solomon in the Text,
discovers ground enough whereform to infer that conclusion, There are many
devices in a Man's heart: nevertheless the counsel of the Lord, that shall
stand. And that in three remarkable differences between the one and the other,
therein expressed.

First; In the different names of the things: Ours are but Devices, his is
Counsel. Secondly; In their different Number: Ours are Devices in the plural
Number, and with the express addition of multiplicity also, Many Devices; His
but one, Counsel in the Singular. Thirdly; In their different manner of
Existing: Ours are but conceived in the heart; we have not strength enough to
bring them forth, or to give them a being ad extra, -- many devices in a Man's
heart: But he is able to give his a real subsistency, and to make them stand
fast and firm, in despite of all opposition and endeavors to the contrary.
The counsel of the Lord, that shall stand.
5. The whole amounts to these two points. First, When we have tossed many and
various thoughts in our heads, amidst the throng of our hopes, and fears, and
desires, and care; cast this way, and that way; plotted, contrived, and
devised, how to avoid this or that danger, how to compass this or that design,
how to gratify this friend, or advance that Child, how to counterwork or defeat
this or that enemy or competitor* when we have summoned all our powers, and set
all our wits on work to manage the design we have pitched upon, and made all so
sure, that there seems nothing wanting to bring our intentions to the wished
end: Unless God say, Amen; that is, unless it please him either in mercy to
bless our endeavors with success for our comfort, or at least for some other
secret ends, agreeable to his wisdom and justice, suffer them to take effect,
they shall all come to nothing, and be as the untimely fruit of a woman, which
after Psalm. 58. 8.
much pain and anguish to her that conceived it, perishes in the womb, and
never sees the Sun. Secondly, What God has in his everlasting counsel
determined, either to do himself, or to suffer to be done by any of his
Creatures, shall, whether we like it, or dislike it, whether we will or no,
undoubtedly even so come to pass as he has appointed. The Lord will be King,
(Fremat licet orbis) Psalm. 99. 1. Psalm. 135. 6.
and do whatsoever pleases him in heaven and earth, in the sea, and in all
deep places, be the earth never so unquiet, and all the people that dwell
therein never so impatient.

6. Which two Points, to wit, the vanity of our Devices, and the stability of
God's Counsels, by reason of the opposition that is betwixt them, whereby they
mutually give and receive light and confirmation either to and from other, are
therefore very frequently joined together in sundry places of Scripture. As
Psalm. 2. 1. -- 2.
in Psalm. 2. the rage and fury of Jews and Gentiles, of Princes and People,
against the Lord and his Anointed; their Imaginations, Insurrections, and joint
Consultations to effect their intendments; and their professed resolutions to
break the bonds, and to cast away the cords of their bounden Allegiance; how --
-- 3.
vain and ineffectual they are, and instead of that liberty and advantage they
had promised to themselves, procure them nothing but scorn and vexation, is
largely, declared in the beginning of the Psalm; and then follows, in few --
-- 4. 5.
words, how effectual (notwithstanding all their imaginations and endeavors to
the contrary) the purpose of God, was in setting up the Kingdom of Christ; Yet
have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion. So in Job 5. Eliphas shows --
-- 6. Job 5. 12. -- -- 13.
the great Power of God; first, in disappointing the devices of the crafty, so
that their hands cannot perform their enterprise; but the wise are taken in
their own craftiness, and the counsel of the froward is carried headlong: and
then in fulfilling his own counsel of saving the poor from the sword, the
mouth, and the hand -- -- 15.
of the Mighty. And the like does David again, in Psalm. 33. fully, and in words
agreeable to these of Solomon, even in terminis; The Lord brings the counsel
of Psalm. 33. 10.
the heathen to naught, and makes the devices of the people of none effect.
That for the first point; then follows for the second, in the very next
words, The counsel of the Lord shall stand for ever and ever; and the thoughts
of his Psalm. 33. 11.
heart from generation to generation.

7. For the better evidencing and enforcing of both which points, I shall
proceed in this order. First, To consider of the three differences formerly
mentioned and contained in the Text, each of them severally and apart; then
(taking the whole together) Secondly, To show some Reasons or grounds thereof;
and, Lastly, To propose some profitable Inferences from the same.

8. The first Difference is in the Names; Man's Devices; but the Counsel of the
Lord. Our most serious thoughts, the most mature and best digested
deliberations and advices of the Sons of Men, and all the most exquisite
resolutions, and advantageous endeavors ensuing thereupon, are but devices in
comparison, Imaginations, Fancies, or if you can find any lighter or emptier
name whereby to call them. Indeed, all these expressions are but too high, to
render to the full, the extreme vacuity and nothingness of all humane devices.
Very Chimaera's they are, Gastles in the Air, that have no real existence in
them, no base or bottom under them to uphold them.

9. I know not readily how to present them unto you, better than under the
notion of Fancies: and so might the word be well enough here rendered. There are
many fancies (or fantastical devices) in a Man's heart. Now the vanity of Men's
fancies may something appear in mad Men; in whom the inflammation of blood
distempering the brain, as it hinders the operation of the mind, and
depriveth them of all solidity of judgment; so it adds strength and
nimbleness to the fancy. Whence it comes to pass, that the sharpest Satirical
wits, with all the help of Art and Study, cannot ordinarily invent such shrewd
and stinging answers, nor make such quick and smart returns of wit, to those
that talk with them, as a mad Man sometimes in a frantic fit will hit upon of
a sudden.

10. But in nothing is the vanity of Men's fancies more apparent, than in our
ordinary dreams. Wherein we often fancy to our selv^s golden mountains, and
many other such things, as never were, nor ever shall be in rerum natura; such
as have neither coherence nor possibility in them; and such as when we are
awake, we do not only find to be void of all truth and reality, but we laugh at
as ridiculous, and wonder how such senseless and inconsistent imaginations
should ever come into our heads. And yet whilst we are dreaming, we entertain
them with as full a persuasion of the truth and reality of them, as we do those
things whereof we have the greatest assurance in the World, without any the
least suspicion to the contrary, and are accordingly affected with them,
mightily pleased or displeased, even as they suit with, or go cross to our
natural desires. But when we awake, we many times can scarce well tell what we
dreamed of, much less do we find our selves possessed of those things which in
our dreams we fancied to be ours.

11. As these dreams of one asleep, or those flashes of wit that come from a
madman; such are all the plots and projects, the thoughts and purposes of Men,
wherewith they so much please or disquiet themselves about any thing that is
done under the Sun. Of all which Solomon, out of his great wisdom, and much
experience, pronounces often and peremptorily, that they are but vanity, Eccl.
2. 1, 2, etc
and folly, and madness. They that applaud themselves in their cunning and deep
contrivances; that trust to their Wealth, Power, Strength, or Policy; that
think they are able to carry all before them, and to do what they list, are all
the while but in a dream. So David affirms of the wicked in the midst of
their greatest prosperity and successes: Like as a dream when one awaketh, so
Psalm. 73. 20. -- 76. 5.
shall thou make their Image to vanish out of the City, Psalm. 73. And Psalm. 76.
The Proud are robbed: they have slept their sleep; and all the Men of might,
(that is, that thought themselves such mighty Men, whilst they continued in
their dream) when they awaked, found nothing in their hands. And the Prophet
Isaiah says, concerning all the Nations that fight against mount Sion, that
they shall be even Isa. 29. 7, 8.
as when a hungry Man dreameth that he is eating, but he awaketh, and his soul
is empty: or as when a thirsty Man dreameth that he is drinking, but when he
awaketh, behold he is faint, and his soul has appetite. Isa. 29.

12. You may see, in these representations, what a poor nothing is all humane
wisdom. Those devices which we applaud in our selves or others, as matters of a
great reach, and contrived with deep policy, are no better than mere fancies or
dreams; whimsies, as we call them. At the most, but as a Spider's Web, Isa. 59.
5, 6.
(that is one of the Prophets comparisons too) a thing of great curiosity to
the eye, spun of a most fine subtle thread, and in a most exact proportion:
but a thing of no strength at all, unless against a small fly, (the greater
ones will break through it) and the light touch of a besome strikes it all
away in a moment.

13. But as for God's eternal Purposes, it is not so with them: We are not to
conceive of them, as of our own vain devices, but rather as of sage Counsels;
The Counsel of the Lord. By which name they are also styled in Psalm. 33. 11.
and elsewhere in the Old Testament. The same name is found also in the New, --
according to the purpose of him that works all things after the Counsel of
his own Romans 11. 34.
will, Ephesians. 1. 21. Yet is not this to be understood properly neither: for
Counsel is a thing, that in strict propriety of speech cannot be attributed
unto God; for who has been his Counselor? Counsel imports always some
debate with ones self or others, some deliberation, what is best to do, or not
to do, and how to do it; and consequently must suppose some impotency or
defect, either in respect of knowledge, or action, or both. He that knows
perfectly at the first thought of a thing what is fit to be done, and is
assured nothing can hinder him for doing the same, needs not either to ask or
to take counsel about it. God therefore, whose both wisdom and power is
infinite, has not any need or use of counsel.

14. The truth is, as the name of Devices was too high an appellation to bestow
upon our vain imaginations, if we knew a worse: so the name of Counsel is too
low to bestow upon Almighty God's eternal purposes, if we knew a better: But
the Scripture, fitted to our capacity, speaks of the things of God in such
language, and under such notions, as best agree with our weak conceptions, but
far below the dignity and majesty of the things themselves. Counsels then they
are called, in comparison of Men's devices: and the reason of the comparison
stands thus; As those resolutions, which follow upon good advice, and mature
deliberation, where all circumstances are taken into due consideration, and the
conveniences and inconveniences examined and weighed (which we call counsels)
are better approved of, as being more solid, and likely to prove more
successful, than those sudden motions that rash light heads take up in a heat
or humor, and carry on without either fear or wit: so (but infinitely more
than so) do the wise purposes and Counsels of God, exceed the vain imaginations
and devices of Men. As the lightning, which is but a flash, and then vanishes,
so are these; but those, like the Sun, which has a fullness of durable light
and heat within it self, always alike, howsoever it may appear to us, sometimes
more and sometimes less.

15. The second difference in the Text, is in the Number: Ours are Devices in
the plural; many Devices: His but one; Counsel in the singular. Men's purposes
are various, and changeable. Seldom do we continue long in one mind; but upon
every slight occasion as the Weathercock with the wind, we are ready to turn
and face about. What between fears and hopes, desires and cares, our thoughts
are so pulled and harrowed this way and that way, that many times we are so
distracted in our minds, that we cannot well tell what we would have, or not
have, to hold to. Little children, we know, are eagerly fond to have any toy
they see; but throw it away presently, as soon as they see another (perhaps a
verier toy than it) and long as eagerly for that; ( Quod petiit spernit:) Sub
nutrice puella velut si luderet infans. Quod cupide petiit, mature plen^
reliquit. Horat. 2. Ep. 1. (...). Eurip. in Orest.
There is a spice of this childishness remaining in all the Sons of Adam, even
to their dying day: Whether it be from the natural fickleness of our minds
longing after novelty, or from the unsufficiency of any thing in this World, to
satisfy the appetites of the Soul; or from whatsoever other cause it
proceeds; certain it is, that we cannot affect any thing long without some
weariness and satiety. Whence it comes to pass, that we seek for that
contentment in variety, which we cannot find in any one thing, though never so
excellent and desirable. Thus it fares with us, according to what our Savior
said of Martha, Luke 10. 41. Eccl. 7. 29.
(...), We are troubled (or rather we trouble our selves) about many things: or
what Solomon says of Men in general, that they have sought out many
inventions. Many fancies we entertain: and as one nail another, ( clavus
clavum) so one fancy drives out another, in infinitum.

16. Which multiplicity and variety of devices in us, is a most clear and
demonstrative evidence of the vanity and unsufficiency thereof: even as in most
other things, multiplicity argues infirmity. As there are many Stars in the
Firmament, because they give but a little light: but one Sun serves the turn,
without need of more, to give light to the whole World. It were a superfluons
curiosity for a Man to provide two strings to his Bow, if he were sure one
(...). Arist. de mund. cap. 6. Heb. 7. 23. -- 28. and 10. 1. -- 14.
would hold. And therefore are there thousands of Horses and Men prepared for
the managing of a War, because one, or a few, are presumed to be unsufficient
for the Work. By this very Argument, the Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
proves the insufficiency of the legal Priesthood and Sacrifices: the Priests
were many, and there was an itteration of the Sacrifices; because of the
mortality of the one, and the unprofitableness of the other to take away sins.
As on the contrary, he proves the sufficiency of the Presthood and Sacrifice
of Christ, from the unchangeableness, and Oneship (if I may so say) both of
Priest and Sacrifice.

17. It is no commendation then, but rather a disparagement to men's devices,
that they are so many. But it is the Honor of God, that his Counsel is but
one, and unchangeable. We find it expressed, with that adjunct, Heb. 6. Heb. 6.
17, 18.
(...), the immutability of his Counsel. And it is here laid down, as the great
foundation of our Christian hope, and the very strength of all our consolation.
Quod scripsi, scripsi. What he has written in the secret Book of his
determinate Counsel, (though it be counsel to us, and uncertain, until either
he reveal it, or the event discover it, yet) is it most certain in it (...).
Eurip. in Hippol. Act. 2. Hos. 14. 14. Genesis 6. 6. Jer. 18. 8.
self, and altogether unchangeable. We follow our own devices, many times,
which we afterward repent: and truly our second thoughts are most an end the
wiser. But with God there is no after-counsel, to correct the errors of the
former: he knows not any such thing as repentance; it is altogether hid from
his eyes. He is indeed sometimes in the Scriptures said to repent, as Genesis 6.
and in the business of Nineveh, and elsewhere. But it is not ascribed unto God
properly, Jonah 3. 10.
but as other humane passions and affections are, as grief, sorrow, etc. (...),
to import some actions of God, eventually, and according to the manner of our
understanding, like unto the operations which those passions produce in us; but
have nothing at all of the nature of those passions in them. So that still,
that is eternally true, which was spoken indeed by a false Prophet, but whose
spirit and tongue was at that time guided by the God of Truth, Number. 23. 19. God
is not a Man, that he shall lie; Neither the Son of Man, that he should repent.
His Counsel therefore stands ever one and the same; not reversed by
repentance, or countermanded by any after counsel.

18. Follows the third Difference, which consists in their Efficacy, that
is expressed in the Text by their different manner of Existing. Many devices
may be in a man's heart, but it is not in his power to make them stand; unless
God will, they shall never be accomplished. But in despite of all the World,
the counsel of the Lord shall stand: nothing can hinder or disappoint that, but
that it shall have the intended effect.

19. The Heart, although sometimes it be put for the appetitive part of the
Soul only, as being the proper seat of the desires and affections, as the Head
or Brain is of the conceptions or thoughts; yet is it very often in Scripture,
and so it is here, taken more largely; so as to comprehend the whole Soul, in
all its faculties, as well the apprehensive as the appetitive; and consequently
takes in the Thoughts, as well as the Desires of the Soul. Whence we read of
the Genesis 6. 5. Acts 8. 22. Luke 24. 38. Mat. 15. 19.
thoughts of the heart, of thoughts arising in the heart, of thoughts
proceeding from out the heart, and the like. The meaning then is, that
multitudes and variety of devices may be in a Man's head, or in his heart, in
his thoughts and desires, in his intentions and hopes; but unless God give
leave, there they must stay. He is not able to bring them on further, to put
them in execution, and to give them a real existency. -- They imagined such a
device, as they are not Psalm. 21. 11.
able to perform, Psalm. 21. Whatsoever high conceits Men may have of the fond
imaginations of their own hearts, as if they were some goodly things; yet the
Lord, that better understands us than we do our selves, knows all the
thoughts Psalm. 94. 11.
of Men, that they are but vain, Psalm. 94. And this he knows, not only for
the (...), that it is so, by his omniscience and prescience; but for the (...)
too (which is the most perfect kind of knowledge) why it is so; even because his
hand is in it, to render them vain -- It is he that makes the devices of the
people Psalm. 33. 10.
(yea, and of Princes too, as it is added in some Translations) to be of none
effect, Psalm. 33.

20. Possibly the heart may be so full, that it may run over, make some offers
outward by the mouth, (for out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth Mat.
12. 34. Jam. 3. 5.
speaks) and the tongue may boast great things, and talk high. It may so
indeed, but that boasting does not any thing at all to further the business, or
to give the thoughts of the heart a firm bottom, or base, whereon to rest; it
many times rather helps to overturn them the sooner. We call it vapouring; and
well may we so call it. For as a vapor that arises from the earth, is
scattred with the wind, vanishes, and comes to nothing; so are all the
imaginations and devices that are conceived in the heart of Man, blasted when
the Lord blows upon them, and then they come to nothing.

21. But as for the Counsels of his heart, they shall stand: Rooted and
established, like the Mountains. The foundation of God stands firm; though
spoken by the Apostle in another sense, is most true in this also. What he has
purposed either himself to do, or to have done by any of his Creatures, shall
most certainly, 2 Timothy 2. 19. (...). Psalm. 89. 2. -- 119. 89.
and infallibility, come to pass in every circumstance, just as he has
appointed it. It is established in the Heavens: and tho all the Powers in Earth
and Hell should join their forces together, set to all their shoulders and
strength against it, and thrust sore at it to make it fall; yet shall they
never be able to move it, or shake it, much less to remove it from the place
where it stands, or to overthrow it. His Name is Jehovah: it signifies as
much as Essence or Being. 1. Not only because of the e^ternity of his own
being, and that from himself, and underived from any other; 2. Nor yet because
he is the Author of Being to all other things that are: 3. But also for that he
is able to give a Being, reality, and subsistence to his own Will and Word, to
all his Purposes and Promises. -- Da voci tuae vocem virtuti^. What he has
appointed, none can disappoint. His counsel does, shall, must stand. My Counsel
shall stand; and I will do all my pleasure, Isa. 46. 10.

22. The consideration of these differences has sufficiently discovered the
weakness, frailty, and unsuccessfulness of Men's devices on the one side; and on
the other side, the stability, unchangeableness, and unfailingness of God's
Counsels. Whereof the consideration of the Reasons of the said differences,
will give us yet farther assurance; and those Reasons taken from the
Sovereignty, the Eternity, the Wisdom, and the Power of God.

23. First, God is the prima causa, the sovereign Agent, and first mover in
every motion and inclination of the Creature: Men, yea and Angels too, who far
excel them in strength, are but secondary Agents, subordinate Causes, and, as
it were, Instruments to do his Will. Now the first cause has such a necessary
Psalm. 103. 20, 21.
influence into all the operations of second causes, that if the concurrence
thereof be withheld, their operations must cease. The Provdence of God, in
ordering the World, and the acting of the Creatures by his actuation of them,
is Rota in Ezekiel. 1. 16.
rota, (so represented to Ezekiel in a Vision) like the motion of a Clock, or
other artificial Engine, consisting of many Wheels, one within another, some
bigger, some lesser; but all depend upon the first great Wheel, which moves
all the rest, and without which none of the rest can move. In him we live, and
Acts. 17. 28.
move, and have our being: and in his hands are the hearts of the greatest
Kings, (and how much more then of meaner persons?) which he turns and bends
which way soever he pleases, Prove. 21. 1. Be the Ax never so sharp and strong,
yet can it not cut any thing, unless the hand of the Workman move it: and then
it cutteth but where he would have it, and that more or less, as he puts
more or less strength unto it. No more can Men, whatsoever strength of wit or
power they are endued with, bring their own devices to pass, but when, and
where, and so far forth only as the Lord thinks fit to make use of them.
Pharaoh's Chariot may hurry him apace to the place of his destruction, because
God had so appointed it: but anon God takes off the Wheels, and the Exodus 14.
2^.
Chariot can move no farther, but leaves him helpless in the midst of the
channel.

24. So vain are all men's devices, as to the serving of their own ends; and the
accomplishment of their own desires. Yet does Almighty God so order these
otherwise vain things by his overruling providence, as to make them
subservient to his everlasting counsels. For all things serve him, Psalm. 119.
91. Happy, thrice happy they that do him voluntary service; they can say with
David, and in his sense, Behold, O Lord, how that I am thy servant, Psalm. 116.
that Psalm. 116. 16.
have devoted themselves faithfully, and accordingly bend their endeavors to
do him true and laudable service, by obeying his revealed will. But certainly
whether they will, or no, though they think of nothing less, they shall serve
him to the furthering and accomplishing of his secret Will. As we find, My
servant Jer. 25. 9. -- 43. 10. Ezekiel. 29. 2^.
David often, as his servant in the one kind: so we sometimes meet with My
servant Nebuchadnezzar, as his servant in the other kind.

25. Another reason of the differences aforesaid is from God's Eternity. Man is
but of Yesterday, and his thoughts casual. They go and come, as it happens;
without any certain rule and order. And as himself is, mutable, fickle, and
uncertain; so are the things he has to do withal, and wherebouts he is
conversant, subject to contingencies and variations. Tempora mutantur. So
(...). Arist. de divin. c. 1. (...). Arist. de incessu animal. c. 7.
many new unexpected accidents happen every hour, which no wit of Man could
foresee; that may make it necessary for us, many times, to depart from our
former most advised resolutions; as the Mariner must strike sail again perhaps
when he has but newly hoyst it up, if the wind and weather change. Sometimes a
very small inconsiderable accident in it self, may yet work a very great turn
in a business of the greatest moment. A Smith in setting on a shoe, chances
to drive the nail a little aside, the Horse is pricked; the prick endangereth
the Horse, and the Horse the Rider; upon the defeat of the Rider (suppose the
General, or some Commander of special use) the battle is lost; upon the issue
of that battle may depend the state of a whole Kingdom, and in the state of
that may the interest of so many Princes and Kingdoms be involved, that a very
little oversight, in a very mean person, may occasion very great alterations in
a great part of the World. So easily may men's devices be disappointed, and
their expectations frustrated.

26. But the Counsels of God are, as himself is, Eternal, and unchangeable.
Mal. 3. 6. (...). Arist. 1. de coelo. 9.
Ego Deus and non mutor, I am God, and am not changed: as if he had said, The
Nature of the Godhead is not capable of any change, nor subject to mutability.
All change is either for the better, or for the worse; but God cannot change
for the better, because he is already best; nor for the worse, for then he
should cease to be best; It is therefore impossible he should change at all.
His determinations therefore are unalterable, more than the Laws of the Medes
and Persians: for time has long since altered those Laws, but his Counsels
remain yesterday, and to day, the same, and for ever. Chance, (and if you will)
Fortune also may have place in the affairs of men, and the things that are done
under the Sun; but to him that dwells in heaven, that inhabiteth Eternity,
that knew from the beginning, and before the beginning of the world, all things
that are done in heaven and earth, nothing can be casual, new, or unexpected,
to cause any change of purpose in him.

27. A third Reason there is from the wisdom of God. There is folly in all the
sons of men. They know but a very small part of the things that are in the
world; and those things they do know, but in part. Besides their natural
ignorance, through precipitancy, misinformation, prejudice, partial
affections, and sundry other causes, they are subject to very many mistakes and
aberrations: whereby it comes to pass, that the wisest men sometimes are foully
overseen, and are fain to take up the Fools plea, and to cry Non putaram.

28. But as for God, he, and he alone, is wise. (...) -- the only wise God, 1 Timothy 1. As we are sure he will not deceive any, being of infinite goodness; 1 Timothy 1. 17. Psalm. 147. 5.
so we may be sure he cannot be deceived by any, being of infinite wisdom.
There is such a fullness of wisdom in him, that it has left no room for second
thoughts, or after-counsels: nor can there be imagined any cause, why he should
retract or reverse any of that he has determined to do, either in part, or in
whole. (...). Arist. 1. de coelo. 7.


29. Lastly, As his Wisdom, so is his Power also infinite. Man may devise,
purpose, and resolve upon a course for the obtaining of his intentions; and
that possibly with so good advise, and upon such probable and rational grounds,
that there appears no reason to the contrary, why he should not persist in
the same mind still, and pursue that his said resolution; and yet there may a
thousand impediments intervene to obstruct the business: so that it shall not
be in the power of his hand to remove those obstacles, whereby to accomplish
the desires of his heart. O Lord, says the Prophet Jeremy, I know that the way
of man is not in Jer. 10. 23.
himself; it is not in man that walks, to direct his steps. And Solomon, a
little before in this book; A man's heart devises his way? but the Lord
directs his Prove. 16. 9.
steps.

30. But as for the Lord; his Power has no bars or bounds, other than those of
his own will: Quicquid voluit, fecit, Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he
in Psalm. 135. 6.
heaven, and in earth; in the sea, and in all the deep places. For who has
ever resisted his Romans 9. 19. (...). Hom. Odyss. (...).
will? Romans 9. Does he mean his revealed will think you? Surely not; thousands
have resisted, and daily do resist that will; the Will, and the Commandments of
God. But he means it of his secret will, the will of his everlasting Counsels
and purposes: and that too of an effectual resistance, such a resistance as
shall hinder the accomplishment of that Will. For otherwise there are thousands
that offer resistance to that also, if their resistance could prevail. But all
resistance, as well of the one sort, as of the other, is in vain, as to that
end: Though hand join in Psalm. 118. 16.
hand, it will be to no purpose; the right hand of the Lord will have the
preeminence when all is done. Associate your selves, O ye people, and ye shall
be broken in pieces; gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces. Take
counsel together, and it shall come to naught; speak the word, and it shall not
stand, Isa 8. 9, 10. But the Counsel of the Lord, that shall stand, and none
shall be able to hinder it.

31. Lay all these together, the Sovereignty, the Eternity, the Wisdom, and the
Power of God, (and in all these God will be glorified) and you will see great
reason, why the Lord should so often blast men's devices, bring all their
counsels 1 Cor. 1. 19. -- 3. 19.
and contrivances to naught, and take the wise in their own craftiness. Even to
let men see, in their disappointment, the vanity as all humane devices; that
they might learn, not to glory in, or trust to their own wisdom, or strength,
or any thing else in themselves, or in any creature; but that he that glories,
might glory in the -- 1. 31.
Lord only.

32. Let every one of us therefore learn, (that I may now proceed to the
Inferences) I. Inference.
from the consideration of what we have heard; First of all, not to trust too
much to our own wit, neither to lean to our own understanding; Nor Prove. 3. 5.
please our selves overmuch in the vain devices, imaginations, fancies, or
dreams of our own hearts. Tho our Purposes should be honest, and not any ways
sinful, either in Matter, End, Means, or other Circumstance: yet if we should
be over-confident of their success, rest too much upon our own skill,
contrivances, or any worldly help: like enough they may deceive us. It may
please God to suffer those that have worse purposes, propose to themselves
baser ends, or make use of more unwarrantable means, to prosper to our grief
and loss, yea, possibly to our destruction: if it be but for this only, to
chastise us for resting too much upon outward helps, and making flesh our arm,
and not relying ourselves entirely upon him and his salvation.

33. Who knows but Judgment may, nay, who knows not that Judgment must
(says the Apostle; that is, in the ordinary course of God's providence usually
does) begin at the house of God? Who out of his tender care of their 1. Pet. 4.
17.
well-doing, will sooner punish (temporally I mean) his own children, when they
take pride in their own inventions, and sooth themselves in the devices of
their own hearts, than he will his professed enemies, that stand at defiance
with him, and openly fight against him. These he suffers many times to go on
in their impieties, and to climb up to the height of their ambitious desires,
that in the mean time he may make use of their injustice and oppression for the
scourging of those of his own household, and in the end get himself the more
glory by their destruction.

34. But then, secondly; howsoever Judgment may begin at the house of God, II.
Inference.
most certain it is, it shall not end there: but the hand of God, and his
revenging justice, shall at last reach the house of the wicked oppressor also;
And that, not with temporary punishments only, as he did correct his own, but
(without repentance) evil shall hunt them to their everlasting destruction,
that despise his known Counsels, to follow the cursed devices and imaginations
of their own naughty hearts. The Persecutors of God in his servants, of Christ
in his members; that say, in the pride of their hearts, ( with our tongues,
with our wits, with our Psalm. 12. 4.
arms and armies, we will prevail: We are they that ought to speak, and to
rule: Who is Lord our us? We have Counsel and strength for war. etc.) what do
they, Isa. 36. ^.
but even kick against the pricks, as the phrase is, Act. 9. which pierce into
the Act. 9. 5.
heels of the kicker, and work him much anguish; but themselves remain as they
were before, without any alteration or abatement of their sharpness. God
delights to get himself honor, and to show the strength of his arm, by
scattering Exodus 14. 17. Luke 1. 51.
such proud Pharaohs in the imaginations of their hearts: and that especially
when they are arrived (and not ordinarily till then) almost at the very highest
pitch of their designs. When they are in the top of their jollity, and gotten
to the uppermost roundle of the ladder, then does he put to his hand, tumble
them down headlong at once: and then how suddenly do they consume, perish, and
come Psalm. 73. 19.
to a fearful end? Then shall they find (but too late) what their pride would
not before suffer them to believe, to be a terrible truth, that all their
devices were but folly, and that the counsel of the Lord must stand.

35. A terrible truth indeed to them: But, Thirdly, Of most comfortable
consideration III Inference.
to all those, that with patience and cheerfulness suffer for the testimony of
God, or a good conscience, and in a good cause, under the insolences of proud
and powerful persecutors. When their enemies have bent all the strength of
their wits and power to work their destruction, God can (and as he sees it
instrumental to his everlasting counsels will) infatuate all their counsels,
elude all their devices and stratagems, bring all their preparations and
enterprises to naught, and turn them all to their destruction, his own glory,
and the welfare of his servants. 1. Either by turning their counsels into
folly, as he did Achitophel's. 2. Or 2 Samuel 15. 31.
by diversion, finding them work else where; as Saul was fain to leave the
pursuit of David, when he and his Men had compassed him about, and were ready
to 1 Samuel 23. 26, 27.
take him, upon a message then brought him of an invasion of the Land by the
Philistines. And as he sent a blast upon Senacherib, by a rumor that he heard
of the King of Aethiopia's coming forth to war against him; which caused him
Isa. 37. 7, 9.
to desert his intended siege of Jerusalem. 3. Or by putting a Blessing into
the mouth of their enemies instead of a curse: as he guided the mouth of
Bala^m, Number. 23. 3.
contrary to his intendment and desire. 4. Or he can melt the hearts of his
enemies into a kind of compassion, or cause them to relent, so as to be at
peace with Prove. 16. 7.
them when they meet, tho they came out against them with minds and
preparations Genesis 31. 29. Genesis 33. 4.
of hostility: as he did L^ban's first, and Esau's afterward, against Jacob.

36. Howsoever, some way or other he can curb and restrain, either their malice
or power, or both; that when they have devised devices against them, as they
Jer. 18. 18. (...). Home^. ^llad. ^.
did against Jeremiah, they shall not be able to put them in execution. As a
cunning rider, that suffers a wild untamed horse to fling and fly out under
him, but with the bridle in his jaws can give him a sudden stop at his
pleasure, even in the midst of his fullest career: Or as a skilful fisher, when
some great fish has caught the bait, lets it tumble and play upon the line
a while, and beat it self upon the water, or against the bank, and at last,
when he spieth his time, strikes the hook into him, and draws him to the
Land. So can the Lord deal, and often does, with the great Be^emoths and
Leviathans of the World: he lets them go on in the pleasing devices of their
own seduced hearts, and suffers them to prosper in their mischievous
imaginations (according to the old, or as the new Psalm. 140. 9. Psalm. 73. 6.
Translation renders it, Psalm. 140.) in their wicked devices, till they be
even covered over with pride and violence. But when the time is come which he
in his eternal Counsel has appointed, he puts his hook into their noses,
and his bridle Isa. 37. 29.
into their lips, (they are both his own expressions by the Prophet, in the
case of Hezekiah and Senacherib) and so defeateth all their malicious purposes
for Isa. 51. 20.
the future. And though they fret and rage for anger, and are as impatient as a
wild Bull in a net (which is another of the Prophets expressions elsewere) yet
is it to no purpose: though they gnas^ with their teeth, through indignation
and Psalm. 112. 10.
envy, yet will they, nill they, they shall melt away, and their desires shall
perish. Whereof, besides sundry examples in Scripture, God has given us of
this Nation some remarkable experiments: especially in two never to be
forgotten defeats, the one of the invincible Armado in eighty eight, the other
of the Gunpowder Treason since.

37. The mediation of which both examples and experiments, would be as a
sovereign Cordial, to relieve our spirits, and sustain our souls with comfort,
against those deliquia animae, those fainting-fits that sometimes come upon us,
when we are either over-burdened under the pressures of our own sufferings, or
over-grieved at the prosperous successes of our cruel enemies. The comfort is,
that neither they, nor their devices, can prevail against us any farther than
God will give them leave: and we know, that if we cleave steadfastly to him, he
will not give them leave to prevail any farther than shall be for our good. He
that by his power, stilleth the raging of the Sea, and has set it its certain
bounds which it may not pass, and by his peremptory decree has said unto it,
Hitherto shall thou Job 38. 11.
go, and here shall thou stay thy proud waves; by the same power also can
still, at his pleasure, the madness and the tumult of the people. Pilate that
condemned Christ, Psalm. 65. 7. Joh. 19. 11.
could have had no power so to do, if it had not been given him from above. And
Judas that betrayed him, and the Jews that crucified him, did no more than what
God in his determinate counsel had fore-appointed to be done. But not Pilate,
Acts 2. 23.
nor Judas, nor the Jews could hinder him from rising again from the dead. The
reason was, because in the eternal Counsel of God, Christ was to die and rise
again: therefore God suffered them to have power to procure his Death; but they
had no power at all to hinder his Resurrection.

38. And therefore also, fourthly, it will well become us, nay, it is our
bounden IV. Inference
duty, to submit to such sufferings as God shall call us to; and to take up our
Luke 9. 13.
cross, when he shall think fit to lay it upon us, with all willingness. When
we have to do with Satan and his temptations, resistance may be of good use to
us, ( Resist the Devil, and he will fly from you;) but when we have to do with
God, Jam. 4. 7.
and his Chastisements, it is in vain to oppose. His hand is too mighty for us;
there is no way but to submit, and to humble our selves thereunder, by
acknowledging -- 10.
our weakness, and resigning our wills and desires to his wisdom and goodness.
It is the fondest thing in the world to think to redeem our selves out of
troubles by our own wit or power alone, without his leave. Our own devices can
no more help us, if in his eternal Counsel he has determined to afflict us,
than other men's devices can harm us, if he have determined to protect us. But
how to behave our selves, when any trouble is upon us, or danger toward us,
the Apostle has given us an excellent Rule, and our Savior an excellent
Example. The Rule is, Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for nothing: but in every thing by
prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your request be made known unto
God. As if he had said, Acquaint him with your griefs, what it is that
troubles you, and with your desires, what it is you would have; commend all to
his good pleasure and wisdom, by your humble and hearty prayers, and then take
no further anxious care about it: your heavenly father will take care of it,
who knows better than you do what is fittest to be done in it. The Example
is, our Savior's prayer in his agony; Father, if it be possible, let this cup
pass from me: nevertheless not my will, Luke 22. 4^.
but thine be done. He makes his request known unto God in the former clause:
and then submits all to his will in the later.

39. But you will say, Must we sit still when trouble is upon us? Suffer all,
and do nothing? May we not cast and devise how to free our selves therefrom,
and use our best endeavors to effect it? Doubtless you may. There is nothing
meant, in what has been hitherto said, to exclude, either prudent counsels, or
honest endeavors. God forbid. He takes no pleasure, either in fools, or
sluggards. But here is the danger, lest we should rest in our own counsels,
without asking counsel at his mouth; or trust in our own endeavors, without
seeking help at his hand. We are to use both Counsels and Endeavors, (provided
ever that they be honest and lawful:) but there is something to be done
besides, both before and after. Before we use them, we must pray unto God, that
he would direct us in our Counsels, and bless us in our endeavors: and when we
have used them, we must, by our prayers, again commend the success of both to
him, who is able to save us; and submit it wholly to his wisdom and goodness,
at what times, and by what means, and in what measure it will please him to
save us. For so it must be, even as he will, and no otherwise, when all is
done. His counsel shall stand; but so shall no device of Man, that agrees not
thereunto.

40. That therefore we may give unto our purposes as great a certainty of good
V. Inference.
success, as such uncertain things are capable of; it should be our care in the
last place, to provide that they may be as conformable to his Counsels as
possible may be. Now since the Eternal Counsel of God, which is nothing else
but his secret will (tho it be properly the counsel meant in the Text, yet) is
not proper for us to meddle withal, nor appointed by him to be the rule or
measure of our Actions: we are not bound to conform our wills and purposes
thereunto; nor consequently to trouble our selves thereabouts. Secretum meum
mihi. When we are called to be of his Counsel, but not before, we may look into
the Ark of his Decrees, and enquire into his secret will. But till then (which
will never be) it is happiness enough for us, and an unspeakable favor from
him if we may be admitted to be of his Court (though not of his Counsel) and
thereby to have some good knowledge of his revealed Will. That is all that
belongs to us; to that therefore let us hold us, as to our proper Rule and
Standard. As it is not fit for us to search into that Counsel of his which is
locked up in the Cabinet of his secret Will; so neither is it safe for us to
despise that Counsel of his, which is imparted to us in the treasury of his
revealed Will. Ask we counsel at God's Mouth; consult we the Oracles of his
holy Word; let his Testimonies be our guides and counselors; and let our
thoughts and purposes be conformed to the Counsels and Directions given us
therein; and that is the most probable way to secure the success according to
our own hearts desire, and to make them also to stand. For what more likely way
can be imagined to accomplish the secret Will of God, than faithfully to
endeavor the accomplishment of his revealed Will, and commit the rest to him?

41. Whereunto that you may give the better credit; take it upon the word of
three creditable Witnesses. First, Solomon, Prove. 16. Commit thy works unto the
Prove. 16. 3.
Lord; and so shall thy thoughts be established. His Father David before him,
in Psalm. 37. Commit thy way unto the Lord, and put thy trust in him, and he
shall Psalm. 37. 5.
bring it to pass. And Eliphaz the Temanite, long before them both, in Job 22.
If thou return unto the Almighty, and make thy prayer unto him, etc. Thou shall
also Job 22. 23. -- 28.
decree a thing, and it shall be established; and the light shall shine upon
thy ways.

42. If any Man, unto such evidence of Reason, and pregnant Testimonies shall
oppose common Experience, against which there is no disputing; That thousands
of Men, that have hearkened to the Counsels of God in his holy Word, made their
requests known to him by Prayer, and committed their ways to him by a holy
dependence upon his good providence; have yet failed in their hopes, and the
success of their affairs, and fallen under their enemies hands. All this must
be confessed a truth; yet no contradiction to what has been delivered. For it
was not said, that such thoughts and purposes shall infallibly have the desired
success, but that it is the most probable way for the obtaining thereof, amidst
the great uncernity of all humane affairs and devices. Many times there may be
some sinister respects and corrupt aflections mingled with our best intentions,
or devotions: or there may lurk in our hearts some secret noisome lust
undiscovered, and so unsubdued: or there may be a leaning too much upon our own
devices, or other inferior helps, without casting our selves upon the
providence of God so entirely as we ought: something or other there may be in
us, or in our purposes, or in our Prayers amiss, though perhaps we perceive it
not; for which it may please God to suffer our Hopes to perish, and to render
our Endeavors unsuccessful.

43. But howsoever, two other Considerations there are, that will fully answer
the Objection, and remove all difficulties in this Point. First, That all
temporal Promises are to be understood cum exceptione crucis: that is to say,
not absolutely according to the tenor of the words in the utmost extent; but
so far forth, as God in his infinite wisdom shall see it expedient to deal with
his servants, either in Mercy or Justice, according to the present temper of
their hearts, and in order to their future good. So that still there is a
reservation of a power in him to exercise them with the cross, as he shall
think Good. In that large promise which our blessed Savior makes to all those
that suffer loss in any kind for his sake and Mar. 10. 29, 30.
the Gospels; eternal life in the world to come is promised absolutely, but the
hundred fold now in this present life not simply, but with persecutions
expressly annexed, Mar. 10.

44. Secondly, That the desires and hopes of godly Men that are agreeable to
God's holy Word, though they may for the reasons now specified, fail, as to the
particulars desired in these inferior things, which are of smaller importance,
and concern a Christian but upon the by: yet in that which ought to be, and in
every true Christian is, the main of his desires, and the ultimate end that he
looks at, so that he desires all other things but respectively, and in order
to that, to wit, the glory of God, and the fruition of his favor; unless the
fault be in himself, he shall not fail his expectation.

45. Hear then the sum of all, and the conclusion of the whole matter. Give up
thy self faithfully to follow the good counsel of God in his revaled will: and
then give up thy desires entirely, to be disposed by his wise counsel in his
secret will: and he shall undoubtedly give thee thy hearts desire. Either in
those very particulars thou cravest at his hands, if he see the same expedient
for thee in order to his glory and thy good; or else in some other thing, which
is in truth much more expedient for thee, than that which thou cravest, and
shall in the end so appear to thee, although for the present thou do not so
apprehend it. Aut quod volumus, aut quod malumus: one of both we may be sure
of. If we submit our wills to his, both in doing and suffering; doubtless we
cannot finally miscarry. He will consult nothing but for our good: and what he
has consulted, must stand.

A Table of the Places of Scripture, to which some Light (more or less) is
given in the foregoing One and Twenty Sermons.
Chap. Verse. Page. Genesis III. 5 525 iv 13 496 vi 5 658 -- 6 657 ix 3 390 -- 6
612 -- 27 465 xi 4 362 xiv 21 423 xv 2 445 xviii 21 632 xxi 15-16 557 -- 19 559
xxviii 12 547 -- 20 432 xxxi 29 662 xxxiii 4 662 xlii 21-22 411-573 l 15-17 411
Exodus I. 6 559 -- 10 644 ii 9 559 iii 15 546 xiv 17 662 -- 25 659 xviii 21 584
xx 17 641 xxiii 2 616-627 -- 3 611 -- 8 649 Levit. IV. 1 651 xxv 17 646 Number.
XXIII. 3 662 -- 19 658 Deuteronomy. X. 15 561 xv 11 606 xvi 19 649 xxxi 8 562 1 Samuel
II. 30 543 viii 5 636 -- 11 639 XII. III 635- etc. xv 30 630 xxiii 26-27 662
xxiv 6 523 -- 13 426-427 xxv 34 412 xxvii 1 587 2 Samuel IV. 1 581 xii 13 410 xv
3 572 -- 6 572 -- 31 662 xxiii 16 414 1 King. XV. 5 411 2 Chro. XXV. 13 415
xxxii 31 588 Nehem. II. 5- etc. 376 Esther IV. 14 608 Job I. 9 542 -- 21 498 --
22 556 ii 10 442 v 12-15 655 vi 15 555 xx 18 650 xxii 23-28 664 xxix 13 615 --
16-17 631 xxxi 13 392 xxxv 8 646 Psalm II. 1-6 654-655 iii 1 498 ix 9 562 -- 20
503 xii 4 661 xvi 5 568 xix 12 402 XIX XIII 401- etc. xx 7-8 558- etc. xxi 11
658 xxii 14 582 XXVII X 553 xxx 6 587 6-8 504 xxxii 9 412 xxxiii 10 658 10-11
654 xxxvi 6 495 xxxvii 5 564-664 19 662 23 378 xxxviii 20 381 xxxix 4 548 9 499
xli 1 629 xliv 21 633 xlv 1 548 7 365 l 21 653 23 540 lvi 6 573 lviii 8 654
lxii 10 640 11 543 11-12 608 lxv 7 663 lxvi 1 540 lxxii 1- etc. 605 14 644
lxxiii 20 656 lxxvi 5 656 lxxvii 2 504 10 563 12 607 lxxviii 72 533 lxxix 12
608 lxxxii 5 578 6 60^ lxxxiii 5 5^3 lxxxiv 6 568 lxxxvi 11 582 lxxxix 2 659
xci 4 564 15 506 xciv 11 658 19 505 xcvii 11 569 xcix 1 654 civ 15 362 31 539
cvi 3 617 cvii 2 458 16 582 cviii 2 547 cix 18 363 28 615 cxi 10 578 cxii 9 442
10 662 cxv 1 543 cxvi 7 498 16 659 cxix 28 582 57 568 CXIX LXX 493- etc. 89 658
91 659 96 626 105 569 115 416 116 562 122 646 cxxii 3 551 cxxvii 3 434 cxxxiii
1- etc. 396-459 cxxxv 6 561, 654, 660 cxl 9 664 12 560 cxli 4 564 6 549 cxlii
5-6 560 cxliii 2 494 cxlvi 2-3 557 cxlvii 9 559 5 660 cl 5 549 Prove. I. 10
416-584 11-13 609 iii 3-4 613 5 661 vi 6 576 x 2 643 7 362 xi 18 645 26 614
xiii 10 468 24 501 xiv 31 646 xv 1 468 30 363 xvi 2 620-633 8 440 4 542 XVI VII
373- etc. 9 660 xvii 15 474-516 26 532 xviii 13 511 14 582 17 624 xix 3 370-592
XIX XXI 653- etc. xx 14 645 xxi 1 368-380 xxii 1 360 16 648 22-23 647 xxiii 2
414 5 557 XXIV X-XII 603- etc. 21 386 24-26 614 xxv 27 543 xxvi 2 615 13 581 16
577 xxvii 6 502 xxviii 3 608-647 11 577 xxix 7 631 xxxi 89 605 Eccles. II. 11
504 26 434 iii 1 627 11 627 iv 1 622-628 5-6 429 v 8 628 VII I 357- etc. 7 522
8 468 29 657 ix 1 383 3 361 8 361 x 1 369 20 628 xi 4 531 xii 10 359 Isaiah II.
22 557 xi 3-4 510 xiii 6 582 xxix 13 547 xxxiii 15 647-648 xxxvi 5 661 xxxvii
7-9 662 29 662 xlii 8 539-543 xlvi 10 659 xlix 14-15 561 15 555 l 1 455 li 20
662 LII III 449- etc. lv 5-6 656 8-9 653 lvii 15 572 lviii 5 413 7 606 Ier. II.
13 558 viii 9 578 x 23 660 24 495 xii 2 547 xviii 18 371 xxi 12 616 xxv 9 659
xxxvii 7-9 662 29 662 xxxviii 4 581 xliii 10 659 li 20 662 Ezekiel. I. 16 659 iii
19 618 vii 17 581 xiv 14, etc 617 xxi 7 581 xxix 20 659 Daniel V. 6 581 27-28
633 Hosea II. 9 442 v 15 504 xiii 14 657 Amos VI. 1 646 v 11 647 12 648 13 627
viii 4 646 5 645 Jonah II. 8 559 iii 10 658 Nahum II. 10 581-482 Zephan. I. 9
644 12 633 Mala^. I. 6 547 iii 6 660 Mat. III. 17 379 iv 10 416 v 16 547 vi 2
568 -- 17 361 vii 12 389 -- 16 489 -- 20 489 x 16 639 xi 12 464 xv 8 547 -- 19
658 xvi 1 573 -- 24 585 xviii 7 473 -- 27-28 647 xxiii 37 559 xxv 24 496 Mark
VI. 26 414 x 30 500 xii 40 572 Luke I. 51 662 ii 14 573 vi 42 516-638 x 34-35
567 -- 41 657 xi 18 573 xii 4 582-584 -- 15 419 xiv 26 586 xv 12 610 -- 22- etc
560 XVI VIII 565- etc. -- 9 566 xix 8 651 xxi 4 610 xxii 23 475 -- 42 663 xxiv
38 658 John I. 29 460 -- 1-2 547 iii 20-21 634 vi 27 460 -- 70 574 ix 24 544 xi
50 522 xii 6 514 xiii 2 574 -- 23 397 xiv 27 584 -- 30 460 xv 19 567 xix 11 663
xx 17 547 Acts II 23 482-663 iv 32 471 viii 22 658 ix 5 662 xii 23 544 xiv 15
544 xvi 18 573 -- 28 659 xx 24 538 -- 33 423 xxiii 5 541 xxiv 16 635 xxvi 9 406
Romans III. 4 543 -- 7 517 iv 18 562 -- 20-21 562 v 4-5 563 vii 14 450 viii 7*8
377 -- 33 56^ -- 39 561 ix 3 541 -- 19 661 x 10 548 xi 36 54^ xii 2 567 -- 5
471-606 -- 18 369 xiii 7 387-388 xiv 17 54^ -- 19 472 xv 3 375-549 -- 5 538-
etc. XV VI 537- etc. xvi 18 572 -- 27 541 1 Cor. I. 10 550 -- 19 661 -- 20 577
-- 21 661 ii 12 573 iii 19 661 -- 10 53^ -- 18 50^ iv 3 420-^31 -- 4 ^^^ -- 21
532 v 12 394 vi 19 459-542 -- 20 542 vii 37 414 viii 1 530-575 -- 6 546 -- 13
532 ix 15 363 -- 20 532 -- 22 532 x 10 441 X XXIII 507- etc. -- 29-30 517 -- 31
541-549 -- 33 374-476 xi 1 476 -- 19 465 -- 31 497 -- 32 495-497 xii 25 606
xiii 5 613 -- 12 484-653 xiv 33 551 2 Cor. I. 3 467 -- 5 506 -- 12 631 iv 4 569
-- 9 564 -- 16 505 -- 17 539 vi 14 570 vii 6 506 xi 12 532 -- 13-15 489 xii 11
421 -- 17 645 xiii 10 608 Gal. I. 10 532 vi 1 407-588 -- 2 532 -- 3 653 -- 9
586 -- 10 397 Ephesians. I. 7-9 483 -- 6 542 -- 11 656 ii 2-3 568 iii 21 547 iv 3
551 -- 15 471 -- 16 549 -- 25 606 v 3 419 -- 8 571 Phil. I. 27 551 ii 1-2 469
-- 4 550 -- 15 368 -- 21 583 iii 6 544 -- 16 471 -- 20 567 iv 6 563-663 -- 8
362-368 IV XI 417- etc. -- 15 417 Col. I. 12 569 iii. 14 551 1 Thessalonians. II. 5 419
-- 10 638 iv 3 645 -- 6 626-645 1 Timothy I. 17 539-606 ii 6 459 iii 15 529 III
XVI 479- etc. iv 8 562 v 3 387 -- 17 393-420-614 vi 6 434 -- 7 448 -- 8 448 --
10 420-642 -- 17 646 2 Timothy II. 13 560 -- 19 487-569 -- 24-25 471 -- 26 414 iv
16-17 560 Tit. II. 11-12 487 Heb. IV. 12 547-633 vi 17-18 657 x 32-34 585 -- 36
466-469 xi 2 362 xii 2 579 XII III 579- etc. -- 4-5 589 -- 9 561 -- 10 503-561
-- 12 581 -- 14 476 xiii 2 504 -- 5 422-444 -- 21 378 Iam. I. 8 584 -- 13
456-583 -- 14 583 -- 27 568-615 ii 1 398 -- 6 622-646 -- 8 606 -- 17 516 iii 16
472-551 iv 7 663 -- 10 663 v 11 469 -- 15 580 1 Pet. I. 4-5 560 -- 10 484 -- 18
459 II XVII 385, etc. iii 13 381 -- 16 369 iv 12 575 -- 17 661 v 7 563 -- 8 576
II Pet. I. 5 488 -- 16 580 -- 19 569 ii 10 374-628 iii 7 380-381 I John II. 16
360 -- 27 430 iii 8 588 iv 1 488 -- 16 560 v 18 413 Jude 3 397 Rev. V. 9 459
xxii 9 544

FINIS.

