THE HISTORY OF Monastical Conventions, AND Military Institutions With a SURVEY
of the COURT of ROME.

OR, A Description of the Religious and Military Orders in Europe, Asia and
Africa, for above twelve hundred years, being a brief Account of of their
Institution, Confirmation, Rules, Habits, and manner of Living; the
Qualification of their Institutors, and the time of their respective
Institutions, extending to either Sex, etc. Together with a Survey of the Court
of Rome, etc. in all the Great Offices, and Officers Ecclesiastical and Civil
dependant thereon; as also the Ceremonies of the Consistories, Conclave and
those that have been used in the Creation of Cardinals; Election of the
High-Bishop or Pope, and his Triumphant Coronation Procession, and that of his
taking Possession of the Lateran Church in Rome; with what is observed in his
Sickness, and the manner of Solemnizing his Funeral Obsequies; with many other
things worthy of Note, according to what has been recorded by Candid Authors of
diverse Nations, and faithfully Collected

By J. S.

LICENSED May 11. 1686.

London, Printed for H. Rhodes next door to the Swan-Tavern near Bride-Lane in
Fleet Street. 1686.

A prospect of a monastical Life and Pilgramage
Jerusalem taken by the Christians Anno 1099
In hoc vincis The Pontifical proscession to the Eateran Church


THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
REader, in the following Treatise you will find the Cause and Original of a
Monastic Life, referring to either Sex, viz. as well of Nuns as Eremites,
Monks and Friars, etc. of diverse Orders and Institutions, with the Motives that
induced their Founders to such Pious and Charitable Undertakings, and the Time
of their Institution; the account of their Progress, Encouragement, Increase
and Decay for upwards of 1200 years: Also the Rules and Habits prescribed to
the several Orders, and the Regulation of the Monasteries and Covents, as they
are warranted by Authors, the truth of whose Testimony has not been reduced
under the least scruple or imagination of Falsity or Partiality; in taking a
Survey of which, you will not only find what Progress Religion made in the
World, since its mavelous light removed the shadows of Ignorance and Atheism;
but many other remarkable things, affording much variety. To these Orders,
properly termed Religious because devoted to Religious Worship, and the
propagation of the Christian Religion; I have added others, viz. Military
Orders of Knighthood, which have been, and are at present in the Christian
World, with the Time of their Institution, the Countries they were erected in,
their Habit, Badges, Collars, And the names of those Kings, Princes, and
Nobleman, who erected them mostly for the defense of the Christian Cause; as
well in the Holy land, as in Europe and Africa; non were they, when the
Infidels, like a deluge, sought to carry all before them, a little serviceable,
as appeared by the Valor and Conduct of some of them against the Sultans of
Egypt in Palestine; and others by Eclipsing the Turkish Moons with blood at the
famous Sieges of Rhodes, Candia, etc. To these I have added a Survey of the
Court and City of Rome, in all its great Offices, Places of Honor and
Eminency, from the Pontifical Chair, to the Inferior Officers, Ecclesiastical
and Civil; with the Consistorial Order and Proceedings in the Conclave Election
of a Pope to fill the empty Throne, and what is Observable and Remarkable on
that occasion, and in the splendid Procession to the Lateran Church; the manner
of Benediction, Creation of Cardinals, and many other things very Remarkable;
in which is described the Magnificence and Splendour of that great Court and
City, as it has been faithfully delivered, and what may be very much
serviceable to Readers, or Writers of History, or other matters that any way
concern the affairs of either, or border on things of this nature. And thus
much I thought fit briefly to lay down, as well for the Pleasure and
Instruction of the Curious, as to prevent Mistakes or Misconstructions in the
Ignorant, who generally are abused by Misrepresentations: And hoping this
Candid Undertaking may please some, and give offense to none, Reader, I remain
yours to oblige you in what I may,

J. S.

The Introduction, etc.
IN the dawn of the Gospel, when as St. John observes in his Apocalypse, The
woman had given her the wings of an Eagle to fly into the Wilderness, from the
the face of the Dragon, who cast out a flood of water to carry her away: When
the Primitive Christians, to avoid the persecutions stirred up against them by
the Prince of Darkness, in the Reigns of the Heathen Emperors, fled into
Mountains, Woods, Caves, and solitary Places, there to enjoy (though in the
greatest external Poverty) that Religion in the freedom of its exercise, which
they valued infinitely beyond tlie Pomp and Glory of the Universe, as knowing
their blessed Redeemer lived, and that he would not fail to Crown their Labor
in the end with Life and Immortality, with a Crown of Glory that will never
fade: Then it was, that many Devout Christians, being wonderfully taken with
such Solitude, altogether weaned themselves from the world, and despising its
vanities, chose to live and dye in the privacy of their Retirements; for the
support of whom, Nature, or rather the more immediate hand of Providence, by
unexpected ways, produced the food whereby they did subsist; and these from the
Deserts and obscure Places, where they chose to reside, as also their
singleness of Life, were called Eremites, or Monachies, held by the Church in
high esteem for their Piety and Devotion; and of these in the Primitive Times
Paul, Hillarian, Basil, and Hierom were note-worthy, who lived in that Estate,
and were imitated by others, no less devout than themselves: But when the
Church had Peace, especially under the happy Reign of Constantine the Great,
and many of those Emperors that succeeded him in the Eastern and Western
Empires; those that were scattered in solitary places, that they might be at
hand to proclaim the Gospel Truths to those, who as then sat in darkness, or
but dimly beheld its mavelous Light, chose to change their Hutts and Caves
for convenient places in populous Towns and Cities, where they lived together
in a poor, but contented Estate; having all things in common amongst
themselves; and from thence the places in which they chose to reside, were
called Monasteries, Convents or Cloisters. Nor was it long, e're by their good
example, in a devout way of living, the number was increased; nor were there
wanting devout Women, who, as we may properly term it, left the world, that is,
the enjoyment of worldly things, and voluntarily chose to live in such
retirements; and from their recluse manner of living and singleness of life,
were called Nonnae or Nuns, or as some will have it from the Egyptian word
Nonnus, and were further distinguished by the name of Moniales, from whence the
word Monastery seems to be derived. Great indeed was their Devotion, insomuch
that increasing in holy zeal, and a fervent desire of heavenly things, they
procured to themselves the name of Sanctimoniales; and from these good
beginings the several holy Orders sprung, and were (as the Church increased,
and spread her silver Wings of Peace, to shadow her Children from the heat of
persecution) at diverse times constituted and confirmed; of whose several Rises
and Progresses I intend to speak, that those who are unacquainted therewith,
may be fully satisfied, and Mistakes or Misrepresentations rectified and
avoided: That at one view much of this nature past and present, may impartially
be surveyed, without offending any by augmenting or extenuating. And so take
them briefly in order, as they are warranted on the credit of such Authors, as
have been curious in the search and inquiry of those things, and left them to
our consideration as undoubted Truths; as also what relates to the Offices and
Ceremonies of the Court of Rome, etc.

CHAP. 1. A Discourse of diverse Religious Orders, Instituted and Established in
the Primitive Times, etc. at the Thabenesii, the Monks of St. Basil and St.
Hierom, etc. with the Rules prescribed for their manner of Living, and
strictness of Life, their Tenants, management of Affairs, Habit, etc.
CHristianity prevailing, and in spite of Opposition, mounting like the
victorious Palm under weight and oppression; the Church that before was blessed
with Internal Peace, found the like External Blessing, under that glorious
Christian Emperor, Constantine the Great; and not only Peace, but
Encouragement, insomuch that Piety and Learning began more and more to
flourish, and a settled Method and Order in Ecclesiastical matters to be
regularly observed; which in the days of Persecution, could not be brought to
perfection, all the strict Professors being forced to live in Caves and Deserts
like Eremites, or fly from one place to another, to avoid the Sword or Flames:
So that the first well settled Orders we read of, were called Thabennesii, from
the Isle of Thabenna, in the Province of Thebais, the place of their Abode; and
these were established by one Pachomius an Eremite, who in the Reign of
Constantius, Son to Constantine the Great, convened diverse Religious Men, and
giving them the Title or Style of Monks, prescribed the following Rules, viz.
That they should cohabit or live together in one House, in which House were
diverse little Cells, every Cell allotted for three persons; yet that they
should eat together in common, at a Table placed in the Hall for that purpose,
eating or abstaining being otherwise left to their discretion. That they must
take their repose in Chairs, and not in Beds; the Clothes that were allotted
them were made of Goat Skins, which they put not off, unless when they received
the Blessed Sacrament: Hoods they likewise had, with which they covered their
faces, and in their eating were enjoined silence, and to be intent upon what
they were about: Prayers were likewise enjoined them twelve times a day, as
also in the Evening, and in the Night, a Psalm going before each Prayer: Their
Cells, or as some will have it, their Orders were twenty four; and in this
manner they lived up to the strictness of their Profession in honest Demeanor
and Piety, which stirred up and incited others to imitate them. Nor was St.
Basil Presbyter of Caesarea in Cappadocia slow in erecting, or causing to be
erected, places for Religious Worship, and giving Instructions to those that
had betaken themselves to such places: For being molested by Eusebius his
Bishop, lest they contending, any trouble might be raised to the Church, or
occasion of scandal given to the enemies of the Gospel; he withdrew himself to
a Monastery in Pontus, and sent his invitation to such as had chosen to dwell
in Caves, or other the like Retirements, to leave those Solitudes and come to
him: When getting together a competent number, he prescribed them Rules under
ninety five Heads, and were by most of the Eastern Monks embraced, etc. the
which by reason they tend to Piety, and the settlement of a good Living, I
think not amiss to repeat.

As first, They were enjoined to love God with all their hearts, soul and
strength, and their Neighbor as themselves. 2. To ground and fix the love of
God upon his Glory, Power and Excellency, as he is in himself, and on his
Bounty, Goodness, and Mercy toward us. 3. That the love of our Neighbor be
founded upon the Will and Commandment of God, and on his Love toward us who
were his enemies. 4. That they should live together for the sake of mutual
Help, Comfort, Instruction, Exercise of Virtue, Efficacy of Prayer, and
security from danger. 5. That they should renounce and forsake the Pleasures
and Vanities of the world. 6. That they should dispose of their wealth to the
poor and needy. 7. That none, without trial, be admitted into their Fraternity.
8. That Children, with the consent of their Parents, may be admitted. 9. That
they should endeavor to be temperate in all things, as well in Diet as
Behavior. 10. That measures be set down for their eating and drinking. 11.
That none strive for Superiority at the Table, or elsewhere. 12. That their
Apparel be plane and decent, that they girded them with a girdle. 13. That they
walk not after their own Sensuality, but square their Actions by the word of
God. 14. That next to God they be obedient to their Superiors. 15. That they
should serve God with upright hearts, and all ferventness of affection. 16.
That he who should be their Governor, consider he is God's Minister, and be
careful and tender over his charge. 17. That at first he reprove the Offenders
with meekness and gentleness; but if they prove obstinate, and will not be
reclaimed, then he is to account them as Heathens and Publicans, etc. 18. That
he suffer not the least offense to pass unreproved. 19. That Repentance be
sincerely performed. 20. That it be accompanied with good works. 21. And with
Confession. 22. That if any person relapse, he must use more sincerity in his
Repentance than before. 23. Let him who reproves be as a Father, or a
Physician, and the reproved persons, as Sons and Patients. 24. That no man be
obstinate, or seek to excuse, or justify himself in any evil course or
undertaking. 25. That amongst them all things be Common. 26. That men of
Estates render to their Kindred what is their due, and the remainder to the
poor. 27. That none that are entered, return to their Parents houses, unless to
give them Instructions, and that to be done by the permission of their
Superiors. 28. Through which none must give way for their minds to wander after
vanity. 29. That to avoid idle and sinful Dreams, they apply themselves to
meditation on the Law and Word of God. 30. That with the same affection our
blessed Savior washed his Disciples feet, the stronger ought to assist the
weak and infirm in sickness, and on sundry other occasions. 31. That they
should love one another, as Christ loved us. 32. That their speech be not vain
or idle, but edifying and suitable on all occasions. 33. That they should by no
means upbraid one another, or any other person. 34. That whoever defames, or
patiently hears his Brother defamed, be Excommunicated. 35. That they give not
way to Malice or Anger. 36. That they set their affections on Heavenly and not
on Earthly Things. 37. That they neither rejoice nor sorrow, but when they see
God honored or dishonored. 38. That they take heed and beware of worldly
Cares, and too much Security. 39. That whatever they do, may be done to the
glory of God. 40. That they beware of Pride. 41. That by having a low esteem of
themselves, they may learn Humility. 42. That they may be obedient, and ready
to help and serve each other. 43. That no man give occasion of scandal or
offense to his Brother. 44. That every one do his duty with cheerfulness, that
reconciliation may be made where it is wanting. 45. That they judge not, least
they be judged. 46. That they be truly zealous against sin. 47. That no man do
his own will, or ought without leave, seeing Christ came to do the will of his
Father. 48. That they be thankful to God, who has made them capable of
partaking with the Saints in light. 49. That they in their duty instruct no
Vices. 50. That they debar no man from entering their Convent upon trial, nor
give them any offense. 51. That in their fasting, they use Moderation and
Devotion. 52. That none scorn to wear a Garment that is given him, though old.
53. That every one observe the due hour for repast or eating. 54. That they
give their Alms with due consideration, but especially according to the
discretion of the Superior. 55. That the elder instructing the younger, perform
it with reverence, and that none presume to break the Orders of the Monastery.
56. That they should be careful of the Utensils, and other necessaries,
appertaining to the Monastery. 57. If any one be necessarily detained from
Prayer in public, and singing, that then he prays to God with his heart. 58.
That they be reverent and devout in their Prayer, not suffering their Eyes to
wander. 59. That the Steward and other Officers be prudent, faithful, and
frugal. 60. That the Rewards on all occasions be proportioned to the works. 61.
That he who returns to God by Repentance, must weep and be sorry for his
misdoings, and be in hatred with his former actions. 62. That none should be
dismayed, seeing they have nothing to give to the poor, because they have lest
all to follow Christ. 63. That they must not be silent, or wink at Offenses,
but reprove them. 64. They should never be without compunction and care, seeing
the remainder of sin is in them. 65. That they endeavor to be poor in spirit,
which is to forgo all for the love of God. 66. That they continue in well
doing to their lives end. 67. That though in respect of themselves, they ought
not to be solicitous what to eat or drink; yet that they may be helpful to
others, they ought to labor with their hands. 68. That they are not desirous
of meat and drink out of season. 69. That in token of humility they wear
Sackcloth, and speak with moderation, expressing therein neither Shame nor
Confidence. 70. That the Eucharist be received with Reverence, Fear, and Faith.
71. That they observe when it is convenient to speak, and when to be silent.
72. That they have ever the the fear of God before their Eyes, shuning the
broad way, and choosing the narrow. 73. That they avoid Covetousness and
Vainglory, as also Gayety in apparel. 74. That they abstain from the
defilement of the flesh, and endeavor to be pure in heart. 75. That they hate
sin, and make Gods Law their delight. 76. That they try and express their love
to God by their thankfulness to him, their obedience to his Commandments, their
love to their Neighbor, in prosperity and adversity. 77. That they should
imitate Christ in loving their enemies. 78. That they should be angry, but not
so as to sin, and suffer without resistance, or fly from the persecution. 79.
That they labor for the peace of Conscience. 80. That none be puffed up with a
conceit of his own worth, brag thereof, or glory therein. 81. That they implore
true Wisdom of God, acknowledging him the Author of all good. 82. That they
study to know, what it is to be good and holy. 83. That they visit no Women,
but in company, and that by permission, and for Edification, thereby to avoid
offense. 84. That reproof be moved with Gentleness, none relying on his own
judgment. 85. That they patiently bear each others infirmities. 86. That they
pray against Temptation. 87. That what they do they do advisedly, and with
mature deliberation. 88. That the Alms be delivered by the hand of him to whom
the charge is committed. 89. That they labor not for Faith without Charity,
nor hide the Talent that is given them to improve. 90. That they distinguish
between Fury, which is to be accounted sin, and the just Indignation against
sin. 91. That Satan has no absolute power to oblige a man to sin, without his
own consent and yielding. 92. If any man be desirous to enter into the
Monastery, and be in debt, he ought first to satisfy his Creditors, if he be
able. 93. That when any of that Monastery confesses a Nun or Recluse, he ought
to do it with decency in the presence of the Abbess. 94. That if the Temptation
to prevent a Good Work be strong, they ought to desist till they have prevailed
against it. 95. That they rely not on their own wisdom nor strength, but upon
God in all emergences, and on all occasions.

Thus St. Basil enjoined this Holy Order, as they more largely appear in his
Works, which were religiously and devoutly observed; and indeed contain in them
the whole Body of the Christian Religion. As to the principal Heads proposed,
and what therein may appear ceremonious, was enjoined, no doubt, for Decency,
and the better regulating the affairs of the Monasticks, whose tenants were
much to be commended: Nay, following the example of St. Paul, they labored
with their own hands, and became so industrious, that their Monastery was
called the place of Exercise, and they the Exercisers, as Hospinian out of
Budaeus observes; as for the Garments enjoined them, they were white, plain and
decent.

Subsequent to these, St. Hierom, after he had lived with diverse of his
Followers in the Desert of Syria, to avoid his seeing those vices, in those
that made an external profession of Christianity, which he could not redress,
betook himself, with his Company, to a Monastery in Syria, founded by a Noble
Roman Lady, near the Stable in Bethlehem, where our Blessed Savior was born.
There he and his Companions lived diverse years, spending the time in Devotion
and Meditation Writing and Instructing those that cam^ to him in the knowledge
of the Gospel truths, so that his fame, for Piety and Learning, spreading
abroad, many Noble Youths came and were instructed by him. As for the Monks of
his Order they were accounted very devout, and distinguished from others, by
wearing Swart or Brown colored Garments, having a plaited Cloak over their
Coat, a Leathern Girdle with which they girded themselves, as also wooden
Shoes; they were called Hieronimiam, and flourished after his death, who
changed this life for one more Glorious, in the 91 year of his Age, and of
Christ 421.

There was likewise an Order-of Eremites of St. Hierom, instituted by Charles
Granellus, a Florentine, about the year of Christ 1365. which flourished
chiefly in Italy and Spain, procuring, by their Piety and Industry, large
Revenues from Charitable Benefactors, etc.

CHAP. II. A Discourse of the Religious Orders of Monks, or Canons-Regular, and
Eremits Instituted by St. Augustine; their Habit, manner of Living, etc. with
the Opinion of some in relation to the Monks, etc. Shaving their Crowns. A
Discourse in general of Religious Orders, and their strict Observance.
ST. Augustine, that great Pillar of the Church, being miraculously Converted
and withdrawn from the debaucheries of his Youth, thought with St. Paul, that
he ought to labor more abundantly for his former remissness, and therefore
bent his Study to do what might most tend to the Conversion of Souls; wherefore
being made Bishop of Hippo in Africa, he founded a Monastery within the Church,
where himself resided with many Learned men as in a College, sending, as he saw
occasion, diverse Learned men from thence to Preach the Gospel, and persuade the
people to renounce those Errors, or erroneous Opinions that had been Imposed
upon them, or Instilled into them by False-Teachers: And to him is attributed
the Institution of three Orders, viz. Eremites, Monks, and Canons-Regular. Yet
Authors give but a very slender account of the two first, though many have
since professed to live after his Rules: As the Scopetini, instituted by
Stephen, and James of Sena, and confirmed by Gregory, the Eleventh Bishop of
Rome, Anno 1408. The Trisenarii, otherwise called Lateraneses, who had their
beginning in the Province of Hetruria near Luca, and confirmed by Eugenius, the
Fourth Bishop of Rome. The Order of St. George in Alga, instituted by
Laurentius Justinianus at Venice, Anno 1407. and ratified by John the 22 Bishop
of Rome, who are habited in Blew, with many others, of whom I shall have
occasion to speak hereafter.

The Habit of the Canons-Regular is a white Cloth Coat open before, reaching
down to their Feet, and girded to their Body; over it they wear a White
Surplice reaching to their Knees, and over that a short Black Cloak not
exceeding their Elbows, with a Hood fastened to it, having their Crowns shaven
like Friars: When they go abroad they wear a broad Hat, or a black cornered Cap.

After the Example of the Canons-Monastical, were other Canons erected, styled
Ecclesiastical Canons, who had no Abbot, but were governed by their Bishop.
These had still their residence near the Cathedral Church, which was frequently
called Monastery, and whilst they lived up to the strictness of their Order,
were called Regular; but interessing themselves in worldly business, the word
Regular was changed to Secular, as Volateran will have it. That there were
Monasteries of the Order in Europe 4555. though now there are many of them
converted to other uses, for of 700. which he affirms to have been in Italy,
not 70 are extant, or at least that are in possession. He further adds, that
out of this Order have sprung 30. Popes, and 300. Cardinals.

As for the Order of Eremites, the account in short is, that they wore a Black
Coat, with a Hood of the same color, having underneath it a little White Coat,
with a Girdle of Leather, at the end of which was a Buckle of Horn. As yet
Shaving was not generally used, especially that of the Beard, though some will
have it, that many in the Primitive Times did imitate St. Peter therein, who
being shaven by the Gentiles at Antioch, gloryed in what they accounted a Shame
and despite: though Bellarmine and others seem to refer it to a Decree of the
Fourth Council of Toledo, Anno Christi 631. But the matter in this case being
of no considerable weight or moment, I shall wave it, and give the Opinions of
some, why Monks and Clerks are shaven amongst Christians on the top of the
Head; and they hold it as the sense of those that enjoined it, viz. That the
hair hanging round their Heads like a Circle, should put them in mind of the
Crown of Thorns, worn by our blessed Savior, and to resemble it. To intimate,
That Christ's Priests are Spiritual Kings: That by shaving of the Hair they
signify the laying aside all superfluity of the flesh, and sinful lusts: That
by the nakedness of the Crown of the Head, is showed the mind ought to be free
for contemplation, as also purity and simplisity of Life, to show their
repentance and conversion, for such were commanded to cut their Hair before
they were again admitted into the Church: And further, that in the Primitive
times the Christian Monks cut their Hair to distinguish them from the Jewish
Nazarites, who wore long Hair, as Moses did a Veil, to signify the Mystery of
Redemption was not yet revealed: That they cut their Hair likewise to show
their Contempt of the world, and of those effeminate men who gloryed in long
Hair, as an Ornament of Pride.

As for the shaving of the Beard, it is held to be done, that they might look
smooth like Children, and Angels, who are always represented youthful; and by
this is meant that they should be harmless and free from malice as the first,
and innocent as the latter. These are the Opinions of some who have undertaken
to give the sense of the first Practisers, with much more to the same purpose,
which is probable enough, though whether so or otherways I shall not undertake
to determine.

Having spoken somewhat in particular as to the Religious Orders in the
Primitive Times, I shall now proceed, for brevities sake, to speak in general,
relating to their Exercise and Institution, viz. They labored upon several
occasions, Eat and Drank moderately, went decent in Apparel, Fasted and Prayed
often, possessed their Goods (such as they had) in common, Preached, Meditated,
read the Scriptures, studied Modesty, Obedience, Temperance, Humility and
Silence. They were divided into Tens and Hundreds, every nine having their
Decurio or Tenth man, every hundred their Centurio, to whom the Decurio's were
subject. They lay in distinct Beds, and at the ninth hour went to hear Sermons,
and to Sing. At the Table they sat silent, and for the most part contented
themselves with Bread, Herbs, and Salt; Wine was only permitted to those that
were stricken in years. In the Nightime they had their set hours of Prayer;
Dining only in the Summer time without any Supper. Their Chief Governor they
called their Father, and Abbot in the Syriack; he generally being a man of
great Learning, and Eminent for an Exemplary Life. They wore Hoods and Girdles,
went with Staves, and Scrips of Goat Skins: and some again, especially those in
Egypt, wore no Shoes, they served one another by turns, and knew their places,
humbling themselves by washing each others Feet, ever most devoutly observing
the Sixth, Ninth, and Third hour for Prayer: Nor were they admitted till they
had given Ten days attendance without the Gate, and patiently suffered the
Indignities and Reproaches of the Gentiles; then the Abbot read them a Lecture
of Humility, Patience, Obedience, Sobriety, Submission, Mortification,
Self-denial, and Confession of their Infirmities, then they received the Habit,
and remained a whole year under the strictest Discipline. And if a dislike in
that space happened on either side, they had free leave to take the Clothes they
brought, and depart: No Offenses were connived at, but on the contrary punished
with public Humiliation, the offender after having acknowledged his
Transgression, lying flat on the ground till the Abbot commanded him to rise;
this was the punishment of small Offenses, but for greater, greater punishments
were awarded, as Stripes and Expulsion. At the Table (to be taken off from idle
Talk and vain Imaginations) they were to attend to such portions of Scripture
as were appointed to be read, that so their minds might be fed as well as their
Bodies. The subjection of those Primitive Monasterys, was in chief to the
Bishop of the Diocese wherein they were situate, nor could they go abroad, or
any exceed their bounds without his leave. And thus they lived in a happy
contented estate, despising worldly vanities in expectation of being rewarded
in the world to come with lasting Joys, which this cannot afford.

CHAP. III. A Discourse of the Institution of Nuns, and their Monasteries; what
they Profess, and how Received. The Manner of Consecration of Monks and Nuns in
the Primitive times, and how they were Received.
THat Women were no less devout than Men in the Primitive Times, it is
wonderfully apparent, not only in Holy Writ, but in the writing of the Fathers.
Nor amongst others can we be ignorant of the memories of Eustochium, Marcella,
Sophronia, Principia, and Paula, who vowing Chastity, and a contempt of worldly
things, betook themselves to a retired Life, and in hopes to gain an immortal
weight of Glory, left their Parents, Riches, and large Possessions, though in
those times they were not kept to strictness, but might return if they saw
convenient; but most of them being ravished with the contemplation of Holy
Things, Renounced all Converse, unless with such as were their Companions, and
still employed themselves in Holy Duties, and Works of Compassion and Charity.

The first Nunnerys we find in the Writings of the Fathers, that could be
termed a Settlement for Religious Women, were founded in the Reign of
Constantine the Great, when God gave his Church peace. For in the storm of
Persecution, the Condition of the Christians was uncertain, their places of
Religious Worship obscure, and remote from Cities and Towns, nay in Caves and
Deserts, as I have already spoken: And Religious Women for fear of being
ravished in despite, by the enemies of the Gospel, rarely made a public
Profession of Chastity: But when they found they might do it with safeguard of
their Honor, they made it their Glory, and though born of Noble Parentage,
they applied themselves in their recluses and retirements to study Modesty,
Frugality, Patience, Obedience, Submission, Silence, and were enjoined to go
plain and neat in apparel; not to converse with men, nor to walk alone; not to
Bathe, unless their Feet and Hands; to Pray and Fast often; to wash poor
Peoples Feet in token of Humility; not to be idle, but rather Sing, Pray, Read,
hear, or perform some curious Work with the Nedle, or otherwise. They were
prohibited shaving by the Council of Gangra. Can. 17. Though some of the Nuns
in Egypt did cut their Hair: And in the Reign of Jovinian, because the lustful
Donatists defloured diverse Nuns, it was made Capital for any man to marry or
solicit a Nun, and such married Couples were excommunicated by the Church, had
perpetual Imprisonment, or were put to Death by the Civil Magistrate, and the
Marriage absolutely disanulled.

As for the Consecration of Monks in the Primitive Times; the Monk after
Prayers and Exhortation made by the Priest, was signed with the Sign of the
Cross, and his Hair Cut or Shaven, and being stripped, the Monastical Habit put
upon him, and with other holy Men present, was made partaker of the Divine
Mysteries.

As for Nuns they were usually Consecrated by the Bishop or Priest, who covered
them with a Veil, the Abbess or Abbotess upon pain of Excommunication not
daring to attempt it. Twenty five years of age were the years of Discretion,
then held for a Virgin to be Veiled, but now Twelve is accounted a sufficient
number. The days for receiving the Veil and Consecration, were Epiphany and
Easter Eve, or the Festival Days of the Apostles, unless in case of death, and
then the Virgin to be Consecrated, was usually presented to the Bishop in her
Nuns Attire, standing at the Altar, with Music and burning Tapers, when
putting on the Veil he used to express these words, viz. Behold, Daughter, and
forget thy People, and thy Fathers House, that the King may take pleasure in
thy Beauty, to which the people saying Amen, the Veil is cast over her, and the
Religious Women and Virgins present Kiss and Embrace her; after which the
Bishop blessing her, and praying for her, she departs to her place, to be
instructed by her Seniors in good Works. And thus much may suffice as to the
Primitive Times etc. Primitive we may call them, because Christianity was then
in a manner in its Infancy, and the splendour of the Visible Church, though in
Devotion great, was not so Apparent or Conspicuous as it afterward was by its
increase of Riches, Power, and the multiplying of Religious Orders. Wherefore
to come nearer to our times, I shall in the next place give you an account of
the Original and Progress of the Benedictine Monks, or Monks of the Order of
St. Benedict or Benet, and what other Orders sprung from them, etc.

CHAP. IV. A View of the Order of the Benedictine Monks, their Institution and
manner of Living, and Habit: The Rules enjoined them by St. Benet, and the
Council of Aquisgran or Aix, with what relates to the Nuns of that Order, and
what to their Superiors, etc.
BEnedict, or Benet, being born in Vmbra, a Province or Country in Italy, gave
himself much to the Contemplation of Holy Things; and not having such
opportunity as he desired in popular places, by reason of the continual Wars
and Tumults, he withdrew himself into the Deserts, where he remained not so
secretly, but he was found out and followed by multitudes of people, which made
him leave his Solitude, and go to Cassinium, an ancient Town, and there it was
he prescribed Laws or Rules to his Followers under the style of Monks, and is
reported to have Founded twelve Monasteries, placing over them twelve Abbots
that had been his Disciples and Followers. And at Cassinium the principal
Monastery, which was endowed by Turtullius a Roman Patrician, Equitius a
Senator, and others who followed their Example, with Castles, Villages, and
Lands to a great Revenue: And so successful was this Order, that in a short
time it spread it self all over Germany, France, Spain, Sicily, England, and
other Countries. In France the first Monastery was founded near Orleance by
Maurus, Son to Equitius the Senator, who was of the Benedictine Order,
consisting of 140 Brothers, that Number not to be lessened or increased.
Placidus, Son to Turtullius the Patrician, founded another in Sicily; and
Benedict by the assistance of Leobardus founded one in Alsatia near Strasburg;
he planted a Monastery likewise near the Latteran Church in Rome, in the time
of Pelagius. And by Donatus, a Benedictine Convent was erected in Spain, in or
near the year of Christ 590. And by the Encouragement and Countenance of
Augustine Archbishop of Canterbury, this Order began to spread in England,
Anno 596. As it did in Germany, Anno 545. by the Influence of Boniface Bishop
of Mentz, who gave great encouragement to those of the Order. But in process of
time these Benedictines divided themselves into diverse Branches or Sects, viz.
the Cluniacenses Ordained and Promulged by Otho, an Abbot in Burgundia, on whom
William, Dean of Aquitain, bestowed a Village named Mastick, Anno 916. The
Camalduenses were erected on the top of the Appenine Hills by Romoaldus a
Benedictine: And those called Vallisumbrenses, from Villis Vmbrosa the place of
their Situation, were erected by a Florentine named Gaulbertus, Anno 1060. The
Montelinetenses were erected by Bernard Ptolomeus at Scienna in Tuscany, Anno.
1047. The Grandimontenses were erected much about the same time by Stephen, a
Noble French man. The Cistertians, who derive their denomination from
Cistertium in Burgundy, were not long after erected by Robert Abbot of
Motismenia; and of this Order was St. Bernard who was Abbot of Claravalis,
about the year of Christ 1098. and from him, in process of time, his Monks were
called Bernardines, though they are the same with the Cistertians, saving the
Bernardines wear a Black Gown over a White Coat, and the other White Garments
only. The Celestini, deriving their Denomination from Pope Celestine the Fifth,
were founded by him, and by Gregory the Tenthconfirmed in the General Council
held at Lions in France.

These were, as I have said, the branches of the Benedictine Order, mostly
following the same Rules, yet differed in the Color of their Garment, for the
Camalduenses, Montelinetenses, and Cistertians wear White, whilst the Monks
called Valisumbrosa or Shadow-Valley wear Purple, the Celestines Sky Color or
Blew, and the Grandimontenses a Black Cloak over a Coat of Mail.

As for Benet or Benedict, he may be properly termed the Author or Founder of
each respective Religious Order, or the dependent Orders from his time, till
the Dominicans and Mendicants took place: So that Trithemius in the Fourth
Chapter of his Fourth Book, reckons no less than fifteen thousand Abbeys, which
produced a number of Learned men, as Cardinals, Archbishops, and Bishops, etc.
As for the Gregorian Order, it was a branch of the Benedictines, Gregory the
Great being a Monk of that Order; who, after the decease of his Father, erected
six Monasteries in the Isle of Sicily, and turned his own House in Rome into a
Monastery, dedicating it to St. Andrew, ascribing to his Monks, or the Persons
by him convened, the Rules of St Benet, which in general were to be obedient to
their Superiors, observe the appointed and seasonable Times for Divine Worship,
to be industrious in such matters as were enjoined them, and to live in
Brotherly Love and Kindness one toward another, and in particular much the
same that was enjoined by St. Basil before recited. Decency and strictness in
all Affairs, especially in those of Importance, being necessarily required; and
briefly what follows as to Religious Rules relating to this Order, were
prescribed and approved by the second General Council of Aquisgran or Aix, in
the 816. year after Christ; which was,

That the Laymen or Secular Priests should not be received into the
Monasteries, unless they would become Monks. That the Monks take an Oath, that
in Preparation week they take nothing but Water and Bread. That before they go
to sleep the Prior sprinkle them with Holy Water, and that of their Alms the
tenth part be given to the Poor. That without the Priors leave they bathe not
themselves, and that they sing pecular Psalms for the Dead. That they bow not
their Knees, nor Fast, but that they see in the Ember week they do it; as
likewise on the Eves of the Apostles. That in case of necessity the Brothers
support themselves with Staves, and when any Theft happens amongst them that
cannot be discovered readily, that then they be suspended from Supper until the
Criminal confess the Fact. That at Christmas and Easter, for the space of eight
days, those that are so minded may feed on the flesh of Fowl, and that they
learn their Rules by heart. That in the Mills, Kitchen, and in other necessary
Offices, they observe at seasonable times to work with their own hands. That in
case of Offense, the Offender prostrate himself before the Prior or Abbot, and
in humility acknowledge his Offense; and that they refrain to Kiss or Salute
Women. That they wash in Lent each others Feet; and that the Abbot, at the
receiving the Lords Supper, Wash and Kiss the Feet of the Monks: That it be
observed at Christmas, Easter, and in Whitson Week Discourses be refrained in
the Cloister, and that they give themselves up to the hearing of Sacred Things.
That the Abbot exceed not the proportion of his Monks in Eating, Drinking,
Lodging, Clothing, and Sleeping; that he ramble not often abroad, but that he
labor with his Hands. That after the refection of the Brothers, the Servants
attendant on the Monastery eat by themselves, but that they should have the
same Lessons read to them. That Hallelujah be not repeated in the Septuagesima.
As for the Novices, they must neither be Clothed nor Shaven as the Monks, till
the time of their Probation be expired, and promise of Obedience made. That
none be the Monks Superior, but such an one as is a Monk. That in Lent they
work till the ninth hour, and then hear Mass, and take their refection in the
Evening. And these are the Principal Duties enjoined to the Monks of of this
Order, who at first being Laymen, without any Priests, but such as they had
from abroad, are now permitted to have Priests of their own Order, chosen from
amongst themselves, and that they should be capable of receiving Tithes,
Oblations, Donations, and First Fruits as other Priests; and this benefit was
confirmed to them by Gregory. the Great, Boniface, and other Bishops of Rome,
as Gratian witnesses.

The Habit and Diet of the Benedictine Monks, they are generally these, viz. A
Round Coat, a Hood called Cuculla Cappa, and Melos from Melis a Brock, of whose
Skin they were first made. A Scapular so called from its covering the
Shoulders; in Summer their Hoods are single, but in Winter lined: Nor were they
wont to wear Breeches but in case of Traveling; as for their upper Garment it
is Black, and that under it a White Woollen Coat, and formerly they wore
Sackcloth, and went Booted, and indeed in Coarser Garments than now they do; as
likewise in their Diet there is much alteration, as to the quantity and
quality. As for those that are desirous to be better informed herein, let them
consult Polydore Virgil, Hospinian, Sebelicus, etc.

As for the Abbots, each Monastery chooses its own from amongst the Monks,
either by a General Consent, or the Major Part of Voices; but if any Monastery
do not find one within it self capable of that Charge, liberty is given to
choose an Abbot out of another. Nor is it in the power of those that Elected
him to Depose him when Elected, nor must he have more than one Monastery under
his Charge, being likewise prohibited meddling with Secular Affairs. If he
commit any grievous Offense, his Punishment must be in another Monastery, and
not in his own, because of the strict Subjection and Obedience wherewith his
Monks are bound. If an unfit man be chosen, the Bishop of the Diocese,
assembling the Neighboring Abbots may depose him and choose another, whom the
Monks must accept. Nor is the Bishop restrained from visiting the Monasteries,
to see whether the Rules be observed; and that no Imbezlement be made, for the
Abbot without his consent ought to dispose of nothing that may prejudice the
Revenues; and if the Abbot shall refuse to submit to the Bishop in this or the
like case, he is suspended from the Communion till he acknowledge his Fault and
repent. If a Clergyman be chosen Abbot, he must relinquish his Function: What
is conferred upon the Monastery by Benefactors, the Abbot must not convert to
his own Use, nor ought any man to erect a Monastery without the Bishops
Consent; nor must the Abbot travel far without his leave; nor ought the Bishop
himself to do any thing to the Prejudice of the Monastery, for if he do, the
Abbot may appeal from the Bishop to the Prince, or to a Council. And indeed
there are Monasteries that are only subjected to the Pope, as Cassinium. The
Monastery of St. Maximinus near Trevers is subject to the Pope in Spirituals,
and to the Emperor in Temporals, but the Abbots swear Allegiance and Fealty to
the Pope only, though formerly the power of Electing Abbots was in the Prince
of the Country, in which the Monastery was situate, and the manner was by
putting a Staff and Ferula into his Hand, thereby to mind him of his Pastoral
Office, as testify Breschius, Balaeus, and Hospinian.

As for the Nuns of this Order they were Instituted by Scholastica, Sister of
St. Benedict or Benet, who erected an Order of Nuns after her Brothers Rule;
but as to what is more particular, they are not permitted to be Godmothers in
Baptism, nor unless in case of necessity to go abroad, and that must be with
some Ancient Woman. The greatest part of their Divine Worship to consist in
Singing, Meditation, and Prayer, observing the Canonical Hour; nor must they
speak with any man unless before two persons who must hear the Discourse, nor
without a years Probation must any be admitted into the Nunnery. If any be
found unchaste, she receives three Disciplines or Scourgings, and is to be fed
with Bread and Water for the space of a year under a strict Confinement; nor
must they wear Silks: Their Consecration and Veiling belongs to the Bishop
only, and being clothed with the Vestments of her Order, she kneeleth before
the Altar with two Tapers in her Hand, and the Gospel being read, the Bishop
prays for her perseverance in Patience, Chastity, Sobriety, Obedience, and the
like. As for the Abbatess she ought to be a Woman of Gravity and Discretion,
Religious and Vigilant over her Charge, not suffering the access of men, nor
after Sunset till Morning any man to speak with her self or her Nuns, though
at a distance; nor without the Bishops leave must she go abroad, and that leave
obtained she must substitute one to look to her Charge, and be speedy in her
return, having some Nuns to accompany her in her way: And to be qualified for
this trust she must be sixty years of Age or upwards; no man must be permitted
to enter unless the Priest to confess the Nuns, and he to stay no longer than
he is Officiating, a considerable distance being always allotted between the
Monasteries of either Sex, to prevent Scandal and Temptation: Nor by any means
must the Abbatess presume to lay hands on to Ordain a Priest, or Veil a Virgin.
And those that would be further satisied in this point, let them peruse Gregory
and the Council of Tours, Fo^ojulium the sixth of Constantinople, and that of
Paris, under Ludovicus and Lotharius. And thus Reader have I given you a
summary, and, as I hope, an impartial account of St. Benet's Order, or the
Order of the Benedictines, which flourished extremely in most parts of Europe;
from which I shall proceed to give you an account of such other Orders, as upon
its decay sprung up in the West, etc.

CHAP. V. A View of the Orders, Institutions, Confirmations, Rules, manner of
Living, Habit, etc. Of the Cluniacenses, Camaldulienses, Villasumbrasenses,
Sylvestrinii, Grandimontenses, Carthusians, Cestertines, Bernardines,
Humiliatii, Praemonstratenses, Gilbertines, Crucigeri, Hospitalarii,
Trinitarians, Bethlemites, Dominicans or Praedicants, Mendicants, their several
Orders, etc. as Augustines, Carmelites, Minorites, etc. Franciscans or Minors
and their Division in a Triplicity, with what else is convenient or necessary
to be known.
THe Benedictines, for the space of four hundred years, having flourished in
the Western part of the World, even from the time of Justinian, to Conradus the
First, which was about 900 years after Christ; and having somewhat derogated
from their Primitive Rules and Institutions, diverse persons undertook to reform
that Order, or rather to institute new ones, confining them mostly within the
compass of St. Bennets Rules, etc. Though for the most part, if not all of
them, making some new Additions or Statutes: And the first that we find to
undertake it, was one Berno who founded a Monastery near Cluniacum, over which,
before his Decease, he placed as Abbot one Odo; and from the situation of
their Monastery were called Cluniacenses. By their Rules the Abbot was bound to
eat with the Monks; that a revolting Monk returning to his Obedience, might be
three times received, or more, at the discretion of the Abbot. They renewed the
custom of dipping the Consecrated Bread into the Cup, which was before used, in
case of necessity, to sick persons, and sometimes to Children, and afterward
promiscuously used by all the Communion, till by Pope Julius, 340. years after
Christ, it was forbidden; but this Custom again revived Anno 580. but continued
not longer; it was interdicted by the third Synod of Baracara, and so ceased
till these Monks, Anno 920. revived it. In case any desire to be admitted into
their Order, they are brought to the Monastery, and there washed, clipped, and
shaved; when as their old Clothes being stripped off, they have new Clothes
put on, and are thereupon admitted, being enjoined Piety, Obedience, Chastity,
Labor, and Patience, little differing from the Benedictines in their Rules and
Orders, as witness Peter Cluniacensis, Bernard, Sebelicus, Cassander, and
others.

In or about the year 1030. as Sabelicus will have it, one Romualdus of
Ravenna, observing St. Benets Rules, not kept up to their Primitive strictness,
resolved upon erecting a new Order, and laid his Foundation in the Field of
Camaldulum, whence the Monks of his Order took the name of Camaldulenses. After
this Foundation he erected a Monastery on the top of the Appenine Hills, a
place there being granted him for that purpose by Modulus, who was induced
thereto by a Dream representing Ladders reaching to Heaven, on which he saw men
in White Clothing mounting upwards, fancying he beheld the Ladders on those
Hills, and that it signified the climbing of devout Christians to Heaven by
Faith. And the better to fulfill this Vision, Romualdus having built his
Convent or Monastery, gave his Monks White Hoods, enjoining them silence,
unless in time of Divine Service; and yet some to keep this Rule of Silence
more exactly, refuse to join with the rest, choosing to pray by themselves: Two
days in a Week, which they account their Fast, they subsisted with Bread and
Water only, sitting barefooted on the ground: About half a mile from this
Monastery are Wooden Crosses; the boundaries of Women upon strict penalties,
least they approaching the Monks walks, should tempt them to folly.

Subsequent to these are the Monks of Villa Vmbrosa, or Shaddow-Valley, called
from thence Villasumbrenses, and those were instituted by John Gualbert, by
birth a Florentine, Anno 1060. as it is generally held; who resolving to
renounce the world, came to this Valley, where he found two Monks, and there he
builded himself an House of Board; and his Pious manner of living soon spread
his fame, insomuch that not only the Layety flocked to visit him, but many
likewise of the Clergy: And the Lady of that Soil being an Abbotess, gave him
not only that ground, but other large Possessions; and by the Monks that
flocked to him being made Abbot, he enjoined them St. Benets Rules with
additions; that they should wear no other Clothes, but what they made of the
Wool of such Sheep, as should be brought up for their use in those Valleys; and
that they should burn Lights in the Dormitory and Chapel. Nor did he only
regard his own, but made a reformation in diverse Monasteries; placing Provosts
of his own election over them; building diverse Religious Places in Lombardy,
and elsewhere; and for that and his pious way of living being Canonized, his
Order was confirmed by Pope Alexander the Second, and Gregory the Seventh. And
those that would be further satisfied as to this Order, may read Surius de
vitis Sanctorum, Volateran, Sebelicus, Antonius, and others.

The Sylvestrini, so called from Sylvester, their Institutor, walk much after
the Rule and Habit of those Monks of Villa Vmbrosa, or Shaddow-Valley, taking
their beginning in Italy in the Marquisate of Ancona.

The Grandimontenses, according to Tradition, were Instituted upon an unknown
Voice, uttering three times distinctly, Grandi-Monte, in a great Hall, where
one Peter then hearing it was advized by it to build a Monastery, he being the
Disciple and Successor to Stephen, who Anno 1076. erected this Order on the
Hill Muretum in Gascony, and gave Rules little inconsistent with St. Benets,
though something was added of the Rules observed by the Canons-Regular of St.
Austin's Monks, and of his Eremites; after which he wandered through diverse
Deserts, wearing next his Skin a Coat of Mail, his Bed was hard without Straw
or Covering, his Hands and Knees with often kneeling and bearing on the ground
to kiss it, were hard as horn. This Order had an Abbot set over them by John
the Second Bishop of Rome.

The Order of the Carthusians, or Charter-Fryers, were instituted by one Bruno,
and as Tradition goes, on the following occasion, viz. Bruno, a Native of
Collen, and a Professor of Philosophy in Paris, about the year of Christ 1080.
being present at the singing the Office for his Fellow-Professor, deceased, a
man in no mean repute for his holy way of Living: The dead Corpse (by the help
of what power is uncertain) raised it self upon the Bier, and with a lamentable
voice cried out, I am in God's just Judgment Condemned, which words were three
several times distinctly repeated; at which Bruno was in so great a
consternation, that if a man reputed so pious was lost, what would become of
Him and his Fellows; the terror of which wrought so far in his mind, that he
concluded that there could be no safer way to prevent the like doom, than by
forsaking the world; whereupon with six of his Fellows or Disciples, he betook
himself to a dark place overshadowed with Woods, high Hills, and Rocks,
inhabited before only by wild Beasts, which he found out in the Province of
Dolphini, that place being called Carthusia, from whence his Monks took their
Denomination; and there obtaining ground of Hugo Bishop of Grenoble, they built
a poor Monastery, which Bishop afterward beholding their pious manner of Life,
became one of their Order. By their Rules they should wear Sackcloth, or a
Hair-shirt next their Skin, and over it a long loose White Cloth Coat, and when
they walk abroad a Hood and a Black Cloak over that; and that the Lay Brothers
wear a snort Coat reaching but to their Knees. As for flesh, by their Rule they
eat none at all, nor any fish unless given them; their Bread is a great part
Bran, and their Drink Wine mingled with Water. On Sunday and the fifth day of
the Week Cheese and Eggs are their only fare, on the third Pulse, or
Pot-hearbs, on the second, fourth and sixth, they subsist on Bread and Water.
They eat but once a day, and that apart, every one preparing what he eats,
unless on Festival days, and then they eat twice a day, sitting all together at
a Table, and then they may talk together; but at other times are enjoined to
keep silence, every one being accommodated with a peculiar Cell, in which he
Reads, Prays and Meditates, sometimes writing Books, etc. observing the
Canonical hour; but their Vespers and Mattins they keep in their Churches,
whence Women are excluded. On the Saints days and Festival days they hear Mass,
nor go they abroad unless the Prior and Procurator, and they not unless some
urgent affairs require it, relating to the Monastery: Some small parcels of
Land they have whereon they feed Sheep, Goats, and the like to give them Milk;
not cohabiting above twelve Religious men in a Convent, besides the Prior,
eighteen Lay Converts, and some few Servants to fetch in their Provision, who
are not admitted into the superior Quire, but have one by themselves; nor will
they re-admit any that has revolted: These were their Primitive Rules, but are
since somewhat moderated. Their yearly meeting is at a Chapter annually held at
Carthusia about their own affairs, two Monks being deputed to represent each
Cloister, being enjoined not to be absent from their Cells above fourteen days.
As for this Order it was confirmed Anno 1178. by Pope Alexander the Third, and
coming into England Anno 1180. seated themselves at Witham near Bathe, and of
them more at large you may read in Balaeus, Polidore Virgil, Vincentius, etc.

The Cestertian Order began about the year 1098. being founded by one Robert,
Abbot of Molismenia, who by the persuasion of one Robert Harding an Englishman,
forsook the society of the Benedictines, as not pleased with the indifferent
regard they had to their Primitive Strictness of living; and in the Company of
twenty one Monks came to Cestertium in Burgundy, and there erected a Convent,
resolving to revive, as it were, St. Benet's Rules, and strictly to observe
them; and professing Poverty and Humility, they would not suffer their Monks to
meddle with Husbandry, or any Secular matters; ordering, as St. Benet did, that
each Monastery should consist of twelve Monks and an Abbot, and are enjoined
silence, unless to the Abbot or Prior, and if any one escape, the Bishop
apprehends him, if he can be found in his Diocese, and obliges him to return;
two Coats and two Hoods, being all the Garments that are allowed them. They are
very strict in their Fasts, saluting Strangers by declining their Body and
Head, and in imitation of our Blessed Savior wash their Feet: and after a
third escape, no one is to be received into the Convent: And as for the Abbots
Table, it must be furnished for strangers; to relieve them on their journey.
Pope Vrbin the Second confirmed this Order, Anno 1100. and thirty two years
after they came into England in Gray Habit, wherefore by some they were called
Grisei.

The Bernardines, so called from St. Bernard, Abbot of Clarivallis, and differ
from the Cistertians but in that their Habit is Black; nor are they in
subjection to Bishops or Advocates; it being ordered by Pope Alexander the
Third, upon the refusal of the Bishop to bless the Abbot, one of the Monks of
this Convent might bestow the Benediction.

The Humiliati began their Order, about the Year of Christ 1164. They were a
people brought out of Lombardy into Germany, as Captives, by Frederick
Barbarossa, who warred upon that Country; and being tired with their long
Captivity, they attired themselves in white; and assembling (especially the
chief of them) together, they cast themselves with Tears and Supplications at
the Emperors feet, imploring him to give them leave to pass into their own
Country; which moving him to compassion he granted: And having Vowed to turn
Recluses, they built Monasteries, and mostly betook them to a Monastical life;
giving themselves to Fasting, Prayer, Meditation, and Working with their Hands
at making Cloth. Their Habit is a plain Coat, a Scapular, and a white Cloak
over it; and strictly observe St. Benet's Rules, with some small addition.
These were confirmed an Order by Pope Innocent the Third, and others that
succeeded him. The which, together with a larger discourse of these Monasticks,
you may find in Polydore, Sebelicus, Volateran, Antonius, Trithemius,
Crantzius, and the like Authors.

The Praemonstratenses were an Order Founded by one Robert, or as some will
have it, Norbert, Archbishop of Magdeburgh; who not relishing the Vanity and
Pride of some Ecclesiastics of those days, betook himself, with thirteen of
his Companions into a Forest, in the Diocese of Liege; and entering upon a
strict Life, he went barefoot, even in the Winter; preaching Repentance, Anno.
1119, and regulated their Actions by the Rules of St. Austin, which they say
were delivered to them in golden Letters. Their Habit is a white Coat with a
Linen Surplice, under a Cloak; and these were confirmed by Calixtus the
Second, by the Title of Canons Regular Exempt: Their Abbots are denied to wear
Gloves, Miters, and Staves, or Rings: All the Abbots of the Order in their
persons, or by their Deputies, are obliged to be present at Praemonstratum once
a year, to consult the good of the Order; and if any of them refuse, the rest
may inflict such Penalties as none but the Pope can take off. These Abbots have
likewise power to Excommunicate: If the Diocesian refuse to give Ordination,
they may require it of any other Bishop, he (by reason of their Exemption)
having no power over them. These and many the like Privileges Pope Innocent
the Fourth bestowed on them, after they were Confirmed; they having likewise
diverse Schools amongst them, for the Education of Youth. Their coming first
into England was about the year of Christ 1145. and having liberty from the
Pope to have Nunneries close to their Monasteries, they seated themselves in
Lincolnshire.

The Gilbertines took their denomination from one Gilbert, a Native of
Lincolnshire; who in the year 1148. instituted that Order, and Erected in a
little space Thirteen Monasteries; to whose Monks he prescribed diverse Rules,
taken out of those of St. Bennet and St. Austin; and had the Order confirmed by
Pope Eugenius the Third; his chief Monastery, or Cloister being at Semperingham
in Lincolnshire, in which were said to be Seven hundred Monks, or as some will
have them Friars, and Eleven hundred Nuns: And of this Order, as to its rise,
etc. Balaeus, Capgrave, Crezantius, and Trithemius, Sigebert's Continuator,
etc. witnesses.

The Cruciferi or Crucigeri, vulgarly called. Crouched Friars, were first seen
in England, Anno. 1244. having their first Monastery at Colchester; but are
said to be the Institution of Cyriacus Bishop of Jerusalem; in memory of the
Cross which Helena, Mother to Constantine the Great, found by his directions;
and therefore were enjoined when they went abroad to carry a Cross in their
Hands. And in the year 1215. they were Restored or Confirmed by Innocent the
Third, Bishop of Rome; or rather, as some believe, newly Instituted; and the
reason they give is, because the great Commotions raised in Rome, were
suppressed by the Croysados, or Army of Christians, who had the Cross for their
Badge, and were then going for Syria, against the Infidels. This Order was
ratified and confirmed by Pope Innocent the Fourth, and Pope Alexander the
Third, wearing a skiecolour'd Habit, by the appointment of Pope Pius the
Second. Polydore makes some scruple to believe, That the Grucigeri are the same
Order with those we have mentioned, because they wear black Cloaks, and carry,
not in their Hands, but have fixed on their Breasts, a Red and White Cross, and
observe St. Austin's Rules.

The Hospitalers of the Holy Ghost took their beginning at Rome, about the Year
of Christ 1201, and were called Hospitalarii confirmed by Pope Innocent the
Third; having the privilege of the Monks that preceded them. Their chief
business was to see the Poor and Sick were well lodged, attended, and carefully
provided for; as likewise to Bury them when they were dead, and use other
charitable Offices to the same purpose.

The Trinitarians, or Monks of the Order of the Trinity, began Anno 1211. and
were Founded by John Manta, and Faelix Anachoreta, who its said were warned in
a Vision to repair to Innocent the Third, and to require of him a place for
their Order; and he warned by the like means of their coming, approved and
confirmed them; clothing them both in white Cloaks; giving them as a Badge, a
red and skie-coloured Cross upon their Breasts, calling them Brothers of the
Holy Trinity, and Monks of the Redemption of Captives: Their charge being to
Collect Money for the Redemption of such as were taken Prisoners, and held in
Bondage by the Infidels. The first coming into England of this Order was Anno
1357. two parts of whose Revenues were allowed for their Maintenance, a third
for Redemption of Captives. By their Rule Three Clergymen, and as many
Lay-Brothers, were to dwell with one Procurator, who was to be called by the
Name of Minister: They were to wear Garments of white Cloth, and lodge in
Woollen, putting off their Breeches when they went to Bed: They might ride on
Asses, but not on Horses; Fasting is enjoined them, and not to eat Flesh but on
a Sunday, from Easter to Advent-Sunday, and from Christmas to
Septuagesima-Sunday; likewise on the Nativity, Epiphany, Ascension, Assumption,
Purification, and on all Saints days; being further enjoined to labor with
their Hands; and every Sunday to hold a Chapter, or Assembly, for regulating
their Affairs in the Convent, and in the Octaves of Pentecost a General Chapter
to be held every Year: As for their Minister he must be chosen by the Brothers
in common consent, being a Priest, every Convent having one over all, which
must be owned Superior; nor must any be admitted into the Order till past the
Age of Twenty, who must be shaven, though the Laymen are allowed their Beards,
and have enjoined them Rules for Civility, Continency, Love, Sobriety and other
Christian Virtues, according to the Rules of St. Basil, St. Benet. and St.
Augustine, etc.

The Bethlemites are another Order, who came into England about the Year 1257.
and had their abode near Cambridge, and soon after in it, and had a red Star on
their Breast, like a Comet, in Commemoration of the Star that appeared to
signify the Birth of our Savior to the Wisemen of the East: Their Apparel
being comparative to that of the Dominicans, or Praedicants, of which we shall
hereafter speak.

The Dominicans were so called from the Founder of their Order, viz. one
Dominicus a Spaniard; taking their original from the Humiliatii, and were Anno
1205, Instituted by Innocent the Third, Bishop of Rome: The main design of
their Institution being to Read, Preach, Write, and Expound the Word of God,
which gives the occasion of naming them Praedicants, or Praedicatories. As for
the Founder of their Order, by the aforesaid Bishop of Rome, Anno 1207. he was
joined with Twelve Abbots of the Cistertian Order, to preach against the
Doctrine of the Albigenses; and professing the Rules of St. Austin, with some
addition, he had his Order confirmed by Honorius the Third, Bishop of Rome,
dividing his Monastery into Three parts; one he allotted himself, and those
Brothers that were Contemplative; the second for Contemplative Sisters, and the
last for either Sex, if they were given to a stirring and active course of
Life, under the denomination of Brothers and Sisters of Saint Dominick, or the
Soldiers of Jesus Christ. The Dominicans are bound to renounce worldly Riches;
every Year to hold a General Chapter; to Fast as much as possible, from
Holy-Rood Day in September, till Easter; and at other times to eat no Flesh on
Fridays, unless in case of sickness. As for their lying it is to be in
Blankets; nor must they lie in Feather-Beds; silence is enjoined them, as
likewise to wear a white Coat under a black Cloak. That they be satisfied with
the Title of Friars Praedicants, to celebrate every Saturday the Office of the
Virgin Mary, unless in Lent, and on Festival Days; and that for the preaching
the Gospel, they disperse themselves through all parts of the World, choosing
them a general Master, whose subordinate Prelates should be styled Priors;
Dominicus himself being the first Master-General, Anno 1220. but he enjoyed it
not long, dying the next Year. As for the Praedicants they do not faithfully
promise to live according to these Rules, but to live up to them as well as
they can; and by their Preaching and Industry, they wonderfully spread
themselves into most parts of the World; insomuch that Sebelicus affirms, That
in the Year of Christ 1494. there were Monasteries of this Order, Four thousand
one hundred forty three, in which were found One thousand five hundred Masters
of Divinity, and One hundred and fifty Convents of Dominican Nuns; and the
cause of this great increase, is thought to proceed from the good Opinion the
World had of Dominicus, who gave himself up to a strict Life, and for which he
was Canonized by Gregory the Ninth, Anno 1233. and at this Day the Order is in
high esteem at Rome; and many Privileges were conferred upon them, as to
Preach in any Pulpit of a Roman Clergyman without asking leave of the Eishop,
to oblige Nobleman and Ladies to Confess to them, and not to their Curates; to
Administer the Sacrament when they think sit, and be utterly exempted from all
Ecclesiastical Censures; and these were confirmed by Pope Innocent the Fourth;
not are any that have taken this Order to change it. And of these things
testify Antonius, Vicentius, Theodoricus of Apolea in the Life of Dominicus,
Matthew Paris, Crantzius, and others.

The Mendicant Friars were of Four kinds, and amongst them the Praedicants (of
whom we have spoken were recorded) the rest were Augustinians, Carmelites, and
Minorites; and of these in their Order.

As for the Augustinians, their first Founder was William Duke of Aquitain,
about the year of Christ 1150. from whom they took the denomination of
Guilebelimites, and were enjoined by Innocent the Fourth to follow St. Austins
Rule; and Alexander the Fourth reduced these and all other Eremites to the same
Rule, being as Tradition goes warned so to do by St. Augustine, who appeared to
him and subjected them to a grand Prior, dispensing with their former Rules and
Observations, enjoining them to forsake the Deserts, and live in Cities, Towns,
and Villages, there to teach the people, giving them diverse privileges, which
were augmented by Honorius the Fourth, about the year 1290. Their Habit was a
Black Coat with a Hood of the same color, and under them a White short Coat
braced with a Leathern Girdle, and a Buckle of Horn, and came into England,
Anno 1252. and in a short time spread so fast, that they were reckoned two
thousand Convents, professing Poverty, Obedience, Fasting, praying, Meditating,
Modesty, Charity, Silence, and the like* That their Rules be read once a Week,
and observed not only by all the Canons Regular, and Eremites of St. Austins
Order, but by all Mendicants, except the Minors, as likewise by the Dominicans
and Servants of our Lady, etc.

The Monks or Eremites commonly called Carmelites, from Mount Carmel, from
whence they begun or sprung, were in the beginning a Striped Cloak, or Coat of
party color, in imitation of the Prophet Elijah, and spread themselves over
Syria and Egypt, living very devout; but Pope Honorius the Third, not thinking
it fit for a Religious Garment, prohibited it, and gave them a White Cloak and
Hood, with a Scapular of Hair-colour; the use of which Garments were confirmed
by Pope Nicholas, which so disgusted the Sultan of Egypt, that he banished them
his Dominions. These Honorius the Fourth called Brothers of the Virgin Mary,
exempting them from the jurisdiction of Princes and Bishops, and Gregory the
Ninth enjoined them not to seek Riches or Possessions, but to subsist by the
Charity they should beg from Door to Door. By Alexander the Fourth they were
allowed Prisons to punish such as revolted, and John the Twenty third took them
into his own protection; but in time neglecting their former strictness, they
divided into two Sects, one being called Observants, and the other
Non-observants. In their Cloisters many of them have the portraiture of John
the Baptist in the Habit of their Order, and the reason they give is, because
he was called Elijah, and they say Elijah did wear this Habit; but those called
Non-observants have changed their Hair-coloured Garments into Black.

The Franciscans, from which Order the Minorites sprung, or were an institution
of the Founder, took their Original from Francis, a Native of Italy, who living
extravagantly in his youthful days, at length left his Fathers House with a
great sum of money, with which, as it is said, he repaired diverse ruined
Churches, and for which his Father cast him in Prison and disinherited him; yet
striping himself of his Ornaments he greatly rejoiced, and in the end being
released from his Confinement, he gathered diverse Religious Persons as his
Associates and prescribed them Rules, Anno 1198. viz. That they shall persevere
in Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience to Christ, the Pope, and their Superiors;
that none enter that Order, till they be Examined and proved. That in Divine
Service the Clergy follow the Order of the Roman Church; and that the
Lay-Brothers say twenty four Pater nosters for their Mattins, etc. and that
they fast, as much as may be, from All Saints till Christmas, and that upon
their coming to an House they enter not till they say peace be to it, and then
what is set before them they may eat: That they keep their vow of Poverty, not
meddling with Wealth: That they help each other, and that Penance be inflicted
on those that have transgressed: That they have Public Meetings and Chapters,
and that they choose their Provincial Minister over the Fraternity: That their
Preachers be Learned men, not preaching abroad without leave of their Bishop:
That they use Brotherly Admonition and Correction, and that they give
themselves much to Prayer, Modesty, Temperance, and the like commendable
Virtues; and that none of them, unless authorized, enter into any Nunnery; and
that none undertake to convert Insidels, unless by the Permission and Direction
of the Provincial Ministers: That they all remain steadfast in the Catholic
Faith, not presuming to transgress these Orders. This Rule or Order, St.
Francis strengthened by his Will and Testament, which he enjoined to be read as
often as the Rules were read, and these were confirmed by Pope Innocent the
Third, and again by Honorius the Third, and Nicholas the Third in his Decretal
Epistles, which he enjoined to be read in Schools. This Francis declined the
calling his Order Franciscans by his Name but Minors, and so ordered the
Masters and Governors of his Order to be called Ministers, putting them in mind
of Humility, and of Christ's advice to his Disciples.

As for the Classes Francis divided his Disciples into, they were three; the
first was of the Friars Minorites, himself being one of them; the manner of
whose life was very strict and poor. The second was of Ladies and poor Virgins,
who taking their denomination from St. Clara, were called Clarissae, somewhat
less strict than the former. The third was that of Penitents, intended for
Married people, who were desirous of Penance, yet permitted to enjoy Goods and
Lands. The first of these were for Contemplation and Action; the second only
for Contemplation; and the third only for Action; wherefore it is not properly
called a Religious Order. These are called Friars Penitents of Jesus Christ,
and from their wearing Sackcloth, Saccii, and Continentes; because that certain
days in the Week, though married, they abstained from carnal knowledge of their
Wives. The Women of this rank were called Sisters Penitents, nor were the first
Order to permit any of the third to enter their Churches in time of Interdict.
This Order after its having been condemned in England Anno 1307. was again
advanced by Peter Tuxbury a Franciscan Minister, and allowed in the Chapter of
London.

Out of the Minorite Order sprung many distinctions of the Observantes,
Conventuales, Minimi, Capuciani, Colectanes, or Collectors of money, Amadeani
Reformati de Evangelio, Chiachini cum Barba de Portiuncula Pulini Bostaini
Gaudentes de Augustinis, who wore open shows, and Servientes.

As for Francis, he wore a short Coat undied, and going barefoot, used a Cord
instead of a Girdle; from whence after his decease, who dyed naked in external
poverty, a long debate happened what Garments should be worn; which being
proposed to Pope John the Twenty second, he referred it to the Arbitrament of
their General and Provincial Minister; So that of late they wear a long Coat, a
large Gray Hood or Hair-colour, the Coat girded with a Cord, going barefooted,
or in case of necessity with Sandals: Yet in this Order were some Schisms, and
the strict Rules neglected or thwarted, and during the vacancy of the Popedom,
after the decease of Clement the Fifth, for almost the space of two years,
these Monks rejected their Habit, and chose their own Governor or Master,
wearing a short Garment; Excommunicating and Imprisoning the Obedient; but
afterward a better understanding was had, and Gregory the Eleventh, limited the
power of the Minorites Protectors, That none should be under their Censure, but
those that disobeyed the Pope and the Church, that apostatize from the Faith,
and renounce the Rule. And Honorius. the Third decreed, that not one of them
should change or forsake his Order; and they obtained the favor that they
might Commence or make Masters of Divinity amongst themselves.

The Franciscan Order soon spread it self in all parts; insomuch that from Anno
1211. till the year 1380. as Sebellicus affirms, 1500. Monasteries of this
Order were erected in Christendom, and in his time were reputed to be 90000.
Minorites. And thus much of these Orders, from whence we proceed to those of
lesser Note or Antiquity.

CHAP. VI. A Brief Account of diverse Orders, and Institutions of either Sex, as
the Clarissae, Eremites of St. Paul, Monks of St. Mary, Celestini Jesuati; the
Order of St. Bridget, and that of St. Katharine; Canons Regular of St. Savior,
and of St. George Albati, with many others.
CLara was the Daughter of Ortubana, born in the Town of Assisium in -- who
from her Infancy, in a manner, was wonderfully given to Devotion, and desirous
to lead a Religious Life; so that as soon as she was able, she undertook two
tedious Pilgrimages, one to Rome, and the other to visit the Holy Sepulcher at
Jerusalem; and stole from her Parents (who would have restrained it) that she
might cut off her Hair, nor by any persuasion could she be brought to renounce
her intended course of Life: but about the year 1215. She instituted at the
Church of St. Damianus, the Order of the poor Ladies and Virgins, called from
her Clarissae, and from that place were sometimes called Nuns of St. Damian;
and in a Cottage near to this place lived she 4.2. years, afflicting her self
with Watching, Fasting, and all manner of hardship, lying on Boards, and
wearing next her flesh the hairy side of a Hogs skin, going barefoot, and in
Lent, and on other fasting days, subsisted on Bread and Water, not tasting Wine
but on the Sunday, giving as her Rule that of the Franciscans, and had her
Order confirmed by Innocent the Third, or as some will have it, Honorius the
Third; nor by Pope Gregory could she be persuaded to reserve any of her
Possessions, but lived and died in Poverty and was Canonized.

The Eremites of St. Paul were Anno 1215. Instituted in Hungary after the Rules
of St. Augustine, by one Eusebius of Strigonium, and by Gentilis the Popes
Legate, confirmed Anno 1308. and seated themselves at Colchester in England,
about the year 1310.

The Order called Boni Homines, or Boni Viri, Good Men, was instituted by
Edmund, Son to Richard Earl of Cornwall, who had been elected Emperor of
Germany, or the Roman Empire, and wore a Skie-coloured Garment, following St.
Augustine's Rules.

The Monks or Servants of St. Mary were Instituted by Philip Tuder, a
Florentine, after St. Austin's Rules; the Garment or Habit of this Order, was a
Black Cloak plaited about the Shoulders, and under it a short Coat, and was
confirmed by Benet, the Eleventh Bishop of Rome, and by seven other Popes or
Bishops succeeding him, being permitted to carry a Satchel or Bag to gather
Alms, which in Italy they beg: The Institution of this Order was Anno 1282. or
as some will have it 1285.

The Celestini were so named from Celestine the First, Bishop of Rome, who
before his advancement lived as an Eremite in sundry Deserts, and erected this
Order, enjoining the Monks St. Bennet's Rules, procuring them to be confirmed
by Pope Gregory the Tenth, in the General Council of Lions, ordaining their
Habit to be of Sky-colour without a Hood. These Monks came into England, 1414.

The Jesuati was an Order that began at Senae, and founded by John Columbanus,
and Francis Vincent, in the year 1365. and were so called from their often
using the Name of Jesus, who being approved by Pope Urban the Fifth, he
appointed them to wear White Garments, a White Cover for their Heads, a
Leathern Girdle, and to go barefooted, with only wooden bottoms tied about
their Feet, and for their plainness of life and sincerity were afward called
Apostolici.

The Order of St. Bridger, both Monks and Nuns were instituted by a Princess of
Sweden of that Name, Anno 1360. who obtained a confirmation of her Order from
Pope Urban the Fifth, according to St. Basil's Rules in the general, though
with some additions: The Monks and Nuns of this Order, are not debarred their
Religious Houses to be far separated the one from the other, and to be present
at one and the same Church. As for the Brothers it is their business, according
to injunction, to officiate below, while the Sisters do the like above: As for
the Clothing of both Sex, Crey was enjoined, viz. a Cloak-Coat and a Red Cross
thereon. As to Sustenance or that wherewith they subsisted, it ought to be
common amongst them, and their Lodging to be only on Straw. The Nuns were
enjoined to wear on their Veil, a White Linen Crown spotted or streaked with
Red Cloth imitating drops of Blood, and so placed that they may appear like a
Cross. As for the Sisters they are directed what Prayers to use every day;
enjoined silence and to avoid conferring with men, except upon urgent
occasions, and that through a Window, but she who opens not her Window at all
has the most praise. As for their Consecration, it is from the Bishop, and
their Confession through a Lattice, where they may be heard, but not seen,
unless upon receiving the Sacrament. When any one enters the Convent she has
her Coffin carried before her by four Sisters, and in the Convent is a Grave to
put them in mind of their mortality; as for their Devotion it is enjoined very
strict, as likewise are all the other matters relating to the Order. More of
which you may see in Antonius, Trithemius, Balaeus, Nauclerus, etc.

The Order of St. Katharine is according to the Rules of Dominicus; the story
going, That she saw him with the Founders of diverse other Orders in a Dream,
and he having a Lilly in his hand, bid her undertake some of their Orders,
which made her choose his. She was born at Sena in Tuscany, and vowed Virginity
in her Childhood; and after she professed this Order drank only Water, and eat
Bread and Herbs, lying in her Clothes upon the Boards, and afflicting her self
with an Iron Chain, watching often, and giving her self much to Devotion,
chastizing her self for her own sins, for the Dead, and for those that were
Alive. The Nuns of St. Katharine's Order wore Garments of White, cast over with
a Blcak Veil and Head Covering, and is held to begin Anno 1372. or as some will
have it 1455.

Lodovicus Barbus, a Venetian, instituted the Order of Justinian, in the year
1409. after the Rule of S. Benet, which was by Eugenius the Fourth, Bishop of
Rome, enlarged, and by John the Twenty fourth, Bishop of Rome confirmed. As for
the Monks of this Order they lived very strictly, never eating out of their
Convent with Laymen, unless great necessity urged it; and being very charitable
to strangers, they often washed their Feet, etc. As witness Hospinian, Polidore
Virgil, Franciscus, Modius, Antonius, etc.

The Eremites of the Order of St. Hierom were enjoined the Rule of St. Austin,
being instituted in Vrbinum, a City of Vmbria in Italy, about the year 1366.
during the Papacy of Pope Gregory the Ninth, and by Gregory the Twelfth
confirmed; and there were of this Order in Italy twenty five Convents, and are
little different in Habit and other matters from St. Hierom's Monks, etc.

The Canons of St. Savior had their beginning in Italy, at a place called
Seopetum, whence they took the denomination of Scopetines, and follow the Rules
of St. Austin: Their first Institution was by Francis of Bononia, in the Year
1366. during the Papacy of Urban the Fifth, and were by Gregory the Eleveth
confirmed, in the Year 1370. wearing a white Cloak and Hood, under the Cloak a
Linen Vestment, etc.

The Abbati took their Denomination from the white Linen Vestments they wore.
This Order, in the time of Pope Boniface the Ninth, descended the Alps into
Luca, Flaminea, Hetruria, Pisa, and other Italian Countries. Their principal
Priest, or Conductor being clothed in White, and carrying a Crucifix in his
Hand, made a more than ordinary pretense to strictness in Religion; weeping for
the Sins and Calamities of the Times, eating together in Highways, and lying
promiscuously; and they increased so fast, that Pope Boniface the Ninth,
growing jealous that their Priest aimed at the Popedom, apprehended him and put
him to death; whereupon his Followers dispersed themselves; but these, together
with the Fratricelli and Turlupini, being by many termed Broachers of Heritical
Opinions, and scarce to be ranked amongst Religious Orders, I shall for
brevities sake pass them over.

The Montolivetenses, or Monks of Mount Olivet, had their beginning 1407.
betaking themselves to a Hill which they called Mount Olivet, professed St.
Bennet's Rules, and clothed themselves in white Garments, getting their Order
to be confirmed by Pope Gregory the Twelfth; and before these there were
several of the said Denomination, but Pope Boniface the Eighth disannulled
them, as witnesses Fran. Sebellicus, and others.

The Canons Regular of St. George, by some called Apostolici, were Founded by
Lawrence Justinian, Patriarch of Venice, in the year 1407. Their Order was
confirmed by Gregory the Twelfth; their Habit was a Linen Surplice over their
other Clothes, and a black Hood; but being out of the Cloister, they wore a
black Cloak and Hat: And of these were Two other Orders, the one wearing Blew,
and the other White; and except in time of sickness, they abstained from Flesh,
nor were they by any Vow tied to the Rules of their Profession.

The Mendicants of St. Hierom were instituted Anno 1407. by Charles Florentine;
and Pope Gregory the Twelfth confirmed their Rule according to that of St.
Austin: As for their Garments they are of a dark colored Cloth, wearing a
plaited Cloak uppermost, having likewise a Leathern Girdle and Wooden Shoes.

The Canons of Lateran seem to derive their original from St. Austin; these by
Pope Calixtus were expulsed with Saint John Lateran, but were again seated
there by Pope Paul the Second; their Hoods, Scapulars, and Cloaks are black.

The Monks of the Order of the Holy Ghost, were, Anno 1407. Instituted by
Gabriel of Spoletum, at Venice; using the like Habit as the Canons Regular.

The Brothers of St. Ambrose ad Nemus, had their institution at Millan; and
were Confirmed Anno 1433. professing St. Austin's Rules, and wearing
dark-colored Clothes.

The Minimi of Jesu Maria, were the Institution of Francis Paula, a Sicilian,
Anno 1471. who made Three Rules, one for the Brothers, another for the Sisters,
and the third enjoined to both Sexes. They were enjoined to observe the Ten
Commandments and the Church Laws, to be obedient to the Pope, to persevere in
their Vows of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, as also to Fast: This was
allowed by Jalius the Second, Innocent the Eighth, Alexander the Sixth, Sixtus
the fourth, and Leo the Tenth; they altogether abstaining from Flesh, wandering
up and down in course Linen, barefooted and bareheaded: more of which you may
see in Surius, Tom. 2. de vit. Sanct. etc.

In the Year 1500. came out of Germany a sort of people, who styled themselves
Poor Pilgrims, bare-headed and barefooted, clad in Linen, or gray Cloth,
having a Wooden Cross in their Hands, drinking neither Beer nor Wine; their
Food all the Week, except Sunday, being Herbs seasoned with Salt, altogether
abstaining from Flesh, Fish, Milk, Butter, Cheese, and Eggs; stretching their
Arms out in Churches cross-wise, in imitation of a Cross; and in Prayer fell
flat on the ground; no where staying above the space of Twenty hours at once,
going from door to door begging by couples: And amongst them were diverse
Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons; which Penance they voluntarily undertook,
for what number of Years they thought convenient, and the set time expired,
they returned home to follow their former Employments; and only excluded from
their Pilgrimage Women and Monks.

The Order of Indians were Instituted in the time of Pope Julius the Second;
being of the Carmelite Race; and are thought to be called Indians, for that
they intended to Convert the Indians to the Christian Faith; the Indias being
about that time discovered: As for their Garments they wore a black Cloak over
a white Gown.

The Society of Divine Love, was composed of a People that met in obscure and
remote places with much Devotion, where they Prayed, sung Psalms, and
Administered the Sacrament; and were called Theatini, from the Bishopric of
Theatinum, which was rejected by John Peter Carassa, that with less trouble and
encumbrance he might profess a devout Life, and give himself up more seriously
to Contemplation, and the study of Divine Mysteries; nor would he accept of the
Bishopric of Brundusium, which Charles the Fifth Roman Emperor, would have
conferred upon him, and Instituted his Order under Pope Clement the Seventh:
This Man was afterward made Bishop of Rome, by the Name of Paul the Fourth, etc.

The Order of Paulini was Instituted by a Noble Matron, called Gastalia, Anno
1537. at Mantua, whence those of the Order were sometimes called Gastalini; and
their chief business was to mortify the Concupiscence and Lusts of the Flesh:
But for some Inconveniences that accrued by such Temptations as they gave
themselves up to, the Order was, not long after its Institution, extinguished
or suppressed.

Thus have we briesly run through most of the Religious Orders that held of, or
were confirmed by the Sea of Rome. Some there are that yet remain, which being
rather Military than Ecclesiastical Orders, I shall say something of them and
their Founders in due place; and conclude the Religious Orders with that of the
Jesuits, or those of the Society of Jesus, Founded by Ignatius Loyola.

CHAP. VII. A Description of the Society of Jesus, or the Order of the Jesuits,
in what relates to their Institution, Confirmation General Rules and Offices;
being a brief Abstract of a Book published by the Superiors of the Order, etc.
THE Order Called the Society of Jesus, so much talked of through the Christian
World, was Instituted about the Year 1540. by Ignatius Loyola, a Native of
Cantabria; who having been a Soldier, and received some Wounds in the French
Wars, they occasioned a years sickness or more, which made him so sensible of
his own Infirmites, that he resolved upon his Recovery to renounce the World,
and devote himself to the advancing the Name of Jesus; and accordingly in the
Twenty sixth Year of his Age traveled to Jerusalem, where having paid his
Devotion at the Holy Sepulcher, he returned to Spain, and gave himself to Study
at Complutum and Salamanca, preaching Mortification by his Doctrine and
Poorness of Habit; and from thence going to Paris, where he studied Ten Years,
he was made Master of Arts, and in the Year 1536. came again into Spain, with
Ten Persons, who had undertaken to follow his directions; and so to Rome to get
leave of the Pope to travel to Jerusalem. But the Peace being broken between
the Venetians and Turks, they held it not safe; but chose to go to Venice, and
there (as occasion required) to dress the Wounds of Poor Persons, and look
after the Sick, etc. Seven of his Companions, undertook to preach about the
Territories of Venice, though they had nothing to sublist on but Charity; and
by this time being better improved, they again returned to Rome, where the
Clergy molested and opposed their proceedings; yet they increased, and by
applying themselves to Pope Paul the Third, had their Order confirmed, and
since ratified by Julius the Third, Paul the Fourth, Pius the Fourth, and the
Council of Trent; being enjoined at first not to have above Sixty of the
Society, but afterward that Limitation was disannulled, permitting all that
were capable to become Members of the Society, if they could be admitted by the
Superiors. Their Chief or General of the Order they have, who commonly resides
at Rome: Likewise their Coadjutors in Spiritual Things; such as are their
Priests, Professors of Divinity, Philosophy, and Inferior Arts and Sciences:
Their Coadjutors also in Temporals, whose business it is to have a regard to
their Clothes, Dict, and Domestic Affairs; and for the better supply of their
Order, maintain their Scholars and Novices, who without disputing what is
enjoined, are bound to obey their Superiors. This Order differs from others,
for that beside the three usual Vows of Poverty, Chastity and Obedience, they
bind themselves to the Pope readily and cheerfully, to undertake whatever he
gives them in charge, without being chargeable to him; nor must they refuse any
journey he shall enjoin them for, the propagation of the Roman Catholic Faith:
Amongst them the Title of Professer is in higher esteem than that of Priest,
the latter being frequently obtained long before the former. Instead of a Hood
they wear a Philosophical Cloak long and black, their Cap is called Bareta,
resembling a Cross, which they do not wear abroad; their Cassocks are called
Solannas, tied about them with silken Girdles: And so fast they spread, That
about Sixty or Seventy Years since, they had Two hundred fifty six Colleges,
besides Houses: More of which you may see in Christianus Franken, in Coloqu.
Jesuit, etc. Surius Hospinian, etc.

The general Rules of this Order are twice a day to examine their Conscience,
to be diligent in Meditation, Prayer, Reading, and daily to be present at the
Divine Service, at the times appointed to Confess their Sins, twice every Year
to renew their Vows, and on Fridays to be abstinent, without the Superiors
leave not to Preach; that they keep no Money by them, nor have any valuable
matter in Property; not to read any Book without leave, nor to meddle with any
thing that is not their own; to learn the Language of the Country where they
are, and not keep their-Chamber-door or Chests under Lock and Key, nor in the
night to sleep with their Windows open, or go Naked, nor to go out of their
Chambers without their Clothes, neither to teach or learn without their
Superiors leave, nor to drink between meals, nor to eat abroad without the like
leave, which must also be had for their taking Physic, or consulting a
Physician: They must observe the Ring of the Bell, keeping their Chambers neat,
and their Beds clean; and when they find themselves under any great temptation,
to acquaint their Superiors therewith: They must be Obedient, Humble, and
Respective to their Superiors, uncovering their Head when they approach; not to
complain of one Superior to another: To keep silence, or briefly to speak to
the purpose, with Submission and Moderation; to avoid Contradiction,
Contention, and speaking evil of each other, or their Countries, he being only
to reprove who is Authorized so to do. Whilst two are in a Chamber let the Door
stand open: Let no man at the Table put off his Hat unless to his Superiors,
nor talk with Strangers, or have conversation with them by Letters without
leave; report idle Tales, or tell abroad what is done at home they must not;
nor without leave meddle with Secular affairs; nor write any thing of
Instruction or Consolation; every one is required to instruct his Brother to
confess, as likewise exhort him to it. Without leave none must go abroad, and
when he does, he must show the reason, and upon his return give an account of
the effect it took; ever observing to write down his name, and to acquaint the
Porter whither he goes; and must return before night, unless he has leave to
travel, and then he must lodge in Jesuits a College, if any offer in the way,
and there to be as obedient to the Superior as to his own. As for these Rules,
etc. they must every one have them in being, that once a month they may read
them, or hear them read; but the Co-adjutors are bound to read their Rules
every week. Their Constitutions likewise they have, wherein is demonstrated
that the main end of their Society is to do good to their own Souls, and those
of their Neighbors, and Relations; wherefore they are bound to travel up and
down, and every six months to confess their sins to the Priest; then to receive
the Communion, and cast off all inordinate affections of Kindred, Friends, and
temporal matters; to deny themselves, to study humility, to take up the Cross
of Christ and follow him; to aim at Perfection and all other Virtues, but
chiefly at Charity; to be careful of the inward man; to embrace Poverty with
alacrity; to dispense freely their Spiritual gifts, as they have freely
received them; to study Chastity, Purity, and to be watchful over their Senses,
but especially their Eyes and Tongues: To be temperate, decent, and modest,
espeally at the Table; not in any thing to disobey the Superiors command, nor
to conceal any thing in Confession; to study Unity and Conformity in judgments,
in affections; to avoid idleness, and Secular astairs; to avoid all excess that
may impair health, and rather use what means he can to preserve it; to entreat
the Superior that once a year he would enjoin a Penance for the past failings,
in not duly observing their Rules and Constitutions as they ought.

These are their Rules in general, according to their Book of Rules and
Institutes, Printed at Lions in France, Anno 1607. But to come nearer to
particulars, there are diverse others set forth in the same Book: As the
Constitutions and Rules of Provincials, Rules for Provosts, Rectors of
Colleges, and the Examiner, Rules for the Masters of the Novices, and their
Counselors, Rules for Travelors, Rules for their Minister or Controler, for
the Admonitor, the Overseer of the Church; Priests their Rules, Rules for
Preachers, the General Proctor his Rules, Readers their Rules, as also for the
Infirmarius Librarii, as they are set down in their Book, for the better
instruction of every Officer and Member of the Society; which Book, by the
Order of the Superiors, was Printed in the Year and Place before mentioned; to
which for brevities sake the inquisitive Reader is referred. As for the
Privileges and Immunities granted them by several Popes, they are very great,
and have been very much Improved.

CHAP. VIII. A Description of the several Military Orders, or Orders of
Knighthood in most Christian Kingdoms, Provinces, and Countries, as they have
been, and are at this day found, with their Institution, Confirmation, Rules,
Habit, and Collars or Badges of their respective Orders: To what end they were
Instituted, and by what Kings, Princes, Noblemen and Prelates they were
Encouraged and Confirmed; with the Decay of some, and Rise of others, etc.
THe ensuing Orders being rather looked upon as Military ones, than confined to
the strictness of Religious Worship, we shall but lightly mention them; yet
that the Reader may be benefited thereby, especially in reading of History, etc.

The Knights Hospitalers, or Knights of the Order of St. John Baptist, first
obtained leave to build a Monastery at Jerusalem, of the Calypha of Egypt,
which they dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and employed themselves in defending
Pilgrims; as also in entertaining and relieving them in Hospitals and Houses
built for them, squaring their matters as to Devotion, according to St.
Augustines Rules; and so well behaved themselves, upon the Christians taking
Jerusalem, Anno 1099. that they were held in high esteem with Godfrey of
Bulloigne, and other Kings; stoutly defending with their Swords the Christian
Religion, till the Princes of the West failing, by reason of their own
intestine Discords, to send them succor, they were by the Infidels quite
beaten out of Syria, Anno 1308. at what time, with a great Fleet they invaded
Rhodes, took it from the Turks, and maintained it 214. years, but lost it in
the Reign of Solomon the Magnificent, after a bloody six months siege, from
whence they were called the Knights of Rhodes, but since the Knights of Malta;
which place their Posterity at this day possess and defend against all
opposition, Governed by a great Master, etc.

The Order of the Knights Templers was founded by Hugo de Paganis, and Gufrid
de St. Aidemaro, who with their followers undertook to secure the Roads, for
the sake of Pilgrims, from all Robbery and Outrages; and from their being
assigned a residence near the Temple in Jerusalem by King Baldwin, were from
thence called Templers, and did great service under the leading of their Great
Master against the Infidels in the Holy War; but having lost Syria, upon their
return into Europe, they were hardly treated, and the Order quite extinguished;
as for their manner of Religious Observance, it was much according to the Rule
of the Canons Regular.

The Teutonick Order was Instituted or Erected before the Walls of Prolomais,
by the King of Jerusalem, in the presence of diverse Princes and Prelates, who
approved it, and was confirmed by the Emperor Henry the Sixth, and Pope
Celestine the Third, and enjoined St. Austin's Rules: They were also called
Marinii or Knights of St. Mary, and did great service in the Holy War, and
since that time upon sundry occasions, under their Superiors or Great Masters,
being mostly Germans and Polonians that are admitted into it, and at this day
are very Powerful and Rich, having many Lands and Possessions.

The Order of the Knights of St. Lazarus were Instituted, Anno 1119. but being
almost extinct, Pope Pius the Fourth renewed them. The Habit of this Order is a
dark-colored Garment, with a Red Cross on their Breasts, and were also
Instituted the Knights of the Annunciada, in memory of the Annuntiation of the
Blessed Virgin, and held an Annual Feast on her day.

The Knights of Calatrava, who took their Denomination from a Town of that Name
in Spain, were Instituted by Sanctius, or as some will have it, Alphonso King
of Spain, in the year 1121. or as others say, 1160. who being of the Cistertian
Order, undertook to defend the Frontries against the Incursion of the Turks and
Saracens, which the Templers were too weak to do, and live very strict in the
observance of their Rules; and had many Fovours conferred upon them by Pope
Innocent the Third.

The Knights of St. James in Spain, had their Institution from Pope Alexander
the Third, who confirmed them, and enjoined them the Rules of St. Austin; whose
first grand Master was Peter Ferdinand, who for the support of himself and his
Order, had yearly 150000. Crowns, being Instituted, Anno 1170. the Great Master
taking place next the Blood Royal; wearing in Peace and War a Purple Cross on
their Breasts, resembling a Two Handed Sword Handle, called Spatha, whence the
Knights of the Order are called Sancti Milites Jacobi de Spatha, and from
Compostella, Compostellanos.

The Knights of the Holy Sepulcher were likewise called Knights of the Order of
St. James; their business being to guard the Sepulcher: But when the Christians
lost footing in Syria it expired, their Charge being given by the Sultan to the
Franciscans that were found in Jerusalem, etc.

The Order of the Gladiators began in Livonia, Anno 1204. and were so called
for carrying on their Cloak two Red Swords across; their Institutor was
Albert, Bishop of Riga, who gave toward their Maintenance the third part of
his Church Revenues; their Habit, unless the two Bloody Swords worn thereon,
was White, to show their Innocence and Resolution to maintain war against the
Enemies of the Cross of Christ, converting many Unbelievers to Christianity,
not only in Riga, but in other places of Livonia; for which good service, Pope
Innocent assigned them what Lands in those parts they should win from the
Infidels. But in the end by the Popes persuasion, both this, and the Order of
the Cruciferi, became one in conjunction with the Teutonick Order: To see which
more at large, read Crantzius, l. 7. Funcius, l. 10. Munster in his Geography,
Balaeus, etc.

The Knights of St. Mary de Mercede or Redemption, were Instituted by King
James of Aragon, who in the year 1212. subdued the Isles of Baleares, and
settled this Order about the year 1232. which was confirmed by Pope Gregory the
Ninth; their business was chiefly to redeem Christian Captives taken by the
Infidels: Their Garments were White, with a Black Cross, and professed the
Rules of the Cistertian Order.

The Knights of Montesia were Instituted by the same King of Aragon, and
confirmed by Pope Gregory the Ninth, and were so called from a place in
Valentia; the Badge of their Order being a Red Cross, and hold the Cistertian
Rules.

The Knights of St. Maurice were Instituted by Amadeus the Seventh, Duke of
Savoy, in honor of St. Maurice, Anno 1490.

The Order of the Golden Fleece was instituted by Philip the Good, Duke of
Burgundy, and Father to Charles whom the Switzers overcame and slew; he
Instituting it on his Wedding day with Isabel, Daughter to the King of
Portugal, in memory of Jason's fetching the Golden Fleece, as some will have it.

The Order of the Moon was Instituted by Reiner, Duke of Anjou, upon his
obtaining the Kingdom of Sicily, Anno 1464. and as a Badge the Knights wear a
Silver Half Moon on their Arms, and were in all dangers bound to stand by, and
defend each other, not at any time presuming to fall at variance amongst
themselves.

The Knights of St. Michael the Archangel, were Instituted by Lewis the French
King, Anno 1469. The Badge of their Order being a Gold Chain, at which hangs
the Image of St. Michael, trampling on the Infernal Dragon; and of this Order
he appointed 36. Knights, himself to be the Chief.

The Knights of St. Stephen, were the Institution of Cosmo, Duke of Florence,
and were confirmed Anno 1561. by Pope Pius the Fourth, wearing Red Crosses set
in Gold; their Seat is in Ilua, an Isle of the Ligustick Sea, and were
Instituted in imitation of the Knights of Malta, taking their Denomination from
Stephen, Bishop of Florence, or as some are of Opinion, from Stephen, Bishop of
Rome.

The Knights of the Holy Spirit, were Instituted by Henry, the French King,
Anno 1579.

The Knights of St. George in England, were Instituted by King Edward the
Third, commonly called Knights of the Garter.

The Knights of the Star, were Instituted by King John the First of France, in
memory of the Star that guided the Eastern Magi to the place where Christ was
born.

The Knights of the Genets, held to be the first Order of Knighthood in France,
was instituted by Charles Martel, in memory of the signal Victory he obtained
over Abdiramo, in whose Camp he found many of those Creatures, whose skins are
excellent Furrs.

The Order of the Crown Royal, was Instituted by Charles the Great, in honor
of the Frisons, who had done him great service in his wars again the Sesnes, or
ancient Saxons.

The Order of the Star in France, was Instituted by King Robert, Anno 1022. the
whole Order consisting of thirty Knights, of which the King was the Principal;
the Garb they wore were Cloaks of White Damask, and a Star of Gold imbroidered
with five pointed Rays on the left side.

The Order of the Broom-Flower, was instituted by St. Lewis, the French King,
who in the Collar of his Order wore Golden Broom-Husks or Cods, intermingled
with Flower de Ly's, by which he signified that from a Law Estate or Humility
he had been exalted to the Throne.

The Order of the Ship was likewise Instituted by the same King, to encourage
the Nobility of France, either in Person or Estate, to set their helping hand
to the improvement of Navigation, or to attempt the Seas with him to restore
the Possessions of the Christians in the Holy Land. The Collar of this Order
was interlaced with Scallops double, imitating or Emblematically signifying the
Sandy Shore, and double Crescents or Half-Moons, which with the figure of a
Ship at the Collar or Chain in Cipher, might signify his intentions to sight
against Mahumetans; wherefore the Knights were daily obliged, to hear things to
incite them to the vindication and promoting of the Christian Faith, to protect
Widows, Orphans, and those that were oppressed.

The Order of the Holy Ghost in France was Instituted by Henry the third, in
memory of his Nativity, Election to the Polonian Kingdom, and his coming to the
Possession of the Crown of France, all which happened on Whitsunday. This Order
consisted of the King, and one hundred Knights, amongst whom were four
Cardinals, five Prelates, the Chancellor, Provost, Master of the Ceremonies,
the High Treasurer and Register, all the Knights being bound to wear the Cross
on their Garments.

The Order of Christian Charity was Instituted by the same King, enjoining
those to use their diligence in relieving Captives, and have regard to maimed
Soldiers, and other Objects of Charity; And to that end he assigned them Rents
and Hospitals; they wore on their Cloak as their Badge, an Anchored Cross,
embroidered with White Satin.

The Order of the Virgin Mary in Mount Carmel, was instituted by Henry the
Fourth, French King, the number ordained being one hundred Gentlemen, Natives
of France, and was confirmed by Pope Paul the Fifth, Anno 1607.

The Order of Orleance was Instituted by Lewis of France, Duke of Orleance,
Anno 1393. called the Order of the Porcupine: Because the Knights wore a
Porcupine of Gold at the end of three Chains for their Badge.

The Order of the Golden Shield was Instituted by Lewis the Second, third Duke
of Bourbon, surnamed the Good; in the Shield was a Bend of Pearls, and written
thereon the word Allon, which is much at one with Allons in French, by which
some say he meant, Let us go all together to the service of God, and Defense of
our Country. He likewise Instituted the Order of the Thistle, called also the
Order of bourbon, Anno 1370. consisting of Twenty six Knights, who wore Belts,
on which were embroidered the word Esperance, and a Thistle of Silk and Gold
hanging as a Tassel; the like word was on their Collar of Gold, interwoven with
Flower- de-Lys's, and the Virgin Mary's Picture Crowned with Rays, and Stars
hanging at it in an Oval, with a Thistle-Head at the bottom.

The Order of St. Mary Magdalen was Instituted Anno 1614. by John Chesnel, a
Noble Frenchman, Instituted to restrain the French Nobility from Duels and
Quarrels; and of this Order were usually five hundred Knights, who had a House
assigned them near Paris, and were enjoined to be Charitable, Obedient, to
avoid Quarreling, to observe conjugal Chastity, etc. and had a Great Master
over them, more of which you may see in the History of Andreus Favine Parisian,
an Advocate in the Court of Parliament, as also of the Order of Bretagne or
Hermine, and Ears of Corn, Instituted by Francis, Duke of Bretagne, Anno 1450.

The Knights of the Bath, were Instituted by Henry the Fourth, King of England,
who constituted six and forty of that Order, appointed them their Chambers in
the Tower, and to this day the Order flourishes, being conferred, as the Favor
of the Prince, upon worthy Gentlemen of known Loyalty and Integrity.

The Order of the Thistle, or St. Andrew, was Instituted in Scotland by King
Achaius, who made a League Offensive and Defensive with Charles the Great, Anno
809. The Collar be composed of Golden Thistles and Rue, with this Motto, Nemo
me impane Lacessit, and at the bottom of it hung the Image of St. Andrew with
his Cross.

The Order of the Lilly or Navarr, was the Institution of Prince Garcia the
Sixth, Anno 1048. in the City of Nagera, to the honor of the Virgin Mary,
consisting of Thirty eight Knights, himself being the Chief; and the main end
of their Institution was to expel the Moors out of that Kingdom; each of them
wore on his Breast a Silver Lilly, and a double Chain of Gold, interlaced with
the Letter M. standing for Mary, at the end of the Chain hung a Flower-de-lys
with the like Letter Crowned.

The Order of St. James, or the Sword, was Instituted under the Reigns of
Ferdinand, King of Leon, and Alphonso, the Sixth King of Castile, in the year
1158. The Knights of this Order, on their Breasts and Left Sides wore a
Scallop-shell, and about their Neck a Chain of Gold, with a Sword, or the shape
of a Sword made of Red Satin imbroidered, and a Scallop-shell upon the Sword;
the Red Sword signifying their Victory over the Arabians: This Order was also
established in Portugal, increasing to above Six hundred, insomuch that many
Lords of Spain held it an Honor to be of the Order of St. James.

The Order of St. Julian, commonly called that of the Pear Trees, had its
Institution in the Kingdom of Leon, Anno 1179. being allowed and approved by
Pope Alexander the Third, Lucius the Third, and Innocent the Third. These
Knights had a Pear Tree for their Arms; but Alphonso the Ninth, taking the City
of Alacantara from the Moors; he bestowed it upon the Great Master of
Calatrana, who bestowed it upon the Master of the Pear Tree, whence they styled
themselves Knights of Alacantara, and changing their Arms, wore the Green
Cross, set with Flower-de-lys's on their Breast; and as to Religious matters
undertook to square themselves by the Rules of St. Bennet, and strictly
professed Chastity; but Pope Paul the Fourth dispensed with that, and gave them
leave to Marry, and the Great Mastership was united by Pope Alexander the
Sixth, to the Crown of Castile.

The Order of the Band or Red Scarf, was Instituted by Alphonso the Eleventh,
King of Leon and Castile, Anno 1330. The Knights of this Order wearing a Red
Scarf or Riband, and were enjoined to accompany the King in his wars, etc.

The Order of the Dove was Instituted at Segobia in Castile, by John the First,
Anno 1379. The Collar of this Order was linked with Sunbeams, and to it was
fastened the figure of a Dove of Gold, enaml'd with White, in a flying posture,
but it continued not above a year.

The Order of St. Savior of Montreal, commonly called the Order of Aragon, was
Instituted in Aragon, Anno 1120. by Alphonso, the Eighteenth King of Navarr,
and the First of Aragon; the Knights of this Order wearing Red Robes, and on
their Breasts an Anchored Cross, and had leave given them to Marry.

The Order of the Dragon, was Instituted by the Emperor Sigismond in Germany,
Anno 1418. The Knights of this Order on Festival days wore a a Scarlet Cloak,
with a double Golden Chain, at the end whereof hung a Dragon overturned, and
her Wings broke, and moreover a Cross Flower-de-lys'd; which grew and were held
in high esteem.

The Order of Austria and Carinthia, or of St. George, was Instituted by the
Emperor Frederick the Third, who was First Duke of Austria, in the Year 1470.
the Garments of the Knights were white Coats, with red Crosses, and by their
Rule were bound to guard the Frontiers of Germany, Hungary, Austria, Styria,
and Carinthia.

The Order of Poland, or of the White Eagle, was Instituted by Ladislaus the
Fifth, King of Poland, in the Year 1325. the Kings wear a triple Chain, at
which hangs an Eagle crowned.

The Order of the Elephant, or of Denmark, was Instituted by Christiern the
First, King of Denmark, Anno 1478. the Collar of this Order being composed of
Elephants with silver Castles on their backs, at the end whereof hangs the
Effigies of the Virgin Mary, anorned with Rays, and a Crescent under her Feet.

The Order of Sweden, or of Jesus, or of the Seraphims, was Instituted Anno
1334. by Magnus the Fourth, King of Sweden; the Collar is composed of
Patriarchal Crosses and Cherubims, and the end of the Collar hangs an oval
Tablet, with these Letters, J. H. S. signifying Jesus Hominum Salvator, with
four Nails enameled white and black.

The Order of the Swan, or of Cleve, is at this day held up by the Princes of
that House, who have the Swan for their Order Supporters, and Crests of their
Arms.

The Order of Livonia, or the Sword, was Instituted by Albert a Monk of Breme;
who drawing to his Party diverse rich Men, persuaded them to renounce the World,
and vow Chastity and Obedience, and to be conformable to the Rules of the
Cistertian Order: They were clothed in long white Cassocks, with black Hoods;
near the Shoulder the figure of a red Sword, and two red Swords across on the
Breast, with their points downward: The chief end of their Institution being to
fight against Infidels, etc.

The Order of St. Gall was Instituted in Switzerland, by Frederick the Second,
Emperor, Anno 1213. upon his coming to visit the Abbey of that Name: He
likewise Instituted the Order of the Bear, giving the chief Lords Collars and
Chains of Gold, at the end of which hung a golden Bear: And these two Orders he
Instituted in the memory of St. Gall, said to be the Converter of the Germans,
to the Christian Faith, and Saint Vrsus who suffered Martyrdom before the
Temple of the Sun at Soleverre.

As for the Italian, or rather Roman Orders, they were many; the most material
of which we shall briefly mention, though most of them at this day are ceased.

Anno 1320. Pope John the Two and twentieth, Instituted the Order of Jesus
Christ, at Avignon; those of the Order wearing Crosses of Gold enameled with
red, enclosed with another Cross.

Anno 1468. Pope Paul, at Rome, Instituted the Order of the Holy Ghost; the
Badge of the Order being a white Cross.

Anno 1498. Pope Alexander the Sixth Instituted the Order of St. George; those
of the Order carrying a Cross of Gold, adorned with a Wreath, made in the form
of a Crown.

Anno 1520. Pope Leo the Tenth Instituted the Order of St. Peter; constituting
those of the Order to wear, within an Oval of Gold, the Effigies of that Saint,
at the end of a Tortois of Chains of Gold: Their Office being to guard the
Seacoasts, against the Turks; who at that time committed many Piracies and
Outrages.

Anno 1540. Pope Paul the Third established, or rather Instituted the Order of
St. Paul.

Anno 1560. the Order of Pies, whose charge was to carry and guard the Pope
when he went abroad, was Instituted by Pope Pius the Fourth.

Anno 1587. Pope Sixtus Quintus ordained the Knighthood of Lauretto, to whom he
erected our Ladies Church at Lauretto for a Cathedral.

There are likewise at Rome some Churchmen that have taken upon them the Order
of Knighthood, as those of St. Anthony, whose General is styled the Abbot of
St. Anthony of Vienna: Their Garments are black Cassocks, Cloaks and Gowns, a
double St. Anthony's Cross, viz. two T T's made of blue Satin, though the
inferior fort wear but one T.

Anno 1233. the Knights of St. Mary, or the Virgin Mary, were Instituted by
Bartholomew Bishop of Vienna, and confirmed by Pope Urbin the Fourth, and are
bound to St. Dominick's Rules; the Knights wore a white Cassock, with a red
Cross and two Stars on the Breast, their Cloak of a gray color, and had charge
to take care of Orphans and Widows, and to their power on all occasions
reconcile differences, and had liberty to live at home with their Wives and
Families.

Anno 1618. An other Order of the Virgin Mary, was erected at Rome, by three
Brothers; Bernardo, Pedro, and John Baptista, and was Confirmed by Pope Paul
the Fifth; who with those that Succeeded him, where to be great Masters
thereof; their Convent being in the Palace of Lateran, and are bound to defend
the Catholic Faith, and fight against the Turks, and other Infidels, and to be
of Noble Extraction. The Knights-Laicks, and Knights-Priests of this Order, the
latter being Beneficed, are to wear Blew Ribands about their Necks, and a
Golden Cross with Blew Enamel, and on their Cloaks a Cross of Blew Satin; but
the Knights Chaplains are to wear only a Blew Cross on their Cloaks, and within
the Cross is a round Circle, wherein are M. S. standing for Maria Sancta, with
a Crown; Twelve Silver Beams or Rays being about the Circle, and Four Lillies
at the four ends of the Cross as also Four Stars.

At Venice is the Institution of the Order of St. Mark, Instituted in Honor of
that Evangelist, his Body being brought thither, from Alexandria in Egypt; and
is in great esteem at this day; the Venetian Nobility generally coveting to be
of that Order. And at Genoa is the Order of St. George's Knights; and so in
other Cities in Italy are peculiar Orders: But seeing some of them, as indeed
of what has been already mentioned, have long since ceased; those that are
desirous of a larger Account, I refer them to the Histories of those Countries;
and so conclude the Military Orders that are, and have been in diverse
Countries, highly in esteem with Princes and Prelates, and were not the least,
to whose signal valor and prudent conduct, Christendom ows her Deliverance,
from the Incroaching Sword of the Infidels; in repelling whom their Blood was
so freely shed. And so hoping that what has been said, will not be construed to
any Sinister end, but remain a lasting Monument, to the Memories of such as
have done well: I conclude this part of the Book, and proceed to what is
Material to be known, by those that are Studious in Curiosity, and not much
Incoherent, if at all, with what has been said.

THE SECOND PART, CONTAINING A Survey of the Court of Rome, etc.
CHAP. I. A Brief Account of the Sacred College, or College of Cardinals; and
of those depending on it, Relating to Offices and profits, etc.
HAving entertained the Reader thus long, with the several Religious, and
Millitary Orders, that are and have been in Europe and Asia, since that
flourishing Cedar of Christianity took Root, and spread its Branches to the
ends of the Earth; and delivered them (as we hope) Impartially, without comment
or Gloss: We shall from thence proceed to speak of other things, curious in
themselves, and perhaps not Vulgarly known; and will be found in the following
Survey of the Roman Court, which for Magnificence, exceeds all others; as in
the multitude of great Offices and Officers, splendid Receptions, large
Revenues, pompous Ceremonies, and the like, and of these we shall treat in
their Order; and the first to be observed is the College of Cardinals, called
the Sacred College; etc.

In this Cafe the Pope, or Bishop of Rome, for his Collaterals, has Cardinals
to the Number of 70. and these are Six Bishop Cardinals, Fifty Priest
Cardinals, and the remainder Deacon-Cardinals; as the number was determine and
confirmed by Sixtus Quintus, Bishop of Rome, and these compose the Sacred
College: Amongst them, there is one that is Chamberlain of that College,
differing in Office from the Pope's Chamberlain, and is but for a year, whereas
the other is for Term of Life; the Cardinals Residentaries in the Court of
Rome, succeeding to it by Order of Seniority, have by the space of a year, the
Charge of the Revenues; at the end of which they distribute to each Cardinal
his Portion, which they that are not resident, enjoy no longer then Six Months,
after they have left the City: And for the exacter Computation and Management
of Affairs, have a Secretary, Clark, and Caster up of Accounts, belonging to
the College; yet the Clark continues his Trust but a year; the Secretary is
ever an Italian, but the Clark may be a German, French man, or Spaniard, etc.
Each of them by virtue of their Office, requires of the Heir of every Cardinal
that Deceases, 25. Ducats of the Chamber, and have their Maintenance from the
Palace.

The Secretary's Office, is to write in the Conclave, the Letters in the name
of the College, which are subscribed and Sealed by the Principals of the
Orders, viz. The first Cardinal Bishop, Cardinal-Priest, and Cardinal-Deacon:
He assists likewise in the General Congregation, and in the Congregation of the
Heads of the Orders, setting down the Decretals and Orders that in them are
made, and keeps a Register of the Resolutions of the Secret Consistories, given
him by the Cardinal-Chamberlain of the College: In the Consistory he
Officiates in a Red Habit, reaching to his Feet, with a Hood of the like upon
his Shoulders, but upon the Extra omnes, he likewise departs.

The National Clark is the Secretary's Substitute, or Deputy, to supply his
room, or Business in his Absence.

The Caster up of Accounts is enjoined to keep a due and just Account, in what
relates to the Revenues of the College, and make the Cardinal-Chamberlain
sensible thereof.

CHAP. II. An Account of the Masters of the Ceremonies, Master of the Palace,
the Lord Vestry Keeper, the Popes Secretary, their Office and Dignity, etc.
THE Pope or Bishop of Rome, has Four Masters of the Ceremonies; two of which
are styled participants, and have large Incomes as Fifty Ducats of the Heir of
every Cardinal that deceases, and a Hundred and Twelve of every new created
Cardinal; with many other Perquisits; insomuch that their Office yields them
Annualy 700. Ducats each: The other Two are called Supernumeraries, to each of
them every new Cardinal gives Twelve Ducats of the Chamber; and though both the
former have their entertainment from the Apostolical Palace, yet of these the
most Ancient only is so favored, notwithstanding their Authority is equal in
ordaining the Pontifical Functions, advising the Lords Cardinals what they are
to do, and have a great Command. They are all likewise present in the
Congregations of Rites, and one alone in the Ceremonial Congregation; all of
them entering the Conclave; and when the Pope sends any Cardinal Legate de
Latere, he proposes to him one of these Masters, who is attired in Purple, and
whilst he is in that Habit give place to none, but the Master of the Chamber,
or the Pope's Cup Bearer.

The Master of the Palace has his abode there, viz. In the Palace of the
Vatican, with 2. Attendants. And this place belongs properly, to the Fathers of
the Religion of S. Dominick: His Charge it is, to peruse the Works that are
Printed in Rome, and to take a Copy, after he has approved them; and when by
the Lord Vicegerent they are Subscribed his Reverend Paternity sets likewise
his hand to them, or one of his Assistants, who are Masters and Fathers of no
mean Quality. This Master is present in the Congregation of the Judge; and in
the Pope's Chapel, has a place under the Lord Deacon, or the most Ancient
Auditor of the Exchequer, called Della Ruota, and has his own Entertainment,
and his followers, daily from the Pope.

The Lord Vestry-Keeper, inhabits in the Palace, and must be a Father of the
Augustine Order, and under his Charge are Garments, and other things of great
Value: He ever attends the Pope at Mass in Pontifical or Private Celebration,
and his Office it is to provide the Wine, the Water, and the Wafer; and when he
is a Titular Bishop, he takes his place in the Chapel among other Bishops
Assistants; and though he be not a Bishop, he goes in the Habit of a Regular
Prelate, sitting in the Chapel above the Dean and the Auditor of the
Exchequer, waiting upon the Pope's Mytre; who gives him Entertainment, as he
does the Master of the Palace.

The Pope's Secretary is ever a Cardinal, styled the Cardinal-Nephew, and has
many Secretaries under him: His chief Business is to write and subscribe
Letters by the Pope's Order, to Princes, Nuncios and others; to Sign the
Patents of Governors, Podestates, Provosts-Marshals, and other officers of the
Church: Likewise all the Ambassadors of Princes at their Departure, give an
Account of their Negotiation to this Cardinal-Nephew; and the like grand
Observance he has from all the Ministers of Rome; and was wont to have the
Title of Superintendent General of the State Ecclesiastical, which the Pope
gave to him by his Breve, and by the like means, gives him the Title of
Secretary.

CHAP. III. An Account of the Officers and Servants, imediately Officiating,
and attending on the Pope, and in his Palace, their Places and Dignities, etc.
AS for the Master of the Pope's House, or Major Domo, he is always a Prelate;
and diverse others there are, who are properly called Domestics, as the Master
of the Chamber, the Cup Bearer, the Sewer, Carver, chief Harbinger,
Under-Master of the Chamber, Under-Cupbearer, Under-Sewer, and Under-Master of
the House; also, the Secret Chamberlains, of which there are frequently seven
or eight Participant Chamberlains; one of the Secret-Chamberlains, being always
Secret-Treasurer, and bestows the Popes Donation or Alms; an other
Secret-Chamberlain there is, who is the Ward Robe Keeper, under whose Charge
are Jewels, Gold, Relics, and the like; there are likewise Adjutants: Nor
does the Entertainment of a Secret-Chamberlain amount to less than 1000. Crowns
per Annum; and the Participant Chamberlain more, and all the rest
proportionable to their Degree in Office. There are also six Secret Clarks of
the private Chapel, who have great In-comes by Perquisits and Stipends; and
when the Pope Pontifically proceeds to his Chapel, it is the Duty and Office
of his Chaplains to carry his Triple-Crown and Mytre, going before the Cross in
Red Habit.

There are besides these, Palfrey-Men, who commonly are called Chaplains, and
Chaplains of the Guards, Secret-Adintants of the Chamber; and besides them,
Chamberlains of Honor, descended of Noble parentage, and of good Education.
There are also, three other Chamberlains, viz. Della Bussola, the Chamberlain
Extramuros and the Scudiere, who by turns keep the Watch, and have their Office
distinct; except the Chamberlains of Honor, who do not appear in the Palace,
but when it pleases them, and by them the Pope frequently sends the Hats to the
new Cardinals.

There are likewise, a Sewer, and a Carver of the Sacred College, whose places
are very advantageous. A Carver, and a Sewer, there are likewise for Strangers,
and the Poor that daily feed in the Palace, at the Pope's Charge, who were
Instituted by Pope Clement the Eighth: he Ordaining, that the Father Rectories
of the Penitentiaries of St. Peter, of the Society of Jesus, should observe to
bring in every Morning twelve Pilgrims to eat in the Palace, at the Pope's
Charge. All these Officers are attired in Purple, according to their Degree.
For the Family there are two Physicians, and a third is entertained by the
Secret-Chamberlain.

A Person of Quality there is, who is entertained by the Pope, in the Nature of
Master of the Stable, under whose charge the Horses, to the number of two
hundred or upward, continually are; yet, he manages his place by Substitutes,
and is permitted to wear a Cloak, and Sword, his place being of considerable
value; nor do any beside himself, and the Chamberlains of Honor, wear Cloaks,
and Swords; his Charge is also of the Mules, Litters, and Carriages. And Pope
Leo the Eleventh, gave the Title of Master of the Horse, to Signior Pomponeo
Frangipanii, a Valiant Roman, who had well deserved in the Wars.

Other under Officers there are, in whose Custody is the Pope's Furniture, and
Household stuff, whose Care it chiefly is to see the Rooms, and other Places
kept in order, and accomodated when there is a Consistory Signature of Grace
and Congregation. There are likewise Secret and Public Sweepers, whose upper
Garments are Purple, and formerly were the Pope's Coach-men, viz. when he was a
Cardinal, as also Palfrey-men, more then forty; which are usually such as
belong to the Deans of the Cardinals, and Ambassadors, who reside in Rome, when
the Pope comes to his Dignity: Their Clothing is Red or White, as themselves
shall choose, with a Purple Cloak, and a Guilt Sword.

Twelve Mace-bearers there are, and the like number of Vergers, both of them
salable Offices, and neither worth less then six hundred Crowns a piece,
yielding fifty Crowns or upward Yearly. These and many others, are the Officers
immediately attending on the Pope, who are plentifully provided for.

As for the Pope's Palace, the Gate thereof stands but half open, for the
Reception of any Ambassador or Minister of State; but when the Pope, or his
Brethren pass it, it stands wide open.

CHAP. IV. An Account of the Pope's Secretary of State; The Secretaries of the
Breives, their Office and Dignity, etc.
THE Secretaries of State are accounted Superior Officers, and have great
Entertainment from the Pope, depending upon the Cardinal-Nephew, and wearing
Purple attire, taking their Directions from that Cardinal, though they
negotiate with the Pope, sending to him their Letters to be subscribed; and
have distributed amongst them the Nuntiary Provinces, one of them being
Secretary to the Ciphers, or dark Significations; yet his place is but half the
value of the others: They all co-habit in the Pope's Palace, and are well
provided for.

There are belonging to the Ecclesiastical Affairs, three Secertaries of the
Brieves, and of those Brieves that go under Taxation, of which hereafter more
will be said.

There are also two other Secretaries, one of the Councils, and an other of the
Memorials, the latter being usually Master of the Pope's Chamber, and Secretary
of the Congregations, de Bono Regimine, and ex gravi; and under each of them,
two or three others serve: Every one of them over and above Emoluments, have
large Entertainments from the Pope; all his Officers being appareled in Purple,
but their habits made different according to their Place and Office, either of
Silks, Cloth or Stuff.

The Secretaries of the Breives under Taxation are 24. and every Secertary's
Place, is worth no less then a Thousand Crowns; and of these by the Pope's
Declaration, one is constituted Superior, whose Habit is that of a Referendary,
or Domestic Prelate, and has his Lodging in the Palace. All Breives,
dispatched by this Secretary, do pay; (Indulgences ad Tempus excepted,) and
those Breives being taxed by one of these Secretaries, taking it by turns, the
Original of the Breives, being viewed by the Cardinal Prefect of the Breives,
they are Sealed and dispatched.

The Secretary of the Secret Breives is ordered either by the Cardinal Nephew,
or Secretary of State, to make them: The Originals of which are not exposed,
nor Subscribed by the Cardinal Prefect; and after these Breives are Sealed
with the Seal of the Principal Secretary, they are Examined by the Originals,
and then Signed by him; one of which Breives is always accompanied with a
Letter of the Cardinal-Nephew's. Of the Original of these Brieves, great care
is taken, being upon the Death of the Pope, carried into the Castle of St.
Angelo; as likewise all Registers of things, and such Letters as the
Secretaries have in their hands.

CHAP. V. An Account of the Pope's Guard, and the Military Officers and Forces,
etc. Dependent upon the Sea of Rome, by Sea and Land, etc.
THE General of the Pope's Guards is made so by Virtue of a Breive, and has
each Month 200. Crowns Salary: Under him there is a Lieutenant, whose Office is
computed at Fourscore Crowns a Month; the Money is paid by the Chamber: In this
Guard, are generally two Troops of Light Horse, whose Captains and Cornets, are
as the Lieutenant before mentioned, made by the Pope's Breive; a Company there
is consisting of Switzers, Commanded by Officers of the same Nation; and Twelve
Demy-Launces, all Captains Reformadoes, having each Fifteen Crowns a Month: All
the Captains and Military Offices, are paid after the manner of the Wars,
befides which by Vails and Perquesits much does accrue, in the Apostolical
Palace, where is continually a Guard of 50. Switzers, Twelve Light Horse, and
Four Demy-Launces; and these are divided into two Bodies.

The General of the Holy Church is Constituted by the Pope's Breive, and his
Staff, and Oath, being privately given him in the Chamber. In time of War he
has Three Thousand Crowns a Month; and in time of Peace, but One Thousand; and
of him about 500. Officers hold their plaee by Patent; most of them Military
men, officiating within the Territories of the Church. Under him he has a
Lieutenant General, whose place is worth 3000. Crowns a year; and a Sergeant,
Major General, whose Salary is 500. Crowns a year; but these last places are
not at his dispose, but the Pope's, and are granted by his Breives; who in like
manner, constitutes the General of the Artillery, with a 100. Crowns a Month.
Nor can any Soldier be Imprisoned without a License or leave, under the
General's hand, and the Soldiers inroeled through the Territories of the
Church are computed 80000. Foot and 3500. and Horse, yet have no pay, but serve
when occasion requires, upon certain Exemptions, and privileges and enjoyment
of things, whereby benefit does accrue; and these are called the Bands, or
Batoglias, and are ready upon the first notice, and very well disciplined; and
the better to furnish them upon Occasion, diverse Armories and Magazines are
placed throughout the Territories of the Church, erected by precedent Pope's
and Generals: The Praefectship of Rome, is ever bestowed upon an honorable
Person, being held in great Esteem by the Bishops, as it was of old by the
Roman Emperors; and has many great Privileges belonging to it, it being the
proper Office of the Prefect, to carry before the Emperor in Solemn Riding,
the Imperial Sword.

The Governor of the Castle of Saint Angelo, is Constituted by the Pope's
Breive; his pay is each Month 500. Crowns, and has under him of his own making,
a Deputy Governor, who looks to the charge of that Important Castle, whose
entertainment is fifty Crowns a Month, besides many Perquisits: The Providitor
holds his Office, by Patent from the Governor. Another there is, who looks to
the Armory, having diverse under him; besides there are two hundred Soldiers,
together with their Officers, who are paid according to the manner of the
Wars: All the Officers, together with the Master-Gunner, are made by the
Governor; except the Corporals, who together with the Soldiers, and
Chaplains, are constituted by the Deputy Governor; and by him the Adjutants of
the Castle are enrolled, which are usually five hundred, and are privileged to
wear Arms.

The General of the Galleys, is made by the Pope's Breive, and take an Oath, as
do all the great Officers, before the Lord Treasurer General; and his
entertainment is three hundred Crowns a Month, and pay for twelve Demi Lances;
he constitutes his Lieutenants, and all his Subordinate Officers; the
Providitor Play Master, Patron of the Gally, Munition-Master, Apothecary, being
exempted, who hold it by the Lord Treasurer General's Patent; and though the
General cannot by right, free any one from the Chains, without a Council of
War, yet he often does it without being contradicted.

CHAP. VI. An Account of the Pope's Vicar, and many other great Officers and
Offices resting in the Persons of Cardinals: with their Dignities, and Valuable
Considerations, etc.
HAving discoursed briefly, of many Offices and Officers in the Court of Rome;
as well immediately dependant upon the Pope, as the College of Cardinals; we
shall now proceed to the great Offices, wherein the Cardinals are immediately
concerned; and first of the Pope's Vicar.

The Pope's Vicar, since the time of Pius the Fourth, has been chosen out of
the College of Cardinals, who before was a Bishop: His Duty is to observe,
that all things are kept in good Order, and has Jurisdiction over the Priests,
and Regulars inhabiting Rome; as likewise the Companies of Laymen, Hospitals,
and Pious places, etc. within the precincts thereof; and has for his
entertainment 100. Crowns a Month, out of the Chamber: Under him are four
Notaries, who Exercise their Office apart; each Notary, having under him eight
or nine Clarks. This Office has likewise two Lieutenants, the one for Civil
matters, who commonly is a Referendary Prelate, and the other for Criminal
Causes; as also a Vicegerent, who for some years past, have been a Titular
Bishop, to the end he may not be absent, but perform his Episcopal Function in
Rome; and his Superintendency, or more peculiar care, is over the Monasteries
of Nuns; yet is present with the other Officers in the Congregations, which are
made before the Cardinal-Vicar, relating to matters and causes of that
Tribunal; and under him has a Provost-Marshal, with Sergeants, and the like.

The charge of the Chief Penitentiary, is undertaken by a Cardinal, conferred
on him by the Pope, and is worth 8000. Crowns a year; and under him is a
Prelate, styled the Regent of the Penitentiaries, whose Jurisdiction is over
the Cases referred to the Pope, of granting Absolutions Gratis, Ubique,
directed to approved Confessors in Parliament; Sealed with the Seal of the
Penitentiaries.

The Cardinal Penitentiary, sits in three Cathedral Churches, viz. St. John
d'Lateran, St. Peter in the Vatican, and that of Sancta Maria Maggiore; upon a
Seat raised four Degrees, in the Nature of a Tribunal, with a staff of his
Office in his Hand, from whence he gives Audit to Confessions of Cases
reserved: He likewise makes his Congregations with the intervening of his
Regent of the Prelate, who is the Seal-bearer, and two other Divines with a
Canonist; many Offices of Profit are at his disposal.

As for the Vice Chancellor, he is at this day an Eminent Cardinal, and the
place is guessed to yield him, between 15. or 16000. Crowns a year; his
Jurisdiction is over the Dispatches of Apostolical Letters, concerning any
matter, whereof the Supplication is signed, except such as are dispatched by
Breve sub Annulo Piscatoris. On Tuesday, Thursday, and Sunday, every Week the
Officers of the Chancery Apostolical Assemble in his Palace, which are the
Regent; and the Abreviators de Parco Magiore, being in number twelve Prelates,
beside the Regent, attired in Purple, made in the shape of that of Prelates:
And these Offices are to be sold at a great value, being at the disposal of the
Cardinal, Vice Chancellor. As for these Prelates, thirteen in number, they take
place in the Pope's Chapel; but the Regent declines it, in respect to the
precedence with other Prelates. They likewise are Referendaries, both of the
one, and the other Signature, and the Regent has Power to commit the Cause of
Appeals in Rome, which he generally does to the Auditors of the Ruota, and to
the Referendaries, distributing them, that every one may have a part.

The Office of the Abbreviators is to make the Original of the Bulls, upon the
Supplications signed by the Pope, and review them, when fairly Written on
Parchment, and is assisted by Inferior Officers, who have their Fees out of
Taxing the said Bulls, etc.

As for the Cardinal-Chancellor's further Office, it is to take the Collations
of the Cardinal's Tithes, and Declarations of Promotions in the Secret
Consistory; as also of the Bishoprics, which the Pope makes pro tempore:
Likewise, of the Consistorial Abbeys, giving out the Schedules of such
Provisions.

The Cardinal-Chamberlain's Place is in high Esteem, and proves worth, between
12. and 14000. Crowns yearly; his Jurisdiction being to take notice of the
Causes, that appertain to the Apostolical Chamber, as also of the Clarks
thereof, when he is not detained by the Consistory, he sits in the Chamber,
most part of the dispatches passing there under his Name, although they be
subscribed and discussed by the Clark. His likewise Judge of the Appeals, from
the Sentence given by the Master of the Streets: Taking Cognizance of the
Reason of Building, as also of the Bridges, Streets, etc. And during the
Vacancy of the Sea, takes Possession of the Pope's Lodging, and has a Guard of
Switzers; Coining Money, with his Arms stamped thereon, and is in a manner Pope
till one be Elected.

The Prefect of the Signature of Justice, is always a Cardinal; his place
yielding him 200. Ducats a Month, and has a Jurisdiction in Reference of
Supplication, and Commissions of Causes, which are delegated for Justice; and
unless it be in Vacation time, sits every Thursday of the Week in his own
Palace, to decide Matters between the Commissioners and their References, where
there are Officiating twelve voting Prelates; the Ancientest Referendaries,
with the Auditor of the Ruota, and the Cardinal-Vicar's Livetenant Civil, who
are there to defend the Jurisdiction of their Courts, and are permitted to
Vote, and since many of the Causes delegated, are dispatched by Breive, or the
Cardinal Praefect's Letter; two Officers are purposely appointed, one of which
is called the Prefect of the Originals of the Breives, who consigns them when
made; the other Officer, called the Master of the Breives, which he consigns to
the Secretary of the Breives, under Taxation, that he may get them Sealed: The
first of these Offices is worth 12000. Crowns, and the latter between 12 and
1300. Crowns; and to these in a manner is joined the Office called the Revisor
of the Commissions of Signature of Justice, and all of them are attired in
Purple Robes.

The Office of Prefect of the Signature of Grace, rests in the Person of a
Cardinal, and procures him a hundred Ducates of the Chamber each Month; his
Business being chiefly to assist at the Signature of grace made before the
Pope, and to Seal each Supplication, where also the twelve Voting Prelates are
present, which are commonly the same that Vote in the Signature of Justice; and
there likewise officiate the Cardinal Prelates of the Signature of Justice, the
Cardinal-Vicar, and Cardinal-Praefect of the Breives, the Lord Datary, and more
or less of the Cardinals, as the Pope-shall appoint, twelve being ever the
least, and interuening at that Signature, are likewise the Lord Auditor of the
Chamber, his Civil Lieutenant; the Lord Treasurer General, the Auditors of the
dela Ruota: the Cardinal Vicars Lieutenant Civil, a participant Pronotary, a
Clerk of the Chamber, an Abbreviator de Parco Maggiore, with the Lord Regent of
the Chancery; and their business there, is to defend the Jurisdiction of their
respective Offices: It is held every Week upon Sunday or Tuesday before the
Pope, unless in Vacation time.

The Prefect of the Breives has as the reward of his Office 100. Crowns each
Month, out of the Chamber, his Business being to Review and Sign the Original
of the Breives that are under Taxation.

The Library Keeper is generally a Cardinal; whose Charge is to supervise the
Printing, and look to the Vatican Library, and those that Work in it, and where
Classical Works in the Original Tongue are Printed.

CHAP. VII. An Account of the several Congregations held at Rome, the end for
which they were held, the Nature of the several Offices thereto belonging, with
the Dignity of the Respective Offices, etc.
AS for the Congregations of Cardinals, they are many and different in their
Effects, of which I shall speak in their order; and in the first place, of that
called the Congregation of the Holy Office.

This Congregation Assembles on Wednesdays and Thursdays, every Week; the first
Assembly is in the Convent of the Dominicant Alla Minerva, and the second
before the Pope, about Matters to Religion, etc. Where many Cardinals
intervene, and by him twelve at least are appointed, together with diverse
Prelates, other Divines, and Religious Orders, etc. And have in Conjunction the
Title of Consultors of the Holy Office; the Seal of this Office is kept by a
noted Cardinal, who is allowed a Prison, and Officers to punish Offenders, as
likewise Ministers, amongst whom is the Commissary, who is a Father of the
Dominican Order, and the Assessor a Prelate, or one of the Pope's Chamberlains
of Honor, whose Business it is to make report of the Causes in the
Congregation.

The Congregation relating to the Affairs of the Bishops, and Regulars, whose
Jurisdiction is in Case of Differences arising between the Bishops and their
Subordinates, and the like; as to the Regulars also, to take Care in providing
for the Occurrences of Bishops, which require Consultation, and is held in the
House of a Cardinal, who is the Principal every Friday.

The Jurisdiction of the Congregation of the Counsel, is to interpret the Text
of the Council of Trent, and is kept in the House of the Eldest Cardinal, who
is the chief therein, though a second Cardinal keeps the Seal, and is held once
a Week on the day the Chief Cardinal appoints.

The Ecclesiastical Immunity Congregation was erected, for that some in sundry
Cases enjoyed not Ecclesiastical Immunity; and because through Diversity and
Mixture of Offenses, the Determination rested many times doubtful; Pope Urban
the 8th. erected this Jurisdiction, which is held in the eldest Cardinal's
House, every Tuesday; diverse Cardinals assisting, as also the auditor della
Ruota; a Clark of the Chamber, a Voter of the Signature, and the Secretary who
fiequently is a Referendary of either Signature; as also the Cardinal-Praefect,
in whose Custody the Seal is, and has from the Cardinal, the Entertainment of
(...) Crowns per Annum.

Another Congregation is, viz. That of the State, which is often held before
the Pope, but oftener before the Cardinal Nephew, whereat all the Cardinals that
have been Nuntios Apostolical ought to be present, as likewise the Pope's
Secretary of State. Another Congregation was erected by Gregory the Fifteenth,
for the Propagation of the Catholic Faith, from whence it takes its
Denomination.

In this Congregation, diverse Cardinals, together with an Apostolical
Protonotary sit; as also the Pope's Secretary of State, the Judge who usually
is a Referendary of both Signatures; and further, the Assessor of the Holy
Office and Secretary of the same Congregation.

The Congregation of Rites, is likewise held in Rome, and the end of it is to
compose differences, and see the opinions concerning Rites, Precedencies,
Ceremonies, etc. And the Antientest Cardinal deputed by the Pope to attend this
Service is the Judge, and in his house it is held once every Month, or oftener
if the head Cardinal thinks fit to appoint it; or if the rest of the Cardinal's
Assistants require it.

There is a Congregation for Water, of which the Cardinal in whose house it is
held, is Chief; and the chief business is to inquire into matters, relating to
Rivers, Brooks, Bridges, Watercourse, Aquaeducts, and Conveyances; and is not
convened unless occasion require it: And much to the same purpose, is the
congregation held for Inspecting matters, relating to the Fountains,
Water-Conveyances, and Streets for the Commodity, and advantage of the City.

The Congregation for Printing, and Correcting Books, is headed by a Cardinal,
and Constituted to be held at his house; but there being Persons deputed to
that end, they seldom meet unless complaints are made.

The Council of the Government of the State of the holy Church, is managed in
chief, by the Cardinal-Nephew; in whose Palace it is held, Frydays and
Tuesdays; where five or six Cardinals, and seven or eight Prelates, with other
great Officers, hear and determine matters relating to the Church Affairs,
settling business in all Countries, in which their Jurisdiction extends; by
sending Directions and receiving answers from their Legates, Nuncios,
Governors, etc. in Princes Courts and in the Churches proper Teritories.

The Congregation for easing the people, and of Bono Regimine, consists of the
Pope's Nephew Protempore, as chief, to whom the people apply themselves, for
the easing of Grievances; and the one held on Saturday in the Council Room, and
the other in the next Room to it, and tend to one and the same purpose at which
five or six Cardinals, and seven or eight Prelates are Generally asisting.

The Congregation relating to the Mint, is managed by four Cardinals, and four
Chamberlains, who take an Account of the Coin, and what is Minted; and observe
that it may when Coined, be disposed of to the use of the Church, etc. And this
is held at the Eldest Cardinals House, as often as there is Occasion for it.

A Congregation there is held, in order to Examine the Person, on whom the Pope
intends to bestow the Dignity of Bishop; or those on whom he has bestowed it,
and is held before the Pope, consisting of nine or ten Cardinals, and half the
Number of Prelates; yet it extends for the most part, no farther then to those
that are to have those Dignities confered on them. In Italy, the party to be
examined continues kneeling on a Cushion, before the Pope; it being in the
power of every Member of the Congregation, to put Interrogatories to him; when
he is approved, he is Registered in a Book, kept by the Secretary of the
Congregation: If he be once examined, although he change his Bishopric, he is
not to be a second time examined; but if he was never Examined, it is in the
power of the Congregation, to convene him, but the Cardinals are not subject to
this Examination.

The chief Cardinal-Deacon pro tempore, is head of the Congregation, relating
to consistorial Affairs; the Pope appointing the day, the main business being
the Resignation of Bishoprics, the Interest of Taxations of the Church, of
consistorial Abbeys, and things of the like Nature; it being generally held in
the house of the first constituted, or head Cardinal, though many Assistants
were allowed and Ceremonies used in the performance; the heads of every
Congregation having their Secretary to draw up the Letters, etc. according to
the decrees, that are established in a full Congregation; every head
subscribing the Letters of his own Congregation, which the Secretaries Seal,
with the Seal of him that Subscribed them, the Register remaining in the hands
of the respective Secretaries.

CHAP. VIII. An Account of the three Arch-Priest-hoods, the Apostolical
Chamber, Lord Governor of Rome, Lord Treasurer, Lord Auditor, Lord President,
Advocates of the Exchequer and Poor; the Proctor of the Exchequer, etc. Their
Offices and Dignities, etc.
THere are redounding to particular Cardinals, three Arch-Priesthoods; that is
to say, of the three noted Churches in Rome. These Arch-Priests, have the sole
power, within the Jurisdiction of their Church, to confer all the Benefices,
Livings Chaplain ships, and other Vacancies depending thereon: And these
Churches are St. Peter's, in the Vatican, Santa Maria Maggiore, and Santa
Johannes de Lateran; and as to the latter of these, the Archpriest has power
in Criminal and Civil Cases, to Inquire and Examine, those within the
Jurisdiction of his Church; and in the year of Jubilee: Every Archpriest, goes
Pontificaly to his Church, with a splendid retinue, in order to open the Holy
Gate; and to the Church of St. Paul, the Cardinal-Deacon takes his way, and
takes the same Order, in opening the Holy Gate; but that of St. Peter, is
opened by the Pope; in which Church, the Fathers of the Society of Jesus, are
Penitentiaries; in that of St. John de Laterand, the Fathers of the Order of
St. Francis; and in Sancta Maria Maggiore, the Fathers of the Order of St.
Dominick; and are well provided, with all necessaries; hearing Confessions in
diverse Languages, and one of them for each place, is Rector of the
Penitentiaries.

The Ruota, is properly the Apostolical Exchequer and is managed by Twelve
Prelates Auditors; every Auditor having Four Notaries, and assemble in the
Apostolical Palace, twice a week, viz. On Monday and Friday; unless the first
week of July, and the first of October, the Ruota operus; and then the
Auditors, with diverse Cardinals, and Prelates, ride in a Triumphant manner to
Congratulate the Pope; to whom the youngest Auditor makes an Oration.

The Apostolical Chamber sits every, Monday and Friday, and upon such days, as
the Consistory is held; there sits the Cardinal-Chamberlain; the Lord Governor
of Rome, a Vice Chamberlain, the Lord Treasurer General, the Lord Auditor of
the Chamber, the Lord President, the Auditor of the Poor, the Fiscal Advocate,
the Commissary, and twelve Clarks of the Chamber, four of which are, viz. the
Prefect of Flesh and White-meats, the Prefect of Corn and Victuals, the
Prefect of the Prison, and the Prefect of the State. And the Jurisdiction of
this Chamber, is over Writings, and Deeds, relating to the Praefects, the
Revenues of the Sea Apostolical, Treasures of the Provinces of the State
Ecclesiastical, over Causes of the Commonalty, Ecclesiastical Feuds, Reprisals,
Accounts of Officers, Ministers of State, Coinage of Money, Appeals, Building,
and the like; and have nine Notaries, who hold their Offices separately, with
many Clarks under them, and are places of great profit. This Chamber gives over
sitting as the Ruota, and then the Pope makes the Ministers and Officers a
great Feast; and on the first of August another is made by the
Cardinal-Chamberlain, and on St. Peter's Eve, all the Tributes of the
Feudatories of the Church are paid with other Matters.

The Lord Governor of Rome, in civil Causes, has usually two Lieutenants to
take Cognizance of Wages, Sallaries, and the Condition of poor People. And in
Criminal Cases he has usually but one, and his Jurisdiction is over all the
City; as likewise Prevention with all the Tribunals, having diverse Judges, and
a prime Notary under him, all whose Emoluments are distributed to Charitable
uses, so that he is called the Notary of Charity: Further he has under him a
Provost-Marshal, and 300. Sergeants: When this Lord passes the Streets of
Rome, he has a Guard of Halberdiers, Italians, and over them a Captain, which
together with himself are maintained out of the Chamber.

The Lord Treasurer General takes Cognizance of the Reprisals of Ecclesiastical
Persons, as Priests, etc. of unwholsom Fruit, of the Fountains, of unlawful
Negotiation, exacting the Rents of the Chamber, and See Apostolic, he gives
Mandates to those appointed to receive them; overlooking the Accounts of
Ministers, Officers, and Fathers, and is diligent in all things, wherein the Sea, and Chamber, are interessed, or concerned; and is a place disposed of by
the Pope, yielding between a 11 and 12 Thousand Crowns a Year.

The Lord Auditor of the Chamber, has a large Jurisdiction, as being the
ordinary Judge of the Roman Court, and of all the Merchants, Strangers, and
Courtiers, that reside in the City; as also of the Princes, Barons,
Ambassadors, Bishops, Patriarchs, and Cardinals; being likewise, ordinary Judge
of the Appeals, as well those without, as within the State Ecclesiastical, that
are within the Jurisdiction of the Court; and is Executer privative quod omnes
of the Chamber, Obligation, and Cumulative of all Letters Apostolical, and of
all Writings upon Oath, and otherwise, and the like of Sentences, de partibus
Fulminata Censura, and has a large power over Criminals, having under him two
Civil-Lieutenants, being Prelates, and one Lieutenant Criminal, with many
Judges, and ten Officers for Notaries, keeping their Offices separate: And this
Auditor's place is sold for 10000. Crowns, which accrews to the Pope; and
further he has a Provost-Marshal, with many Sergeants.

The Business of the Lord President of the Reverend Chamber, is to make a
review of all the Accounts of the Treasury of the Chamber, and See Apostolical;
his Habit is Purple, and his place valued at 30000 Crowns,

The Advocate of the Exchequer, is bound to defend its Rites, in all Courts,
and before all Tribunals, if they are injured or brought in Question.

The Advocate for the Poor, writes Supplications, and other matters for
indigent Persons, without Fee or Exaction.

The Commissary of the Chamber has his Charge to defend, and as much as in him
lies, to support its Interests in civil Matters; and as Occasion requires, to
be assisting to the Lord Treasurer General, in reviewing the Accounts of the
Revenues, and Rents of the Chamber, of Assessments, Customs, Provision of Corn,
and Coinage.

The Proctor of the Exchequer in facto, defends all its Rites before Tribunals
as Cause requires.

CHAP. IX. An Account of the Marshal-Senator, Conservator, Prior of the
Caporioni, Master of the Streets, Chamberlain of the Water-Bank, Referendaries,
Governor of the Buroughs, with many other great Offices, etc.
THE Marshal of Rome's Dignity, is of a long standing, and is generally
conferred upon a Nobleman of Rome; his Office is to take Cognizance of many
Causes, not amounting to the Effusion of Blood, and for a time has the Custody
of the Conclave, on which he places the Guard of Soldiers, commanded by him;
as also the Charge of a Prison.

In Rome, there is a Senator, whose Residence is in the Capitol, constituted by
the Pope's Breive, and has under him two Judges in civil Matters, as also a
Criminal Judge of Malefactors, and dispences Justice to the Citizens, etc.
Causes of Appeal only devolving from him, and his Judges to the Captain of
Appeals, who is likewise a Magistrate, resident in the Capitol. This Senator
upon public Occasions, is apparelled like the Ancient Romans; with a Cloth of
Gold Garment, reaching to the Ground, long Sleeves lined with Crimson Silk, and
a great Chain of Gold, and is commonly a Doctor of the Law; he holds his place
at the Pope's pleasure, and frequently gives him an Account of his proceedings.

In the Capitol, as the former, are the Conservators, consisting of three Roman
Gentlemen; and the Prior of the Caporioni pro tempore, Which Caporioni are in
the Nature of Aldermen, in Number 14. and with the Conservators, etc. are every
three Months renewed and the Choice de novo, made before the pope, Cardinal
Chamberlain, and Cardinal-Nephew; and the day after Election, they take their
Oath before the Pope, and have by the Order of the Senator, the first Month,
their places assigned them in the Capitol: Their Office and Jurisdiction,
mostly relating to the conservation of the Customs and Antiquities of the City,
and inspecting Weights, Measures, and Prices of Victuals, administering Ordinary
Justice; and are Ordinary Judges, in case of Appeals, brought by the Consuls of
Trades and Husbandry; granting also Freedoms, and other things of the like
nature; taking place above the Secret Chamberlains, and going on high days, in
Senators Habit; as for the Prior, he is chosen by the Caperioni, and is equal
with the Conservators, etc.

The Master of the Street, has his place likewise Assigned him in the Capitol;
and has an Assistant with an Assessor, and a Notary, and they employ themselves
in Surveying the Streets, and Bridges, as occasion requires, to keep them in
good Order; determining controversies arising on that Occasion, and amerceing
Offenders: As for the Master, his Office is conferred on him by the Pope's
Breive, and continues during his pleasure.

The Chamberlain of the Water Bank, an Officer so called; exercises his
Jurisdiction amongst Mariners; and what relates to Maritine affairs, and from
him there is an appeal to the Clark of the Chamber Apostolical, whose lot is to
have the president ship of the Water-Bank; and h^ has a Judge, who administers
Justice to Mariners, Barge-men, and the like, wh^ Trade upon the River, etc.
where the Cardinal Chamberlain appoints by hi^ Pattent, a Commissary over the
Wood, to prevent frauds.

The Referendaries of both Signatures, are a College of Prelates, without any
settled number; and their Jurisdiction is to propound the Commissions, and both
the Contentions, and Gracious Supplications in the Signature of Justice, and
Grace; and to take Cognizance, of all Causes committed to them, under twenty
five Crowns; for if any Exceed, they are to be Committed to the Ruota. When any
of these are Created, he is obliged to visit the College of Cardinals, and the
Twelve Voting Prelates.

The Governor of the Borough at Rome, is empowered by the Pope's Breive, and
maintains a Judge, and an Attorney General; a formal Court, a Palace, and a
Prison, a Head Notary; with diverse Clarks under him, a Provost-Marshal, and
fifteen Serjants under him, to administer Justice throughout the Buroughs; his
Jurisdiction in that case, extending as far as Settig^ana; his Judge having
Weekly Audience of the pope, to render him an Account of the Affairs of his
Tribunal.

The Datary, and Under-Datary are two Roman Officers, through the hands of the
former pass the Vacancys of Beneefices, not valued at above 24. Ducats a year,
and causes supplications even without the participation of the Pope to be
signed; and in case of Benefices of greater value as Dignities, Canons, places,
etc. in carrying the Supplications to the Pope* and exposing the Concurrents;
it stand^ in his power by favoring the Merits o^ one more then another, to
procure advantage to his Friends; as also to pardon that part of the
Compositions, wherein some sorts of Graces are Taxed; he and his Under-Datary,
have daily Audience of the Pope, by carrying the Supplications to be signed:
The latter or the Under Datary, is to consider all dispatches which pass
through the Datary; the Vacancie of the Benefices that happen by Death
excepted; and his place is worth a thousand Crowns a year, as the forme^ is
worth two thousand; these two^ have many Officers under them, to manage Affairs
all very advantageous.

Besides what have been mentioned; there are Venial Offices whose Posessors
exercise no Jurisdiction, ye^ are of a considerable value; as the Writers of
the Penitentiaries, the Apostolical-Writers, Apostolical Chamberlains,
Apostolical Squires, and Secretaries, Writers of Breives, Knights of St. Peter,
and those of St. Paul, Knights of the Flowr'd-de-lys, Pious Knights,
Lauretan-Knights, the Rolls, the President.

Other Offices there are of the Palace, whose value is not inconsiderable, as
the first Chain, the second Chain, the Iron-Gate, the Keeper of the Pictures,
the Vergers, the Mace-Bearers; which Offices are for Life, and when Vacant
disposed of by the Pope, though the Praemium of some of them, appertain to the
Cardinal Vice-Chancelor.

CHAP. X. An Account of the Summist, Participant Notaries, Consistorial
Advocates, Praefects of Provision, General-Visitor of Prisons, Judge of
Confidence, Auditor of Contradictions, Apostolical Subdeacon, etc. their Office
and Dignity.
THE Office of Summist is of a great value, and is generally possessed by a
Cardinal, who has in his Gift, one of each of the Offices before mentioned.

The Participant Protonotaries, is a College of twelve Prelates, instituted by
Pope Clement their First, and the principal Business is to Write the Lives of
the Saints, the place of each being valued at 7000. Crowns: They go attired in
Purple, and preceed all the Prelates that are not consecrated, they make
request for the Canonization of Saints; and when the Pope intends any great
Action, he causes one of them, to rebuest of him the performance, and have
respectively power to Create Doctors, and Notaries; but it extends not without
the Walls of Rome; and commonly these Protonotaries are Referendaries of either
Signature.

The Consistorial Advocates are Twelve, being made by the Pope, and are
Instituted to make public Orations, in public Consistories, and to be
Advocates: The Orator who speaks, having for his Oration 12. Ducats out of the
Chamber, and enters into the Secret Consistories, to require the Palis for the
New Archbishop, and he that does it is paid Twelve Ducats of the Chamber, by
him for whom he moved; and have power, within the Walls of Rome, to create
Doctors of the one and the other Law; with many other privileges: The Habit
they wear upon public Occasions, is a Purple Robe, of Wool with Red Silk
Lining, a Hood of the like Purple Wool about their necks, lined with Ermins;
but usually they pass up and down, with a black Cassock, and Cloak, reaching to
the Ground; their Arms coming out; and if any one of these be a Referendary
Prelate, etc. he may be a Consistorial Advocate.

The Prefect for the Provision of Corn, is given by the Pope to a Prelate most
commonly, and he continues that Jurisdiction, durante Placitum, which extends
over the whole Patrimony of St. Peter, even to the confines of the State of
Siena through Tuscany, as far as Marni, through Latio; Savina Campagna, and
Maritina, to the Borders of the Kingdom of Naples; and under him are ten
Offices, that officiate in Buying up Corn, and taking an account of what comes
into the City; and has a Tribunal, a Notary, a Provost-Marshal, and his Men,
and is Judge in all Matters concerning the Office of Provision of Corn, etc.

The Prefect of Flesh, and White-meats, is commonly one of the Clarks of the
chamber, drawn by Lot, who has the prices stated, and continues in that Office
the space of a Year; strictly observing, that the prices appointed be not
exceeded by Exaction, and that no unwholsom Provision is vended; and in
scarcity, can alter and moderate the prices, etc

The General Visitor of the Prisons, is a Clark of the Chamber, who has the
Title of Prefect of the Prisons; and is to take care that the Prisoners be not
oppressed, nor starved; and in his Visitation, to relieve their necessities;
and there is likewise a course frequently taken for their delivery, for the
Pope being once made acquainted that any poor person is in Prison for debt, and
not of Ability to pay it, will not suffer him long to lie there, and the
Visitation is made every Thursday, till they all are visited; and then they
begin again, upon Easter and Christmas-Eve: The Visitation is called Gracious,
because at that time many are delivered, and small Offenses pardoned.

The Judge of Confidence, is attired in Purple in the Habit of a Prelate,
wearing a Rocket, and has a place in the Pope's Chapel, under the participant
Protonotaries; his Office is to enquire whether there be any Simonical
Practices, or Confidence in the resignation of Benefices, or Permutation in
Cases Beneficial.

The Corrector of Contradictions, wears the Purple Habit of a Prelate; as also
a Rocket, and has a place assigned him in the Chapel; his Business being to
Correct the Bulls, that pass through the hands of the Auditor.

The Auditor of the Contradictions, in the Pope's Palace wears a Rocket, and
the Purple Habit of a Prelate; his Office is to set his hand to the Bulls;
wherein is found the Clause vocat is, that is in the Bulls si in Evidentiam.

The Apostolical Subdeacons, otherwise called Participants, are five, one of
them ever carrying the papal Cross before the Pope, when he goes abroad on
Horseback, or on Foot; and two of them assist the Deacons-Cardinals, to attire
the Pope in his Pontifical Vestments; between the Cross and the Pope, none but
the Cardinals, and such as sit on the Seat, are to go: The two Master
Door-Keepers attending it, with their Silver Verges on either side, etc.

These are the Offices, and great places in the Court of Rome, as well in
Temporal as Ecclesiastical Matters; and if there be any other then have been
mentioned, they are not of any moment; so that passing them over as
Insignificant, we now proceed to speak something of the Management of Religious
Matters, Customs, and Ceremonies, etc.

CHAP. XI. An Account of diverse Offices done by the Pope, relating to the Agnus
Dei, Golden Rose, Benediction, Washing poor Men's Feet, and Creation of
Cardinals, Canonization of Saints, etc.
THE Pope, or High-Bishop of Rome, by ancient Custom and Appointment, was wont
Solemnly to bless the people, three times in the year, viz. On Maunday
Thursday, Easter day, and Ascention-day; the places of performance being the
Church Porches of St. John de Lateran; that of St. Peter in the Vatican; of St.
Peter in Vincola, and of St. Mark; and since the first Institution, Pope Urban
the Eighth, added the Porch of the Squirinal palace; where he gave his first
Benediction, Anno, 1639. and every Pope in the first year of his Papacy, is
wont to celebrate the Benediction of the Agnus Dei, and every Seventh year
renew it: The Agnus Dei, being the shape or Figure of a Lamb, in Virgins Wax;
which is consecrated and sent to Princes, and Potentates, etc. And much in the
same manner the Pope uses a Rose of Gold, on the fourth Sunday in Lent; which
is sent as a great Present, and the Bearer of this, as the former, receives
great rewards.

In the popes Washing poor men's Feet, this Order is observed, viz. Upon Maunday
Thursday, after the solemn Benediction, the pope accompanied by the Cardinals,
and carried in his Chair by the Palfrey-men, into the Ducal Hall; he there puts
off his Papal Ornaments, when assisted by the Cardinal-Deacon, he puts on a
purple Stole, a Red Pluniate, and a plain Myter; and sits down in the
pontifical Chair, seated on purpose for him; then putting Incense in a Cencer,
he Blesses the Cardinal Deacon, who reads the Gospel, and then kisses the Text,
which is held to him by the Apostolical Subdeacon; and so being censed by the
said Cardinal-Deacon, the Anthem of Mandatum novum is sung, at the beginning of
which, he lays aside his Pluniate, and with an Apron before him, Washes the
Feet of Twelve poor men. Unto each of them, causing to be given by his
Treasurer-General, certain Medals of Gold and Silver, and by the master of the
Household the Towel, wherewith their Feet was wiped, which ended, he returns to
his Seat, where he puts off his Apron, washes and dries his Hands; the Basin
being usually held to him by a Nobleman, or Prince, and his Hands being wiped
by the chief Priest-Cardinal, his Red Pluniate is again put on; when laying
aside his Mytre, he says a Pater Noster, together with the Verses and Prayers:
After that, taking his Seat, he puts on his Mytre, and so goes on foot to his
Dressing Chamber, and putting on his Pontifical Vestments, returns to his
Palace.

The Pope in making Cardinals has diverse ways, to the same effect; especially
two, viz. When he has a mind to promote any Person, resident in Rome, to the
Dignity of a Cardinal, he sends word to the Cardinal-Nephew at the usual hour;
and when the Secret Consistory is shut, he Pronounces whom he intends to
Create, causing the party to be called in, upon whose Head, kneeling at his
Feet, he puts on the Red Hat; and on it makes the sign of the Cross; saying,
Esto Cardinalis, etc. and wear this Red Hat in Token, that without Fear, thou will expose thy self even unto Death; and the Effusion of thy Blood, for the
Exaltation of the Holy Faith, for the Peace and Tranquillity of the Christian
People, and Augmentation of the Estate of the Holy Roman- Church; In the Name
of the Father, etc. Then the New-Cardinal, taking his Hat off, kisses the
Pope's Feet, and so rises up.

The other way is after this Manner: the Pope having Pronounced the Party in
the Secret-Consistory, and certified the Cardinal-Nephew with his Intentions,
he sends his Master of the Chamber, with his own Coach to fetch him to his
Lodgings, where he has his Crown Shaved; for which as a Fee, he gives the
Cardinal-Nephew's Barber 25. Ducats; and having Dined, he is conducted by the
Cardinal-Nephew to the Pope, kneeling before whose Feet, he has the Red Hat put
on his Head by him; and being Pronounced as the former, after returning many
Grateful Acknowledgements, he departs, and proceeds to visit the Pope's
Kindred; but neither appear out of their Houses in the Red Habit, until the
Public Consistory. Another way of Creating a Cardinal, is by notifying it to
him in his own Country where he resides, and sending him a Hat, etc. Which is
carried by one of the Pope's Chamberlains, accompanied with his Breive.

In Canonization of any Person, at the request or entreaty of a Prince, People,
or Relations; he sends to some Prelate, who is resident in the Country, to
inquire into the Life and Conversation of the party, and to signify what they
can learn by Letter, grounded upon the Examination of Witnesses; which is
propounded to the Sacred College, or College of Cardinals; who if they find
sufficient cause, for further inquiry, and the which, if they adjudge meet;
then the same or some other Prelate, has further Orders to examine Witnesses,
and exactly inquire into the Matter; and for the better Exaamination, Articles,
and Interrogatories, are sent under the Pope's Bull, or Bull Apostolical, to
the Prelate or Prelates; wherewith they are to examine Witnesses upon Oath,
concerning the Excellency, Purity of Faith, and Sanctimony of the party
deceased, of which if the College approve, as sufficient ground to believe the
party is in Bliss, and that by his good example, many are encouraged to lead a
Holy Life; he is Canonized according to the Rules, or Ceremony of Canonization;
if not the Suit is rejected.

CHAP. XII. The Manner of the Pope's entering the Public, and
Secret-Consistories; and the Order that is observed there on frequent
Occasions, and a Description of those Places, etc.
IN the Publick-Consistory, or Place for the Reception of kings, and Princes
Ambassadors in the most Splendid manner, at the upper end is a Pontifical
Throne, erected almost four square, and four-foot broad; in the midst of it, is
a Seat fastened to the Wall, with a great and lesser Foot stool, all the Floor
of the Throne being covered with Scarlet-Cloth, as is the great Foot stool: The
Wall is spread with Cloth of Gold, as also the Seat, over which hangs a Cloth
of State of the same; on the Right Hand within the Throne, are the Seats of the
Bishops, and Priests-Cardinals, two hands breath from the Wall, with a
convenience to lean on, as high as their Shoulders, and a step to set their
Feet on; unto which is adjoining another Seat, standing cross the Hall, facing
the Pope's Seat; on the Pope's lest Hand is the Seat of the Deacon Cardinals,
between which, and the Seat that goes cross the Hall, is about Eleven hands
breadth, which serves for a Door of Entrance. These Seats are hung and adorned
with Cloth of Arras and Tapestry, and are of an equal breadth; all the Room
besides, being hung with Green Cloth.

To the Publick-Consistory, the Pope proceeds in Rich Ornaments, with the
Cross, the Cardinals going before him; and these takes his Place, as do the
Cardinals, after they have done their Reverence; as for the Arch bishops,
Bishops, Protonotaries, and all the prelares, they place themselves upon the
three steps of the Pontifical Throne; and last of all the Subdeacons, Auditors,
Clarks of the Chamber. As for the long robed Courtiers, they sit on the Ground,
between the Cardinals Seats. The Chamberlains and Secretaries, doing the like
betweem the Preiates Seats, and the long robedl Courtiers; and if it happen
that thee Pope's Nephews, or some great Frinces, are there, which are not to
sit on the Cardinals Seats; they take their Places, standing near the Pope; the
Ambassadors of Kings, Princes, and great Men stand on his right hand, between
the sreps of the Throne, and the Wall, whilst his Domestics, and Courtiers,
stard on his left. The Consistorial-Advocates stand behind the Priests and
Deacon Cardinal's Seats; as for the procurators of Kings, Princes, and those of
the Religious Orders, their Place is to stand behind the Bishops-Cardinals
Seats. In the space between the Priest, and Deacon-Cardinals Seats stand the
Sergeants at Arms; and through them those that are to come to the Pope enter,
and before them stands the Master of the Household; and in the head of the
Deacon-Cardinals Seats, are the Masters of the Ceremonies, and in this Order
Matters of great moment are heard, and debated; and the Cause of the Assembly
being ended, they return in the manner they came, every one knowing his Place
and Order.

The Secret Consistory is held in a convenient Room in the Apostolical Palace,
called the Papal Chamber, in the midst of which is a Throne, raised from the
Ground without steps, only little footsteps to remove at pleasure, not having
any degrees as the former: The Cardinals Seats in their order are placed on the
right and left hand, in the Front of the Throne, which is adorned with Cloth of
Gold, but their Seats are only painted Red with the Pope's Arms on them; but
between the Throne and the Cardinal's Seats, Tapestry is usually spread. When
any Consistorial Business begins, all the Prelates, except the Cardinals, with
draw into another Chamber, and without the Door, wait two Secret Chamberlains;
who upon the least Ring of the Silver Fell, carried by the Junior
Cardinal-Deacon, enter to know the pleasure of the Consistory. In this place it
is, that the Pope propounds such matters as are to be handled in the Senate,
and requires their Opinions, which he takes by Vote, and declares according to
the Majority, which is called a Decree.

The Conclave, is the Place where the Cardinals affemble in the vacancy, to
elect a new Pope; and is seated in the Apostolical Palace, containing two
Halls, and a Chapel, with some other Houses, for the convenience of Servants;
the place of Election is very unlightsom, as having but a few Lights, and those
very high, so that in the outside they can hardly be seen; the Gate, or
Entrance into the first Hall, has a Wicket, through which the Cardinals that
are shut up receive Necessaries; Necessary-Houses there are, and other things
Necessity requires. In the lesser Chapel, the Fathers convene to Celebrate
Divine Service, and to make the Election. In the greater Chapel, or Hall, are
as many Cells, as there are Cardinals qualified to give their Voices, and are
divided with Linen Cloth very Artificially, and an Alphabet sixth on them; so
that at the first Entrance, they are chosen by Lot, and afterward strictly
Possessed; and as soon as the Cells are so chosen, the Servants of the
Cardinals make Provision of Beds, Curtains, and other necessary Furniture; and
when the Conclave is closed, Order is taken, that no Person may go, stand, or
tarry, above, below, or on any side, or part of it; nor may see, speak to, or
cast in any Paper, etc. to those that are shut up, lest by such means, any
might be capable of diving into their counsels; and for the Prevention of this,
or any Disturbance that may happen, there are four several Guards, a distance
from each Other, set upon the place Day and Night, till the Cardinals come to a
Conclusion, and are under the Command of Prelates, and Captains of great.
Trust; and the first Hall is made fast with four Locks, two on the out side,
and two on the in side; those that guard next the Door, keeping the outward
Keys, and those within them of the inward Locks; so that none can get in nor
out, without a mutual Agreement. But proceeding from this, and waving other
Elections, and Funerals of smaller note, We now go on to those of the
Pontifical Prelate, or the Pope himself, as we find them in a Brief Abstract;
and of the Election of Pope Innocent the Tenth.

CHAP. XIII. An Account of the Manner of Proceeding to the Election, Creation,
and Coronation of the Pope, or High Bishop of Rome, with the many and splendid
Ceremonies, Processions, and what else is Remarkable.
UPon the Death of Pope Urban the Eighth, the Sea of Rome being Vacant, care
was immediately taken for the Election of a High Bishop, to supply his place;
so that the Cardinals having put an end to the ninth days Solemnity, and
celebrated his Interrment with much pomp and Grandeur; the usual Mass was sung
before them at St. Peter's Church, by Cardinal Latini, Dean of the College,
and an Eloquent Oration, made by Jacomo Accaressio; after which, the Master of
the Ceremonies taking up the Papal Cross, marched on with the Gentlemen of the
Chapel, singing the Hymn Veni Creator Spiritus, etc. And the Cardinals in
their Degree and Order followed him to the number of fifty four, who were then
at Rome, and entering the Conclave went directly to Pope S^xtus the Fourth's
Chapel, where the Cardinal Dean repeated Prayers, and after that each Cardinal
took his proper place; all persons else being shut out of the Chapel, except
the Secretary of the College, and five Masters of the Ceremonies: Then were
the Bulls for the Election of a New Pope, read and allowed by the Secretary,
and the Masters of the Ceremonies; then the Cardinals took an Oath, to observe
them, and retired into their Cells; and having finished their eating, they went
to the Chapel, where the Prince Savelli, Perpetual Marshal of the Holy-Church,
and others were appointed to keep the Guards on the Doors and Avenues, during
the time of the Election; and to that purpose took their Oaths before the
Cardinal-Dean.

The proceedings having been thus far, the Cardinals returned to their Cells,
and gave Audience to the Lords Ambassadors, and Titular Personages of the
Court, till about three hours within night; at which time, upon one of the
Masters of the Ceremonies Ringing a Bell, they fell to Immuring and doing all
that was necessary for the Closure of the Conclave: the Cardinal Dean, and
Cardinal-Chamberlain, having the Charge to see all places secure, which in
Writing was certified by the Master of the Ceremonies; at which time all but
the Cardinals, and such as were allowed to attend them, withdrew: The Principal
of their Attendants, being the Lord Vestry-Keeper, and his Adjutant; Five
Masters of the Ceremonies; the Secretary with an Adjutant; the Confessor, two
Physicians a Surgeon, and an Apothecary with two Adjutants, two Workmen,
viz. A Mason, and a Carpenter, and sixteen Laborers, and were Elected by
Secret Votes inclusive; which were held in St. Peter's Vestry, every morning
before they entered the Conclave; and over and above Orders given for the good
Government of the City, during the Recluseness of the Cardinals, prime
Magistrates. And now the Guard being set at the four Gates, under the command
of the Marshal-Captain of the Switzers, and diverse Prelates; the Conclave was
walled up, and every little Craney, together with the great and lesser Windows
closed, leaving on the top only an overturn of four of five hands in breadth,
covered with a Linen Cloth, of which part was fastened and part not; yet there
were seven passages, by which provision was brought; and in this order came it
in: First came two of that Cardinals Palfrey-men, for whom the Diet was
designed, with two purple colored Maces, and on them that Cardinals Arms; next
him the Silver Mace-bearer and other Gentlemen; after whom came the Sewer with
a Napkin, followed by two Palfrey-men, carrying Cups, and a Silver
Chasing-dish, succeeded by two others, with Manchets, and they by two more,
with Glass Bottles of Wine and Water; and all these had a purple wooden-Mace
borne before them; whilst the Deputy Prelates had the charge to see what
entered, the which were changed at every several Meal, assisting at each
passage, and narrowly searching every thing that was carried in: The diet being
entered, an Apparitor in his purple Robe, with his Silver Mace, closed the
passage; where upon the assisting Prelates took a view, whether they were well
secured, and with a paper Sealed up the key hole of the door within, and the
Master of the Ceremonies did the like without.

In the morning succeeding the shutting up, the Cardinal Deacon celebrated
Mass, and administered the Communion to the rest of the Cardinals: making a
brief Exhortation, for the Election of a new Bishop; so that after may debates
for the speace of thirty seven days (for so long they continued there
nominating and Scrutinizing) on Thursday September, 15. 1644. Cardinal
Pamphilio, was agreed upon; he upon the Scrutiny, having fifteen Votes and upon
the Access thirty three: After-wards the Chapel being open, the Vestry Keeper,
with the Masters of the Ceremonies and Secretary, entered it, and burnt the
Schedules: Then the first Cardinal Deacon, and first Priest-Cardinal, and in
the Room of the Prince Cardinal D' Medici who was absent, by reason of his
Indisposition; the second Deacon-Cardinal made Humble Suit to the most eminent
Cardinal Pamphilio, that he would accept of the Papacy, according to the
Election, that had been made by the Sacred College; which he accepted, and
assumed the Name of Innocent the Tenth: Whereupon the two Deacon-Cardinals
conducted him to the back side of the Altar of the Chapel; and there by the
assistance of the Lord Vestry keeper, and Master of the Ceremonies; he was
divested of his Cardinals Habit, and attired in the Papal Vestments: Then they
placed him in the Pontifical Chair before they Altar; when as the
Cardinal-Deacon, kneeled and kissed his Feet, and his right Hand; who raised
him up, and gave the Osculum pacis, or Kiss of peace on either Cheek, and this
upon the like reverence, he observed to all the Cardinals in their Order: Then
the two Principal Master of the Ceremonies took up the Cross, whilst Music of
the Chapel Ecchoed, Ecce Sacerdos Magnus, etc. and so going out in Order, to
the Lodging of Benediction, where so much of the Wall of that place being
broken down, as would give them convenient passage with the Cross; the Cardinal
showed it to the people, who stood with eager expectation, to know the event;
signifying thereby there was an Election made, and with a loud voice, declaring
as much in Latin, which in English was thus: I pronounce you great joy, we have
a most Eminent, and most Reverend High Bishop, the Lord John Baptist Pamphilio;
who has taken to himself the Name of Innocent the Tenth. Upon this great
Acclamations of joy ensued; every one hastening to give notice to their
Friends, and spread it through the City; which was more effectually done by the
Ordnance, that breathed the news in Flame, from the Castle of St. Angelo; as
also by the Bells, Drums, Trumpets, and volleys of small shot from the Guards;
and all that day, and night, was spent in Rejoicing. Whilst the new Pope and
Cardinals refreshed themselves with a Collation; the Masons unwalled and
unclosed the Conclave: when the repast being ended, the Cardinals again entered
the Chapel to make their second Acknowledgement; and the Pope being feated in
his Chair, the Cardinal-Deacon began as before, and the rest did the like in
their Order; which ended diverse Anthems were Sung to the Music of the Chapel,
and the Pope with the Cross before him, was carried to St. Peter's Chapel in a
pontifical Chair, and placed on the high Altar, where whilst he sat he was a
third time Reverenced as before, whilst Te Deum, etc. was Sung with Music;
after which the Deacon-Cardinal read in cornu Epistolae diverse verses and
prayers, relating to the Pope, who descending from the Altar, where he had all
that while fat, turned himself to the people, and gave them his Benediction,
and going out of the Chapel, after he had faluted the Cardinals, he entered a
close pontifical Chair, and was carried to his Lodging, with a splendid
retinue; at night the Cannon was again discharged, and the Streets shined with
Torches and Fires; and thus finished the Ceremonies of Creation, when as great
preparations were made for his Coronation, the Ceremony of which take as
follows.

The Elected Pope, a Roman by Birth, having sung the solemn Mass, and performed
other Ceremonies, precedent to his Coronation, he passed on Tuesday the Fourth
of October, 1644. about seven in the Morning, from his own Lodgings, to Pope
Sixtus Quartus's Chapel, supported on either side by the Master of the
Chamber, and the Cup Bearer, habited in red Cloaks, with red Hoods lined with
Taffeta, or Sarsenet of the same color; and in the same Attire went all the
other secret Chamberlains of Honor and Chaplains, precedent to whom, in long
red Robes, went the Chamberlains, extra muros, though without Hoods, as also
the Pope's Esquires: Before the Pope, went the Emperors Ambassador, General of
the Holy Church, the Ambassador of Bologna, and the Governor of Rome; on either
hand were the great Officers of his Horse, and Foot Guard; then followed the
Cardinals in their Habits: And in this manner, the Pope arriving at Sixtus his
Chapel, entered with the Master of the Chamber, Cup Bearer, Ambassador, and
Governor of Rome, going into a Retirement in the Vestry, where a long Table
stood covered with a purple Cloth, interwoven with Gold, upon which, by the
Wardrobe-keeper, was laid a large played Garment of Taffeta; which by the
Assistance of the Master of the Ceremonies the Pope put on, and girded about
him, and put a red Satin Night cap on his Head; and so with his Attendance he
passed into the Chapel, at whose approach, the Cardinals stood up and
uncovered themselves, making their Reverence, whilst he returned them a kind
Salutation: Such as attended the Cardinals, being the mean while on their
Knees. Then the Pope Leaning on the Altar, the two Deacon-Cardinals took from
him his Cap, and put on a white Taffeta one, whilst the Cardinals circled him
round, and by the prime Master of the Ceremonies, were bidden to put on their
Hats. Then from the Apostolical Subdeacons, the Deacon-Cardinals received an
Amite, an Albe, a Surplice, Girdle, Stole, a Red Rocket Imbroidered and
otherwise adorned with Gold, and with these they attired the Pope; after which
the Chief Deacon putting on his Head a rich Mitre, the Maestra of the
Ceremonies cried Extra, at which word the Apostolical Subdeacon took up the
Cross, usually carried before the Pope; at the passing of which the Cardinals
put off their Hats, before this Cross went the Pope's Squires, after whom
followed the Courtiers Richly Habited, then the Chamberlains, Extra mures, with
other Courtiers, and after them the Consistorial Advocates, the Popes Secret
Chamberlains of Honor, the Referendary Prelates of the Chancery, the Bishops,
Archbishops and Patriarks, and seven of the Pope's Chaplains, each in his Hand
carrying a rich Mitre; then came the Cross the Deacons, Priests and Bishops
Cardinals, having at parting from the Pope, who all this while leaned against
the Altar, made a reverend Bow; these marched two and two, their Servants going
before them; next after them passed on the three Conservators of Rome, and the
Prior of the Caporioni, in Gowns of black Velvet; then the Ambassadors,
Princes, etc. and next the Pope, placed in his Pontifi^al Chair, over which was
a Cloth of ^tate, supported by the two Deacon Cardinals, and the Master of the
Ceremonies, the Chair being carried by his Palfrey-men, who were attired in
long Rose-coloured Garments, passing through a Guard of Switzers, who stood on
either side with drawn Swords and Halberts, making way with their
Launcespezzadoes through the numerous Crowd; and in this manner was he carried
to St. Peter's Church.

The Procession aforesaid arriving at the Church Porch, near to that Door
called the Holy Door, was a Throne erected, under a Cloth of State, railed
round to keep off the Crowd, and furnished with Seats for the Cardinals. Being
on his Throne, the Chapter, and Clergy of St. Peter's Church, were admitted to
kiss his Feet, which being performed, he entered the Church at the great Door,
and being come before the Host, he kneeled on a Carpet, and Prayed; after
which, he went to St. Gregory the Great his Chapel, otherwise called the
Clementine; and seated himself in a Rich Chair, under a Cloth of state, with
the Ambassadors of France, and of the Emperor on the right Hand, and the
Conservators of Rome, and Prior of the Caporioni on the left; all the
Cardinals, and other Prelat^^ rendering their Obedience; the Cardina^ by kissing
his Hand, and the Bishops his Knee; and from thence he gave solemn Benediction
to the People.

The Ceremony thus far advances, the Cardinals, Bishops, etc. put on their
White Ornaments, whilst the Pope read the Prayers, and Preparation for Mass;
the which when he had ended, and the Music resounded, Benedicamus Domino, he
washed his Hands, the Conservators holding the Basin the first time, and the
General of the Church the second, the Ambassador of France the third time, and
the Emperor's Ambassador the fourth; and then he put on White-Garments, and a
Rich Mitre bedeckt with Pearls, and precious Stones: Then the Prince Cardinal
of Tuscany, ordered the manner of the proceeding, in Procession; wherein, the
Pope's Chaplains carried the Mytres in their Hands, and the Acolite bore a
Censer, and an Incense Pan in his Hand before the Cross; after the Procession,
passed the Dean of the Ruota, then the Master of the Chamber, Cupbearer, the
Secret Chamberlains, the Protonotaries, and other Prelates, in Copes, and in
the space between this Chapel and that of the Apostles, the usual Ceremony of
the Blaze was performed three times distinctly, by one of the Masters of the
Ceremonies which is done by holding a bundle of Flax upon a Staff, and setting
it on Fire, and whilst it blazes, these words are expressed by him; viz. Pater
Sancte sic transit Gloria Mundi: Holy-Father, so passes away the Glory of this
World. Which is done to put him in mind of Humility and Mortality.

The Pope coming near to the Altar of the Apostles, kneeled down on a Cushion,
and prayed, having his Mitre taken off; then rising up, he made his Confession
for Mass: In the following Order, on his right hand stood Cardinal Latini the
Dean, as the Assistant-Bishop on the left, Cardinal Barbarino Deacon of the
Gospel, and assisting to them, behind were the Deacons Cardinals: In the mean
while the Gentlemen of the Chapel, began to sing the Introit of the Mass; the
Confession ended, the Pope having again his Mitre on his head, sat down in his
Chair, wherein he was brought thither; whereupon the Cardinals Latini, Roma,
and Ceneva, read each of them a prayer for the Pope, who coming out of his
Chair, and his Mitre taken off; the Prince Cardinal of Tuscany assisted by the
first Deacon, with the help of the second Deacon, put upon him the Pall;
saying, Accipe Pallium Sanctum, etc. Which done, the Cardinal of the Gospel
stuck in the three Labels of the Pall, as many pins, each of them fastening a
different Jewel, viz. on the Breast and either Shoulder; and so the Pope
without a Mitre, went to the Altar and kissed it, as also the Book of the Holy
Evangelists; and putting Incense into a Censer perfumed the Altar, and then
gave it to the Deacon of the Gospel: After this the Prince-Cardinal put on the
Mitre, and thrice perfumed him with incense; then that Cardinal and the two
Deacon-Cardinals kissed his Breast and Left Cheek; when seating himself on his
Throne all the Cardinals, and Prelates in their Vestures, together with the
Penitentiaries of St. Peter in their Vestures, did him Reverence; and the
Cardinals were admitted to kiss his Feet, Hands, and Mouth, but the Bishops
only his Feet, and Knees; the Abbots, and Penitentiaries, his Feet only; when
standing up, he read the Introit, and Kyrie eleison, and after that, the Gloria
in excelsis Deo, with the Prayer of the Mass, de Die Coronationis, being sung,
he sat him self again in his seat; then the Prince-Cardinal of Tuscany,
assisted by the Sub-Deacons-Apostolical, the Auditors of the Ruota, the
Consistorial Advocates, and other prime Officers, descended to Ranks to St.
Peter's Confession place, where some Latin Expressions, and Responses passing,
the Latin Epistle was Read by the Apostolical Subdeacon, and the Greek Epistle,
by the Greek Subdeacon; with some other Ceremonies, which for brevities sake
are omitted.

Mass ended, and the Pope being in his Chair, the Cardinal-Arch-Bishop of Saint
Peter's, and the chief Canons of the Church, presented him with a Purse of
white Taffeta, with Gold Tassels, Imbrodered and purled with Gold, and in it
twenty Giuliis, or the coin of Pope Julius, as the reward of his singing Mass,
and he as freely bestowed it on the Prince-Cardinal, who had read the Gospel:
This done, he was carried in the usual processional manner, to the
Benediction-Hall, under a Canopy supported as before; where a Throne being
placed upon a high Stage he sat him down, and after the Verse Corona aurea
super caput ejus was sung, with other Versicles and Answers: Cardinal Lenti
said a Latin prayer for him, and Cardinal Barberino took off the Mitre, and the
Prince-Cardinal of Tuscany, chief Deacon placed the Triple Crown on his Head,
withthese words, Accipe Tiraram, Tribus Coronis ornatum, and Scias te esse
Patrem Principum, and Regum Rectorem orbis, in terra Vicarium Salvatoris
nostri, Jesu Christi, cujus est Honor and Gloria, in secula seculorum, Amen.
This done the Pope read the Benediction; which began Sancti Apostoli, and when
he came to the words Benedictio Dei Patris omnipotentis, he stood up three
times and Blessed the people, and gave Plenary Indulgences; and once more
repeating the Benediction, he went to his Lodging, after his Pontifical
Ornaments were taken off, in Pope Sixtus's Chapel; where from Cardinal Capone,
in the name of the College of Cardinals, he received the usual wish of Ad
multos Annos; then upon sign given, the Cannon of the Castle let fly, as did
the Guards from St. Peter's Piazzo. And so in sum, have you heard (Reader) of
the Creation and Coronation of Pope Innocent the Tenth, nor have any since him,
much varied in particulars, as to the Manner of Performance; from whence we
shall proceed, to give an Account of his riding in State, to take possession of
the Church of St. John de Lateran, and of the Ceremonies performed there.

CHAP. XIV. An Account of Pope Innocent the Tenth, his Riding in Procession, to
take possession of the Lateran Church, and the Ceremonies used in Rome on that
Occasion.
POPE Innocent the Tenth, being raised to the highest Ecclesiastical Dignity,
to complete the Ceremony on the twenty third of November, 1644. he went to take
Possession of his Lateran Church; setting forth from his Palace about seven in
the Morning, with a very Splendid Train; the Order being thus.

After the Trumpets, and a Vant-Guard of Horse, rode two and two; many of the
Cardinal's Servants, each carrying his Lords Valise of Scarlet, imbroidred with
Gold, and after them the Mace-bearers, with their Silver Maces, on Horseback,
having the respective Cardinal's Arms, Engraven on each; then the Cardinal's
Followers, with those of the Ambassadors, and Princes, with the Nobility of
Rome, Richly Habited, and well Mounted; after them, came diverse Lanspez zados,
who kept off the Crowd, and after them, four of the Pope's Squires in Red; also
two Valise-bearers in Red Jackets, with Crimson Valises embroidered with Gold;
after them, clothed with Red Mandilions, the Palfreys whereon the Pope was wont
to ride, were lead by the Grooms of the Stable; and these are the yearly
Presents of the King of Spain, for the Kingdom of Naples, by way of Tribute;
and were adorned with Foot-Cloths, and Trappings, imbost with Silver, and
imbroidered with Silk, and Gold; and some of them led the Mules, with Trappings
of Red Velvet: After these came the Pope's Litters, some Scarlet, and others
Crimson-Velvet, imbroidered, and fringed with Gold: Then rode a great many of
the Roman Nobility, splendidly accoutred, waited on by Footmen in Rich
Liveries, without observing any order of Precedence: Next these, came five of
the Pope's Mace-Bearers, in Purple Gowns, bearing Silver Maces: After them,
Fourteen Drummers, in Red Satin Jackets, on Foot, trimmed with Gold, and
Feathers in their Hats, beating a March, having on their Drums the Pope's Arms,
as likewise those of the People of Rome: Then the Pope's Trumpets, with
Crimson-Banners, whereon his Arms were imbroidered in Silk, and Gold; after
them, came the Chamberlains, extra Muros; and a considerable number of
Secret-Chamberlains, followed by the Consistorial Advocates, and the four
Participants, carrying the Pope's four Crimson Hats, upon Maces: After these,
followed on Horseback 40. Roman Magistrates, Habited in Black Senatorian-Velvet
Gowns, reaching to their Feet, with Horse Coverings, and Bonnets of the same:
Next them, came the Abbreviators de Parco Maggiore, Auditors de Ruota, and the
Masters of the Palace, who were followed by Fourteen Roman Marshals, in
White-Sattin, under-Garments Purple, Sattin-Jackets, and Caps of Velvet: After
them, followed the Fourteen Caporioni, habited in Crimson Velvet-Gowns,
imbroidered with Gold, and Velvet-Caps, enriched with Jewels.

These were succeeded by the Senators, and Conservators of Rome in splendid
Apparel, and they by the Lord Governor, and the Emperor's Ambassador. Then the
chief Masters of the Ceremonies, and Apostolical Subdeacon, bearing Crosses
between the two Red Vergers, so called, from the Crimson Vergers they carry;
then Fifty Noble Youths, in Garments of White-Sattin, with Gold imbroidery, who
went near the Pope's Litter, bare-headed, which was likewise imbroidered with
Gold, and wherein the Pope was; when immediately after him, came the Master of
the Chamber, Cup Bearer, Physician, Secretary, etc. Whilst on each side stood
the Guard of Switzers, with Halberts: And lastly, in order followed the
Cardinal-Arch-Bishops, Patriarks, Assistant-Bishops, Protonotaries,
Referendaries, and as the Rear, the Horse Guards, in Red Cassocks, and their
Officers richly attired.

In this manner, the great Procession came to the Church porch of St. John de
Lateran, where the Pope alights from his Litter, Cardinal Colonna, who was
Archbishop of that Church, gave him the Cross to kiss, which he did kneeling
on his Knees; after that, sitting a while in the Porch, the Canons and Clergy
kissed his Feet; then the Cardinal-Arch-Priest made an Oration, and presented
him with a Silver-Bason, and in it two Keys, one of Gold, and the other Silver,
spread with Flowers, being the Keys of the Church, and Lateran Palace; after
which, he went from the Porch to the great Gate of the Church, where the
Aspersorio, or sprinkling Brush, was put into his Hand by the
Cardinal-Arch-Bishop, with which, having sprinkled himself, and others, he
returned it again, and by that Cardinal, was three times censed; Then in his
Chair, under a Canopy, he was carried to the Altar of St. Peter, and St. Paul,
where all the Cardinals did Obeisance to him; upon which he went to the
High-Altar, and gave the Benediction, saying these Words, viz. Sit Nomini
Domini Benedictum; and then again ascending his Chair, he was carried into the
great Hall of the Lateran Palace, where seating himself at the upper end, he
gave each Cardinal a Medal of Gold, and another of Silver; and to those that
had Offices, for every Office a Medal of Gold; then standing on his Feet, he
took handfuls of Coin out of the Assistant's Lap, which was made of a mixed
Metal; but neither Silver nor Gold; and saying, Gold and Silver I have none,
but such as I have, I give unto you, he threw it amongst the Spectators; then
went he in Procession to the Lodge of Benediction, where he gave a solemn
Benediction, and caused the Prince Cardinal d' Medici, to publish a Plenary
Indulgence in Latin, and the Cardinal Antonio, the like in Italian; then he
gave a second Benediction, and so returned to St. Peter's, accompanied by the
Train he brought. And thus much of Triumph, from whence we shall proceed, to a
sadder part, which is, the Conclusion of all Wordly Pomp and Glory, and so put
an end to this Work; which is an Account of the Proceedings at Rome, upon the
Sickness, Death, and Funeral-Solemnities of the Pope, or High-Bishop.

CHAP. XV. An Account of the Pope's Behavior, on his Deathbed, and of the
Ceremonies of his Burial, and Solemn Obsequies, etc.
IF the Pope fall Sick, and the Physicians find he will Dye of that Sickness,
they are not to hide it from him; but advise him to be mindful of his Immortal
State; yet to give him some Encouragement, by promising not to be wanting in
any thing, that may contribute to his Recovery. After which, they must acquaint
his Confessor, what they think as to the nearness of his end, who thereupon
hastens to him, and makes him more sensible of his approaching Fate, by letting
him know he is but Dust, admonishing him to confess himself to him; soon after,
all his Domestic Prelates come before him, and the chief of his Family; in
whose Presence, and in that of the Eucharist, he makes usually his open
Confession of his Faith, which he protests he has ever constantly held, and
maintained, and therein by the grace of God, will Live and Dye. Then he asks
forgiveness of them, if by Inadvertency, he has injured any of them, and
bestows some Spiritual Benediction, or Graces on them, yet requires them to
pray for his Soul; then he requires the Vestry-Keeper, that he may receive the
Viaticum, and the other Sacraments, when the Prelates see it needful, and if he
be in perfect Memory, and not in extraordinary pain; he sends for the
Cardinals, and again makes his Confession of Faith before them, and asks
their pardon, if by mis-government he has offended any of them; entreating
them to pray for him, and recommends the Church to their care; and to be
diligent and unanimous in the Election of one to succeed him; and sometimes
nominates whom he thinks fit for that charge: He likewise lets them know his
Debts, and Credits, with all his Treasure; and makes his Will, recommending to
them his Family, and Retinue, and so dismisses them with his Benediction, who
finding the Pope past Recovery, with the Chamberlain, take an Inventory of all
things in the Palace; as likewise, take an Account of what is in the Lord
Vestry-keeper's Charge; and to prevent Tumults, privately draw the
Ecclesiastical Militia into the City, posting them to the best Advantage, and
provide for the Provinces within the Territories of the Church, by Letters and
Messengers to the respective Governors: And when the Pope is about to depart,
the Cross is held to him by some of his Domestic Prelates, to put him in mind
that Christ died for the Sins of Mankind; and the Vestry-keeper gives him the
Extreme Unction, and commends his Soul to God, whilst the Penitentiaries stand
round him, reading the Penitential Psalm, and other Prayers, as he is expiring.

Being dead, the Lord Chamberlain washes his Body with the Decoction of sweet
Herbs and Wine, stopping all the purging Vents with Aromatical Gums and Odors;
after which, the Penitentiaries put on him his ordinary Clothing, and over
them the Vestments he was wont to celebrate Mass in; and so lay him upon a
Bier, covered with Cloth of Gold, on which are the Popes and the Churches
Arms; under his Head they put a Pillow of the the same, and two under his Feet,
and on them two Pontifical Hats; and thus if he dies in the Night is it watched
till the Morning by the Penitentiaries, singing about it; and then by them
carried to the great Chapel, the Subdeacons carrying the Cross before it, and
the Gentlemen of the Chapel sing Subvenite, etc. Whilst his Esquires bear many
lighted Torches, as his Family following; and being in the Chapel, the
Penitentiaries sing Vespers and Vigils, until the approach of the other
Religious Orders: After some time the College of the Clergy, and Convents of
Friars come, and singing Vigils, sprinkle the Corpse with Holy Water, and cense
it: Then with many Torches before him is he carried to St. Peter's Church, and
there placed in the midst of it: He remains two days, that the People may see
him and kiss his Hand: Then is he carried again to the Chapel in the Night
time, and buried, whilst great preparations are made to solemnize his Funeral.
In the Church a Hearse hung round with his Arms is erected, Illuminated with
Wax-Tapers. Then the Messengers of the Roman Court give notice of the Day of
Obsequies to all the Cardinals, Prelates, Ambassadors, Officers, etc. and the
Morrow following, the Cardinals repair thither in their Mourning, and take
their places on Seats prepared for that purpose, near the high Altar, and so
the rest as they are in Office and Dignity, as well Prelates as inferior
Servants, all in Mourning, the latter placing themselves about the Hearse: Then
the Celebration of the Obsequies is entered upon, after the Funeral manner of
the Roman Church. On the first Day two hundred Masses are said, and Alms
bountifully distributed to Men and Women of several Religious Orders; and a
sermon in commendation of him is made; and so continue to officiate till the
ninth day, on which an equal number of Masses with the first day are said; and
an exhortatory Sermon, to encourage them to the Election of a new Bishop,
preached; and so ends that Ceremony.

As soon as the Pope is dead, the Cardinals send their Dispatches, by the
Consent of their College, to the several Princes, Prelates, and such as are
dependant on the Roman See, to signify it; useing the Apostolical Style, in
calling the Princes, Sons, and the Prelates, Brethren. Also the Vice
Chancellor, upon the Death of the Pope, takes away the Bulls, wherewith the
Apostolical Letters were Sealed, from the Keepers, and rases out the Pope's
Name, rendering it unfit for Sealing; and redelivers the other part in a Linen
Bag, taking great Care, that no Letters pass in the Pope's Name after his
Decease.

And thus much, Reader, have we thought fit to set down, the which, tho be so
unhappy, as not to prove beneficial to the Curious, in letting them know, what
before they might be ignorant of; yet, at least, it cannot prejudice or offend
the impartial and unbiassed of the Age.

FINIS.
There is lately Printed for Hen. Rodes, next door to the Swan-Tavern, near
Bride-Lane in Fleet Street; the following Books.
THE Comical History of the State and Empire of the World of the Moon. As also
a Description of the World of the Sun: Written In French, by Cyrano Bergerac,
newly done into English in 80.

The Strange and Prodigious Religions, Customs, and Manners, of diverse Nations.
Containing; First, the Ridiculous Rites, and Ceremonies of the Heathens, in the
Worship of their several Deities. Secondly, the various changes of the Jewish
Religion, and the State it is now in: With a full Relation of the Apparitions,
that foretold the fall of Jerusalem; as also of the dreadful Famine, wherein a
Woman roasted, and eat her own Child; with the Circumstances of the Final
Destruction of that Famous City, under Titus. Thirdly, The Rise and Growth of
Mahometanism, giving an Account of the Doctrine of the Turkish Alcoron. viz.
Their Commandments, and Strange Pilgrimage to Mecca, etc. With the Life of that
Grand Impostor, Mahomet; as also Remarks on the Life of Scanderbeg, with the
many Victories he gained over the Turks. Fourthly, the Schisms, and Heresies in
the Christian Church: Being an Account of those Grand Heretics, the Adamites,
Mugletonians, etc. and all intermingled with Pleasant Relations of the
Fantastical Rites, both of the Ancients and Moderns, in the Celebration of
their Marriages, and Solemnization of their Funerals: Faithfully collected from
Ancient and Modern Authors, and adorned with diverse Pictures, of several
remarkable Passages therein; by R. D. price bound one Shilling.

Historical, and Political Observations on the Present State of Turkey;
describing the Policy, Religion, Manners, and Military Discipline of the Turks;
with an Account of all the Battles, Seiges and other remarkable Transactions
and Revolutions which have happened, from the Beginning of the Ottoman Empire,
to this Present Grand Seignor. To which is added his Life, containing all the
material Occurrences, that have happened during his Reign; together with the
Present State of Hungary, and History of the Wars, Price bound one Shilling.

Conversations on several Subjects, written in French by M. de Scudery, and
done into English, by Ferrand Spence.

The London Jilt, or the Politic Whore, wherein is showed all the Artifices
and Stratagems, which the Ladies of Pleasure make use of, for the Intriguing
and Decoying of Men: Interwoven with several pleasant Stories of the Misses
ingenious Performances, in two Parts.

A New Voyage to the East Indies; containing an Account of several of those
rich Countries, more particularly of the Kingdom of Bantam; giving an exact
Relation of that Monarchs Dominions; the Religion, Manners, and Customs of the
Inhabitants; their Comerce, and the Product of the Country; and likewise a
faithful Narrative of the Kingdom of Siam, of the Isles of Japan, and
Madagascar; and of several other parts, with such new Discoveries, as were
never yet Extant by any other Traveller; the second Edition, by Mr. Olanius;
price bound one Shilling.

The School of Recreation; or the Gentleman's Tutor, to those most Ingenious
Exercises, of Hunting, Racing, Hawking, Riding, Cock-Fighting, Fowling,
Fishing, Shooting, Bowling, Tennis, Ringing, Billiards, Price Bounel 1 s.

Coffee-House Jests, Refined and Enlarged, by the Author of the Oxford Jests,
the Fourth Edition, with large Additions, Price Bound. 1 s.

Wit's Cabinet, or a Companion for Young Men and Ladies, containing the whole
Art of Wooing, and making Love; with the best Complemental Letters, Elegant
Epistles, Amorous Addresses, and Answers, in a most Pleasant and Ingenious
strain, with the newest Songs, Sung at Court, and both Theaters.

The School of Bacchus, or the whole Art of Drinking, taught by a New, and most
Learned Method.

The Interpretation of all sorts of Dreams.

The Art of Chiromancy, and Palmistry.

The several sorts of Cosmeticks, for Chearing, and Beautifying the Face, and
taking away all Freckles, Morphews, Tetters, and Ring-worms, and for preserving
the Complexion; together with the way of making all sorts of Perfumes and
Sweet-Waters.

The use of Metals, and precious Stones, and the way to Counterfeit them.

Several of the choicest Secrets of Art and Nature.

General Rules for Genteel Behavior of Young Men and Ladies, in all Companies.

Several sorts of News, from diverse Parts, very Jocose and Pleasant, Price
bound 1 s.

The Christian's Guide to Devotion, with Rules and Directions for a Holy Life;
as also Meditations and Prayers, by S. Smith; the Second Edition, Price bound
one Shilling.

The whole Duty of a Communicant; being Rules and Directions, for the Worthy
Receiving the most Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, by the Reverend Father
in God John Gauden, late Lord Bishop of Exeter: The Second Edition, with
Additions out of that Reverend Prelate's Original Copies, Price bound one
Shilling.

The History of Cera Mustapha, the late Grand Vizier, being a Faithful Account
of the Rise, and several Degrees of his Fortune; his Amors in the Seraglio,
his Exploits, the true Cause of his undertaking the Siege of Vienna, together
with the Particulars of his Death. Originally Written in French, and Faithfully
Translated into English by F. Philo, Price bound 1 s.

The Serasquier Bassa, or an Historical Novel of the times, containing all that
passed at the Siege of Buda, out of French, Price Bound 1 s.

The End.

