Advertisement
THere is now in the PRESS a Book, Entitled, The Liberty of an Apostate
Conscience: being a plain Narrative of the Controversy long depending Between
Francis Bugg on the one part, and Samuel Cater and George Smith on the other
part: whereby F. Bugg's Liberty of Conscience is proved not only Unchristian,
but Immoral and Injurious.

Righteous Judgment Placed upon the Heads of Malicious OPPOSERS AND Persecuting
Apostates: In some brief Animadversions upon Francis Buggs Book, entitled, De
Christiana Liberate: In which his great Weakness and gross Wickedness is
Detected, his foul Defamations and uncivil Reflections are Reprehended. With a
seasonable Warning to him and the rest of his Abettors in their Mischievous
Work of Opposition to and Separation from the Lord and his People.

By a Lover of Peace, Robert Sandilands.

Together with an Ingredient by another hand.

Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses,
contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them, Romans 16.17. For
there are many Unruly and Vain Talkers, whose Mouths must be stopped, Tit
1.10, 11. I will remember his Deeds, Prating against us with Malicious Words, 3
John London, Printed by John Bringharst, at the Sign of the Book in
Grace Church Street. 1683.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
READER,
ALthough this, with diverse other Testimonies, may prove as Water spilt on the
ground, and seem altogether as ineffectual, so as to produce any real
conviction upon the Spirits of some of our Opposers, who are become many of
them so obstinate, stout and hard-hearted, that the most clear demonstration
that may be produced to convince them of their folly, appears partly impossible
to prevail, so as to persuade or bring them to a true sense of their
unchristian proceedings and malicious endeavors: Yet I am not without hope,
but the sober unbyassed persons, whose minds are not pre-possessed, neither
with partial selfish designs of Interest, on the one hand; nor with private
Affection, on the other hand; may reap of the profit, and gain a right
understanding by their serious perusal and deliberate examination of this and
other Testimonies.

And therefore is it mainly for such we are encouraged to open, and give a true
naked relation of matters, as plainly before the All-seeing, Heart-searching,
Divine Majesty, Who will bring all the hidden things of dishonesty to Light;
and indeed, had it not been upon this Account, I do reckon that the confused,
rambling, impertinent stuff, made up with most notorious lies and malicious
Insinuations, grievous Slanders and Reflections, were not worth while to take
notice of; for I mind well the saying of a Wise Man, Contra verbosos noli
contendere verbis; We are not to contest by words against windy Men, or Men of
words; and he gives a good Reason, Sermo datur cunctis animi sapientia paucis:
Many have the Gift of Speech, but few (comparatively) attain to Wisdom, and
therefore we are advised in the Holy Scriptures, Answer not a Fool in his
Folly, lest thou become like unto him: But lest advantage should be catched,
the simple ensnared, and the true Enquirers misinformed, we are not willing to
be quite silent.

The Reader may also take notice what dreadful hardness of Heart some of these
contrary opposite Spirits are fallen under, that they have had the daring
boldness most insolently to deny the very power of God in its Operations and
Effects, when it has wrought upon his people true tenderness and brokenness of
Heart; and if they have thus impudently slighted the same, no wonder then that
they so basely abuse us at such a rate as W. R. T. C. and this F. B. and others
have done.

Now Reader, if so be that through he good hand of God, thou art not one
tinctured with this dirty foul profane flouting, and I may say in some
respect, Blasphemous and Atheistical Spirit. O! praise it highly, I beseech
thee, as thy great mercy, as I do; and I pray God keep thee with my self and
all Gods faithful honest-hearted people, from the Snares of this murdering
Spirit, that has destroyed in such in whom it has prevailed, the inward
tender sense of the precious life of Jesus, that they have as openly denied and
violently opposed the same as any of our former or present public Enemies
among the Professors ever did or can do. Obs. Crying out, Away with our inward
sense, away with our discerning of Spirit, which I have heard some of them to
say.


And if (Reader) thou be one of a mild, sober, retired mind, and desires not to
be much concerned with these Controversies; then Ladvise thee, regard well the
prosperity of the work of Truth, and feel thy daily experience thereof in thy
own particular, (and Oh! well had it been this day with many, That they had
looked more at home than abroad.) Beware I pray thee of a cold, lukewarm,
indifferent Spirit (which would appear neutral, and it is not, but is nearer to
that which is wrong than right) and this I know lies near to enter many
well-disposed persons, who are of a good natural temper, and mean well; and if
it happen thou be at any time exercised concerning the differences of Opinions,
or in things in themselves indifferent, be not stiff in maintaining thy own
Judgment of them; but rather be of a condescending mind, and so let thy
humility and meekness appear thereby, that thou art rather willing to acquiesce
in thy Sentiments, to the understanding and sense of others (when especially)
there is a reason and a cause requires the same) then seem to be of such who
are heady, high, and self-conceited in their own imaginations; there is a
notable expression of a certain Devout Person wort by of observation; Its true
(says he) that every one willingly inclines to follow those who are of the
same Opinion with him. Sedsi Deus est intra nos ^ecesse est ut relinquamus
etiam quandoque nostrum sentire propter bonum pacis; i. e. But if God be
amongst us, there is a necessity that we sometimes also for the good of Peace
forsake or leave our own Opinion; for who is he that is so Wise that can fully
know all things.

And if so be thou art one that has suffered thy Affections to corrupt thy
Judgment and cloud thy Understanding, that thou cannot discern nor judge of
things clearly as they are on neither sides, and yet some true tenderness and
goodwill to both, and a reverend regard to the Testimony of Truth remaining in
thy heart. Well Reader; I would counsel thee in the first place be still,
patient and quiet in thy mind, and then draw in the Affections of thy Soul from
all visible presentations, and so singly wait upon God, to feel him reveal that
to thee which thou sees not; and in the interim have a special care, that
hardness of heart insensibly come not over thee, and steal in upon thee, as too
many have been thus sadly betrayed, especially after once that their Affections
have been catched with that transforming, cunning, and alluring Spirit of Envy
and Discord: For, Anguis later in herba.

Moreover, Reader, I would by way of Caution premonish and entreat thee, not to
entertain harsh thoughts of me, when thou reads some Expressions that may seem
somewhat hard, and thereby judge I want Charity.

I can uprightly say in the singleness of my heart, and do in the presence of
the allseeing great God, ingenously profess, That what I here wrote in this
following Testimony, proceeds not from any kind of pieque, prejudice or envy to
the persons of any of these contrary party, being both altogether a stranger to
this Francis Bugg; having no occasion to entertain any such thing, nor no
temptation as upon an outward account, to lead me thereunto; and also being of
another Nation: and truly it was contrary to my disposition, having no delight
or satisfaction (for my life is not in these Controversies and Contentions) to
have meddled at all with them to appear thus in public; but F. B's Book coming
to my hand, beyond either what I was in the least expecting or desirous of; and
after my perusal of the same, I found a Holy Zeal and Indignation arise in me
against that most malicious mocking Spirit of the Author: and I could not but
show an Absolute Antipathy and utter Abhorrency of that base scurrilous abusive
Spirit, that has prevailed upon such as are Adherents to this proud conceited
man, to vent forth so many lying Insinuations, uncivil and unchristian
Reflections, abominable Forgeries and Defamations, as well against the whole
Body of Friends in this and other Nations, as against diverse particular honest
Friends, viz. G. F. G. W. R. R. I. F, etc.

And I can say, Blessed be the Lord, as for my self, so for many of his
Servants, that what we have given forth as the sentence and judgment of Truth
against this disorderly, loose, libertine Spirit, and such as walk therein, is
in measure from the same Good Will, Meekness, and tender regard to the Eternal
Well-being of the Souls of our envious Detractors, as appeared in our blessed
Head, the Lord Jesus, in whom there was no Spleen, Bitterness, or Envy, against
the Persons of those Hypocrites, the Scribes and Pharisees, in his time,
notwithstanding he denounced such and such dreadful Woes unto them.

And Reader, there are diverse other passages I could have taken notice of,
which I have omitted (being somewhat straightened at present with the convenience
of leisure, and engaged in another service, more delightsome to me) as
concerning the lamentable Apostasy and Backslidings of these Separates, vho are
but wheeling round about again into their old Center; so that indeed I may say
the Scale is turned, and the Scene is changed with them, and those things which
formerly they testified against they are found in the practice of, building
again the things which they once destroyed, thereby making themselves
Transgressors, as diverse instances could be produced; but these two or three
may serve as a sufficient proof at present.

First, I know diverse of them, have fallen back from the pure Scriptural
language of Thou to one (which Friends of Truth in our day have been led into
by the Spirit of the Lord, and in obedience thereunto, continue in the same)
into the corrupt Babylonish Speech as You to one person, etc.

Secondly, They have degenerated from their Testimony, and fallen in again with
the World in their Observation of the heathenish Names of the Months, as this
F. B. particularly says, page 206. Being in London in the Month of February.
And,

Lastly, Their woeful Apostatizing from their ancient Testimony, as to paying of
Tithes, and going to the Priests to be married, See T. C's. 2d. Part Bab.
builders, p. 5. and 4 Part p 9. where he says expressly, It is his Principle to
do so and so.
both as well practiced as professed to be T. C's. Principle, justifying the
same.

And Reader, for thy further satisfaction, I refer thee to read that Book
called, The Accuser of the Brethren cast out, etc. and Tho. Elwoods Antidote
against the Infection of W. Rs. Book, lately printed, of special service,
wherein his, and the rest of his Brethren in Mischief, their Confusions and
Contradictions are plainly discovered, and the charge of Apostasy and
Innovation is justly retorted upon them.

Finally, Reader, I leave thee to the serious perusal of this ensuing Treatise,
and desire that it may be in the holy Fear of Almighty God, and with a calm,
moderate, and impartial mind; and so recommend thee to the word of his saving
Grace, which alone can open to thee both the Mystery of Godliness and also of
Iniquity, that thou may duly attend and obey what it teaches, and so thereby
thou may attain to the one, and escape the other, is the end of this labor of
Love through him, who is a real Well-wisher of all the Sons and Daughters of
men,

R. S.
London the 12th of the 5 Mo. 1682.
THE INTRODUCTION:
THat Exercise which through Divine Assistance I am now about, in undertaking
to discover the Hellish Enmity, and most malicious, bitter, venomous Spirit of
Deceit and Discord, that has possessed and prevailed upon too too many of
those (with heavy sadness of Heart and great grief of Soul do I express it)
whose minds are Adulterated from the Experimental living Sense of the
Holy-Divine Gift of God: As it is truly in the Cross to my own will or natural
Inclination, who would have more gladly been contented to be silent in such a
work; so was it very contrary to my expectations, when it pleased the Almighty
God of Heaven and Earth first to draw me forth into the Service and Labor of
his blessed Truth, of ever being concerned with such hard and grievous
Exercises amongst false Brethren; occasioned by the subtle Stratagems of the
old Troubler of Israel in his wicked Agents, what by their unchristian and
inhumane Reflection^ whereby I might be liable to the Censure of the Civil
Powers, Obs. I was more than once reproached by them as a Jesuit, of which many
Witnesses I could produce.
and what by their disdainful; uncivil behavour other ways, that for my part
they have fully evidenced to me (though outwardly Strangers to most of them) to
be in the first place persons altogether void of the living Virtue, Power; and
Efficacy of the Truth and true Religion, and so far from being Christians in
Nature and Possession, however, under the bare Name and empty Profession
thereof.

The second place destitute of that common Discretion, Prudence and Civility as
amongst Men, and so far from the Reason or Rational Principle in Man; whereby
that saying is verified, Man that is in honor, and understands not, is like
the Beasts, that perish; Psalm. 40* 20.

But what shall I say! has not this been always the lot and the very portion
of the Righteous in all Generations under eevery Dispensation, As there was a
Cain against an Abel, an Ishmael against an Isaac, a Esau against Jacob, and a
Judas amongst Christ's Disciples.
from the beginning of the Creation, since the Lord gathered a People to
himself, to this our Day or Age, thus to be attended with various deep
Exercises by Oppositions, Violence and Persocutions from the World on the one
hand, and by Distraction, Discord and Separation on the other hand, of those
who have appeared as amongst us, but were not of us; and therefore that they
might be made manifest what Bottom and Evil Spirit they were of,
notwithstanding they lurked under, and were covered for a time with a
Profession of the Way and Holy Truth of God, they have gone away from us, as
the Apostle writ concerning the Antichrists, They went out from us, but they
were not of us: and the Reason he gives is clear, For (says he) if they had
been of us, they would, no doubt have continued with us: But they went out, (to
what end?) That they might be made manifest, that they were not all of us, 1
John 2.19. We may observe, the Church of Christ in his time was then sadly
troubled with these Antichrists, such as rose up in Appearance for Christ
against Christ, in opposing the Blessed Divine Manifestations of his Spirit,
through the Members of his Church: And I remember, he makes particular mention
of one Diotrephes* who it seems (as many like unto him in our day following his
very footsteps) Ioved to have the pre-eminence, and who prated against them
with malicious Words; and good Paul, was he not very sensible in foreseeing
that this would attend the Churches, and therefore forewarned them thereof in
his farewell to the Elders of Ephesus? Take heed therefore unto your selves, and
to all the Flock, over the which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers; for I
know this, that after my departing, shall grievous Wolves (under the form or
appearance its like of Lambs) not sparing the Flock: also of your own selves
shall Men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them,
Acts 20.25, 26, etc. And in his Salutation to the Romans, Chap. 16. v. 17.
says, Now I beseech you, Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions and
Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them. So
that we may clearly perceive, it is no new or strange thing that has happened
to be our sad Exercise; as indeed I do look upon it to be the most grievous of
all the Exercises that could have befallen us, I mean as with respect of the
Body of Friends.

And now amongst many of the chief Agents of Cruelty, Slander and Envy, whom
the Devil (that great Enemy to the Peace of Christ's Church) has made use of,
and this pernicious work of opposition to, and separation from the good Order
and wholesome Discipline thereof, I find lately one called Francis Bugg in
Aragon, a proud self-conceited person, and yet as confused and malicious as
any, which I hope (anon) to Evince, by some brief Animadversions on the Second
Part of his Book, called, De Christiana Liberate; the first part only relating
to Liberty of Conscience, none of his Work, but by a nameless Author.

So far now as I feel my self concerned for the Truths sake, and the
vindication thereof, to give forth my Testimony as well against the great
weakness, as the gross wickedness of this Hellish, dark piece of deceitful work
of Envy and Folly, and to detect his groundless Suggestings, unchristian
Reflections and uncivil Informations, not at all designing thereby to undertake
the Answering of every particular passage that has relatition to particular
persons engaged in the differences betwixt our Friends, and the separate party
(for that would be a work both more tedious, and also would require more pains
then at present I can take to undertake the same) which I leave to them as they
find themselves concerned, in Truth to take notice of; my present work then
only is to make some shor Observations of that which in General I am concerned
with, and lies most obvious in my view.

Righteous Judgment placed upon the Heads of our Malicious Opposers.

CHAP. I.
HAving perused the Second Part of Francis Bugg's Book, he miscalls, De
Christiana Liberate, I do not so much as find any one page or passage to have
the least resemblance of, I doubt very much whether he knows what the true
Chrsstian liberty means
or Relation to Christian Liberty, in a true and proper sense; I mean what he
has wrote himself, and not what is Transcribed from other Authors, abstracting
which, there will be but a small parcel of his remaining.

Besides, thou may take notice of the Pride and Self-conceitedness of this vain
Man, who gives his Book a Latin Title, which signifies no more in Latin then in
English, and has no more Emphasis nor Authority in it, therefore only useful
for Vain Ostentation: especially considering that the Book it self is no ways
correspondent to the Title.

In his Epistle, page 4. He alleges two principal Reasons, why we look upon
him and his Adherents to be no Quakers, or consequently as he says no
Christians. First, He says, Our Non-submission and Nonconformity to the New
Order of the Women. (He begins thus in his flouting Airy mind.) And Secondly,
That their way of compelling and Antichristian way of proceeding to bring to,
and force Uniformity, is by us slighted and contemned.

Answer, But we know right well, there is a Third and a more weighty Reason
than either of these, and that is, We have a certain inward sense and sure
discerning from the Infallible Spirit of Truth (which I know they will not
regard, or admit of) that the wrong, wicked, perverse Spirit has entered into
them, and thereby are Adulterated in these minds from the blessed pure Spirit
of Christ Jesus, and departed from the Truth in the inward parts, whereby they
are degenerated, and were so in their Spirits, before ever they durst publicly
appear in this treacherous work of Separation, and before it wa^ so notorious
as it is now. And so they having Apostatized from the Truth, and the living
Virtue and sensible Operation and Experience of the Life thereof, first in
their own particulars, thus, They (and not We) have rendered themselves n^^
Quakers, or no Christians.

For we never concluded any person to be truly a Christian simply because of
his outward Conformity to the Profession of Truth, and because of his
Submission to the Holy and Decent Order of Christ's Church, in respect there is
nothing visible can rightly constitute and properly denominate any Man or Woman
True Christians in the sight of God, who regards more the inward bent, frame
and disposition of the Minds of People, than their outward appearance, however
glorious it may be; and therefore it is of absolute necessity that their hearts
and spirits be uprightly stated in his sight, if ever they attain to the Nature
of true Christianity.

Now though it be confessed, that many outwardly may appear in the view of others
for a time seemingly strict and serious in their Conversations, so that nothing
can be justly charged against them, that is apparently Wicked and Gross; yet in
the mean time their Hearts not right, nor ^ound before the Lord, something that
is ^bominable, offensive and grievous to his Holy spirit, Thus has it been
with many of the separate party.
is secretly lodged and privately enter^ain'd, as their beloved Delila, which
at ^ast (may be) breaks forth into some Extravagancy or other; I say one (as a
Hypocrite) may be thus dressed up with a specious show and fair cover, appear
so and so; Yea, and for their interest sake Conform to that which is good and
praiseworthy, and which in its self is commendable and laudible; but in the
bottom rotten and deceitful; yet though these do so, it will not follow in good
reason, that those who are truly and inwardly sanctified, cleansed and purified
in their Conscience from dead works, and whose Hearts are Sincere, Honest, and
Upright, should not so and so appear as to the outward, in an holy harmless
Life and innocent Conversation, and also in a Conformity and Submission to that
which is Orderly and Decent, and to be subject to follow that which is
convenient, needful and profitable, amongst a People, no more then that is true;
though as the common Proverb is, It is not all Gold that glisters. And as we
say, All are not in the Possession of what they are in the Profession of. Yet
is there no true Gold that glisters? And surely those who do possess of the
living Virtue of Truth, and are faithful to the Lord, they are engaged
publicly to appear in Profession of, and Confession to the same.

In the beginning of the Preface, page 7, F. B. says, The main thing intended
by this Discourse is to show the Mischief of Impositions on tender Consciences
in matters Spiritual, etc.

Thus he insinuates as a false charge upon the whole Body of our Friends to be
guilty of, which indeed is their main principal Basis or ground, from whence
does proceed all their fierce violent Clashings, bitter and malicious
Invectives, base and unchristian Reflections, viz. Their Imaginary, formed, and
groundless supposition and envious suspicion, That we endeavored to compel and
force tender Consciences in matters Spiritual, to be conformed and in
subjection to that, contrary to the persuasion of their minds, and Light of
Christ in their Consciences; this is easily disproved, and has been fully
confuted by many living Testimonies that we have given forth on this account,
both by word and writing, and for a further confirmation thereof, thus do I
affirm on the behalf of all my dear Friends, who are thus abused by these foul,
perverse, and scoffing Spirits, That the Almighty God, the searcher of Hearts,
and tryer of Reins, he knows we never endeavored nor designed to compel any to
subject in a Conformity to that which we know was both just and reasonable, who
were not fully satisfied in their own Consciences, and not freedom and
clearness in their minds thereto.

For they who received Truth in the love thereof, and continue in subjection to
it, the power and force of it will enable and make them willing to obey the
voice of God, immediately in their own Hearts, and in the Mouths of his
Servants; which Voice of God calls unto Holiness, without which none shall see
him, and there being an aptness or proneness in many after they are reached to
by the Lord to neglect that Duty he requires of them, therefore in his tender
Love, has he given Gifts for the work of the Ministry, for the perfecting of
the Saints, for the Edifying of the Body, till we all come in the Unity of the
Faith into a perfect Man, unto the measure of his Stature, of the fullness of
Christ, Ephesians. 4.8. etc. -- And well said the Apostle Peter, Yea I think it meet
as long as I am in this Tabernacle to stir you up (or) to stir up your pure
minds by way of remembrance) that we may be mindful of the words which were
spoken before by the Holy Prophets, and of the Commandment of us the Apostles
of the Lord and Savior; knowing this first, that there shall come in the last
days scoffers, walking after their own Lusts, 2 Pet. 1.15.3.1, 2. etc. Which
also was practiced by the Apostles in Exhortation, Admonition, Counsel,
Reproof, and Condemnation, as the Spirit of Truth Directed them, and according
to the several states of People, to whom they Ministered by Word or Epistle.

And Reader, it is well known, that any who were really scrupulous, from a true
tenderness of their Spirits; careful, or fearful to do any thing but what they
found to be their Duty, and in the Light of Christ Jesus, did see they were
called to be obedient to the same; over these we have been very tender, and
have encouraged and counseled them, Singlely to wait upon the Lord, for a
sight and sense from him by the in shinings of his pure Light of that which
they ought to do, and if we could inform their understandings, and in the good
hand of the Lord be instrumental to clear their Judgments, by opening to them
the profit and great advantage reaped by those who have found it their place to
be in Unity with their Brethren in a Christian Condescension, to those things
that are decent, orderly, and profitable in the Church of Christ, that we have
endeavored to do, and (blessed be the Lord) our labor of Love and pains
therein has proved successful, and many have been helped thereby, to see
through the Mysterious wiles and subtle workings of the Enemy, both immediately
and instrumentally.

So thou may be assured, we never pleaded for a conformity or submission of
any to the Christian Order, and wholesome Discipline amongst us, but as they
came to be Convinced in their own Consciences, and well persuaded in themselves
from a clear and sensible Conviction, That it was their bounden duty so to do.
And therefore I say, and thou may see, that this Authors false Charge, with
all the rest of his confederacy, in all their lying Clamours, proceed from a
base perverse Spirit (that does surmise to People that we were bringing in an
implicit Faith and blind Obedience, by forcing a Conformity before Conviction;
which is opposed by us, with our utmost endeavors) and is of the Devil, the
Father of lies, who is the original Author of all this mischievous dark work of
Separation, etc. and makes use of those his wicked Agents to defend the same,
under the specious pretense of Liberty of Conscience, Liberty of Conscience;
and influences them to defame the Lords faithful and innocent Servants, by
malicious, abusive Reflections, and false Insinuations, to amuse People, as if
the end of all their labors and travels in the Service of Truth, for the
preservation of Gods Heritage, were to bring them into a Uniformity of such and
such Canons, Decrees, and Orders, that tended to an Apostasy, Imposition, and
what ^ot.

Now, I hope, Reader, thou will plainly see, that the very main thing intended
by this angry Author, as the principal foundation of his work, is notorious
false, and abominable; seeing it is so, without all doubt, then thou may
safely conclude all the rest of his work (I mean, his ensuing Treatise) is a
piece of perfect Forgery, absolute designed Lies and Slanders, so much of it as
insinuates and has a tendency to introduce a false report, and beget a wrong
belief concerning us, whose Innocence is well known both in the sight of God
and sober-minded people, that it was never our business directly or indirectly,
to drive any to a forced subjection contrary to their persuasion and
inclination of their own minds. And for my part, I do ingeniously declare, that
I could never perceive any such thing less or more amongst Friends where ever I
have been in any of our Meetings, neither truly do I yet see (and I hope never
shall, I desire never to see it whilst I live) that by all the vain Scribbling,
Prating, and Tattling of their Idle, Ridiculous Stories, either by Words or
Books of our Opposers, that they have produced any convincing solid proof,
rational or clear demonstration to any judicious understanding Persons, that
the Body of Friends are so and so Apostatized, and do so and so drive, impose,
force and compel any to a Conformity to the wholesome Christian proceedings in
their Men and Women's Meetings, or that G. F. that faithful Servant of the Lord,
is become an Apostate or Innovator, as W. R. etc. most maliciously suggests.

As for this of F. B's I have considered it, and I find much weakness, attended
with a great deal both of extreme Wickedness, and also of foolish Drollery,
Malice, and Envy, and I doubt not but the impartial, and such as are not
prepossessed with prejudice, will easily discern and readily observe the same
by what follows.

For in Page 8. he brings in an impertinent parallel, saying, And now I will
show you a Parallel betwixt the Treatment, which the Protestants met withal
from the hands of the Papists for their pains, and betwixt the Treatment W. R.
T. C. and others have met withal from the hands of G. F. and those of party
with him for their pains; and so sets down at large in page 11, 12, 13. the
manner of the Papists Cursing Thomas Bennet, for publishing and manifesting
their Error.

Ans. Is not here the height of Malice and extreme wickedness? first to
insinuate most falsely our being like to the Papists, for which F. B. thou
deserves a dreadful reward, and shall unavoidably meet with it from the hand of
the just God of Heaven and Earth, if thou speedily repent not.

And Secondly, To compare what several of us have given forth from the Spirit
of the Lord, in a true living Zeal, and from a holy Constraint and Detestation
against that rending, tearing, and dividing Spirit, that is cursed of God for
ever; which weighty Testimonies through his People shall stand over thy head,
and all those joined with thee in that mischievous work of Separation from the
Lord, and Opposition to his Work, and that which would divide and scatter his
Heritage: I say, to bring in Parallel, betwixt what the Lord gives forth in the
Authority of his Eternal power, through his Children either singly, as with
respect of themselves; or jointly, as a Body of People gathered together by his
power, to give forth a true Sentence and Judgment upon that which is wrong,
with what the Pope or Papists have done in their dark and blind minds, by their
Bulls and Curses. Oh! what a wicked and abominable thing is this!

And as if this was not sufficient to show thy Rage, thou also basely
insinuates, page 15. As if we were not a suffering People our selves, and had
but once the Law to assist us, in our Church Censures, etc. We would expose
People to Fire and Faggot, Curse and Excommunicate them, and deprive them of
their Privileges and Advantages, Temporal, as well as Spiritual, as ever the
Papists did: And that Reader, this is the true English and natural Consequence
of this Man's unsuitable Parallel, and not by bare Inferences therefrom, he
expresses the same more fully in plain legible Characters, falsely saying, page
200. A Man may transgress the Scriptures, days without number, but yet never be
Excommunicated by G. F. and his Party (this is largly inserted, but not at all
proved in his Book) but I. B. never sold but one Book, namely that of W. R. his
publishing that ever I heard of (but I ask how many did I. B. vend and dispose
of them into the Country? and I doubt he sold many more then one, which I
believe himself will not deny) And so you see he is dismembered, no Spiritual
Followship, no spiritual Communion they can have with him (that is true, nor
with thee either, or any such Rambling, Ranting, Loose, Libertine Spirits, like
W. R. and thy self, yet here no Curse, though no Concord, no deprivation of
Temporal Privileges, though an Exclusion of Spiritual Communion) -- Nay, (says
F. B.) they do not only testify against that Bad Spirit, as they account it,
but him also, viz. the Man also. Oh that we could but say, Take him Iaylor, and
that effectually; and further as a complete Draught of thy Divellish Malice in
page 203. where thou says, Had I all the Books of Controversy by me, I presume
it were a thing too hard for me to undertake, so that I must take a step into
the Papists Road of Cruclty and Severity, etc. Oh! the most Envious, Cruel,
Hard-hearted Man, full of Malice and Mischief, what shall I say unto thee?
Certainly the Lord God will call thee to an account for this perverse,
deceitful, devilish piece of Treachery, Lies, and implacable Enmity: and
remember I tell thee, in the fear of the great God, if thou do not deeply
lament for, unfeignedly and speedily repent of it, most dreadful shall thy
Portion be, and most terrible shall the Judgment and Indignation be, which thou
must feel from the hand of the Righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth.

Being much astonished to see the great boldness and strange Impudence of this
unruly Person, and other Rambling, Disorderly, Opposite Spirits, that dare give
forth in Print, and publicly also report such manifest Forgeries, Notorious
and Apparent Calumnies against the Faithful Innocent people of the Lord, and in
the serious consideration of all their ungodly Railing Expressions, with many
scurrilous Mockings, abusive and scoffing Reflections. May not I say, and many
also with me, as they of old expressed their Admiration of that unusual passage
mentioned in Judges 19. And it was so, that all that saw it, said, There was no
such deed done nor seen, from the day that the Children of Israel came up out
of the Land of Egypt unto this day. Consider of it, take Advice, and speak your
minds, Was there ever such Wickedness and Folly done? Was there ever such
Madness and Envy seen in any People (since the time the Lord appeared unto us,
and brought us from under the Egyptian Bondage and Darkness, and since the day
that the Lord Visited us by his mighty Hand, and outstretched Arm, and
gathered us to be a People to himself) as in these now, who under the
Profession of the same Truth, have (it seems) even made a Covenant with Hell,
Death and the Devil, and proclaimed a Confederacy together, to War against the
Lord and his People, by their open Opposition to, and disdainful slighting of
the comely and commendable Practices in the Church of Christ; especially
considering (which greatly aggravates their guilt) the singular advantages they
have had above many people, what understanding I believe diverse of them came
unto, concerning the work of Truth, their great knowledge they had attained of
the Principles of the true Religion, and some of them (its like) once enjoyed
experimental nearness to the Lord, and Fellowship with him and his People; and
yet for such to become as Absolute, Stour, Resolute Enemies, to oppose both, as
everany, yea by many degrees are farworse, and as it were in the superlative
endeavors to exceed their former Predecessors ( I mean the old dry Apostates)
was there ever such a deed done or seen? And that notwithstanding the Lord has
been so graciously pleased, both signally to appear by his Heavenly and Divine
power, as well for the preservation as the vindication of his chosen faithful
ones, who have stood in his Counsel, and in the uprightness of their Hearts
could appeal their Innocence to him, and also has evidently manifested, and
apparently discovered his Wrath and fierce Indignation against his and their
Enemies on every hand, in so much that those who in their time rose up with a
high, lofty and imperious Mind, proud and exalted Spirit, abusing and
villisying the Innocent Servants of the Lord amongst whom our ancient faithful
Friend G. F. has not been one of the least concerned both then and at this
present juncture of Controversy; I say, where are these now, with all their
confused stuff of Janglings and Contentions? What came all their Noises and
Bustlings to? We clearly see the Devil and all his cursed Agents could not
produce what they designed thereby; and why? The Lord Iehova, the mighty God of
Heaven and Earth appeared as a terrible Enemy against them.

Now (...) it ^o (...) Admiration to me; to see thee treading on in the very
Foot-stepts of those old Back-sliders from the Holy Commandment of Life
delivered to them, who from the same perverse Spirit, to the same end, and much
after the same method Opposed the Truth, and abused Friends thereof; as thou
do: but thou and W. R. etc. go some steps beyond them, and did not they (as
well as thou F. B.) print diverse Scandalous Pamphlets, amongst which there was
one called, Liberty of Conscience asserted against Imposition (if I be not much
mistaken) wherein they endeavored to misrepresent Friends to the World as
Apostates and Innovators, and such as were setting up a Romish Hierarchy, and
bringing in Arbitrary Jurisdiction over tender Consciences? so that now its
clear as the Sun shines, their false charge thou and thy Adherents have
revived, their way you have followed, their Cause you have undertaken,
evidently demonstrates you to be in the same work of wickedness, and one with
these in the very root of bitterness.

How comes it Francis that thou art so benumbed, stupefied, hardened and
be^o^^ed, yea and befooled by the Devil. But alas! What shall I say,. He, eve^
the God of this Wo^d has lulled thee into a deep Lethargy or sleep, and so
blinded thy Eyes again (if ever they were once opened) that thou, and such as
thou art, cannot see nor apprehend what you are running and hurrying headlong
into, till the Flames of Eternal Judgment, and the fury of that fiery
Indignation make you sensible what your wicked devilish Work has been.

But O! the earnest Prayer of my Soul, is to the God of infinite Mercy, and
unspeakable Compassions, That you may prevent such an awakning, and that you in
time now may be roused up and alarmed by his Righteous Judgments in your
Hearts, by lying under the same, and by bowing to the Indignation of the
Almighty, you may obtain mercy from him to your poor Immortal souls, before the
day of mercy be quite shut against you; that though you then may cry, yet you
will not be heard.

CHAP. II.
IN p. 21. I find F. B. say, But if G. F. and his party shall stiffly stand to
it, that the women's meetings it of Divine Institution, etc. and then brings in
an impertinent, needless Query, Whether Christ was deficient either in his
Delivering to that honored Auditory or in his Memory.

Answ. I say he was in neither; but according to the Capacities of the People,
amongst whom he conversed, it was that he spoke, delivered, and opened things
to them: And F. B. scoffingly interrogates, And who did he constitute in his
room to supply that defect, whether a visible head, namely G. F. etc.

We do know very well whom he did appoint in his room, when he was to be
removed bodily; he encouraged his Disciples with a sweet promise, I will not
leave you comfortless but the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the
Father will send in my Name, Obs. The true force of the Greek word (...), is
Advocate, one called to, sent for, invited to come, upon what occasions or for
what end soever, see 1 John
he shall teach you, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I
have said unto you: and although he gave forth and spoke much unto them, yet
they were not able to bear all things, therefore he says, I have yet many
things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now; howbeit, when the Spirit
of Truth is come, he will guide you into all Truth; for he will not speak of
himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, and he will show
you things to come; he shall receive of mins, and shall show it unto you.

From which we may observe, that there is large room left for the Spirit of
Truth (who should receive of Christ's and show unto his followers to instruct
and lead to, never contrary, but agreeable with the Scriptures of Truth, that
which is needful, proper, and profitable in the Church; for the preservation of
the Members thereof, in the comely commendable gospel of Order, that thereby
the lovely sweet Unity, Concord and Heavenly Harmony may be retained amongst
them, to their mutual joy, comfort, and edification, and to the praise of his
glory, who has called us to be his peculiar people, zealous of good works, and
has preserved us against the malice, violence and rage of the Devil and all
his Instruments, under every appearance or transformation.

Now whereas this angry peevish Man makes such a noise against and bustlings
about the Lawfulness of Women's Meetings, because he cannot find Chapter and
verse expressly set down in the Scripture for erecting Women's Meetings distinct
from the Men, to be constantly set up once a month about the 10th hour of the
day. This he brings in (page 101, 102.) as in the name of the Professors; but I
look upon it rather as his than theirs, and therefore shall apply my self
particularly to him in what follows upon this Subject.

Tell me now F. Bugg. honestly (if there be the least dram of Ingenuity yet
remaining with thee) have not thou in thy time performed diverse lawful, and may
be (with respect to thy particular satisfaction) very necessary Duties, and
that upon a Religious account too, and such as thou could not well omit
without offending the Lord, or breaking thy peace with him; and yet if thou
were to be questioned by the professors (for that has been always then great
plea against us) to produce expressly Scripture Chap. and verse to prove the
Lawfulness thereof: if thou have not, I am sure I have, and many have found it
as a pleasure upon our Spirits, being commanded of the Lord to go about such
and such a service (I could name many particulare) for which we could not give
express Scripture to prove the lawfulness of the same. Pray what Chap. and
verse from any of there Four Evangelists can I give to any of the professors
that would ask the same of me, Suppose I were commanded of the Lord to go to
such or such a Steeple-house in City or Country, or it were weighty upon my
Sprit to visit any one particular Meeting or County in this Nation: this I hope
thou will not deny but its in the first place lawful for me so to do; and in
the second place necessary also, with respect to the Command of God, which I am
bound to observe, as duly as if it were set down in Scripture expressly. R. S. I
command thee to go to such a place, at such a day, in such an hour, etc.

And next F. B. where will thou find expressly Chap. and Verse in the Scriptures
that thou should meet in such a place on the First day or Week day, at such an
hour, either for Men's Meetings to take care of the Poor, etc. or other Solemn
Meetings, on the Account of Gods Worship?

And further, to come closer to the Matter, if Professors should Query of thee,
Come F. B. give us Chap. and Verse expressly: to prove thy Practice of keeping
on thy Hat, or disprove our taking it off to persons, as a Vain Unchristian
Practice? and as to many other things I might mention.

Moreover as concerning Women's Meetings, something further.

As the Christian Women in the Primitive Gospel Times had their Services in the
Church, as the Spirit of Truth then led and guided them, which was and is
unlimited (and what does thou know Fr. but the Lord Jesus did then encourage
them in the same?) So the Christian Women in this our Gospel day, having
received a measure of the same Spirit, and as they walk in the Leadings and
Guidings thereof (which I believe certainly many do) know and see their
Services appointed them of God, and by him are enabled to perform their Duty.

Observe, The Apostle speaks of the Elder Women as Mothers, and the Aged were
to Teach the Young Women to be sober, etc. Tit. 2.3, 4.

Josephus (in his Antiquites, p. 706.) speaks of a peculiar place destinated
for Women for Religion sake, where as they exercised their Devotion, so no
doubt but they performed their Services for the Edification one of another, and
doing good to such as they were related to and concerned with. And p. 60. he
says, The Women also strove with Emulation to exceed each other in the Work
and Service; to the Honor of God.

In the Third Volumn of the Book of Martyrs, p. 24. Ann. 1563. And in Queen
Elizabeth's Reign. Its said as follows.

An outrage done to poor Women, who met together to comfort one another, viz.
There was an Honest Woman of the ^ity of Bois, whose Name was Nichale, the wise
of one John Lemanche^ a Maker of Sun-Dials, in whose House certain Neighbors
meeting together, to Comfort and Edify one another, and to pray one with and
for another, to the number of Nine, or there-abouts, with their Daughters;
these Murderers hearing of it, ran violently in among them, thinking to have
found a Minister Preaching to them; but when. they saw how they were mistaken,
they dragged them out by the Hair of the Head into the midst of the Street,
where leading them with abundance of Stripes, they cast them into the River; in
which Calamity God endued them with such strength and skill, being unbound,
that endeavoring to swim, at length they arrived at an Isle, they being seized
upon by some Ferry Men, they were stripped naked, and then thrown again into the
River, and thinking yet to save themselves, they were in the end knocked down
by the seditious in the Suburbs of Vienna. Now by this Spirit of Truth the
Christian Women are directed and l^d to meet together to discharge the^r Duty
aforesaid, in their taking care of the Poor and Fatherless, and other good
Christian profitable Services, as the same directs them; and the Lord both
attends them by his Counsel and Wisdom, and also countenances them with his
Living, Divine, Refreshing Presence in their Meetings, and by him are the
Faithful Women justified, whoever may condemn them.

And we do very well know that as his living eternal power has set up and
established our public solemn Assemblies, and our Men's Meetings, so I do
confidently affirm from senblesi well grounded experience; as I have been many
times an eyewitness, the same has established Women's Meetings; and I am fully
satisfied without the least hesitation or scruple in my mind, that now which
has and does give authority to the former, to render them lawful, attends the
latter, to authorize and render them both lawful and laudable.

Therefore I may safely say, that Spirit which opposes, abuses and despises the
Women, in their respective Christian services, and would not allow them the
liberty which they have in Christ their Head and Husband, is the Dark wicked
Spirit of Imposition, etc. which condemns that which God justifies and approves
of, and so an abomination before him: and I am truly sensible, that those
joined thereunto, I mean thee F. and such like to thee, who through that
rancour and radicated Malice, have hardened your selves (I am afraid) to
destruction, and not all who through ignorance or simplicity are betrayed by
your crafty designs and subtle insinuations to favor your work, such as stand
in opposition to, and separation from the Women's Meetings, that though they
seem first and mostly to envy against Women's Meetings (and as I remember
follows or imitates the old Serpent, who first set upon the Woman by his
Temptations with a Design to gain ground upon the Man afterward) yet the same
wicked ranting loose libertine Spirit, that cries out so vehemently away with
our Women's Meetings (as thou in thy scoffing Airy Mind abuses them, comparing
them to the Papists great Idol, viz. the Roob of Grace, to Graceless as well as
Lifeless Image (see p. 8. and 47.) will not only descry Women's Preaching as
some of them have done already) but also at last would overturn our Men's
Meetings, and so would bring all things topsiturvey, These are indeed the Babel
Builders.
upside down, into a mere Chaos, Disorder and Confusion again, and here would
be (which the Devil would be at, and mainly seeks) an open door for
Libertinism, Ranterism, Atheism, Profanity, and all manner of Debauchery. But
God Almighty will overthrow all these devilish Designs and hellish
Imaginations, and Truth and Righteousness has he decreed to establish in the
Earth, everlastingly magnified be his holy Name for ever, for he is worthy over
all to be feared, served and obeyed by all the Sons and Daughters of Men.

CHAP. III.
NOw I come to the first Chapter of F. Bugg's Book, p. 24. in the which he
pretends to treat of Principles of Truth received and believed in the
beginning, etc. wherein there is but little of weight to be noticed, being but
a slender imperfect Relation thereof, and that too, with a crafty, subttle
Design to strike against Friends of Truth, maliciously thereby insinuating to
the World, How it was so and so with them in the beginning, and now otherwise.

This living Testimony I have to bear to the contrary, that (blessed be the
name of the Lord) the same foundation principle and corner stone that was laid
in the beginning for the building of Gods Spiritual House, is as precious to us
now as ever; and is of as great esteem, and we do preach the same, and no
other; even the saving sufficient Divine Light of Christ Jesus, and the
Spiritual appearance thereof; and it is our work and labor to direct and turn
the minds of people to be inward and retired thereunto, as unto the more sure
word of Prophecy; and that there is sufficiency in it, being obeyed, to lead to
salvation: and as we are come to the experience of the holy Unction, and feel
and taste of the sweetness, excellency and virtue thereof in our own
particulars, so we declare thereof unto others, that they might be stirred up
to wait upon the Lord with us in his heavenly Gift, and have the same sense and
experience in themselves, and so see and taste for themselves: and blessed be
God, our love one to another. does abound, and our zeal for his ^oly name does
increase, and a heavenly harmony of life sounds in our Assemblies as in the
beginning, in which stands our Unity and Fellowship, and there are many who are
living witnesses by how much the more we are spiritually minded and seriously
exercised in the inward Testimony or Law of the Spirit of Life, and the more we
take delight to meditate therein Night and Day, by so much the more the Lord is
pleased to maifest his Love unto us, and to reveal his pure Power amongst us,
and is our Hedge and Wall to this Day, and gives us favor in the sight of the
People, glorified be his pure name for ever.

And we do testify in a holy fresh zeal against all such Formalities, Will
worships, Church-Authorities, Ceremonies, Orders, Institutions, as are neither
useful, decent nor comely in the sight of God; and our Testimony lives and
remains as in the beginning (everlasting praise to the Almighty) against all
that Trash and Trumpery of the Whore of Babylon, brought in and set up in the
dark Night of Apostasy; and we do testify, That Christ and his Kingdom is to
be known within, not in any Observation or Profession that is Visible, without
the possession and inward enjoyment of him; and he, even the second Adam, the
Lord from Heaven, is head of, and Lawgiver to our Church, on whose shoulders
the Government and Authority thereof is laid. And we know, that though in the
World there are Faiths many, and Lords many; yet unto us there is but one
Faith, and one Lord Jesus Christ: who is the Author of that Faith.

And we have an honorable esteem of the Scriptures of Truth, and they are very
good, and useful in their place, and they are by us believed, and a great
comfort and blessing to us; but still the spirit of God is the first Principle,
the Pale, and only Head of the true Church, and Sanctified people of God; and
is likewise the Rule of our Life and Practice, and always has the pre-eminence
in our Testimony, as ever from the beginning: this we have declared, and do
declare on all occasions, to all People, Professor, and Profane, etc. and such
as are faithful to the Lord, will not question the truth of this, as it is at
present witnessed (Everlasting praises to the Lord over all.) And these need
not go for proof thereof, as thou say page 28. to such and such Testimonies
of those good faithful Servants of the Lord, who did bear a Noble Testimony
against all Apostates and Back-sliders, as the Reader may see in a Book of our
worthy Friend Isaac Penington (whom F.B. mentions) concerning Church
Government. For we have a certain evidence and many clear tokens of the
powerful, divine, and refreshing presence of the Almighty God attending us in
our holy Services and Christian Practices, both in our Men and Women's Meetings,
which shall stand and in Glory remain, when thou and all such clashing jarring,
jangling, and perverse prating spirits shall vanish and be no more seen in this
World. And indeed, I know for certain, and many times it has livingly and with
unspeakable comfort opened in me, when I have had occasion to be under any sad
Exercise, by any of this Opposite Party, that their wild and hasty furious
Contentions and malicious Endeavors, against the Gospel Order in the Church of
Christ, is but another smoke (though one of the blackest and thickest) that is
come up, or may be, may hereaftercome up from the Bottomless Pit. And the
breath of the Lord God Almighty is scattering of it, and will blow it quite
away, so that it (as we have seen other smoaks) shall utterly disappear.

And the wise prudent Reader may observe, that many of the Epistles of Advice
and Counsels to Friends from their Meetings, nothing now more than in the
beginning implies any imposition or force thereunto; and they are so worded as
that Christian liberty is preserved, and the people not imposed upon beyond
their freedom; and that it is so I shall prove in the next Chapter.

And so we plainly see that the Devil and his Agents have but befooled
themselves by falsely insinuating to any, as this F.B. does in page 31. That we
exercise Dominion, Gentile-like, and with Lording over Gods Heritage: for the
same Christian Confession discension and true moderation appears amongst us as
in the beginning.

CHAP. IV.
IN page 32. F. B. says, I am now to manifest the alteration and the cause of
Divisions amongst us about Matters of Faith, and the exercise of it, Church
Discipline, and Conformity to it.

Poor Man! Thou look far abroad to seek the Cause of Division, and little
minds to look at home in thine own House; and for all thy vain insolent Braggs
and proud Boastings, in bringing thy proof, That there is Violence, Tyranny,
and what not, done to our first Principles of Union; citeing W. P's Saying in
his Address to Pro^^ page 149. That Persuasion and Conviction began all true
Christian Societies; and whether his violence upon this part, Tyranny and not
Order is introduced, etc. -- I say it is a Lie in thee to insinuate the
contrary as to us; and Reader, to evince the same, consider but the weakness of
his Proof, for which he inserts G. F's New Order (as he in his flouring mind
terms it) wrote about the year 71. for Women's Meetings to be held Distinct from
Men's Meetings, and was confirmed afterward (as he says) by a General Council
or Yearly Meeting, etc. viz Dear Friends, To whom is my love in that which
changes not, it would do well, and be of service for you, to have a Women's
Meeting, as they have in other parts, etc. I refer thee to the perusal of the
rest of G.F.'s Epistle, which I believe he wrote from a sense of the holy
Power, and see if thou can find any thing therein like unto imposition,
violence, or alteration, done to our first Principles of Union.

In page 38. he scoffingly and impertinently says, At the Yearly Meeting or
General Council held at London, in the year 75. The said Grant or Order was
strengthneed and confirmed in all points, and with as much Policy as ever the
Learned Bishops or Grave Senates, used to establish their Monarchical
Governments, etc. The understanding Reader may perceive his weakness and folly
herein.

And in page 40. he greatly braggs, to give both proof and president, of what
he insinuated, and so transcribes something, concerning propounding of
Marriages, which he calls, the confirmation of the Foundation of the Women's
Meetings ( namely, G. F. his Order above recited ( by a General Council held at
London, Anno 1675.

London, 27. 3 Mo. 75.
IT is our Judgment, That for better satisfaction to all parties, that there
may be due time for Enquiry of Clearness of the persons concerned, it is
convenient that Marriages be twice propounded to the Meetings that are to take
care therein, both to the Men's and Women's Meetings, where both are established
before they are accomplished; and when things are cleared, that the Marriage be
accomplished in a Grave and Public Assembly of Friends or Relations.


I have set this down verbatim as I found it in F. B's Book, wherein thou may
observe, First, It Is said, It is our Judgment, that for better satisfaction to
all parties, etc. (not for Imposition upon any.) Secondly, It is convenient
(here is a good cause and reason.) And Thirdly, Where both are established, etc.
For my part he must see further than I can, that draws such an Unnatural
Conclusion from the premises of Imposition, Violence, or Tyranny, done to the
first Principles of our Union.

But to prove yet the same, it seems he is somewhat pinched, for he strains and
snatches greedily every thing he can to make out his matter. In page 42. he
says, I am necessitated to transcribe more of the transactions of this
Notable, if not Universal Council, than I am willing (Alas! that ever thou
should have been so willing to serve the Devil at such a rate as thou does;
too too willing Francis to make use of all thy strength to hatch out of Hell
and plod in the dark, if thou can thereby but abuse an innocent people) lest
G. W. should again call for a Proof or Catalogue of their new stamped
Government: And to this end he inserts another paper which Friends wrote
concerning Men and Women's Meetings.

It is our Judgment and Testimony in the Word of Gods Wisdom, that the rise and
practice, setting up, and establishment of Men's and Women's Meetings in the
Church of Christ in this our day and generation, is according to the mind and
counsel of God, and done in the endearing of his eternal Spirit; and that it is
the duty of all Friends and Brethren in the power of God in all places to be
diligent therein, and to encourage and further each other in that blessed work,
etc.

I refer the Reader to consider the rest of this, and compare it and the former
with a Letter of advice and counsel for the help and information of the weak
and lately convinced, page 28. wherein in he says, It was so worded, as that
Christian Liberty was preserved, and the People not imposed upon beyond their
freedom. And see if there be such a vast difference as he would insinuate in
page 45. Behold (says he) the difference between this Decree and the n="*" Yet
in that I do not find Chap. nor verse of Matthew, Mark, Luke, or John; which he
calls for so much.
Letter of Advice and Counsel inn the first Chapter, etc.

That was not proposed otherwise then Advise and Counsel, and not as a Form or
Rule to walk by, etc.

CHAP. V.
ANd Reader, That thou may see whether this Author either looks like to be a
sober discreet prudent Man, or like a true Christian Quaker, as he and W. R.
and some few of their party would be reckoning themselves, as only such; I will
here insert something of his flouting Mockery and idle Drollery in his
Observations upon the foregoing paper, and indeed the greatest part of his
Book (I mean this Second part, and what properly may be termed his) is stuffed
up with such impertinent Stories and uncivil Reflections.

In page 46. But (says he) to make good provision against any that shall yet
dare to slight this new Model or new found Method of Church Government, or call
in question their power and authority, see what a strict and severe Admonition
is uttered forth, even as if it had come from the Popes Council of Jesuits and
Crafty Friars, etc. In page 47. and speaking of Women's Meetings, I say, if it
be so, why should not the Episcopalians, Presbiterians, Independants, Baptists,
etc. know of them (and why not? as many of them do, of which we are not
ashamed, if all the World knew it; and by the sober part of them are commended
therefore) but if it be a mere Imagination of their own brain (I think strange,
Francis, thou have now so much discretion as but to suppose it, and say [If] to
it, it seems it sticks a little in thy throat, and thou would fain come out
with a positive Assertion, if it were not an absolute downright Lie, of which
it may be thou art conscious thy self to the contrary, and therefore could
not determine that it is mere Imagination, etc.) and an Idol of their own
erecting, why should it not publicly be brought to Light, and made as manifest
as the Lord Crumwel made the Papists great Idol, viz. the Rood of Grace ( which
had gogling eyes, thou sain, and would smile when a good gift was offered to
it) when he caused it to be brought to Paul's Cross, where the People tore it
all to pieces in King Henry the Eighths time.

Francis, Pray tell me, Could thou find it in thy heart to use the Women and
their Meetings so? A body would think that such a gross wicked thing were far
off from thy very thoughts, much less to do so wickedly, if it were in thy
power.

But alas! what thou have publicly printed and falsely insinuated to the World,
that we are Imposers, Apostates, and Innovators, and like to the Papists, and
are introducing Blind Obedience and Implicit Faith, and that G. F. and his part
are more severe than the Bishops of the Protestant Churches; see page 195.
These and many more malicious suggestions do they not be speak thy fury and
envy, and may not many suspect that thou would gladly that both our Men and
Women Friends, and their Meetings too, were exposed to the Rage, Violence, and
Cruelty of our Enemies and Persecutors, thereby to tear us in pieces.

Tell me, Francis, Would it not sadly grieve thee to see us so used, as Lord
Thomas Cromwell in K. H's time cause the Papists Rood of Grace to be torn in
pieces? Would not thine heart be sore to see such a dismal Tragedy? Some may be
rather think thou would rathe rejoice at it, and may be as busy as any of
them to add fuel to the fire, and help forwards their work of Persecution, as
W. R. and T. C. have done, and are doing what in you lies, because they may
safely judge, whout breach of Charity, that Spirit of Envy, Slander and Malice,
by which you are guided naturally, leads to it, being the same ground in you
from whence all Persecution has proceeded.

And therefore if such work as this please thee (I do not positively affirm it
does) would not this show the very worst part of the Spirit of Popery; and too
like the Spanish Inquisition.

I pray God to pity thee and the rest of thy Abettors, and if it may stand with
his holy will to forgive you, and open your eyes to see the evil of your ways,
and what you have cruelly acted against him and his faithful innocent People,
This is the worst I wish you, I can uprightly say, and God knows I lie not.

But to proceed, I will give thee, Reader, a further relish of this scoffing
Spirit that has prevailed upon this Author F. B. (if so be he is the very
Penman or Compiler of all this Second Part, for I have my own reason to
suspect some other Person to be concerned therein; I mean as to the bulk of it;
for I find J. A's. name in page 87. whether F. B. had power from J. A. to
insert this, yea or nay, I cannot tell:) making his Observations upon the rise,
practice, etc. of the Women's Meetings according to the mind and counsel of God
and the ordering of his Eternal Spirit, which blessed be his holy Name, many
are living Witnesses this day, who can set their seal to the verity thereof,
from their sensible experience of his sweet refreshing presence, countenancing
us in our Men and Women's Meetings. -- Whereby (says F. B. in his ordinary
strain of mockery) G. F. his erection of this as New as Needless Ceremony, is
ratified by these presents, according to their true intent and meaning; No Pope
ever had a more true and loyal Council, or one better skilled, or more
politic, Is not F. B a plain Mocker and foolish Scoffer.
to save his Holiness from any danger, or confirm his infallible and unerring
^nstitutions; nay further, I think they have granted to him his heirs and
successors for ev^r, I see no limit in the whole Ecclesiast^cal Cannon. And (in
page 56.) he says thus -- So that upon the whole matter, I cannot see what
could have hindered the completing this Grant and Confiirmation, had they put
these four branches to the remaining six (for they are in all twelve
particulars) and obtained their passing both Houses of Parliament and the
Royal assent; the neglect whereof has been greatly d^sadvantageous to their
carrying on their then notable Designs.

Reader, What may thou conclude, has this Man the style of a true like
Christian Quaker, or sober discreet Man? No surely, one may more safely judge
(without any breach of Charity) he is more like to a rambling Droller or
Stage Player, and an absolute Profane Mocker, in his base unsavory
expressions; and a great deal of such I could mention, had I either leisure or
delight to trace him thoroughly. -- But as we use to say, A Dogs bark is no
slander.

In page 58, 59. He most maliciously suggests, to amuse people (ignorant of us)
with strange apprehensions and harsh thoughts concerning us. We (says he) that
differ from others, and desires their forbearance, yet at the same time,
differing among our selves, cannot, nay, will not bear one with another. (A
humble lie) We cry to the Ma^^strates for the liberty and free exercises of our
Consciences in Matters Spiritual, and will not, nay, resolves not, come what
will come, to allow the free exercise of Conscience in Matters Spiritual to our
Dissenting Brethren. Oh depth of hypocrisy and forerunner of Tyranny! should
you have power put into your hands, be so you Peoples* eyes are a little opened
to see your Treachery, your Double Dealing, your Antichristian Dealing, etc.

Is not this Man a Complete System both of gross Lies and Envy, and also of
Malice, Rancor and Drollery?

And in page 71. But too much like the Papists, implicitly believe as the
Church believes, practice as the Church practices, and in all points yield
obedience to her Decrees without any examination, scruple, or doubt; or else
why should that abettor of the cause of G. F. advise as follows? viz.

Let not this Spirit be reasoned with, enter not into Proposals and Articles
with it, but feed it with Judgment, that is Gods Decree. By thy Observations on
this, it seems thou do not understand what that means, saying, Mark the
tendancy of this advice; for should the Apostles have thus preached to the
Bereans, what liberty had been left for their search and further examination?
Nay, Christ himself reasoned in the Synagogue of the Jews, and the Apostles did
the like, a free Debate was admited when any difference arose amongst them,
which amongst us is stiffly denied.

There is; Reader, first a wicked Slander and Oli^^um cast upon us, suggesting
false^y we are too much like to Papists, etc.

2. His ignorance of that sentence of one of G. F's abettor, as he calls him;
Its that treacherous, deceitful, perfidious, opposite Spirit, and not the
Persons joined thereto, we are not to reason with, and which is to be fed with
Judgment, and will be, I know certainly its Gods Decree; and its well known
what pains and labor we have taken to reclaim and recover many who have been
betrayed by their reasonings and consultings with that deceitful cursed Spirit
of Separation, and the Lord has blessed our endeavors therein, and our earnest
Cry to him, That none may be lost but the Son of Perdition: such who are simply
and ignorantly betrayed, I hope may be restored into Unity with God and his
People (as many are) who have true honesty, or rather an honest right ground,
remaining in them. But for those who have sinned wilfully (as the Author to the
Hebrews writes) after they have received the knowledge of the truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a fearful looking for of judgment and
fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries: and so goes on, and
gives the reasons, and concludes with a severe sentence, It Is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the Living God, who is a consuming Fire: Heb. 10.26,
27. For such who speaks lies in hypocrisy, having their Consciences seared
with a hot Iron, whose hearts are quite hardened, and become twice dead, plucked
up by the roots; whose day of visitation is expired by their reiterated
abominable provocations and rebellion, I fear such are hardened to destruction,
and judicially sealed up to damnation.

And Thirdly, There is a notorious Lie. For when any difference arises amongst
us, there is a free Conference and sober Debating thereof admited, to reconcile
and resolve the same; so that he lies, in saying, That both by our practice and
advice it is stiffly denied.

In page 101. Come give us Chapter and verse for your Women's Meeting distinct
from the Men, to be constantly set up (unless a little n="*" When that comes, we
have seen by many observable Instances, how these Separates have crept into
holes of the Earth to save themselves from Persecution, much like to the Flies,
when it is warm Weather, they vex both Men and Beasts, but hardly to be seen,
when Winter comes.
cold weather intervene) Monthly about the 10th hour, to get a little stock; we
suppose thou meanest (speaking to G. F.) a lttle money for certain select uses;
it being a more private way than the Basin and Platter, etc.

We say to thee F. Bugg and all Professors by way of retortion, Come give us
expressly Chapter and verse for Men's meeting together to take care of the poor
Widows and Fatherless, at such a place in such a Month, and of such an hour of
the day; as thou put us upon proof concerning Women's. Meetings, in page
101. Could thou bring Chap. and verse in express terms for the proof of the
former (which thou allowest of to be Lawful) as with respect to place, Month,
and hour of the Day.

Query. And ought not then the Men to meet together, to discharge the foresaid
Christian Duties, unless thou can bring expressly Chap. and verse to prove
their practice therein, as with respect to place, month, and hour? If thou say,
Nay, Then has not this a tendency to overthrow Men's Meetings, as well as the
Women's Meetings?

Though we know in the holy Scriptures of truth, there is plentiful
encouragment for both Men and Women to serve God, and each other in love and
faithfulness; and though diverse Circumstances relative to Men and Women's
Meetings, as day, hour, month, and place, cannot be proved from express words
of Scripture, yet the Meeting of Men and Women, and their appointing (in the
wisdom of God) day, hour, month, and place, is not contrary to the Scriptures.

For now any rational person may conceive that it were grossly absurd and
irrational, to affirm that every good act or thing done, which cannot be proved
by express plain Scripture words, without any sound inference and true
consequence, is therefore contrary to Scriptures.

Consider this seriously and in the coolness and calmness of thy mind, and I
hope thou willt not be so stout in opposing Women's Meetings as thou have been,
and likewise I desire thee and the rest of thy brethren in mischief, to
consider what the wise man expresses in Ecclesiasticus, A Backbiting Tongue
has cast out virtuous women, and deprived them of their labors; who so
hearkneth unto it shall never find rest, and never dwell quietly: Eccl. 28.15,
16.

And to complete thy Draught of Mockery, maliciously and unseemly abusing that
worthy ancient Labourer of the Gospel G. F. by thy proposing a Battledore, and
in thy flouting airy mind sets within it the form of Spectacles, in page 163.
thereby to beget a light wanton mind in the People; and so makes but thy self a
Mocking stock, or the foolish like to thy self, to deride thee, and the sober
to distaste and disdain thy scurrilous, base, unworthy doings.

May not I now say unto thee for these and many more of thy unchristian
defamations, malicious suggestions, and inhuhumane reflections, as Paul said to
Elimas? Art not like to him in his wicked work? Have not thou by this Devilish
piece of treachery, withstood the Lord and his Servants, and thereby
endeavored to turn away many from the faith of Gods elect. Thou enemy of all
righteousness, thou Child of the Devil; O full of all subtilty! will thou not
cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord? And now behold the hand of the
Lord is against thee, and if thou humble not thy self speedily under the same,
most lamentable shall thy state be, when thou must bid an everlasting Adieu to
all thy comforts, pleasures, and riches, thou enjoyest in this life: God grant
thou may find a place for repentance.

CHAP. VI.
IN page 63. F. B. inserts an Order recorded in the Quarterly Meeting Book in
the Isle of Ely, which I leave to those particularly concerned to take notice
of; but supposing that they had done amiss, which I do not grant, pray tell me
what reason or justice is it, as amongst men, that a whole Nation or Body of
People, should be charged so and so with the fault of a particular County, or
any one Quarterly Meeting.

Most part of this Chapter relates to particular Persons to answer, if they
find it worthy the pains.

But he makes such a bustle and noise about J. A's Marriage, its meet something
should be particularly hinted at as concerning the same.

Our Friends for Conscience sake could not own nor countenance J. A's Marriage,
which he would impose on us to own, without the Woman's appearing, whom he
intended to take. And is this W. R's and F.B's Conscience, that we must own
J.A's Marraige to a Woman that comes not with him to the Men's Meeting to
declare her mind (for we know our Women's Meetings they are against and
disregard. And we must declare its a matter of Conscience to us in the Case of
J. A. or any other, for him to come to our Meeting and tell us, that he intends
to take his Housekeeper to be his Wife; and we desire him to bring her to our
Men's Meeting to hear what she says to it: And he says, He is not free to bring
her to declare that she intends to take him to be her Husband) that we may hear
both parties: And if he make a matter of Conscience of this to let the Meeting
hear what she says, but we must take his word without hearing the Woman what
she says; and if he be ashamed of her to appear before the Meetings together,
is not this wilfulness? We have no Unity with such. If a Man should come to one
of our Meetings, and say, I would take such a man's daughter to Wife; you will
impose upon us, that we must have Unity with it; and he will not bring the
Woman with him, nor Relations, that we may have satisfaction from their mouths
(or by a Certificate) and hear what they say to it; such Marriages we can have
no Unity with. And if W. R. F. B. and T. C. that was married with a Priest, can
nurse up such, we say, we have no Fellowship nor Unity with them as be not
decent, civil, modest, and of good report; for we would have the satisfaction
of the Man and Woman, and their Relations also, that all things may be done
decently and in good Order; that no Man or Woman, or Relations, may be wronged:
for our God is a God of Order, and not of Confusion.

Now Reader, thou may easily discern whether we or they be the Imposers and
Innovators. F. B. and W. R's new Order, Traditions, Prescriptions, Impositions,
and Innovations, is, that J. A. or another Man, must tell his intention of
Marriage without the Woman being there, to know her mind; and this is their new
Way, new Order, and new Method: And this was J. H's way (at the Peel) and the
Woman M. P. was not there, who when she heard of it, she utterly denied him:
And another in Kent did so foolishly declare he pretended to take a Woman not
present there, which grieved her sore, when she heard of it.

And so by this new Order, Prescription, and Innovation, which F. B. and W. R.
would impose on us to have Unity with, Women may be greatly wronged and their
Relations abused by every bad loose Man, and make people believe that their
consent is to it, when it is not; and so be scandalized and offended: therefore
to prevent which, we do judge that in the Wisdom of God the Man and Woman ought
both to come together, when they lay their intentions of Marriage before a
Meeting, and their Relations to be satisfied; and if they live far off beyond
Sea or in another County, then to have a Certificate from them that they are
satisfied: And this I understand has been our Friends practice before thee F.
B. came amongst us, and will remain, I doubt not, when thou art gone.

Other particulars I would mention, whereby it may be justly repelled upon W.
R. F. B. etc. that they are the Innovators and Imposers, but what I have set
down already may serve as a sufficient proof at present.

In page 74. there are some Queries, strange sort of ones as I have read; viz.
Whether Christ Jesus, the true God and eternal life, in whom the fullness of the
Godhead dwelt bod^ly, be the Head of the true Church? Or whether George Fox,
who is but a Man, unto whom the Spirit is given but by measure, be head
thereof? His second Query is an Answer to the first, and the third to the
second, etc.

I wonder much F. B. has shown so much discretion and civility, as to confess
(but I believe he cannot otherways do) that we acknowledge Christ Jesus to be
both the Head, Ruler, and Lawgiver of the true Church.

But then in his Fifth Query he seems to boast greatly, and brag at a high
rate, as if (forsooth poor Man) he had gained all (how wise is a fool in his
own vain conceit, what his empty noddle or brain does apprehend, that he judges
none can disprove?) If you say that Christ nor his Apostles, left neither
command, example, nor president for Women's Meetings, etc. then I query further
of you the said Imposers, where had you your power, or from whence had you your
Authority to institute such a way of Government in the Church, by Women or
other ways, containing such Rites and Ceremonies; and in whose name do you
compel to an Uniformity and Conformity thereto?

What I have formerly said in Chap. 4 may be enough to answer the foresaid
Query; but in short, I say again, from the Lord God of Heaven and Earth his
People have received power, and therewith are they endued to perform those Holy
Christian Practices in their Men and Women's Meetings; and thereby are they
invested with Authority and Dominion to stand up as Noble Witnesses for the
Standard of Righteousness against all opposition: and by how much the more we
are saithful and singly resigned in a holy Zeal and due diligence to attend and
wait upon the Lord in our Meetings to perform that which tends to his Glory,
and the good of one another, etc. by so much the more does he countenance us
with his divine comfortable presence; and therefore we are not careful, nor
need we be troubled what unruly, disorderly, loose, ranting Spirits, such as
are given to a Fleshly liberty and wanton mind, say to the contrary, question,
or condemn us therefore.

And I may say as an encouragement to you that are faithful to the Lord in your
services, both in your Men and Women's Meetings, as the holy Apostle said in his
day to the Philippians; Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any
virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things; and not only so,
but those things, says he, which ye have both learned and received, and heard
and seen in me, do, and the God of peace shall be with you; Phil. 4.8, 9.

And Francis, that is an absolute plain forgery to imply by way of Query (taking
it for granted that it were really so) in whose Name do we compel to a
Conformity, etc. For we do deny it as feigned and false, and many living
powerful Testimonies arise in the hearts of Gods Children against this wicked,
malicious, abusive Spirit, that would defame us by falsely suggesting we did
compel, force and drive People (nolens volens) against the persuasion of their
own minds, whether they will or not, comply they must. We never endeavored
such driving forward work to bring any to an uniformity and subjection to that
which we know of certain to be according to the mind of God, and the counsel of
his eternal Spirit, consentaneous or correspondent to the Principles of Truth,
or the true Christian Religion, and no ways repugnant to, but congruous with
the sentiments of sound Reason, etc. and its our desire, that every one should
be fully persuaded in their own minds; and we direct them to wait upon the
Lord, that he may reveal that to them which would tend to his glory and their
good; and I know such, who singly wait and are freely given up in an entire
Resignation to obey what God opens and commands, they will not want clearness
nor freedom in their minds to follow that which is praise worthy, comely, and
commendable in the sight of the Lord and all sober People; and then they will
see (as many have come so to understand, who were once blinded and hardened also
for a time, by the alluring snares and cunning stratagems of the enemy) and
confess, that those wholesome Counsels and weighty Admonitions from the Spirit of
the Lord through his Servants, are not Prescriptions and Institutions of Men,
or Innovations, Canons, etc. as F. Bugg basely insinuates page 175. but that
which is very profitable, yea, and necessary to prevent Looseness, Libertinism,
Confusion, Prophanity, and all manner of Debauchery, which this selfish,
disorderly, separate Spirit opens a door unto; and to keep down that ranting,
rambling, wild, and wanton mind, that is got up in many, and matters not, nor
will not bow to the good Discipline and heavenly Government in the Church of
Christ.

And to show thee, Reader, a little more of this vain Man's Impertinencies, he
queries in an Ishmaelitish Spirit, page 78. Then I still further query of you
Directory-makers (Dictator-like indeed, in an Imperious manner) What Is the
reason, and what does it mean, that neither Matthew, Mark, Luke, nor John, nor
any one Chapter of any of those Books are recorded in our Great Book of
Records, first and before the Epistle of G. F. as that which is more powerful,
more binding, and of much more Authority?

What thinks thou, Reader, is not here a mighty fault committed? surely worthy
of condign punishment, had he power to inflict it upon us; but I doubt much if
he or others of his confused fraternity, would e^cape this imputation,
notwithstanding of a^l their wisdom, had they distinct Quarterly Meeting Books,
to insert in the beginning of their great Books of Records, either the Books or
any one Chap. may be hardly so much as a single verse of Matthew, Mark, Luke,
or John.

One may surely suppose this vain, idle man either misses of his prudentials,
or else seems not to be in good earnest and serious in what he scribles here
and there.

Thus, Reader, I have followed the Wisemans advice, and in the middle way have
kept, neither altogether on the one hand disregarded these needless, senseless,
Queries, and not to take no notice at all of them; nor to be too much concerned
with them on the other hand, as to spend more time (and truly I think much more
I have taken, than the Author or they either deserve, and am almost wearied now
in canvassing him, and tracing through his dirty puddles) and therefore it is
said, Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like unto
him. (Here must be a holy slighting of the vain pratings and idle stories of
ridiculous Fools) but then says the same Wiseman, Answer a Fool according to
his folly; and he gives the reason, As the phrase is, Plus rogat asinus, quam
probat P^ilosophus.
lest he be wise in his own conceit. Oh would to God that the many seasonable
Answers had but this good effect upon those Fools our present Antagonists and
this peevish angry man F. B. amongst the rest, that he and they might seem no
longer wise in their own conceits and imaginations, as this might tend to their
unspeakable mercy and lasting welfare; so alas! this is their great misery,
that commonly befalls these opposing, wilful, stubborn persons, that instead of
being bettered by due, correction, they (as ill-natured Boys, the more they are
beat, the more cross they are) they grow more obstinate; or like to those the
Apostle mentions, Such as they are, even evil men and seducers, wax worse and
worse, deceiving and being deceived; yea and whose latter end is worse than the
beginning: so that for my part I have but little hopes of these self-conceited,
imperious, proud ones, who in their own foolish fancies imagine themselves to
be such and such, as its said, See thou a man wise in his own conceit, there
is more hope of a fool, than him.

CHAP. VII.
IN his IV. Chapter, page 87. in which he transcribes the Testmonies of R. H.
F. H. with G. F's Old Doctrine and New Practice, etc. as he calls it.

Reader, I desire thee to take notice that it has been the constant work of
our Opposers to pervert and bring in one page or sentence of Friends
Testimonies which (as distinct by it self, without coherence and relation,
either to what precedes, or what follows) may both seem to answer their crafty
designs, and their malicious ends, and also clash against the rest of the
matter not cited. Mysteries I do certainly know that they are not only
misunderstood and perverted with respect to what the Authors really meaned and
intended, but also mis-applied by our Opposers in this present matter.

For I have observed F. H's Testimony out of his Works in p. 614, 616, etc.
directly speaking against the Church of Rome, and this F. B. brings in against
Friends of Truth.
And as concerning the false suggestiion of this wicked, lying, perverse man,
that G. F's new practice were contradictions to his Old Doctrine, and seems to
repeat W. R's false, abusive Charge of G. F's being an Apostate and Innovator.
For I do firmly believe that faithful, ancient Labourer of the Gospel G. F. his
testimony and practice now is not contrary to what he first preached; and the
same almighty power and holy divine presence that attended his Ministry in the
beginning, continues with him now in his services and exercises; and I do know
that his life is hid with Christ in God: and let the Devil rage and roar, and
his cursed instruments on every hand stamp and stare; yea, let the wicked bend
their bow and shoot their arrows of deceit and malice, the great God, the Lord
Jehovah he will certainly surround us with his heavenly power, and over-shadow
us with his divine wing, and protect us under his safe pavilion; whereby as we
continue faithful to him, according to that good understanding he has bestowed
upon us, and so retain our innocence and uprightness before him, we shall be
defended, and all our enemies confounded: For blessed be his holy name, that G.
F. and many thousands with him, know Christ Jesus by his eternal spirit to rule
in us, to be our Guide, our Head, our Lawgiver, and who is made unto us of
God, Sanctification, Righteousness, Wisdom, and Redemption.

And as for thy bringing in the Professors (page 99.) saying so and so,
according to thy foolish invented stories and base lies, I know the sober sort
of you and the very civil people of the world, will readily acknowledge, and
have done, when they have been witnesses to our orderly Christian way, in the
beginning, proceeding, and accomplishing of our Marriages, that they have been
really satisfied therewith, and that it was but lying slanders cast upon us,
that we did so and so, without regard either to God or Men.

And further, Such also will condemn thee Francis and thy adherents, who in
your hasty, forward, and rash minds cannot wait in the patience to have your
matters done in that orderly discreet way and method amongst the Lords people.

And this brings before me, and which I cannot well omit, but take notice, how
impudently thou insinuates and slily infers, That the way Friends take, were an
easy way and more pleasing to the flesh, and is most taking, and drawing after
them the greatest number; I speak of them that profess the Truth: (see page
83.) Now let but any rational and judicious person consider in the first place,
Whether that way is more easy and pleasing to the flesh, which leads people to
a weighty serious deliberation of such a great solemn Concern as Marriage is,
and so after their ponderous considerations to propose it before Meetings of
Friends both of Men and Women's, and so to be satisfied in patience and
submission of mind with the ordering hand of God, as they have Unity therewith,
and gives way to be accomplished, which sometimes as occasion presents, as
circumstances stand, and need is, may be pretty long betwixt the proposal and
accomplishment: this I know has been so far from being an easy way and more
pleasing to the flesh, that on the contrary to several it has proved a very
unpleasant, hard, and difficult exercise, to come before our public Meetings,
so often in the way and order of Truth, and it has been in the cross to their
own wills; and they have got good by it both outwardly and inwardly, though for
the present time it might seem tedious and grievous to some.

And next consider Reader, Whether this way of Marriage be not indeed an easy
and more pleasing to the flesh, for a man, after that his affections are drawn
out toward a woman, immediately to give Friends a kind of a general slight
notice thereof, may be after your public Meetings, and tell them he intends to
take such a woman to be his wife; and so whether they have the consent of
Friends and their Unity therewith or not, they are resolved, and in their minds
fixed to go on and so in their own wills and at their own time, out of the fear
of God and the good order of Truth, begins and ends their matter.

And because several disorderly, hasty, forward spirits could not have Friends
at all to countenance them, they have run to the Priest and been married by
him, and become either on the one hand loose, yea and more wicked and
extravagant in their debauched conversations than they were formerly, before
they were convinced of the Truth, or made profession thereof, or on the other
hand from the pride and prejudice of their minds, turned disaffected, and so
joined to the discontented opposite party; and as this was the very rise or
original cause, viz. either pride and prejudice in some, or looseness and
libertinism in others, that has brought forth this cursed work of separation
from and opposition to the Lord and his people, and which at last leads into
Ranterism, yea Atheism, and all mannet of prophanity; so its the very same this
day that draws so many to join with these Separatists, and become their
proselites; either such I say as are from pride and prejudice disaffected and
discontented, or are inclinable to looseness, wantonness, and false liberty,
and so such grow weary of the Cross, and cannot, nor delight not to walk longer
in the strait and narrow way of holiness, that alone leads to everlasting life.
Thus that proverb is fulfilled as to them, The Dog is turned to his own vomit
again, and the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire.

CHAP. VIII.
AS concerning the V. and VI Chapters. wherein he inserts the Opinion of
several of the Clergy both Bishops and Ministers, and shows the judgment of
ancient Protestants and Martyrs, against Impositions and forcing a Conformity
to Men's Traditions not grounded on Scripture Authority, etc. We are not at all
concerned with the wrong, abusive application of these and diverse other good
testimonies of those worthy men, the great tendency of all which, both what is
cited by F. B. and also much more could be produced, was to testify against
the Romish Antichristian Tyranny of Imposing upon Tender Consciences to be
subject to their Superstition and Idolatry, and of persecuting and inflicting
Temporal or Bodily Punishments upon such as could not comply nor bow to them
therein. See R. B's Anarchy of the Ranters, etc. that opens this very clearly.

For though we do say, and always have declared that forced Imposition of
Consciences is an Antichristian, Abominable, and Unreasonable Practice: Yet we
also affirm, according to the Scriptures of Truth, The true Church is to exert
that Power and Authority with which she is invested, and to improve that
Privilege God Almighty has bestowed upon her in those Admonitions, Reproofs,
etc. this in short being more largely treated of by T. Ellwood, see his VI.
Chap. in his Antidote, etc. and other Friends, and also I direct thee to peruse
W. Gibson's General Epistle for the preservation and increase of Charity and
Unity, amongst the Professors of Christ Jesus, etc. lately Printed and Sold by
John Bringhurst.

But to return to the Matter in hand, Thou may observe the height of
Wickedness, Baseness, and Malice in the Superlative Degree in F. B. falsely
insinuating (in p. 115.) in his ungodly, lying, pretended Discovery of that
Hypocritical and twofold Practice, Viz. Of plead^ng to the Magistrate for
liberty of Conscience, and at the same time are using and exercising all force,
rule, dominion, and authority, they are capable to inflict upon their
dissenting Brethren (thou show thy self here a to be an impudent liar, that
I must needs tell thee by the way) who cannot fall down and cry Hosannah to
every likeness (and here thou art an insolent Scoffer) lest the accepting and
conforming to one needless Ceremony, should be ground of encouragement to the
Ruling Party, to introduce another, and so a numberless number, until at length
Rome may (if possible) be outdone, etc.

Reader, I cannot but signify to thee that we are not unsensible what the main
Design is of all this sad, grievous, work of Unchristian Defamations, base,
lying, Reflections, and groundless Suggestions, as if we were endeavoring to
impose upon tender Consciences, and so to Persecu^^ such as will not Conform,
and be in Uniformity; this I say is the very Work of the Devil, to expose an
innocent, harmles^ People, to the hard Censures, sever^^ Thoughts, and strange
Apprehensions o^ them, and not only so, but to be an occasion of ambage to the
cruel maliciou^ Persecutors, both to harden them i^ their work, and also to
instigate others whose inclination leads them not thereto So thou may easily
discern what is the tendency of this devilish Work of Opposition to the
Heavenly Government of Christ, established in and amongst his People, and what
Spirit it is that drives and hurries them on joined thereunto; no doubt but
that it is a murdering one (even that of Cain, and that of Rabshakeh,
notwithstanding its fair pretenses, as if it were for Liberty of Conscience
against Impositions, Prescriptions, and Innovations of Men, and so seem to be
for the Lord, as he pretended; Am I now come (says he) without the Lord
against this place to destroy it? The Lord said to me (here was a great boast)
Go up against this Land, and destroy it, etc. Yet good Hezekias said, This is a
day of Trouble, of Rebuke, of Blasphemy, when the King of Assyria had sent this
Rabshakeh to reproach the living God, etc. 2 Kings 18.25.19.3. which would not
only be contented to stain our Reputations amongst sober people, but also
labors by these indirect means, that we might be in hazard of being deprived
both of our Lives and Estates, in falsely and most maliciously rendering of us as
Papists, Apostates, Innovators, and Imposers.

Well Francis, we leave the God of Heaven to reckon with thee for all thy
Hellish Lies, Slanders, and Insinuations, and we desire thou may find a
place of Repentance.

In thy 7th. Chap p. 128. I find little of weight in it to be noticed by me, in
respect that the substance of the matter therein contained, for the most part
relates to particular persons by Epistles, etc.

Only amongst some of thy Queries I shall observe thy 6th, in p. 158. wherein
thou asks, Whether it be not a Popish Tenet to cry down Wisdom, and to say that
Wisdom will destroy us, as it is usual with you to say? (And then comparing us
with the Papists, goes on) for the Papists can not how foolish the common
people are, not how much in Ignorance (it being, as they say, the Mother of
Devotion) they educate them; provided their Ministers an^ Jesuits be very
expert and able to defen^ their way of Worship, and heap of Ceremonies: And
when do any that Write or Dispute to defend our way of Worship, Obs. Its well
known how great Fools and Idiots the blind World has accounted and reckoned us
to be in our Speaking or Writing to defend the true Way and Worship, etc.
Write on Speak like Fools, except they can neithe^ Write nor Speak other ways?
And why do yo^ cry out against Wisdom upon every occasion; as if Ignorance were
become our only Darling. Thus far F. B. in his Query.

And his Answer is with the words of W. P's Address to Protestants (p. 187.)
end as he abuses this passage with many others in his Book, perverting them by
misapplications to a wrong use, never, I know, intended by the Author, to
gratify this evil, malicious Spirit, and its a pity that such a good Book that
has been of so great a Service, should be thus abused; and I cannot pass by,
but desire, VV. P. may take notice of this twofold Practice of this deceitful,
hypocritical Person, who sometimes seems to admire and fawn upon him, when he
expresses himself thus in (p. 133.) Now let us a little Animadvert upon this
Noblemans words, viz. VV. P's and yet at other times seems basely to abuse and
indirectly Reflects upon him (as in p. 145.) saying to VV. P. That they may not
look one way, and row another, a thing some suspect (may be thy self as ready
as any, for all thou seems to be clear of such a suspicion) by thy disputing on
G. F's. part, etc. But as to what the Queries say, Why do we cry out against
Wisdom on every occasion, etc. he either is a very Ignoramus of that Wisdom
against which we do thus cry, otherwise he would not impose such an impertinent
Query; or else its from a malicious premeditated Design, contrived from his
carnal fleshly Wisdom (as I rather judge) to amuse simple people, and beget a
wrong Apprehension in their Minds of our oneness with the Papists in this point.

For its well known, that we never denied that Wisdom and Understanding which
comes down from above, that is heavenly, pure, peaceable, and gentle, easy to
be entreated, wherewith God endows his people, to discern and see over all bad,
dark, and opposite Spirits in all their twinings and twistings from the
earthly, carnal Wisdom that is from below, devilish and sensual, which has
begot in the hearts of those who are led by it, bitter envy and strife; and as
the Apostle said, Where this is (as we may observe by daily experience on every
hand) Confusion, and every evil work is amongst them.

Our Testimony stands against this sort of Natural Wisdom, unsubjected to the
holy divine power, and therefore hear what the Wise Man says unto thee, who
cries up so much the same, Cease from thy own Wisdom, Pro. 23.4. and see how
much the Apostle speaks against this Wisdom, Citing the Prophets words, Isa.
29.14. For it is written, I will destroy the Wisdom of the Wise, etc. and where
is the Wise, the Scribe, the Disputer of this World? Has not God made foolish
the Wisdom thereof, and the World by Wisdom knew not God: 1 Cor. 1. (nor to
this day does the World by its Wisdom know him) and Brethren ye see your
Calling, how that not many Wise men after the Flesh are called: But we know
that there is a Divine Understanding and heavenly Wisdom better than strength,
and better than Weapons, and it is the lowly that feels this Wisdom to abide in
and remain with them, and blessed be the Lord there are a remnant who have
supplicated before him, not for Riches, Honor, Wealth, nor Long life, but with
the Wise King, Give us Wisdom and Knowledge, and he has granted this our
Request; O magnified be his most Holy Reverend Name for ever and for evermore.

In p. 211. he brings in another business concerning the Order of Barbados,
which VV. R. makes a great noise about in his bustling bulksome Book, that is a
heap of Lies and Consusion; but they have no such reason, considering in the
first place, that if they did that which was not agreeable to Truth, should be
a just occasion to impeach a Body of people as guilty thereof: I desire they
may learn better the right Rule of Reasoning of Matters; for any person of
small judgment may conceive it were unreasonable to conclude, because that F.
B. may be of such a heady, wilful, cross, perverse Nature, or that W. R. may be
of such a high, self-conceited, violent, opposite Spirit, therefore that all
who are inclinable to follow or favor him a little in his Cursed Work of
Division, are so malicious and envious, etc. as he or F. B. are.

And Secondly, I believe Friends at London have disproved in that particular
aforesaid.

But Lastly, If those belonging to that Meeting were all contented with, and
gave their consents to that Order, from diverse Considerations, inducing them
thereto; here I think then was no imposition or forcing in the matter relating
particularly to themselves, though it was an Error which they themselves have
confessed, as R. R. has fully shown in his Answer to T. C.

But what will not wrong minded Men catch advantage against, and raise jangling
and contention about!

I cannot pass by, but discover to thee Reader a little more of this railing,
abusive Man's Temper, F. B. who in p. 178. most basely Calumniates and falsely
Slanders that precious worthy Servant of the Lord G. W. at a most unworthy,
uncivil rate, saying, He being lately in Huntingtonshire and else where, where
he took too much upon him, and behaved himself more like a Lordly Bishop or
Popish Prelate, than an humble Minister of Christ; and by me at this time is,
and stands impeached, as an Enemy to Christian Liberty, a Usurper over the
Conscience, the which I stand ready publicly to Assert, Maintain, and
Vindicate; and in p. 39. in his scoffing strain says, (Citing the words of the
Accuser of the Brethren) we do profess seriously ( a notable serious George, if
we may believe him) says F. B.

I desire the Reader to peruse the said Book, which he supposes G. VV. to be
the Author of; and he shall find both him and Friends finally Vindicated from
these foul wicked Villainies, base and lying Imputations; and though its well
known geneally amongst Friends that G. W. is of a tender, mild, and meek
Spirit, and there needs little to be said to Vindicate his Reputation, his
Honesly, and Fidelity being so apparent and noted amongst us; yet meeting with
a Certificate from Friends in Huntingtonshire, I was willing to insert it.

From our Monthly Meeting at Godmonchester, the 7th of the 5th Month, 1682.
WHereas George Whitehead has beeen evilly traduced in two Letters of Fra.
Buggs, and charged in one of them, with behaving himself in Huntingtonshire
like a Lordly Bishop or Popish Prelate lately. Now we whose Names are
subscribed, do testify, That we never in this County, nor elsewhere at any
time, saw any such thing: And that he is a Man of a temper remote from any such
matter, but do believe he is a true Labourer in Godd Service, and an humble
Minister of the Gospel.

Matthew. Key Samuel Notinghon Tobias Hardmeat Robert Lister Jasper Robins John
Wilsford John Devensol Will. Starling Rd. Snahdall John King David Tisdal Tho.
Lister Whose Name F.B. sets down in his Book in p. 98. approving something
sent to the Quarterly Meeting in the Isle of Ely, in which he says abusively
(but grieved some Friends) and adds this his Forgery in a Parenthesis,
[perhaps Richard Jobson and Tobias Hardmeat, G. Foxes two principal Studs in
that Country.]
Richard Jobson.



CHAP. IX. A Catalogue of the Scoffing Lies, and Scandalous, Abusive
Insinuations from F. B's Second Part, consisting of false Matter, placed on a
wrong Subject, and tending to a bad end.
1. IN page 4. he falsely Insinuates, That their way (intending G. F. etc.) of
compelling, and antichristian way of proceeding to bring to, and force an
Uniformity, is by us slighted and contemned.

II. (p. 6.) He says, And how far these Tyrannical proceedings have been used
by our new Spiritual Lords.

III. (P. 8.) And now I will show a Parallel betwixt the Treatments which the
Protestants met with from the hands of the Papists for their pains, An odious
Comparison.
and betwixt the Treatment that W. R* T. C. and others have met withal from the
hands of G. F. and those of party with him, for their pains, and I expect no
better reward; for I know they will be very angry, yea dreadful angry, to see
their Rood of Grace, or Graceless, as well as Lifeless Image [Note a graceless
as well as lifeless Application] brought forth to the peoples view in its
proper dress, in all its imperfect parts, ana deformed shapes, as I have done,
showing the several sorts of Metals it is made up with, and the ill composed
Ingredients therewith tempered to make it stand; when all is done, it is so
lame of its Feet, and so benumbed to the Toes end, that it must and will fall
as soon as ever Implicit Faith; and Blind Obedience [the Papists old Crutches]
do but take away their hands from it, etc.

Francis, I tell thee, unless thou unfeignedly repent of this thy base,
scurrilous, treacherous work of Folly, Enmity, and Mockery, of these envious
Suggestions, scurrilous Reflections, notorious Abuses and Perversions of thy
Scoffing, Railing, and Reviling; remember I warn thee of it, a most terrible
dreadful reward may thou expect and look for to meet with from the hand of the
Righteous Judge of all Flesh, and which unavoidably shall overtake thee.

IV. P. 59. We cry to the Magistrates for the liberty and the free exercise of
our Consciences in Matters Spiritual; and will not, nay resolves not, come what
will come, to allow the free Exercise of Conscience in Matters Spiritual, to
our Dissenting Brethren. [ A falsehood; we allow the same Liberty we call for,
i. e. from Corporal Punishments, etc. but not from Spiritual Gospel Reproofs.]

V. P. 71. The whole Rubric, Laws, and Canons Ecclesiastical of G. F. and
other Innovators -- they have no will to reason things, to debate things; but
too much like the Papists, would have things taken upon Trust. [Note, these are
abominable-Lies upon Lies, and most odious Slanders; and he is a lying Informer
that is the Author of them.]

VI. P. 75. And in as much as you seem to make G. F. the Author of the Errors,
it stands him upon, finally to reject, and to bear a public Testimony against
the new strange and dangerous Innovations and Babylonish Inventions. -- In
whose Name you complete a Conformity to the new Invented Orders and Rules,
under pain of Condemnation. [These are all Clamorous Abuses, and Slanderous
Aspersions, without Proofs.]

VII. And p. 83. Drawing them from the Anointing within to Observations
without, to express the Kingdom there, being an easy way, and more pleasing to
the Flesh, is most taking, drawing after them the greatest number: I speak of
them that profess the Truth. [The Charge is general and Abusive.]

VIII. P. 95. Speaking of G.F. says, And if W. R. calls him Apostate and
Innovator, as that he is manifest enough to be, then he is angry, and those of
party with him stigmatize and abuse W. R. instead of endeavoring to convince
G. F. of the Error of his way. [Note, what abuse of W. R? and what Errors, etc.]

IX. And p. 95. Antichristian Canons, which limit people to a Stated Form. [A
soul Slander again, yet we must hold the Form of Godliness, though Ranters
oppose it.]

X. P. 97. To cover their Deceit and Hypocrisy, and Arbitrary Church
Government, Dominion, Lordship, etc. [All gross Slanders.]

XI. And page 102. But you deny the Scriptures of Christ and his Apostles to be
n="*" A Lie.
A Rule; and yet we see you are for A Rule as much as any People: only you must
have a Rule of your own Making, of your own Framing; a Child of your own Brain
must be your Darling -- And so make to your selves a Graven Image. [This is not
true of the people called Quakers, but of thy self, and such as thou art.]

XII. P. 115, 116. he says, -- To discover that Hypocritical and Two-faced
Practice, viz. Of pleading to the Magistrate for Liberty of Conscience, and at
the same time are using and exercising all Force, Rule, Dominion, and Authority
they are capable to inflict upon their Brethren, who cannot fall down, and cry
HOSANNA to every Likeness, etc.

[How loathsome is F.B. heaping up such a Dunghill of lies!]

XIII. And (p. 150, 151, 152, 153.) In a Letter of his to G.W. he thus says,
It is reported that Nicholas Lucas told thee, THOU WENTEST UP AND DOWN TO CHEAT
THE COUNTRY; [I reckon he meant not of Money, but the people of their Liberty
they have right to.] Truly thy Behavior has manifested the Truth of his words
in a great measure, as I am abbe to make appear not only by thy Advice in
Huntingtonshire; but also by thy Erroneous Doctrine amongst us, etc. --
Exercise Dominion, Gentile- like, over your Brethren; as if you were resolved
to turn Monopolizers, and Ingrossers of all Power Rule and Dominion over
Consciences into your hands -- Oh! the Discord, Contention and Debate, which
entered, and does daily increase by reason of the Ceremonies, and your forced
Conformity to them: and the chief cause hereof lies at your Doors. [See the
Certificate from Friends of Huntingtonshire inserted p. 90. which sufficiently
detects his Abuses, and Defamations against G. W.]

XIV. And in p. 164. he thus insinuates, viz. Whereby we thwart and contradict
our avowed Principles; and so are building again the thing we once destroyed
and cried out against, condemning in others the things we allow in our selves.
Through which Practices a man may discern, without a pair of Spectacles, ERROR
and SUPERSTITION coming in apace; LIMPING upon the old Crutches of IMPLICIT
FAITH and BLIND OBEDIENCE. [What are those he thus accuses? The people called
Quakers are not chargeable herewith.]

XV. And in page 159. he thus insinuates, When do any that write or dispute, to
defend our way of Worship, write and speak like Fools, except they can neither
write nor speak otherwise? and why do you cry out against Wisdom upon every
accasion? as if Ignorance were become our only Darling. [This is an abominable
abuse: we cry out against no Wisdom, but corrupt, fleshly, earthly, sensual,
devilish Wisdom]

XVI. P. 163. George Fox, See if thou have not as much need of a battledore as
the Scholars and Professors had, n="*" A Gross Lie.
who art as much APOSTATIZED from thy former Principles for liberty of
Conscience as the Scholars and Professors were from the single Language, viz.
THEE and THOU to a single person.

And a little after he brings in this abusive lie and wicked Insinuation in
rhyme, viz.

This I set here, not to Adore
Because I do well understand,
He that gave forth the battle-dore
Now brings Grapes of another Land;
Which sower be, because not free
From Force and Impositions;
Although as yet he will not see
Them like old Romes Traditions.
Think to scare us out of our good Order with thy Goggle-eyed Image of
Jealousy: which if thou did see through thy own Spectacles might affright
thee out of thy shallow Conceits. An ugly Spectacle. For,

Rogers, Crisp, Pennyman, Bullock and Bugg,
Dark Devil-driven Dungy-gods desp rately lug,
That are tied to the tail of their separate Schism
Pap-Lihertin-Heathen-Juda-Athe-ism.
XVII. And page 178. Speaking of Richard Richardson, he thus Scossingly
insinuates, viz. If R. R. has no better Logic, he need not be admired by G.
W. in print for his great Learning, See R. R. Ingredients against the Venom in
W. R s. Book Printed for John Bringhurst.
nor perhaps had not, only he has found out some History, or Popish Author
(This is a lie; for there are many Protestant Authors) which say, There were
Deaconnesses, as well as Deacons: which were helpful to G. W. in his preaching
and disputing for Women's Meetings lately in Huntingtonshire, and elsewhere;
where he took too much upon him, and behaved himself more like a Lordly Bishop
or Popish Prelate, than an humble Minister of Christ. [This is confuted before.]

XVIII. Pa 195. And now I shall turn to the Bishops of the Protestant-Churches,
and do not question, but shall make it appear, that they (their Power
considered, and that the Laws are on their sides) are more moderate, and use
not that Severity to the Members of their Church (although they are severe
enough too) that George Fox, and those of party with him, use to the poor
QUAKERS, if they chance to transgress their Traditions, etc. [These are false
and proofless insinuations.]

XIX. And in p. 200. They do not only testify against that BAD SPIRIT, as they
account it, but HIM ALSO, viz, the MAN ALSO: Oh! that we could but say, TAKE
HIM JAILER, and that effectually. [A wicked Lie and base Insinuation.]

XX. And in p. 291. he has this abusive Scoff, viz. For which very piece of
Service, Stamp and Probatum est, I think that very Meeting deserves a TRIPPLE
CROWN. [For this thou F. B. deserves to be reputed a Scornful Lying Informer.]

XXI. Page 208. And now may they [the Presbyterians,] say to G. F. What had
thou rather that B. Clark and J. Bringhurst, should sell Papists- Books, Play-
Books, Jesting- Books, nay Books, rather than that Book of W.R. [What Papists
books are these? Profane books we own not, mark that; and then brings in this
lie for the reason of their not Selling it] because it Discovers the Naked
Truth of their NEW MODEL OF CHURCH GOVERNMENT. [But J. B. gives a Conscientious
Reason to the Reader, at the beginning of Chr. Tailors Epistle of Caution; etc.
why he could not fell them. And we testify against Play-books, Jesting-books,
Popish-books, and disown the selling of them, as we do the selling W. R's and
thine, for they are all from one spirit, only yours the most malicious and less
to be born, because of your hypocritical pretended Friendship. See Psalm.
55.12, 13.]

CHAP. X.
IN this following Chapter I shall insert what the sense of J. S. and J. W. is
concerning Womens-meetings, and also what T. C. says in his Babels, part 1st.
page 9. with a paper subscribed by John Wilkinson, and others of his party,
approving of and unanimously consenting to the Epistle of G. F. which F. B.
terms his new order (which was wrote about the year 1671) for women's Meetings;
all which contradicts F. B. in his violent Rage, and most furious Clashings
against Women's Meetings, as the understanding impartial Reader may readily
perceive by his perusing of the same.

First, John Wilkinson's and John Story's Sense concerning Women's Meetings.

As we do approve of Monthly and Quarterly meetings, for the necessary service
of the Truth; some say, that as these or any other meetings of Friends in
Truth, shall be continued to answer those services, we believe that as it now
is, it also will become our duty to be at unity with our brethren in the
service thereof; and though one of us (viz. J. Wilkinson) did condescend to
subscribe a paper for the erecting a woman's meeting in the Country, to answer
the ends proposed in the paper, which (he testifies.) he then did in singleness
of heart for unitys sake: yet according to that inward sense we now have, there
appears to us no absolute necessity to continue Women's meetings in the Country
distinct and separate from the men, and therefore do conscientiously forbear to
assent or encourage to lay the Intentions of Marriage before them; yet that
inward sense and heavenly understanding we receive from God, has and yet does
confirm us in this Judgment, that it is not agreeable with the line of Truth, to
oppose others in the Exercise and appointed service of the said Meetings as
heretofore and yet settled and agreed upon, who being conscious therein, are
otherwise minded than we are; and if any of our words and actions have any
tendency to oppose, etc. (which we are not conscious of, but if we were, we
would readily confess,) we say the Truth in us would have condemned it, even as
it now does; and if it shall please the Lord to manifest unto us a service in
those Meetings in the Country as well as Citys, the same integrity toward God,
which has dwelt with us this many years past, we believe will become a Bond on
us to join Hand and Heart with others our Brethren and Sisters therein; but
till then our desires are, that they may not become an occasion of straitness
of Spirit each toward others, but that embracing the wholesome Council of the
Apostle in another case, If in any thing ye are otherwise minded, wait till God
reveal it; we may walk together in pure undefiled love of our God, which
thinks no Evil. This I have from T. C's Book, called, Several Testimonys
concerning Liberty of Conscience, page 23. the same also is set down at large
in W. R's Book, 4 part, page 37. which we suppose he has abbreviated out of it.

Secondly, But that which more closely contradicts F. B. hear what T. C. his
Brother in Iniquity says in the 9'th page of his Babels, part 1st.

Now those they term STUBBORN, are not against Men and Women's Meetings, but
differ about the form and power thereof, they are only against Women having
Meetings apart from the men, when they have no business requires it; not
against them in Citys, Great Towns, and Places, where they live near together,
and occasions require; but where they live remote from each other, and have no
Business; also the form of Marriages, etc. (for these persons who they say are
against Meetings, do and are willing to use them on necessary occasions,) this
is the great State of the Difference, and Case of those Persons G. F. etc.
terms Apostates, bad Spirits, etc. and G.F. etc. say, The Universal Spirit
cannot receive that. Thus far T. C. fairly grants: from which 1st. observe,
They declare, or T. C. on their behalf, that they are not against Men and
Women's Meetings, and that they are only against Women's Meetings apart from the
Men, when they have no business; which grants they are for them when they have
business even to be apart from the Men though they say there is no Precept,
President nor Command for them in Scriptures; and who should be the most proper
Judges of the Business? I hope they will grant, that those who are most
immediately concerned to do the business must judge when they have business,
etc.

Secondly, They declare, or T. C. for them, that they are not against Women's
Meetings distinct or apart from the Men, in City's, Great Towns and Places; and
yet Cry out against, without distinction, scoffing at them, and calling them a
Dead Lifeless Image, and comparing them to the Rood of Grace, (so called) etc.
that F. B. says, would smile when a good gift was given it, etc.

Thirdly, They are only against Women's Meetings where they live remote from
each other and have no business; but if they have business then they may meet.
He does not say, they must bring Chapter and Verse for their meeting at the
tenth hour of the day, to get a little stock, etc. no, no; if they have but
business, they may meet, says T. C. though there is neither Precept, President
nor Command for them, I will dispense with that in Cities, great Towns and
places, nay in Counties too, if they have business,) and then I hope if there
be need they will grant they may meet when they be found in the practice of
communicating and doing good, which the Apostle says is that Sacrifice
wherewith the Lord is well pleased, as also to visit (and communicate where
need is) the Fatherless and the Widow, and not be like to those the Apostle
mentions; If a Brother or Sister be naked and destitute of daily food, and one
of you say unto them, depart in peace, be you warmed and filled,
notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body,
Ja. 2 16. And if they have a stock for these Christian Charitable Uses it
matters not what the Devil, envious or hard-hearted men and women may say, that
may have of this Worlds goods, and yet suffer your Brothers and Sisters, or the
poor Fatherless and distressed to want, for these Cannot truly say with good
Job, 31.16, 17. verse. If I have withheld the poor from their desire, or have
Caused the Eyes of the Widow to fail, or have eaten my morsel alone, and the
Fatherless have not eaten thereof: If I have seen any perish for want of
Clothing, or any poor without Covering? If his loins have not blessed me; and
if he were not warmed with the fleece of my sheep, etc. Then let my arm fall
from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone.

So by what T. C. writes it is over and over granted, that the women may meet
apart from the men. So that one may tell F. B. that T. C. (whose Babells he
quotes) grants what he spends many pages against: And Prints a foolish
nonsensical Ballad of scorn against, (to which is added many verses that were
not in the former,) and this says T. C. is the great part of the difference
and the case of those persons G. F. terms Apostates, etc. viz. in short, that
they are only for women's meetings when there is business and necessary
occasions, etc. Well, if they can produce when or where any women had their
meeting and no business, nor necessary occasion, let them, and then prove that
its a Crime at such times to wait upon the Lord in his Spirit and fear, to
receive of his Divine Counsel and Wisdom, by which they may be acted and guided
to the praise of his Grace, to show forth the virtues of him that has called
them, etc. and that that is not a necessary occasion. And furthermore observe,
we have men's monthly meetings, and must they not meet at the time appointed if
no business should present? And if they meet not, pray how should they know
whether they have business or not? And if they may meet, why not the women
likewise? If neither, except as before, why is any time appointed? This looks
as if they would have Friends only meet when they can tell of outward business
to be proposed; so if any but say, he knows no business, he is excused. Oh what
a disorder and confusion would they lead into! Well may they be termed
Babell's-builders, and compared to the foolish woman, etc.

3ly. Moreover Reader, I desire thee to consider that notwithstanding F. B. so
much abuses that Epistle of G. F's concerning Women's meetings, which he
transcribes in p. 33. and brings in as a proof of an alteration and violence
done to our first Principles of union, whereof I have already taken notice: See
Chap. IV. p. 50. Yet this very same paper was approved of by John Wilkinson and
others of his party, and for thy further satisfaction, and to show thee both
how much they have contradicted this foolish conceited man F. B. and likewise
thou may clearly see how much they are degenerated, and Apostatized from what
they once owned, I shall present a paper writ from the Quarterly meeting at
Kendall the 6th of 8th month 1671. where the foresaid Epistle of G. F's. was
read and joined with, and with an unanimous Consent to be Practiced, as appears
by what follows.

It is further agreed upon, that this paper be read in every particular Meeting
that the WOMEN-friends, who are faithful, may be stirred up to a serious
consideration in the light of the Lord, to examine themselves and feel his
requirings, and so to answer the Lord with diligence and willingness of mind,
that so every one that profess the living truth of God may be serviceable
Instruments in his hand to Extol his Name, and to perfect his praise in our day
and time. And in the women's assembling together, to see and consider that all
women, young and old, who profess the Truth, do walk therein in good order, in
modesty and moderation, in Charity, out of the Customs and fashions of the
World, and that nothing be lacking; and so herein the femals will become very
sensible of the necessities of the body, and so you will rejoice with them that
do rejoice, and suffer with them that do suffer, and mourn with them that do
mourn, who are not gotten out of the bondage and Captivity of the adversary,
and so be ready to lend unto such a helping hand, and encourage every such good
desire, and reprove the willful and obstinate. And so every one acting in the
just Principle of God in our selves justice will be exalted, and righteousness
established; and herein Male and Female is serviceable in our place and calling
in this our day and generation: And so all Women-Friends who feel sincere
desires in themselves to be instrumental of good unto others, let them meet
together (as aforesaid n="*" viz as is expressed in G. F's paper, wherein its
found thus; and so it would do well for the Women to have a distinct meeting?
by themselves, as it is in other places, and to see that nothing be lacking --
So once a month to have a Woman's meeting in the County-Town, or other places
convenient then the other Neighboring Women may come and go home they meeting
together about the 10th hour of the day, etc.
) and in this desire certainly the Lord will assist you in his Wisdom and
Counsel to act and speak that which is convenient; and all the faithful women
who are inclined and affected herewith may signify their minds and intents to
the Men's meetings, and so be encouraged by us whose names are hereafter
subscirbed. John Wilkinson. Henry Story. Richard Stephenson. Henry Garner. etc.


CHAP. XI.
THE last part of my present business is in something by way of tender Counsel,
and Brotherly advice unto all Friends of truth, both here and also beyond Seas,
etc.

That which will render you in a true Capacity in your several stations, to be
a good savor in your places before the Lord, and Instrumental in his Blessed
Hand, to be serviceable in advancing this great and glorious Work of the
universal Restoration of the Sons and Daughters of men; is, as you are kept in
the continual daily subjection of your Spirits to the Leadings of that holy
pure power of Almighty God, who has called you unto a high and Honorable
vocation; For that has been as well the ground of our preservation in a right
state and good condition, as the alone foundation of the infinite loving
kindness and continuation of the tender Care of our heavenly Father toward us,
till this moment of time,

And because of the want of this holy subjection, in the particulars of those
who have been convinced of the blessed Truth, and publicly have appeared for
it; but having gone from the life of it in themselves, and because that they
have not kept in the Constant dependency on the Lord, in the daily self-denial,
and in the Cross to their own wills, and so have not abode in the lowlike,
humble, meek and quiet peaceable Spirit of Jesus, therefore is it that a
disorderly, treacherous, loose, libertine, reaching, high, perverse Spirit has
entered into them, and has so far prevailed upon them, as to influence them
thus to appear in such an abusive, heady, Cross, opposite, willful and stubborn
mind; that they become like those mentioned in Jude, likewise also says the
Apostle, These filthy dreamers (mark well the sayings they are so apposite to
illustrate and clearly demonstrate the very Characters of these Apostates,
defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities, and of those
things which they know not; and what they know naturally as bruit Beasts, in
those things they corrupt themselves: Woe unto them, for they have gone in the
way of Cain, and perished in the gainsaying of Core; these are Spots in your
feasts of Charity, feeding themselves without fear, Clouds without water,
Carried about with Winds; Trees, whose fruit withers, twice dead plucked up
by the roots; raging waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame; wandering
stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever: But beloved,
Remember ye the words which were spoken before by the Apostle^ of our Lord
Jesus Christ: How that they told you, there should be Mockers in the last time,
who should walk after their own ungodly lusts, (and at last very evidently
concludes, demonstrating what persons these are, as a signal mark to know them
by) These be they that SEPARATE themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. And
Observe further how the Apostle Peter describes them more fully, for when they
speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure through the lusts of the
flesh, through much wantonness. While they promise them liberty, they
themselves are servants of corruption: For it had been better for them not to
have known the way of righteousness, than after they had known it to turn from
the holy Commandment delivered unto them; but it is happened according to the
true Proverb, the Dog has turned to his own vomit again; and the sow that was
washed to her wallowing in the mire, 2 Pet. 2.

Every one of these passages are so Correspondent with, and agreeable to the
practices and ways of this dividing opposite party, who have separated
themselves from our blessed unity, First as with respect to the good Spirit of
God in their own particulars, and next (which of necessity and so naturally
follows) as to fellowship, concord and Communion with his People, and methinks
one near parallel, and a more close comparison could not be drawn as to every
circumstance betwixt those in the Apostles time, and those in ours; it is so
apparent that people of small understanding may readily observe the same.

And its my firm Faith, and certain persuasion, that as on the one hand they
are daily discovering their own shame, by their uncivil defamations abominable
lies and malicious suggestions, so on the otherhand shall their folly thereby
be the more laid open: For as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, So do these
also resist the Truth; but says he, they shall n="*" Obs. In Gods appointed
time all the resi^^ers and Rebellers are stopped in their envy and malice
against his People.
proceed no further; why so? the reason is clear as follows; for their folly
shall be made manifest (to whom? not only to a few, or a little remnant who
from that inward sense and true discerning, the Lord has indewed them with, do
see and have seen when first they began their wicked work of separation, and
before it was so notorious as it is now; but) unto all men as theirs was

Now to return unto that which was most weighty in my view (having made some
little digression) seeing it has thus sadly befallen such who have not kept
their habitation in the Truth, by reason of their woeful departure from that due
constant subjection of their Spirits thereunto, having also the advantage of
observing the Rock they have split upon, and as this F. B. says in his word of
advice to the Pennsylvanians in his last Chap. such a slender pitiful dry one
as it is, and indeed I think better could not be well expected from him; for as
I remember the substance of what he says that is worth observing, much like to
the dead professors, strain, keep the Scripture in esteem amongst you, etc. But
never so much as a syllable of the ancient Principle of Truth, viz. To mind the
light of Christ) you may perceive what has been one Impediment to the increase
of love and Charity, which Blessed be the Lord God of Eternal Glory,
plentifully abounds amongst Friends in Scotland, Ireland and other places,
where this opposite dividing party has not gained any Interest among them, and
so in most Counties of this Nation of England, where it has not prevailed,
there is great amity, blessed unity, sweet concord, Peace and Heavenly harmony,
daily increases amongst them; O Blessings and glory and Honor unto the Lord
our God for ever for the same!

Therefore my tender Counsel and brotherly advice, in the love of our Lord
Jesus unto you all is, be very Careful, that at all times, above all things
whatsoever, and on all occasions you may be found in that holy Reverend
subjection of your Spirits, to the blessed Divine power of the living God, that
has reached unto you, and by which you are Called to be his holy pure People,
and then in this holy frame I do right well know shall you be kept near unto
and in unity with himself, and in concord and fellowship one with another, in
the unity of his Spirit, and in the bond of peace, bundled up in the bundle of
everlasting Life, and so thereby shall you be preserved from that rending,
tearing, and devouring Spirit; and the same God of blessings, who as he has
graciously attended you here in your various exercises, will also favorably
accompany, and be present with you (his faithful, honest right-hearted ones) in
all your several services for the advancement of his glorious work, even the
Salvation of Souls, the promotion of the pure name, and the exaltation of the
glorious fame of holy Jesus amongst the Heathen and all the World over.

And our Confidence is, that notwithstanding of the great fury and wrath of the
Devil, the implacable malice and envy of his cursed agents, against the Lord
and his faithful Children, yet I am fully persuaded Truth and innocence shall
over all prevail, as John saw, and said behold a white horse, and he that, sat
on him had a bow, and a Crown was given unto him, and he went Conquering and to
Conquer.

So I recommend you all to the saving Word of Gods Grace, that by it you may be
guided, and under the safe conduct thereof, preserved to the End of all those
various Changes, Trials and troubles here; that you may finish your time, and
testimony, and lay down your heads in peace, and in the close of all return to
your God, and my God, the Father of Spirits, from whence we came, and with all
the Heavenly Host Laud and Extol his holy worthy Name, with everlasting Songs
of pure thanksgivings, and living praises, and so receive the product of all
your labors, and excercises in the Lord, even the immortal Crown of eternal
Glory and perpetual Renown; is the sincere supplication of my Soul for you all,
as for my self, and who earnestly prays for the establishment and preservation
of all the Lords people upon the everlasting Rock, that unchangeable
Foundation, against which the Gates of Hell cannot prevail.

The Conclusion.
AND now Francis Bugg I think I have done with thy book and spent more time
then I Judge it either deserved, or I designed in answer thereunto, and indeed
never expected to have been concerned with thee or any upon this Account, in
public especially, I being altogether a Stranger, to and unacquainted with
thee, and therefore assure thy self what I have written or may yet say unto
thee, and others of thy Adherents, is not from any Rancour, Heat or Prejudice,
but really from that good will, true tender love, and earnest desire which the
Lord has begot in my soul for the eternal welfare and happiness of all the
Sons and Daughters of Men, but more singularly for the restoration of such whom
God in any measure has visited with his Glorious Blessed Day, and reached unto
by his everlasting pure power, and thereby has tendered their Spirits, and
broken their Hearts, and given, unto them a feeling and sense of that Precious
divine life, the constant enjoyment of which is above, and beyond all what this
fading transitory World can afford.

But what shall I say unto thee Francis Bugg, alas! how have thou betrayed thy
great weakness, folly and envy? had it not been far better for thee, thou
had never set Pen to Paper, in bringing forth such a wicked. piece of work?
have thou not clearly evinced there how aptly thy name answers to thy crooked
perverse nature, and thy devlish venomous disposition, the enemy has wrought
in thee; for thou have done what thou could to wound, hurt and spoil, not only
the good name and reputation of particular persons; but have endeavored with
all thy strength and policy to bring a lash and blur upon many thousands of
faithful Friends; however, all thy Malicious smitings in the dark, and thy
open notorious abuses, and scandalous reflections will be in vain and return as
a weighty load upon thy own head; for I know that the Innocence and uprightness
of the one, with the honest circumspect conversation of the other, will
outlive, confute and disprove all thine, and the rest of that hellish
Combination, your forged callumnies, and lying stories: and all your malicious
insinuations, and false suggestions shall but redown to your own utter ruin,
and everlasting shame, perpetual defamation, and eternal Confusion, if you
repent not, but stoutly persevere, and obstinately continue in this wilful
wicked work of opposition to, and separation from the Lord and his People; and
be of such who have sold themselves to do wickedly, and so devoted to the
Devils service, to be his Vassals, Slaves and subjects. Oh! for shame, for
shame, that ever it should thus befall any who have made profession of Gods
Truth, and confession also to the Testimony thereof through many sufferings and
hardships, and yet to become the absolute greatest enemy to the Profession and
Progress of it; which I am persuaded had more gloriously shined, and that more
universally in the Nations, had not these Clouds of Division, and separation,
looseness indifferency and dishonest conversation of many convinced of, and who
have appeared for the same, come over to Eclipse the Splendour of this glorious
day; but I know in due time the Sun of Righteousness will so arise, and shine
in that brightness and Glory, as that all these Mists and Clouds, shall be
dispelled and scattered.

And therefore this is that which is weighty upon my spirit in the Powerful
Name, of the Dreadful God of Heaven and Earth, to warn you all to cease from
the evil of your doings, and O return, return, so long as it may please the
Lord to strive in you by his Holy gentle spirit, and bow every one to his
righteous Judgments in your hearts to destroy that wicked, perve^se opposing
and separating Spirit that is prevailed upon you; and remember what the Apostle
said, that is very weighty; For if God spared not the Angels that Sinned, but
cast them down to Hell and delivered them into Chains of Darkness; and spared
not the old World, and turned the Cities of Sodom and Gomorah, into Ashes: and
in his Exhortation to the Hebrews, 10, 25. Says, Not forsaking the assembling
of our selves together, as the manner of some is. (For observe well what
follows; Oh! how near and close a Sentence is it) IF WE SIN WILFULLY, after
that we have received the knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more
Sacrifice for Sins, but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery
Indignation which shall devour the adversaries. Oh! dread fear, and stand in
awe of the living Almighty God, who is a consuming fire to all the workers of
iniquity, and who knows how to deliver the Godly out of Temptations, and to
reserve the unjust unto the day of Judgment; but chiefly them that walk after
the flesh, in the lust of uncleanness, and despise Government; who are
Presumptuous self-willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities,
(mark these sayings.)

And let me tell you plainly, that for all your fair specious pretenses,
Plausible Eloquent Orations, smooth speeches, (cunningly contrived) your great
and high Notions, glorious-like appearances, and Mysterious Transformations,
may be as an Angel of light; or like unto a lamb covered with a profession of
Truth it self and Preach up the words and Principles thereof in the manly part
and with the Wisdom from below (that's your beloved darling) endeavors thereby
to catch the affectionate itching part of simple People, and such as are but
young, raw, and unsettled in their minds; For all this know as certain, and
which I am constrained in the holy fear of God to forwarn you off, You that are
the workers of iniquity, however you may cover and hide your selves for a time
from the Eye of Mortals, if you dye as thus you have lived, in opposing the
Work of Truth, in separation from the Lord and his People, you (I say) shall be
eternally excluded, and forever shut out from entering into the Pure
everlasting Kingdom of Eternal Glory, rest and Felicity; and the Lord Jesus
will no more acknowledge you, than he did those, that though you (as they did)
Cry, Lord, Lord, have we not Eaten and Drunken in thy presence? have we not
Prophesied in thy Name, and cast out Devils, and done many wonderful works,
(yet you shall meet with the same dreadful Sentence) depart from me, I know
you not, (for all your fair Plea) ye workers of iniquity.

Wherefore this is a seasonable warning to all you gainsayers, who are in the
work of Corah, in the Devils work of Division, opposition of, tearing, rending
and devouring, of disorder and confusion, and innovation, who are become
mockers, scoffers and abusers of the Lords work, and his Innocent People, and
that in a higher Degree than any of your former Predecessors; if you come not
sadly to mourn, deeply to lament for, and unfeignedly to repent of the same, a
most terrible heavy stroke and dreadful cup of weighty vengeance shall be your
Portion from the terrible hand of the mighty Pure God of righteousness, the
just Judge of Heaven and Earth, who shall reward every man according to his
works.

This from the Lord I lay before you, receive or reject it as you please,
however I shall enjoy Peace with him in clearing my Conscience to you and
discharging my Duty before him, and so shall be clear of your Blood; who
sincerely wishes, and earnestly Prays for the Recovery of backsliders, and
Restoration of all such whose gracious day of Visitation is not quite expired.

By one that heartily prays for the daily increase of the Peace of Jerusalem,
and the prosperity of Sion, and for the Advancement of Holy Jesus over all,
throughout all the Earth. R. Sandilands.

Postscript.
FRANCIS BUGG, I desire to advertise thee, that what I have now wrote in Answer
to thy Book was in the First place, with a regard to the clearing of my
Conscience inthe sight of God, as a Testimony against. Malicious Opposers, and
crued Hard-hearted Apostates; and in the Second place, it was with a true
desire, and real intent of mind, for thine and others good, if perhaps thou
may be thereby persuaded of the evil of thy doings, repent thereof, and so
obtain Mercy from the God of all Mercy, whom thou have grievously provoked to
wrath against thee, by the many abusive slanders and unchristian Calumnies,
reproaching his holy Innocent Heritage: But in Case I should not be answered
therein, and thou rather prove more obstinate perverse and peevish against me,
and the Lords people, and so should take occasion by this to bring forth and
Publish to the World more gross lies, impertinent and ridiculous stories, or
suchlike to thy form: I do not intend to take much notice thereof, or spend my
time so as to enter into a list of Controversy with thee; For as I said
already, it was far beyond my expectation ever to have been Concerned with
thee, or any of thy party on this score in these things, where there is little
or no satisfaction found, especially when we have to do with Cross, heady and
unreasonable brutish Persons: -- And so far now as I have cleared my
Conscience, and discharged my Duty, I shall enjoy Peace with my God, and rest
satisfied, being singly given up to follow him, and honestly to perform that
Service he has allotted for me in my generation, and which as most proper for
me to attend in that station he shall place me; though I should never set Pen
to peaper, or thus Publicly appear again in these comfortless Contentions, and
endless debates; for I do well understand in my small measure, wherein the true
Victory is obtained, and which I know cannot be by all the blusterings, Noises
and Clamours of wrong rambling and bragging Spirits detained from such who are
kept in a meek, quiet harmless and Innocent mind, whose Souls are possessed in
Patience, and whose habitations are preserved in that virtuous Blessed truth,
in which alone is the true overcoming experienced; Everlasting Glory to God on
High. Amen, says my Soul.

R. S.

ANOTHER INGREDIENT Against The Venom in E. B's. Book,
F. BUGG abetting W. R. etc. Like a Conceited man, Entitles his Book, to the
Primitive Discipline, but Handles it not, but names Evagrius, and New Sirnames
him Scholasticus, as if it were to get himself thereby the opinion of a
Scholar. And Dedicates his Book to his Honored Friend, H. N. Knight. as writ many
years since; as if he Honored Antiquity, arguing from it, p. 7. If so, let him
hear the many Authors following, many Ages Ancienter, disclam the later
Author's Error, which is also his Author's, which bears its own Evidence of its
utmost Age with it, The Dutch Wars, which it mentions. Into whose Errors he
leads his Honored Friend (as for his part) and his Readers, to whom he
commends his Book to be read, after the Scriptures, and Ri. Hub. and F. H s.
works ( p. 215) without any exception, caution, praemunition, or anuotation in
his Episile, Preface or Margin; but owns his judgment as his own in this
subject. Praef to the 2d. part
Now Conscience is the Subject of the position that Conscience is free, and is
not that the Subject of the Book? In the beginning whereof he makes the light
therein in some at ^ast, only Natural, and not Divine Universally, in all men,
Contrary to the Scriptures. John 1, 9.
And makes Conscience, (at least in some) a reflect Act of the Soul, Whereas
the Scripture says, the Conscience also witnesses with them, Romans 2, 15.
and thoughts between themselves, accuse or excuse one another (Dialogue wise)
then there must needs be two. Diologismos


And the word Conscience seems to be used, as it were in the Concrete; as they
term it, that which exercises, 2 Pet. 1, 4. Jam. 3, 4.
of God; that which is exercised, of man; as Nature Naturizing, the Creator.
Naturized the creature And Calvin himself though a main man for the
Presbyterian Doctrine, inclines to the Divinity of the light in men Universally,
though a little shy of speaking more positively, for fear of abuse by
Phanaticks (as he calls them.) But to go higher to those Fathers, as Clemens
Alex. Justin M. and other, cited already by our Friends ss by Wm. Pen G. Keith
and others of our Friends I hope I may have leave (without reflection. n="*"
And let not F. B. swel, as raising all the dust, because on thewheel. For it is
to the Reader I bring them, whom he seeks to pervert and proselyte, as Simon
did the Deputy, and make worse than himself. Mat. 13. Acts, 13.
) on this occasion to add some other writers I not known or remember, have yet
observed by others, to show ourjudgment agrees with the ancients, though many
of late years call it a new light and some no mean men, as W Prin, though it
may seem strange that perjudice should so blind such a great Antiquary John
Seldom, the greater, if not the greatest of late times is not so blinded, but
that he both sees and approves the general acknowledgment of the Learned before
the year 1400. that the light in the Soul of man Universally is Divine. De jure
Naturali and Gent. lib. 1, cap. 9.
As first, The Gentiles, in whom Paul says, that which may be known of God is
manifest. Epicharmus says, man's reason sprung from God (which is agreeable to
what Paul alleges out of Aratus) which reason must be understood of the Divine
Reason, Acts 17.28.
as Justine Martyr, Irenaeus, and others understand it, Logos theos.
Antoninus Emp says, the understanding agent is that which God has given to
every one for a Guide, and of the Divine Nature. So Plato, Priscianus Lydus,
Alexander Aphrodusaeus, Marinus Neopolitanus, Aristotle, Themistius, n="*"
Thought to be about Moses time.
The Author of Pimander Hermes, speaking of Divine Preaching, without which men
are Ignorant for what they are made, and whereby. The Ancient Hebrews say, that
the understanding that acts is God (and in their later Discipline, an
intermediate Minister) as appears by Maimonides, citing their Doctors;
Shechinah. ruahh.
and that not only for general principles of good and evil; but also for
particulars, what they are, the Conclusions and propositions to be shown
perpetually So the Arabians Avicenno, Avorroes, Argazel, etc. say, That the
understanding that acts is a thing separate, by Divine Ordination, (though they
agree not of its degree.) And that it is not humane form; nor a part of it, but
something more Divine. More of the Heathen and Arabians John Philoponus has,
l. 3. c. 5. de an. l. 2, de Intel ag.
and Albertus Magnus, Bonaventure, Zabarella, and others. The contrary opinion
(That F. Bugg's First part owns, his Second disowns not that I find) was coming
in, or growing on about 400 years since. Anno 1250.
And therefore opposed by the Universities of Oxford and Paris, and the Chief
in them in those t^mes, as Robt. of Lincoln. W Avern of Paris. Adam de Marisco,
etc. R. Bacon, M. S. to P. Clem. 4. c. 28. Cited at large by J. Seldom opposes
the Modern that said, A. 1290.
The Agent Intelect was part of the Soul. All the Ancients (says he) till our
times, have said it is God. Zab. de mente agente. c 13. Scalig. exerc. 307. 30.
Bodin. Theat. not. lib. 4.
The Ancient Tenet is resumed of late by some Famous Learned men; as Zabarella,
Cardan, Bodin, and others in Licetus. And seeing F. B seems to have some
respect for learning (...) g^ving his Book a Latin title, and citing in Latin
(with W. R) B Hooper's words, and after translating, and marring it with his
Master, even in the first word. I may hope he may forbear, so often Ironica ly
to call me learned, learned, (as he has done though els^where unlearned) for
supplying his defect, or neglect at least, in removing the stumbling blocks he
has laid and left in the way of his Honored Friend, and his Reader, that he
Dedicates and commends his Book to, whereof another is, (which is co-incident
with, and backing the former) making the Scriptures The rule Universal in every
particular, 2. part p. 70,
which contradict^ the former from being the Rule; and his former part, p. 58.
Which makes that a difference between the Law and the Gospel. The Law writing
down things particularly, not the Gospel. And all the circumstances in
Scripture cannot now be recalled, unless the same Ages were brought about again
(as the Platonics tell of their great year) as I have noted else where, from
Musculus, God: can. l. 2. c. 11. 12.
D. Mat. S^t^liff, D. Bridges and now lately D. Beveridge, (all Protestant
writers) That there s no certainty of the perpetual Government of the Church
established from the Apostles; that can be concluded from those things that
they are delivered to have done from their first Preaching, but by little, and
little, upon occasion; and that the same Spirit breathed on the Apostles was
Ministered to others. So he, whom I can follow no further. But must with
Protestants, ( Sadiel and others, I have cited elsewhere) return to an
immediate call after the Apostasy. And what method God will then use, he has
not declared nor bound himself, and man cannot do it. And F. Bugg deals
fallaciously with me, in saying I do so with W. Tindal, wher^as I cite him and
others not for particular service, but general. F B. reasons from service in
general, to particular service. As he deals with the Scriptures, which must
have a particular direction, suiting Circumstances, from the adaequate, Phil.
3.16. Canon.
or sufficient Rule in the new creature, which reaches all truth, even
perticulars, not only General Principles, but also assumptions, and
conclusions as is said before (It is a Maxim or Rule, D. Andrews on Command.
that it is a point of greatest power to reach the most remote.) And this Rule
we have need of, and at hand at every instant * Fr. Bugg may find in the
Scripture, this General. If the Son makes you free ye shall be free indeed,
John 18.38. But where finds he his assumption. (rather presumption?) The Son
makes F. B. free. ( And therefore F. B. is free indeed.) Does he find this
particular freedom in Scripture, it is well if he come to find it written in his
Heart? I am sure he is not in the way of it, in this his dark way ward work, of
bondage to the Spirit, though Liberty to the Flesh. If he grant, not to persons,
times and other circumstances, Can he find there the Meeting to be at Hadenham,
in Ely, or once a quarter, month, week at such an hour, and so long, etc.
Seeing the Scripture says, Paul at Troas, abode 7. days, Acts 20.6, 7.
broke Bread on First day, continued till midnight, etc? I have reason to ask
him this question; seeing he requires the like of G. F. (about women's meetings)
who held professors to their Rule, as I do F B. Which meetings, J S. and J. W
owned in Cities, 4th p p. 38.
owned by W. R. Or, will F. B. demand the Liberty of having no Meeting, because
all Circumstances in Scripture cannot be recalled. That is the Liberty that
spirit would lead to, Libertinism, Ranterism, disorderly, walking. But, do but
consider n="" See Oecolampadius and Junius, on Ezekiel. 2, 3 of silent waiting,
the General Calling; and particular institution the particular calling.
what a vast Chasm and gulf this empty conceit void of form fixes betwixt his
2 parts; which this Son of Anak in his own Eyes seems to bestride to make a
co-herence. In his first part, indeed he makes a notable Defense with Reasons,
and Testimonies against outward force as improper, unequal and insufficient to
urge and accomplish matters pertaining to inward concerns: But yet gives away
his Cause by leaving a weak place to let in the persecutor to lay all waste, by
granting him a power to compel to things of a mixed Nature, and not purely
Supernatural, but partly Moral, as hearing; But not to receive Sacraments;
which, by his leave, is more grossly mixed than hearing, which he makes under
the Magistrates verge, as Moral. But Eating and Drinking, is Natural; and more
strictly so. Therefore if the other, much more this. If that which belongs to
Morality, honesty, etc. Much more that which belongs to Sub^^^ty, Temperance,
etc. If compel Children to be washed, and after ever to lend their Ears to
attend to the mouths of whom he pleases; sure he may compel them to let their
mouths take Bread and Wine, or a Wafer-cake, from their hands. And thinks he
yet their minds free enough; and Liberty enough for their Consciences? Nay, the
Jesuits know better the effects of Education and Custom, and the lasting savor
of the Liquor poured in at the Ears of the tender, and how the Eyes affect the
Heart.: J. Fox p. 596.
Stands his liberty amidst all their gaudys. Philpot, the Martyr tells them
another tale, that think they have liberty to go to their places of worship. So
that in his first part there is a great shortness for Liberty in Religion, and
ex^rcise of a good Conscience toward God; which should extend to things
Natural and Moral in themselves; but with respect to Supernaturals, otherwise
it limits our Service and Worship of God after such a manner as we conceivemost
acceptable to him, to which outward violence is ineffectual, to convince and
render acceptable. Here he puts and leave another great block, or deep ditch in
the way of his Honored Pation and Reader, not at all heeded or not a straw
regarded or sounded by this heedless, heady shallow Latinist and disputer for
liberty, but Patron of licenciousness, conceiting himself Manager of the
Eastern Association, and Treater for a Cessation, though eager urger of
Contention and Confusion, to race out order in Church Affairs. For now mark,
From this inadaequate insufficient, imperfect and unsound Subject, or
antecedent of his First part, de Christiana liberate, what a towering
contradictory consequence he makes i^ his second part, de Christiana liberate:
And on his inconsequent feet of Iron and Clay would establish a Golden
Babylonish Liberty, paramount over Church censure, which his Antecedent will
not bear; which allows Church censure, page 138. Read him there at large.

For his Consequence in his two parts if any at all must needs be this, viz.
Because the Magistrate by Natural and Moral power can only compel Conscience
(which he cal^s a reflect Act of the Soul) to mixed Moral Actions, as to hear,
but not to such as are purely Supernatural, as to receive the Sacraments, as
being only Subject to Church-censure, being of a Spiritual nature, and not
Subject to outward force. (The Subject or Argument in his first part, which he
owns to be his Judgment in the Preface to his second part) Therefore the Church
by the Spirit of Christ, may not exhort, nay not disown any unsound Principle
or practice in its members, tending to Lic^n^iousness or Scandal, and declare
they have no unity with it, nor with them in it, lest they be more Compulsive
than the Magistrate that imposes Worship by outward violence and force, (which
is the consequence in his second part,) The Magistrates cannot compel,
outwardly with carnal Therefore not the Minister inwardly, with Spiritual
weapons, Luke 14, 23. 2 Timothy 4 2.
contrary to Scripture, and his first part allowing Spiritual censures. May the
Magistrate compel to hear, and the Minister not be suffered to speak, unless
it be what pleases every hearer? Hear's Liberty of a bad Conscience to the
hearers; but no Liberty for a good Conscience to the speakers. This is the
Liberty indeed found in most places. As if he should say The Cannon (as he
writes and Prints it, and wrongs, mine) i. the great Gu^, is not to be used
against the Church, Phil. 3.16.
but to shoot men into the Church. Therefore the Canon, i. the Rule of the new
Creature is not to be used in the Church in admonishing them to walk by it, and
reproving and disowning them that do not, but are wilful and disorderly.

Richard Richardson.

HOW the laboring man and Crisp and Bugg
Shrewdly at Women' s labors tug!
Not meet apart; not speak the least
Before men; (if not after a Priest!)
Not ope' their months, to ask men Nurses
Fo women! or to ope' their purses!
Should Rhapsodi one patch then lack,
A (...) et s^itched on the back!
HOW the Serpent old creeps his old way;
Ore' the women seeks first to prevail;
Meetings meet helps first to assay;
That thereby men's he may assail!
HOW the unleed vermin venomous thing,
The wrigling crooked crawling beast,
Seeks the woman 's upright seed to sting;
Or the heel thereof to hurt at least.
THE Serpent 's seed 's a Cockatrice,
Which fiery flying Dragon grows.
Himself an outcast when he spies,
He floods of Venom at her throws.
Errata.
p. 97. for (Rogers Team) read (Team Rogers)


