SYNODVS ANGLICANA: Or, The Constitution and Proceedings OF AN ENGLISH
CONVOCATION, SHOWN From the ACTS and REGISTERS thereof, to be agreeable to the
Principles OF AN Episcopal Church.

APPENDIX. 1. Three Registers of the Upper-house, in 1562. in which the xxxix
Articles were agreed upon. 1640. under Archb. Laud. 1661, etc. in whch the
Common Prayer was Revised.
2. The two entire Journals of the Lower House, in 1586 and 1588.


LONDON: Printed for A. and J. Churchill at the Black Swan in Paternoster Row.
1672.

THE PREFACE.
THE unhappy Disputes in the last Convocation, were too plain a prejudice to
our Church and Order, to suffer any man who had a common respect for either, to
stand by unconcerned. But in studying proper Remedies, the great difficulty
was, to find out where the Disease lay; that is, from which House the
Encroachments came, and upon what foundation a sure Judgment thereof might be
made.

The REASON of the thing had been offered, as one way of fixing the Right: but
that (I found) might be urged plausibly on either side. For an Advocate of
common knowledge and dexterity, which part soever he undertake, cannot in
Causes of this Nature want a Variety of that sort of Colors; but they are
little regarded in Law, nor ever urged in a case of Legal Right, that can be
supported by Arguments and Authorities from Custom or Statute. Such Suggestions
about the Reason and Consequence of things, are useful toward the prudent
Settlement of new Laws; but can have no part in the determination of questions
about ancient Rights. In this imperfect State of things, many Failings and
Inconveniences will ever attend the wisest Establishments; and when Designs are
set afoot to invade or undermine them, these Possibilities of mischief are
always made the Instruments of raising jealousies and discontents among the
Generality; who are hardly brought, either to see the mischief of too much
Liberty, or the necessity of lodging an ultimate Trust some-where, in order to
the peace and safety of any Society.

The Proceedings in PARLIAMENT have been also urged, to justify some late
Measures in Convocation; but whatever be the virtue of a
Parliamentary-Relation, the very persons who contend for it, disown its being a
Rule in the present Disputes; by confessing that the Clergy have not a right to
all the Privileges of the Commons in Parliament, and yet assigning no reason
why some may be claimed upon that foot more than all the rest.

There is, however, one known custom in Parliament, that may well deserve to be
considered in Convocation, viz. the Recourse they have, and the Deference they
pay, in all contests about Privilege, to the Records and Journals of former
Parliaments. For both our Civil and Ecclesiastical Meetings are Ancient
Constitutions; each whereof has all along proceeded by established Methods of
its own: And as Custom has, in a Legal sense, markt-out the Privileges of the
two Houses in each of these Assemblies; so, by all Prudential Rules, our
Security lies, not in making new Experiments, but in the Continuance of Methods
which have been tried and established upon the practice of former times, and are
not become disagreeable to our own by any new or singular Circumstance. And
even this last is a Consideration that could have very little place in
Ecclesiastical Government; wherein the different Orders and Degrees, with the
proper Rights of each, are established upon a primitive foundation, not to be
removed at the pleasure of Men; and much less, if that ancient foundation
appear to be confirmed and supported by the additional authority of its own
Usages as a Particular or National Church. And it ought certainly to be matter
of Joy to every good man, to find such a double Security to the Honor and
Purity of the Church of which Providence has made him a Member, as is the
Concurrence of a Civil with its Ecclesiastical Claim to the Vsages of Antiquity.

Resolving therefore to make the strictest Enquiry, how far the Church of
England is entitled to this Blessing in the great point of Holding her Synods,
I entered upon a diligent Search into all the remaining Registers of
Convocation. I begun with that of 1356. (the Acts whereof are the first we
have) and descended in order to our own times; according to the Catalogue of
Convocation-Acts, subjoined to this Preface. All these (I say) I have
distinctly examined since the disputes in Convocation began; and am the rather
obliged to make this particular Profession of it, because a late Paper entitled
the Expedient, p. 17. c. 2. studying to weaken the Authority of my Arguments
for the Archbishop's Right to Continue, says, they are only the Substance of
what passed in the Debates of the House, reduced by me into Form. I shall
always have a just honor for that House and the Debates of it; but must beg
leave to think, that the Registers of Convocation (the only Rule in all
disputes about Privilege) are a Guide somewhat surer: Which Guide and no other
I followed, as in examining that Case of Continuations, so also in drawing the
States upon those other Heads, which I formerly promised, Right of the
Archbishop, p. 113, 136.
and do now Present to the Reader. The truth is, from my first entrance upon
this Examination of the Registers, in order to form a true judgment about the
differences depending, I have industriously laid by the late Accounts of both
Sides concerning the Nature of an English Convocation; resolving to give way to
no Impressions, but what should come immediately from the Registers themselves,
where alone the State of the Controversy is apparently lodged.

The Reflections upon the Paper I just now mentioned (the Expedient I mean)
were intended for a part of the Preface to this Book; but proving somewhat too
large, they are already sent abroad in a Separate Paper.

As for the present Work; I am sensible that the same Accounts in the way of a
regular History, would have been much more Entertaining; but it was not my
business to divert, but to instruct and convince: and I was sure, no
description I could frame, would either have a Weight equal to the very Words
of the Registers, or give so lively a View of Proceedings upon all Points, as
this regular Deduction of Authorities through the Successive Ages.

It was, I confess, a mighty Satisfaction to me (as it must be to all the
friends of Episcopacy) to find the Proceedings of an English Synod so agreeable
to the Constitution of an Episcopal Church; however some late Books had
misrepresented them. And as to the Publication of what I found, it is
accounted for in the Introduction, which contains the general Occasion and
Design of the Chapters that follow it.

A scruple has been raised by some Members of the Lower House, how far the
Registers before the Reformation are to be regarded in the Methods of Holding
an English-Synod. But as nothing passed then, which could any way affect the
usual Intercourse between the two Houses when met and entered upon business; so
after the Reformation, they continued the self same Ways of acting, that were
established before; as these Deductions under the several Heads do abundantly
show. For though many of our Accounts since the Reformation, are only Abridgments
of the Acts, the Originals whereof were burnt in 1666. yet even in them, and
much more in the others that remain entire, we have clear and numerous
testimonies of the Clergy's continuing to Act, in all respects, with the self
same Deference and Subordination to their Metropolitan and Bishops.

I doubt not, but an objection formerly made, will now be renewed, against the
Authorities from the Upper House Registers, as insufficient Witnesses in the
Concerns of the Lower. They are so, as to the Debates there, but not as to the
Matters Debated; many of which, and those the most considerable, have
originally come from the Upper House, with particular Instructions how to
proceed upon them: and the same have been also constantly returned thither, and
together with the Applications of all kinds from the Lower House, have made a
part of the Register of the Upper. Now, our present Concern is not about the
methods of debating in either House separately, but the usual Communication
between the two Houses: Which being maintained by the going up of the
Prolocutor, alone or attended, voluntarily or as sent for by their Lordships;
the Reports they bring, the Petitions they make, with the Orders they receive (
i. e. all the matters from whence we infer these methods of their
corresponding, and the authority of my Lords the Bishops in the Proceedings of
Convocation) are entered of course in the Books of the Upper House. And the
Heads of which the Lower-house-Books chiefly consist, viz. the Motions made
Below, with their Debates upon them, and the appointment of Committees of their
own for special purposes, would not (if we had them entire) be of any great
moment in the present Points. For these immediately concern the Relation
between the two Houses, and turn not upon the proceedings of each Separately,
but upon the Manner of the Intercourse and Correspondence between them.

The methods of the Journals of both Houses, with the Matters usually entered
in each, will be best understood by the Acts of five Convocations, added by way
of Appendix to this Book, as a Pattern to future Proceedings. The three first,
in 1562, 1640, and 1661. belong to the Vpper-house; and the two others of 1586
and 1588. are the Acts of the Lower. These last are the only entire Journals of
that House now remaining: and I made choice of the three others, as they are
accounts of Transactions while all the Original Registers were in being, and
yet so lately (two of them at least) that the Establishment of different Vsages
since that time, will not be pretended. Add to this the importance and variety
of the matters transacted in each, viz. the xxxix. Articles in 1562. the Canons
in 1640. (against which no exceptions were ever taken, as to the Methods of
Proceeding in Convocation;) and the Review and Establishment of the Common
Prayer, with many other things of public note and concern in 1661. and the
three following years.

That of 1562. is certainly the entire Register of the Vpper-house, but whether
the Book which remains be the very original, I cannot directly say. Those of
1586, 1588, and 1640. are the Original Books deposited (according to custom) in
the Registry of the Sea of Canterbury: The Book of 1640. contains also an
Account of the second Convocation in the same year: but such were the
Confusions of the Kingdom and the Miseries of the Church, that no Business
could be done in it, save only the Opening, and then Continuing it, in the
common Form; after the Archbishop (Sess. 3.) had committed the determination of
certain controverted Elections to the Prolocutor and other Members of the
Lower House. See the Passage cited p. 114. of this Book.
The last also is the very Original Register of the Vpper-house from May 8.
1661. to Sept. 19. 1666. inclusive; mostly in the hand of Mr. Fisher (Actuary
of the Lower House in 1640. and Deputy-Register to the Upper in 1661.) with an
Attestation in form to every Session. It was lately communicated to his Grace
the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, by the Reverend Mr. Nurse, Executor to a
Gentleman in whose House Mr. Fisher died; and by his Grace, to the Bishops and
Clergy in Convocation.

The Method in which they are now published, is this: The beginning and ending
of every Session in the Vpper-house is usually the same: at the beginning, they
express the place of meeting, the attestation of the Notary, the names of the
Archbishop, or his Commissary, and of the Bishops present, with the accustomed
Prayers; concluding always with the Con^tinuations at length. As to all these
therefore (which are pure matters of form and a repetition of the same words,
in the same Order) I have thought it sufficient to give a Specimen of them at
the beginning of each, and then to contract them; especially in 1661. etc.
where the Sessions are more numerous: But the Reader may rest assured that the
like Forms run through the whole. It Is true, the Names of the Persons present
sometimes vary; but they can be of no use, except on some un-foreseen and very
extraordinary Occasions: and whenever these happen, recourse may be had to the
Originals themselves. In 1661. the Bishop of London usually Presided in the
Archbishop's stead, and is always meant by the style Dominus when it stands
single; the names of the other Commissaries, who were but few, being constantly
expressed.

But the Forms in the two Journals of the Lower House, are various; and having
withal made so great a part in the Dispute about Continuations or Adjournments,
I have printed both the Introduction and Conclusion of each Session, at length;
without omitting any thing, except the Names of the Persons every day present.

IN perusing these Acts both of the Upper and Lower House, the Reader will
observe all along, How the Synodical Business is mark't-out by the Metropolitan
and Bishops, as Governors of the Church; and so much of it considered,
debated, and prepared by the Inferior Clergy, as their Lordships from time to
time have recommended to their Care: That the Presbyters of former times have
ever received and pursued those Directions with the utmost readiness, and then
taken care to osser their Applications and Reports with all the marks of Duty
and Humility: That therefore the public Cancerns of our Church have in English
Convocations been transacted by rules and methods purely Ecclesiastical, that
is, by a Synod consisting of Metropolitan, Bishops, and Presbyters, all
contributing their Endeavors toward the same common End, and within the
Bounds assigned by Antiquity to their respective Orders and Degrees in the
Church of Christ: That however the Bishops and Presbyters have their Separate
Places of Debate, and may not (under that general Appearance) be unlike the two
Houses of Parliament, yet as to their Independence in Acting or any degrees of
it, there is no such Resemblance as has been pretended between the Proceedings
of Parliament and Convocation: That, on the contrary, the chief part of the
Prolocutor's Business, is to convey to the Presbyters the Pleasure of their
Metropolitan and Bishops, and to represent to their Lordships the Answers,
Opinions, and Petitions of the Lower House; and so, for ever to prevent the
Independence of the Clergy, and preserve the Original Union of the Synod, as to
the matter, method, order, tendency, and progress of the Debates.

These (with many more testimonies of an English Convocation's being in reality
what all the Friends of our Church ought to wish it, an Ecclesiastical Synod)
will naturally occur to every one, who shall peruse these Acts with
impartiality and an ordinary attention: And Readers, under that conv^ from the
practice of former Convocations, may be allowed to wonder upon what Model some
late Proceedings and Principles were formed; and to re^ seriously upon the
Design, or at least the nature Trndency, of them. The Archbishops, Parker,
Wh^gift, Laud, Juxon, and Sheldon, (under whom the five Convocations were held)
are Names distinguished in this Church by an eminent Zeal in maintaining its
Constitution and the Rights of the Clergy. And, now the Proceedings of the last
Convocation are made public, let every Man be his own judge, whether our
present Metropolitan and Bishops have not acted by the self same Rules: and he
will then see, what Spirit has governed those Men, who from thence have taken
occasion to inveigh so freely against their Lordships, as endeavoring to
Overthrow the Rights of the Church and Clergy.

That part of the Controversy which relates to the Proceedings of Convocation
when met, began not before the Opening of the last in 1700. The Nation had been
industriously prepossessed with false Notions of the Constitution and
Proceedings of an English Synod: but the Alteration of Opinions about the Right
of Continuing, upon a plain State thereof from the Registers, was evident
enough; and shows, that the Generality both of Clergy and Laiety are disposed
to make as impartial a judgment upon all other Heads, when the Practice of
former Times shall be clearly laid before them. For the Information of such,
five Journals are here published Entire, and the Form and Proceedings of an
English Convocation particularly defcrib'd, not only upon the Authority, but in
the very Words, of all the remaining Acts. I pray God they may in any measure
tend to the Removal of our unhappy Differences, and the future preservation of
Peace and Unity in the Synods of our Church.

A CATALOGUE Of the Remaining Acts and Registers OF CONVOCATION; From whence
the Following HISTORY is drawn.
The Years in which they were held. The Days on which they were opened. The
Registers wherein the Acts are entered. 1356 May 16. Islip, fol. 117. a. 1369
Jan. 21. Wyttlesey, f. 17. b. 1371 Apr. 24. Wyttlesey, f. 40. 1373 Dec. 1.
Wyttlesey, f. 63. 1376 Febr. 3. Sudbury, f. 33. b. 1377 Nov. 8. Sudbury, f 44.
a. 1379 May 9. Sudbury, f. 55. a. 1380 Dec. 1. Sudbury, f. 72. a. 1383 Dec. 2.
Courtney, f. 78. a. 1384 May 20. Courtney, f. 79. a. 1384 Dec. 1. Courtney, f.
79. b. 1385 Nov. 6. Courtney, f. 83. b. 1386 Nov. 5. Courtney, f. 84. b. 1387
Febr. 26. Courtney, f. 73. a. 1388 Oct. 12. Courtney, f. 74. a. 1391 Apr. 17.
Courtney, f. 75. a. 1396 Febr. 19. Arundel, f. 44 a. 1394 Febr. 5. Reg. 4. Epp.
f. 195. b. 1399 Oct. 6. Arundel, f. 51. a. 1400 Jan. 26 Arundel, Vol. 2 f. 1.
b. 1402 Oct. 21 Arundel, Vol. 1. 54. a. 1404 Apr. 21. Arundel, 57. a. 1404 Nov.
24. Arundel, f. 62. b. 1406 May 10. Arundel, 65. a. 1408 Jul. 23. Arundel, f.
71. a. 1408 Jan. 14. Arundel, Vol. 2. f. 7. b. 1409 Febr. 17. Arundel, f. 15.
a. 1411 Dec. 1. Arundel, f. 22. a. 1412 Mar. 6. Arundel, f. 4. b. 1415 Nov. 18.
Chichley, Vol. 2. fol. 1. a. 1416 Apr. 1. Chichley, 3. a. 1416 Nov. 9.
Chichley, 6. a. 1417 Nov. 29. Chichley, f. 10. a. 1419 Oct. 30. Chichley, f.
17. a. 1421 May 5 Chichley, f. 23. b. 1422 Jul. 6. Chichley, f. 30. b. 1424
Oct. 12. Chichley, f. 33. b. 1425 Apr. 23. Chichley, f. 40. a. 1426 Apr. 15.
Chichley, f. 65. a. 1428 Jul. 5. Chichley, f. 69. a. 1429 Oct. 19. Chichley, f.
77. b. 1430 Febr. 19. Chichley, f. 81 a. 1432 Sept. 15. Chichley, f. 86. b.
1433 Nov. 7 Chichley, f. 93. a. 1434 Oct. 7. Chichley, f. 99. a. 1437 Apr. 29.
Chichley, f. 101. a. 1438 Apr. 28. Chichley, f. 103. a. 1439 Nov. 21. Chichley,
f. 109. b. 1444 Oct. 19. Arundel, Vol. 2. f. 28. a. 1452 Febr. 7. Kemp. f. 219.
a. 1460 May 6. Bourchier, f. 12. a. 1463 Jul. 6. Bourchier, f. 18. a. 1480 Mar.
21. Bourchier, f. 26. a. 1486 Febr. 13. Morton, f. 33. a. 1488 Jan. 14. Morton,
f. 41. a.

Thus far, the Acts are distinctly entered in the Registers of the Archbishop:
but about this time they began to have separate Books for the affairs of
Convocation.

1529 Nov. 5. Large Extracts out of the Upper-housebooks, except those of 1553.
and 1554. which are taken from Journals of the Lower House. 1532 Nov. 5. 1536
Jun. 9. 1541 Jan. 30. 1547 Nov. 5. 1553 Oct. 6. 1554 Apr. 3. 1554 Nov. 13. 1555
Oct. 22. 1555 Dec. 10. 1557 Jan. 1. 1558 Jan. 24. 1562 Jan. 21. The Register of
the Upper-house, entire. 1584 Nov. 24. Index of the Upper-house Register. 1586
Oct. 16. Two Journals of the Lower House, in the Registry at Doctors-Commons.
1588 Nov. 13. 1586 Oct. 16. Index of the Upper-house Registers, in the hands of
Dr. Atterbury. 1588 Nov. 13. 1592 Febr. 20. 1601 Oct. 18. 1603 Mar. 20. 1605
Nov. 6. 1606 Nov. 19. 1614 Apr. 6. 1620 1623 Febr. 13. 1625 May 18. 1625 Febr.
7. 1627 Mar. 18. 1640 1a Conv. Apr. 14. Entire Registers of the Upper-house,
and Minutes of the Lower, in the Office at Doctors Commons. 2a Conv. Nov. 4.
1661, etc. May 16. The original Register of the Upper-house: and Minutes of the
Lower at Doctors Commons. 1689 Nov. 6. The original Register of the
Upper-house, at Doctors Commons.

THE CONTENTS.
Introduction.
THE Occasion and Design of this Book. 1 The late Principles about a
Parliamentary Alliance. 2 The ill Consequence thereof to Episcopacy. 3 The
beginning of these Innovations in the Convocation of 1689. 5 The tendency of
such Proceedings, to a Coordinate Power of Presbyters. 7 Some new Claims of the
last Lower House. 8 The design of this Book, To settle all Proceedings upon the
Custom of Convocation. 9 All Proofs from the words of the Registers. 11 The
necessity of citing Authorities at large. ibid. The necessity of such a Work,
at this juncture; to maintain the honor of our Reformed Church. 12
CHAP. I.
The Method of Summoning an English-Convocation. 15 The Writ to the Archbishop.
ibid. The Warrant to the Lord Chancellor, of another nature. 17 The Returns,
immediately and ultimately to the Archbishop. 18 The Summons not less
Ecclesiastical, because required by the Prince. 19 The Clergy not summoned in
the same manner from the beginning, as at present. 20 Inferences from the
foregoing Testimonies. 21
CHAP. II.
The manner of Opening an English Convocation. 23 The President's coming to S.
Paul's. ibid. The Dean of the Province's Certificatorium Exhibited. ibid. Other
Certificates and Proxies. 24 Contumacy Pronounced. 25 These, a clear foundation
of the Archbishop's Power over the Members in point of Attendance, and
therefore more particularly treated of 25 1. By the tenor of the Mandate, none
to be excused, but who shall show reasonable Cause to the Archbishop. ibid. 2.
In pursuance hereof, all Returns ever made directly to his Grace. 28 The Dean
of the Province more particularly required to do it. 30
3. The Dean of the Province's Certificatorium, with his Grace's Commission to
receive and inspect Proxies. 31 4. Sentence of Contumacy against Absents 32 The
Sentence of Contumacy, a written Instrument. 33 The Suspension of it by the
Archbishop. 36
5. The exercise of the Archbishop's Authority over the Members in the middle
of Convocation 37 1. In Praeconizations. ibid. 2. In giving License to be
absent. 38 3. In admonitions not to depart. 40

The Archbishop absolves or punishes the Absents of the Lower House at the
Conclusion of the Synod. 41 The Substance of the Arguments for the Archbishop's
Power over the Members. 45 The Claim of the Lower House to a concurrent Power,
confuted. 46 The Prolocutor cannot reserve punishment, but in the President's
name. 47 The Prolocutor cannot give leave of Absence, but as empowered by the
President. 49 The Practices of the last Lower House in this particular. 50
CHAP. III.
Of Admitting or Denying Proxies.
The Lower House have no Power to admit or deny Proxies. 52 All Proxies lodged
with the Register of the Upper-house. 53 The Entry of Proxies in the
Lower House Book, no argument of their Right to Admit them. 54 The Actuary of
the Lower House, an Officer of the Archbishop. 55 Certain Irregularities lately
committed in this business of Proxies. 57 The Lower-house's additional Leave to
depart, an Invasion of the President's Authority. 59 The Vpper-house, the
Protectors of the Persons and Privileges of the Lower. 60
CHAP. IV.
Of the Election and Office of a Prolocutor.
Prolocutors at the first, chosen only upon some single occasions. 63 When they
came to be chosen at the beginning of Convocation. 65 The first instance of
Presenting a Prolocutor. 66 Of the Admission and Confirmation by the President
and Bishops. 67 The Office of a Prolocutor or Referendarius. ibid. The
immediate End, to Report the Answers of the Lower-Clergy. 68 The bringing back
the Instructions of the President and the Bishops. ibid. The moderating in the
Debates of the Lower House. 69 The Prolocutor properly supplies the President's
Place among the Lower Clergy. ibid. The Prolocutors at the beginning, usually
Officers of the Archbishop's Court. ibid. Prolocutor sometimes recommended by
the President. 71 Neither of these Observations, intended to prejudice the
Freedom of their Election. ibid. The Order or Leave of the President, necessary
before they proceed to the Choice. 71 In case of death, or promotion, the
President's Order necessary to a new Election. 72 Always presented to the
Vpper-house for Confirmation. 73 The Prolocutor's Application to the
Vpper-house for Protection. ibid. The Prolocutor cannot Substitute a Deputy,
but by Leave from the Vpper-house. 74 The Prolocutor's Office, when present, to
convey all Messages from the Clergy to the Vpper-house. 76
CHAP. V.
By what degrees the Inferior Clergy became a Separate House from the Bishops.
78 The false account of the late Narrative. ibid. Retirement of the Clergy to
consider business (in their united State,) was by direction from the Archbishop
and Bishops. 79 The Place to which they retired, uncertain for a long time. 80
The Lower Clergy have a separate House, for Debate only. 81 The Place of Debate
has been ever assigned by the Archbishop. 82 The Separation of the Bishops and
Clergy stated upon the foregoing Accounts. 83 The Accounts given of this Matter
in the Narrative, etc. groundless. 84
CHAP. VI.
The manner of Entering upon Business in Convocation. 85 The Archbishop's Right
to declare the Causes of the Convocation. ibid. The Clergy usually ordered to
retire, and debate about the business of Convocation, as declared by the
Archbishop. ibid. Inferences, from the Testimonies brought to confirm the
foregoing Heads. 93 The difference between the former Methods, and the late
Practice of Convocation, in these respects. 95
CHAP. VII.
The Right of the President and Bishops to require the Clergy to consider any
particular Business throughout the Convocation. 97 The necessity of showing
this. ibid. The Separation of the two Houses made no difference in this Point.
98 Inferences from the Testimonies alleged upon this Head. 106
CHAP. VIII.
The Right of the President and Bishops to Order Committees of the Lower House.
107 Committees of the Clergy to attend Committees of Bishops. 108 Committees of
the Clergy alone, ordered by the Vpper-house. 112 The names of the Persons
chosen in the Lower House, Reported to the Upper. 115 The Right of the
Vpper-house to appoint Committees of the Lower-Clergy, never questioned but in
1689 and 1701. 116 The Refusal in 1689. 117 And in 1701. -- (both irregular.)
118 The Reasons alleged in the Narrative particularly answered. 119 Committees
chosen by the Lower-Clergy for purposes of their own. 123 The Lower House never
Consent to the Chosing, when required by their President; but only to the
Persons or Numbers. 124 The last Lower House justly chargeable with all the
Consequences of that Refusal. 126
CHAP. IX.
The Right of the President and Bishops to prescribe a Time for the Return of
Business committed to the Clergy. 127 The time for such Return, expressly
prescribed. ibid. The Clergy's Answers called for by the President and Bishops,
and longer time granted at the request of the Clergy. 129 Inferences from the
foregoing Testimonies. 131
CHAP. X.
The Right of the President and Bishops to require the Answers of the Clergy in
Writing. 133 The last Lower-house's refusal to answer in Writing. ibid. Proved
irregular from the practice of Convocation. ibid. The State of this Case
between the two Houses, the last Convocation. 137 Free-Conference, a new term
in Convocation. 138 No such Free Conference ever insisted on by the Clergy
before. ibid. Inferences from the foregoing Accounts. 139
CHAP. XI.
The Right of the President and Bishops to take to them the Assistance of
Persons learned in our Laws, etc. 140 Application of the foregoing Testimonies
to the Transactions of the last Convocation. 143 The necessity of having
Recourse to Council, about the Censure of Books, in the last Convocation. 143
Their Lordships in recommending the Case to the Bishop of the Diocese, acted
agreeably to the Practice of Convocation. 144
Thus far of the DVTY of the Inferior Clergy, as acting in Subordination to
their Metropolitan and Bishops.

Next, of the RIGHTS of the Inferior Clergy in Convocation. 146

CHAP. XII.
The Share, of right belonging to the Clergy, in preparing and in presenting
the Gravamina and Reformanda. 147 The GRAVAMINA often considered and presented
with the Subsidies. 147 The Gravamina, how addressed by the Clergy. 151 The
time, when Grievances shall be proposed; at the discretion of the Upper House.
ibid. Grievances first offered in a general Representation viva voce. 152 The
Clergy's Right to Redress, and the manner thereof. 154 The REFORMANDA
frequently proposed by the Archbishop among the Causes of Convocation. 155 The
Clergy's Right to propose Reformations. 157 The Clergy's Right to bring in
Schedules of Reformation. 159 A short state of the Reformanda, from the
foregoing Accounts. 161 The Care of the Reformanda in Parliamento usually left
to the Archbishop and Bishops. 162 Deputies appointed by Convocation to Assist
in Soliciting. ibid.
CHAP. XIII.
The Clergy's Right to offer Petitions of other Kinds. 164 The several sorts of
Petitions, particularly occurring in the Acts of Convocation (not specified to
restrain the Clergy from Petitions of other kinds.) 1. For making new Canons.
164 2. For the revival of old ones. 165 3. For the Abolition or Suspension of
Laws. ibid. 4. About Festivals. 166 5. For the Archbishop's Intercession with
the King. ibid. 6. For the more strict Execution of Discipline. 167
Petitions of several kinds, An. 1555. 167 Clergy's Petitions of all kinds,
presented immediately to the Vpper-house. 168 The usual Time of presenting such
Petitions. 169
CHAP. XIV.
The Part to which the Clergy have a Right in Judicial Cases in Convocation.
The Occasion of bringing Offenders (ordinarily tried in the Bishops Courts)
before the Convocation. 169 Constitution, for bringing Heretics before the
Convocation. 170 Offenders usually said to be brought Coram Archiepiscopo,
Episcopis, and Clero, as the Judicature. 171 The Sentence ran in the Name of
the Archbishop by authority of the Synod. 171 This Account not opposed to any
Restraints laid upon the whole Convocation by subsequent Statutes. ibid.
CHAP. XV.
The Clergy's Right of a Negative, or Final Dissent from the Vpper-house. 172
The Original of the Clergy's Negative. ibid. A Negative or Final Dissent, a
peculiar, but yet established Right of the English Clergy. 173 All Denials of
the Clergy ever made with great Humility and Condescension. ibid. This, no
prejudice to the Clergy's absolute Right to a final dissent. 175
CHAP. XVI.
The manner of Passing business in Convocation. 176 The manner of Consenting in
the Lower House. ibid. The Circumstances of that Consent, in some Instances,
reported to the Vpper-house. 177 All Instruments read publicly and finally
agreed to in the Upper-house. 178 The Sanction of the Metropolitan. ibid.
Articles, Canons, etc. passed otherwise, viz. by Subscription. 180 Why
Articles, Canons, etc. pass now by Subscription. 182
CHAP. XVII.
Of Proroguing and Dissolving.
The Royal Writs for these purposes necessarily directed to the Archbishop. 183
The Archbishop's Prorogations and Dissolutions upon these Writs, Authoritative,
and Canonical. 184 The Archbishop executes them by his own Metropolitical
Power; and in his own Name. ibid. The Commissions to do the same things in
Parliament, express a Special Power and Authority from the King. ibid. The
Archbishop's Admonitions immediately before Prorogations or Dissolutions. 185
The Schedules of Prorogation or Dissolution mention the Royal Writs, but run in
the name of the Archbishop. 186 The English Reformation unjustly charged with
destroying the Canonical Methods of transacting Ecclesiastical Affairs. ibid.
APPENDIX; containing the Journals of five Convocations:
With Observations drawn from them, concerning 1. The Right of CONTINUING or
PROROGUING. 2. The Right of determining controverted ELECTIONS. 3. The Right of
SUBSTITUTING a PROLOCUTOR. 4. The AUTHORITY of the Summons to Convocation.

I. Of the Right of Continuing or Proroguing. 223 The Schedule of Continuation
constantly mentioned in the Vpper-house-Registers. 224 The Antiquity of
Schedules in Convocation. ibid. The Inferior-Clergy Present at the Archbishop's
Continuations. 226 A Summary account of the Schedule. 227 The deriving our
Schedules from the Lateran-Council, an improbable Scheme. 228 The dispute
depends not upon Proroguing by Schedule, or otherwise. 230 The heads upon which
the dispute turns. 231 The Schedule evidently comprehends both Bishops and
Clergy. ibid. The Clause Praelatorum and Cleri, a genuine part of the Schedule.
232 The transmission of the Schedule, only a circumstance in this dispute. 233
Reasons to believe that the Schedule has been ever sent down. 235 The
Prolocutor is judge of the Time of Intimating, when the President and Bishops
don't interpose. 234 The Form of Intimating to be taken from the most Exact
Journals. 235 The ordinary Phrase to be in reason the Established Form. 236
Declaring by Intimation, the ordinary Form. ibid. The Prolocutor's Intimation
has no reference to the Consent of the House. 237 The Intimation, given by
Command of the President. 239 A formal Intimation of the Prolocutor, not
necessary to Continue the Lower House. 240 The President's Right to Continue
the Clergy in the Upper-house. 241 The Phrase Continuavit quoad hanc Domum, no
argument of a Separate Power in the Lower House. 243 Nor the Phrase in
Parliament, Dominus Cancel. contin, praesens Parliamentum. 245 A Separate
Power of Continuing in the Lower House, opens a way to perpetual Divisions of
the Synod. 248 Intermediate Sessions a great Irregularity, and mischief to the
Church. 251 The Clergy of former times did not think of Intermediate Sessions.
253
II. Observations touching the Right to determine Controverted Elections. 256
Instances of such Elections, occurring in the Acts. ibid. No question, whether
the Archbishop have a Right to determine Elections. 261 The Lower House have no
Right to intermeddle in Returns. 262 The Pretenses to a concurrent Right in the
Lower House considered. 263 The Prolocutor, and not the House, determined the
Election in 1586. 265 The Instance of 1640. considered. 266
III. An Additional account of the Substitution of a Prolocutor. 268 The late
Substitution in 1701. ibid. The account of it in a Paper marked Numb. 1. 269
Orders made in Convocation against publishing the Debates, while depending. 269
Reasons why a Sub-Prolocutor ought to be confirmed in the Vpper-house. 273
Instances of Substitutions by Authority of the Vpper-house, defended against
the late Paper, Numb. 1. 272 The arguments for an Independent Power in the
Lower House, answered. 276 Instances where the Registers of the Vpper-house are
Wanting, of no force. 277 The bare Silence of the Vpper-house-Books, no Proof
against Positive Evidences. 279 The Precedent of 1640. particularly considered
280 The Paper [ Numb. 1.] speaks against the sense of the House, in this
matter. 281 No difference between a Prolocutor and Referendary. 282 The Duties
belonging to the Office of a Prolocutor, are all annexed to that of Reporting,
as the Consequences of it. 284
IV. Additional Observations touching the AUTHORITY of the Summons to
Convocation. 287 The Authority of Summoning applied both to the King and the
Archbishop. ibid. The Archiepiscopal Summons confessed to be Authoritative,
before the Act of Submission. 288 The notion of a Civil Summons, an argument
for the Papists against our Reformation. 289 The intent of the Statute, no more
than to restrain the Archbishop from Exerting his Authority without the
Royal-License. 290 The word Authority in the Statute implies a Leave or
License. 291 The Archbishop's Summons Authoritative, from the style of the
Mandate and Return. 292 The Case of the Convocation's being dissolved by the
death of the Prince. 295 A dissolution by the King's death, no prejudice to the
Archiepiscopal Authority as giving Subsistence to a Convocation. 296 The
Archiepiscopal Authority recognized in the Dean of the Province's
Certificatorium, set down at large. 297
V. Observations upon the Table of Fees, and the Catalogue of Members, presixt
to the Registers of Convocation. 301 Inferences from the Table of Fees, 1. That
the Officers of Convocation are under the immediate Jurisdiction of the
Archbish. 303 2. That the Admission of Proxies of the Lower-Clergy belongs to
his Grace. ibid. 3. That none could make Proxies, but who were personally
Cited. ibid.
Catalogues of Convocation-Members, and Inferences from them, 304 1. That the
Entry of the Lower-Clergy in the Upper-house-Books, shows the Convocation to be
one Body under one common Head. 304 2. That the Lower House is Included in the
Clause Convocatio Prael. and Cleri in Continuations. ibid. 3. That the Members
of both Houses in the Convocations of 1640 and 1661, were eminent Assertors of
the RIGHTS and LIBERTIES of the CHURCH. ibid. 4. That therefore our present
Prelates in Convocation have been unjustly traduced, for proceeding by the same
Rules. 306


THE CONSTITUTION AND PROCEEDINGS OF AN English Convocation, etc.
INTRODUCTION.
The Occasion and Design of the following Discourse.
AMong the pretenses that have been framed of late, to gain the Clergy in
Convocation some new Exemptions from their Metropolitan and Bishops, no one has
been insisted on so much as a Parliamentary Capacity supposed to belong to
them. And it was an artificial Management in those who set the design a-foot,
to make this the chief ground of their Claim: not only because such Exemptions
could have no Color from their Ecclesiastical Capacity and the Constitution of
the Primitive Synods; but also because an Alliance to the Parliament, in
Constitution, was the most likely way to lead the generality of Men to take the
measures of their Proceediegs from thence. Every one knows, that the Parliament
consists of two Houses; and they have withal an Opportunity of observing out of
the public Votes the Separate Methods whereby the Commons Act and Govern
themselves: And little more of the nature of a Convocation being ordinarily
understood than that It also consists of two Houses debating apart, this,
without recourse to the Primitive Times or opportunity to know our own
Established methods of acting, prepared Men's minds to favor the late Claims of
some of the Clergy to such Privileges as the Commons enjoy. In which Error they
have been industriously confirmed, by the Endeavors of the same Persons, to
bring the Parliament and Convocation to such an alliance as was never thought
of before the publication of some late Books.

The late Principle; of Parliamentary Alliance.
That the Members of the Lower House are the Clergy Commoners, and Spiritual
Commons; that the whole Convocation subsists by the King's-Writ, and not by the
Archiepiscopal Mandate; that the Clergy thereof are ATTENDANT on the
Parliament, as the Parliament has a Right to be ATTENDED by them; is the
ordinary Language of a late Book; Atterb. Rights, etc.
which yet is pretended to be written in Defense of the Church's Liberties, and
censures the Principles of its Adversary, as of a Slavish tendency. From this
Principle, others of the same kind relating to their Constitution and
Privileges, have since sprung; Answer to 1st Letter p. 2. Col. 2.
That the Model of an English Convocation was, doubtless, taken from the Model
of an English Parliament, Ibid. p. 6. c. 1.
That an English Synod was formed upon the Platform of an English Parliament,
Nar. p. 6.
That the Synodical Rights peculiar to the Lower-Clergy of the Church of
England, are owing to a Conformity to the Parliament, Nar. p. 8.
That the distinct Capacity of the Lower House of Convocation was derived from
an imitation of the Lower House of Parliament.

The ill consequence thereof to Episcopacy.
The two last Passages acknowledge in effect, that some of the Privileges they
are already in possession of, were unknown to the more ancient Synods: And as
to the other Exemptions for which they contend, if they had any countenance
from those Early Times, That (I suppose) would be thought a more decent Pleain
a Case of Ecclesiastical Government, than laying their model in the imitation
of a Parliament. For I take it to be new Doctrine, that a late Author delivers
with great assurance, to take off the ill appearance of Contending, and that
with so much warmth, for Ecclesiastical Rights upon a Secular Foundation:
Atterb. Rights, etc. p. 138.
I am sure, and am ready whenever I am called upon, particularly to prove, that
the more our Church shall resemble the State, in her temper and manner of
Government; the nearer still will she approach to primitive Practice. This is a
Position that will require Proof, when he is at leisure to go about it; not
being half so evident (in my opinion) as that the Rights and Privileges of the
House of Commons, if vested in the Lower House of Convocation, would give the
Clergy a coordinate Power with their Bishops, and so remove our Church still
further from primitive Practice. But all along on one side of this
Controversy, the Church seems to signify no more than the Inferior Clergy,
exclusive of the Metropolitan and Bishops; as if the giving Presbyters new
degrees of Exemption from their Ecclesiastical Superiors, were the way that
primitive Practice has traced out, for the perfection of an Episcopal Church.

An Opposition to the Liberties of the Church has an odious sound; and sounds
no worse than it really is, when the Bishops as well as Inferior Clergy, acting
regularly and peaceably within their proper Spheres, are allowed to be the
constituent Members of that Church. But the present claim of Parliamentary
Rights, is only, in other Words, a diminution of the Canonical Authority of the
Archbishop and Bishops over their Clergy; which being diminished as far as
Parliamentary Exemptions would do it, must evidently destroy the Subordination
of Presbyters to their Bishops; that is, it must bring us by degrees to a state
of Presbytery. Now, no Law has determined how far these, which they call their
Parliamentary Rights, may be carried; or which is the same thing, how near the
Claims upon that Foundation may bring us to Presbytery. The late Narrative of
the Lower House, p. 8.
speaking of their distinct Capacity as derived from an Imitation of the
Lower House of Parliament, does indeed say, that they are far from presuming to
set themselves upon a level with that honorable Body, or to pretend to equal
Privileges thence with respect to the Lords, the Bishops. But they no where
tell us, how far they will or may carry their Claims upon the foot of that
Relation, nor assign any reason why it does not as well entitle them to all the
other Privileges of that august Assembly, as to those they contend for at
present. And the Friends of Episcopacy will hardly be content that our
Constitution be perpetually exposed to Ruin, whenever a majority of the
Lower House happens to be out of humor, and in a disposition to withdraw their
Obedience, or invade the Rights of their Superiors, under a general pretense of
their Parliamentary Relation. That they enjoy several Rights, unknown to the
Presbyters of the primitive Times, is not denied; nor ought to be forgotten by
those, who not content with that addition of Power and Privilege, were making
larger Encroachments upon their Ecclesiastical Superiors; and which is worse,
upon a Foundation that will raise them to what further degrees of Independence
the Clergy may at any time be drawn to attempt, either out of a personal
dislike of their Bishops, or a secret enmity to the Character it self.

These Innovations begun in 1689. Reg. Sup. Domus.
These new Claims were set a-foot (with what design, or upon what grounds, I
cannot say) in the Convocation of 1689. In the sixth Session whereof, the
Upper-House drew up an Address of Thanks to his Majesty, for his Royal License,
and a Gracious Message which he had sent that day to the Convocation. The Form
being agreed on, was (according to Castom) sent down to the Lower House for
their consent; but they, instead of giving their consent, or signifying the
Amendments they conceived necessary, returned an Answer to this effect, "That
they had resolved to Address in a Form of their own framing; and presently
after, upon their Lordship's disapproving that Answer, they declared their
Resolution more openly, "That they intended to Address separately: Intendebant
Supplicem Libellum separatim praesentare. An expression very agreeable to the
Constitution of a House of Commons, but never heard of before in Convocation:
And as the Practice was wholly New, so was it resisted and overruled by the
Right Reverend the present Lord Bishop of London, then President, and his
Brethren the Bishops.

In the Tenth Session, Ibid.
the Prolocutor having received certain Amendments from the President to be
considered by the Lower House, immediately asked the Question, Whether, in case
the Lower House agreed to those, their Lordships intended to make any more?
Which would not perhaps have been thought a very proper or decent Offer, even
from One House of Parliament to the other, in a like Case: And being so much
more improper in Convocation, especially as coming from the Lower to the
Vpper-House, would have justified their Lordships in a Resentment less mild and
gentle, than they were pleased to express: Praeses, etc. declaravit quaestionem
per cum propositam fuisse valde Irregularem, and talem cui nullo modo
respondere queat aut tenetur.

Session 13th, Ibid.
The President proposes to the Prolocutor the naming a Committee of the
Lower House, to meet a select number of the Upper, in order to inspect the Acts
of both Houses. Upon this a double Irregularity ensued; (so I take the liberty
to call them now, because they will be proved such hereafter in their proper
place:) the first, in the Prolocutor, who returned an answer, that I dare say
no President ever met with before from a Prolocutor, se non posse ad id
consentire sine Consensu Coetus domus Inferioris Convocationis prius habito:
The second, in the House, whose resolution was, not to appoint any Committee
for that purpose, durante recessu Convocationis: As if by the established Rules
of Convocation, they had a negative upon the President in the appointment of
Committees, or had any further share in it, than to receive his Directions,
and; when the number and the Persons are left to their discretion, to confirm
the Prolocutor's Nomination.

In that Convocation also, the new practice of sending the Resolutions and
Opinions of their House, by other hands than the Prolocutor's, was first
attempted; but presently taken notice of as an Innovation, and checked by the
President and Bishops.

I produce not these, as testimonies of any Design in the Clergy of that time
to transgress the Rules of Convocation, or to gain new Privileges to their
House. The tendency of Parliamentary Claims to a coordinate Power.
Though it may be, some of the Members then had this notion of Parliamentary
Rights in their Eye; and the manner of holding an English Convocation, not
being near so thoroughly considered as since it has been, the taking some of
their Measures from the Proceedings in Parliament might (under that imperfect
knowledge of things) be a pardonable Error. But the observation I would make
upon these Practices, is, That they were plainly enough an Imitation of the
Methods in the house of Commons; and being so, show how the very beginnings of
such an Imitation tend to divide and separate the Synod, and introduce a
coordinate Power of Presbyters with their Bishops; and that therefore the
safety of our Episcopal Constitution, at this juncture, depends upon a timely
and steadfast opposition to those Parliamentary Claims, with the Establishment
of all Proceedings in Convocation upon the only true bottom, the current usage
of former Convocations, as contained in the remaining Registers of either
House. These have been diligently examined since the year 1689. and being so
opposite to the Claims that were then made (as will be shown at large from the
Registers themselves) it might have been hoped that some of the more
inquisitive Members would have come together the last Convocation, in a
disposition to recede from those groundless pretenses. But whether they had not
thoroughly examined the Books, or whether they suffered themselves to be misled
by one whose Interest it was to draw a majority of the Clergy to act upon
Principles that he had publicly advanced; whatever (I say) was the Cause, it is
certain in Fact, that they were far enough from revoking the Innovations
attempted in 1689. Some new Claims of the last Lower House.
So far, as upon the same Foundation to proceed to new Claims of Independence,
as little warranted from the Usage of Convocation, and tending equally, if not
more, to set up the Coordinate Power we are complaining of, and to destroy the
fundamental Constitution of an English Synod. Such are, The Power they pretend
over their own Members; Their sitting and acting in a Synodical Way, without
their Metropolitan and Bishops; Their proceeding to Resolutions upon matters of
the highest importance, without the previous knowledge and directions of the
Vpper-House; Their refusing to return their Answer in Writing, and to appoint
Committees, when required by the President, etc. with other steps toward such
an Independence from their Bishops, as the Commons in Parliament are possessed
of, with relation to the Lords. And if this must be their standing Pattern, and
their Parliamentary Capacity a certain refuge whenever their Claims exceed the
Custom of former Convocations; how far they will go I cannot say, nor will I
judge with what Intention they pursue Measures so opposite to the State of the
primitive Church; but this I am sure of, that the same Foundation upon which
their late Claims are grounded, will equally justisie them in many more; that
being once introduced would make the Frame of an English Convocation as
inconsistent with Episcopacy, as the professed Enemies thereof can desire.

It will be objected, that the Persons who at present are in those Levelling
Measures, have not formerly been thought in the Presbyterian Interest, and that
now also they are more open and bitter than most other Men in their Invectives
against them, and remarkably loud in a Concern for the Church.

All this is readily acknowledged, and it is no new thing with frail Mankind
(such especially who are uneasy under Government) to rail at those the most,
who are in the possession of what themselves most desire. But Words are empty
Testimonies in comparison of Actions; and the hardest Names they can find for
that Sect, will be no Conviction to Them nor Us, either that these endeavors
to lessen the Character of Bishops, are not an evident Service to their Cause,
or that such Invasions by Presbyters upon the primitive Rights of Episcopacy,
are not an evident undermining of our Establishment.

The design of this Book, to settle their Proceedings upon the Custom of
Convocation.
But when I speak of the primitive Rules, I would not be understood to propose
the forms of the more ancient Synods, as the measure of my future reasonings
upon the Privileges either of Bishops or Clergy in an English Convocation; but
only to prevent its being thought, that any of the Powers they now claim, and
the Bishops deny, are so much as pretended to receive support from the
Condition of Presbyters in the primitive Church. So far from this, that many of
their real Privileges peculiar to the Clergy of this Nation, and now grown into
legal Rights, are much younger than the first Accounts we have of a Convocation
properly so called; such are, Their debating in a separate Body; Their having a
standing Prolocutor of their own, The share they have in framing Canons and
Constitutions, Their Negative upon the Archbishop and Bishops in Synodical Acts
of an Ecclesiastical Nature; and even their right to be summoned in the present
Form, or for Ecclesiastical Purposes. For their Civil Property could not be
disposed of, but by their own consent; and the necessity of having this, gave
them a Negative upon the Bishops in Subsidies, which was then the chief
business of Convocation; the Canons and Constitutions of the Church being for
many Ages after constantly made in Synods, consisting only of the Archbishop
and his Provincial Bishops. But the Affairs of the Church, as they came to be
transacted in Convocation, fell under the Rules and Methods that had been
established there upon Civil Accounts: By which means, the Inferior Clergy
came into the same share in the Ecclesiastical, that they had enjoyed in the
Secular Business; and as Custom has given them a legal Claim to several
Privileges of that kind, unknown to the Primitive Presbyters, or even to the
Presbyters of any other Episcopal Church at this Day; so (be their original
what it will) it is no part of my Design to call in question any of their
Claims, that the remaining Acts of Convocation will warrant. Their want of
Authorities from the primitive Times, with the lateness of their coming to a
share in the Canons and Constitutions of our own Church, and the secular
Original of the Title they now have to bear a part in framing and passing them,
will be a general Reason with all unprejudiced Men why they should at least
acquiesce in these, and not endeavor to build higher upon that secular
Foundation. But in the present Controversy, I freely pass by all these
disadvantages, and desire only that every Point may be determined by the
Constitution and Customs of Convocation; resolving neither to assert any
Authority to the Upper-House, nor deny any Privileges to the Lower, but as the
Proceedings of former Convocations establish the first, and prove all
Pretensions to the second groundless and illegal. All proofs from (...)
Registers themselves.
Nor do I propose to have the Reader depend upon my Assertions or bare
Representations of things; but upon all Points that are either made a Question
already, or can possibly bear one, the Evidences shall be produced at large;
that so every Reader may be his own Judge, and none be able to contradict the
Positions laid down, but by first denying the Authority of the Registers.

My accounts may perhaps seem too minute and particular to some, who are
already skilled in Convocation Affairs; but it is not for their Use that I
write this, but for the sake of the Generality; many of whom, Eminent in other
parts of Learning, may without reproach be presumed Strangers to a Subject,
that has so lately come under Consideration. Which will also be a fair Apology
for their having been misled into a favorable Opinion of some Measures, not
to be warranted by the Practice of Convocation; if they show themselves ready
to retire upon a clear Conviction from proper Authorities. In the producing of
which, my multiplying Testimonies of the same kind, and to the same purpose,
may possibly be thought a fault; but if it be, they who have so openly denied
Truths established upon Evidences so plain and numerous, are answerable for it.

The necessity of citing Authorities at large
In Truth, the Errors and Prejudices arising from the notion of a Parliamentary
Body, have been wrought into Men's Minds with so much Art and Diligence, that
nothing under Originals, and a variety of Authorities from thence, can hope to
dispossess them; nor will it upon any less Testimony be thought possible, that
Persons in Holy Orders should contend so earnestly for meeting and acting in a
Civil Capacity, about matters of an Ecclesiastical Nature; if they had any
Pretense in Law or Custom, to meet and act under the Character or Appearance of
a Sacred Synod: Especially when Subsidies, the great Business of a Secular
Nature that ever belonged to the Convocation, are not now granted in it. And
since, even after the business of it is become purely Ecclesiastical, the
Endeavors to make it a Civil Meeting, have been so remarkable: my design, in
the following Papers, is to do Right to its Constitution, by restoring it to
all the Spiritual Liberties and Advantages it may justly claim by the Laws of
the Land, and its own perpetual Usage: From which, as conveyed to us by the
Acts themselves, The general Design of this Book.
I will show in a plain and naked Relation of Matters of Fact, That an English
Convocation, however laid under some Restraints from the Civil Constitution, is
far from being so much transformed into a Civil Meeting, as has been pleaded of
late; That in the Summoning, Opening, and Acting, it appears what it is, an
Ecclesiastical Synod of Bishops with their Presbyters, and neither a
Parliamentary Body on the one hand, nor an Assembly of Presbyters on the other;
That however the Papists slander the English Reformation, as if it had changed
our Church into a Civil Constitution, yet it is evident (against all the
Endeavors of some among our selves, to help the Church of Rome in that
Objection) that, as to the Nature of our Synods at least, it left (...) in the
same Ecclesiastical State as it found them.

To proceed regularly in this Design, it must be all along observed, what I
hinted before, that the Corruptions which have been endeavored of late in an
English Convocation, are, in general, the Diminution of the Canonical Authority
of the Metropolitan and Bishops, and the Clergy's claiming such Exemptions from
that Authority, as makes the whole Body look more like an English Parliament,
than a Sacred Synod. To this purpose it has been pleaded, Nar. p. 6.
That the Convocation was divided into two Houses, in conformity to the
Parliament: Answ. p 9. c. 2.
That the Prolocuter is President of the Lower House, as the Archbishop is of
the Upper: That the Acts and Declarations of both, are only the Effect of the
Order or Consent of each House respectively: That the Prolocutor governs the
Time of the Lower, in as full a manner, as his Grace does that of the Upper, i.
e. with the Consent of the House: Nar. p. 17.
That their Debates are managed Independently from their Lordships: Nar. p. 61.
That they have a general Negative upon the Vpper-House: That in virtue
thereof, they have a Right to deny the Appointment of Committees, and even a
sight of their Journals (in which, by the way, they exceed their Pattern; the
Journals of the two Houses of Parliament being mutually open to the Members of
each, at all times and upon all occasions): Nar. p 3.
That without the Knowledge or Directions of their Lordships, they can enter
upon and proceed in business of the highest Importance; and if any Point
happen, that in the judgment of the Vpper-House may be most conveniently
Debated in Writing, Nar. p. 50.
they can insist upon a free Conference as the fittest Method, and if that be
denied, are under no Obligation to be further accountable to their Lordships
for any of their Practices or Proceedings: Nar. p. 49.
Add to these, the Power they claim over their own Members, upon which they can
require their Attendance, and (according to the known practice of the last
Convocation) can discharge them from it by a Vote or Resolution of the House;
with that other Claim which has been so much insisted on, their Right to
adjourn to different Days, from the Metropolitan and Bishops, and to sit and
act on these Days as a House.

In these Claims and Practices, I say, we have the view of an English
Parliament, but lose that of an Ecclesiastical Synod, consisting of a
Metropolitan, Bishops, and Presbyters. By these Rules, we see, the Debates (as
to the matter, manner and time) are all separated at the pleasure of the
Inferior Clergy; and as the Archbishop and the Upper-house are made to resemble
the Speaker of the House of Lords and the Lords Temporal, so (to complete the
Parallel) the Prolocutor and the Lower House (that is, as they term themselves,
the Spiritual Commons) answer to the House of Commons and their Speaker.
However, such Comparisons, if they went no further than Names, or the general
Appearance of the two Bodies, might be innocent enough; but when upon these the
Claims of new Privileges begin to be founded, and such Privileges too as are an
apparent diminution of the Metropolitical and Episcopal Authority, separating
the Synod and raising the Presbyters by degrees to a coordinate Power; then
the Parallel is no longer safe, but the Governors of the Church, and all that
love our Episcopal Constitution, are concerned to enter upon proper Measures
for the Preservation of it. And these, in our present Circumstances, I conceive
to be, the opposing to those new attempts the Authority of former Convocations,
and describing from thence ( i. e. from the only true Rule) the Practice and
Proceeding proper to each House. Which will not only show, that their Lordships
have insisted upon no Power but what their Character and the Usage of
Convocation fully justify, and that therefore the Clergy's Claims of Exemption
from it are not to be warranted; but will also discover to the World how they
have been imposed on by those, who have grounded such Claims upon an imaginary
Alliance between the Parliament and Convocation; two Bodies that will appear to
be widely different both in Constitution and Proceedings. And since that
difference (as I said before) consists chiefly in the Authority which belongs
to the Metropolitan and Bishops over the Inferior Clergy and their Proceedings;
it is my design to show out of the Records themselves, how that Authority
stands, and has always stood, in the several Ages and Instances, from the
Summoning and Opening a Convocation, to the Dissolution thereof; with an Eye,
all along, to the different Constitution, and manner of corresponding, in the
two Houses of Parliament, and particularly to the late Claims of Independence
built upon a Parliamentary Relation.

CHAP. I.
The Method of SUMMONING an English Convocation.
The Writ to the Archbishop.
I. WHen his Majesty, by the Advice of his Council, resolves to Summon his
Parliament, and with it a Convocation, he signifies his Royal Pleasure by Writ
to the Archbishop, Rex, etc. Reverendissimo, etc. (then the generaI Causes of
his calling a Convocation are recited) Vobis in fide and dilectione quibus
nobis tenemini, rogando mandamus, quatenus praemissis debito intuitu attentis
and ponderatis, universos and singulos Episcopos vestrae Provinciae ac Decanos
Ecclesiarum Cathedralium, necnon Archidiaconos, Capitula and Collegia totumque
Clerum cujuslibet Dioecesis ejusdem Provinciae, ad comparendum CORAM VOBIS in
Ecclesia Cathedrali S. Pauli London -- die, etc. VEL ALIBI prout melius
expedire videritis, cum omni celeritate accommoda, MODO DEBITO Convocari
faciatis.

A Writ to this effect, and for some hundred Years in this very Form, has been
all along directed to the Archbishop, whenever the King had resolved that a
Convocation should be Summoned. Upon the reception whereof, his Grace always
proceeded to summon it in the fixed and Canonical Method, that he ever used in
calling of Convocations upon his own motion, without that Writ. For though the
King, as having a Right to the Assistance of the Clergy, had also a Right to be
obeyed by the Archbishop, in calling them together for that end; yet in the
dispatch of that business, he left them to proceed according to the known Rules
of a Provincial Synod, viz. to be summoned before their Metropolitan, and to
the Place he should think fit to appoint, and in the manner that was usual in
all other Convocations. For the Archbishop had a Right to call a Convocation at
pleasure, till the Statute 25 H. 8. c. 19. absolutely restrained him from doing
it, unless empowered by the King's Writ: Which effected this Alteration in the
Summons, that whereas before it was issued sometimes upon the Pleasure of the
Prince signified to the Archbishop, and sometimes upon the Archbishop's alone,
the Authority of the Summons in both, resting equally in his Grace: Now he is
restrained from the Exercise of that Authority, till he receive leave or
direction from the Prince: The Summons upon that intimation of the Royal
Pleasure, being still issued in his Grace's Name, and under the Archiepiscopal
Seal; that is, remaining as properly Authoritative as before. See this point
proved more largely in Right of the Archbishop. 9 etc.


II. For whereas in the late comparisons of a Convocation and Parliament, the
parallel lies between the Archbishop in the first, and the Lord Chancellor in
the second; the share they have in the Summoning these two Bodies, is very
different. The Warrant to the Lord Chancellor, who acts Ministerially.
The Lord Chancellor or Keeper receives a Warrant from the King, whereby his
Majesty signifies his Resolution to call a Parliament; In which case, diverse
and sundry Writs are to be directed forth, under our Great Seal of England,
etc. Wherefore we Will and Command you, forthwith upon the receipt hereof, and
by Warrant of the same, to cause such and so many Writs to be made and sealed
under our Great Seal, for the accomplishment of the same, as in like cases has
been heretofore used and accustomed, etc.

What the King, in this case, requires of the Lord Chancellor, is in a way
purely Ministerial; his Lordship being commanded to act only in his Majesty's
Name, and under his Seal, i. e. solely by his Authority; while the Archbishop
is only Licensed or Directed to Exert a Power and Authority which belongs to
him, as well in the common Right of a Metropolitan, as by the ancient Laws and
Customs of this Realm. In virtue whereof, he directs his Mandate to the Bishop
of London, whose Office it is, as his Grace's Dean of the Province, to Execute
that Mandate, and whose part therefore in the calling a Convocation, answers to
that of the Lord Chancellor, in the Summons of a Parliament. Both of them Act
Ministerially, in the Name and by the Authority, the one of his Civil, and the
other of his Ecclesiastical Superior.

The Writ for a Parliament, issued in the King's Name by the Lord Chancellor,
summons the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Personally to attend his Majesty on a
certain day, at Westminster; Vobis in side and legiantia, quibus nobis
tenemini, firmiter injungendo Mandamus, quod consideratis, and Dicto die and
loco personaliter intersitis nobiscum: And another also, in his Majesty's Name,
to the Sheriff of each County, commands him to take care that the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses, duly Elected, pay their Attendance to the King, at the
same Place. But the Archbishop, in his Mandate executed by the Bishop of
London, first reciting the Royal Writ, to show that the Restraint of the
Statute is taken off, Summons the Bishops and Clergy of his Province to appear
before himself, in his Provincial Convocation at St. Paul's: Quod iidem Episcopi
Decani and Archidiaconi, and caeteri Ecclesiarum Cathedralium Praelati, etc.
compareant coram nobis, aut nostro in hac part locum tenente sive Commissario
in Domo Capitulari Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi Pauli London.

The Returns to Parliament, to the King.
The Sheriff of each County is directed in the Royal Writ, to make a due Return
of his Election to the King, in his Court of Chancery: Et Electionem tuam in
pleno Comitatu tuo factam distinct and aperte sub sigillo tuo and sigillis
eorum qui Electioni illi interfuerint, nobis in Cancellaria nostra ad diem and
locum in Brevi Contentum certifices indilate. -- In Convocation to the
Archbishop.
By the Archbishop's Mandate, the Bishop of each Diocese (to whom the immediate
Execution thereof belongs) is directed to make the Return to his Grace, or his
Commissary: Et praeterea vobis, ut supra, injungimus, quod omnibus and singulis
Coepiscopis, Suffraganeis Provinciae nostrae Cant. injungatis and injungi
faciatis, ut singuli eorum sigillatim de facto suo, quatenus pertinet ad
eosdem, Nos seu locum-tenentem sive Commissarium unum vel plures, dictis die,
hora, and loco per literas eorum Patentes Nomina and Cognomina omnium and
singulorum per eos respective Citatorum continentes, distinct certificent and
aperte.

These Returns are ultimately deposited in their proper Offices; the
Parliamentary in his Majesty's Court of Chancery, and those to Convocation in
the Register of the Sea of Canterbury: That is, the due Execution of each being
immediately certified to the Person from whom the Command comes, and in whose
Power it is to punish the default; the Testimonies of that Execution, rest and
stop at the Authority, The Summons not less Ecclesiastical for its being
enjoined by the Prince.
from whence the Summons in both cases immediately flowed.

Thus far (to the Honor of our Reformed Church) nothing appears in the manner
of an English Convocation, but what is truly Ecclesiastical; or in other Words,
suitable to the Constitution and Government of an Episcopal Church, as well as
the Degrees and Order of the Members whereof it consists. Bating, I mean, that
one Restraint which the Statute has laid upon the Archbishop, from calling a
Convocation at pleasure, as the ancient Metropolitans and our own here in
England before that Statute, had a right to do. For as to the Archbishop's
exercising his Summoning Authority, at the Command of the King; this is so far
from changing our Convocations into Civil Meetings, that it is no more than an
obedience which has been ever paid to Christian Princes, by the Governors of
National Churches, planted and established under their Influence and
Protection. Nor in our own, did the Archbishop's calling his Clergy, upon the
King's Writ or without it, ever make the least Alteration in the stated
Ecclesiastical Methods of Summoning. All these, God be thanked, are still
pretty entire; and I hope safe enough against the Endeavors of some restless
Men, who would persuade us that they are pleading the Cause of the Church, in
doing all they possibly can to make her a mere Creature of the State.

The Clergy not Summoned in the same manner from the beginning.
This has ever been the Method of Summoning a Convocation; but as to the
Members summoned, the Cathedral and Diocesan Clergy were not from the beginning
represented, as now they are, by Persons of their own immediate Choice. The
Deans, Priors and Abbots were required by the Archbishop to bring Procuratorial
Letters from the respective Bodies over whom they were placed; as the
Archdeacons were to do from the Parochial Clergy within their District.

Anno 1257 the Archiepiscopal Mandate runs thus. -- In virtute obedientiae
praecipiendo, ut praedicti Decanus and Prior dictarum Cathedralium Ecclesiarum,
Abbates, and alii Priores, cum literis Procuratoriis nomine Congregationum
suarum confectis, ac dicti Archidiaconi cum literis similiter factis ex part
Clericorum qui subsunt eisdem, etc. dictis die and loco personaliter debeant
interesse.

Anno 1258 to the same purpose: Vocetis eciam Decanos Cathedralium et aliarum
Ecclesiarum, nec non etiam Abbates, Priores Majores insuper et Archidiaconos
vestrae Diaecesis universos, ut cum literis suorum subditorum Procuratoriis
loco et die antedictis compareant. -- And the Bishop's Order upon that Mandate
to the Archdeacon, Ac nihilominus Vos ipsi compareatis dictis die et loco cum
literis Procuratoriis Cleri totius Archidiaconatus vestri.

Anno, 1279. The Archbishop's Mandate directs the Bishops to call their Clergy
together, and excite them to contribute liberally to the King's Necessities;
and then leaves them at liberty, whether they will send their Resolutions by
the Bisho^ or their Proxies, or by Proctors of their own. Hujusmodi autem
Servitii vel Subsidii quantitatem per Vos aut Procuratores vestros, vel certe
per Procuratores proprios ad hoc, si expedire videritis, destinandos, nobis
intimare studeant in Congregatione nostra London, etc. The same Method (I mean
of the Bishops calling together the Clergy) is prescribed by the Archiepiscopal
Mandates of 1282. and 1283. when the Clergy appear to have been represented in
both by two Proctors. But afterward,

Anno 1296. we find the Diocesan Clergy required to appear by one Proxy:
Vnumquodque Capitulum seu Conventus per unum; Clerus quoque cujuslibet
Dioecesis per unum similiter Procuratorem idoneum et instructum: And, Anno
1311. either by one or two: Clerus autem per unum vel duos Procuratores
consimiles, communiter destinandos.

Inferences from the foregoing Testimonies.
I produce not these Instances to invalidate the Right of the Cathedral Clergy
to be constantly represented by one, or the Diocesan, by two Proctors of their
own choice: For that, they have now an undeniable Custom of almost four hundred
years; as they have a Prescription of half that time and upwards, for the part
they bear in framing and passing Ecclesiastical Constitutions. But such
Observations came naturally into this Historical Account of the Archiepiscopal
Summons; and the Inferences I would draw from them, are, 'That an Interest in
Convocation, much more a concern in Affairs Ecclesiastical, is far from
belonging to the Lower Clergy Originally, even by the Customs of our own
Nation; and those Customs Modern, if compared with Primitive Practice: 'That
the present Frame and Establishment first arose from the Command of the
Metropolitan, to send two Proctors, and from a Custom growing thereupon: That
the Figure they now make in Convocation, and much more the Figure that some of
the Members would make, is far beyond any thing that these their Predecessors
pretended to: That the Exercise of the Archbishop's Authority in Convocation,
has been much greater than it is, and yet the Church and her Rights did not
prosper the less: That therefore, even waving the Practice of Convocation, upon
which the Claims of the Upper-House are immediately grounded, the late Clamours
of Danger and Ruin to the Church from thence, can in Reason be regarded by
none, who will look back to the Condition of the Presbyters in the Primitive
Times, or even in our own Nation, and that not many Centuries ago.

CHAP. II.
The manner of Opening a Convocation.
All the Members to be ready at St. Paul's.
ON the day prefixed in the Archbishop's Mandate for the Convocation's meeting,
all the Members cited thereby are obliged to be ready at St. Paul's for the
coming of his Grace. Thus it is, and ever has been, according to Archbishop
Parker's account of the established Form of Opening a Convocation: Sciendum est,
quod omnes qui authoritate Reverendissimi citantur ad comparendum coram eo in
domo Capitulari Ecclesiae Cathedralis D. Pauli London. -- die -- tenentur
praefixo tempore interesse atque in eadem Ecclesia Cathedrali praestolari
adventum dicti Reverendissimi.

The President's coming to St. Paul's,
His Grace, waited on at his Landing by all the Advocates and Proctors of his
Court, is by them and his own Retinue conducted to the Church of St. Paul's; at
the Door whereof the Bishops and Clergy meet and receive him, and all walk in
Procession to the Quire. Prayers and Sermon ended, he with the Bishops and
Clergy go into the Chapter House: The Dean of the province exhibits his
Certificatorium.
where the Lord Bishop of London, Dean of the Province, exhibits a Certificate
that the Mandate has been duly executed: Reverendissimo ac caeteris suis
Coepiscopis in suis sedibus ordine consedentibus, ac reliquo Clero
circumstante, Reverendus Dominus Episcopus London. Mandatum sibi a dicto
Reverendissimo ad Convocationem hujusmodi Summonend. directum, una cum ^bito
Certificatorio super Executione ejusdem i^roducere, ac debita cum Reverentia
eidem Reverendissimo Patri praesentare and tradere tenetur. -- This Certificate
under the Episcopal Seal, and directed to the Archbishop, first acknowledging
the receipt of his Grace's Mandate, recites it: and then signifies, how by
Virtue and Authority thereof, the Bishops of his Province, and by them the
Deans, etc. have been regularly Summoned: That he owns himself duly Cited by
the Authority of the same Mandate: That he has intimated to them his Grace's
Resolution not to hold any excused but upon good Reasons to be then and there
alleged: That he has also enjoined every Bishop to bring with him a
Certificate of the Execution of the foresaid Mandate in his own Diocese: And
then adding, how he has executed it particularly in the Diocese of London, he
subjoins a Catalogue of the Members therein. In like manner, every Bishop makes
his Return immediately to the Archbishop, in a formal Instrument under his
Episcopal Seal, certifying the Summons of his Dean, Archdeacons and Clergy, in
Virtue of his Grace's Letters Mandatory transmitted by the Lord Bishop of
London, and adding their several Names and Sirnames.

By the Archbishop's Order, the Bishop of London's Certificate is publicly
Read, and one or more Officers of his Court appointed by him, Other
Certificates and Proxies.
to receive in his Name the Certificates of the other Bishops, and all the
Letters of Proxy. Then a wiritten Schedule is put into his Grace's Hand, by
which he pronounces all Members cited and not appearing, Contumacious;
Contumacy Pronounced. Forma Convocat.
reserving the Punishment of their Contumacy to another time, Reservando poenam
eorum Contumaciae in aliquem diom competentem pro beneplacito ipsius
Reverendissimi.

This is a short and general Account of the Opening a Convocation; enough to
convince any Indifferent Man of his Grace's Right, as to Preside over the whole
Body, so to dispense with the Absence, or require the Attendance of every
particular Member, according to the reasons and circumstances of Things. The
Archbishop's Jurisdiction over the Members, as to their Atte^, asserted.
But because in the last Convocation the Power of the Archbishop over the
Members of the Lower House, was not only called in Question, but in effect
directly denied by the departure of several without applying to his Grace for
leave; and not only so, but in contempt of the Metropolitical Authority,
several Applications were directly made to the Lower House, and the leave of
the House thought a sufficient Discharge from their obligation to attendance:
Upon these Accounts, and the Inferences that are made on the Supposition of
such a Right in the Lower House, it becomes necessary to be full and clear in
the Explication of these Certificates or Returns, which (as made in pursuance
of the Archiepiscopal Mandate) are the foundation of his Grace's Power in that
point, over all the Members indifferently: To show, on the one hand, the
Antiquity of them, that no room may be left to suspect 'em Innovations; and on
the other, their real force and effect, as appearing from the Archbishop's
frequent Exercise of this Power, that they may not be thought a matter of Form,
or the appearance only of a legal Title without the Authority of Practice to
support and confirm them.

By the Tenor of the Mandate, none to be excused but who shall show reasonable
cause.
I. In the Archbishop's Mandate for the Summoning a Convocation, it is, and
always has been usual for his Grace, to require the Dean of the Province, among
other things, to acquaint the Bishops, and by them the Inferior Clergy, that he
will excuse no member from attending, according to the Tenor thereof, but who
shall show such cause as his Grace shall judge reasonable. This Notice is given
in the ancient Mandates under different Forms, but all to the same effect with
the present Clause.

Anno 1281. After an Enumeration of all the Members to be cited; Denunciantes
eisdem quod contra absentes in Forma Canonica procedemus. Nec debilitatis
Excusationem sufficere reputamus illorum, qui per Maneria sua juxta Dioceses
suas, and extra, and ad alia loca per Cant. Provinciam, se faciunt pro
familiaribus negotiis in quibuscunque vehiculis deportari.

Anno 1296. Compareant eodem die and sequentibus opportunis -- Sub poena
Excommunicationis Majoris and Interdicti, quae merito poterunt formidare qui in
forma praenotata contumaciter omiserint seu contempserint comparere; and quae
contra eosdem qui sic comparere detrectaverint sine delectu Personarum
intendimus Executioni debitae demandare.

Anno 1297. Vos etiam praemunimus, and caeteros sic citandos praemuniri
Mandamus, quod absentes in Citatione praedicta, msi Evidens and inevitabile
impedimentum per probationes certas superesse docuerint tanquam Inobedientes
and offensores notorios graviter punicmus. And another the same Year:
Denunciantes dictis Coepiscopis, and per eos suos subditos sic vocandos
faciatis idonee praemuniri, quod absentes in citatione praedicta, nisi Evidens
and inevitabile impodimentum sufficienter probetur; tanquam inobedientes
graviter puniemus. Much of the same Form and wholly to the same purpose, is
this Clause in the Mandates, Anno 1333. and 1327.

Anno 1356. Intimantes eisdem, quod contra absentes in forma Canonica
procedemus; nullius sic absentis excusationem penitus admissuri, nisi quatenus
ad hoc nos arctaverint Canonicae Sanctiones.

Anno 1359. Volumus and intimamus, quod intimetis seu denunciari faciatis
dictae Provinciae Coepiscopis and Confratribus ac Vicariis hujusmodi, Decanis,
Abbatibus, Prioribus, and caeteris Ecclesiarum Praelatis supradictis, quod cos
a personali comparitione in hujusmodi Congregatione, dictis die and loco per
nos seu nostra Auctoritate, Deo annuente, celebranda, habere non intendimus
excusatos ista Vice, nisi ex causa necessaria tunc ibidem alleganda and
probanda; sed eorum Contumacia, si qui forsitan absentes fuerint, secundum
juris exigentiam Canonice punietur.

From thence to this Day, the same Clause continues a part of the
Archiepiscopal Mandate, with a very small variation of the Words, and none at
all of the Sense or Intention: Volumus insuper et mandamus, quatenus intimetis
et denuncietis seu intimari et denunciari faciatis dictae Provinciae nostrae
Cantuar. Coepiscopis, Decanis, Archidiaconis, ac caeteris Ecclesiarum Praelatis
suprascriptis, quod eos a Personali comparitione in hujusmodi negotio
Convocationis et Congregationis dictis die et loco ut praemittitur, divina
favente Clementia celebrand. excusatos non habere intendimus ista Vice nisi ex
causa necessaria ^nc et ibidem alleganda et proponenda, et per nos approbanda;
sed Contumacias eorum qui Absentes fuerint Canonice punire.

I know not, how clearer Testimonies can be given of any Point, than these are
of a constant right in our Metropolitan (the same that Metropolitans have
always enjoyed) to require Attendance according to the tenor of his Mandate,
and to judge of the Reasonableness of all Excuses of Absence, and to punish the
Contumacy of those who are Absent without sending Reasons that in his Grace's
Judgment are good and sufficient.

All Returns ever made directly to the Archbishop.
II. In pursuance of his General Summons, and that particular Admonition; the
Archbishop in the same Mandate and in the Clause immediately following,
commands the Dean of the Province to Intimate to every Suffragan Bishop, that
he Exhibit to his Grace at the Day appointed, a Schedule under his Episcopal
Seal containing the Names and Sirnames of all the Persons he has cited to
appear. The words of this Clause have not always been the same they are now;
but such as express the same meaning, and had the same effect; for instance,

Anno 1281. Mandantes insuper singulis Episcopis quod secum deferant in
scriptis nomina omnium in forma praedicta de suis Dioecesibus ad Concilium
vocatorum. And more distinctly the very next Year, viz.

Anno 1282. De nominibus vero Abbatum, Priorum, et aliorum Religiosorum,
Decanorum, Archidiaconorum, Procuratorum, tam Cleri cujuslibet Dioecesis quam
Capitulorum, singuli Episcopi pro suis Dioecesibus ad dictos diem et locum per
suas literas distinct nos certificent et aperte.

In the next Century, it comes yet nearer to our present Form: As,

Anno 1350. After direction given to the Dean of the Province, to bring a
particular Return or Certificate of the due Execution of the Mandate, it is
added, Et caeteris Coepiscopis Suffragancis nostris, Electis, et Vicariis
praedictis similiter injungatis, ut Nos vel nostrum Commissarium eisdem die et
loco singuli sigillatim modo debito certificent per literas suas patentes harum
seriem et citatorum Nomina Dioeces. eorundem in Cedula consimili continentes.

And before the end of that Century, we find it the same with the present Form,
excepting a very small variation of the words: So,

Anno 1396. Vobis etiam, ut supra, injungimus et mandamus, quod omnibus et
singulis Venerabilibus Fratribus nostris, Coepiscopis vestris, vel Vicariis
hujusmodi, injungatis seu faciatis injungi, quod singuli eorum singillatim de
facto suo quatenus pertinet ad eosdem, Nos seu loca nostra tenentes vel
Commissarios, dictis die et loco, per literas suas Patentes, Citatorum Nomina
continentes, distinct certificent et aperte.

The Clause at present, runs thus:

Et praeterea, Vobis, ut supra, injungimus et mandamus, quod omnibus et
singulis Coepiscopis Suffraganeis Provinciae nostrae Cant. injungatis et
injungi faciatis, ut singuli eorum Sigillatim de facto suo, quatenus pertinet
ad eosdem, Nos seu locum-tenentem sive Commissarium, unum vel plures, dictis
die, hora, et loco, per literas eorum Patentes Nomina et Cognomina omnium et
singulorum per eos respective Citatorum continentes, distinct certificent et
aperte.

The several Forms of these two Clauses, we see, are only different ways of
expressing the self-same things: And I produce them thus distinctly, that they
who have lately Acted against the Intent and Authority of them, may have no
Opportunity to Suggest to their Friends, that as they stand in our Modern
Mandates, they are not agrecable to the Sense and Language of Antiquity, i. e.
that the Denouncing Canonical Censures against Absents, and the Returns from
the several Bishops, to inform his Grace whose Attendance it was that he had a
right to require, has not ever been, as now it is, the Method and Practice of
an English Convocation. Since the Beginning of this Controversy, Assertions no
less groundless have been given out and propagated, and have had their designed
effect, in misleading many honest and well-meaning Men; which is a warning for
the future, not to leave Room for any Misrepresentations of that kind, and is
also the reason why I take the same Method in the Explication of the next
Clause, whereby the Lord Bishop of London, in particular, is obliged to
Certify the Archbishop that his Mandate has been transmitted to the Suffragan
Bishops, and duly executed within his own Diocese.

In Archbishop Peckham's time, Anno 1281. Vos autem, praedictis die et loco, in
forma praedicta Comparentes comite Sanitate, certificetis nos per Patentes
vestras literas quid feceritis de praemissis.

The Dean of the Province required to certify to his Grace the Execution of
the Mandate.
Anno 1282. Vos autem, quos tunc praesentes adesse volumus, nobis rescribatis
per vestras literas Patentes, harum seriem continentes, qualiter praesens
Mandatum nostrum fueritis Executi.

Anno 1350/1. De die vero receptionis praesentium, et quid seceritis ac facere
duxeritis in praemissis, Nos vel nostros Commissarios dictis die et loco
Certificetis per literas vestras Patentes harum Seriem et Citatorum Nomina
vestrae London. Dioeces. in Cedula separata, his Certificatoriis annectenda,
plenarie continentes. -- Which, after 3 Centuries and a half, continues the
same in effect to this Day, viz.

De die vero receptionis praesentium, et quid in praemissis seceritis, Nos aut
nostrum in hac part, locum-tenentem sive Commissarium hujusmodi, dictis die,
hora, et loco, debite Certificari curetis per Literas harum seriem, una cum
nominibus omnium et singulorum [adding the several degrees, Episcoporum, etc.]
in separata Schedula literis Certificatorum annectend. complectentes.

The Dean of the Province's Certificatorium or Return Exhibited.
III. According to this precept of the Archiepiscopal Mandate, it is, and
always has been the Usage of Convocation, for the Bishop of London to Exhibit
his Certificatorium, or Return, to his Grace on the first Day of its Meeting.
Which being read by some one of the Officers of the Archbishop's Court
appointed by his Grace; certain Commissioners are directed to receive the
Returns of all the other Bishops, and the Proxies of the Persons mentioned
therein, i. e. the Procuratorial Letters of the Cathedral and Diocesan Clergy
appearing in Person, and the Substitutions of Proxies made by the absent
Members, upon reasonable Causes of Absence, offered and alleged according to
the terms of the Mandate. Archbishops Com missioners to receive and inspect
Proxies.
Nor is the Commissioner empowered only to receive, but also to inspect and
examine the Proxies of both sorts; to see, that they be in due form, and the
Causes alleged for absence, fit to be admitted.

The Proxies, as well of the Cathedral and Diocesan Clergy, as of the Absent
Members, are ordinarily expressed under the Common Name Procuratoria, in his
Grace's Appointment or Commission; but sometimes with express reference to the
Absent Clergy. So, Feb. 7. 1452. -- nec non quorumcumque absentium Procuratoria
in dicto Concilio sive Convocatione comparere debentium. -- Anno 1557. He is
required to examine, among other things, causas Absentiarum; and in 1562 (the
first after the Reformation, the Acts whereof remain entire) the Archbishop's
Deputation is thus set down at large: Deinde dictus Reverendissimus Pater
commisit vices suas Mro. Thomae Yale Cancellario suo, ac Magistro Willelmo
Drurie Legum Doctori, Commissario ad facultates, ad recipiend. Certificatoria
Episcoporum ac ad inspiciend. Procuratoria quorumcunq Absentium ac causas
absentiarum suarum examinand. et approband. Answerable to which the Contumacy
pronounced immediately upon this Inspection and Examination, is (in the
ordinary Style of the Registers) against those who did Nullo modo comparere,
that is, neither in Person, nor by Proxy: And yet more express in that of 1562.
-- monitos et citatos, ac per se aut Procuratores suos idoneos minime
comparentes, For

Sentence of Contumacy against Absents, by the Archbishop or his Commissary.
IV. The Certificates and Proxies being duly examined, and the Members
particularly Preconiz'd; the Usage has ever been, to pronounce the Absents,
Contumacious. Anciently, it was pronounced in the Name of the Archbishop, by
the Person commissioned to receive and inspect the Certificates, etc. And in
that Case, the punishment was reserved to the Archbishop, Poena Contumaciarum
Domino reservata: But when his Grace pronounced it in Person (as he then did
sometimes, and constantly afterward) it ran, Poena sibi reservata, or in words
to that effect, i. e. to be inflicted or not inflicted, with strictness or with
abatements, as he himself should see convenient.

The Certificates, etc. were exhibited by his Grace's Appointment, not on a
Convocation Day, but at an Intermediate Time; and so the Registers, though they
constantly make mention of the Bishop of London's Certificatorium, and his
Grace's Commission to inspect the rest, (both these being done in Convocation,)
do yet seldom take notice of the Contumacy pronounced which was out of
Convocation. But we find the manner of the Commissioner's proceedings, entered
at large in the Convocation Acts of 1432. after the Business of the Day: Post
Prandium dicti diei Lunae praefatus Venerabilis Vir Magister Thomas Bronus
adivit dictam domum Capitularem, et ibidem recepit Certificatoria Episcoporum
et Procuratoria Praelatorum ac Cleri et Capitulorum, et receptis
Certificatoriis hujusmodi, idem Magister Thomas Praeconizari fecit omnes et
singulas personas quarum nomina in Cedulis singulorum Episcoporum
Certificatoriis annexis fuerunt annotata. Quibus sic Praeconizatis, idem
Magister Thomas omnes et singulos ad illud Provinciale Concilium citatos,
certificatos, et (ut praemittitur) praeconizatos, ac nullo modo seu minus
legitime comparentes, pronunciavit Contumaces, Poena reservata Domino. Et
mandavit idem Magister Thomas Procuratoria hujusmodi custodiri cum
deliberatione examinanda, et prout juris fuerit, admittenda seu rejicienda.

At other times, the Archbishop himself pronounced the Absents Contumacious, at
the meeting next after the Inspection of the Returns and Proxies: Which indeed,
in the natural Order of things, seems to be more regular than the Practice that
came after and still continues, of the Archbishop's pronouncing the Contumacy
immediately upon his Appointment of a Commissioner to receive the Certificates.

The Sentence of Contumacy a written Instrument.
I cannot affirm (because the Registers don't say it) that this Act of his Grace
and his Commissioner, was in a written Form from the beginning: But I find one
as early as Archbishop Chichley, in the Year 1438. Tenor vero Decreti sive
Sentenciae contra Absentes, ut praefertur, sequitur, et est talis, IN DEI
NOMINE Amen. Henricus permissione divina Cantuar. Archiepiscopus, totius
Angliae Primas et Apostolicae sedis Legatus, Omnes et singulos Abbates,
Priores, Decanos Ecclesiarum Cathedralium, Archidiaconos, Custodes et Magistros
Ecclesiarum Collegiatarum, et alios de Clero quoscumque ad praesentem
Convocationem vocatos, citatos, praemunitos, et praeconizatos, diuciusque
expectatos, ac nullo modo aut non legitime secundum tenorem Mandati nostri
comparentes, Pronunciamus Contumaces, poenam Contumaciae in omnes et singulos
praedict. infligend. nobis reservantes: Monemus insuper omnes et singulos
praefatos Contumaces, quod sexto die Octobris prox. futuro omnes et singuli
Contumaces supradicti compareant coram nobis in loco praesenti poenas
Contumaciarum hujusmodi auditur. et subitur. completur. et factur. prout
justicia suadebit; et praesentem Convocationem usque in et ad diem praefatum
Continuamus: Monentes insuper omnes et singulos jam praesentes, ut die
praedicto compareant, et quilibet eorum compareat, coram Nobis aut nostris in
hac part Commissariis in Convocatione praesenti isto eodem loco processur. et
^isur. factur. et subitur. quod in Conciliis Provincialibus faciend. ordinand.
et providend. fuerit, et quod Canones et Jura suadebunt.

Afterward, the Extracts out of the Register of the Upper-House in 1529. speak
of it as a written Instrument; referring to the Register when it was entered at
large: And in 1545. where the remaining Convocation-Acts in the Province of
York begin, the Schedula contra Contumaces is set down at length, and said to
be then and there Read by the Commissary: -- Omnes et Singulas Personas
Ecclesiasticas, ad hos diom et locum interessend. in hac sacra Convocatione
vocat. praecenizat. expectatas et non comparentes, Pronunciamus eas et earum
quamlibet Contumaces, et in poenam Contumaciarum suarum hujusmodi decernimus
procedend. fore ad ulterior. Ipsorum Contumaciis sive absentiis non obstan. Et
ulteriorem poenam Contumaciarum suarum hujusmodi per nos imponend. usque ad et
in xxvi diem mensis Januarii prox. futurum reservamus in hiis scriptis.

Whatever Schedules of Contumacy had been from time to time deposited in the
Registry of the Sea of Canterbury, were burnt in the Fire of London, with those
of Continuation or Prorogation; and I find no one entered at large in any Acts
since the Reformation: Only, at the opening of Convocations, the Pronouncing it
is mentioned, and reference made to the original Schedule in writing. The
Register of 1562. mentions it thus: Ac praeterea dictus Reverendissimus Pater
pronunciavit omnes et singulos Decanos, Archidiaconos, Capitula ac Cleri
Procuratores, et caeteros quoscunque ad interessend. in hujusmodi sacra Synodo
sive Convocatione monitos et citatos ac per se aut Procuratores suos idoneos
minime comparentes notorie Contumaces; paenas Contumaciarum suarum hujusmodi
usque in prox. Sessionem reservand. prout in Schedula per eum lecta before
continetur; cujus quidem Schedulae verus tenor sequitur in haec Verba, IN DEI
NOMINE AMEN.

The present Schedule, of the same import with the former, is as follows: Nos,
Archiepiscopus -- omnes et singulos Decanos, Archidiaconos, Capitula et Cleri
Procuratores, ac caeteros quoscunque ad interessendum nobiscum in hac praesenti
sacra Synodo Provinciali etc. legitime et peremptory monitos et citatos, ncc
per se nec per Procuratores suos idoneos comparentes, nec ullas causas
Absentiarum suarum hujusmodi sufficienter allegantes, Pronunciamus Contumaces,
et eorum quemlibet Contumacem; sed poenas eorum Contumaciae usque ad et in diem
-- reservando reservamus.

The Execution of the Sentence of Contumacy suspended every Session by the
Archbishop.
IV. By this Sentence, all the absent Members fall under the Guilt of
Contumacy; and that rests upon them till they give satisfaction to his Grace,
either by their Personal Appearance, or the transmitting some such reasonable
Cause of Absence, as he shall approve. In expectation whereof, the Canonical
Punishment is usually suspended, in aliquem diem competentem pro bene-placito
ipsius Reverendissimi, according to Archbishop Parker's Form; and the day that
is usually fixed by his Grace, is to that of his Continuation. For in the tenor
thereof, we find this Suspension of Punishment for Absence particularly
expressed in our most early Acts of Convocation. Archiepiscopus Continuavit,
etc. and decrevit Absentes fore expectandos, and ipsos expectavit usque in diem
-- Continuavit, etc. de gratia expectando absentes -- Fecit Continuationem and
Expectationem -- Here, the Expectatio Absentium is properly the same Suspension
of the Punishment of Absence, that has been constantly expressed in the
Schedule of Continuation, viz. nec non omnia and singula Certificatoria,
hactenus introducta and introducenda and non-introducta, in eodem statu quo
nunc sunt, usque ad and in diem -- Continuamus and Prorogamus, in hiis
scriptis. The Certificatoria thus continued, are the forementioned Returns made
by every Bishop to his Grace at the Opening of the Convocation, and deposited
in the Office of the Archiepiscopal See: As the Continuation of them, is a
Decree, suspending both the Praeconization of the Persons therein returned, and
the infliction of the Punishment that would thereupon belong to the Absents.
And so, in the year 1554. Sess. 5. where it is said, that the President
Continued the Convocation to such a day, it is added, Et etiam continuavit
Certificatoria contra Absentes usque ad and in --

The Archbishops have frequently exercised their Authoriry over the Members in
the middle of Convocation.
V. But the Declaration of Contumacy at the Beginning only, as well as the
Continuation of the Returns from time to time, are purely Acts of Grace and
Favor in the Archbishop: Who therefore, as the Members appeared to be slack in
their Attendance, has solemnly declared them Contumacious, and in the several
Instances actually inflicted the Punishment of Suspension, in the middle of
Convocations. Which I the rather observe, because I remember at the meeting of
the last, they who contended for a Power in the Lower House over their own
Members, went upon a groundless distinction, 'That the Archbishop's part was
only to pronounce Contumacy at the Beginning, and either to execute or take off
the Sentence at the End of Convocation; but as to the Time between these, i. e.
in the whole course of their Proceedings, he had never interposed. Whereas,
that his original Right to require or dispense with their Attendance, has been
frequently, and in several ways, shown and exerted in the middle of
Convocations: As,

In Preconizations, and solemnly declaring Contumacy.
1. In Praeconizations, and solemn Declarations of Contumacy: Of which sort
there are several Instances, but none so particularly affecting the
Lower House, or so fully represented under all the circumstances, as that of
the Convocation in 1562. It begun January the 11th, and sat till it was
Prorogued by the Queens Writ, April 14th. Between these, on February the 19th.
Venerabilis Vir. Magister Thomas Yale Legum doctor Vicar. in Spiritualibus
Generalis dicti Reverendissimi Patris, ac Commissarius in hac part specialiter
deputatus, in Capella Beatae Mariae infra Ecclesiam Cathedralem divi Pauli
London scituat. Domo, viz. Inferioris Convocationis praedict' in praesentia (ut
dicebatur) Magistri Willelmi Say notarii publici dictae domus Inferioris
Registrarii et actorum Scribae, judicialiter sedens, legit quandam Schedulam
contra omnes et singulos Decanos, Capitula, Archidiaconos, et Cleri
Procuratores, ac caeteros quoscunque in dicta Convocatione juxta monitionem
legitimam in hac part factam non comparentes, aut ab eadem sine licentia, etc.
recedentes. Cujus quidem Schedulae verus tenor sequitur et est talis. In dei
nomine Amen.

So also, ann. 1605. The Extracts out of the Upper-House-Books have this note
in the middle of the Session: Nothing of moment more than Suspension of
Contumacious Non-Comparents, and Absolution of some.

Again, in the same Convocation, ten Sessions at least before the conclusion of
it, the same Extracts, referring to the Acts of the Upper-House, say, Nothing
more than the Absolution of Dr. Tooker Dean of Lichfield, and Mr. Robotham,
from Suspension at Non-Comparents, and the Suspension of Dr. Stern, Suffragum
Bishop of Colchester, for not appearing.

Ann. 1588. In the Convocation whereof there were 22 Sessions, it is said in
the Extracts, Sess. 19. Archbishop suspends Absents and Departers without
leave; particularly the Bishop of Litchfield for going without leave.

2. Another effect of the Archbishop's Power over the Members in point of
Attendance, is his giving License to be Absent: So,

Ann. 1438. May 10. Dominus continuavit Convocationem suam, etc. Licentia prius
data dictis Religiosis recedendi, constitutis per eos certis Procuratoribus,
prout de facto constituerunt, ad Interessend. consentiend. and faciend. in ipsa
Convocatione, quae ipsi facerent si personaliter interessent.

Ann. 1586. Sess. 10. The Lower House Book: The Prolocutor coming from the
Upper-House, intimates the Continuation -- and moniti sunt omnes supra-nominati
ad tunc ibidem interessend. etc. Mri. Nowell, Walker, Humfrey, Bysse, Powell
and Say, ex Relatione Domini Prolocutoris isto die fuerunt Licentiati quoad
little personalem comparitionem.

In the List of the Members before the Lower House Minutes in 1640. at the
Archdeacon of Canterbury's Name, I find this Note: Abs. ex Licentia domini
Archiepiscopi.

So also, in the Catalogue of the Members before the Minutes of 1662. at the
Dean of Sarum's Name it is said, Excusatio per licentiam Archiepiscopi. And at
the same Name in the next List, the Bishop of London Presiding, Excusatus per
Episcopum London. ut informatur.

With reference to this Right in the Archbishop to require the Presence of all
the Members during the Convocation, we find his Dissolution of it anciently
expressed by his giving them leave to depart.

Ann. 1371. The Bishop of London Presiding, Procuratores Religiosorum and Cleri
ibidem comparentes ad recedendum Licentiavit per Decretum.

Ann. 1373. Commissarius dictos Procuratores ex praecepto Domini, ut dixit, ad
recedendum Licentiavit.

Ann. 1379. Et tandem idem dominus Archiepiscopus dictis Praelatis and
Procuratoribus Licentiam recedendi a dicta Convocatione dedit, and ipsam
Convocationem dissolvit.

Ann. eod. Et sic idem Dominus Cant. Archiepiscopus dictam Convocationem
dissolvebat, and legitimam dictis Praelatis and Procuratoribus Cleri Licentiam
recedendi a Convocatione hujusmodi concessit.

Ann. 1400. Reverendissimus Pater, etc. Convocationem praedictam and Concilium
suum Provinciale consummavit and dissolvit, omnibus praebens Licentiam
recedendi.

3. His Grace's Admonitions to the Clergy, not to depart before the End of the
Convocation, is another direct Testimony of his Power over them in this
particular.

Ann. 1379. 16 Kal. Jan. Et Dominus post tractatum hujusmodi moneri fecit
ibidem public Procuratores dictorum Praelatorum and Cleri, ne quis ipsorum
recederet a Civitate London, ante dictae Convocationis negotium finitum, sub
poena a missionis Procurationum Suarum, and aliae multae eis per eum imponendae.

Ann. 1541. Sess. 2. The Prolocutor and Clergy being in the Upper-House, Monuit
Reverendissimus, ut nemo se subduceret a Convocatione ob ullam causam nisi
prius approbatam a Sc.

Ann. 1557. Sess. 1. Et moniti sunt tam Patres quam totus Cleri chorus ad
Interessendum in hoc sacro Concilio usque ad Dissolutionem ejusdem ad singulos
Actus expediendos.

And therefore, Archbishop Parker, describing the several Branches of the
Prolocutor's Office, makes this One: Ejusdem Prolocutoris est, etiam monere
omnes ne discedant a Civitate London. absque Licentia Reverendissimi.

To these Admonitions not to depart, I will join a remarkable Reproof from the
Archbishop to the Lower House, occasioned by the negligence of the Clergy in
not duly attending the Convocation. It is upon their own Book in 1588. Sess.
12. Dominus Prolocutor praeconizari fecit citatos ad comparendum in hac part,
and Praeconizatione hujusmodi minime finita, Reverendissimus Pater Dominus
Cant. Archiepiscopus, caeterique Domini Praelati, accersiverunt ad se integrum
Coetum hujus Domus, eosdemque Dominos Praelatos adierunt -- ibique dictus
Reverendissimus Pater reprehendit negligentiam sive contumaciam nonnullorum
citatorum and monitorum ad comparendum in hac Domo and non comparentium, ac
express affirmavit se velle propter eorum Contumacias procedere juxta Juris
Exigentiam, etc. Et mox omnes Supranominati in inferiorem Domum praedict.
reversi sunt, and tunc ibidem finita fuit Praeconizatio, ut praefertur,
Citatorum.

The Archbishop absolves or punishes the Absents at the conclusion of the Synod.
4. Pursuant to his Power of requiring the Attendance of the Members, with
putting the Absents under the Censure of Contumacy, and the Exercise of that
Inherent Power, while the Convocation continues; the Archbishop at the
Conclusion thereof usually calls for a Catalogue of the Members who have either
not appeared at all, or departed without his Special Leave; and the Punishment
having been all along reserved to himself, he absolves or punishes them, as he
sees reason.

Upon some Occasions, the Registers particularly mention the Pardon of their
Contumacy, as an Act of Favor in his Grace.

Ann. 1417. Dominus omnibus and singulis ad ipsam Convocationem vocatis, and
nullo modo seu minus lgitime comparentibus, ad rogatum Praelatorum and Cleri
ibidem praesentium, ex sua gratia speciali remisit.

Ann. 1419. Dominus, ad petitionem and rogatum Confratrum suorum Coepiscoporum
and aliorum Praelatorum and Cleri ibidem praesentium, omnes and singulos ad
ipsam Convocationem vocatos, minus ligitime seu nullo modo comparentes, pro
illa vice duntaxat habuit excusatos.

Ann. 1422. Dominus, ad petitionem Procuratorum Cleri ibidem tunc praesentium,
quibuscunque ad dictam Convocationem vocatis and nullo modo seu minus legitime
comparentibus, ex gratia remisit.

At other Times when the Non-Attendance of the Members put him under a
Necessity of using other Methods less mild and gentle; he continued them in a
State of Contumacy, and proceeded to Canonical Censures, sometimes reserving
the Punishment to himself, but frequently declaring the Punishment publicly in
Convocation.

Ann. 1356. The first Convocation, of the Acts whereof we have any Accounts
remaining, concludes thus: Dominus Archiepiscopus omnes citatos ad idem
Concilium, qui illo die non comparuerunt, ut tonebantur, pronunciavit
Contumaces, poena sibi reservata.

Ann. 1386. In domo Capitulari, idem Dominus Cant. praeconizari fecit
Suffraganeos suos, Abbates, Priores, Decanos, Archidiaconos, and Procuratores
Cleri, ad eandem Convocationem citatos; and omnes absentes Praelatos
praeconizatos, and nullo modo comparentes, pronunciavit Contumaces; and in
poenam Contumaciae eorundum sequestravit fructus and proventus omnium
Ecclesiarum eisdem Praelatis vel eorum Beneficijs approprietarum.

Ann. 1404. Reverendissimus Pater Archiepiscopus ad promotionem and
excitationem Cleri praedict. and de consilio and avisamento Praelatorum
Dioeces. Cant. Provinciae sibi assidentium and circumsedentium, omnes ac
singulos Abbates, Priores, ac alios quoscunque dictae Cant. Provinciae, qui ad
comparendum in dicta Convocatione per loci Ordinarios, prout in eorum liquet
Certificatoriis, citati fuerunt, and non comparentes, pronunciavit Contumaces,
and in poenam Contumaciae eorum hujusmodi Sequestravit fructus, redditus, and
proventus omnium Monasteriorum, Prioratuum, and aliorum locorum hujusmodi, and
praesertim Exemptionum, and decrevit exinde fieri Publicationem in partibus. Et
post aliquot dies postea, idem Reverendissimus Pater Archiepiscopus scripsit
Suffraganeis suis pro intimatione hujusmodi Sequestri, and pro eodem sequestro
custodiendo.

Anno 1416. we meet with another Execution of the same kind: Archbishop
Chichley directs it to the Bishop of London's Vicar General, and reciting how
they had been Summoned to Convocation, and did not obey (nec in dicto Concilio
personaliter comparere, aut Procuratores sufficientes, saltem qui causas
rationabiles ipsorum absentiae allegare possent aut vellent, mittere
curaverunt) he signifies his Declaration of their Contumacy, and the Punishment
he had inflicted, In poenam Contumaciae suae hujusmodi, fructus quoscunque
omntum et singularum Ecclesiarum non exemptarum personis Exemptis et little
Monasteriis ubicunque infra nostram Provinciam Appropriatarum, cujuscunque
Ordinis existunt, duximus Sequestrandos; prout tenore praesentium Sequestramus.
Alios vero Abbates, et Priores, at Praelatos non exemptos, et Archidiaconos ab
ingressu Ecclesiae in his scriptis suspendimus -- Afterward, we find nineteen
Absolved from the Sentence, upon their Submission and an Oath taken by every
particular Person, quod ipse in singulis Convocationibus Praelatorum et Cleri
Cant. Provinciae de caetero celebrand. juxta vim, formam et effectum Citationis
sibi fiendae fideliter comparebit, nisi impedimento legitime fuerit
praepeditus; et in eventum quod citatus fuerit ad personaliter comparendum,
parebit Citationi, nisi impedimento legitimo, ut supra, detineatur; in quo casu
mittet unum ex confratribus suis cum sufficienti Procuratorio tam ad allegand.
causas Absentiae sue et eas proband. quam ad comparend. nomine suo in
Convocationibus hujusmodi, nec non hiis que ibi sieri, statui, concedi, vel
ordinari contigerit, consentiend. ibique durantibus Convocationibus hujusmodi
remansurum, nisi abinde recedendi Licentiam obtinere valeat Specialem.

Anno 1428. Dominus, ex assensu Confratrum suorum, pro eo quod complures
Abbates, et Praelati ac alii Religiosi qui in Convocatione debuerant comparere
nullo modo comparuerunt, ipsos omnes non Comparentes Pronunciavit Contumaces,
poena sibi reservata.

Anno 1437. May 14. Dominus omnes citatos ad dictum Provinciale Concilium nullo
modo vel juxta tenorem Mandati non comparentes, Pronunciavit Contumaces --
Monemus insuper omnes et singulos Contumaces quod sexto die Octobris --
compareant coram nobis in loco praesenti, poenas Contumaciarum hujusmodi
audituri et subituri, etc. prout Justitia suadebit.

At the Conclusion of another Meeting of the same Year. -- Dominus omnes et
singulos ad hujusmodi Convocationem legitime citatos, ac non comparentes, juxta
tenorem Mandati eis in hac part facti, Pronunciavit Contumaces, poena sibi
reservata.

Anno 1541. Sess. 15. before a Prorogation, Dom. Cox [the Archbishop's
Commissary] omnes Praelatos non comparentes seu non Licentiatos, suspendebat a
celebratione divinorum et ingressu Ecclesiae. The Praelati were the Lower House
Members (the Dignitaries at least) who under that Style are commanded to retire
and choose a Prolocutor in the Convocation that immediately preceeds.

Anno 1586. Dec. 2. in the Extracts out of the Registers of the Vpper-House it
is said in short, upon a Prorogation -- Non comparents, Contumacious,
suspended. And before the Dissolution -- -- Suspension of Absents, or Departers
without leave.

Anno 1601. in the same Extracts, we meet with the like Hint, immediately
before the Dissolution -- Contumacious suspended.

Of which Act we have a full and particular account in the Lower House Journal
Sess. 14. Mar. 24. -- That the Prolocutor (according to Custom) might be able
to lay before his Grace a Schedule of the Absents in the Lower House, de
mandato Domini Prolocutoris facta fuit publica Praeconizatio omnium Citatorum
ad comparend. in hac domo, juxta consuetudinem alias usitatam, and juxta
tenores Mandatorum and Certificatoriorum alias respective coram ipso
Reverendissimo Patre Domino Cant. Archiep. etc. exhibitorum and introductorum:
The Prolocutor and the whole House being immediately sent for, Reverendissimus
querelatus est de incuria, negligentia and contumacia citatorum, etc. and non
comparentium etc. -- and tunc, porrecta sibi Schedula Suspensionis, una cum
Schedula continente nomina and cognomina contumaciter Absentium ab hac Sacra
Synodo, idem Reverendissimus eos omnes and singulos in hujusmodi Schedula
nominatos, a Celebratione Divinorum and omnimodo Exercitio Ecclesiasticae
Jurisdictionis suspendit; prout in ipsa Schedula penes Registrarium ipsius
Reverendissimi quoad Superiorem Domum remanen. continetur.

The Substance of the Arguments for the Archbishop's Power over the Members.
These therefore, in short, are the Grounds which give the Archbishop an
undoubted Power over the Members of the Lower House exclusive of the House it
self. It is an inherent Right of the Sea to require the Attendance of the
Inferior Clergy in his Provincial Convocation: And a right to require
Attendance, includes and supposes a Power of enforcing it when required: That
Right has been ever exercised, and this Coercive Power expressed, in the
Archiepiscopal Mandate or Summons: The Returns of the Persons Summoned are made
immediately to him, that he may know upon whom the obligation of attending
lays; and also rest ultimately with him, as a testimony of his Right to such
Attendance, during the Convocation; his Summons being not simply to appear
before him, but with the addition of such further Days as he shall see
convenient, cum continuatione dierum prout convenit. According to the several
Returns, it has ever been the Custom, at the opening of the Convocation, to
call over all the Members, and to pronounce the Absents Contumacious. In the
Course of their Proceedings, his Grace as Presiding in Person over the whole
Body has either suspended the Punishment from time to time, or inflicted it
upon particular Persons, as he saw Occasion: Sometimes, when Business of great
moment was under Consideration, giving general Admonitions not to depart before
the Conclusion; at other times, Licensing particular Members to go away upon
reasonable Causes alleged and approved, and at the end, either by way of Grace
remitting the Penalties threatened, or confirming them by a formal Execution.

The Claim of the Lower House to a concurrent Power confuted.
All these, belonging to the Archbishop and to him alone upon the Foundation of
Law and Practice; it has been wondered how his Power over the Inferior Clergy
in point of Attendance could be made a question: Especially, when those of the
Lower House, who claim a concurrent Right (tho'some of the Departers acted the
last Session as if it had been solely in that House) The Lower House have no
Coercive Power over their Members.
don't pretend any Coercive Power over their own Members: And yet I take a
right to grant leave, to suppose a right of Refusing it; and a right to refuse,
without an enforcing Power in case the Member depart, to be somewhat singular
both in Law and Reason. Suppose one or more Members to be necessary to some
Purposes depending in Convocation, neither the Prolocutor nor the Lower House
can oblige him to come up or attend longer; nor have they any way to bring him
thither or to keep him there, but by Application to the Archbishop (in whom the
Coercive Power rests) and by his Grace's Admonition, and Censure in case he
will not readily comply. So that what the Narrative means in saying that they
have a Power of demanding the Attendance of their Members, Nar. p. 49.
I am yet to learn; because (as I understand the word) all Power of Demanding
necessarily supposes a Right in Law to prosecute upon refusal; and they have
not aimed at the proof of such a right in themselves, though they could not but
see the necessity of clearing that point before their way could be made to the
other.

Nar. p. 34. The Prolocutor reserves Punishment only in the Presidents Name.
I know, they observe in another Place, that the Prolocutor has a Power to
reserve the Punishment (meaning the Punishment of Contumacy pronounced against
the Absents) as well as the Archbishop, in whose Schedule it is always,
immediately after the Sentence, added, poena sibi reservata. And it is easy to
imagine, how the Person, upon whose Sentence the Guilt is contracted, reserves
the Execution of that Sentence in his Power; but how a Man can suspend the
Infliction of the Punishment, who had no part in pronouncing the Guilt (which
is the Prolocutor's case,) is not so easily comprehended. They say indeed (to
avoid this Absurdity I suppose) that they don't mean reserving in the first
Instance the Punishment to himself, Ibid.
according to their Lordships Construction of reservata poena; but reserving
the Punishment for a Synodical Act, which the words they conceive will bear as
well. But before they induce others to conceive so, it will be necessary to
show in what instance any one Member of their House was ever punished for
Absence by a Synodical Act, or any other way, than by a Sentence of Suspension
solemnly pronounced by his Grace, of whose Authority in Summoning a Convocation
their Absence is a Contempt: And the Punishment can certainly be reserved to no
other Power, than that which has always finally inflicted it. Accordingly, in
the very first place where that Journal speaks of the Prolocutor's reserving
the Punishment, it expressly mentions it as done by the direction of his Grace.
-- Anno 1586. Sess. 1. The Prolocutor and the whole House being called up,
Reverendissimus Pater Dominus Cant. Archiepiscopus, ob paucitatem Comparentium,
etc. intimavit Domino Prolocutori absentes ob eorum Contumacias Suspendend.
fore debere, etc. Upon this they go back, and having called over the House,
Dominus pronunciavit eos and eorum quemlibet Contumaces, etc. reservata little
poena in diem Mercurii, the day to which the Archbishop's Schedule had
Contina'd the Convocation and suspended the Certificates. Sess. 2, 3, 4. The
Contumacy not being yet pronounced by the Archbishop, the Prolocutor (after
coming, in every Instance, from the Upper-House, and his delivery of other
Messages from thence to the Lower) reserves the Punishment; in the same sense
that after the Continuation Intimated from the Schedule, he in virtue thereof
admonishes all the Members to be present at the day; according to Archbishop
Parker's description of the Office: Forma Con.
Ejusdem Prolocutoris est monere omnes ne discedant Civitate London, absque
licentia Reverendissimi; quodque Statutis diebus tempestive veniant ad
Convocationem. Which shows the meaning of an Expression, in the form whereby
Archbishop Bancroft suspends three Members of the Lower House for departing
without Leave: Bancr. Register.
Cum nos, etc. omnes and singulos alios Decanos, etc. and alios quoscunque in
dicta Convocatione comparentes, and ab eadem sine Licentia nostra in ea part
obtenta recedentes, aut mandatis nostris licitis vel Prolocutoris dictae
Convocationis minime obtemperantes, pronunciaverimus Contumaces, etc. Here, the
Mandatum Prolocutoris can signify nothing but the Admonition to attend
regularly at the Day appointed by the Archbishop, given always by the
Prolocutor, in pursuance of the Intimation thereof from his Grace's Schedule,
Monuitque omnes, etc. ad interessend. A Clause, that the Actuary of the
Lower House in the last Convocation ought not to have added to the Adjournments
to Intermediate Days as well as others; because he knew that the Archbishop had
declared against their meeting on those Days, and it is plain from hence, that
no Authority, but that of his Grace, can warrant such an Admonition.

The Prolocutor can give no Leave but as empowered by the President.
But as to the Leave to depart, and the Place of Application; in these (we see)
the forecited Passage directs us solely to the Archbishop; whose License either
immediate, or by the Prolocutor (the conveyer of his Grace's Pleasure to the
House in all other particulars) is absolutely necessary. In 1586. Sess. 10.
after the Admonition to be present according to his Grace's Schedule, the
Journal (as I observed before) mentions five, who ex Relatione Domini
Prolocutoris isto die fuerunt licentiati quoad eorum personalem comparitionem.
And (not to omit the smallest Objection) this teaches us how to interpret that
short hint which is in the List before the Minutes of 1640. over against the
Name of one of the Proctors for Glocester-Diocese, Venia Mri. Prolocutor.
ratione mortis filii. In other Parts of that Catalogue, V. Supr.
we find the Archbishop's Leave in such Cases directly expressed; and in this,
the Lower House will as little own, as his Grace, that the Prolocutor could
give it by his own Authority. For when in the Narrative they assert a Power of
giving Leave concurrent with that of his Grace, Narr. Page 49.
they do not make the Prolocutor, but the House, the Subject of that Power: If
either the Archbishop or the Lower House give a Leave of Absence, it is of
Course to be interpreted so far only as the Claim of them that give it is
concerned: So that the Member is not perfectly at Liberty without Leave from
both. How groundless this Notion is, I have proved at large; but it shows
however, that in their Sense the Venia Prolocutoris can be no more than a
Declaration of Leave given by another: And nothing but a Resolution to be
Obstinate, can make it suggested that this other must be the House (which
before the last Convocation, does not once appear to have interposed directly
or indirectly in that Matter) and not the Archbishop, who as he has been proved
to have the Legal Right to give Leave, and to have frequently done it in
Person, so the Prolocutor's is the Hand whereby he conveys all his Messages to
the Lower House, and by whose Relation, as we are sure from an exact Journal of
their own, Five of the Members were formerly Licensed to depart.

The groundless Practices of the last Lower House, in giving Leave to be absent
and admitting Proxies.
But be the Claim of such a Power in the House as groundless and unprecedented
as it will, it is in Fact certain, that it was openly and frequently exercised
by the Majority of the last Lower Clergy -- Sess. 7. Et tune Venerabiles Viri
Subsequentes petierunt licentiam sese absentandi ab hac Domo; cui consensum
fuit ab hac domo. Sess. 13. Two Persons -- desired Leave to go into the Country
-- Sess. 20. Mr. Archdeacon -- desired Leave to go into the Country to hold his
Visitation. In the 24 Session, another Member asked the same Favor; as in the
27th, not only Leave for Absence was desired, but also that a Proxy might be
admitted, which the following Chapter will show to be equally out of the Power
of the Lower House.

CHAP. III.
No Power in the Lower House to admit or deny Proxies.
The Lower House have no Power to admit or deny Proxies. Narr. p. 50.
IT is upon the Supposition of a Power in the House, to admit or deny Proxies,
that they build their Claim of a Right to give or deny Leave. So the Narrative
represents it: But the Power of the Lower House to admit or deny Proxies, which
has been always exercised, and never disputed, what else is it but a Power of
giving or denying Leave to be absent? It was wisely done, to obtrude this
Doctrine upon the Reader as a self-evident Truth, because particular Proofs of
it were not to be had either from Law or Practice. We have already explained,
how at the Opening of the Convocation, the Archbishop appoints a Commissioner
to inspect and receive Proxies of all kinds, and to Judge of the fitness of the
Person substituted; to examine the Causes of Absence, and to admit or reject the
several Excuses for non-attendance; those (I mean) that are then offered in
pursuance of the Clause in his Grace's Mandate, which declares that none shall
be excused, nisi ex causa necessaria tunc ibidem alleganda and probanda ac per
nos approbanda. This Summons to appear on a certain Day, cum continuatione
dierum prout convenit, is not satisfied by a Personal Attendance at the
Opening, but evidently extends to the whole Time of his Grace's Continuing, and
the Convocation's sitting thereupon. There is therefore the same Obligation in
Law, not to depart in the middle without the Archbishop's Approbation of the
Cause, as not to be absent at the beginning without sending it up and laying it
before his Grace or his Commissioner: And, on the other Hand, if his Grace's
Approbation of the Cause, be of it self a legal and entire Discharge from
attending at all, why is it not a sufficient Warrant to depart before the
Attendance be entirely paid?

Proxies lodged with the Register of the Upper House.
Agreeable to the Law of Convocation, the Practice has been, as to apply to the
President for leave to depart and Substitute a Proxy, so to enter Proxies of
that kind in the Register of the Vpper-House. In that of 1640. (the Catalogue
whereof, at the beginning, is the chief Light we have of this kind) frequent
mention is made of Archdeacons appearing by Proxies, with the Name of the
Persons substituted by them. Mr. Wade was then Register of the Upper-House, and
in the List before the Minutes of the Lower House, we find it often added over
against the Names of Absent Members, Wade habet Procuratorium; and W. (for
Brevity's sake) habet Procuratorium: As the Memorandum entered at the
Archdeacon of Derby's Name, is remarkable to the present Purpose; Comparuit per
Prol. -- Mr. Prol. habuit Procuratorium and exhibuit Mro. W. But there are
Entries of this kind yet more distinct, in the Catalogue before Mr. Mundy's
Minutes of 1661. where the Actuary of the Lower House notes thus:

Archidiaconus Col. constituit Dom. Porey ejus Procuratorem, and reliquit
Procuratorium penes Registrum.

Archidiaconus Wellen. constituit Magistrum Franklin. S. T. P. in Procuratorem;
and reliquit Procuratorium penes Registrum.

Archidiaconus Huntingdon comparuit, and constituit Do. Layfield ejus
Procuratorem; and reliquit Procuratorium penes Registrum.

The entering of Proxies in the Lower-House-Book, no Argument of their Right to
admit them.
It Is true, several of the Proxies we meet with in the Upper-House-Book of
1640. are likewise taken notice of in the Catalogue before the Minutes of the
Lower; and the Reason is obvious, because they were to be produced and
exhibited there, whenever the House were occasionally to divide upon any Point.
Others also are set down in the Minute-Book, without any mention of them in the
Register; because his Grace's leave is frequently given in the Intervals of
Sessions, and may not therefore directly come to the notice of the
Upper-House-Register, but cannot escape the Knowledge of the Actuary in the
Lower; where the Proxy left behind is to be considered upon all Divisions.

But that the receiving of Proxies exhibited, belongs Properly and Solely to
the Register in the Upper-House, appears from these three remarkable
Circumstances: 1. That by Archbishop Whitgift's Table, he alone has a right to
the Fee assigned for Exhibiting such Proxies. 2. That this Fee is constantly
paid to him, and none to the Actuary of the Lower House. 3. That when the
Actuary either receives an Instrument of Proxy or the Fee of Exhibiting it; the
Instrument is always delivered and the Fee accounted for, to the Register of
the Upper-House.

Nor was it material in which Book the Entry was made, so long as the Member
had the President's leave to depart and substitute; the Notaries of each House
being equally under the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop, and Members of his
Court: As the Books themselves at the end of every Convocation, are equally
deposited in the Registry of his See. The Actuary of the Lower House, an
Officer of the Archbishop.
For that the Actuary of the Lower, as well as the Register of the Upper, is
properly the President's Officer, cannot be denied, when the very Original
Table of Fees for the Vicar-General's Office, established by Archbishop
Whitgift, appoints among the rest Feoda Actuario Domus inferioris Convocationis
solvenda. According to which Table, the Fees of the Lower, as well as the
Upper-House, are demanded and paid; and a Copy of that Table, so far as it
concerns the Convocation, is entered at the beginning of the Act-Books of each.
And so I find in 1640. that he in whose Book the Proxy was first entered,
commonly received the whole Fees, and the other only entered a Memorandum that
they were paid ( Sol. Wade 7 s. 8 d. or 7 s. 4 d. is the usual Note in the
Minutes) because they were the Fees of the same Court, and the respective
Proportions were assigned by the same Authority.

Add to this, what we meet with in their own Accurate Journal of 1586. Sess.
Ult. where the Notary having observed his Grace's Suspension of the Absents,
says, prout in ipsa Schedula, penes Registrarium ipfius Reverendissimi Patris
quoad Superiorem domum remanen. continetur; which surely can imply no less,
than that the President had a like Officer also in inferiore Domo.

That therefore the Names of Proxies appear upon the Journal of the
Lower House, shows no more, than that it is fit that Substitutions made by the
President's Authority, should be recorded by an Officer of his own, and then
deposited in the Registry of his See. But the bare bringing in and exhibiting
of Proxies, or even the Lodging the Instruments in the Actuarie's Hand, is far
from proving a Right in the House to admit them: For that must include a Power
of denying, and as we have shown that the President has frequently licensed
Members of their House to go away upon Substitutions, so it lays upon them to
produce any such Instance attended with the least mark either of the Members
asking their concurrent leave, or of any Doubt or Scruple, whether those
Members should depart, or their Proxies be admitted. What they claim in this
Case, is a Negative upon the President; but what can support that Claim besides
such Testimonies of Denial or Scruple, I cannot see.

There is (I confess) a Clause in the Lower House Journal of 1586. Sess. 3.
that seems at first sight to imply a concurrent Power with the President in
this Business of Proxies: Et tunc Ego Notarius antedictus [i. e. Tho. Barker,
Actuary of the Lower-House] ex mandato Domini Prolocutoris, monui omnes isto
die comparentes ad exhibend. and introducend. Procuratoria, si quae habeant, ad
comparend. pro Absentibus citatis ad comparend. in hac sacra Synodo prox.
Sessione. That the Prolocutor could give this Admonition by his own Authority,
is inconsistent with their Claim in behalf of the House; the Power whereof
would doubtless be contended for upon this Precedent, were we not sure that
what he did was by Order of the Archbishop. At their first meeting after a
Prorogation, the President intimates to the Prolocutor the offense he took at
the thinness of the House, and his Resolution to proceed against the Absents.
Sess. 3. we find this Note in the Extracts out of the Upper-House-Books,
Archbishop orders all Proxies of the Lower House to be brought in: And in the
very same Session it is, that the Prolocutor admonishes all ad exhibend and
introducend. Procuratoria.

From these Accounts (and these are all I can meet with in the Registers) it
appears that the President as in Law so in Practice also, has the sole Right
to admit or deny Proxies; and their giving leave for Absence, being grounded
upon the supposition of a concurrent Power in the Lower House to admit Proxies,
these two Claims must of course fall together. The late Irregularities in this
Business of Proxies.
But, that some late Practices may not grow into Precedents, it seems to be a
necessary Enquiry (and I hope they who are concerned, will make it in time) how
the Instances recorded in the Acts of the late Lower House are to be reconciled
to the Constitution or Usage of an English Convocation.

Sess. 16. May 5. Et postea Georgius Fulham S. T. P. exhibuit Procuratorium
Speciale sub manu and Sigillo Thomae Sayer S. T. P. Archidiaconi
Archidiaconatus Surriae, concedens potestatem dicto Georgio Fulham, nec non
Samueli Palmer, comparendi pro eo in Convocatione hac die. Quod Domini
admiserunt.

Sess. 27. Jan. 13. Mr. Bridges prayed his Proxy might be admitted. --

Add to these, the Orders they took upon them to make in relation to Proxies,
as within their own Power and Cognizance.

Sess. 7. Et tunc mota quaestione de numero Procuratoriorum per quodlibet
membrum in hac Domo exhibendorum, decreverunt, nemini licitum esse, de caetero,
ultra a numerum trium in hujusmodi domo exhibere.

Sess. 8. Decreverunt and declararunt, 'That the Proctors for the Clergy may
make Proxies, pursuant to the former Practice of this House, though such Proctors
have not appeared personally.'

Which former Practice, I fear, consists not of above one Instance; and yet
even that is more than they have, to warrant this interposing in the Regulation
of Proxies. In the Extracts out of the Vpper-House-Books, Anno 1584. we meet
with an Order, 'That none be hereafter Proxy for a Dean or Archdeacon, but one
of the Lower House: And a question moved at the same time, Whether fit that a
Dean or Archdeacon of the Lower House should be Clerk of the Convocation. In
the Lower-House-Books, we likewise find Orders made for preserving Decency and
Regularity in their own Debates, Dec. 2. 1640. and May 22. 1661. But that they
have in any one Instance before the last Convocation, undertaken to give leave
for Absence, or to admit Proxies, or to interpose, in any kind, about the
Attendance of Members, is more than I have yet been able to discover. For I
cannot think, that those Substitutions in the first of Queen Mary, and the
Order then passed for a Liberty to choose any Members of the two Universities to
sit with them in Convocation, will be regarded in the present Case; Especially,
when the Business of that Convocation was under the immediate direction of the
Court, and acted in some Respects by Commission from thence, and when the want
of the Upper-House-Register leaves it uncertain, whether these Appointments (as
all others of that kind have done) came not Originally from thence.

The additional leave of the House, an Invasion of the Presidents Authority
If it be said (as it was by some at the beginning) that though the additional
Leave of the House be not necessary, it can however do no harm; it may be
remembered, that in the Eye of the Law no kind of Possession is so tender as
that of Jurisdiction, nor any Invasions so strictly forbidden, as the
unwarrantable Exercise of another's Authority. And every good Man will concur
with the Laws, in a more than ordinary Zeal for the preservation of an
Authority, that has been always enjoyed by his Prodecessors, of which he is not
the Proprietor, but rather the Guardian; of a thing, not at his own disposal,
but that which he is bound in Conscience to transmit entire to Posterity. And
when the same Laws have moreover vested in him a Coercive Power, sufficient to
defend that Jurisdiction; he must be excused (when Men will not be otherwise
kept within their proper Bounds) if he be forced into a Resolution not to lose
the one for want of using the other.

The Members who departed silently without Leave, either from his Grace or
their own House, might presume upon the known Tenderness of the President, and
the improbability of any such Business as might make their further Attendance
serviceable to the Church. But the asking Leave of the House, especially in
those who departed upon that without attending on his Grace, was a plain and
open Contempt, which nothing but a very great degree of Goodness and Clemency
could have overlooked. In that, even their own Principles forsake them: which,
with a Power in the House to give Leave, assert the necessity of having the
President's too. Narr. P. 49.


Thus have I considered at large the Power of the President to require the
Attendance of the Inferior Clergy in Convocation; who therefore when their
Privileges were either endangered or actually invaded, have applied to the
Upper-House as the known Guardians thereof. In the Year 1486. Feb. 17. I find
the Prolocutor making his Request in Form, that the Clergy may enjoy their
ancient Privileges: Et Petitum erat per praefatum Prolocutorem, ut Praelati and
Clerus ad Convocationem evocati, suis gaudeant antiquis Privilegiis and
Liberate. Cui Reverendissimus Pater respondebat, quod in quantum poterit,
voluit ea observari. In the same Manner, at the opening of the Convocation,
Ann. 1488. Mr. Humfridus Officium [Prolocutoris] in se assumens, humiliter
petiit ut Sancta Matter Ecclesia, ac eorum Clerus, ad dictam Convocationem
congregatus, suis Juribus, Immunitatibus, and Privilegiis hactenus sibi
indultis gaudere possint.

But more near and direct to the Point in Hand, are the Applications of the
Lower-Clergy to the Upper-House, upon Interruptions in their Attendance;
praying Protection, according to the Statute 8 H. 6. C. I. which gives them a
freedom from Arrests, etc. equal with the Members of Parliament.

Anno 1603. The Prolocutor had two Subpoena's served upon him: He complained to
the President ( Sess. 19.) and care was taken, to have one of the Offenders
Arrested in a Legal Way; and then being convened before the Bishops, he was
sent down to beg pardon of the Prolocutor and Lower House; as the other was
brought upon his Knees in the Vpper-House.

Anno 1624. May 28. The Extracts out of the Vpper-House Register have this
Note: 'A petitory Letter to the Bishop of Lincoln, Lord Keeper, to suspend a
Subpoena served upon Mr. Murrel, Archdeacon of Norfolk, by reason of his
Privilege of Convocation.

Anno 1640. Sess. 13. May 18. Prolocutor querelatus est Breve de Subpoena e
Curia Scaccarii esse executum in Doctorem Burgis Archidiaconum Roffen. and
petiit Privilegium Convocationis. Vnde Reverendissimus Pater Dominus
Archiepiscopus voluit ipsum Prolocutorem cum consensu Domus Inferioris ad
concipiendum Actum quid eis in hoc negotio expedire videbitur, and ad
transmittendum istum Actum ad hanc Domum Superiorem, ut ipse and Confratres sui
de eodem considerent.

The only observation I shall make upon these Instances, is, that the
Honorable House of Commons having a Power to require the attendance of their
Members, and to protect them in it, are known to make no Applications of this
kind: Nor would there have been occasion for them in the Lower House of
Convocation, if the Members thereof had a separate Right in themselves to take
cognizance of these Matters.

CHAP. IV.
The Election and Office of a Prolocutor.
WHile the Archbishop, Bishops, and Clergy, were used to Debate in a Body, the
Clergy upon any Emergency that required separate Consultation, were directed to
Retire for that end. The Result of their Debates was to be reported Above; and
that made it necessary to fix upon some one of the Members to represent the
Opinions or Resolutions of the rest; the whole Body being all the while
present, and he only distinguished by speaking in their Name. From thence he had
the Style of Prolocutor and Organum Cleri; and, from his relating to the
President and Bishops the Effect of their Debates, that of Referendarius.

Prolocutors at first chosen only upon some single occasion.
I. At first, they were chosen only for particular Occasions; for these being
over, we find no Marks of a further design in the Choice, or a longer
continuance in the Office.

Anno 1394. Febr. 17. The Clergy present their grant to the Upper-House, per
Venerabilem Virum Magistrum Johannem Barnet, Offic. Curiae Cant. ad hoc
specialiter electum.

Anno 1399. Oct. 13. Dominus Archiepiscopus misit pro caeteris Praelatis and
Procuratoribus Cleri -- quod venirent de Domo Capitulari ad Capellam Beatae
Mariae coram eo and dictis Suffraganeis suis, Grava mina, siquae haberent, de
and super quibus praetendebant se gravatos, ac Reformanda si quae scirent,
proposituri. Quibus ad dictam Capellam venientibus, surrexit quidam Venerabilis
Vir Mr. Johannes Maydenheth nomine Cleri Provinciae antedictae, and certos
Articulos ex part Cleri Provinciae antedictae conceptos and quamplurima
Gravamina continentes perlegebat.

Anno 1400. Nov. 10. The Archbishop calls for the Articles of the Clergy; and
ex eorum communi consensu per manus Venerabilis viri Mri. Roberti Hallum
Archid. Cant. dictos Articulos in scripta redactos coram dicto Reverendissimo
Patre and Suffraganeis suis unanimiter produxerunt.

Anno 1408. The Opinion of the Clergy having been required, ipsi de Clero
eodem, nomine and vice suis, per Venerabilem Virum Magistrum Henricum Ware
Officialem Curiae Cant. in legibus Licentiatum, praefatis Majoribus Praelatis,
etc.

Three Years after ( Anno 1411. Dec. 7.) we find mention made of Two
Prolocutors representing the Clergy, in the same Business, and at the same
Time: Archiepiscopo cum Confratribus suis in domo Capitulari congregatis,
Venerabilis vir Magister Henricus Ware Curiae Cant. Officialis and Philippus
Morgan utrinsque Juris Doctor, nonnullas Inconvenientias and Gravamina pro and
ex part Cleri, cujus gerebant Organa Vocis, exposuerunt, quae in scriptis
redacta exhibuerunt.

And not only the Lower-Clergy in general, but the Proctors of the Religious
Houses in particular, are said to offer their Resolutions per Prolocutorem; the
Name, as well as the Extent of the Office, agreeing equally to any Person
representing the sense of a Body -- Anno 1437. May 10. Concesserunt ijdem
Religiosi etc. Sub certis modis and formis, in quadam Cedula, per Abbatem
Gloucestriae Prolocutorem ipsorum Religiosorum porrecta, content.

When the Prolocutors were chosen at the beginning of Convocation.
II. The first Instance we meet with of a Prolocutor regularly chosen at the
beginning of the Convocation, was that of William Lyndwood the famous Canonist;
the manner of which Election is thus represented in the Register:

Ann. 1425. April 24. Reverendissimus Pater Causas Convocationis suae exposuit
and explanavit. Quibus expositis, Decani, Archidiaconi, and Procuratores
Capitulorum and Cleri, de mandato dicti Reverendissimi Patris traxerunt se in
Domum Inferiorem sub Domo praedictae Capitulari, ut de hujusmodi Causis
tractarent, and unum Referendarium sive Prolocutorem ex seipsis eligerent, qui
vice eorum omnium and singulorum Causas exponeret and responsa. Qui in Domum
praedict. se recolligentes, Mag. Willelmum Lyndewode, utriusque Juris Doctorem,
Officialem Curiae de Arcubus, in Referendarium and Prolocutorem hujusmodi
elegerunt.

After this, we meet with several Persons in several Convocations exercising
the original Office of a Prolocutor; that is, occasionally reporting the
Answers and Desires of the Lower-Clergy to the Archbishop and Bishops: Anno
1433. Nov. 12. Reverendissimus etc. fecit ad se vocari Clerum Provinciae suae
antedictae. Quo Clero comparente, dictus Reverendissimus Pater interrogavit
Venerabilem Virum Mag. Thomam Bekyngton Prolocutorem Cleri, si Clerus
communicasset and conclusisset super istis punctis five dubiis -- Anno 1438.
Idem Clerus per Magistrum Thomam Prolocutorem suum de contribuendo ad Expensas
transmittendorum ad Concilium petiit and dictis Dominis supplicavit humiliter
excusari -- Ann. cod. They make another excuse from a Subsidy per Magistrum
Johannem Lyndefeld suum Praelocutorem. -- Anno 1439. Richardus Andrew, Cariae
Cant. Officialis, though not chosen at the first, is mentioned four Times, as
doing the Office of a Prolocutor, viz. Reading their Schedules in the presence
of the Archbishop and Bishops, and laying before them the Petitions of the
Clergy. The same things that we find John Byconil, the Archbishop's Official,
executing under that Style in the Year 1444.

All these executed the Office; but after Lyndemood we meet with no regular
Choice before the Year 1452. when the Archbishop, as in that other Instance,
explained to them the Causes of the Convocation, and then commanded them to
retire to their House and choose a Prolocutor. The first Instance of Presenting
a Prolocutor.
But as that is the very first instance of choosing, so is this of presenting
him -- Egregiumque Virum in Prolocutorem Clori, ut praemittitur, electum
Reverendissimo Patri, Reverendisque Patribus Praesentando. He declined the
Office, usque adeo quod dictus Reverendissimus Pater sibi in virtute
Obedientiae praedictum Onus ut assumeret, injunxit. Quo audito dictus Electus
etc. onus hujusmodi in se nolens volens assumpsit. So again,

Ann. 1460. we meet with the same Circumstances, -- Reverendissimus demandavit
omnibus de Inferiori Domo, quod illuc accederent, and Prolocutorem eligerent --
They chose the Archbishop's Official, ac ipsum (ut moris est) coram
Archtepiscopo and aliis Confratribus and Praelatis praesentabant -- Tandem, ad
mandatum dicti Reverendissimi Patris, hujusmodi onus in se suscepit.

The next Convocation opens with the Choice of a Prolocutor, under all the
foregoing Circumstances; only, instead of the Obligation to accept it, laid
upon the other two by the Archbishop, it is said, The Admission and
Confirmation of a Prolocutor by the President, and Bishops.
Quam Praesentationem Dominus Admisit; as in some of the Convocations that
follow, the Style is Admisit and Acceptavit; and yet nearer to our own times,
Approbavit and Confirmavit, de Consensu Confratrum: Which Consent is generally
expressed or at least implied, (in that he is said to be Presented to both
President and Bishops,) from the first Instance of Confirmation in 1452.

By these degrees, we are come to the very Method of Choosing and Confirming,
which Archbishop Parker lays down as an Established Custom in his time, and is
the standing Rule at this Day -- Reverendissimus solet eosdem ex Inferiori Domo
monere atque hortari, ut statim se conferant in dictam inferiorem Domum, ibique
de viro docto, pio, and fideli in Prolocutorem suum assumendo consultantes
unanimiter consentiant and eligant, sicque Electum ipsi Reverendissimo in eadem
domo Capitulari prox. insequen. Scssione, debita cum solempnitate praesentent.
-- And when they come to Present him, Reverendissimus, etc. ipsam Electionem
sua Archiepiscopali auctoritate express confirmare and approbare non
dedignabitur.

The Office of a Prolocutor.
III. The Office also of a Prolocutor, with the End of its Institution, are
exactly described by the same Archbishop, according to the constant usage of
the Times before him -- Quoniam, si in rerum tractandarum serie unusquisque ex
Inferiori domo suam ipse sententiam, quoties visum esset, diceret, aut si omnes
aut plures simul loquerentur, pareret confusionem, igitur semper hactenus
observatum fuit, ut unus aliquis doctus and disertus ex gremio dictae
Inserioris domus in eorum omnium locum ad hoc munus assumatur, ut is
intellectis and scrutatis caeterorum omnium votis tanquam unum eorum omnium Os
and Organum loquatur, and consonam eorum sentenciam eidem Reverendissimo, cum
ad hoc rogatus seu missus suerit, caeteris silentibus, fideliter referat. Qui
ex hoc munere Referendarius sive Proloquutor comuniter denominatur. The
immediate End, to report their Answers.
This, as we have shown, and the Name implies, was the immediate End of making
it an Office in Convocation, viz. the reporting the Resolutions of the Clergy
to the Archbishop and Bishops, by whom they were directed, as occasion required
to Confer about particular Matters and return their Answers thereupon. While
therefore the Clergy's ordinary Place in Convocation was the Chapter House, the
same wherein the Bishops also fat; they came back thither in a Body, and the
Prolocutor (styled by them Organum Cleri, and Vocis suae Organum) had no more
to do but to deliver the general Sense of the Clergy in the Presence of all the
rest. And in this united State, whatever Directions the President and Bishops
had to deliver to the Clergy, were given immediately to the whole Body. But as
the Debates grew by degrees more Separate, and they also had a title to send up
their Opinions and Resolutions by the Person whom upon the Archbishop's special
Order they had chosen, and his Grace had confirmed and allowed to be their
standing Prolocutor; this of course drew on a new Addition to that Office, the
reporting to the Lower House the Commands and Admonitions of the Upper. The
bringing back the Instructions of the President and Bishops.
Which Branch, omitted by Archbishop Parker in his Form of a Convocation, when
he had only the original Institution in his Eye, is afterward mentioned in his
Speech, An. 1572. Qui [Prolocutor] vestra nobis desideria, nostraque vobis
vicissim monita exponat atque referat. He conveys to the Bishop the Petitions
and Opinions of their Clergy, and carries back to the Clergy the Advice and
Direction of their Bishops; and so by this Office, the Inconveniences of
debating together are avoided, and yet the Synod remains, in effect, as United
as ever.

Again, as Canons and other Ecclesiastical Affairs (which before had been no
where considered but in a Synod of Bishops) came to be passed and framed in
Convocation; the Business of the Lower-Clergy, as well as of the Bishops,
increased, and upon both these Accounts the Retirements of the Clergy became
more frequent; 'till at last, preserving the same Union they had ever done as
to the Matter and Method of their Business and Debates, as to the Place thereof
they became wholly separated. And (being now removed from the immediate
Government of the President as moderating the Debates of the whole Body) this
brought on the Necessity of a standing Moderator in the Debates of the
Lower House; His moderating in their Debates.
whom the foresaid Archbishop describes in the Office of a Prolocutor, Qui and
vestras diceptationes, ne aut longius producantur, aut acrius vehementiusque
tactentur, temperet.

The Prolocutor only supplies the President's place.
This being a true State of the Office and Institution of a Prolocutor, it is
strange how that Fancy of making the Prolocutor a President by his own
Authority in the Lower House, could enter into the Thoughts of any one who had
ever looked into our Acts of Convocation. The several Branches of this Office,
it is plain, are only Executions of what the President formerly did in Person,
and now does by the Prolocutor, solemnly admitted and confirmed for these Ends.
While the Bishops and Clergy acted together, the President moderated the
Debates of both; and the Clergy being removed to another Place, the Care of
Order and Decency there was by him entrusted with the Prolocutor. In that
united State, his Grace delivered his Directions immediately to the Clergy
themselves; which he now transmits, as they do their Answers, by the Mouth of
the Prolocutor. And yet this very Office has been made one main Argument to
settle the Lower House in greater degrees of Independence; though it was so
evidently instituted to convey to them the Authority of the President and
Bishops, and in all their Proceedings to preserve as strict a Union, as is
possible in different Places of Debate.

The Prolocutors at the beginning, Omcers of the Archbishop's Court.
To this purpose (I mean, the Prolocutor's supplying the Archbishop's Place
among the Inferior Clergy) it is observable, that Lyndewood and six of the
Prolocutors who came after, viz. Bekyington, Lyndefeld, Andrew, Byconill,
Stokys, and Pykenham, were all Officers immediately under the Archbishop; the 1
st, 2d, 4th, and 5th, his Officials; the third, Decanus Curiae Cant. the sixth,
Auditor Causarum, and the last his Chancellor. And I find some others to be the
the very same Persons who were Commissioned to receive and examine the Returns
of the Bishops; a Business, that was ordinarily performed by the Officers of
his own Court: But these, not being directly taken Notice of in the Registers
under the particular Characters they might bear in his Grace'd Court, I add not
to the rest, whose Offices are expressly mentioned. Nor is my Observation upon
these seven (successively Prolocutors and at the same time Officers under the
Archbishop) intended to prejudice the Freedom of Election in the Lower House;
but only to suggest the Regard they then had to the President in the Choice of
a Person, by whom they were to appear before him, and who was in effect to
supply his Place among them whenever they debated apart from their Lordships.

Prolocutor sometimes recommended by the President.
With the same Design, and no other, I add the following Instances of the
President's recommending to the Lower-Clergy the Choice of particular Persons;
who were accordingly elected.

Anno 1562. Archbishop Parker ordered the Clergy to retire to the Choice,
Commendans illis maxim Decanum Ecclesiae Cathedralis D. Pauli London,
Alexandrum Nowel; and we find him presented and confirmed in form, the next
Session.

Anno 1588. the Dean of St. Paul's ex part Reverendissimi Patris Joh. Cant.
Archiep. significavit ut ad Electionem futuri Prolocutoris procedere licite and
libere valiant and possint; and Commendavit eis Venerabilem Virum Magistrum
Johannem Still tunc ibidem praesentem. Vnde omnes tunc praesentes uno ore
eundem Magistrum Johannem Still sine mora in eorum and dicti Coetus Inferioris
Domus Cleri Prolocutorem and Referendarium concorditer unanimi consensu
nominarunt and elegerunt, nemine contradicente.

Anno 1605. The Extracts out of the Registers of the Upper-House say thus; the
Archbishop recommends Dr. Overal Dean of St. Paul's to be chosen Prolocutor, in
the room of Dr. Ravis made Bishop of Gloucester.

The Order or Leave of the President necessary before they can proceed to the
Choice.
But whether the President recommended or no, it is certain that the Clergy have
never used to proceed to their Election without the antecedent Order or Leave
of his Grace: Reverendissimus demandavit, praecepit, monuit, has been and is
the Language in which our Registers ordinarily express it: And in the
Convocation of 1586. (as well as that of 1588. which I just now mentioned) the
Archbishop's Leave is directly expressed in the Journal of the Lower House: The
Dean of St. Paul's, ex part Reverendissimi, etc. significavit ut ad Electionem
futuri Prolocutoris procedere licite and libere valiant and possint; but
without any Recommendation accompanying the Notice.

In case of death or promotion, no new Election but by the President's Order.
And as in the beginning, so in the middle of a Convocation, in the case of the
Death or Promotion of a Prolocutor, a new Election is not yet pretended to be
made without the President's special Direction. Thus,

Anno 1541. Reverendissimus evocari fecit Clerum Inferioris Domus; quibus
exposuit illos debere eligere novum Prolocutorem per mortem D. Gwent.

Anno 1677. Cleri hujus domus coram Reverendis Dominis Episcopis personaliter
comparentes, and requisui ut recederent in domum suam propriam, and eligerent
aliquam personam idoneam e gremio ipsorum in Prolocutorem sive Referendarium
Convocationis praesentis, loco ultimi, nuper in Archiepiscopum Cant. promoti.

Anno 1661. Febr. 18. Praesidens, etc. voluit ad se accersiri Clerum Domus
Inferioris Convocationis; quibus advenientibus dictus Dominus Praesidens
antedictus (in verbis latinis conceptis) eosdem Cleros dictae Domus Inferioris
monuit quatinus ad solitum and consuetum Conventus sui locum sese conferentes,
unum virum gravem, doctum, and peritum de gremio suo provideant and eligant in
eorum Prolocutorem and Referendarium in loco Reverendi Viri Henrici Fearne
sacrae Theologia Professoris, ultimi Prolocutoris ratione promotionis suae, ad
Episcopatum Cestren. jam vacan.

Anno 1664. Nov. 25. Dominus Episcopus London. Cleros dictae Domus Inferioris
monuit quatenus ad solitum and consuetum Conventus sui locum sese conferentes
unum virum, etc. eligant in eorum Prolocutorem and Referendarium in loco
veneribilis viri Johannis Barwick sacrae Theologiae Professoris, ratione ejus
mortis, jam vacan.

Prolocutor always Presented to the U. H. for Confirmation.
2. The Person chosen upon the Order or Leave of the Archbishop, is solemnly
presented to his Grace and his Brethren for their Confirmation; which our
Registers always express in Terms signifying his Acceptance of him, with the
conveyance of Power and Authority for the Execution of the Office: Cum consensu
Fratrum admisit, acceptavit, approbavit, ratificavit, or confirmavit.

The Prolocutor's Application to the U. H. for Protection.
3. As he receives his Authority from the Archbishop and his Brethren, so upon
a remarkable Invasion of that and of the Privileges of Convocation in his own
Person, we find him directly applying to the Upper-House for Protection. The
Case hapn'd in the Year, 1604. Sess. 19. and is thus represented by the
Extracts out of the Registers of that House: " The Prolocutor complaims to the
Bishop [Presiding] that he had two Subpoenas served upon him by Harrington and
Walker, notwithstanding his Privilege. The President answers, that the King was
acquainted with it, and that Walker was arrested for it by a Sergeant at Mace,
and a Warrant gone for Harrington -- Sess. 20. Walker abovesaid convented
before the Bishops, sent to the Lower House to beg Pardon of the Prolocutor and
House; which he did, and was dismissed pro tempore -- Sess. 32. Harrington
brought upon his Knees, for serving a Sub-poena upon the Prolocutor.

If the Inferior-Clergy of that Time had thought their House to have a
sufficient Power in this Case, they would (I suppose) have protected their own
Prolocutor: Or, if they had reckoned it consistent with their Duty, as Members
of the same Convocation with the Metropolitan and Bishops, to seek for Refuge
otherwise than by Recourse to their Lordships, the Prolocutor would scarce have
been suffered to bring in question the Independent Rights of the House by such
an Application.

The Prolocutor cannot Substitute a Deputy but by Leave from the U. H.
Two Questions remain concerning the Office of a Prolocutor: 1. Whether he have
Power in his Absence to Substitute another, without leave from the Vpper-House?
2. Whether the Prolocutor being present, Messages may regularly be sent up to
the Bishops by any other Hand? I will not pretend to solve these Two, purely
from the Reasons of the Things (which are no certain Rules in Questions of this
kind;) but surely the solemn Confirmation of a particular Person for that
Purpose, to continue during the whole Convocation, should imply an Obligation
upon him (when present) to discharge a Duty, to which He, and He alone, has
received that general Appointment: And his own Incapacity to convey such
Messages till he be admitted and confirmed, and thereby publicly known to be
the Mouth or (in the Language of the Registers) the Organ of the Lower House;
seems to make it unreasonable, that another shall be capable of exercising that
Office without Confirmation, that is, without being known to their Lordships to
be the Mouth of the Lower House, when yet the Messages are to come by him, as
such. Especially, if to this we add, that neither the Speaker of the House of
Commons, nor the House it self, have the Power of a Substitution, in case of
Sickness or Business; who yet Act in a much more Independent State than the
Lower House of Convocation.

These Presumptions are seconded by the Authority of the Registers; assuring us
that the Prolocutor has actually desired Leave of the Vpper-House to make such
a Substitution.

Anno 1533. Sess. 3. In the Upper-House; Ibidem Dominus Prolocutor D. Wolman,
affirmavit se aegrotum esse, and petiit ut durante infirmitate ejus, Magister
Fox, si vellet adesse, vel Magister Bell exerceret Officium suum; and consensum
est.

Anno 1554. At the end of the Acts of the Vpper-House we find this Note
entered. Memorandum, quod Vicesimo octaio Novembris, Dominus Prolocutor
substituit loco suo, durante ejus absentia, Magistros Hugonem Weston, Nicolaum
and Johannem Harpesfield conjunctim and divisim ad exercendum Officium
Prolocutoris; which could no way have come into that Register, but that the
Vpper-House had their Share in the Substitution.

The same Year, certain Minutes of the Lower House mentioning the Presentation
and Admission of the Prolocutor, and after that, a Debate with the Bishops in
the Upper-House; immediately adds, Et cum praedictus Prolocutor (who had been
presented just before) non potuit adesse dictae Convocationi, Substituit N.
Harpesfield and Johannem Wimbleseys (the two Persons who had just then
presented him, and stayed there with him) conjunctim and divisim in loco suo.

On the other Hand; Ann. 1555. it is said, Dec. 16. Quo die, Dominus Prolocutor
substituit loco suo Magistros Cole and Harpesfield: But this was in a Legatin
Council of both Provinces, and not in Convocation; nor have we any contemporary
Accounts of the Upper-House, where some such Memorandum as we find in the
foregoing Year might probably be made. But in the Year, 1640. May 2d. the
Minutes make mention of a Substitution, no notice whereof is taken by the
Register of the Upper-House, though in other Respects full and exact: Only, as to
the Notice there, the Instance has this Disadvantage that the Bishops did not
meet and act that Day.

Here therefore the Qustion rests; Whether a Certainty that the Prolocutor has
actually applied for leave to make a Substitution, be not a stronger Argument
of his Obligation to do it; than the bare want of an Entry thereof (in one
Instance, in the absence both of the Archbishop and Prolocutor, on a Day when
no Business was done besides the Continuation) is any Ground of a Right to do
it without such Leave. Thus the Case stands; and under these Circumstances the
Right of the Upper-House may (I think) be trusted to the decision of any
Impartial Man.

No Messages can regularly be carried up but by the Prolocutor, when present.
The next Question is, Whether the Prolocutor being present, Messages may be
regularly sent up to the Bishops by any other Hand? For in the last Convocation
(Session 14.) a Message was sent by Dr. Finch, but rejected by the President as
irregular, because not brought up by the Prolocutor: Which occasioned a Vote of
the Lower House, That the Prolocutor himself should carry it, but salvis
juribus hujus domus.

It is true, that some Messages had been so sent up in the Convocation of 1689.
but in the 9th Session the Irregularity was observed; and the Bishop of London
the then President declared to the Lower House, Quod apparet per Recorda Domus
Superioris Convocationis, quod quoties and quando aliquid fuit per dictam Domum
Inferiorem superiori Domo Convocationis propositum, Prolocutor semper comparuit
in propria sua persona, aliis dictae Domus secum comitantibus.

Hereupon, a Committee of both Houses was appointed to inspect the Registers:
And though no Report be entered in the Journal of that Year, and the late
Narrative affirm that they brought in none; Nar. p. 45.
yet the Bishops who were of that Committee very well remember, that those of
the Lower House were satisfied, that all their Messages ought to be sent by the
Prolocutor; the Books affording no one Instance of the contrary.

I know, upon the revival of that Difference in the last Convocation, and the
Censure thereof as Irregular, an Attempt was made in one of their Answers to
vindicate it upon the Authority of a Precedent in the Year 1444. When, the
Clergy after the grant of one Tenth, being desired by the Keeper of the Privy
Seal to give another, sent up a Doctor of Laws and the Archdeacon of Canterbury
for direction from the Bishops, whether they should proceed to the
consideration of that Request; though William Byconyll, the Archbishop's
Official, was Prolocutor at that time.

But, 1. In that Convocation we read of no Prolocutor as chosen by the Clergy
or confirmed by the Archbishop; and therefore though Biconyll made two several
Reports from the Lower-Clergy, that must be upon a particular Choice for those
purposes; such as we know was made of the Persons whom they styled their
Prolocutors. 2. It does not appear, that Biconyll (who had done the Business of
a Prolocutor before) was then in the House: On the contrary, the Circumstances
make it much more probable that he was not. This Message was carried up on a
Monday; and the Saturday before, the Clergy had granted a Subsidy, on condition
that the Archbishop would dissolve the Convocation. His Grace promised that he
would; upon which, as the Register has it, Plures Procuratores Cleri eo
praetextu ad parts suas recesserunt. And it was actually dissolved on the same
Monday.

However, its not appearing that he was there, is reason enough why it can be
no Precedent in the present Case; and no other Testimony has yet been aimed at.
Indeed the Drawers of the Narrative seem to have been apprehensive that the
Acts would afford none, and that therefore they should be forced to relinquish
their Claim: If (say they) Nar. p. 45.
the Precedents overruled this Matter, 'twill become us to submit.

CHAP. IV.
By what degrees the Inferior Clergy became a Separate House from the Bishops.
The false Account of the late Narrative, of the L. H. p. 6.
THE late Narrative of the Lower House observes, serves, what was too plain to
be denied, that in elder Times the whole Body of the Convocation used to sit
together in the same Room. But when afterward the same Narrative comes to
speak of the manner of their occasional Retirements, and of the Division into
two Houses; the Accounts are agreeable to no Usage but that of the last
Convocation. For in the Registers of these ancient Times whereof they speak,
there is not the least ground for what they say about the Retirement of the
Bishops from the Clergy, or the Clergy from their Bishops at their own Motion,
and upon distinct Business that belonged properly to their Consideration: Nor
does it appear, that the Division into two Houses, or the Settlement of a
Prolocutor did at all arise from an imitation of the Parliament; but, on the
contrary, came in gradually, and, as the occasion of them increased and the
convenience appeared, improved by little and little into an Establishment.

Two Reasons for the Retirement of the Clergy.
While the Bishops and Clergy debated together (as they frequently did a long
time after the regular Election of a Prolocutor) we find the Clergy
occasionally directed to retire upon two Accounts. 1. When the Archbishop and
Bishops found it necessary to debate any Matter in secret: As, Anno. 1376. 5.
Id. Febr. Dominus cum confratribus suis, exclusis omnibus a^s personis, secret
deliberavit -- And the next day, Exclusis omnibus aliis personis, super
praemissis deliberavit. In these cases, not only the Clergy but the lesser
Prelates also who beloug'd to the Upper-House, retired; as these latter are
said to have done again upon the same Occasion, Anno. 1428. Nov. 16. -- Aliis
Praelatis ad tunc ibidem in multitudine copiosa existentibus, de mandato
Praesidentium se interim retrahentibus ad partem domus Capitularis hujusmodi.

Retirement of the Clergy to consider Business, was always by the Direction of
ABs and Bishops.
But the ordinary Occasion of their Retirement was, the Business from time to
time referred to their Consideration by the President and Bishops. That this was
the constant Method as often as the Archbishop thought fit at the beginning of
Convocation to lay before them the Causes of his calling it, will be plain to
any one who shall cast an Eye upon the next Chapter: And the frequent Instances
of the same kind throughout the Course of their Proceedings, to be produced in
the Chapter following that, will sufficiently prove their Retirement in those
Days to have been the sole effect of Business proposed to them by the
Archbishop and Bishops; and not of their own Pleasure or Occasions. Nor have
the Registers left us to infer this, from their separating immediately upon
Business proposed; but they mention it frequently as done at the express
Command of the Archbishop: Anno. 1369. 4. Kal. Febr. Injunxit Procuratoribus
Cleri quod se ad parts transserrent -- Anno 1379. 5. Id. Maii, Praecepit quod
Procuratores praedicti exirent -- And on many other Occasions, their departing
is said to be de mandato, ad mandatum, and juxta assignationem Domini; as will
appear from the Passages quoted at large in the two next Chapters about the
Entrance upon Business in Convocation. Nor can I remember any Instance of their
Retiring, in which the Circumstances thereof leave room for a Supposition, that
it was at their own Motion, or upon distinct Business of their own: so far was
any such thing from being (according to that Account in the Narrative) the
Usage of Convocation in those days.

The Place to which they retired uncertain for a long time.
The Place also to which they retired in such Cases, was not the same from the
beginning, but settled by degrees. So,

Anno 1369. II Kal. Febr. Rogavit dictos Religiosos, quod se insimul traherent
ad aliquam partem Ecclesiae and Clerum suae Dioeceseos and Prove. quod ad aliam
partem ejusdem Ecclesiae se traherent, tractarent, and deliberarent. -- 4 Kal.
Febr. the same Year -- Injunxit Procuratoribus Cleri Relig. hujusmodi,
exhortando eosdem quod se ad parts in dicta Ecclesia transferrent, and
concordarent, etc.

Anno 1382. Nov. 19. the Place is left to their own Choice; Quod convenirent in
aliquo loco decenti and honesto, and de praemissis tractarent invicem.

Anno 1383. Dec. 3. The Proctors are directed, Quod ad aliquem locum in tali
negotio hactenus consuetum se declinarent.

Anno 1384. May 24. Procuratores in Domo Scholarum in Caemiterio dicte
Ecclesiae situata ad invicem denegotiis ipsis tractarent.

Anno 1394. Feb. 6. After a debate super principali causa Convocationis between
the Bishops and Clergy; separato Clergo ad Claustrum subtus eandem Domum
Capitularem, they there considered of a Subsidy.

Anno 1402. Oct. 30. The Archbishop directed them, for the Choice of a
Committee, ut in aliquo privato loco convenirent; and when they chose that
Committee, they are said to be in Basso sub dicta Domo Capitulari insimul
congregati -- And Nov. 10. ad dictum Bassum sub Domo Capitulari secesserunt --
Again, Anno 1404. Clero seorsim separato ad Domum Bassam sub Domo Capitulari.
And 1408. Dicto Clero in valto inferius sub eadem Domo Capitulari, etc. Where
their Meeting is said, some Years before this to be, more solito Accordingly,

Anno 1419. the Deans, Archdeacons, and Proctors are directed to retire in
Domum suam solidam: And two Years after (May 7. 1421.) in Domum suam Inferiorem.

Anno 1422. The Direction is, Quod recederent de Domo Capitulari and adirent
Domum Inferiorem: Under which name, Simply, we find it mentioned in the
succeeding Convocations.

But here, two Things are to be observed,

The L. C. have a House for Debate only.
1. That this was not styled the Domus solita, or Domus sua with reference to
their constant meeting and sitting there; for many Years after we find them
ordinarily with the Bishops in the Upper-House at the beginning of the
Sessions, and present at the Debates there; the same that we also meet with now
and then, in some of the latest Acts of Convocation, recorded in the old
Registers, which end with the Year 1488. inclusive. It was therefore Their
House, only for such Occasional Debates, as those for which they retired in the
manner already hinted, and to be explained more at large in the two following
Chapters.

The Place always assigned by the Archbishop.
2. That this place of Debate, after Custom and the Name seemed to have
appropriated it to the Use of the Clergy, was always thought and said to be
assigned them by the Archbishop.

Which two Heads are clear from the following Instances:

Anno 1408. Clerus Inferior in loco sibi Deputato constitutus.

Anno 1421. May 7. Recedentibus tunc, de mandato Domini, Procuratoribus Cleri
in Domum suam Inferiorem, pro tractatibus fiendis in hujusmodi Convocationibus
consuetam.

Anno 1421. Dominus demandavit, etc. quod adirent Domum inferiorem solitam pro
Cleri Procuratoribus, and ab antiquo in Cleri Convocationibus Assignatam eisdem.

The next Convocation, Oct. 16. Recedentibus Procuratoribus in Domum Inseriorem
Clero pro tractatibus habendis in Convocationibus antea celebratis solitam
assignari de mandato Domini ad tractandum de and super materiis ipsis per
Dominum declaratis.

In the same Convocation: The King's Commissioners being gone, Et finita
expositione hujusmodi, Procuratores Cleri de mandato Domini recesserunt de Domo
Capitulari in Domum inferiorem, ubi tractatus Cleri Procuratorum in talibus
Conciliis fieri antiquitus consueverunt.

Anno 1452. Feb. 9. It is again mentioned as a Place intended only for those
occasional Retirements: The President commands the Clergy, Vt ad locum eis ab
clim in hujusmodi actibus solitum and consuetum, viz. locum inferiorem subtus
dictam domum Capitularem ad electionem sive nominationem futuri Prolocutoris
Cleri rite processuri unanimiter insimul declinarent.

The Separation of the Bishops and Clergy stated upon the foregoing Acounts.
From the Particulars of this Chapter, there arises this natural Account of the
Separation of the two Houses. While they met, abode, and debated together in
the Chapter House, their Separations were rare, because the Occasions requiring
the Retirement of the Clergy, were so too. As the Business of Convocation
increased, these Retirements, and by consequence the Separations, became more
ordinary and frequent: 'Till, by degrees, upon the evident Inconvenience of the
Clergy's going up in a Body with all their Answers and Petitions (for so they
did at the first, notwithstanding their choice of a Prolocutor) the Archbishop
and Bishops on ordinary Occasions accepted the Attendance of a Prolocutor
regularly chosen and confirmed, instead of all the rest; returning their
Pleasure and Instructions by the same Hand. From hence there ensued a gradual
Separation as to the Place of Debate; the Union and Communication in other
respects, remaining entire, and the Correspondenee about the Business of the
Synod continuing such as is suitable to the known Subordination of Presbyters
to their Metropolitan and Bishops.

Nor are the Debates themselves so separated, but that the Archbishop and
Bishops as often as they saw cause for debating together, have always sent for
the Inferior Clergy to the Upper-House, either in a Body or by the Prolocutor
with some few of the Members; Reverendissimus, etc. fecit ad se vocari Clerum;
Accersito Clero, etc. Who coming up, and conferring with their Lordships as
long as the Occasion of sending for them required, were dismissed from further
Attendance at that time; and being dismissed, returned to their own House:
Dimisso Prolocutore, etc. is the ordinary Style of the Registers in all such
Cases; as appears from those two (of 1640. and 1661. etc.) which are published
at large in the Appendix.

If this be a true Account (as no Account from the Registers themselves can be
otherwise) it is hard to believe, that the Acts of Convocation were ever seen
by those, who have lately disputed the President's Right of Assigning them a
Place, and have talked so much of their distinct Capacity as derived from an
Imitation of the House of Commons, and raised so many Uncanonical Exemptions,
with I know not what degrees of Inherent Power, from the Denomination of a
House and their separate Debates. Nar. p. 41. Nar. p. 40. 41. Answ. to 1st Let.
p. 2. Nar. p. 17. Power of L. H. p 2.


CHAP. VI.
The manner of ENTERING upon Business in Convocation.
The Archbishop declares the Causes of the Convocation.
THE Members of Convocation being settled by the Returns of the Bishops made and
exhibited to his Grace; he, in virtue thereof, has a Right to their Attendance,
as they have, to proceed with him in the Business of Convocation. And
therefore, the Bishops and Clergy being together in one Body at the opening
thereof, it has been the Usage of Convocation, especially when met upon
Business of great Moment, for the President to explain to them the Causes and
Ends of his Summoning it at that time. So, Archbishop Parker explains the
Custom of his own and former Ages; Forma Conv.
Reverendissimus ad Episcopos and Clerum tunc praesentes Anglice sive latin
Causam sui Adventus ac dictae Convocationis inchoatae exponit. And another more
early Directory for the first day of Convocation in Edward VI.'s Time -- The
Clergy of thinferior House to be called up to the Chapitour; his Grace to
declare the Cause of this Convocation.

The Clergy ordered to Retire, and debate about the Business of Convocation as
declared by the Archbishop.
At the same time that the Registers speak of the President's declaring the
Causes of the Convocation in this solemn manner, they generally add, that the
Clergy were thereupon required to go down to their House and confer about the
matter proposed to them by his Grace; who also very frequently enjoined the
Return of their Answers within a certain time.

Anno 1369. Kal. Febr. The Archbishop ( assidentibus confratribus, etc. and
Procuratoribus Cant. Provinciae coram eo, etc.) explains to them the
Necessities of the Kingdom, and proposes a Supply; -- And then it follows, Et
super petitione praedicta, rogavit dictos Religiosos quod se insimul traherent
ad aliquam partem Ecclesiae, praedictae, and Clerum suae Dioeceseos and Prove.
quod and aliam partens ejusdem Ecclesiae se traherent, tractarent, and
delibearent de petitione praedict. quid and quantum concedere velint; and
deliberatione habita per cosdem, sibi refer and intimare de voluntate little
in dicta domo Capitulari super praemissis die crastino.

Anno 1379. May 9. The Archbishop explains the Occasions of the Meeting,
Reformation and Subsidy: And then, Habita in Domo Capitulari inter Praelatos
and Procuratores quadam deliberatione super materia Convocationis, idem Pater
injunxit singulis Procuratoribus quod eodem die post prandium -- in dicto loco
comparerent -- tractaturi super materia antedicta.

Anno 1383. Dec. 2. The Archbishop explains the Cause of the Convocation's
meeting: And the next Session, Praecepit Procuratoribus quod ad aliquem locum
in tali negotio hactenus consuetum se declinarent, ac de and super negotio,
etc. per ipsum eis exposito diligenter tractarent, and super deliberatione sua
in ea part Responsum sibi and Confratribus suis, ibidem protunc personaliter
existentibus, mellori modo et forma, quibus poterant, praeberent.

Anno 1399. Oct. 8. Coram Domino comparuerunt personaliter Reverendi in Chisto
Patres, etc. and Praelatorum and Cleri Provinciae antedictae Procuratores; and
exposita ibidem per Dominum Causa Convocationis, tractabant ipse Dominus and
Reverendi Patres Episcopi per se de negotiis communibus Ecclesiae, aliis
Praetit and Procuratoribus Cleri scorsim separatis.

Anno 1408. July 23. The Archbishop explains the Causes of their Meeting; and
then, Clero vero Inferiori a praefatis majoribus Praelatis seorsim separato,
and in Scolis Theologiae sub domo Capitulari praefata juxta assignationem
Archiepiscopi conveniente more solito; iidem Venerabiles Patres, etc.

Anno 1415. Nov. 18. Reverendissimus Pater conveniens in domo Capitulari
Ecclesiae S. Pauli cum Suffraganeis suis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Decanis,
Archidiaconis and Procuratibus Cleri suae Provinciae in multitudine copiosa,
exposuit eis Causas suae Convocationis; quibus expositis, Decani, Archidiaconi,
and Procuratores Capitulorum and Cleri, de mandato dicti Reverendissimi Patris
traxerunt se in domum inferiorem sub domo praedict. Capitulari, and intra
tempus modicum redeuntes, etc. concesserunt Domino nostro Regi duas decimas.

Anno 1419. Archiepiscopo, Confratribus suis, Praelatisque and Clero praedictis
in Domo Capitulari insimul congregatis, the Archbishop declares the Causes of
his calling a Convocation; one whereof was, pro defectibus in Clero
regnantibus, auctoritate illius Provincialis Concilii reformandis: Super
quibus, idem Reverendissimus Pater assignavit Decanis, Archidiaconis and Cleri
Procuratoribus, quod recederent in domum suam solitam, and quod ibidem de and
super materiis praedictis tractarent and communicarent, etc. Vnde ipsi statim,
ut eis fuerat assignatum, recesserunt de Domo Capitulari praedicta; praefatis
Reverendissimo Patre, Confratribus suis Episcopis, ac Abbatibus and Prioribus
Provincae suae remanentibus, and insimul tractantibus de and super materiis
antedictis.

Anno 1422. Dominus, cum Confratribus suis Praelatisque and Clero in domo
Capitulari insimul congregatis -- They debated for some time in Common about
the Business of the Convocation; and at last, Dominus demandavit public and in
genere omnibus Cleri Procuratoribus tunc ibidem praesentibus, quod recederent
de domo Capitulari et adirent Domum inferiorem solitam pro Cleri Procuratoribus
and ab antiquo in Cleri Convocationibus assignatam eisdem, ibidem insimul
tractaturi de habendo subsidio praelibato; and dominus dixit se and confratres
suos facere illud idem.

Anno 1424 -- Domino cum Confratribus suis nonnullis, Praelatisque and Cleri
Procuratoribus in domo Capitulari, etc. Dominus Causas and modum Convocationis
illius public declaravit; habitisque nonnullis communicationibus de and super
Causis ipsis, recedentibusque Pro^atoribus in Domum Inferiorem Clero pro
tractatibus ha^ndis in Convocationibus antea celebratis solitam assignari de
mandato Domini ad tractandum de and super materiis ipsis per Dominum declaratis.

Anno 1425. Comparentibus in domo Capitulari coram Reverendissimo, etc.
Archidiaconis, Cleri que Procuratoribus in multitudine copiosa ad tunc
praesentibus; eisdem exposuit and explanavit. Quibus expositis, Decani,
Archidiaconi, and Procuratores Capitulorum and Cleri, de mandato dicti
Reverendissimi Patris traxerunt se in domum inferiorem sub domo praedicta
Capitulari, ut de hujusmodi Causis tractarent, and unum Referendatium sive
Praelocutorem ex seipsis eligerent, qui vice little omnium and singulorum Causas
exponeret and responsa.

Anno 1426. Comparentibus coram Reverendissimo Patre, etc. Archidiaconis,
Cleriquoque Procuratoribus in multitudine copiosa -- The Archbishop recited to
them the Condemnation of William Russel, Vnde Dominus Petiit a Clero ut
deliberarent per quam viam contra fautores haereticorum hujusmodi esset
procedend. and habita aliquali Communicatione super hoc, Dominis assignavit
Procuratoribus Cleri praedictus, ut post prandium ejusdem diei in Domum
Inferiorem eisdem consuetam se colligerent, and super hujusmodi negotio
communicarent.

Anno 1428. The Archbishop, etc. Decanis, Archidiaconis, Clerique
Procuratoribus tunc praesentibus, explains the Causes of calling the
Convocation: And the next day he sends his Chancellor to the Convocation, qui
intimavit quod voluntas Domini erat, quod Praelati pro part sua and Clerus pro
part sua eligerent certas personas, etc. quae inter se communicarent and
deliberate viderent, quomodo and qua via esset melius and expeditius procedend.
contra haereticos.

Anno 1428. The Archbishop, etc. cum Decanis quoque, and Archidiaconis, ac
Praelatis aliis, and Cleri Procuratoribus, opens the Causes of the Convocation
in the usual manner, prasertim pro aliqua provisione facienda contra hereticos,
etc. Then, Clero and Procuratoribus in solitam Domurn Inferiorem de mandato
Domini recedentibus, Dominus cum Confratribus suis and Praelatis
communicationem habuit de and super Provisione seu Ordinatione hujusmodi
facienda contra malitiam haereticorum.

Anno 1432. The Archbishop, as before, declares the Causes of calling the
Convocation; one whereof was, how the Bishops and Clergy of England should
carry themselves toward the Pope after he had dissolved the Council of Basil
-- Dominus mandavit Clero and Procuratoribus, quod ad Domum suam solitam se
diverterent, and insimul been and mature ac cum deliberatione se avisarent
quomodo in materia praedicta and sub qua forma esset procedendum.

Anno 1433. Dominus, etc. exposuit Clero Causam Convocationis -- Insuper
Dominus movit coram codem Clero quaedam Dubia -- Et post istas dubitationes
motas, etc. quaesivit Dominus a Clero quid in his esset finaliter dicendum seu
sentiendum -- Et Clerus respondit, quod cum dicta Motiva essent talia, quae non
fuerant a pluribus eorum perantea perfect communicata nec laborata, etc.
oporteret eos de licentia Domini and suorum Confratrum, etc. quandam habere
deliberationem and communicationem specialem: quod Dominus libere concessit.

Anno 1438. Dominus -- assidentibus sibi Confratribus suis Episcopis, ac aliis
Praelatis and Clero ibidem existentibus, intimavit eisdem Causas Convocationis
suae -- De his Causis desideaavit dictus Reverendissimus Pater deliberationem
habere communem, and super hoc mandavit Clero ut in Domo Inferiori convenirent
and super istis diligentur communicarent.

The same Year, upon a Prorogation from May 14. to October. 6. Archiepiscopus,
etc. recitando plura suadebat Praelatis and Clero tunc ibidem existentibus,
quod cum eis non essent ignotae Causae ob quas convocati erant, super eis pro
eorum celeri expeditione communicarent, etc. Vnde ex mandato Domini Clero in
Domum Inferiorem se colligente, etc. --

Anno 1439. Archiepiscopus, etc. coram Confratribus suis Episcopis, aliisque
Praelatis and Clero suae Provinciae Causas propter quas eosdem ea Vice
convocaverat, declaravit -- Then, the Pope's Collector Presents a Bull of
Indulgence; qua tunc in publico prelecta, and habita Communicatione aliquali
super eadem, Dominus decrevit Copias fieri, and ipsis de Clero Domus Inferioris
liberari, ad effectum ut Communicatio habeatur inter cos de modo and forma
Executionis and Publicationis ejusdem.

Anno 1444. Archiepiscopus, etc. Causas propter quas cosdem ea Vice
convocaverat, declarabat. One was, Qualiter in Ecclesia Anglicana fuerant
plurima Reformatione digna -- Vnde communicante Domino cum Confratribus suis
and Clero suae Provinciae super pramissis, continuavit etc. -- And the next
Day, Dominus praecepit Clero quatenus pro corrigend. and reformand. per
hujusmodi Concilium inter se diligenter communicarent.

Anno 1452. Feb. 9. Archiepiscopus etc. -- Episcopis, ac aliis Praelatis, nec
non Procuratoribus de Clero etc. Causam Convocationis explicavit; and then
(that they might be in a Condition to bear their part in the Business) he
commands them to retire and choose a Prolocutor.

Anno 1460. May 10. The Archbishop first directs the Choice of a Prolocutor,
and then confirms him; after which, he explains to them the Causes of the
Convocation.

In these two last Instances, the Clergy are not directed to Retire, as they
had usually been, to debate apart about the Matters of Convocation laid before
them by the Archbishop: Because now they began, as to their debating, to be in
a more separate State; so that the bare Proposition of Business to be Prepared
or Considered, was notice enough that they were to Retire to their usual Place,
and set about it.

The old Registers have only the Acts of four Convocations more; so that we
have no light between the Years 1488 and 1529. nor any from thence to the Year
1562. besides certain Extracts out of the Registers of the Upper-House.

But the ancient Directory in Edward the sixth's time, and Archbishop Parker's
Form of holding a Convocation (both of them written while the Registers of
Covocation remained entire, and both, as above cited, setting down his Grace's
declaration of the Causes of the Summons as a necessary part of their
preparation for Business) leave no Room to doubt whether in that Interval the
same Usage continued, which we have shown to be the Practiee of Convocation
from the beginning of the most early Acts. Not, but that even in these
Extracts, we find the Custom plainly enough; though not expressed under all the
Circumstances that appear in the Original Registers. So,

Anno 1536. (the Second in that Collection) the Bishop of London's Return being
exhibited, Reverendissimus exposuit Causas hujusmodi Convocationis, and denide
monuit omnes Praelatos quatenus conferrent se ad. locum consuetum, and eligant
unum virum in Referendarium and Prolocutorem qui eorum nomine loqui possit.

Anno 1547. the next but one (in which, as well as in the first of that Book,
the Form of Opening is very much contracted by the Abridger, and consists only
of some short hints) Archbishop Cranmer is there said in general, to have
acquainted them that the Convocation was then Summoned, quod Praelati and Cleri
inter se consulerent de vera Christi Religione probe instituenda and tradenda
popule; that being the first Year of Edward the sixth. Again,

Anno 1444. The Return being exhibited, Episcopus London (in the Vacancy of the
Archbishopric) Summarie and compendiose. Causam Synodi vocatae exposuit, and
monuit Inferiorem Domum de eligendo sibi Prolocutorem.

Anno 1557. The Archbishop with the Consent of his Brethren, having confirmed
the Prolocutor, mox Causas hujus Synodi verbo-tenus proposuit; which are there
set down at large.

Anno 1558. Praeconizatione facta, and Inferiore Doino evocata, exposuit
Episcopus ibidem Causam Convocation is. -- But more distinctly in the next
which is an entire Register: That, I mean, of Archbishop Parker, in which the
39 Articles were made: viz.

Anno 1562. Reverendissimus Dominus Archiepiscopus Cant. brevens quandam
Orationem Eloquentiae plenam habuit ad Patres and Clerum; per quam inter alia
opportunitatem Reformandarum rerum in Ecclesia Anglicana jam oblatam esse
aperuit, ac propensos animos tam illustrissimae Dominae nostrae Regine quam
allorum Magnatum hujus regni ad hujusmodi Reformationem habendam declaravit,
hortando, praecipiendo, and mandando Praelatos and Clerum Inferioris Domus in
dicta domo capitulari coram co and reliquis Patribus constitutos, quatenus ad
Conventus sui locum sese conferentes, unum virum gravem etc. eligant in eorum
Prolocutorem.

Anno 1640. (the next Convocation, of which the Upper-House-Acts remain,) after
the Prolocutor is confirmed, the Archbishop produces the King's License -- Et
Reverendissimus Pater antedictus praefatum Prolocutorem and alios de Domo
inferiori, Decanos, Archidiaconos, Capitula, and Cleri Procuratores ibidem
praesentes, voluit ut ipsi inter se convenirent and mature excogitarent de
Subsidiis Domino nostro Regi concedend. and Canonibus and Constitutionibus
Statum Ecclesiasticum and Christi Religionem in Ecclesia Anglicana concernen.
concipiendis. Et quicquid inde senserent sive excogitaverint in scriptis
redigant, and coram ipso Reverendissimo and Confratribus Episcopis exhibeant.

Anno 1661. The Prolocutor being confirmed, Committees of both Houses were
ordered in the Upper-House, to compose Services for the 29th. of May, and the
30th of January, etc. And when afterward, by the coming of the Royal License,
they thought themselves at liberty to Enter upon the Business which was the
chief Cause of their Meeting, the Archbishop directs the Members of the
Lower House to proceed in it; in the self same words that Archbishop Laud had
used in the Year 1640.

The Inference from the Archbishop's declaring the Causes of Convocation.
I have been thus particular, in my Deduction of Authorities, to show the Right
of the President to mark out a Scheme of Business to be transacted in
Convocation: Beause, as by the Tenor of the Mandate (his first step in
Summoning) we are led to the Foundation of his Grace's Power over the Members
of the Lower House; so in this their Entrance upon Business, we clearly see his
Influence and Authority over their Proceedings: That is, we have the view of an
Ecclesiastical Synod, consisting of a Metropolitan, Bishops, and Presbyters,
all going on to Act within their proper Spheres, and suitably to the
Constitution of an Episcopal Church. The Metropolitan, having advised with his
Suffragan-Bishops about the State and Condition of the Church, of which He and
They are constituted Governors, recommends to the Synod the Consideration of
such Improvements or Reformations as evidently tend to its Honor and Safety.
The Clergy are there in readiness to receive the Opinion and Directions of
their Ecclesiastical Superiors, and to offer their own Judgment, as there shall
be occasion, with all Duty and Humility; and in short, to give their Assistance
of every kind (in a proper Subordination) toward the ready and effectual
Dispatch of all Business that shall be regularly proposed for the Advancement
of Religion. The Archbishop and Bishops, we see, deliberate Above: And the
Clergy debate the same Matters below, to be ready with their Opinions and
Resolutions when required: And thus they appear like one Body of Men, met about
the same common Business; in which all in their several Stations are
immediately concerned: Proceeding also with such a Paternal Affection on the
one Hand, and such Dutiful Obedience on the other, as becomes their holy
Function, and is due to Measures for preserving the Order and Unity of the
Church.

But some late Principles and Practices have another Tendency: For instance,
the Clergy's proceeding in Business of the greatest Moment, and even coming to
formed Resolutions thereupon, without ever acquainting their Ecclesiastical
Superiors; and much less offering them first in general, as Points that in
their Opinion deserve or require Consideration, The difference between former
Methods and the late Practices.
and taking the Advice and Direction of their Lordships about the Expediency
and Methods of proceeding in them. To the same effect, is that Language so
familiar of late among some of the Inferior Clergy in Convocation, That they
have Business of their own to do; That it is generally different from what is
transacted at the same time in the Vpper-House; That their Debates are managed
independently from their Lordships: that the Archbishop with his Suffragans has
no Right to take cognizance of or interpose in their Debates; That there is no
Necessity) be the Matter never so important) of previous Directions from the
Vpper-House. Principles, somewhat ambiguously expressed, perhaps not without a
foresight of certain Objections; but being interpreted by the late Practices,
their Tendency to a Division of the Synod, and a Coordinate Power in the
Church, is no less plain, than is their Opposition to all the Proceedings of
former times.

One thing more I would observe upon this Head; what little likeness there is
between a Convocation and a Parliament, in their very first Entrances upon
Business. Unless the Enemies of the Ecclesiastical Power will object (as they
who are so fond of a Parliamentary-Relation are like enough to do) that the
Archbishop in Convocation, opening the Causes of their Meeting, does only the
same thing with the Lord Chancellor in Parliament; whose Office it is to Convey
and Enforce to the two Houses the Instructions he receives from his Majesty.
But they may understand, that as often as the King had occasion to solicit
Business in Convocation, he sent Commissioners of his own to do it; as every
one must know who casts his Eye upon our Convocation-Registers never so
slightly. These were said to come thither, ex part Domini Regis; and their
coming, as occasion required, to represent the Desires of the King and the
Condition of the Kingdom, was a Custom so much known and established, that the
Register takes notice of the Archibishop's doing it as a thing Singular and
Extraordinary. Anno 1380. Dec. 1. Et quia protunc Dominus meus Archiepiscopus
erat Cancellarius Angliae, nec comparuit alius pro part Domini Regis, qui
exponeret Clero negotia regni sicut fieri Consuevit in aliis Convocationibus;
dictus Dominus meus negotia regni and pericula imminentia satis clare exposuit.
Nor did it make any Difference in the Form of their Proceedings thereupon, that
the first Motion came from the Court; but the Archibishop having given the
Commissioners some such general Answer as this, quod voluit super his mature
communicare cum Confratribus suis Praelatis and Clero, he immediately proceeded
to that Communication, either with the Clergy and Bishops in a Body, or
(directing the Clergy to debate in their own House) with his Brethren alone.

If it be further said, that the Necessity of a Royal-License before the
Convocation can proceed to make Canons, etc. has restrained the President's
ancient Power of explaining the General Causes of the Summons; the Answer is
this, That the Persons whose present Endeavors it is to diminish the
Metropolitical and Episcopal Authority, affirm that a great Variety of
Ecclesiastical Matters may not only be begun, but transacted and concluded,
without the Authority of such a License; and so far the President's Right of
proposing the General Matters, stands where it did. And as to Canons and
Constitutions, if they may not be actually entered upon without a License, yet
his Grace at the opening of the Convocation may deliver his own Judgment as to
the Expedience of them, and refer it to the Consideration of the Bishops and
Clergy, Whether it be advisable to desire the Royal-License for that end.

CHAP. VII.
The Right of the Archibishop and Bishops to require the Clergy to consider any
particular Business throughout the Convocation.
THE foregoing Chapter shows the Right of the President, after consultation had
with his Brethren the Bishops, first to lay before the Clergy the general
Causes of his Summons, and then to require them to Retire and Deliberate
thereupon. But the Scene of Business opening and enlarging it self, many
unforeseen difficulties will unavoidably occur; and new Designs also for the
Benefit of the Church, must naturally arise from the mutual Debates of the
Governors thereof assembled in Convocation. And accordingly, when any such
Occasions required, the Inferior Clergy have been ever enjoined to Debate and
Examine all Matters proposed by their Ecclesiastical Superiors for that
purpose, from the beginning to the end of Convocation. The instances hereof are
very numerous; The necessity of showing this, to prevent an objection from the
explication of the General Causes at the opening of a Parliament.
but necessary to be added to the Testimonies contained in the last Chapters;
which without those would leave room for an Objection, that as to the General
Causes at the beginning, those are equally explained to the two Houses of
Parliament, and yet the Honorable Members of the Lower House there, are under
no such Restraint or Subordination in their subsequent Proceedings. An
Objection, I say, of this sort is like enough to be started, considering how
industriously those Fancies about a Parliamentary Relation have been insinuated
into the minds of Men. I will therefore show, that what the Archibishop does,
in opening the general Causes of his Summons and directing the Clergy to
deliberate about it at the beginning of Convocation; the same thing he and his
Suffragans have a Right to Do upon all emergent Occasions during the whole
course of their Proceedings. And this will manifest to the World, how the
Constitution and Proceedings of an English Convocation (to the glory of it) are
exactly modeled according to the Primitive Distinction between Bishops and
their Presbyters in point of Order and Authority: while, from the most early
Accounts of Convocations to this day, we see the Metropolitan and Bishops as
the Governors of the Church, Propesing and Directiing in Ecclesiastical
Affairs, and the Presbyters at hand with their Advice and Assistance in
Subservience to the same Ends.

The separation of the two Houses made no difference in this point.
Nor do we find any difference in this Point, between the Times before and
after the Separation of the Bishops and Clergy, excepting this one, that before
it they all took the directions immediately from the President and retired in a
Body; and since, his Grace upon those Occasions, has either sent up for the
whole House, or, which is more ordinary, for the Prolocutor with Five or Six
more (Reverendissimus, cum consensu Confratrum, voluit, jussit, mandavit, ad se
accersiri Prolocutorem,) and by him conveys to his Brethrem below, the Pleasure
and Instructions of the Upper House. But as to the manner, end, or authority of
these occasional Directions, their Division into two Houses made not the least
difference in them; as will appear beyond contradiction from the Registers
themselves. Anno 1369. 10 Kal. Febr. The Clergy having granted a Supply, on
condition to have their Grievances redressed; Archiepiscopus voluit, quod
Clerus and Religiosi praedicti Petitiones suas, etc. in Scriptis redigerent,
and sibi porrigerent die Veneris.

Anno eod. 4 Kal. Febr. The Archibishop having enlarged before the Clergy upon
the necessity of a Decima triennalis which the Bishops had granted; Tunc
injunxit Procuratoribus Cleri Relig. bujusmodi, exhertando eosdem, quod se ad
parts in dicta Ecclesia transferrent, and concordarent pro dicta decima
triennali.

Anno 1376. Id. Febr. The Bishop having proposed certain matters for the
benefit of the Church, Oneravit Clerum, in eorum Conscientiis, ut deliberarent
inter se quid esset melius faciendum pro utilitate dictae Ecclesiae.

Anno 1377. Id. Nov. Dominus voluit quod Procuratores compararent simul in
praefata Ecclesia [S. Pauli] dicto die post prandium, ad deliberand. ad
invicem, utrum melius expediat concedere Decimas an Impositiones.

Anno 1379. 5 Id. Maij. Reverendissimus Pater praecepit, quod Procuratores
Praelatorum and Cleri exirent dictam domum Capitularem, imer se tractaturi
super materia Convocationis praedictae: quibus exeuntibus, dictus
Reverendissimus Pater cum Suffraganeis in calem Domo [Capitulari] secret
tractavit super materia praedict. Et post tractatum hujusmodi, dictus
Reverendissimus Pater praecepit Procuratoribus quod die fovis tunc prox
sequente, post Prandium, convenirent ad invicem, in Domo Capitulari praedicta
tractaturi ad invicem super materia Convocationis praedictae and dixit quod
ipse and alii Confratres sui revenirent die Veneris tunc prox. sequente ad
Domum Capitularem praedictam, ad effectum tractandi materiam Convocationis
praedictoe.

Anno eod. 16 Kal. Jun. Dominus, etc. moneri fecit ibidem public omnes
Procuratores Praelatorum and Cleri, quod die Mercurii prox. tunc sequente in
dicta Domo Capitulari comparerent simul ante boram nonam, deliberaturi and
tractaturi de modo Subventionis.

Anno eod. 13 Kal. Jun. Dominus praefixit Procuratoribus ad comparendum in Domo
Capitulari dictum diem Veneris post prandium, etc. ad before tractand. super
praemissis.

Anno 1383 December. 4. The Pope's Subcollector comes to Convocation, and desires
a Subsidy: The Archbishop having enforced his Request, praecepit Procuratoribus
quod super codem Negotio diligenter tractarent, and finalem responsum sibi and
Confratribus suis praeberent. Super quibius omnibus and singulis, habito inter
ipsos tractatu diligenti, Procuratores eodem quarto die responsa sua in ea
part finaliter in Scriptis redacta dicto Domino Cant. coram Confratribus suis,
pretunc ibidem existentibus, exhibuerunt.

Anno 1404. May 17. Archiepiscopus, etc. continuavit -- and demandavit aliis
Praelatis and Clero tunc ibidem praesentibus, quod singulis diebus interim ad
dictum locum convenirent, and laborarent circa Reformanda in Cantuariensi
Provincia.

Eod. Anno Jun. 9. Conveniente Reverendissimo, etc. and expositis periculis and
necessitatibus Regni, tandem Procuratores Cleri convenientes sub domo
Capitulari more solito, and ibidem super proedictis per aliquantum tempus
tractantes, tandem abinde secesserunt, and convenerunt coram dictis
Reverendissimo Patre, and suis Suffraganeis, and concesserunt, etc. -- and
again in the same Year, June 16. upon the request of a Grant from the Pope's
Collector.

Anno 1421. Maij 7. The Chancellors of Oxford and Cambridge coming to
Convocation, Reverendissimo Patri, and Confratribus suis, totique Concilio
commendabant, etc. Rogantes assidue de aliquo congruo Remedio propromotione
Pauperum Studentium in Universitatibus bujusmodi, auctoritate Concilij ad tunc
inibi congregati, graciose and misericorditer provideri -- Quam quidem
Recommendationem Dominus and Confratres sui gratanter and benevole (ut
apparuit) acceptarunt; and recedentibus tunc de mandato Domini Procuratoribus
Cleri in Domum suam Inferiorem pro tractatibus fiendis in bujusmodi
Convocationibus consuetam, Dominus and Confratres sui remanserunt in Domo
Capitulari praedicta; and post Tractatam non modicum tam circa Promotionem
Graduatorum, and Studentium in Universitalibus praedictis, quam circa
subventionem Domino Regi faciendam, Dominus tandem Continuavit, etc.

Anno 1428. Nov. 18. Clerici Seculares and Cleri Procuratores ad Domum suam
solitam de mandato Domini recesserunt: Dominus vero and Confratres sui Episcopi
in Domo Capitulari remanserunt per aliquod tempus, de and super certis materijs
arduis Convocationem bujusmodi tangentibus simul tractantes.

Eod. Anno November 23. Lectoe suerunt in publico literae Apostolicae
(Soliciting for a Subsidy, to suppress the Heretics of Bohemia:) quibus
lectis, Dominus, cum Confratribus suis, etc. de and super materia, in dictis
literis Apostolicis contentd, communicavit, caeteris de Clero interim de
mandato Domini se retrahentibus.

Anno 1433. December. 1. Reverendissimus Pater injunxit Clero, quatenus
collaborarent and providerent quid fiendum seu dicendum esset de Subsidio
concedendo. And again, December. 10. Clero Dominus mandavit quatenus circa
Subsidium Domino Regi concedend. diligenter collaborarent.

Anno 1434. Oct. 20. Dominus mandavit Mro. Thomae Bekington and alijs diversis
de Clero, ut Articulos illos de generali Sententia quae consueta est quater in
anno per Curatos Ecclesiarum publicari and solemniter denunciari, conciperent
in lingua materna sub breviori modo quo possent.

Anno 1438. After the meeting of Oct. 6. upon a Prorogation: Dominus praecepit
omnibus de Clero, quatenus in Domo Inferiori simul convenirent, and super illis
pro quibus fuerant bac Vice convocati diligenter tractarent, viz. pro
promotione in Universitatibus ordinanda, and pro Subsidio pro trasmittendis ad
generale Council. Ferrar. and super his effectualiter responderent.

Anno eod. die Martis prox. Dominus mandavit Clero quantenus super praemissis
effectualiter communicarent; recitando eis qualiter and quomodo secerunt and
concesserunt Praelati Religiosi pro expensis transmittendorum ad Council.
Generale Ferrar. and Suadendo ut, omni post posita in ea part divisione, ad
consimiliter concedend. suos animos applicarent.

Anno 1439. Dec. 11. Cedula, etc. pro quadam Constitutione Augmentationis
Pauperum and Exilium Vicariarum Provinciae Cant. auctoritate bujusmodi
Conciliis Provincialis facienda; post aliqualem Communicationem babitam super
eadem inter Dominos Episcopos and Praelatos Religiosos de Domo Superiori,
tandem ipsis de Clero Domus Inferioris pro certis in cadem resormandis, neo non
pro avisamento and deliberatione in hac part capiend. extitit liberata.

Eod. anno Dec. 22. Clerus de mandato Domini ad tractand. pro subsidio and
aliis materiis supradictis, ad Domum Inferiorem se divertebat; ubi babita inter
cos Convocatione diutina super praemissis, tandem ad Domum Superiorem reversi
sunt.

Anno 1444. Oct. 22. Dominus praecepit Clero, quatenus pro Corrigend. and
Reformand. per bujusmodi Concilium, inter se diligenter communicarent, usque ad
adventum Dominerum ex part Domini nostri Regis and Concilii sui illie in brevi
adventurorum.

Anno 1529. Sess. 7. The Prolocutor in the Upper House; Monuit Reverendissimus,
ut conciperentur Articuli contra haereticos.

Eod. Anno Sess. 20. Ingressi sunt Prolecutor cum diversis Archidiaconis; cum
quibus Episcopus London. babuit secretam communicationem, and voluit cos redire
in Domum Inseriorem, and ibi tractarent de bujusmodi negotio.

Eod. Anno Sess. 32. Reverendissiimus monuit Prolocutorem, etc. invicem
consultare super Articulis ipsis super Opinionibus suis.

-- Sess. 97. Reverendissimus putavit expediens ut Responsiones fierent ad
bujusmodi querelas, [ viz. to a certain Address presented to the King against
the Archbishop and Bishops] quem libellum tradidit Proloquutori ad
perlegendum, ut ostenderet opiniones suas de codem.

-- Sess. 104. Episcopus London. Commissarius recitavit voluntatem
Reverendissimi super praedicta Supplicatione, and voluit Prolocutorem, etc.
quod concipiant Responsa sua in scriptis.

-- Sess. 105. The Archbishop's Commissary pressing for a Subsidy, monuit
Prolocutorem ut alios consultaret de eadem materid, and rediret cum Responsis
suis.

Anno 1534. Dec. 2. Reverendissimus voluit Prolocutorem ingredi, ut examinarent
Libros praedictos, and Librum Tyndal; and ut ostendant Opiniones suas.

Anno 1541. Jan. 27. Reverendissimus ibi tradidit Prolocutori quosdam Libros
examinand. and conficerent Leges de Simonia vitanda.

Anno 1558. Feb. 10. The Prolocutor speaking to the Bishops, Episcopi
responderunt, quod eis expedire videtur, ut Clerus, etc. Preces faciant Dominae
Reginae, ne quid oneris imponatur Clero in Parliamento illo.

Anno 1562. The Prolocutor being sent for, and coming-up with six others,
Reverendissimus, de and cum consensu Confratrum suorum hujusmodi, tradidit
quosdam Articulos in scriptis conceptos, mandando quatenus super contentis in
dictis Articulis diligenter inquirerent, ac quicquid inde invenirint, in
scriptis redigant, ac dicto Reverendissimo porrigant and exhibeant.

Anno 1640. Sess. 10. 1 Conv. Reverendissimus Pater Prolocutorem and alios de
Donio Inseriori, Decanos Archidiaconos, and Cleri Procuratores ibidem
praesentes voluit ut ipsi inter se convenirent and excogitarent de
Benevolentid, etc. and deinde de Canonibus and Constitutionibus statum
Ecclesiasticum, and Ecclesiae Utilitatem concernen. componendis, faciendis, and
inter se consentiend.

-- Ead. Sess. Prolocutore comparente cum acto Decanis eum comitantibus,
Reverendissimus eos voluit ad conveniend. die veneris prox. tempestive, and
adtuno tractand. cum toto Coetu Domus Inferioris citra Benevolentiam sive
Contributionem voluntariam dicto Domino nostro Regi concedend. and ut ipsi
Formam Articulorum in Visitationibus imposterum ministrand. concipiant.

-- Sess. 16. De mandato Reverendissimi, Prolocutor cum sex aliis e Domo
Inferiori Domum Superiorem intravit; and Reverendissimus ei tradidit Canonem
and forman Juramenti per totum Ca'tum Domus Inferioris considerand. tractand.
and consentiend.

Anno 1661. Nov. 23. Reverendus, etc. ad eum accersiri jussit Prolocutorem
solum; quo adveniente, dictus Reverendus Pater tradidit ei partem libri
publicarum Precum per hujusmodi Domum examinat' and revis', and in mandatis
dedit, ut dictus Prolocutor una cum Clero dictae Domus Inferioris dictam partem
cum omni celeritate qua potuit, revideat, and emendet si sit necessarium.

-- Nov. 27. Praesidens dedit in manibus dicti Prolocutoris residuar. partem
Libri Publicarum Precum, and requisivit dictum Prolocutorem, ut ille una cum
Domo sua eandem omni cum celeritate revideat, and post Revisionem hujusmodi
Praesidenti retradat.

-- Dec. 10. Reverendus Pater, etc. voluit ad se accersiri Dominum Prolocutorem
ad revidend. Emendationes. Quo adveniente, etc. dictus Locum-tenens ostendit
dictas Emendationes per Domum Superiorem fact. and june and ibidem perlect. and
ordinavit eum ad consulend. Domum suam Inferiorem de and super eisdem.

The Appointment of Committees reserved for the next Chapter.
In drawing down these Testimonies of a Right in the Upper-House to direct the
Business of Convocation, I have designedly waved the Committees of the Inferior
Clergy, ordered by the President and Bishops, upon particular Matters wherein
their Assistance was necessary. Instances of such Appointments are very
numerous, and shall be produced at large in the next Chapter, which begins the
Proof of a Right in the Archbishop and his Suffragans, to direct the Manner,
as well as the Matter, of Proceedings in Convocation.

The Inferences from the foregoing Testimonies.
In the mean time, the foregoing Instances, from the most early Accounts we
have of these things, till after the Restoration, may suffice to show a Right
in the Upper-House, to send for the Inferior Clergy, either in a Body, or by
the Prolocutor, and to direct them to consider or prepare all such Business as
their Lordships shall think fit to reccommend to their Care: And that, not only
at the beginning, but in the whole Course of the Convocation; nor only Business
of an Ecclesiastical, but (while that lasted) of a Civil nature also: Nor was
it by way of Request, or upon the foot of a mutual Agreement between the
Bishops and Clergy, (as some late Writers have uncanonically represented the
Correspondence between the two Houses of Convocation) but both their Retirement
and Deliberation were the Effects of an express Command, grounded upon the
Canonical Authority of the Metropolitan and Bishops, received by the Clergy
with all the Marks of Duty and Obedience, and accordingly executed without the
least Appearance of Refusal of Scruple in any one Instance.

It is needless to explain how unlike this is to the Communication between the
two Houses of Parliament; it is enough, as we go along, to put the Reader in
mind of making the Comparison; and to reflect withal, how well they had
considered these things, who could first frame the Parallel, and then publish
it to the World, with such a seeming Assurance.

CHAP. VIII.
The Right of the Archbishop and his Suffragans to Order Committees of the
Lower House.
THE two last Chapters show us, how the President, at the Head of his Suffragan
Bishops, has at all times, as occasion required, enjoined the Inferior Clergy
to consider and prepare Matters according to the Instructions they received.
But, because the joint Debates of the whole Body of the Clergy may in some
Points be unnecessary and inconvenient in others; therefore the Archbishop and
Bishops (the proper Judges thereof) at the same time they referred. Business to
the Clergy, have frequently determined it to be done by a Committee, and
commanded a Choice immediately for that Purpose: On some Occasions, to debate
alone; and on others, to attend a Committee of Bishops appointed for the same
Purpose: At one time, confined as to the Number; and at another, left to their
own Liberty: In some Instances, required to signify to the Upper-House the
Names of the Persons elected, (which we find accordingly done;) and in others,
proceeding to their Business without such a Report. Which Variety of
Circumstances accompanying the same Act, and all arising from the different
Instructions of the Upper-House, are so many Confirmatious of a Right lodged
there, to direct the Manner and Method of Proceedings in the Lower House, as
they see cause to interpose, and to recommend Business to their Consideration.

Committees of the Clergy to attend a Committee of Bishops.
I. It has been usual for the Archbishop to order the Choice of Committees out
of the Inferior Clergy, to attend a Committee of Bishops appointed for the same
Purpose: So I term it, in the Language of their own Actuary, Anno 1661. several
times repeated, to express the Ends for which the Committees of the Lower
Clergy were chosen. May 16. Chosen for attending the Bishops at Ely-House, four
Deans, etc. -- May 18. Chosen for the Review, etc. to attend the Bishops, three
Deans, etc. -- to attend the Bishops at the Savoy, etc. to consult about the
Form of Baptizing Adults, two Deans, etc. -- June 7. Form of Prayer, etc.
referred to Eight of this House to attend four Bishops at Ely-House this
Afternoon. -- June 19. To attend the Bishops at the Savoy, etc. seven Deans,
etc. -- All these were as late as the Year 1661. but (as the following
Testimonies show) grounded upon the ordinary Usage of much elder Times.

Anno 1428. Nov. 12. Clero and Procuratoribus in solitam Domum Inferiorem de
mandato Domini recedentibus, Dominus, etc. Communicationem habuit de and super
Provisione seu Ordinatione facienda contra Malitiam Haereticorum; and statim
extitit avisatum quod certi Episcopi, Praelatique alii, and Clerici, tam in
Theologia quam Jure Civili and Canonico Doctores, Provisionem hujusmodi seu
Ordinationem conciperent, and Minutam exinde redigerent in Scripturom.

Eod. Anno Nov. 20. Dominus intimavit and in publico declaravit, quod diversa
Negotia ardua, etc. in hujusmodi Convocatione tractari deberent; and ideirco
pro acceleratione and celeriori Expeditione Negotiorum ipsorum, sibi and
Confratribus suis videbatur expediens, quod certi Praelati Religiosi, Decanique
Ecclesiarum Cathedralum, Archidiaconi aliqui and Cleri Procuratores quidam
magis providi and discreti nominarentur, qui communicare possent cum Episcopis
de and super materijs illis; de quo ut (apparuit) omnes reputarunt se
contentos. Et tunc Dominus assignavit eisdem Religiosis and alijs tunc ibidem
praesentibus terminum ad eligend. personas hujusmodi.

Anno 1557. Jan. 24. Voluit Reverendissimus Statuta Ecclesiarum noviter
erectarum, aut mutatarum a Regularibus ad Seculares, expendi per Episcopos
Lincoln, etc. item and Nicolao Wotton, Cant. etc. Ecclesiarum Decanis and quae
consideranda sunt, referri Reverendissimo quamprimum commode poterunt.

Anno eod. Febr. 4. Upper-House Book: Quod negotium quo facilius expediri
posset, electi sunt Episcopi London, Elien, Roffen, Lincoln, and Petriburg,
quibus adjuncti sunt sex de Domo Inferiore; qui constituerent inter se tam de
quantitate solvend. quam etiam de modo and tempore Solutionis.

Eod. Anno Feb. 12 or 13. Deinde, quia Liber Concessonis nondum been absolutus
erat, rogavit Reverendissimus, ut dicti London, etc. cum Prolocutore and
quatuor ex illis ex Inferiore Domo [accederent] ad Cubiculam Reverendissimi in
Aula Regia apud Westminster. circa horam Secundam, etc. ubi ulterius deliberarunt.

Anno 1586. Sess. 7. Mar. 10. The Prolocutor and all the Clergy being sent for
to the Upper-house, Tandem omnes supra nominati in Domum hanc redierunt,
excepto Domino Prolocutore qui cum eisdem Reverendis Patribus post dicessum
reliquorum aliquantisper permansit. Ac deinde in hanc Domum revertens, cum
consensu omnium ut praefertur praesentium, elegit Venerabiles Viros, etc. ad
tractand. and communicand. una secum cum Reverendis Patribus de
Constitutionibus and Decretis, licentia and vigore literarum Paten. per Dominam
nostram Reginam in ea part concessarum, stabiliendis pro Collectione, etc.

Anno 1588. Sess. 3. Dominus Prolocutor significavit universo Coetui, consensum
and concordatum fuisse and esse inter Dominos Praelatos Superioris Domus, quod
Reverendi Patres, Domini Winton, etc. Episcopi, tractarent, Statuerent, and
deliberarent de Subsidio Dominae nostrae Reginae erogando: Et in eundem finem,
Dominus Prolocutor nominavit and elegit Venerabiles Viros [Seven Deans, and
Nine others there nam'd] ut similiter vice ac nominibus totius hujus Coetus
communicarent and tractarent de Subsidio hujusmodi.

Anno 1640. Sess. 3. Apr. 22. Reverendissimus in Examinatores and Correctores
libri Subsidiorum nominavit [Three Bishops by Name] and voluit Prolocutorem and
totum Coetum Domus Inferioris ad eligendum quatuor vel sex graviores viros de
gremio suo, ad idem negotium cum dictis Reverendis Patribus expediend.

Anno cod. Sess. 5. Apr. 25. Reverendissimus, cum Confratrum suorum consensu,
decrevit libitum fore, aliquibus duobus Episcopis, cum quatuor e Coetu Domus
Inferioris aliquo tempore ad dictum librum examinand. and corrigend.

Anno eod. Sess. 22. May 23. Prolocutore dimisso, paulo post revertebat cum
duobus vel tribus e Domo Inferiori: Et Reverendissimus in eorum praesentijs
elegit Dominos Episcopos Winton. Exon. Elien. and Bristol. ad praesentand. cum
ipso instrumentum Benevolentiae sive Contributionis Voluntariae Serenissimo
Domino Regi; and voluit Dominum Prolocutorem ad eligend. Sex aut Octo alios
Domus Inferioris ad similiter praesentand, cum ipso Prolocutore, dictum
Instrumentum.

Anno 1661. May 16. Habito aliquandiu Tractatu inter Reverendum Patrem
[Praesidem] and Reverendos Episcopos Suffraganeos de and super Precibus
Specialibus pro die Nativitatis Domini nostri Regis, etc. 29. die mensis jam
instantis Maij per quatuor Episcopos hujusmodi Dominos, viz. -- in ca parle
respective elect. and per octo Praelatos sive Cleros Domus Inferioris, eligend.
concipendis, etc. And another Committee was appointed, the same Session, and in
the same manner, to Compile the Service of the 30th of January.

Eod. Anno Maij 18. Dominus Commissarius intimavit D. Prolocutori de Precibus
specialibus and particularibus pro Baptizatione nonnullorum Adult. concipiend.
and formand. Et pro conceptione earundem, dictus Reverendus Pater, cum consensu
Fratrum, tres, etc. Episcopos elegit, and voluit dictum Prolocutorem Sex Cleros
e Domo Inferiori eligere ad procedend. cum dictis Episcopis in dicto negotio.

Eod. Anno Jun. 7. A Resolution among the Bishops about a Service for the Fast
Day ( June 12) per quatuor Episcopos hujusmodi Domus -- in ea part respective
electos, and per 8 Praelatos sive Cleros Domus Inferioris eligendos, concipiend.

Eod. Anno Jun. 19. The President and Bishops resolve upon a Committee of
twelve Bishops, and twenty four of the Lower-Clergy, for the Examination of the
Canons, etc. The Bishops being chosen, the President sends for the Prolocutor
and all the Clergy, and omnia and singula praemissa dicto Prolocutori and Domui
Inferiori significavit; and voluit dictum Prolocutorem ad eligendum viginti
quatuor e gremio suo ad conveniend. cum dictis Reverendis Patribus sic ut
praefertur electis.

Eod. Anno Dec. 13. Reverendus Pater una cum Confratribus, etc. tractatum
habuerunt de eligendo personas aptas and idoneas tam ab hujusmodi Domo quam a
Domo Inferiori pro diligenti Examinatione and Revisione Libri Publicarum
Precum, etc. The President names three Bishops, and the Prolocutor, three of
the Clergy.

Anno 1663. Jun. 27. The President names a Committee of Bishops to correct the
Subsidy Bill, Et voluit Prolocutorem and totum Coetum Domus Inferioris ad
eligend. nonnullos graviores viros de gremio suo ad idem negotium cum dictis
Reverendis Patribus expediend.

Anno 1664. May 4. A new Grammar being brought in, and a Committee of Bishops
appointed for the Examination of it, the Prolocutor and Lower House are sent
for; Et Reverendissimus voluit eos ad eligend. certum numerum virorum gravium
and discretorum e Gremio suo ad revidend. and examinand. dictum Librum
Grammaticalem cum dictis Reverendis Patribus per Domum Superiorem nominatis.

Committees of the Clergy alone, ordered by the Upper-House.
II. In the same manner, and by the same Authority, do we find Committees of
the Lower Clergy, ordered for particular business, at times when no Committees
of Bishops were chosen. During the Accounts of the Old Registers, the ordinary
way was for the Archbishop and Bishops to refer or commit the consideration of
such occasional Points to the whole Body of the Clergy, as appears at large
from the VIth and VIIth Chapters. But,

Anno 1555. The Clergy in the Upper-house, Dominus Praeses eos remisit ad
Inferiorem Domum, volens ut inter se eligant. viii. vel x. de gravioribus una
cum Prolocutore, ad audiend. quaedam Arcana non solum ex part Regis and
Reginae, sed etiam Cardinalis Poli, bonum publicum Regni and Ecclesiae
concernen. -- At the same time,

Dominus Elien. vice omnium, (addressing himself to the Lower-Clergy) monuit,
ut eligerent inter se Viros doctos, qui examinarent Canones omnes
Ecclesiasticos quos utiles putarent; si antiqui non Sufficiant, novas
constituant.

Anno 1603. May 2. In the Extracts out of the Upper-house Books, we meet with
these Words: "Bishop of London delivers the Prolocutor a Book of Canons,
desiring him to take a Committee of Eight or Ten to consider of them.

Anno 1640. Sess. 3. Apr. 22. Reverendissimus etc. de mandato Regio voluit
divinam Dei gratiam implorari, ac Formulam Precis ad eundem effectum per duos
doctos and graviores viros Coetus Domus Inferioris, ad hoc per Dominum
Prolocutorem cum consensu totius Coetus dictae Domus eligendos, concipi.

Anno eod. Sess. 10. Maij 13. Reverendissimus Pater Prolocutorem and alios de
Domo Inferior^, Decanos, Archidiaconos, Capitula and Cleri Procuratores ibidem
praesentes voluit, ut ipsi inter se convenirent, and excogitarent de
Benevolentia, etc. and deinde de Canonibus and Constitutionibus Statum
Ecclesiasticum and Ecclesiae Utilitatem concernen. componendis, faciend. and
inter se consentiend. Et ut ipsi, pro meliori negotij istius Expeditione,
quosdam graviores and doctiores Viros de gremio suo eligerent, dictum negotiunt
de Canonibus concipiend. subitur.

Anno 1640. 2 Conv. Sess. 3. The Prolocutor and Six more sent for. Quibus
comparentibus, Reverendissimus eis significavit, quod ipse audivit esse quasdam
discrepantias inter quosdam Clericos citra little Electiones; and voluit eos, ut
ipsi and alij dictae Domus easdem examinarent and determinarent juxta Juris
Exigentiam and Consuetudines cujuslibet Dioeceseos, donec aliter ordinatum
fuerit.

The Names of the Persons Elected, returned to the Upper-house.
III. The Direction of the Upper-house to the Lower for the choice of
Committees, has been also accompanied with a further Order to return an Account
of the Persons Elected; whose Names we find Entered also in the Registers of
the Upper-house, with an express Approbation of the choice by the President and
his Brethren.

Anno 1428. Nov. 20. After the Resolution for the choice of a Committee,
Dominus assignavit eisdem Religiosis and alijs tunc ibidem praesentibus
terminum ad eligend. Personas hujusmodi -- Et ad praesentand. sibi Nomina
hujusmodi Personarum nominandarum in Scriptis -- which were presented
accordingly, Nov. 23. -- And some Years before, Viz.

Anno 1408. It is mentioned as a matter of Duty and Decency, though no particular
order was given, Quarum 24. Personarum Electionem factum idem Inferior Clerus
incontinenti Archiepiscopo and Praelatis in Domo Capitulari, ut decuit, retulit
seu fecit referri.

Anno 1640. Sess. 3. Apr. 22. Dominus Prolocutor cum toto Coetu revertens,
nomine suo and eorum dixit, se and totam Coetum Domus Inferioris praedict.
elegisse in Examinatores and Correctores libri Subsidiorum praedict. cum
praefatis Dominis Episcopis -- Venerabiles Viros [the Names particularly
entered.] Quam Electionem Dominus Archiepiscopus and Confratres sui Approbarunt.

The same Session: Prolecutor venit and dixit, se, cum consensu Coetus Domus
Inferioris elegisse Venerabiles Viros [their Names,] ad concipiend. Formulam
Precis, etc.

Eod. Anno Sess. 10. Maij 30. After the direction to choose a Committee for the
Canons: Et subsequentur Mr. Willelmus Fisher Netarius Pablicus and Domus
Inferioris Actuarius, mihi praefato Notario certificavit in fidem Notarij,
Venerabiles Viros Dom. Prolocutorem [with three Deans, etc. all particularly
Nam'd] esse electos cum consensu totius Domus ad effectum praedict.

Anno 1661. Jun. 19. The President, etc. misit pro Prolocutore and Sex alias
Domus Inferioris ad introducend. Nomina e gremio suo elect. de and super
Negotijs tunc tractat'. Quo Prolocutore una cum sex alijs dictae Domus
Inferioris adveniente, dictus Prolocutor presentavit dicto Reverendo Patri
Domina Episcopo London. Schedulam quandam in papiro Scriptam, continen. Nomina
Praelator^m and Cleri Domi^ Inferioris per eos elect. scil. [the Names all
entered in the Upper-house Book.] Quibus nominibus per me Notarium publicum, de
mandato Reverendi Patris Praesidentis antediuti public perlect. dictus
Reverendus Pater acceptavit little respective Nomina and Pers^s, and di^sit
dictam Prolocutorem, etc.

Anno 1663. Jun. 27. The Prolocutor declares, quod ipse and Coetus Domus
Inferioris de propositis diligenter tractarunt -- seque and totum Coetum Domus
Inferioris elegisse in Examinatores and Correctores Libri Subsidiorum, etc.
Venerabiles Viros, etc. [all the Names entered in the Upper-house Book.] Quam
Electionem Dominus Praeses and Confratres sui Approbarunt.

The Right of the Upper-house to appoint Committees of the Lower, never
questioned before 1689. and 1701.
In this manner, have the Archibishop and Bishops in Convocation required
Committees of the Lower Clergy in order to treat of any Matters they had to lay
before them; either by themselves, or in conjunction with a certain number of
Bishops, as the Upper-house judged most convenient. Nor can I find, that
Obedience to this their Lordships Authority and Appointment was ever Scrupled,
much less denied by the Inferior Clergy of any Age, before the Convocation of
1689. (Sess. 13.) and the last in 1701. (Sess. 18.) Which Denials not
countenanced from any one Precedent, nay, directly opposed by the Numbers we
have produced above, ought certainly to be accompanied with very singular
Circumstances, and some very cogent Reasons arising from thence, to make them
(I will not say Legal, for that nothing under a New Law can do against an
Established Usage) but in any measure Excusable.

This Denial from the Lower House the last Convocation, produced a Resolution
in the Upper, not to receive any Papers from them till the Irregularity of
refusing a Committee was set right: And this having been since so freely
censured as a groundless Exception, and their Lordships thereupon, made the
Authors of breaking the Communication between the Bishops and their Clergy, I
will consider that Instance, and the other of 1689. to see whether they afford
any Circumstances which may cast the Crime on their Lordships side, against the
authority of so long and uninterrupted a Usage.

The Refusal in 1689 had no grounds from the Registers.
1. Anno 1689. Sess. 13. Upper-house Book: Dominus Reverendus Pater Praeses
antedictus [Viz. Episcopus London] proposuit Prolocutori ad nominand. Coetum
Selectum Domus Inferioris Convocationis, ad conveniend. cum Coetu selecto
Superioris Domus Convocationis, in ordine ad inspiciend. Acta ambarum Domum
Convocationis; sed dictus Prolocutor respondebat, se non posse ad id consentire
sine Consensu Coetus Domus Inferioris Convocationis prius habito -- A little
after, Dominus Prolocutor, cum numero copioso Domus Convocationis, comparuit
and declaravit quod dicta Domus noluit consentire ad nominandum Coetum Selectum
eorum Domus ad conveniend. cum Coetu praedict. Domus Superioris Convocationis
ad effect. supra mentionat. durante recessu Convocationis.

Now, the Archbishop and Bishops, having in their Synods an undoubted Right to
the Advice and Assistance of their Presbyters; this act, upon the foundation of
Primitive Practice, was a breach of their Canonical Obedience. Again, the
Archbishop and Bishops in an English Convocation, having ever required their
Clergy's Asistance in this particular of Appointing Committees, and been as
constantly obeyed without the least appearance of Scruple, that Refusal is
further Aggravated by its opposition to the Established Customs of this National
Church. Contrary to which, was the Prolocutor's suspending his Compliance, till
he knew the Pleasure of the House: for this implys that the House had a power,
if they thought fit, to refuse; but more directly so, was the final Resolution
of the House it self. It Is true, that Refusal is represented by the Register
under one Circumstance, which they seem to have offered as the ground of it,
That it was appointed in a Recess of the Convocation. Which Recess, was no more
than a Continuation in the common Form, from December 14. to January 24. and if
the President and Bishops have a Right to order the Choice of Committees to sit
in the Shorter Intervals of Sessions; by what law or Custom are they restrained
from doing the same thing in the Longer. On the other hand, it was not only
lawful, but at that juncture very necessary too for such a Commit to have sat
upon the business proposed by their Lordships, The inspecting the Registers of
both Houses. Because some differences in point of Custom and Privilege had
then hapn'd between the two Houses; and that Recess was a proper opportunity to
rectify what was past, and by that inspection to prevent future
misunderstandings.

The Refusal of a Committee in the last Convocation, proved Irregular.
2. Anno 1701. Sess. 18. Lower House Book: "The Archbishop signifies, in
Writing, the Appointment of a Committee of five Bishops, to meet with any
Committee to be named by the Lower House, not exceeding the number often, to
inspect the Acts of both Houses of Convocation to this time. -- Et super ear
declararunt and ordina ant, "That they are of Opinion, that their Act-Books of
this Session should not be freely inspected as yet; their Lordships not having
expressed the Intention of any such Inspection. -- And then follows an Order,
"That Notice be given to their Lordships, that they have not thought fit to
appoint such a Committee.

The Reasons alleged in the Narrative, particularly answered.
Supposing, that the Lower House had a Right to judge, in what Circumstances it
is fit, or unfit, that Committees be appointed; yet the Members refusing it at
this time, seem to assign a Reason that is somewhat strange. Why not inspected
as yet? and why were their Lordships to give previous Notice of their
Intention? If it was, that the Lower House might have time to frame them into
Acts, and so make them more accurate; they afterward altered their Opinion of
Things, when in the Narrative, Nar. p. 35.
they prize the Minutes of 1640, (more confused, I an sure, by many Degrees
than theirs could be) even above regular Registers, in point of Credit. But,
however the Minutes of 1701 might be industriously disparaged, to give a Color
at least to this their Refusal; their own Journal says expressly, That the Acts
of the foregoing Session were distinctly read at the opening of the next; which
implies a regular Journal; and the fair Copy now in the Register's Office, is
said to be (the greatest part of it, if not all) a Transcript from those Acts.

No inherent Power to admit or decline the Appointment of their Lordships.
This therefore does not seem to be the Reason they abide by; but an Inherent
Power of naming or not naming Committees at pleasure. Thus much the Journal
intimates in the Notice to be given to their Lordships, "That they have not
thought fit to appoint such a Committee; and the Narrative speaks much more
plainly; Nar. p. 61.
We conceive our selves entirely at Liberty, to admit or decline their
Appointments of Committes, as we shall think fit. This is a clear Declaration
of their Principle; and, if I mistake not, the foregoing Account of Committees,
is as clear a Proof, that there was no Ground to make it either their
Principle, or their Practice. The Narrative derives this Power of Refusing,
from being a distinct House; Ibid.
but as the third Chapter of this Book shows the Vanity of their Claims in
general upon that Foundation, so the Instances of Committees to meet the
Bishops, appointed by express Order of the Upper-House, since as much as before
their Separation, are a full Answer in this Particular.

No Power of a Negative, but only in final Resolutions. Nar. p. 61.
Another Reason they add, is, their having Power to dissent from the Proposals
of the Upper-House. But this is doubtfully expressed: If their Meaning be, That
they have a Right to diagree finally from any Matters depending in Convocation,
so as to hinder them from passing into Synodical Acts; I grant it: But that
being confined to the passing of Business, does not help them in any Point
antecedent thereto. Nor can they ever show, either in this or any other Case,
that the English Clergy in Convocation have not at all times readily and
religiously complied with the Directions of their Metropolitan and Bishops,
both as to the Matters recommended to their Consideration, and the Methods and
Circumstances of considering them.

The Right of the Bishops to take Cognizance of the Transactions of the
Lower House. Ibid.
In Vindication of themselves from this Charge of Irregularity, they say
further; We conceive, the only regular way of their Lordships knowing the
Transactions of our House, is by our own voluntary laying 'em before their
Lordships. As if their Lordships had only a Right to direct the Consideration
of Business, and not a Right also to prescribe the time of returning it, and to
call upon them to know their Resolutions, or what Progress they have made. It Is
a part also of the very Office of a Prolocutor, to report to the Upper-House
the Result of their Debates, (as he has frequently explained the Grounds and
Reasons of their Resolutions;) and, on the side of the Archbishop, to do for
him what his Grace formerly did in Person, that is, to deliver to them his
Commands, and to moderate in their Debates; and (according to a former
Observation) to maintain such an Intercourse as may effectually preserve the
Synod in an United State, under one President the Metropolitan of the Province.
Their Actuary also is an Officer of his Grace, and his Wages limited by an
Archiepiscopal Decree, and their Journals finally deposited in the Office of
the Sea, together with those of the Upper-House; where Recourse may be had
equally to both, by all the Members of Convocation. What therefore they mean by
the Archbishop's detaining from them the Journals of the Lower House, to which
they had free Access upon all Occasions; Nar. p. 62.
and what by their saying, The Journals belong to the Arch Bishop's Registry.
That they conceive these Journals of Right to belong to them, I cannot imagine;
much less account for them, either from Reason or Practice: Nor can I conceive
in what Office they would deposit them, were they put into their own
Possession. The Language they use in this Case may be proper in Parliament; but
sounds strange in an English Synod of Bishops and Presbyters; the latter
whereof (the Majority, I mean, of the Lower House) have in this Denial of a
Sight of their Registers, even exceeded the Pattern they propose, the
Honorable House of Commons. For as a mutual Freedom of Recourse to the
Journals of each House, is well known to be the Custom of Parliament; so should
any Jealousies arise between them, and should the one press for such an
Inspection of the Journals; a Refusal from the other would make the Cause on
that side suffer extremely in the Opinion of the World.

The Lower House not to give Instructions in such Committees. Nar. p. 61.
One thing more they plead in their Justification; "That since their Lordships
neither mention any particular Acts they would inspect, nor assign any
particular Reason for such Inspection; we could see no Ground for such a
Committee, nor could we give Instructions for the Management of the Matter to
be considered by it. Their seeing no Ground for such a Committee, resolves into
their first Plea, confuted before, viz. Their Liberty to admit or decline their
Lordships Appointment of Committees as they shall think fit, and their Right by
consequence to judge in what Case there is Ground for Compliance or Refusal.
But that which follows, their giving Instructions for the Management of the
Matter to be considered by it, is a Style familiar enough in Parliament, but
utterly unknown to the Records of Convocation. For as the Upper-House
(according to the forecited Testimonies, from Registers as well Ancient as
Modern) have a Right to order Committees of the Lower, in Conjunction with
those of their own; prescribing withal the Number, and the Time and Place of
meeting, and all this, to consider Matters of their Lordships own proposing; so
the only End of their appointing such joint Committees, is to have the
Assistance of their Clergy in discussing or preparing those Matters: And in
that Case, the Clergy's taking from the Metropolitan and Bishops their
Instructions, what to do, and how to proceed, is exactly agreeable, both to the
original Distinction between Bishops and Presbyters, and to the share that each
has ever had as a constituent part of an English Convocation. But if we suppose
(according to their Scheme) a Right in the Clergy to refuse their Assistance,
or (in case they think fit to comply) to send their Members under the Restraint
of special Instructions, and by that means prepared rather to stand upon Terms
with their Lordships, than to assist them; whether a Meeting in these
Circumstances would not show us a Coordinate Power of Presbyters with their
Bishops, let the World judge.

Instructions proper only when they appoint Committees of their own.
When they appoint Committees of their own, and upon Business depending in
their own House, they are then at Liberty to give what Instructions they think
fit; because, as the Matters to be debated, so also the Methods and Ends of
debating them, are all within their own Power. And in the present Case, had
they thought fit, either before or after the Appointment by their Lordships, to
choose a Committee to give them Information from the Acts of either House in any
Point whatsoever; that Choice, and their Instructions thereupon, had (without
doubt) been very regular. But when the Archbishop and Bishops; in virtue of
their original Right to require the Assistance of their Clergy, do call for it
in the way of a Committee, to attend a certain number of their own Body; in
that Case, the Directions belong solely to the Upper-House, and the Clergy have
no other part besides Assisting and Advising.

Indeed, if Matters were to be finally determined in Committees, then it would
be necessary for the Clergy (who would in that case be concluded by their Act)
to put their Members under Restraints agreeable to the Sense and Intention of
the House: And this they might do, in virtue of their final Negative upon the
Archbishop and Bishops. But Committees are well known to be only for Debate and
Preparation; and if the Lower House think themselves concerned in the Matter or
Tendency of their Lordships Enquiries, they are wholly free (after the
Discharge of their Duty there) to make what farther Searches or Resolutions
they please; and that also, in the manner they think most proper, i. e. either
in the whole House, or by a Committee of their own voluntary Choice.

The Lower House never consent to the chosing, but only to the Persons or
Numbers.
What I have observed and replied to, is all they urge to justify their Refusal
of a Committee: And I know but one thing more, that gives any Color to that
Act, viz. Its being sometimes said in the forecited Passages about the
Appointment of such Committees, that 'twas done among the Lower-Clergy, with
the Consent of the House. It was so, after the Prolocutor (in pursuance of the
Direction from the Upper-House) had nominated the Persons according to the
Number prescribed; that is, 'twas consented and agreed to by the House, that
those particular Persons should be the Committee; and the same Right of
Consenting they had to the Number also, when that was not fixed and determined
Above. But before 1689, it was never made a Question among the Lower-Clergy,
whether they should comply with their Lordships in the Appointment of a
Committee, or whether the Prolocutor should immediately proceed to the
Nomination; or, lastly, whether they should choose any other Number than that
specified in their Lordships Order. The Course of such Choices, in the
Lower House, at the same time with the Upper, is distinctly described in their
Journal, 1588. Sess. 3. That Day's Extracts out of the Upper-House Books, say,
A Committee of both Houses chosen to consider of a Subsidy. Accordingly, the
Execution of it in the Lower House is described thus: Dominus Prolocutor [upon
his coming from the Upper-House] significavit Universo Coetui, consensum and
concordatum fuisse and esse inter Dominos Praelatos Superioris Domus, quod
Reverendi Patres [three Bishops, nam'd] tractarent, statuerent, and
deliberarent de Subsidio Dominae nostrae Reginae erogando: Et in eundem finem,
Dominus Prolocutor Nominavit and Elegit Venerabiles Viros [seven Deans, with
nine others, nam'd] ut similiter, vice ac nominibus totius hujus Coetus,
communicarent and tractarent de Subsidio hujusmodi. Necnon consensum and
assensum omnium supra nominatorum hujus Domus in Electionem suam hujusmodi
petiit and sine mora obtinuit. The Prolocutor, we see, proceeded immediately to
the Nomination of the Persons; and no Consent was given or asked, but only to
the Persons so nominated. But in the Year 1640. Sess. 10. May 13. when the
Upper-House Register tells us, That in the Business of the Canons, the Clergy
were only directed, in general, Quosdam graviores and doctiores viros de gremio
suo eligere, and no particular Number was assigned; then the Minutes mention
the Houses Consent to the Number also, and to the Proportion of Deans,
Archdeacons, and Proctors: Consensum fuit ut Duodecim e dicta Domo, viz. tres
Decani, tres Archidiaconi, duo Procuratores pro Ecclesiis Cathedralibus, and
quatuor Procuratores Cleri, Eligantur pro Examinatione Canonum; and then,
giving the Names of the Persons nominated, they mention the Approbation of them
as a distinct Act.

The Lower House chargeable with all the Consequences of refusing a Committee.
This is a plain State, as of the general Power of the President and Bishops to
order Committees of the Inferior Clergy, so particularly of the Right they had
to make that Appointment, with which the Majority of the last Lower House
refused to comply; and by their Refusal, gave Rise to one unhappy Difference in
that Convocation. But yet, as if the Blame evidently lay on the side of the
Bishops, and nothing but Innocence on the other, their Lordships stand charged
in the late Narrative with all the Consequences of this Irregularity. His
Grace, who had it in his Power to censure an Act of Disobedience (so
mischievous to Episcopacy, and to the Constitution of an English Synod) with
the Severity it would have justified; was pleased to signify his own and his
Brethrens Dislike of it in a milder way, by refusing to receive any thing at
their hands till that Irregularity was set right: And their Lordships hoped,
such gentle Methods might bring them to a calmer Consideration of what they had
done. Not. p. 56, 58.
But so far was this from having the intended Effect, that his Grace and the
Bishops are openly accused of endeavoring, by that Act, to cut off all
Communication between the two Houses. A Return, that good Nature and an
obliging Treatment must sometimes expect to meet with in this World.

I know not whether it be worth while to take notice here of the Publisher of
the Narrative, who tells the World of a Position laid down in the first Letter,
Page 7.
that I knew to be false, viz. the Power of the Archbishop to order the Choice
of Committees, and the Number of which they shall consist. That Page and this
Chapter compared, may make the Zealous Man more cautious for the future, how he
charges others with speaking against their Knowledge. I will not therefore say,
he wrote that Preface against Knowledge; I charitably believe, and am pretty
sure, he wrote without it.

CAHP. IX.
The Right of the Archbishop and Bishops to prescribe a Time for the Return of
Business committed to the Clergy.
WHen the President and Bishops have put Business into the hands of the Lower
Clergy, in a Body or a Committee; their Lordships have frequently thought fit
to appoint a certain time for the Return of it. In other Cases also, they have
called upon the Clergy for their Answers; who as often as they were not in a
readiness to give it, have desired a further Day: a plain acknowledgment of
their Lordships title to the disposal of their Time. All these will be proved
from the Registers in a regular Deduction of Instances; according to the method
in which their Right to direct the Matter and Manner of the Clergy's
Proceedings, has been already explained.

The time for the return of the Clergy's Answers expressly prescribed.
I. The President and Bishops have frequently prescribed a Time for the Return
of the Clergy's Answers.

Anno 1369. 10. Kal. Febr. The Archbishop directs the Clergy to draw up their
Petitions in Writing, and quod sibi porrigerent die Veneris -- ita quod super
eis cum suis Confratribus poterit consulere and deliberare.

Anno 1373. December. 2. Upon a like Order, it is added, quod Responsiones darent
die proxime sequenti.

Anno 1428. Nov. 20. Et tunc Dominus assignavit eisdem Religiosis and alijs
tunc ibidem praesentibus terminum ad eligendum personas hujusmodi -- and ad
praesentandum sibi Nomina hujusmodi Personarum nominandarum.

Anno 1433. Nov. 10. Upon the Clergy's desire to consult among themselves about
the Matter proposed, Dominus libere concessit; praecipiens eisdem quatenus
circa eadem Motiva, cum alijs ab eisdem dependentibus, usque ad diem Jovis
diligenter and unanimiter laborarent.

Anno 1434. Octo. 20. The Clergy being directed by the President to prepare
business, receive this additional Order, quod ipsis coram eo and Confratribus
suis ostenderent and exhiberent die Veneris prox.

Anno 1529. Apr. 15. Reverendissimus recessit a Convocatione, and commisit
vices suas Episcopis London and Winton. qui fecerunt Responsiones [to a
complaint of the Parliament] rursum legi coram Inferiore Domo; quae petijt
Copiam earundem Responsionum; and assignatus est dies Veneris ad inferendas
Opiniones suas super praemissis Responsionibus,

Anno 1541. Sess. 2. Reverendissimus tradidit Prolocutori quosdam Libros
examinand. and conficerent leges de Simonia vitanda; and referrent Judicia sua
proxima Sessione.

Anno 1555. Sess. 2. The Commissary puts a Copy of a Diploma into their hands,
volens eos mature consulere, and refer Opiniones proxima Sessione.

Anno 1562. Martij 1. Reverendssimus tradidit Domino Prolocutori Librum [de
Disciplina] mandando, quod additis hujusmodi Capitulis sic excogitatis, ipsum
Librum cum Additionalibus praedictis denuo exhibeat coram eodem Reverendissimo
and Confratribus suis in proxima Sessione.

The Clergy's Answers called for.
II. When the Business committed to the Clergy was not voluntarily returned
within the Time expected, the President and Bishops have called for it; and
have also granted a longer term for Consideration, at the Clergy's request.

Anno 1417. December. 3. Certain Persons out of every Diocese had been elected (
Nov. 26.) to consider of methods how to promote the Students in the University
of Oxford; and, Dec. 3. Dominus Archipiescopus petijt a Personis supra
nominatis si aliquid effectualiter laborassent circa materiam praetractatam, de
Relevamine scilicet Studentium and Universitatum.

Anno 1426. Apr. 17. Dominus petijt a Clero utrum ad tunc plene fuissent
deliberati, quomodo foret procedendum in negotio eisdem, die praecedenti, per
ipsum recitato; qui responderunt quod protunc non plene fuerant advisitati in
eadem; Dominus mandavit eis ut ad Domum Inferiorem redirent, ad tractandum and
deliberendum.

Anno 1428. Nov. 18. Upon a Motion ( Nov. 17.) that Heretics might
occasionally be received and imprisoned in the Religious-Houses, when sent
thither by the Ordinary; the Religious desire time to consider: And the next
Day, Dominus petijt a Religiosis, si deliberassent de and super materia
supradicta; qui responderunt, quod non; sed petierunt adhuc delationem
deliberandi in hac part usque in crastinum: Cui adhuc Petitioni Dominus ex
consensu fratrum suorum annuit bono cord.

Anno eod. Nov. 20. Dominus petijt a Religiosis, si adhuc deliberassent de and
super Materia praelibata alias eis ministrata pro deliberatione habenda: Qui
respenderunt, se nondum plenarie deliberasse in hac part. Et quia (ut
asseruerunt) Materiailla, ut eis videbatur, gravis erat, ac res quaedam
insolita and inaudita, supplicarunt Domino pro deliberatione ulteriori in hac
part habenda; ad finem, quod possent communicare cum Jurisperitis, ne eis aut
eorum Privilegijs seu Indultis Apostolicis praejudicium aliquod generaretur.
Cui supplicationi Dominus adhuc annuens, eis ad plene deliberandum, and
finaliter respondendum in hac part terminum assignavit, viz. diem Martis prox.
tunc sequentem.

Anno eod. Nov. 23. Dominus petiit a Religiosis finale responsum, etc. Qui
responderunt, ipsos adhuc non deliberasse in hac part: Unde Dominus eisdem
assignavit terminum adhuc ad finaliter respondendum in praemissis, diem, viz.
Jovis tunc prox.

Anno 1433. Nov. 17. Praesidente Reverendissimo Patre, etc. and examinato Clero
quid adhuc in praefatis Motivis and dubiis cum suis Incidentibus esset
finaliter sentiendum; responsum extitit per Magistrum Thomam Bekyngion
Praelocutorem, non complete adhuc determinatum; and thereupon the Archbishop
continued the Convocation to a further day.

Anno 1439. Dec. 22. Dominus petiit responsum finale a Clero reddend. quaiiter
deliberati fuerint quoad Subsidium praelibatum concedend. Domino Regi: Et
incontinenti Mr. Ricardus Prolocutor Cleri, nomine totius Cleri hujusmodi,
Domino quandam Cedulam, etc. praesentavit.

Anno 1444. Oct. 24. Dominus petiit Responsum a Clero, qualiter deliberati
fuerant, quantum ad Subsidium -- and quid Sentirent de litera Regia pro die
Translationis S. Edwardi, etc. Upon which, the Prolocutor makes his Report to
the President and Bishops.

Anno 1529. Sess. 33. Dominus Prolocutor petiit longiorem terminum ad
consultandum de Articulis praedictis: Unde Reverendissimus assignavit horam
primam ejusdem diei.

Anno eod. Sess. 34. Intravit Prolocutor and Clerus, dicentes, se non habere
tempus consultandi, and petierunt longiorem terminum; and Reverendissimus
concessit horam secundam ejusdem diei.

Anno eod. Sess. 45. Intravit Prolocutor, and petiit Dilationem super eisdem
Constitutionibus legendis; and Reverendissimus concessit usque in proximam
Sessionem: In the foregoing Session, there was put into the Prolocutor's hands,
Libellus quarundam Constitutionum examinand.

Anno eod. Sess. 47. Prolocutor petiit longiorem terminum super
Constitutionibus.

Anno 1557. Sess. 5. Praesidens, etc. advocato Prolocutore, rogabat quid Clerus
deliberasset de Subsidio: Qui eorum nomine respondit, omnes aequum sentire,
etc. but that they had not agreed de modo and tempore Solutionis. Ideo
rogarunt, ut alius dies ad deliberandum Statueretur, qui datus est, viz. dies
Mercurij prox. sequens, hora secunda post meridiem.

Inferences from the foregoing Testimonies.
The Inferences from these Appointments of Time by the Bishops, and Requests
for a further day by the Clergy, will be obvious to every Reader, without my
leading him to them. For there cannot be more plain and direct Testimonies of
any thing, than these are of the general Influence and Authority of the Upper
House over the business of Convocation, and particularly over the Debates and
Consultations of the Inferior Clergy: Who would not have petitioned for a
Respite of their Answer and Report, or offered Reasons why they could not be
ready against the Time appointed them; but that they knew it was in the Power
of their Superiors to require it then, and were desirous to satisfy their
Lordships that their not being able to give it, was not want of duty, but
purely of time. Nor would they have requested, in the last Instance, ut alius
dies ad deliberandum Statueretur, had it been in their own Power to meet and
deliberate on Intermediate Days: Which may deserve the consideration of those
who have been such Zealous Advocates of late, not only for Meeting and doing
business in the Intervals of Sessions (for that the Clergy have often done, and
are bound to do at the command of the Upper-House,) but also for an Inherent
Power in themselves to come together on those Days, to act in all respects as a
House, and to compute such Meetings among the Synodical Sessions. Which (not
only without their Bishops, but in defiance of them) are an uncommon Separation
of a Synod, and cannot be seen or considered by any Impartial Man, without
bringing to his mind a Presbyterian Assembly.

The same Persons may also please to observe, how ill these Instances of the
Upper House's Authority in point of Time, agree with their new Scheme of
Alliance between the Honorable House of Commons and the Lower House of
Convocation. And particularly, the Publisher of the Preface may know from
hence, Pref. p. 7. 1. Let. p.
that I wrote not like him, at all Adventures, much less (as he lays the
Charge) against my own Conscience, when I asserted this Power of prescribing a
Time for the Return of their Answers.

CHAP. X.
The Right of the Archbishop and Bishops to require the Answers of the Clergy
in Writing.
THat the Upper House have a Power to prescribe the Time within which the
Answers of the Clergy shall be returned, has been proved in the foregoing
Chapter; and the design of this, is to show their Right to direct the Manner of
their Answers; particularly, to Require a Report either Verbal or in Writing,
as their Lordships shall judge most suitable to the nature of the Business
recommended to their Consideration. The last Lower House refused to answer in
Writing.
For upon this Point it is, that the Difference in the last Convocation about
Continuations or Adjournments remains (as to the two Houses) undetermined to
this day. The Archbishop and Bishops drew up the Reasons of their Claim in
Writing, and delivered them to the Inferior Clergy; not only expecting, but
directly insisting upon a written Reply. This was refused by the Majority of
the Lower House; who resolved to return no Answer in Writing, but only viva
voce at a free Conference with their Lordships: And there the matter rested
upon this general Question, Whether the Upper House have a right to require of
the Clergy an Answer in Scriptis; which I conceive the following Instances
clearly determine.

The Clergy's obligation to answer in Writing when required.
Anno 1396. 10 Kal. Febr. The Clergy having granted a Supply on condition to
have Grievances redressed, Archiepiscopus voluit, quod Clerus and Religiosi
Petitiones suas super dictis Injurijs, Violentijs, and Gravaminibus, in
Scriptis redigerent, and sibi porrigerent in die Veneris.

Anno 1411. Dec. 2. The Archbishop directs the Proctors of the Clergy, if they
had any Grievances to offer, Quod vellent and deberent citra diem Veneris
extunc proxima futur, coran: Convocatione Dominorum in Domo Capitulari
seriosius intimare. -- And on Friday, Coram Archiepiscopo, etc. comparuerunt
Procuratores Cleri, qui plura referebant Gravamina; allegantes quod de tot and
tantis se sentijt Clerus malis pergravatum, quod nisi in Scriptis contineantur,
non possent de facili recenseri. -- They retire, and the Archbishop and
Bishops debate about the Grievances. Returning about Eleven a Clock, Per
Dominum Archiepiscopum adtunc mandabatur, quod citra proximum diem
Convocationis exhibeant and declarent articulatim Gravamina sua in Scriptis
redacta. Grievances and Subsidies were the chief things that came from the
Clergy in those Days; and this, with other Instances of the same kind upon that
Head, shows, that it was not the ordinary way to offer their Grievances in
Writing, Vid. Infra Cap. 12.
except they were required to do it by the Archbishop and his Brethren.

Anno 1428. Nov. 20. Dominus assignavit Religiosis, and alijs tunc ibidem
praesentibus, terminum ad eligend. Personas [viz. a Committee] and ad
praesentandum sibi nomina bujusmodi Personarum nominandarum in Scriptis.

Eod. Anno Dec. 7. Et quia Clerus Provincie, prout tunc ibidem recitatum erat,
etc. sentijt se gravatum; ex communi deliberatione Domini and Confratrum
suorum, ac totius Concilij, extitit avisatum, ut Gravamina bujusmodi concipi
deberent, and redigi in Scripturam.

Anno 1434. Oct. 8. The Archbishop, in explaining the Causes of calling the
Convocation, reckons up several Grievances of the Church: Et tunc habita
Communicatione super bujusmodi Gravaminibus, ordinatum erat tunc ibidem, ut
bujusmodi Gravamina, ac alia quaecunque in quibus Clerus se sentijt gravari,
necnon si quae forent Crimina and excessus infra Clerum usitat'. quae
necessaria Reformatione indigerent, in Scriptis redigerentur.

Anno 1452. Feb. 15. Prolocutor interrogatus a Reverendissimo Patre, an
quicquam voluisset pro part Cleri in Ecclesia Anglicana Reformatione dignum
proponere; continuo and quasi ex insperato quamplurima, etc. proposuit. Et quia
non erat facile, singula per ipsum ibidem exposita, memoriae, quae admodum
labilis cst, commendare, idcirco admonait eundem Prolocutorem Reverendissimus
Pater, ut singula per eum in bac part proposita, redigeret in Literas, and
Concilio traderet before and maturius super eisdem deliberatur'.

Anno 1460 May 13. Propositis coram Reverendissimo Patre, and alijs in Domo
Capitulari protunc ibidem existentibus, quibusdam Articulis per Prolocutorem
viva voce, dictus Reverendissimus Pater decrevit bujusmodi Articulos sic viva
voce declarat'. in scriptis redigi.

Anno 1529. Sess. 104. Episcopus London Commissarius recitavit voluntatem
Reverendissimi super praelicta Supplicatione, [ viz. an Address of the House of
Commons to the King] and voluit Prolocutorem, etc. quod concipiant Responsa sua
in Scriptis.

Anno 1557. Sess. 3. Deinde monuit Locum tenens Praelatos Inferioris Domus, ut
ipsi exhiberent in Scriptis quod Reformandum putarent.

Anno 1562. (when the 39 Articles were settled) Feb. 19. Reverendissimus, de
and cum cansensu Fratrum suorum, tradidit quosdam Articulos in Scriptis
conceptos; mandando quatenus super contentis in dictis Articulis diligenter
inquirerent, ac quicquid inde invenerint, in Scriptis redigant, ac dicto
Reverendissimo porrigant and exbibeant.

Anno 1588. Dominus Prolocutor universo Coetui significavit volantatem
Reverendissimi caeterorunque Praelatorum Superioris Domus esse, quod si aliquis
bujus Domus noverit quenquam Ministrum de quo just conqueri possit, quod
contra Leges Ecclesiasticas, nunc temporis auctoritate legitima receptas and
approbatas, se gessit and gerit; aut si aliquis noverit quenquam qui Canones in
ultima Convocatione approbatos and editos violoverit; eosdem in Scriptis
denunciarent Reverendissimo Domino Cant. Archiepiscopo caeterisque Dominis
Praelatis praedict. pro debita Correctione and Reformatione in ea part fienda.

Anno 1640. Sess. 2. Archbishop Laud having recommended to the Clergy the
Consideration of certain Canons and Constitutions, adds, Et quicquid inde
senserint sive excogitaverint, in Scriptis redigant, and coram ipso
Reverendissimo and Confratribus suis Episcopis exhibeant.

Ead. Conv. Sess. 3. Reverendissimus, etc. Schedulas Domino Prolocutori
tradidit, Coetui Domus Inferior is proponendas, legendas, and publicandas; cum
monitione, quod Copias earum cuicunque tradere minime praesumat. Et si aliquis
dictae Domus aliquid dictis Capitulis contrarium proponat, porrigat in
Scriptis, and in manus Doproponat, Prolocutoris Domino Archiepiscopo and
caeteris Episcopis Domus Superioris exhibiturum, ut ipsi de eisdem consultarent.

The State of this Case between the two Houses, in the last Convocation.
Thus has the Practice of Convocation stood; and it is certainly agreeable to
the natural Reason of the thing, that they who have a Right to direct the
Consideration of Business, and to prescribe a time for returning it, should
also be the proper Judges, whether the Purposes they have in their Eye, be most
effectually answered in Writing, or by a verbal Report. Not to insist therefore
upon the evident Necessity of Writing in this case, (upon a Point wholly new,
to be determined from Records, some of which are very obscure and imperfect,
and where a diligent Examination and Comparison of all Particulars was
absolutely necessary;) nor yet to observe, that the Refusal of so fair a
Method, is a strong Presumption, that the Advocates themselves distrusted their
Cause: Not, I say, to insist upon these (however of moment toward the
Justification of their Lordships) the Case, and all the Consequences of it,
depend principally upon this, Whether the Archbishop and Bishops have a Right
to require the Clergy as often as they judge it expedient, to bring their Answers
in Writing? Because, if that Right be vested in them, the Refusal on the other
side was a manifest Violation of it; and so the Refusers became obnoxious to
the Censure of the Upper-House, and chargeable with all the Mischiess arising
from that Act of Disobedience. For so I must beg Leave to call it, after so
many plain Precedents of a Command to the Lower-Clergy, to put their Opinions
in Writing, without any one Mark of Doubt or Scruple, whether it should be
complied with, before the last Convocation. And then indeed it was not only a
Scruple, but a flat Denial, and a peremptory Resolution, Not to descend to any
Particulars upon the Point of Continuation, but in the way of a free
Conserence. Upon the Proposal whereof by those of the Lower House, (Sess. 12.)
with a Declaration of their Lordships, that they insisted upon an Answer in
Writing; it was put to the Question, (Sess. 13.) "Whether the House would give
their Answer in Writing at large, or desire a free Conference; and carried for
a free Conference. Again, (Sess. 14.) it was resolved, that an humble
Application be renewed to their Lordships for a free Conference.

Free Conference, a Term unknown in Convocation.
This is a new Term, borrowed from the Proceedings of Parliament, and never
known in any Convocation before the last. The Acts frequently speak of the
Colloquia and Tractatus which the Archbishop and his Brethren had, in the
Upper-House, with the Prolocutor and some of the Inferior Clergy; or (if their
Lordships so ordered it) with the Prolocutor alone. No such free Conference
ever desired by the Clergy.
But I don't remember, in all the Registers before 1689. any Instance of the
Clergy's desiring a Conference of any kind, except one in the Year 1661. the
Circumstances whereof were widely different from the present Case; and they
were then very far from insisting upon it, against the express Resolution of
the Upper-House. The occasion was this: During the Consideration of the
Liturgy, the Lower House had certain Emendations ready to be carried up to
their Lordships. Dec. 12. Dominus Prolocutor, cum consensu, ut asserebatur,
totius Domus Inferioris ad Praesidentem and Domum Inferiorem missus est, ad
petend'. se cum tribus vel duobus alijs e Domo Inferiori admitti ad conferend'
cum Dominis Episcopis in Domo sua seden'. Dictoque Prolocutore, etc. admisso
and adveniente, dictus Prolocutor praesentavit Domino Praesidenti, and tradidit
in manibus suis, nonnullas Papiri Schedas, Emendationes alicujus labri
pubiicarum Precum concernen. These were read, debated, and approved; and then
the Prolocutor, etc. was dismissed. The occasion of their making this Request,
seems to have been a necessity of their explaining to their Lordships the
Grounds and Reasons of some of the Alterations they had then made. But what is
all this to such a free Conference as is practiced in Parliament and was now
proposed by the Inferior Clergy; in which Managers of both Sides were to be
appointed, with special Instructions from each House. The Prolocutor in 1661.
desired to confer with their Lordships, who thinking it in that particular a
proper way of receiving the sense of the Lower House, immediately admitted him.
But neither he nor the House insisted upon that, as the only way in which they
would give their Opinions; much less did they resist an express command from
their Lordships to put them in Writing; which was the Case in the last
Convocation, and very unlike the Daciful Proceedings of the Clergy who assisted
in that Revisal and Establishment of our Liturgy.

Inferences in vindication of their Lordships.
As to the Case in hand, their Lordships had undoubredly a Right to require the
Answers of the Lower House in Writing; and judging it a necessary method of
coming to a true State of the point of Continuations then in dispute, did
insist upon their right, and directly required Obedience. On the other hand,
the Clergy refused to do it, and persisted in that Refusal; and not only so,
but proceeded also to the Irregularities of Adjourning to different Days and by
the consent of their House. Afterward, as if the Obstruction had laid wholly
on their Lordships side, they passed a formal Vote ( May 22.) for a Request to
their Lordships, pressing them to put some end to the present difference
between the two Houses in relation to their Prorogations and Adjournments.
Considering how themselves were then in a State of Contempt, upon refusing to
comply with the Lawful Commands of their Superiors, and that nothing but this
their Refusal put a stop to the measures of Accommodation; I appeal to any
imparial Man, whether that Motion, intended to be made to the Upper House, was
fit to be offered any where but in the Lower, in which the Obstruction solely
lay.

CHAP. XI.
The Right of the President and Bishops to take to them the Assistance of
Persons learned in the Law, etc.
BEsides the Opinion and Assistance of the Inferior Clergy acting in
conjunction with the President and Bishops, as Members of the same Convocation;
their Lordships have a separate Power to advise with Counsel either in the
Common or Civil Law, upon any difficulty in the Course of their Proceedings; in
Cases, more especially, where there is any danger or appearance of their
interfering with the Statutes and Customs of the Realm. The Manner of taking
their Advice, has been either by admitting them to the Debates of the House, or
appointing a Select number of Bishops to lay before them any Doubts or
Difficulties that were in their way, and to desire the Opinion.

Anno 1419. Sess. 3. Coram Archiepiscopo, etc. adductus fuit quidam Ricardus
Walker, etc. quem (ut asserebatur) Prior Ecclesiae Cath. Wigorn. tanquam
Sortilegum, and de Sortilegio suspectum, etc. apprehenderat -- Being examined,
he was remanded to Prison, usque deliberari posset per Jurisperitos qua poena
talis Sortilegus esset per Jurisperitos puniendus.

Anno 1425. Jun. 8. Two Heretics remanded in the same manner, Donec
Reverendissimus Pater, de concilio and avisamento Confratrum suorum, ac
Jurisperitorum, deliberaret quid cum eis faciend. censeret, and si in Poenam
Relapsus cecidissent neone.

Anno 1428. Upon the Question, Whether the Religious should receive Heretics
as Prisoners into their Houses, the Register adds, Et quia, ut asseruerunt,
materia illa (ut eis videbatur) gravis erat, ac res quaedam insolita and
inaudita, Supplicarunt Domino pro deliberatione ulteriori in hac part habenda,
ad finem quod possent communicare cum Jurisperitis, ne eis aut eorum
Privilegijs seu Indultis Apostolicis praejudicium aliquod generaretur.

Anno 1460. Maij. 20. Administratis per Mr. Johannem Stoks Praelocutorem, etc.
certis Articulis utilitatem Regis and Regni Angliae and defensionem Ecclesiae
Anglicanae concernentibus, Reverendissimus Pater cum consensu suorum Confratrum
in dicta Convocatione praesentium, elegit certos viros praeeminentis Scientiae,
viz. Magistros Rob. Styllington, etc. Legum Doctores, ad interessend.
pertractand. and consiliand. cum cis de and super hujusmodi Articulis; coram
dicto Reverendissimo Patre, and suis Confratribus, etc.

Anno 1586. Sess. 3. Mar. 3. Lower House Book, Dominus Prolocutor significavit
praesentem Voluntatem Reverendissimi ac aliorum Dominorum Praelatorum de
benevola Contributione, etc. and quod de bujusmodi Libello concipiendo maturior
deliberatio cum Jurisperitorum consilio habeatur.

Anno 1640. Sess. 12. May 16. Upon a Debare concerning the Fees for Charchings,
etc. Reverendissimus, cum Consilio and assensu Praelatorum and Confretrum
suorum, negotium hujusmodi Attornato Generali Domini Regis significand, fore
decrevit, ut ipse de aliquo Remedio pro eis in hac part curaret.

Eod. Anno Sess. 13. Reverendissimus, cum Confratrum consensu, elegit Dominos
Episcopos Elien and Bristol, ad consulendum cum utroque Dominorum
Justiciariorum Primariorum citra certas Clausulas and Verba in Canonibus contra
Recusantes. They make their Report, Sess. 15. that Sir Edward Littleton
advised, ut quaedam verba in isto Canone expungerentur, and alia verba magis
apta in loco eorum conscriberentur.

Eod. Anno Sess. 25. Reverendissimus in praesentijs Domini Johannis Lamb
Militis, etc. qui ad informandum Reverendissimum and Episcopos vocati sunt,
tractavit cum Domino Prolocutore citra Canones.

Anno 1661. Jan. ult. A Question arising, Whether the Bishops might be present
in the House of Lords in Causes of Blood, Concordatum and ordinatum fuit, de
and cum consensu totius Domus [Superioris] ad censulend. Jurisperitos tam in
Foro Seculari quam in Curijs Civilibus and Ecclesiasticis versatos, de and
super dicta Quaestione sive Argumento, erga proximam Convocationem.

Anno 1662. Apr. 12. Habito tractatu de Subscriptionibus Clericorum
Instituendorum, etc. Dominus Episcopus London Praesidens, etc. curam commisit
Reverendis Patribus, etc. ad consulend. Jurisperitos de concipienda Forma in
Scriptis in and circa Subscriptionem praedict.

Application of these testimonies
I produce these Evidences, to justify their Lordships from the Reflections
cast upon them, for declining to join the Lower House in the Censure of
Toland's Book. The History of which Case, with the Reasonableness of what they
did therein, is set forth at large in the History of the Proceedings of the
Upper House; and comes no otherwise under my Consideration, than as their
Lordships appear from hence to have acted agreeably to the Practice of
Convocation, in advising with Council, and upon that Advice determining
themselves.

The necessity of having recourse to Council about the Censure of Books.
The Penalties of the Statute, 25 H. 8. c. 19. (upon the extent whereof, the
Question depended) are very great; and if incurred in Convocation, would have
affected the whole Body of the Clergy of this Province. And therefore my Lords
the Bishops (the Governors of the Church) could not involve the Clergy, either
of this or future times, in a difficulty of that nature, by omitting any
methods of informing themselves whether the Act could be clearly warranted in
Law. And who were so fit to be their Guides in that Point, as Council Learned
in the Law? to whom Recourse has been ever had in all Doubts of the same
nature; as it was particularly in the Convocation of 1689. and upon this very
Question too, viz. the Power they had in Law to pass a Censure of this kind.

As their Lordships must be presumed to have taken the Advice and Opinion of
the Ablest Men in the Profession, and such withal whom they knew to be Persons
of honor and integrity; so it becomes not me, or any other Person so little
entitled to Accomplishments of that kind, to call in question either the
Justness or the Conscience of that Opinion. The Narrative of the Lower House
says, P. 53.
that though some eminent Lawyers were against it, there were others perhaps as
eminent, who are of a contrary Opinion. It may be so, but did my Lords the
Bishops understand so much? or suppose they had, such a Difference in Opinions
is no uncommon thing; nor must we in many cases ever determine our selves, if we
stay till all Men be unanimous. Their Lordships therefore having applied to
those of the Profession, in whom they thought they could entirely confide, had
reason to acquiesce in the Judgment they gave; especially, when they were so
expressly warned that the Effects of their Acting against it were to reach the
whole Body, and so themselves became thereby much more inexcusable for
endangering that Body, after a Caution given them by such competent Judges, and
upon so much deliberation.

Their recommending the Case to the B. of the Diocese agreeable to the Practice
of Convocation.
But the Statute being a Restraint upon the Convocation only, and not upon the
Ecclesiastical Courts of every Bishop, confirmed and established by Law; their
Lordships, desirous to discourage the publication of such Books by all methods
consistent with the Clergy's safety, recommended that matter to the Bishop in
whose Diocese the Offender resided, and who upon that account had a right to
Summon and prosecute him in a Legal way. A method, that we find taken in Cases
of that kind, even while the Convocation had an indisputable right not only to
judge of Heretical Doctrines, but to convene, censure, and punish the Heretic.

Anno 1416. May 23. One John Barton, of the Diocese of Lincoln, was accused of
holding Heretical Opinions: And, May 26. the Register says, Praefatus Dominus
Johannes Barton, per Dominum Cantuariensem fuit deliberatus Reverendo Patri
Philippo Lincoln Episcopo, ut ipse procederet contra eum Secundum Canonicas
Sanctiones.

Again, at the conclusion of the same Convocation we find this Entry:
Memorandum, quod Ds. Robertus Chapel, etc. post dictam Convocationem finitam,
etiam ex deliberatione and confilio Praelatorum inibi existentium, fuit
remissus ad Episcopum Roffensem, ad effectum quod ipse procederet contra eum,
prout de jure fuerit procedend.

Anno 1428. July 16. The Rector of Heggely, of the Diocese of Lincoln, being
examined in Convocation, tandem Dominus mandavit ut idem Robertus traheret se
ad partem, and ordinavit ut Confrater suus Episcopus Lincoln, etc. procederet
contra eundem, ut Ordinarius suus in hac part.

Anno 1430. Mar. 2. In the Case of one Thomas Bagley accused of Heresy, Dominus
videns quod ipse and Confratres sui nihil possent proficere in eo ad
aedificationem Animae suae, mandavit Domino London, ut ipsum reciperet, and
contra eum procederet, Secundum quod in hac part dictaverunt Sanctiones. And,
Mar. 5. Dominus assignavit eidem Thomae diem Veneris tunc prox. ad audiend.
Sententiam ferend. contra eum, per Dominum Willielmum London. Ordinarium suum,
pro eo quod in Diaecesi sua extitit Beneficiatus.

Anno 1463. July 16. An accusation being brought in against one of the Diocese
of Winchester, Dominus commisit eum Confratri suo Willelmo Winton, Episcopo
puniend.

And in the very Convocation of 1689 (the Right Reverend the Bishop of London
Presiding, and the present Bishops of Rochester, Winchester, Exeter, and
Worcester, being then Members of the Upper House) this method was marked out to
them, as appears from the Declaration they then made, viz.

Anno 1689. Sess. 13. The Prolocutor and Lower Clergy being sent for to the
Upper House, Reverendus Pater Praeses eis declaravit ad effectum Sequen. Scil.
quod conscij fuerunt diversas esse Clausulas perniciosas in Libris alias penes
eos ex directione dictae Domus relict. sed informati sunt per Juris-peritos
utriusque Juris, proprias esse Curias Judiciales pro punitione delictorum
hujusmodi.

I do not mention either this or the foregoing Instances, as agreeing in all
respects with the present Case; but only to show the readiness of their
Lordships (upon a reasonable Apprehension of Danger to the Church and Clergy
from the measures proposed) to enter upon such other methods as the Laws of the
Land would permit, and they were sure the Practice of Convocation would
justify.

THus far we have seen the Clergy in Convocation debating, preparing and
returning Matters immediately recommended to their care by the President and
Bishops, and considered in the manner and to the purposes directed by their
Lordships.

Our next business is, to show the Rights to which the Clergy are entitled by
the constant Practice of Convocation, and the Regard that upon the same ground
is due from my Lords the to their Application and Advice; with the Interest
they have in the final issue of all Synodical Acts.

These I think, come under the four following heads, viz. their Right I. To
present their own and the Church's Grievances, to the President and Bishops.
II. To offer to their Lordships their Petitions of any other kind. III. To be
with them as a part of the Judicature, upon Persons convened and examined in
Convocation. IV. To dissent finally from any Matter, so as to hinder it is
passing into a Synodical Act.


CAHP. XII.
The Gravamina and Reformanda, in Convocation.
The Gravamina often considered and presented with the Subsidies.
I. FRom the most early accounts of Proceedings in Convocation, it appears to
have been usual for the Clergy to lay before the President and Bishops the
Grievances under which they labored, and with a duitful submission to the
judgment of their Lordships to pray a Redress. These were styled the Gravamina
or Articuli Cleri, and chiefly concerned matters relating to Jurisdiction and
their Civil-Property, viz. The Encroachments of the Lay-Officers, the Exactions
and other Irregularities of Ecclesiastical Courts, and such like, called
frequently upon that account Injuriae. Sometimes therefore the Redress of them
made an express Condition of the Subsidies they granted; and accordingly, in
some Instances, we find them presented to the Court together with the Subsidy
Bill, and the King's Answer afterward reported by the President.

Anno 1369. Concesserunt Domino Regi decimam biennalem solvendam eidem Domino
Regi insra biennium a tempore dictae Concessionis numerandum. -- Sub istis
tamen Conditionibus adjectis and additis per dictum Clerum, viz. quod dictus
Dominus Rex Injurias and Violentias ac alia Gravamina Viris Ecclesiasticis in
enervationem libertatis Ecclesiasticae per Ministros Regios multipliciter
attemptata, and per ipsum Clerum in Scriptis redigenda, and dicto Domino
Archiepiscopo, and per cum Domino Regi porrigenda, corrigat and reformet. Et
tunc Dictus Dominus Archiepiscopus voluit quod Clerus and Religiosi praedicti
Petitiones suas super dictis Injurijs, Violentijs and Gravaminibus in scriptis
redigerent, and sibi porrigerent, etc. quod super eis cum suis Confratribus
poterit consulere and deliberare, and cas, habita deliberatione hujusmodi, una
cum concessione decimae biennalis praedictae dicto Domino Regi intimare; and
assignavit dictis Clero and Religiosis diem Sabbatti prox. seq. ad comparendum
coram eo in dicta Capella hora prima, voluntatem Regiam super dictis
Petitionibus, and etiam grates regias pro dicta Concessione, quas reportabit,
audituris. Et ad hoc faciendum continuavit dictam Convocationem ad diem Sabbati
supradictum.

Anno 1373. Dec. 2. Upon the Clergy's Motion to have their Grievances redressed
by the King, they were directed to consider of a Subsidy, and quod interim
Informarent Petitiones suas super Reformatione Injuriarum, ut eas conciperent
in Scriptis, quodque responsiones darent die prox. sequenti.

-- Dec. 8. The Bishop of London Presiding, Coram eo Procuratores Cleri ibidem
comparentes, Decimam, etc. concesserunt, ac dictam Concessionem in Scriptis
dicto Domino London. Episcopo porrexerunt, una cum quibusdam Supplicationibus
pro Reformatione quarundam Injuriarum Ecclesiae Anglicanae illatarum in eadem
Scriptura content.

Anno 1376. Non. Febr. The Grievances were presented to the President and
Bishops; and 12 Kal. Martij. we find the Archbishop making his Report to the
King's Answer Praelatis and Clero, -- and habita deliberatione per dictos
Praelatos and Clerum super hujusmodi Responsione Dominus Continuavit, etc.

And again, 2. Kal. Martij (I suppose, upon some further Application made by
the Clergy) the Archbishop acquaints them with the King's Readiness to comply
with their Petitions, Eas salvo jure Coronae suae feliciter expedire.

Anno 1379. 4. Kal. Martij. Praelati and Clerus concesserunt Domino Regi, etc.
rogando Dominum Regem, quod Injurias and Gravamina illata Ecclesiae and Viris
Ecclesiasticis faceret revocari.

Anno 1384. At the end of the Convocation, Clerus porrexit certos Articulos,
petendo Remedium; and Concessit Medietatem, etc.

Anno 1421. The Archbishop's Official, in the name of the rest, produxit unam
Cedulam Papiri, formam Concessionis unius integrae Decimae continentem, etc.
cum hoc quod per Dominum Regem, auctoritate Parliamenti tunc apud Westminster.
praesentis, posset adhiberi remedium cortis Gravaminibus eis illatis.

In these and other Instances, the Clergy (who had a Right to Petition for
Redress) were willing those Petitions should accompany the Grant, because that
made them sure of a favorable Answer. But this was not constantly observed;
The Grievances to whom addressed.
nor were all the Grievances addressed to the King, but many of them ultimately
to the Archbishop and Bishops, when the Matter thereof concerned their Courts,
and so the Redress was in their Lordships Power. We find also ( Anno 1399. Oct.
11.) mention made of such Articles offered to the Pope, in a Case (we may
imagine) that was not otherwise to be reformed. Decanus Ecclesiae Hereford.
Articulos de mandato Domini Archiepiscopi palam and aperte perlegebat. -- Et
quia in dictis Articulis continebantur certa Gravamina per Sedem Apostolicam
reformanda, visum fuit satis honestum and expediens Domino Archiepiscopo, etc.
that the Pope's Collector should be sent for, and advised with: Whose Council
was, That the King, the Archbishop and Bishops should write to the Pope pro
Reformatione eorundem.

In like manner we meet with Applications of the same kind, as to the King
singly, so to the King in Council, to the King in Parliament; as Redress was
most probably and regularly to be had, either in the one or the other.

The Points of this kind, considered and debated in Convocation, were either
General, when the Matters to be reformed had Relation to the Common Good of the
Church; and, equally affecting the Bishops and Clergy, were settled in a
Synodical way, and addressed and presented in the Names of both; which the
Registers call Reformanda in Convocatione, Reformanda in Parliamento, etc. Or
else Particular, when the Bishops or Clergy had Grievances to offer that
affected only their own Order respectively; and in such cases, though the Clergy
presented theirs to the Upper-House for their Approbation and the Conveyance of
them to the King or Parliament, yet the Form ran in their own Name only; which
were properly what we call the Gravamina and Articuli Cleri.

The Upper house have a Right to direct at what time the Grievances shall be
proposed.
These, the Clergy in Convocation have an undoubted Right to present; but, as
they are to be laid immediately before the Upper-House, so the Archbishop and
Bishops have a Right to direct (as often as they see cause) at what Time they
shall be proposed, and offered in Form.

Anno 1356. 16. Kal. Jun. Archiepiscopus injunxit Religiosis and alijs de
Clero, quod die tunc crastina proponerent Petitiones suas.

Anno 1369. 10. Kal. Feb. Archiepiscopus voluit, quod Clerus and Religiosi
Petitiones suas super Injurijs, Violentijs, and Gravaminibus, in Scriptis
redigerent, and sibi porrigerent die Veneris.

Anno 1373. The Clergy directed, Quod interim informarent Petitiones suas super
Reformatione Injuriarum, ut eas conciperent in Scriptis, quodque Responsiones
darent die prox. Sequent.

Anno 1377. 2. Id. Nov. The President praemunivit quod unus Clericus de
quolibet Episcopatu dictae Provinciae Cant. veniret ad Ecclesiam S. Pauli
London, and ibidem inter se post prandium, etc. deliberarent super Petitionibus
formandis de singulis Gravaminibus communiter Clerum cujuslibet Episcopatu;
tangentibus.

Anno 1399. Oct. 6. Quia videbatur Domino Archiepiscopo and alijs Episcopis sue
Cant. Provinciae satis difficile omnes Praelatos and Procuratores Cleri in
communi congregare ad concipiend. Articulos ex part Cleri proponendos, propter
hoc deputavit 5. Personas, viz. Mag. Thomam Stowe, etc. ad concipiend.
Articulos ex part Praelatorum and Cleri, super quibus praetendunt Ecclesiam
and se gravatos.

Anno 1411. Dec. 2. Archiepiscopus mandavit Procuratoribus Cleri, quatenus si
aliqua essent Gravamina ex part eorum Reformatione indigentia, quod vellent
and deberent citra diem Veneris extunc proximo futur. coram Convocatione
Dominorum in Domo Capitulari seriosius intimare.

The Grievances first offered in a general Representation, viva voce.
At other times, when the Clergy had received no previous Direction to bring
their Grievances in Writing, we find them first making a general Representation
thereof, Viva voce, to the Archbishop and Bishops, and upon that, either
leaving them to their Lordships Consideration, or receiving Directions, what
was further necessary to be done.

Anno 1356. On the first Day of Business, they are directed only in general
quod die tunc crastina proponerent Petitiones suas: And the next Session it is
thus expressed, Propositis quibusdam Petitionibus per Clerum tam viva voce quam
in Scriptis.

Anno 1373. Dec. 2. The Clergy, upon a general Motion for the Redress of
Grievances by the King, are commanded Informare Petitiones suas super
Reformatione Injuriarum bujusmodi.

Anno 1411. Nov. 4. The Clergy (according to the Order of Dec. 2. just now
cited, that they should Gravamina, etc. S^ri^sius intimare) did it on Dec. 4.
in the following manner, Comparuerunt Procuratores Cleri, qui plura referebant
Gravamina; allegantes, quod de t^t and tantis se s^ntijt Clerus malis
praegravatum, quod nisi in Scriptis contineantur, non possent de facili
recenseri. The Proctors retire, and the Archbishop and Bishops debate about
the same Matter. -- Procuratores, etc. reintrarunt circa horam undecimam;
quibus per Dominum Archiepiscopum ad tunc mandabatur quod citra proximum diem
Convocationis exhibeant and declarent Articulatim Gravamina sua in Scriptis
redacta. -- Accordingly, Dec. 7. two of the Members nonnullas Inconvenientias
and Gravamina pro and ex part Cleri, cujus gerebant Organa vocis, exposuerunt,
quae in Scriptis redacta exhibuerunt.

Anno 1452. The Prolocutor having given the Upper-house an Account of what was
done about the Subsidy, is asked, An quicquam voluisset pro part Cleri in
Ecclesia Anglicana Reformatione dignum proponere. And he, continuo and quasi ex
insperato quamplurima, etc. proposuit. Et quia non erat facile singula per
ipsum ibidem exposita memoriae, quae admodum labilis est, commendare, idcirco
admonuit eundem Prolocutorem dictus Reverendissimus Pater, ut singula per eum
in hac part proposita redigeret in literas, and Concilio traderet, before and
maturius super eisdem deliberaturo.

Anno 1452. Feb. 7. Praelocutor, post explicationem and declarationem
nonnullorum Gravaminum Ecclesiae Anglicanae and Clero ejusdem a Laicis
illatorum, super quibus petijt Reformationem debitam, intimavit, etc.

Anno 1460. May 13. Propositis ibidem coram dicto Reverendissimo Patre and
alijs in dicta Domo Capitulari protunc ibidem existentibus quibusdam Articulis
per Prolocutorem viva voce, dictus Reverendissimus Pater decrevit hujusmodi
Articulos sic viva voce declarat'. in Scriptis redigi.

Anno 1460. May 24. Reverendissimus, etc. auditis per eum pluribus Articulis
coram ipso adtunc viva voce ministratis, continuavit, etc.

Anno 1541. Sess. 8. Accessit Prolocutor cum quibusdam de Electis a Clero, and
exposuerunt querelas suas.

Thus, the usual Methods of entering upon the Grievances of the Clergy, were
either upon an express Command from the Archbishop and Bishops, or by a
general Representation thereof to their Lordships; who being in that manner
solicited to redress them, (either by their own ordinary Power, or by
Intercession with the King, or Application to the Parliament) were the best
Judges of the Methods most proper to be taken for that End, and gave their
Directions accordingly.

The Redress of Grievances.
The Grievances being reduced into Articles, and read in the Upper-house by the
Prolocutor, were presented to the Archbishop and Bishops, to be by them
particularly considered and debated; in order to their further Prosecution of
such Measures as should appear most effectual to the Relief of their Clergy.
After mature Deliberation upon them, with the Clergy, or among themselves, as
seemed most convenient; the Articles were either suspended for some time, (as
those in 1411. Dec. 7. Omnes isti suprascripti Articuli, quorum Reformatio
deliberationis and dierum exegit Inducias, de consilio and assensu expressis
Dominorum in Convocatione praesentium posit^ fuerunt adhuc in suspenso) or,
being thought in all Respects just and reasonable, they were approved, and
Measures taken by the President and Bishops in Convocation, or by their
Ordinary Authority; if the Matters were such as came under their own Power in
either of these Capacities. Otherwise, they conveyed them to the King, in
Person, in his Council, or in his Parliament, according to the Nature of the
Requests they offered.

The Reformanda frequently proposed by the Arch bishop among the Causes of
Convocation.
II. The Reformanda (whether in Convocatione, in Parliamento, or per Regem)
were upon Matters that concerned the Good of the Church and Religion in
general, and being therefore equally the Care and Concern as well of Bishops as
Clergy, were frequently moved and proposed by the Archbishop, at the Opening
of the Convocation, among the Causes of his Summons.

Anno 1400. Jan. 29. The Archbishop explains Causas and negotia Celebrationis
sui Concilij Provincialis Convocationis Cleri vulgariter nuncupat. viz. pro
defectibus ejusdem Provinciae tam in Clero quam in Populo juxta Juris
Exigentiam Canonice Reformandis; and then he descends to the Particulars.

Anno 1404. May 17. (The first Day of Business) the Archbishop continuing the
Convocation to May 21. demandavit alijs Praelatis and Clero tunc ibidem
praesentibus, quod singulis diebus interim ad dictum locum [Domum Capitularem]
convenirent, and laborarent circa Reformanda in Cantuariensi Provincia, and
exinde Articulos conciperent in Scriptis redigendos, ut cum Dei adjutorio
adhibita little Benevolentia in hac part, quaeque Reformanda hujusmodi possent
reformari.

Anno 1416. Nov. 16. -- Exposita per Reverendissimum Patrem Causa Convocationis
eorum protunc factae and celebratae, communicato que inter eosdem, [ viz. the
Bishops and Clergy then present] aliquamdiu de and super varijs Reformandis in
Provincia, tandem Dominus Continuavit, etc.

Anno 1419. Among the Causes of calling the Convocation, particularly explained
by the Archbishop, the third is, Pro defectibus in Clero regnantibus,
auctoritate illius Provincialis Concilij reformandis: And then he directs the
Lower-Clergy to retire to their House, and quod ibidem de and super materijs
praedictis tractarent and communicarent, ad finem quod babitd deliberatione de
and super praemissis, ad Dei laudem auctoritate Concilij finaliter concludi
posset and concorditer ordinari.

Anno 1434. The Archbishop reckons up several Grievances of the Church; Et
tunc babita Communicatione super bujusmodi Gravaminibus, ordinatum erat tunc
ibidem ut hujusmodi Gravamina ac alia quaecunque in quibus dictus Clerus se
sentijt gravari, nec non si quae forent Crimina and Excessus infra Clerum
usitat. quae necessaria Reformatione indigerent, in Scriptis redigerentur; ut
super his omnibus ex communi consilio, consensu, and auxilio, Remendium posset
debitum adhiberi.

Anno 1439. The Archbishop declares the Causes of the Convocation, viz.
qualiter Jurisdictio Ecclesiastica per Brevia Regia, and praecipue per Brevia
illa de Praemunire facias plus solito extitit perturbata, impedita, atque
enormiter laesa. -- Qualiter Personae Ecclesiasticae, tam Seculares quam
Regulares, per falsa Indictamenta and alias vias Exquisitas plus solito vexatae
and grava^ae sunt his diebus. -- And the next Sesson, Dominus mandavit
Praelatis and Clero, quartenus super praemissis and alijs materijs quibuscunque
Reformatione recessaria indigentibus, viz. Qualiter illud Breve de Praemunire
facias, and ipsa falsa Indictamenta quae hodiernis diebus falso, nequiter, and
malitiose usitantur and continuantur, in aliquo mitigari aut pro perpetuo
deleri and finaliter extingui valiant -- and Billas and alia Advisamenta in hac
part necessaria ad praemissa Reformanda conciperent.

Anno 1444. After the mention of the foresaid Writ among the Causes of
Convocation, the Archbishop adds, Qualiter in Ecclesia Anglicana fuerant
plurima Reformatione digna, de quibus voluit and asseruit cum Confratribus suis
before deliberare. -- And in the next Convocation (when these things made a
part of the Speech at the first Opening) we afterward find the Reformanda in
Convocatione, and Reformanda in Parliamento, at large.

The Methods of bringing in the Reformanda.
In Compliance with such general Directions from his Grace, or (though these were
not expressly given) in pursuance of one great End of these Synodical Meetings
of the Bishops and their Presbyters; we find the Lower-Clergy, 1. Making
general Representations to the President and Bishops, viva voce, of such things
as they conceived to want Reformation. 2. Bringing in Schedules of particular
Abuses, that in their Opinion were injurious to the Honor and Interest of the
Church.

The Clergy's Right to propose Reformations.
I. The Clergy in Convocation have a Right to offer general Representations of
such things as they conceive to want Reformation.

Anno 1412. At the Conclusion of that Convocation, Domino London. Praesidente,
and tradante cum Praelatis and Clero Provinciae super quibusdam ordinand. ad
honorem Dei and Ecclesiae, tandem certa proposita fuerunt pro part Cleri super
quibus ordinationes fieri jubebantur, and quae Clerus in Scriptis redegit.

Anno 1463. Jul. 6. Dominus, assidentibus sibi Episcopis, post communicationem
inter eos diu habitam, factaque Supplicatione eisdem vivae vocis oraculo per
Praelocutorem pro certis Reformationibus in Ecclesia habendis, continuavit, etc.

Anno 1486. Feb. 17. Dominus communicavit cum Confratribus suis, Praelatisque
and Clero, de pluribus Reformandis in Ecclesia. Et ibidem inter eosdem
responsum erat, quod Privilegia Priori Sancti Johannis Jerusalem in Anglia and
Fratribus suis concessa, male and enormiter his diebus utebantur: Et quod
Praedicantes verbum Dei apud Crucem S. Pauli London. maxim clamant contra
Ecclesiam and Ecclesiasticos in eorum absentia and in praesentia Laicorum, qui
semper Clericis sunt infesti.

Anno 1529. Sess. 4. Ingressus est Prolocutor cum quibusdam de Clero, qui
exposuit certa Capitula in vulgari concernen. utilitatem praedictae Synodi pro
Reformatione Abusionum. Et ibi Reverendus monuit Prolocutorem ut rediret in
Domum Inferiorem, and conciperet Articulos de Abusionibus. Accordingly,

-- Sess. 6. Ingressus est Prolocutor cum Clero, and ibi exhibuerunt Articulos
suos pro Reformatione; and Examinatio delata in prox. Sessionem: And, Sess. 7.
Prolocutor exhibuit suos Articulos, deliberandos in proxima Sessione.

The Bishops, etc. in the mean time, were also preparing their Articles of
Reformation; for so the Register has it,

-- Sess. 5. Reverendissimus voluit ut Suffraganei sui and alijt Praelati
conciperent Reformationem, and exhiberent tales Articulos die Lunae prox. -- On
which Day,

Sess. 6. Episcopus Heref. exhibuit quosdam Articulos pro Reformatione
Clericorum, and Episcopi Exon. Coven. and Lichf. Lincoln. Bathon. and Wellen.
exehibuerunt Billas pro Reformatione Abusionum Ecclesiarum Appropriatarum
Monasteriis, etc. de quibus deliberatio delata in prox. Sessionem.

Anno 1562. Jan. 19. The Prolocutor, with certain of the Lower House, comes up
to acquaint the President and Bishops, Quod quidam de dicta domo exhibuerunt
quasdam diversas Schedas de Rebus Reformandis per eos respective excogitat' and
in Scriptis redact. Quae quidem Schedae de communi consensu traditae sunt
quibusdam viris gravioribus and doctioribus de Coetu dictae Domus Inferioris ad
hoc electis perspiciend. and considerand. Quibus sic electis (ut asseruit)
assignatum est, ut hujusmodi Schedas in Capitula redigant, ac in proxima
Sessione exhibeant coram eodem Prolocutore -- Et tunc Reverendissimus hujusmodi
negotia per dictum Prolocutorem and Clerum incaepta approbavit, ac in eisdem
erga prox. Sessionem juxta little determinationem procedere voluit and mandavit.

The Clergy's Right to bring in Schedules of Reformation.
II. We find the Clergy ( i. e. every particular Clergyman) required to bring
in their Schedule of Abuses for the information of the Synod, and the enabling
the Bishops and Clergy to proceed jointly to a Reformation.

Anno 1586. Sess. 2. Lower House Book. Post aliquem tractatum inter Reverendos
Patres and Dominum Prolocutorem, cum alijs ex Inferiori Coetu, de rebus
quibusdam necessarijs, dictus Dominus Prolocutor cum Coetu suo praedicto in
dictam Inferiorem Domum revertebatur: And after the House was settled in the
accustomed manner, Habita est per Dominum Prolocutorem Admonitio omnibus ex hoc
Coetu, etc. ut si qui sint qui aliquas Schedulas proferre vellent de rebus in
hujusmodi Convocatione Reformandis, easdem sibi traderent in proxima Sessione.

Anno 1586. Sess. 7. (In the Extracts out of the Upper House Journal)
Archbishop gives Intimation at a Conference with the Lower House, to Present if
any had 'Ordain'd or Instituted any unworthy Persons, or of any breach of the
Canons, that it may be Reformed.

1586. Dec. 2. Extracts out of the Upper House Journal -- 'Brought up by the
Lower House 2 Schedules: 1. A complaint of Disorders in Norwich Diocese. 2.
Another Schedule, intitul'd Suffolk-Archdeaconry.

Anno 1586. Sess. 11. Lower House Book: Precibus finitis [Prolocutor] adiit
Reverendissimum Patrem and caeteros Praelatos; and paulo post revertens,
intimavit omnibus praesentibus consultum esse per eosdem Reverendissimum Patrem
and Praelatos de Reformatione fienda quoad Schedulas eidem Reverendissimo ac
Domino Prolocutori exhibitas. Et quod conventum est inter dictos
Reverendissimum and Praelatos de Exercitiis fiend. per Ministros infra Prove.
Cant. Et quod ijdem Reverendi Patres, cum redierint in Dioeceses suas, ordinem
corundem significabunt omnibus quibus interest in hac part.

Anno 1588. Sess. 2. Lower House Book: Dominus Prolocutor universo Coetui
significavit, Voluntatem Reverendissimi caeterorumque Praelatorum esse, quod si
aliquis hujus Domus noverit quenquam Ministrum de quo just conqueri possit,
quod contra Leges Ecclesiasticas nunc temporis auctori. tate legitima receptas
and approbatas se gessit and gerit; aut si aliquis noverit quenquam qui Canenes
in ultima Convocatione approbatos and ed^ ^iolaverit, eosdem in Scriptis
denunciarent Reverendissimo Domino Cant. Archiepiscopo, caeterisque Dominis
Praelatis praedict. pro debita Correctione and Reformatione in ea part
faciend. Accordingly,

The next Session, we find this Intimation of such a Schedule brought in: Isto
die porrecta fuit Domino Prolocutori Schedula Reformand. per M. Coton.

Inferences from the foregoing Accounts.
From the foregoing Passages, I infer this plain account of the Reformanda in
Convocation. While the Archbishop and Bishops are supposed to be consulting in
the Upper House whether any Regulations in the Church or in their particular
Diocese, be necessary at that time; The Clergy in the Lower House (who are
supposed to be Eyewitnesses of many things that don't ordinarily reach the
notice of their Diocesan) have a right, either jointly or separately, to lay
before their Lordships an account of any disorderly Persons or Practices they
know: And this, either viva voce, by the Prolocutor, or in Schedules put into
the Prolocutor's hands, in order to be severally laid before the Archbishop and
Bishops, and to be compared and jointly considered with those of the same kind
exhibited by their Lordships. These Reformanda, in many cases, could require no
more than the strict Exercise of the Ordinary Jurisdiction in in every Diocese,
and were therefore answered by a solemn Recommendation of them to the care of
the Bishops respectively. But if the Abuses called for a new Law, and the
Reformation of them required the assistance of the Prince or the Parliament,
these Schedules were reduced into Articles, and upon them (as containing the
general sense and request of the Synod) such Solicitations were set a foot, as
were judged necessary to bring about the Reformation desired.

The Care of the Reformanda in Parliamento usually left to the Archbishop, etc.
The Applications upon the Reformanda in Parliamento were usually left to the
care of the Archbishop, Bishops, and the Parliamentary Prelates; one instance
whereof I will set down at large, because it is more distinct and particular
than the rest, and will give the Reader a clear apprehension of this matter.

Anno 1452. Mar. 3. Quia caetera Negotia quae in Ecclesia Anglicana
Reformatione indigebant, Majestatem Regiam and Jura regni concernebant, and sic
definitioni and Sententiae dicti Concilii nequaquam interim subjacebant;
supplicatum fuerat ex part Cleri, quatenus dictus Reverendssimus in Christo
Pater, necnon dicti Reverendi in Christo Patres, caeterique Praelati ad tunc
ibidem existentes in Parliamento, quod tunc in prox. diebus apud Radyng
inchoand. fuerat, apud Regiam Celsiudinem, necnon Optimates, Proceres and
Communitatem praedict. regni in codem Parliamento in unum congregando; pro
Reformatione hujusmodi rite faciend. efficaciter instarent. Cujus Supplicationi
annuit idem Reverendissimus in Christo Pater, Reverendique in Christo Batres,
promittentes sc curaturos and acturos apud Regiam Celsitudinem, necnon
Optimates, Proceres, Communitatemque praedict. quoad in cis foret, pro felici
cita and celeri Reformatione eorundem, sicut and in Parliamento praedict. pro
viribus suis pro eadem Reformatione instarunt.

Deputies appointed by Convocation to assist the Bishops in Soliciting.
On some other occasions, we find a certain number of the Clergy, deputed by
Convocation, to assist the President and Bishops in soliciting their business.

Anno 1444. Octo. 22. The Clergy are directed, quatenus pro corrigend. and
reformand. etc. inter se deliberarent -- Oct. 26. Clerus Domus Inferioris
desiderabat ab Episcopis and aliis Praelatis sentire suum super Cedula de
Reformand. in ipsa Convocatione per Clerum concept. and ad tunc Dominus Bathon
[Commissarius] de Consensu Confratrum suorum Religiosorum and caeterorum
Procuratorum Cleri, manu sua proprla subscripsit singulos Articulos in eadem
Cedula contentos. -- Et quantum ad Reformanda per Parliamentum, nominati in
dicta Cedula fuerunt Deputati ad solicitand. dictam Materiam.

Anno 1452. Mar. 15. Assignatis insuper quibusdam de Clero, viz. Magistris,
etc. ad sollicitandum, instruendum, and before informandum Reverendissimum in
Christo Patrem, Reverendos in Christo Patres, caeterosque Praelatos, in and
desuper dictis Materiis and negotiis in Parliamento in proximis diebus
inchoand. corrigend. and Reformand.

Anno 1460. The last day of Convocation, Pluribus Articulis lectis and
recitatis, ad Supplicationem totius Cleri, Reverendissimus Pater aliique
Reverendi Patres se penes Regiam Majestatem pro Reformatione eorundem
promiserunt suos impendere labores. Deinde, certi Viri ex clero electi fuerunt,
qui dictum Reverendissimum Patrem and alios Reverendos Patres ad praemissa
facienda solicitarent.

Thus much is sufficient, to show what part the Clergy in Convocation have
always born, and may therefore justly claim, in Grievances and Reformation;
distinguished in Convocationlanguage from all other Business, by the known Names
of Articuli or Gravamina Cleri and Reformanda. Their Petitions and Applications
of other kinds, come next under Consideration.

CHAP. XIII.
The Clergy's Petitions of other kinds.
THE Clergy in Convocation have a Right not only to the Redress of their own
particular Grievances, or to interpose of the Reformation for any disorders
they may observe in the Church; but also to offer to the Archbishop and Bishops
all such Measures as may in their Opinion tend to the honor and interest of
Religion. This is regularly done by way of Petition; of which the Registers
afford us a Variety, upon several matters and occasions: And my design in the
following Enumeration is not (on the one hand) to lay any confinement either
upon the matter or occasions of the Clergy's Petitions, nor yet (on the other)
to extend them beyond the present Laws of the Realm; but only (in pursuance of
my method all along) to give the clearest Insight that the Registers afford,
into the Practice of former times: And when that is done, every Man is left to
his own application.

Petitions
The Petitions I have observed, are,

1. For making new Canons.
I. For the making of new Canons or Ordinations; of which sort we meet with
none in the more early times, because then the Clergy had no concern in them:
But in the Year 1529. Sess. 7. it is said that the Prolocutor (applying himself
to the Upper House) voluit ut Ordinatio fieret de Appropriationibus
Ecclesiarum, and de Pensionibus Vicariis persolvendis. -- Anno 1541. Sess. 20.
Clerus exposuit iv. Petitiones, primo de legibus Ecclesiasticis condendis -- 3o
de uniendis per jus Beneficiis. 4o. De Decimis solvendis.

2. For the revival of old Canons
2. For the revival of such ancient Canons and Constitutions, as were in force,
but seemed to be disused and forgotten: So, Anno 1412. Sess. 2. we meet with an
Address at large from the Clergy to the Bishops, praying their Lordships to en
force the Observation of certain Constitutions. -- Anno 1419. The last day of
the Convocation, Dominus, ad petitionem Cleri, quandam Constitutionem
Provincialem per Rob. Wynchelse Praedecessorem suum editam, qua sic incipit,
Capellani Stipendiarij, etc. cum omnibus suis Capitulis, verbis, clausulis and
dictionibus in eadem, ad totam Provinciam suam Cantuariensem extendi and omnes
artari debere, ex consensu Fratrum suorum and autoritate totius Concilij,
declaravit and pronunciavit.

3. For the Abolition or Suspension of Laws.
3. For the Abolition or Suspension of Laws or Customs that appeared to be
burdensome or inconvenient.

-- Anno 1428. The last day of Convocation: Dominus ex assensu Confratrum
suorum, and ad Petitionem Cleri, poenam in Constitutione propter excessiva
Stipendia Capellanorum, tam contra dantes quam recipientes latam, pro part
dantium suspendit usque ad proximam Convocationem, and ipsos hujusmodi poena
minime involutos fore decrevit: -- Anno 1529. Sess. 91. Prolocutor intrans,
etc. perijt quod praesentati ad Ecclesiastica Beneficia non arctentar per
Diecesanos scripto aliquo obligatorio aut poena temporali obligari ad Resi
ientiam. -- Anno 1541. Sess. 20. Clerus exposuit Pe^ionem de Conjugies sactis
in Bethlem abolendis -- Anno 1555. Sess. 3. The Clergy grant a Subsidy; and
illie expoluit Clerus tres Petitiones; primum, quod omnes Beneficati qui spe
Remissionis primorum fructuum ex communi rumore Sacerdotia assecuti sunt, non
obligentur rependere duplos, etc. 2 do, ut possint Diplomata Apostolica pro
Sacerdotiis retinend. assequi: postremo, quod Statutum tollatur pro Decimis
solvendis, etc. and quod Decimarum Causae emergentes coram Ordinatio
examinentur and decidantur.

4. About Festivals.
4. For the appointment of new Festivals, or improving the Services of the old.
-- Anno 1434. Oct. 9. Dominus ( ex consensu Confratrum suorum, and ad
Petitionem Cleri) ordained that St. Frideswide's Day, cum novem lectionibus and
aliis quae ad hujusmodi Festum cum Regimine Chori secundum usum Sarum
pertinent, per totam Provinciam suam perpetuo celebraretur. -- Anno 1444. Oct.
24. Magister Willelmus Byconil Offic. Curiae Cant. totius Cleri Praelocutor,
Supplicabat Domino ex part Cleri, ut dies Translationis S. Edwardi, etc. sub
duplici Festo per suam Provinciam solempnizari posset, de Confratrum suorum
consensu, concedere dignaretur.

5. For the Archbishops intercession with the King.
5. For the Archbishop's Intercession with the King, to restrain the Lay
Officers from oppressing the Church; or to pray their assistance in the
Enforcement of Ecclesiastical Laws -- Anno 1394. Supplicatio Cleri, directed to
the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Archbishop of York, Chancellor of
England, that, for the Suppression of Lollardy, they will intercede with the
King, ut dignetur extendere cum effectu brachium suae Majestatis. -- Anno 1463.
Jul. 18. Petitum fuit per Magistrum Johannem Stocks Prolocutorem, a Domino, ut
ipse Regiae Majestati scriberet pro liberatione certarum Personarum
Ecclesiasticarum in Custodia laicali incarceratarum and custoditarum; ut
secundum Cartam alias per Regem viris Ecclesiasticis concessam, suis Ordinariis
possint liberari. -- Anno 1480. Apr. 3. A Petition presented by the Prolocutor
to the Archbishop and Bishops, praying them, in the name of the Clergy, to
intercede with the King for Protection to the Church, against the encroachments
of Lay-Officers, molesting and imprisoning the Clergy.

6. For the Execution of Discipline.
6. For more strict Execution of Ecclesiastical Discipline: As, Anno 1586.
March 15. (Extracts out of the Upper House Book) 'The Lower House beseech the
Bishops to be careful of Ordinations, to restrain their Officers from Excessive
Fees; and that they will force every Instituted Person within a certain time to
take Induction, or else sequester the Profits?

7. Petitions of several kinds.
7. In the Year 1555. I find at the end of the Journal, an Abstract of the
Petitions offered by the Inferior Clergy to the Upper House.

"Item, Supplication of the Lower House to the Bishops, concerning Spiritual
Lands in Temporal Men's hands. -- Item, for Schools and Hospitals promised in
the Statute of Suppression of Colleges. -- Item, for Mortmayn, Tithes,
Appropriations; of Preachers, of Books, of Statutes and Jurisdiction, against
Heretics, of Pluralities, of Seminaries, of Liberties of the Church in Magna
Charta, of Praemunire, of the Statute of Submission of the Clergy, of finding
great Horses, of Usurers, of Violence against any of the Clergy, of Clarks
Apparel, of Priests Married; of Schoolmasters, of exempt Jurisdiction and
Peculiar Places in Laymens hands, of the Cognition of Causes of Tithes before
the Mayor of London; that Places exempted, may be allotted to certain Priests,
-- of Chancels decayed, of Priests Marri^ to be reconciled, of Payment for
Tithes, of Religious Women Married to be Divorced; that in Divorces innocent
Women may enjoy the Lands and Goods which were theirs before the Marriage.

"That Wardens of Churches may make their Accounts; that Ecclesiastical Persons
which spoiled Churches, and plucked down certain Edifices, may be compelled to
restitution, and to Build them again.

Petitions of the Clergy presented immediately to the Upper House.
All Petitions of this nature were delivered to the Archbishop and Bishops, and
rested with them; as those others to the King or Parliament, were put into the
hands of the Archbishop, singly or jointly with his Suffragans; that after
Approbation, they might by their Lordships be conveyed and solicited according
to the Intent and Tenor thereof. Nor do I remember to have met with any
Petition in the Registers, delivered separately, or immediately by the Clergy
themselves, except that one in 1588. Sess. 10. to the House of Lords. The
Commons had sent up a Bill for a provision of Arms, etc. by the Clergy; it was
therefore the single and immediate concern of the Lower House to prevent it; in
order to which, they Addressed the Lords in Parliament, as in a matter of
Property; and among the rest, the Petition was directed to the Archbishop and
Bishops. Upon which Accounts, it cannot be extended to other Cases of an
Ecclesiastical Nature, in all which the Bishops and their Clergy must be
jointly concerned.

The time of presenting such Petitions.
The time of the Clergy's presenting their Petions to the Upper House, whether
Viva voce or in Scriptis, was usually upon Delivery of their Grant, and at the
end of Convocation. Not any but they had the same Right to offer them any other
time, though no Supplies were given; but that being the most desirable
opportunity of conveying their Grievances to the King, became thereupon the
ordinary time of bringing in their Petitions of all other kinds.

CHAP. XIV.
The Part which the Clergy have had in Judicial Cases.
THE ordinary way of Trying and Convicting Heretics and Offenders against the
Canons, was in the Ecclesiastical Courts of every Diocese; where they proceeded
according to the stated Rules of such Courts, and the severe Canons and
Statutes then in force. But if the Bishop, upon Examination, did not see cause
to deliver over the Party accused to the Secular Power, either the Degree or
Evidence of the Crime falling short; the Suspicion was however reckoned a
sufficient Cause of Imprisonment: That if he had not abjured in Form, he might
by that means be compelled to it; or if he had, that he might not be trusted
abroad till he had given sufficient Proofs of the Sincerity of his Recantation.
In Cases of this kind, the Person was frequently brought before the next
Convocation; especially such as had relapsed after an Abjuration of their
Errors, according to the Language and corrupt Opinions of those Times. The
whole Process in the Interior Courts, was returned into the Archbishop's, to
be deposited there against the next Convocation; and when that came, the Person
was produced, and a Relation of the former Prosecutions publicly given, either
by the Archbishop or the Diocesan.

Constitution for bringing Heretics before the Convocation.
This was the ordinary Practice, long before that Establishment of it by a
Constitution under Archbishop Chichle, Anno 1416. part of which I will here
transcribe, because it shows the manner and end of bringing Persons (examined
already in the Bishops Courts) before the whole Body of the Clergy in
Convocation. After a general Direction to the several Bishops, Archdeacons,
etc. to be diligent in the Discovery and Prosecution of Heretics: Et si quas
personas convictas forsan Curiae Seculari non reliquant, ipsos ad carceres
perpetuos sive temporales, prout rei qualitas exegerit, ad minus usque ad prox.
Praelatorum and Cleri Cantuariensis Provinciae Convocationem duratur. realiter
committant, and in eisdem secundum Juris exigentiam servari faciant, ac de
omnibus and singulis supradictis, quomodo, viz. inquisierunt, reperierunt, ac
in Processibus se habuerunt personas hujusmodi convictas, diligentiaque aut
negligentijs Archidiaconorum sieve Commissariorum praedictorum, alijsque omnibus
and singulis circumstantijs praemissis quomodolibet concernen. ac praesertim de
Abjurationibus, si quos interim haerses abjurare contingat, in prox.
Praelatorum and Cleri Convocatione sub forma publica distinct and aperte Nos
and Successores nostros certificare curent, and eosdem Processus Officiali
Curiae nostrae Cant. effectualiter liberent, penes eundem seu in Registrario
Curiae nostrae Cant. remansur. sic videlicet quod quemlibet cujus interest pro
executione ulteriori corundem Processuum, ad eundem Officialem recur. habere
poterit cum effectu.

Such was the Method of those Times; Heretics brought before the Archbishop,
Bishops and Clergy.
but that which I am chiefly to consider, is, the Judicature in Convocation;
and this was usually the Archbishop, Bishops and Clergy in a Body; before whom
the Party accused is generally said to be brought: Coram Reverendissimo,
Confratribus suis, and Clero, in Concilio congregatis, adductus fuit, or words
to the same effect, is the ordinary Language of the Registers in those Cases:
Sentence in all their Names.
And the Sentence, running in the name of the Archbishop, is passed,
auctoritate, de consilio and assensu, etc. Praelatorum and Cleri: The Instances
of both kinds are too numerous to be particularly set down; nor can they be
over-lookt by any one, who shall cast an Eye upon the Convocation-Acts of those
times when such Prosecutions happened.

It Is true, they are sometimes said to be produced Coram Domino and
Confratribus, without mention of the Clergy, or only praesente Clero, and in
praesentia Cleri; in which Cases the Archbishop and Bishops might probably act
as a pure Provincial Council; for into such we know they sometimes resolved
themselves, upon the Opportunity of coming together in Convocation. But in the
ordinary Style of the Registers, the Appearance is made before them, and the
Sentence ordinarily pronounced by their Authority, in Conjunction with that of
the Bishops; and therefore in those Days, and upon those Occasions, they were
ordinarily at least, a part of the Judicature in Convocation. As to any
Restraints in this Matter, that may have been laid upon the Convocation by
subsequent Statutes, I don't pretend to give a Judgment of them; but only
assert the Clergy's Rights by ancient Usage, to a share in the Judicature with
the Archbishop and Bishops; supposing Cases of that nature to come actually
before them.

CHAP. XV.
The Clergy's Right of a Negative or Final Dissent from the Upper-House.
The Original of the Clergy's Negative.
THE greatest Power enjoyed by the English Clergy in a Provincial Synod, beyond
the Presbyters of other Nations, is, a Negative upon the Metropolitan and
Bishops, none of whose Resolutions, either in part or in whole, can be passed
into Synodical-Acts without the previous Approbation of the Inferior Clergy.
It Is very true (what we observed before) that it was a Civil Account which
brought them by degrees into this Extraordinary Power in Ecclesiastical
Affairs: Their Civil Property could not be disposed of, but by their own
Consent; and this being the great Business of Convocation at the beginning, the
Negative of the Clergy became an established Rule there; and so that Rule took
place in Canons, Constitutions, and other Ecclesiastical Affairs, when these
also (which before had solely belonged to a Synod of the Archbishop and
Bishops) came to be considered and framed in Convocation.

A Negative or final Dissent, an established Right of the English Clergy.
However, it is now an established Right of the Lower House, and a part of the
Constitution of this National Church: Nor is it my Design to dimi^sh it, by the
Observation I am about to add, That though the Clergy's Negative, as to
Subfidies, was directly founded in that common Right of English Subjects, Not
to be Taxed but by their own Consent; yet, under that Right, the Clergy of
those Days preserved such a Sense of Duty to their Ecclesiastical Superiors,
All Denials of the Clergy made with great Humility.
that all their Denials were made with great Humility, and often accompanied
also with a Request to be excused for that time, and also with their particular
Reasons, why they could not come up to the Desires of the Archbishop and his
Brethren. For the granting of Subsidies was always proposed by the President;
upon which the Clergy were directed to retire, and Debate, and return their
Answers to him and his Brethren. Generally they concurred with great Readiness;
and when they dissented, they usually showed the Causes thereof with the utmost
Humility.

Anno 1356. 12 Kal. Jun. They excused themselves in a formal Address to the
Archbishop and Bishops: Vobis Reverendis in Christo Patribus Dominis Die
gratia Archiepiscopo Cant. vestrisque Suffraganeis ad celebrandum Concilium
Provinc. juxta sacrorum instituta Canonum congregatis, supplicat humiliter and
devote Clerus Cant. Provinciae, quatenus pio sibi compatientes affectu,
Rations suas and Motiva infra Scripta clementer auscultare dignemini, and eis
in examine circumspectae discretionis vestrae diligentius ponderatis,
Petitiones ejusdem Cleri admittere gratiose. [they offer several Reasons; and
then conclude thus:] Placeat benignitati vestrae absque ulteriori onere hac
vice Ecclesiae imponendo, ipsum Clerum, qui dicto Domino Regi semper devotus
extitit and ipsum nunc in quantum potuit, ne deterioris conditionis existat
quam Communitos Laicorum, habere se libeat Excusatum, and praemissa pro plena
and finali responsione Cleri admittere, ipsi quoque Clero assistere, and ipsum
erga Dominum nostrum Regem in hac part excusare.

Anno 1424. Oct. 23. The Clergy being called upon for their Resolution, as to
the Subsidy, gave in their Answer by W. Lyndewood, the Archbishop's Official,
negatively; pleading the Poverty of the Clergy, and that the Livings were
reduced to a smaller value than formerly; and ideo humiliter petierant, se a
concessione hujusmodi quacunque excusari.

Anno eod. (After a Prorogation) Febr. 17. They excuse themselves again upon
the poverty of the Clergy; quam ob rem ijdem Procuratores Domino and
Confratribus suis humiliter supplicarunt, quatenus ipsi Dominus and Confratres
sui Clerum praedictum a quacunque concessione hujusmodi protunc faciend. ex
causis praeallegatis dignarentur babere pro illa vice penitus excusatum.

Anno 1425. May 4. Among the Causes of the Convocation, explained by the
Archbishop; the third, was a Subsidy: The Clergy retire, and in answer to that
point, Supplicant, etc. ut consideratis oncribus and Subsidiis quae antehac
saepe Supportarunt, haberent ipsum Clerum protunc omnino excusatum propter
insufficientiam ejustem and paupertatem ex argument is diversis luculenter
approbatam.

And again, the same Year, Jun. 8. Clerus insufficientiam suam allegans and
paupertatem, se de bujusmodi Subventione concedenda ea vice pro viribus
instanter excusavit, and se protunc excusari petiit and humiliter Supplicavit.

Dec. 11. 1433. Clerus allegavit certas causas rationabiles, quibus
consideratis, deberent merito a concessione Subsidii eo tempore excusari.

Anno 1438. Oct. -- The Clergy, urging among other things the great Dearth all
over the Kingdom, per suum Prolocutorem Domino supplicarunt quatenus eos ab
aliquo Subsidio protunc concedondo haberet favor abiliter excusatos. And the
like answer they returned the Saturday following, upon a Second Application
made to them.

These Applications, no prejudice to the Clergy's Right of a Negative.
These Instances, as I said before, are not intended either to weaken the
Clergy's Right of a Negative, or to Suggest in particular, that they who were
immediately concerned in those Cases, had not a legal Power of dissenting
without either Reasons or Excuses: But by how much the greater liberty they
were at, to dissent without these; the Applications of this nature are so much
the higher testimony of there Duty and Humility: They knew very well, that their
Civil Property was by Law entirely in their own disposal; but yet they could
not forget that their immediate concern was with their Ecclesiastical Superiors.

Upon their Refusals in this dutiful Manner, they were sometimes moved to
consider of a more favorable Answer; and however steadfast their Resolutions
were not to comply, yet they did not refuse further Deliberation, which (when
enjoined by their Metropolitan and Bishops) they knew to be a part of their
Canonical Obedience. Nor could I ever find an Instance in all the Acts of
Convocation, that did in the least countenance the late Notion of their general
Negative upon the Upper House, as pleaded in express terms to excuse their
Refusal of a Committee: Nar. p. ^.
We of the Lower House being a distinct House, and having power to dissent from
the Proposals of the Upper House, conceive our selves entirely at liberty to
admit or decline their Appointments of Committees, as we shall think fit.
Before they made so large a Step toward an entire Independence, as a Negative
in that extent would draw after it, methinks it might have been considered
whether one Instance was to be met with (either before or since their
Separation) from which they could fairly gather that the Lower Clergy had ever
disobeyed the Upper House in the matter or method of their Deliberations, or
ever attempted to carry their Right of a Negative beyond a power to hinder any
business in Convocation from passing finally into a Synodical Act. This is
their undoubted Right; but their further pretensions are as groundless in
themselves, as they would be mischievous in their Effects, to the Constitution
of our Episcopal Church.

CHAP. XVI.
The manner of Passing Business in Convocation.
AFter any matter in Convocation has been duly considered, read, and agreed to
by the Bishops and Clergy severally; the Prolocutor and the Inferior Clergy are
sent for to the Upper House, and there it is passed into a Synodical Act.

The manner of Consenting in the Lower House.
The manner of consenting and agreeing in the Lower House, is particularly
expressed in the 10th Session of 1586. where the Prolocutor coming from the
Upper House, puts the Ordinances for Collecting the Contribution, into the
hands of the Actuary: He reads it; quo facto, Dominus Prolocutor interrogavit
omnes supra nominates, an Decreta and Ordinationes hujusmodi sibi placerent,
eosque rogavit quatenus eorum consensum and assensum eisdem, si eis ita
videretur, praeberent. Et tunc omnes easdem Ordinationes in omnibus
approbarunt, atque consensum and assensum suos, tam nominibus eorum propriis
quam nominibus omnium aliorum quorum Procuratores in hac part respective
existunt, praebuerunt.

The Circumstances of that Consent have been reported to the Upper House.
I know not whether the Lower House (who return the Instrument by the
Prolocutor) did ever think themselves accountable to their Lordships for any
Circumstances relating to their Consent, besides a general assurance by the
Prolocutor that it is actually given. But I find, in the Year 1532. May 15. a
Report was also made of the number and proportion of Votes. Intravit Prolocutor
cum Clero, ubi Reverendissimus interrogabat, quid ipse sentiebat de quadam
Schedula sibi tradita. Unde Prolocutor introduxit numerum affirmantium, numerum
negantium and numerum Referentium, quantum ad tres Articulos praedictos. Again,
in 1536. Sess. Ult. Prolocutor intravit Domum Capitularem, and praesentavit
Reverendissimo Instrumentum continen. Sententiam Definitivam, quam dictus
Prolocutor asseruit suisse per omnes Cleri Domus Inferioris express
approbatam. -- Some Years before, Anno 1529. Sess. 29. when in the preceding
Session the Clergy were directed to bring in their Opinions the Friday
following about an Answer to a Petition presented by the House of Commons to
the King; on the same Friday, the Answer was read in the Upper House: Et post
introitum Prolocutoris rursum perlecta fuerunt responsa: tunc Reverendissimus
interrogavit an ipsi consentirent, and conjentiere. But in 1533. not only a
general Consent was given in the Upper House, but the Votes also in form, and
the Names were praticularly entered in the Register thereof: So says the
Abstract, Sess. 2. Quo die Reverendissimus convocavit Inferiorem Domum, ut
audiret eorum Opiniones de Quaestione, viz. an ducere liceret uxorem cognitam a
Fratre, etc. ubi (referring to the Original Book of the Upper House)
exprimuntur Affirmantes, Negantes, and Dubitantes.

All Instruments read publicly, and finally agreed to in the Upper House.
But however the Consent of the Clergy be given or signified; it is certain,
that the Instrument after being engrossed, was always read publicly in the
Upper House, before the Archbishop, Bishops and Clergy; and by them finally
agreed to, either viva voce or by Subscription, according to the Nature of the
business they passed. The light we have from the Registers, concerning the
circumstances of passing business, is but small; but this distinction (I think)
is visible enough, since the Reformation at least, That Articles, Canons, and
Constitutions have been ever passed by Subscription; but Instruments of other
kinds, ( Bills of Subsidy, Synodical Letters, etc.) have been enacted, with the
consent of the Bishops and Clergy, by the Hand or Seal of the Archbishop (which
was properly the Sanction) and the Atrestation of one or more Public Notaries,
of its being so Signed or Sealed, or both. To which purpose,

The Sanction of the Metropolitan.
As to the Sanction of the Metropolitan; Anno 1408. Jan 15. we find this
account of Passing the Powers granted by Convocation, to those whom they had
just before Elected for the Council of Pisa. In quorum omnium and singulorum
fidem and testimonium, praesentes literas aut praesens publicum Instrumentum
exinde ficri, ac per Magistrum Johannem Perch, Notarium and Registrarium infra
scriptum subscribi and publicari, ejusque Signi consueti appositione: Ac nos
Thomas Archiepiscopus, Primas and Legatus antedictus, nostri privati sigilli
aurci, ad personales and speciales rogatus omnium dictorum Episcoporum
Suffraganeorum nostrorum, ac de expressis consensu and assensu totius Cleri
dictae Provinciae, appensione, mandavimus and fecimus fideliter communiri.

Anno 1557. Sess. 9. The Archbishop's Commissary Evocavit Prolocutorem and
Clerum, ut Librum Concessionis Subsidii aliqua ex part correctum perlegi
audirent; quo perlecto and diligenter ponderato, omnes tam Patres quam Clerus
contenti erant cum omnibus Clausulis, Conditionibus, and Provisionibus. --
Tenor vero Instrumenti publici, de Subsidio praedicto confecti, de verbo in
verbum illic sequitur, contestatum Subscriptione Thomae Sussex and Johannis
Incent.

Anno 1562. Febr. 24. surrogatum Prolocutoris (Prolocutore absente) and Clerum
Domus Inferioris ad se accersiri jusserunt, ac coram eis public legi fecerunt
Librum de Subsidio Dominae nostrae Reginae concesso in pergameno conscript. ac
Sigillo dicti Reverendissimi Patris Sigillat. Cut quidem Libro sie perlecto, ac
omnibus and singulis Concessionibus, conditionibus, and provisionibus in eodem
mentionatis, sub modo and forma supra Specificatis, Dictus Clerus Inferioris
Domus consensum and assensum suos unanimiter adhibuerunt.

Articles, Canons, etc. by Subscription.
2. Articles, Canons, and Constitutions, since the Reformation, have (so far as
the Registers give any light) been ever passed in the Upper House by the joint
Subscriptions of Archbishop, Bishops, and Clergy.

Anno 1536. Sess. 5. Jul. 11. Episcopus Hereford. produxit quendam Libellum
continentem Articulos Fidei and Ceremoniarum. Qui libellus inseritur ad longum.
Quo lecto per eundem Episcopum, Honorandus Thomas Cromewell, Reverendissimus,
and alii Praelati, Prolocutor, and Clerus Domus Inferioris, eundem Libellum
approbando Subscripserunt.

Anno 1604. May 18. The Extracts out of the Upper House Journals say, 'The
King's Letters with the Articles of 1562. to be by the Convocation approved and
allowed -- The said Articles read, and Subscribed by both Houses; and the Book
so Subscribed, was kept by the Bishop of London, President.

Anno 1640. Reverendissimus in praesentiis Domini Prolocutoris and totius
Coetus Domus Inferioris, protulit Librum Canonum in bac Sacra Synodo tractat.
continen. 17. Capitula Canonum. Quem Reverendissimus in manibus suis tenens cum
Domino Prolocutore, alta and intelligibili voce legebat. Quo perlecto,
Reverendissimus and Reverendi Patres, etc. ac Dominus Prolocutor and totus
Coetus Domus Inferioris antedictae isto die comparen. nominibus suis and
aliorum pro quibus constituti sunt, consensum and assensum suos eisdem
Canonibus proestiterunt, and eorum nomina manibus suis propriis eisdem
respective Subscripserunt.

Anno 1661 Dec. 19. Dominus Episcopus London Praesidens, cum Confratribus suis
praed'. pro tribunali sedebant, and habito tractatu inter eos de Forma
Subscriptionis Libro Publicarum Precum per eos faciend. tandem idem Reverendus
Pater Dominus Episcopus and Praesidens antedictus, de and cum consensu
Confratrum suorum praed'. commisit curam and considerationem concipiendi dictam
Formam Reverendis in Christo Patribus, etc. Postea, nempe inter boras secundam
and quartam post meridiem ejusdem diei, Reverendi Viri Dominus Johannes
Dunelmen. and Humfridus Sarum respective Episcopi una cum dictis respective
Cancellar and Vicarris in Spiritualibus generalibus praed. apud Officium
Registrarii Principalis D. Arch. Cant. intra Parochiam S. Gregorii London.
sit'. convenerunt, and in praesentiis mei Willelmi Fisher and Francisci Mundy
Notariorum respective publicorum, inspectis prius nonnullis Recordis and Libris
antiquis and Archivis ibidem remanen. and fideliter custodit. dieti Reverendi
patres formam Subscriptionis Libro publicarum Precum faciend. unanimi consensu
and assensu conceperunt and desuper concordarunt.

-- Anno eod. Dec. 20. Reverendus Pater Dominus Episcopus London, [Praesidens]
etc. una cum Confratribus suis secum assiden'. pro Tribunali sedebat, and
Librum Precum Publicarum, Administrations Sacramentorum, aliorumque Rituum
Ecclesiae Anglicanae, una cum Forma and Modo Ordinand. and Consecrand.
Episcopos, Presbyteros, Diaconos, juxta literas Regiae Majestatis eis in hac
part directas revisum, and

paginas continen. and per Reverendissimum in Christo Patrem and Dominum
Dominum Gulielmum Providentia Divina Cant. Archiepiscopum totius Anglia
Primatem and Metropolitanum prius redact. recept'. approbat'. and subscript'.
Episcopi ejusdem Provinciae in bac Provinciali Synodo legitime congregat'.
unanimi assensu and consensu in formam redegerunt, receperunt and approbarunt,
eisdemque subscripserunt: Et postea omnes Episcopi praed. tunc praesen. and
congregat'. exceptis Reverendis Patribus Oxon, Assaphen and Landaven. Ep. ad
Domum Parliamenti sese contulerunt, and dictos respective Episcopos in dicta
Domo Convocationis reliquer. ad vidend. Clerum Inferioris Domus Convocationis
dicto Libro subscribere.

Thus the several sorts of Business in Convocation, however differently passed
in some respects, agree in this, That the Inferior Clergy are sent for to the
Upper-House, and there the whole Convocation (the Metropolitan, Bishops, and
Presbyters, in a Body) give their final Consent.

Why Articles, Cations, etc. pass now by Subscription.
The Method of Passing Canons and Constitutions before the Statute (25. H. 8.
c. 19.) was the same that has ever been practiced in Synodical Meetings, viz.
by the Authority of the Synod, and with the Sanction of the Metropolitan; and
these two gave them their full Force and Effect. But now they are framed in
order to be laid before the Prince, as agreed on by the Archbishop, Bishops,
and Clergy; and none to be of any Force, Effect, or Validity in Law, but only
such and so many of them, as he, by his Letters Patents under the Great Seal of
England, shall allow, approve, and confirm. This is the Language of the Royal
License, the Necessity whereof, in order to make, promulge, and execute Canons,
etc. is an Abridgment of the Ecclesiastical Power in these Respects; and
therefore the ancient Sanction (which always signified a final Authority) could
not be continued in any Matters, which were not to be promulg'd or executed
without the Allowance, Approbation and Confirmation of the King by his Letters
Patents under the Great Seal of England. But all Synodical-Acts, to which the
Royal License is not necessary, receive their final Authority from the Sanction
of the Metropolitan; i. e. they still pass in the ancient Canonical way;
whatever some late Writers, too much bent upon the Diminution of Ecclesiastical
Power, may suggest to the contrary.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Proroguing and Dissolving a Convocation.
AS the Archbishop, upon receiving the Royal Writ for Calling a Convocation,
is bound by Law, and agreeably to the Deference that has been ever paid to
Christian Princes, to exert his Summoning Authority; so is he under the same
Obligation to proceed to Prorogations and Dissolutions thereof, in a Canonical
way, when the Pleasure of the Prince shall be signified by Royal Writs to those
Purposes.

For how little Truth there is in the late Notion, That the Archbishop, in
those Cases, acts purely in a Ministerial way, may appear by a Comparison of
the Methods of Executing those Commands in Parliament and Convocation. The
manner of the A. bishop's Proroguing and Dissolving Authoritative
For the the first (the Prorogation of a Parliament) the King, by his Letters
Patents, constitutes such of the Nobility as he thinks fit, his Commissioners
for that end, Dantes vobis, tenore praesentium, plenam potestatem, facultatem
and authoritatem, etc. ad praesens Parliamentum nostrum nomine nostro
prorogand. etc. In the same Style is the Commission for Dissolving, as often as
his Majesty is not present in Person: A Style that is truly and evidently
Ministerial.

But the Writs for doing the same things in Convocation, can be directed to
none but the Metropolitan himself, and that without any Conveyance of
Authority, or Order to act in his Majesty's Name, or any other Direction
besides the Proroguing or Dissolving it according to the accustomed Methods of
Convocation: Debito modo prorogetis; and Dissolvetis seu dissolvi faciatis. In
pursuance of which Order, the Archbishop Prorogues and Dissolves, either in
Person, or by one or more Commissioners, specially constituted by his Grace for
those Purposes.

The Archbishop's Admonitions immediately before a Proragation or Dissolution.
Immediately before a Prorogation or Dissolution, we find the Archbishop (as
he saw occasion) publicly recommending to the Bishops and Clergy the due
Execution of the Ecclesiastical Laws, and the Reformation of any particular
Abuses and Irregularities in the Church.

Anno 1428. Ulteriusque rogavit, hortatus est, and requisivit Reverendissimus
Pater and Dominus praedictus praefatos Confratres suos, ut in inquisitione
fienda contra Lollardos and Haereticos hujusmodi diligentiam interim omnimodam
quam poterant adhiberent, and cu^ revenerint, quid contra eos fecerint, ipsum
before certificarent; and specialiter de illis quorum momina sibi detecta
dictis Confratribus suis prout unumquemque in Dioc. sua concernebant in Cedulis
divisis conscripta circa tres Dies antea tradidit and liberavit.

Anno 1601. Sess. 18. The Extracts out of the Upper-house Books have this Note
immediately before the Dissolution: Archbishop exhorts the Bishops to be
diligent in their Charge, and careful to observe the Canons in the last
Convocation.

Anno 1586. The Lower House Book, immediately before the Dissolution:
Revere^dissimus Pater Dominus Cant. querelatus est de prava and immoderata
luxuria ac minus verecundo gestu ac morum intemperie nonnullorum Clericorum
Provinciae Cant. ad fora and loca publica concurrentium. Quare monuit Decanos,
Archidiaconos, and alios jam praesentes, ad quos Correctio delinquentium
hujusmodi pertinet, ad severe procedend. and puniend. obnoxios and culpahiles,
and si incorrigibiles perseveraverint, ad implorand. auxilium and opem Episcopi
Diocesani, vel ipsius Reverendissimi Patris, vel etiam ipsius Serenissimae
Dominae nostrae Reginae, ne actionum and morum pravitas istorum obnubilet and
obscuret Dectrinam Evangelii quod verbis profitentur, quo pluribus perniciosum
siet pessimum eorum exemplum.

The Writs of Prorogation and Dissolution
On the Day of Prorogation or Dissolution, the Royal Writ is produced, and
publicly read: But that being only a Direction to the Archbishop, to Prorogue
or Dissolve; neither of these are effected by that Publication of the Writ. On
the contrary, the very first Writ of Prorogation we meet with ( Anno 1532. May
15.) was read in the Morning, ( Reverendissimus ostendebat quoddam Breve Regium
sibi directum pro Prorogatione hujusmodi Convocationis: Quod Breve idem
Reverendissimus public legebat;) and yet the Convocation sat till Noon; and
after Dinner, met again. -- So also, Anno 1434. March 31. The Writ of
Prorogation was brought in, and read; and afterward the Resolutions of the
Lower-Clergy, touching the Pope's Supremacy, were delivered; and then the
Archbishop is said to Continue to the Day specified in the Writ.

For so is the Practice of Convocation: The Pleasure of the Prince is signified
to the Archbishop by the Writ; but his Grace pursues that Royal Order by a
^ormal Declaration out of a Schedule, mentioning indeed the Royal Writ, but
running solely in the Archbishop's Name, and by him pronounced in presence of
the Bishops and Clergy.

The Authors therefore of some late Schemes have done a manifest Injustice to
the Constitution of our Protestant Church, in contending, against Law and
Practice, that the Reformation put an end to the ancient Canonical Ways of
transacting Ecclesiastical Matters, and introduced a new Model, inconsistent
with the Primitive Distinctions between Presbyters and Bishops, and unknown
before, either to this or any other Episcopal Church.

The foregoing Chapters, I hope, may vindicate our Reformation from the late
Aspersions of that kind; as well as the Ecclesiastical Government thereof, from
any such Repugnancy to the Primitive Rules; and may withal make it more easily
understood, whether they who have carried on those new Measures, or they who
have opposed them, are the truer Friends to the Rights, Liberties and Honor of
our Reformed Church.

FINIS.
APPENDIX,
Continens
I. Acta in Superiore Domo Convocationis incoept. Anno MDLXII. in conficiendo
XXXIX Articulos Religionis; Praeside Reverendissimo Patre Matthaeo Parker,
Archiep. Cant. Sub jungitur Forma sive descriptio Convocationis. II. Acta in
Superiore Domo Convocationis incoept. Apr. 14. MDCXL. in Canonibus
conficiendis; Praeside Reverendissimo Patre Galielmo Laud, Archiep. Cant. III.
Acta in Superiore Domo Convocationis incoept. Ann. MDCLXI. in Revisione Libri
Precum Publicarum; Praeside Reverendo Patre Gilberto Sheldon Ep. London, Vice
Reverendissimi Patris Gulielmi Juxon Archiep. Cant. IV. Acta in Inferiore Domo
Convocationum celebrat. Ann. MDLXXXVI. and MDLXXXVIII. Praeside Reverendissimo
Patre Johanne Whitgift, Archiep. Cant.
Convocatio Praelatorum and Cleri Cantuariensis Provinciae, inchoata in Domo
Capitulari Ecclesiae Divi Pauli London, authoritate Brevis Regij Reverendissimo
in Christo Patri and Domino, Domino Matthaeo, permissione divina Cantuariensi
Archepiscopo, totius Angliae Primati and Metropolitano in hac part directi,
duodecimo die Mensis Januarij, Anno Domini juxta computationem Ecclesiae
Anglicanae Millesimo, Quingentesimo, Sexagesimo Secundo, Regnique felicissimae,
illustrissimaeque in Christo Principis and Dominae nostrae Dominae Elizabeth,
Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae Reginae, Fidei Defensoris, etc. Anno
quinto: Et Consecrationis ipsius Reverendissimi Patris Anno quarto. UNdecimo
die Mensis Januarij, Anno Domini juxta computationem Ecclesiae Anglicanae
Millesimo Quingentesimo Sexagesimo Secundo,
in quodam alto Deambulatorio infra Moncrium Reverendissimi in Christo Patris
Domini Matthaei, permissione Divina Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi, totius Angliae
Primatis and Metropolitani apud Lambehith, in praesentia mei Johannis Incent
Notarij Publici, dicti Reverendissimi Patris Registrarij Primarij, constitutus
personaliter praefatus Reverendissimus Pater commisit Vices suas Magistris
Thomae Yale,Vicario suo in Spiritualibus generali, Roberto Weston, Almae Curiae
Cantuariensis Officiali, Henrico Jones and Valentino Daledictae Curiae
Cantuariensis Advocatis, Legum Doctoribus, conjunctim and divisim, ad
interessendum Vice and nomine suis in Sacra Synodo sive Convocatione
Praelatorum and Cleri Cantuariensis Provinciae in Domo Capitulari Ecclesiae
Cathedralis Divi Pauli London, duodecimo die praesentis mensis Januarii, per
ipsum Reverendissimum Patrem authoritate Brevis Regii sibi in hac part
directi, inchoand'. and celebrand'. dictamque Convocationem sive sacram Synodum
Provincialem, ac omnia and singula Certificatoria introducta and introducenda
in statu quo nunc sunt, usque ad and in diem Mercurii proxime futurum, viz.
decimumtertium diem praesentis mensis Januarii, hora octava ante meridiem
ejusdem diei, atque ad Domum Capitularem praedictam, cum Ulteriori
Prorogatione, dierum and horarum ex tunc sequentium and locorum (si oporteat)
continuand'. and prorogand'. caeteraque omnia and singula faciend. exercend.
and expediend. quae in praemissis and circa ea necessaria fuerint seu
quomodolibet requisita. Et promisit de rat. etc. praesentibus tunc and ibidem
dictis Magistro Thoma Yale and Francisco AldridgeGeneroso, Testibus, etc.

Sessio Prima.
DUodecimo die mensis Januarii, Anno Domini praedicto, hora nona ante meridiem
ejusdem diei, in Domo Capitulari Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi Pauli praedict. in
praesentia mei Johannis Incent Notarii Publici Registrarii antedicti, praefatus
Venerabilis Vir Robertus Weston, Legum Doctor, Almae Curiae Cantuariensis
Officialis, judicialiter and pro Tribunali sedens, ob reverentiam and honorem
dicti Reverendissimi Patris Domini Matthaei Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis
antedicti, Onus Commissionis ejusdem Reverendissimi Patris in se acceptavit, ac
juxta vim formam and effectum ejusdem procedendum fore deerevit. Ac
consequenter, authoritate sibi commissa, praesentem Convocationem sive Sacram
Synodum Provincialem in Statu quo nunc est, usque ad and in diem Mercurii
proxime futurum, viz. decimumtertium diem praesentis mensis Januarii hora
octava ante meridiem ejusdem diei, atque ad Domum Capitularem praedictam cum
ulteriori prorogatione dierum and horarum ex tunc sequentium, and locorum (si
oporteat) continuavit and prorogavit in Scriptis, prout in Schedula per eum
lecta before continetur, Cujus quidem Schedulae tenor sequitur in haec verba
-- In Dei Nomine, Amen. Nos Robertus Weston, etc. praesentibusque tunc and
ibidem Magistris Johanne Bu^er Clerico, Canonico Ecclesiae Christi
Cantuariensis, Thoma Bolte Canonico, Edmundo Weston in legibus Baccalaureo, and
Thoma Willet Notario Publico, testibus, etc.

Secunda Sessio.
DIE Mercurij, viz. 13o. die Mensis Januarij Anno Domini juxta computationem
Ecclesiae Anglicanae Millesimo Quingentesimo Sexagesimo Secundo,
Reverendissimus in Christo Pater Dominus Matthaeus, Archiepiscopus
Cantuariensis, etc. mane circa horam octavam ante Meridiem dicti diei, Lambetha
Solvens in Navicula sua vulgo nuncupata a Barge, ad ripam vocatam Paul' s
Wharfe, comitante eum Reverendo Patre Domino Nicholao Lincoln Episcopo,
applicuit, ibique ab Advocatis and Procuratoribus and caeteris ministris Curiae
suae Cantuariensis acceptus, pedibus ambulans, deductus fuit ad for as Australes
Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi Pauli London, ibique ad Ostium Australe ejusdem
Decanus Canonici and caeteri Ministri ejusdem Ecclesiae Superpellitiis induti
eum praestolabantur, ac ad vestiarium ejusdem Ecclesiae perduxerunt; ibique
amictu and habitu suis vestitus, ac chorum ipsius Ecclesiae (comitantibus eum
Episcopis Suffraganeis Provinciae suae Cantuariensis similibus habitibus
indutis) ingressus, in Stallo Decani collocatus fuit, caeteris Episcopis
Suffraganeis Provinciae Cantuariensis habitibus suis in hujusmodi negotio
Convocationis solitis, indutis, in Stallis Praebendariorum ex utraque part
Chori sedentibus; ac consequenter decantata fuit per Ministros Ecclesiae
Letania, in Sermon vulgari, (juxta morem and ritum in Libro nuncupato, The
Book of Common Prayers, etc. descriptum.) Qua finita, ac Hymno Veni Creator,
etc. per Ministros ejusdem Ecclesiae in vulgari Solemniter decantato, Magister
Wilhelmus Day Sacrae Theologiae Baccalaureus, praepositus Collegij Regalis de
Eaton, habitu Baccalaurei in Theologia indutus, Suggestum in medio Chori
positum ingressus fuit, ac ibidem Concionem Latinam Stilo venusto, ad Patres
and Clerum ac populum praesentes habuit, acceptis pro themate hiis Divi Petri
verbis in quinto Capitulo primae suae Epistolae descriptis, viz. Pascite
quantum in vobis est, etc. Finita vero concione; ac Psalmo primo (Beatus Vir,
etc.) in Sermon vulgari decantato, celebrata fuit Sacra Communio per
Reverendum Patrem Dominum Edmundum Grindale Episcopum London, dictusque
Reverendissimus Dominus ac caeteri omnes Episcopi praesentes Sacramentum
Corporis and Sanguinis Domini communicabant. Finita vero Communione,
Reverendissimus Dominus Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis Chorum egressus, ac Domum
Capitularem ingressus, comitantibus eum Episcopis, and caeteris Cleri
Praelatis, ibidem pro Tribunali sedebat, assidentibus secum undique Episcopis
Suffraganeis suis, viz. Domino Edmundo London, Roberto Winton, Wilhelmo
Cicestren, Johanne Hereforden, Ricardo Elien, Edwino Wigorn, Rolando Bangor,
Nicolao Lincoln, Johanne Sarum, Ricardo Meneven, Edmundo Roffen, Gilberto
Bathon and Wellen, Thoma Coven and Lichen, Wilhelmo Exon, Johanne Norwicen,
Edmundo Petriburgen, Thoma Asaphen, and Ricardo Glocestren, ac Commendatar'.
Bristolien, respective Episcopis. Cui quidem Reverendissimo sic pro Tribunali
sedenti praefatus Reverendus Dominus London Episcopus exhibuit Certificatorium
suum super Executione Mandati monitorij alias sibi directi, tenorem infra
Scriptum continens, Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, etc. Quo quidem
Certificatorio per Magistrum Thomam Yale Legum Doctorem, dicti Reverendissimi
Patris Vicarium in Spiritualibus Generalem, de mandato ejusdem Reverendissimi,
public perlecto, Magister Gabriel Goodman, Decanus Westminster eidem
Reverendissimo Patri quandam Protestationem in Scriptis conceptam porrexit, ac
ea Protestatione salva, comparuit in hujusmodi Sacra Synodo sive Convocatione,
and non aliter. Tenor vero dictae Protestationis sequitur in haec verba, Sub
protestatione de non consentiendo in Authoritatem Reverendissimi Patris
Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi quoad hanc Convocationem celebrand', nisi quatenus
de Jure ac Statutis hujus Regni Angliae and Privilegiis Ecclesiae Collegiatae
five Collegii nostri Westminster teneor, neque de non infringend' aut
diminuend' libertates and privilegia ejusdem nostri Collegij five Ecclesiae
Collegiatae. Quibus sic factis, Reverendissimus Dominus Archiepiscopus
Cantuariensis brevem quandam Orationem cloquentiae plenam habuit ad Patres and
Clerum; per quam, inter alia, Opportunitatem Reformandarum rerum in Ecclesia
Anglicana jam oblatam esse aperuit, ac propensos animos tam Illustrissimae
Dominae nostrae Reginae, quam aliorum Magnatum hujus Regni ad hujusmodi
Reformationem habendam declaravit; hortando, praecipiendo and mandando
Praelatos and Clerum Inferioris Domus in dicta Domo Capitulari, coram eo and
reliquis Patribus constitutos, quatenus ad Conventus sui locum sese
conferentes, unum Virum gravem, doctum and peritum de gremio suo provideant and
eligant in eorum Prolocutorem sive Referendarium ( commendans illis maxim
Decanum Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi Pauli London Alexandrum Nowel,) ipsumque sic
electum exhibeant and praesentent coram eodem Reverendissimo aut ejus
locum-tenente die Sabbati proxime futuro, hora prima post Meridiem in hoc loco.
Deinde dictus Reverendissimus Pater commisit vices suas praefato Magistro
Thomae Yale Cancellario suo, ac Magistro Wilhelmo Drurie Legum Doctori
Commissario ad Facultates, ad recipiendum Certificatoria Episcoporum, ac ad
inspiciendum Procuratoria quorumcunque absentium, ac causas absentiarum suarum
Examinand' and approband'. Ac praeterea dictus Reverendissimus Pater
pronuntiavit omnes and singulos Decanos, Archidiaconos, Capitula, ac Cleri
Procuratores and caeteros quoscunque ad interessendum in hujusmodi Sacra
Synodo, sive Convocatione, monitos and citates, ac per se aut Procuratores suos
idoneos minime comparentes, notorie Contumaces; poenas Contumaciarum suarum
hujusmodi usque in proximam Sessionem reservand'. prout in Schedula per eum
lecta before continetur, cujus quidem Schedulae verus tenor sequitur in haec
verba, In Dei Nomine, Amen, etc. Omnibus gestis, praefatus Reverendissimus
Pater continuavit and prorogavit hujusmodi Convocationem sive Sacram Synodum,
ac omnia and singula Certificatoria introducta and introducenda, in Statu quo
nunc sunt, usque in diem Sabbati proxime futurum hora prima post meridiem, ad
Domum Capitularem praedictam; prout in Schedula per eum lecta tenorem
subscriptum de verbo in verbum in se complectente, dilucidius apparet, In Dei
nomine, Amen, etc.

Sessio Tertia.
DIE Sabbati, viz. 16o. die mensis Januarii, Anno Domini praedicto, inter horam
primam and secundam post meridiem ejusdem diei, Reverendissimus Dominus
Matthaeus Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis, ac Reverendi Patres Domini Edmundus
London, Robertus Winton, Johannes Hereforden, Richardus Elien, Edwinus Wigorn,
Rolandus Bangor, Nicholaus Lincoln, Johannes Sarum, Richardus Meneven, Edmundus
Roffen, Gilbertus Bathon and Wellen, Thomas Coven. and Lichen, Wilhelmus Exon,
Johannes Norwicen, Edmundus Petriburgen, Thomas Asaphen, and Ricardus
Glocestren, respective Episcopi, in domo Capitulari Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi
Pauli London congregati, primum and ante omnia preces Deo Optimo Maximo
effundebant, dicta public ac alta and intelligibili voce per ipsum
Reverendissimum Patrem Letania in Sermon latino una cum Collectis assuetis ac
Oratione Synodo Provinciali dicenda, noviter (ut apparuit) edita,
respondentibus aliis Episcopis praedictis ac Praelatis and Clero and populo
astantibus. Finitis precibus, ac Clero praedicto ad locum Conventus sui Sese
conferentes, praefatus Reverendissimus, una cum aliis confratribus suis
Provinciae suae Cantuariensis Episcopis Suffraganeis praenominatis, pro
Tribunali sedens, post intervallum temporis denuo ad eum accersiri jussit
dictos Praelatos and Clerum Domus inserioris; cui copiose sese praesentantes
exhiberi and sisti fecerunt Venerabilem Virum Magistrum Alexandrum Nowell,
Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi Pauli London Decanum, in Prolocutorem sive
Referendarium Domus Inferioris electum. Quem Eximii Viri Magistri Gabriel
Goodman, Decanus Westminster, and Thomas Sampson, Decanus Exon. medium inter se
ductum vice totius Cleri, praemissa Oratione brevi Latina ab eodem Magistro
Gabriele Goodman, personam electam ac ejus virtutes and animi dotes
complectente, exhibuerunt. Qua finita, idem Prolocutor per aliam Orationem non
inelegantem se variis de causis ad hujusmodi munus obeundum inidoneum
declaravit: Sed tandem ne opus tam pium effugere videatur, hujusmodi Provinciam
in se lubens acceptare promisit; and tunc habito inter dictum Reverendissimum
Patrem and Confratres suos tractatu de idoneitate dicti Prolocutoris, omnes
unanimiter and concorditer ipsum Magistrum Nowel ad dictum Officum Prolocutoris
obeundum maxim idoneum esse asseruerunt and affirmarunt. Unde Reverendissimus,
cum Patrum unanimi consensu, Electionem hujusmodi de persona tam digni Viri
factam, venusta Oratione approbavit and confirmavit. Et tunc, dimisso Clero
Inferioris Domus, Reverendissimus rogavit Patres, quod unusquisque eorum citra
proximam Sessionem excogitare velit ea quae in eorum separalibus Diaecesibus
Reformatione indigeant, ac in proxima Sessione proponere dignaretur. Et tunc,
habita inter dictum Reverendissimum Patrem and Confratres suos secret a quadam
communicatione (semotis omnibus arbitris,) tandem dictus Reverendissimus de
consensu Patrum continuavit and prorogavit hujusmodi Convocationem sive sacram
Synodum Provincialem, omniaque and singula Certificatoria introducta and
introducenda, in Statu quo nune sent, Usque ad and in diem Martis proxime
futurum hora prima post meridiem ejusdem diei ad Ecclesiam Collegiatam Divi
Petri Westminster, prout in quadam Schedula per eum lecta before continetur,
cujus quidem Schedulae verus tenor sequitur, in haec verba, In Dei Nomine,
Amen. etc. Deinde dictus Reverendissimus poenas contumaciarum omnium and
singulorum absentium, ut prius, ad ejus arbitrium reservavit.

Quarta Sessio.
DIE Martis, viz. 19o. die mensis Januarii, Anno Domini 1562. hora secunda post
meridiem in Capella nuncupata, King Henry the Seventh's Chapel, infra
Ecclesiam Collegiatam Divi Petri Westminster Situata, dictis primitus and
public recitatis per Reverendissimum Patrem Dominum Matthaeum Archiepiscopum
Cantuariensem, and reliquos Episcopos Suffraganeos Provinciae Cantuariensis
precibus de quibus in Superiori Sessione fit mentio coram eodem Reverendissimo
Patre pro Tribunali sedente, assidentibus secum Reverendis Patribus Dominis,
etc. respective Episcopis, comparuit personaliter Magister Gabriel Goodman,
Decanus Ecclesiae Collegiatae Divi Petri Westminster praedictae, ac Vice sua
and totius Capituli (ut asseruit) ejusdem Ecclesiae palam and public
protestatus fuit, Quod non intendit consentire ut hujusmodi sacra Synodus in
dicta Ecclesia Collegiata Divi Petri Westminster celebretur, nisi quatenus per
privilegia ejusdem Ecclesiae liceat and non aliter, neque alio modo, quibus
quidem privilegiis (ut asseruit) in aliquo derogare noluit, neque intendit, sed
eis firmiter adhaerere ac pro posse suo illaesa in omnibus conservare. Et tunc,
habita inter dictum Reverendissimum Patrem, ac caeteros Episcopos suos
Suffraganeos praenominatos communicatione sive disputatione de quibusdam
Articulis ad Christianam fidem facientibus; tandem dictus Reverendissimus
accersiri jussit ad se Prolocutorem Domus Inferioris; qui quidem Prolocutor,
una cum Sex aliis de Clero dicta Domus Inferioris coram Patribus sui copiam
faciens, proposuit and asseruit, quod quidam de dicta Domo exhibuerant quasdam
diversas Schedas de rebus Reformandis per eos respective excogitat. and in
Scriptis redact. Quae quidem Schedae de communi consensu traditae sunt
quibusdam viris gravioribus and doctioribus de Coetu dictae Domus Inferioris ad
hoc electis perspiciend. and considerand. Quibus sic electis (ut asseruit)
assignatum est ut hujusmodi Schedas in Capitula redigant ac in proxima Sessione
exhibeant coram eodem Prolocutore. Et ulterius proposuit, quod Articuli in
Synodo Londinensi, tempore nuper Regis Edwardi Sexti (ut asseruit) editi,
traditi sunt quibusdam aliis Viris ex Coetu dictae Domus Inferioris, ad hoc
etiam electis, ut eos diligenter perspiciant, examinent, and considerent; ac
prout eis visum fuerit, corrigant and reforment, ac in proxima Sessione etiam
exhibeant. Et tunc Reverendissimus hujusmodi negotia per dictum Prolocutorem
and Clerum incaepta approbavit, ac in eisdem erga proximam Sessionem juxta
eorum determinationem procedere voluit and mandavit. Quibus sic expeditis,
Reverendissimus, etc. continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula, etc. In Dei Nomine,
Amen. etc.

Sessio Quinta.
DIE Mercurij, viz. 20o. die Mensis Januarii, etc. inter horam secundam and
tertiam post meridiem ejusdem diei, Reverendissimus Pater Dominus Matthaeus
Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis, etc. Ac Reverendi Patres, etc. in Capella nuper
Regis Henrici Septimi, infra Ecclesiam Collegiatam Divi Petri Westminster,
congregati, etc. de and super quibusdam Articulis sacrosanctam Christi
Religionem concernentibus, de quibus in Actis hesterni diei fit mentio, per
spacium trium horarum aut circiter inter se tractarunt and communicarunt. Ac
tandem dictus Reverendissimus, etc. continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.
In Dei Nomine, Amen. etc.

Sessio Sexta.
DIE Veneris, viz. xxijo. die Mensis Januarii, circa horam octavam ante
meridiem ejusdem diei, praefatus Reverendissimus Pater, Dominus Matthaeus
Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis, ac Reverendi Patres, etc. in Domo Capitulari
Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi Pauli London congregati, etc. Secretam quandam
communicationem per spacium trium horarum Semotis Arbitris, inter se habuerunt;
ac tandem dictus Reverendissimus Pater, etc. continuavit, etc. usque in diem
Lunae, etc. inter horas 1. and 2. post meridiem, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.
In Dei Nomine, Amen, etc.

Sessio Septima.
DIE Lunae, viz. 25. die mensis Januarii, Anno praedicto, circa horam tertiam
post meridiem ejusdem diei, Reverendissimus in Christo Pater Dominus Matthaeus
Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis, etc. ac Reverendi Patres, etc. in Capella nuper
Regis Henrici Septimi infra Ecclesiam Collegiatam Divi Petri Westminster. congregati,
per spacium duarum horarum aut circiter secretam quandam communicationem inter
se habuerunt: Ac tandem Reverendissimus, etc. continuavit, etc. usque ad and in
diem Mercurij, etc. inter horam 1 and 3 post meridiem, etc.

Sessio Octava.
DIE Mercurij, viz. 27o. die Mensis Januarij, 1562. hora secunda post meridiem
ejusdem diei in Capella nuper Regis Henrici Septimi, infra Ecclesiam
Collegiatam Divi Petri Westminster, Reverendissimus in Christo Pater Dominus
Matthaeus permissione Divina Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus, etc. ac Reverendi
Patres Domini, etc. respective Episcopi, pro Tribunali sedentes, per spacium
trium fere horarum secret inter se tractarunt and communicarunt. Ac tandem
dictus Reverendissimus, etc. continuavit, etc.

Sessio Nona.
DIE Veneris, viz. 29o. die Mensis Januarij, 1562. inter horam octavam and
nonam ante meridiem ejusdem diei, Reverendissimo in Christo Patre Domino
Matthaeo Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, etc. nec non Reverendis Patribus, etc.
respective Episcopis in Domo Capitulari Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi Pauli London
congregatis, post tractatum aliquem inter eos habitum, tandem super quibusdam
Articulis Orthodoxae Fidei inter Episcopos quorum nomina eis subscribuntur,
unanimiter convenit, quorum quidem Articulorum tenores sequuntur and sunt
tales: Articuli de quibus, etc. ac deinde Reverendi Patres Domini Edmundus
London, Robertus Winton, Nicholaus Lincoln, and Johannes Hereforden, respective
Episcopi, per Reverendissimum de consensu Confratrum suorum praenominatorum
electi fuerunt ad excogitand. quoedam Capitula de Disciplina in Ecclesia
habend. Quibus sic gestis dictus Reverendissimus, etc. continuavit, etc. usque
ad and in diem Mercurij, etc. inter horam 1 and 2 post meridiem, etc.

Sessio Decima.
DIE Mercurij, viz. 3o. die Mensis Februarij, 1562. in Capella Regis Henrici
Septimi infra Ecclesiam Collegiatam Divi Petri Westminster situata,
Reverendissimus in Christo Pater Dominus Matthaeus Archiepiscopus
Cantuariensis, nec non Reverendi Patres Domini, etc. respective Episcopi, pro
Tribunali sedentes, secretam quandam communicationem sive tractatum per spacium
trium horarum aut circiter inter se habuerunt. Ac tandem dictus
Reverendissimus, etc. continuavit, etc. usque ad and in diem Veneris, etc.
inter hor as octavam and nonam antemerid. etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio Undecima.
DIE Veneris, viz. 5o. die Mensis Februarij, 1562. in Domo Capitulari Ecclesiae
Cathedralis Divi Pauli London, coram Reverendis Patribus, etc. respective
Episcopis tunc ibidem congregatis, praesentatis per me Johannem Incent,
Notarium Publicum Registrarium principalem Reverendissimi Patris Domini
Matthaei Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis, etc. Literis Commissionalibus ejusdem
Reverendissimi Patris, praefatis Reverendis Patribus Dominis Edmundo London,
Roberto Winton, Edwino Wigorn, and Nicholao Lincoln, respective Episcopis, ad
tenendum Locum ejusdem Reverendissimi Patris in dicta Convocatione conjunctim
and divisim, factis and concessis, ac per me Notarium Publicum praedictum
public perlectis, praefatus Dominus Edmundus London, de consensu Collegarum
suorum hujusmodi, ob reverentiam and honorem dicti Reverendissimi Patris
acceptavit in se onus dictarum Literarum Commissionalium, and decrevit
procedendum fore juxta vim, formam, and effectum earundem. Deinde, post
tractatum aliquem inter Patres praedictos habitum; Reverendi Patres Domini
Johannes Sarum, Thomas Coven and Lichen, Richardus Meneven, and Wilhelmus Exon,
de unanimi consensu Patrum praedictorum, assignati fuerunt ad examinandum
Librum vocatum (the Catechism.) Et tunc habita inter Patres communicatione and
tractatu de Subsidio Dominae nostrae Reginae per Praelatos and Clerum
Provinciae Cantuariensis concedendo, iidem Patres accersiri fecerunt coram eis
Prolocutorem Domus Inferioris. Qui quidem Prolocutor cum Sex aliis de coetu
Domus Inferioris, coram eisdem Patribus sui copiam faciens, porrexit and
exhibuit coram eisdem Patribus quosdam Articulos sive Libellum de Doctrina,
etc. a Reverendissimo Domino Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi and aliis Reverendis
Patribus ad coetum Ecclesiasticum dictae Domus Inferioris, alias (ut asseruit)
transmissos, ac per dictum coetum perspect'. and propriis manibus nonnullorum
ejusdem Coetus (ut apparuit) Subscript'. ac, nomine and consensu (ut asseruit)
totius Coetus Ecclesiastici dictae Domus Inferioris, rogavit Patres ut omnes
qui hactenus Articulis dicti Libelli non subscripserunt, id suis propriis
manibus public in frequenti Coetu Ecclesiastico dictae Domus Inferioris, aut
(si id recusarint) coram eisdem Reverendis Patribus facere cogantur. Et tunc
Reverendi Patres unanimi consensu decreverunt, ut omnia and singula nomina
eorum qui supra-dictis Articulis nomina sua propriis suis manibus non
subscripserunt, a dicto Domino Prolocutore descripta ad eos perferantur in
proxima Sessione. Quibus sic gestis, praefatus Reverendus Dominus London
Episcopus, de consensu Collegarum suorum and aliorum Reverendorum Patrum
praenominatorum, continuavit, etc. usque in diem Mercurij, etc. inter horas
primam and secundam post meridiem, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio Duodecima.
DIE Mercurij, viz. decimo die mensis Februarii, 1562. in Capella Regis Henrici
septimi infra Ecclesiam Callegiatam Divi Petri Westminster, Reverendus Pater
Dominus Edmundus London Episcopus, Reverendissimi in Christo Patris and Domini
Domini Matthaei permissione divina Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi, etc.
Locumtenens, Reverendique Patres Domini, etc. respective Episcopi pro Tribunali
sedentes, de rebus Ecclesiae aliquandiu tractarunt. Ac tandem Dominus
Prolocutor, cum Octo aliis de Coetu Domus Inferioris, coram dictis Patribus
comparens, praesentavit and exhibuit quendam Librum de Subsidio Dominae nostrae
Reginae per Clerum Provinciae Cantuariensis concedendo, in Scriptis redactum;
ac penes eosdem Patres dimisit, ac etiam praesentavit and exhibuit Libellum
Articulorum de doctrina, etc. de quibus in ultima Sessione fit mentio;
asserens, quod quidam de Coetu dictae Domus citra ultimam Sessionem dictis
Articulis manus suas subscripserunt, ac quidam alii nondum Subscripserunt. Unde
dicti Patres voluerunt and mandarunt, quod nomina eorum, qui hactenus non
subscripserunt, praesententur coram eis in proxima Sessione. Deinde dictus
Dominus Locumtenens, de consensu Confratrum suorum praelictorum, continuavit,
etc. usque ad and in diem Veneris, etc. inter horas octavam and nonam ante
meridiem, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XIII.
DIE Veneris, viz. 12o. die mensis Februarij, 1562. in Domo Capitulari
Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi Pauli London. Reverendus in Christo Pater Dominus
Edwinus permissione Divina Wigorn Episcopus, acceptans in se onus Commissionis
Reverendissimi, etc. juxta formam and effectum ejusdem procedendum fore
decrevit. As deinde idem Reverendus Pater, authoritate sibi commissa
continuavit, etc. usque ad and in diem Sabbati, etc. inter horas primam and
secundam post meridiem, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XIV.
DIE Sabbati, viz. 13o. die mensis Februarij, 1562. hora secunda post meridiem
ejusdem diei, Reverendissimus in Christo Pater Dominus Matthaeus Archiepiscopus
Cantuariensis, etc. necnon Reverendi in Christo Patres, etc. respective
Episcopi, in Domo Capitulari Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi Pauli London
congregati, de Subsidio Dominae nostrae Reginae per Praelatos and Clerum
Cantuarien. concedend', aliquamdiu tractarunt. Ac tandem dictus
Reverendissimus, etc. continuavit, etc. usque ad and in diem Lunae, etc. inter
horas primam and tertiam post meridiem, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XV.
DIE Lunae, viz. 15o. die mensis Februarij, 1562. hora secunda post meridiem
ejusdem diei in Capella Regis Henrici Septimi infra, etc. Reverendissimus
Dominus Matthaeus Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis ac, etc. respective Episcopi,
pro Tribunali sedentes, de Subsidio Dominae nostrae Reginae concedendo inter se
tractarunt. Ac tandem Reverendissimus praedictus Dominus Matthaeus
Archiepiscopus Cant. and Dominus Robertus Winton Episcopus recesserunt. Post
quorum recessum, Reverendi Patres Domini Edwinus Wigorn and Nicholaus Lincoln,
dicti Reverendissimi Patris Locumtenentes, ac caeteri Reverendi Patres
praenominati Librum de hujusmodi Subsidio in Scriptis conceptum coram eis
perlegi fecerunt. Quo lecto, dictus Dominus Wigorn. Episcopus de consensu
Patrum praenominatorum continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XVI.
DIE Mercurij, viz. 17o. die mensis Februarij, 1562. inter horas secundam and
tertiam post meridiem ejusdem diei in Capella Regis Henrici Septimi infra, etc.
Reverendus in Christo Pater Nicholaus permissione Divina Lincoln Episcopus,
vice and authoritate Reverendissimi Patris Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis, etc.
continuavit, etc. usque ad and in diem Veneris, etc. inter horas octavam and
nonam ante meridiem, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XVII.
DIE Veneris, viz. 19o. die Mensis Februarii, 1562. in Domo Capitulari
Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi Pauli London, Reverendissimus in Christo Pater
Dominus Matthaeus Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis, etc. una cum Reverendis
Patribus Dominis, etc. pro Tribulani sedens, accersiri fecit ad se Prolocutorem
Domus Inferioris. Cui quidem Prolocutori and Sex aliis de Clero dictae Domus
Inferioris coram dicto Reverendissimo and aliis Reverendis Patribus
praenominatis constitut' idem Reverendissimus de and cum consensu Confratrum
suorum hujusmodi tradidit quosdam Articulos in Scriptis conceptos, mandando
quatenus super contentis in dictis Articulis diligenter inquirant, ac quicquid
inde invenerint, in Scriptis redigant, ac dicto Reverendissimo porrigant and
exhibeant. Et tunc dimissis dictis Prolocutore and Clero, ac habito secreto
tractatu inter dictum Reverendissimum Patrem and Confratres suos per spacium
unius horae aut circiter, tandem praefatus Reverendissimus de consensu
Confratrum suorum continuavit, etc. usque ad and in diem Lunae, etc. inter
horas 1 and 2 post Meridiem, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Articuli, vero de quibus supra fit mentio, hic inferius describuntur.

First, Whether if the Writ of (melius inquirend') be sent forth, the
likelihood be that it will turn to the Queen's commodity?

Item, Whether some Benefices rateable, be not less than they be already valued?

Item, To enquire of the manner of Dilapidations and other Spoliations that
they can remember to have passed upon their Livings, and by whom?

Item, How they been have used for the levying of Arrearage of Tenths and
Subsidies, and for how many Years past?

Item, How many Benefices they find that are charged with Pensions of Religious
Persons?

Item, To certify how many Benefices are vacant in every Diocese?

Eodem die, Venerabilis Vir Magister Thomas Yale, Legum Doctor, Vicarius in
Spiritualibus Generalis dicti Reverendissimi Patris, ac Commissarius in hac
part specialiter deputatus, in Capella beatae Mariae infra Ecclesiam
Cathedralem divi Pauli London Situat' Domo viz. Inferioris Convocationis
praedict. in praesentia, (ut dicebatur) Magistri Wilhelmi Say, Notarii
Publici, dictae Domus Inferioris Registrarii and Actorum Scribae, judicialiter
sedens legit quandam Schedulam contra omnes and singulos Decanos, Capitula,
Archidiaconos, and Cleri Procuratores, ac caeteros quoscunque in dicta
Convocatione, juxta monitionem legitimam in hac part factam, non comparentes,
aut ab eadem sine licentia, etc. recedentes. Cujus quidem Schedulae verus tenor
sequitur, and est talis, In Dei Nomine, Amen. etc.

Sessio XVIII.
DIE Lunae, viz. 22o. die Mensis Februarii, 1562. Reverendissimus Pater Dominus
Mat- Matthaeus Cantuariensis, ac Reverendi Patres Domini, etc. respective
Episcopi, in Capella Regis Henrici Septimi infra, etc. congregati, and pro
Tribunali sedentes, ac de Sub^idio Dominae nostrae Reginae concedendo
aliquandiu tractantes, tandem unanimiter convenerunt de hujusmodi Subsidio
eidem Dominae nostrae Reginae concedendo sub modo and forma ac conditionibus
and provsionibus sequentibus, viz. The Prelates and Clergy of the Province of
Canterbury, etc. Quibus sic factis, dictus Reverendissimus, etc. continuavit,
etc. usque ad and in diem Mercurii, etc. inter horam octavam and decimam ante
Meridiem, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XIX.
DIE Mercurij, viz. 24. die Mensis Februarii, etc. in Capella Regis Henrici
Septimi infra, etc. Reverendissimus, etc. nec non Reverendi Patres, etc.
respective Episcopi, congregati, Surrogatum Prolocutoris (dicto Prolocutore
absente) and Clerum Domus Inferioris, ad se accersiri jusserunt; ac coram eis
public legi fecerunt Librum de Subsidio, Dominae nostrae Reginae concesso, de
quo in Actis proxime praecedentis Sessionis fit mentio, in pergameno conscript.
ac Sigillo dicti Reverendissimi Patris sigillat'. Cui quidem Libro sic
perlecto, ac omnibus and singulis concessionibus, conditionibus and
provisionibus in eodem mentionatis sub modo and forma^supra specificatis,
dictus Clerus Inferioris Domus consensum and assensum suos unanimiter
adhibuerunt.

Sessio XX.
DIE Veneris, viz. 26. die Mensis Februarii, etc. Reverendissimus Pater Dominus
Matthaeus Cantuar. etc. in Domo Capitulari Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi Pauli
London congregati, and pro Tribunali sedentes, secretum quendam tractatum
aliquandiu inter se habuerunt. Deinde Prolocutor and december alii de Coetu Domus
Inferioris viz. Magister Georgius Carewe, Decanus Ecclesiae Collegiatae sive
Capellae Regiae de Winsor, Magister Pedder Decanus Wigorn, Magister Salisburie
Decanus Norwicen, Mag. Latimer Decanus Petriburgen, Mag. Cottrell Archidiaconus
Dorset, Mag. Kennall Archidiaconus Exon, Mag. Chaundler Archidiaconus Sarum,
Mag. Walker Archidiaconus Stafford, Mag. Hewitt Praecentor Meneven. and Mag.
Levar Archidiaconus Coven. coram dicta Reverendissimo Patr^ ac ceteris
Reverendis Patribus praenominatis personaliter comparentes, tam nominibus suis
propriis, quam vice and nomine totius Coetus (ut asserunt) Domus Inferioris
Convocationis praedict. porrexerunt eisdem Patribus quendam Librum de
Disciplina, etc. in papiro. Cui quidem Libro (ut asseruerunt) dictus Coetus
Domus Inferioris unanimiter consenserunt. Et tunc dictus Liber, de consensu
Patrum praedictorum, commissus fuit Reverendissimo Domino Cantuar. ac
Reverendis Dominis London, Winton, Cicestren, Hereforden, and Elien,
examinandus. Quibus sic gestis, dictus Reverendissimus de consensu Confratrum
suorum continuavit, etc. Usque ad and in diem Lunae, etc. inter horas primam
and tertiam post meridiem, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XXI.
DIE Lunae, viz. primo die mensis Martii, etc. Reverendissimus Pater Dominus
Matthaeus Cantuar. etc. ac Reverendi Patres Domini, etc. respective Episcopi,
in Capella Regis Henrici Septimi insra Ecclesiam Collegiatam Divi Petri
Westminster, pro Tribulani sedentes, per spacium duarum horarum aut circiter
inter se secret communicarunt. Et tunc comparuit coram eis Prolocutor Domus
Inferioris, and allegavit, quod Coetus dictae Domus Inferioris excogitavit
quaedam Capitula additionalia ad Librum de Disciplina coram Patribus ultima
Sessione porrectum, quae quidem Capitula dicto Libro (ut asseruit) addi cupit.
Unde dictus Reverendissimus tradidit eidem Domino Prolocutori Librum
praedictum, mandando quod additis hujusmodi Capitulis sic excogitatis, ipsum
Librum, cum Additionalibus praedictis, denuo exhibeat coram codem
Reverendissimo and Confratribus suis in proxima Sessione. Deinde, dictus
Reverendissimus, etc. continuavit, etc. Usque ad and in diem Mercurii, etc.
inter horas primam and tertiam post meridiem, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XXII.
DIE Mercurij, viz. tertio die mensis Martii, 1562. coram Reverendissimo Patre
Domino Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, ac Reverendis Patribus Dominis, etc.
respective Episcopis, in Capella Regis Henrici Septimi, etc. Dominus Prolocutor
Domus Inferioris Convocationis, ac Mag. Thomas Sampson Decanus Ecclesiae
Christi Oxon, and Wilhelmus Deye Praepositus Collegii Regalis de Eaton,
personaliter comparentes, nomine totius Coetus dictae Domus Inferioris
praesentarunt eisdem Patribus quendam Librum nuncupatum Catechismus puerorum,
cui (ut asseruerunt) omnes de Coetu ejusdem Domus unanimiter consenserunt. Quem
quidem Librum penes eosdem Patres dimiserunt. Et tunc, dicto Domino
Prolocutore, unacum praefatis Magistris Sampson and Deye ad Domum Inferiorem
praedictam sese conferentes, dictus Reverendissimus cum Confratribus suis
praenominatis ac Reverendis Patribus Dominis Roberto Winton, Johanne
Hereforden, Nicholao Lincoln, and Thoma Coven and Lichen, respective Episcopis,
secretam quandam communicationem sive tractatum per spacium duarum horarum and
ultra habuit. Ac postremo ipse Reverendissimus Pater, etc. continuavit, etc.
Usque ad and in diem Veneris, etc. inter horas octavam and nonam ante, etc.
prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XXIII.
DIE Veneris, viz. 5. die mensis Martii, 1562. in Domo Capitulari Ecclesiae
Cathedralis Divi Pauli London, hora prius assignata, Reverendissimus, etc. ac
Reverendi Patres, etc respective Episcopi, pro Tribunali sedentes, secret
inter se aliquandiu communicarunt. Ac tandem comparuit coram eis Dominus
Prolocutor Domus Inferioris, ac Magistri Johannes Warner Decanus Winton,
Johannes Salisburye Decanus Nor^icen, Thomas Watts Archidiaconus Middlesex, and
Robertus Weston unus Procuratorum Cleri Diaeces. Lichen. and exhibuerunt coram
eisdem Patribus Librum de Disciplina, una cum quibusdam, Capitulis
additionalibus ad eundem, viz. de Adulterio, etc. and penes eosdem Patres
dimiserunt. Et dictus Reverendissimus, etc. continuavit, etc. Usque in diem
Lunae, etc. inter horas primam and secundampost meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XXIV.
DIE Lunae, 8. viz. die mensis Martii, 1562. in Capella Regis Henrici Septimi,
etc. Reverendus Pater Dominus Edmundus London Episcopus, assidentibus. secum
Reverendis Patribus Dominis, etc. resp^ Episcopis, vice ac authoritate dicti
Reverendissimi Patris, continuavit, etc. Usque ad and in diem Mercurii, etc.
inter horas primam and secundam, etc. ad hunc Locum prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XXV.
DIE Mercurij, viz. decimo die mensis Martii, 1562. in Capella Regis Henrici
Septimi, etc. Reverendissimus, etc. una cum Reverendis Patribus, etc.
respective Episcopis pro Tribunali sedens, post tractatum aliquem cum eisdem
Confratribus suis per duarum horarum spacium secret habitum continuavit etc.
Usque ad and in diem Veneris, etc. inter horas octavam and nonam ante meridiem,
etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XXVI.
DIE Veneris, viz. 12o. die mensis Martii, etc. in Domo Capitulari Ecclesiae
Cathedralis Divi Pauli London, Reverendissimus, etc. una cum Reverendis
Patribus etc. respective Episcopis, pro Tribunali sedens, post secretum quendam
tractatum cum eisdem Confratribus suis per spacium duarum horarum habitum, etc.
prorogavit, etc. Usque ad and in diem Lunae, etc. inter horas primam and
secundam post meridiem, etc. ad Capellam Regis Henrici Septimi, etc. prout in
Schedula, etc.

Sessio XXVII.
DIE Lunae, viz. 15. die mensis Martij, etc. in quodam alto deambulatorio infra
manerium Domini Archiepiscopi Cant. apud Lambeth, Reverendissimus, etc. in
praesentia mei Johannis Incent Notarii Publici, Registrarii primarii dicti
Reverendissimi Patris personaliter constitutus, commisit vices suas Reverendo
in Christo Patri Domino Wilhelmo permissione divina Cicestrensi Episcopo ad
continuand. and prorogand. praefatam Convoc. sive Sacram Synodum Provinc. in
Statu quo nunc est usque ad and in diem Mercurij prox. futurum, viz. 17. diem
praesentis mensis Martij, inter horas primam and secundam post meridiem ejusdem
diei, ad Capellam Regis Henrici Septimi infra, etc. ac postea de die in diem
and de Loco in Locum, quoties ipsum Reverendissimum Patrem abesse contigerit;
Ac caetera omnia and singula faciend. and expediend. quae in praemissis aut
circa ea necessaria fuerint, seu quomodolibet opportuna. Et promisit de Rat.
etc. Deinde eodem die in Capella Regis Henrici Septimi super-mentionata, in
praesentia mei praefati Johannis Incent Notarii Publici ac Registrarii
antedicti, dictus Reverendus Pater Dominus Wilhelmus Cicestrensis Episcopus
acceptans in se Onus Commissionis praefati Reverendissimi Patris, juxta vim
formam and effectum ejusdem procedendum fore decrevit. Ac mox, authoritate sibi
commissa, continuavit, etc. Usque ad and in diem Mercurij etc. inter horas
primam and secundam post, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XXVIIII
DIE Mercurij, viz. 17. die mensis Martij, etc. in. Capella Regis Henrici
Septimi infra, etc. Venerabilis Vir Magister Thomas Yale Legum Doctor,
Reverendissimi, etc. Vicarius in Spiritualibus Generalis, and Commissarius ad
infra Scripta sufficienter constitutus, vice and authoritate ejusdem
Reverendissimi Patris continuavit, etc. Usque ad and in diem Veneris, etc.
inter horas nonam and undecimam ante meridiem, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XXIXI
DIE Veneris, viz. 19. die mensis Martii, 1562. in Domo Capitulari Ecclesiae
Cathedralis Divi Pauli London, Reverendissimus, etc. pro Tribunali sedens,
assidentibus secum Reverendis Patribus, etc. respective Episcopis, cum eisdem
Confratribus suis per spacium duarum horarum aut circiter secret communicavit;
ac postea continuavit, etc. Usque ad and in diem Lunae, etc. inter horas 1 and
3 post, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XXX.
DIE Lunae, viz. 22. die mensis Martii, etc. in Capella Regis Henrici Septimi
infra, etc. Reverendus Pater Wilhelmus, etc. Cicestrensis Episcopus, vice and
authoritate Reverendissimi Domini, etc. continuavit, etc. Usque ad and in diem
Veneris, etc. inter horas octavam and undecimam ante, etc. prout in Schedula,
etc.

Sessio XXXI.
DIE Veneris, viz. 26. die Mensis Martii, 1563. hora nona ante meridiem, in
Domo Capitulari Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi Pauli London, Venerabilis Vir
Magister Valentinus Dale, Legum Doctor, vice and authoritate Reverendissimi,
etc. continuavit, etc. Usque ad and inter horam primam and tertiam post
meridiem hujus diei ad hunc locum, prout in Schedula, etc.

Eodem Die, hora secunda post meridiem ejusdem diei in Domo Capitulari
Ecclesiae Divi Pauli London, Venerabilis Vir Magister Thomas Yale, Legum
Doctor, vice and authoritate dicti Reverendissimi Patris, etc. continuavit,
etc. Usque ad and in diem Veneris, etc. inter horas octavam and decimam ante,
etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XXXII.
DIE Veneris, viz. secundo die mensis Aprilis, 1563. in Domo Capitulari
Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi Pauli London, hora nona ante meridiem ejusdem diei,
Venerabilis Vir Magister Thomas Yale Legum Doctor, vice and authoritate
Reverendissimi, etc. continuavit, etc. Usque ad and in diem Lunae, etc. inter
horas primam and tertiam post, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XXXIII.
DIE Lunae, viz. 5. die mensis Aprilis, 1563. Venerabilis Vir Magister Thomas
Yale Legum Doctor, vice and authoritate Reverendissimi, etc. continuavit, etc.
Usque ad and in diem Jovis, etc. inter horas primam and secundam, etc. prout in
Schedula, etc.

Sessio XXXIV.
DIE Jovis, viz. octavo die mensis Aprilis, etc. in Capella Regis Henrici
Septimi, etc. praefatus Magister Thomas Yale vice and authoritate dicti
Reverendissimi, etc. continuavit, etc. Usque ad and in diem Sabbati, etc. inter
horas primam and tertiam post, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XXXV.
DIE Sabbati, viz. Decimo die mensis Aprilis, 1563. in Capella Regis Henrici
Septimi infra, etc. Venerabilis Vir Magister Thomas Yale Legum Doctor, Locum
Tenens antedictus, vice and authoritate Reverendissimi, etc. continuavit, etc.
ad and in diem Mercurij proxime futurum, viz. 14 diem praesentis mensis Aprilis
inter horas primam and tertiam post meridiem ejusdem diei ad hunc Locum, prout
in Schedula per eum lecta tenore Subscripto before continetur. In Dei Nomine,
Amen, etc.

Breve Regium de Convocatione Proroganda.

Elizabeth, Dei gratia, etc. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri Matthaeo eadem
gratia Cant. Archiepiscopo, etc.

Commissio Archiepiscopi.

Nos Matthaeus Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus, etc. habentes Mandatum Dominae
nostrae de Proroganda Convocatione, etc.

Sessio XXXVI.
DIE Mercurij, viz. 14. die mensis Aprilis, An. Dom. 1563. in Capella Regis
Henrici Septimi, etc. in praesentia mei Johannis Incent Notarii Publici
Registrarii, etc. Venerabilis Vir Magister Thomas Yale Legum Doctor, pro
Tribunali sedens, acceptavit in se onus Commissionis dicti Reverendissimi
Patris Domini Matthaei Archiepiscopi Cant. etc. de Convocatione Prorogand. sibi
factae, and decrevit procedend. fore juxta vim, formam, and effectum ejusdem.
Et mox dictus Mr. Yale, vice and authoritate praefati Reverendissimi Patris,
Continuavit and Prorogavit candem Convocationem in Statu quo nune est usque ad
and in tertium diem mensis Octobris prox. futur. ad hunc locum, juxta tenorem
Brevis Regii suprascript. eidem Reverendo Patri in hac part direct. Prout in
Schedula per eum lecta before continetur: Cujus quidem Schedulae verus tenor
sequitur in haec Verba, In Dei Nomine, Amen. etc.

Forma sive Descriptio Convocationis Celebrandae, prout ab Antiquo observari
consuevit.
SCiendum est, quod Omnes qui Auctoritate Reverendissimi Domini Archiepiscopi
Cantuar' citantur ad comparendum coram Eo in Domo Capitulari Ecclesiae
Cathedralis Divi Pauli London' duodecimo die Jan' prox' tenentur praefixo
tempore interesse, atque in eadem Ecclesia Cath' praestolari Adventum dicti
Reverendissimi. Qui ex more, paulo post octavam ante Meridiem illius diei,
solet cum celebri Comitatu apud Portum Thamisis vocatum Paul's Wharf in terram
descendere, atque exinde Praeeuntibus Advocatis and Procuratoribus Curiae
Cantuar' certisque Reverendissimi Generosis ac Virgifero Convocationis, ad
Ecclesiam Cath' Divi Pauli London recta tendere, atque in chorum ibidem
ingredi. Vbi postquam in Stallo Decani collocatus fuerit, ac preces dixerit,
tam Ipse quam Reliqui Episcopi praesentes habitu Convocationis togati, ex
utroque Chori latere in suis stallis sese constitu^nt, and mox incipiunt
preces, quibus S. Sancti gratia invocatur; ac Communio subsequitur. Ac tempore
Offertorii, tam dictus Reverendissimus quam caeteri suffraganei Episcopi rem
divinam celebranti ordine progredientes Oblationem offerre ex more debent.
Peracta in hunc morem Re Divina, solet doctus aliquis ex Coetu Convocationis,
sive Superioris, sive Inferioris Domus, ad hoc selectus, e Suggestu in medio
Chori Concionem ad Clerum ibidem congregatum Latin proferre.

Qua absoluta, Reverendissimus statim se confert in Domum Capitularem dictae
Ecclesiae; sequentibus Episcopis, and toto Clero. Quibus ingressis ac seclusis
Extraneis, Reverendissimo ac caeteris suis Co-Episcopis in suis sedibus ordine
considentibus, ac reliquo Clero circumstante, Reverendus Dominus Episcopus
London. Mandatum sibi a dicto Reverendissimo ad Convocationem hujusmodi
[submonendam] Sub^undam, in the MS.
alias directum, una cum debito Certificatorio super executione ejusdem,
introducere, ac debita cum Reverentia eidem Reverendissimo Patri praesentare
and tradere tenetur.

Quo quidem Certificatorio perlecto, statim porrigitur eidem Reverendissimo
Schedula descripta, per quam pronunciat omnes ad eosdem diem, horam and locum
non comparentes Contumaces, reservando poenam eorum contumaciae in aliquem diem
competentem pro Beneplacito ipsius Reverendissimi.

Praemissis sic expeditis dictus Reverendissimus ad Episcopos and Clerum tunc
praesentes Anglice sive Latin Causam sui adventus ac dictae Convocationis
inchoatae exponit.

Quodque ex laudabili and antiqua Ordinatione eadem Convocatio in duo Membra
dividitur, nempe in Superiorem atque Inferiorem domum. Vnde Reverendissimus and
caeteri Co-Episcopi Superiorem Domum efficient; Inferior vero Domus ex Decanis
Ecclesiarum Cath' Archidiaconis, Collegiorum Magistris, and Capitulorum Cath'
Ecclesiarum, necnon Cleri cujuscunque Dioeceseos Procuratoribus constat.

Et quoniam si in rerum tractandarum serie unusquisque ex Inferiore Domo suam
ipse sententiam, quoties visum esset, diceret, aut si omnes aut plures simul
loquerentur, pareret confusionem, igitur semper hactenus observatum fuit, ut
Vnus aliquis doctus and disertus ex gremio dictae inferioris Domus in eorum
omnium locum ad hoc munus assumatur; ut Is intellectis and scrutatis caeterorum
Omnium votis, tanquam unum Eorum omnium Os and Organum loquatur, and consonam
eorum sententiam eidem Reverendissimo, cum ad hoc rogatus seu missus fuerit,
caeteris silentibus fideliter referat: Qui ex hoc munere Referendarius sive
Prolocutor communiter denominatur. Cujus eligendi libera facultas semper penes
dictam Inferiorem Domum remanet.

Vnde ipse Reverendissimus solet eosdem ex Inferiori Domo monere atque hortari,
ut statim se conferant in dictam Inferiorem Domum, ibique de viro docto, pio
and fideli in Prolocutorem suum assumendo consultantes, unanimiter consentiant
and eligant, sicque electum ipsi Reverendissimo in eadem Domo Capitulari prox'
insequente Sessione debita cum solemnitate praesentent. His dictis, descendunt
Omnes in Inferiorem Domum ad effectum praedictum.

Forma Eligendi and Praesentandi Prolocutorem.
SOlet observari, ut postquam ingressi fuerint Inferiorem Domum, in sedibus se
decenter collocent, and si Aliqui ex Iis sint Consiliarii sive Sacellani Regiae
Majestatis, ut hi superiores seeds occupent; atque ut Vnus ex Iis propter
Dignitatem and Reverentiam, seu in eorum absentia, Decanus Ecclesiae Cath' D.
Pauli London' sive Archidiaconus Lond' Praesidentis officio in hujusmodi
Electione fungatur.

Atque ut ad hoc rite procedatur, primum jubebit nomina omnium citatorum and
qui tunc interesse tenentur a Clerico dictae Inferioris Domus recitari and
praeconizari. Notatisque Absentibus, alloquatur praesentes, atque eorum
sententiam de idoneo Procuratore eligendo sciscitetur.

Et postquam de eo convenerint (quod semper quasi statim and absque ullo
negotio perfici solebat) mox convenient inter se de Duobus eminentioris
Ordinis, qui dictum Electum Reverendissimo Domino Cantuar' in Die statuto
debita cum Reverentia and Solennitate praesentent. Quorum Alter sicut, cum dies
advenerit, ipsum Prolocutorem cum Latina and docta Oratione praesentare
tenetur, sic etiam idem Praesentatus habitu Doctoratus indutus consimilem
Orationem ad dictum Reverendissimum Patrem ac Praelatos and caeteros praesentes
habere debet.

Quibus finitis, praefatus Reverendissimus Oratione Latina tam Electores quam
Praesentatorem and Praesentatum pro sua gratia collaudare, ac demum ipsam
Electionem sua Archiepiscopali Authoritate express confirmare and approbare
non dedignabitur.

Et statim idem Reverendissimus Anglice (si placeat) exponere solet ulterius
Beneplacitum suum; Hortando Clerum, ut de rebus communibus quae Reformatione
indigent, consultent and referant die statuto. Ac ad hunc modum de Sessione in
Sessionem continuabitur Convocatio quamdiu expedire videbitur, ac donec de
eadem dissolvenda Breve Regium eidem Reverendissimo praesentetur.

Et sciendum est, quod quotiescunque Prolocutor ad praesentiam Reverendissimi
causa Convocationis ac tempore Sessionis accesserit, utatur habitu praedicto,
ac Janitor sive Virgifer dictae inferioris Domus ipsum reverenter antecedat.

Ejusdem Prolocutoris est etiam monere omnes ne discedant a Civitate London'
absque Licentia Reverendissimi; Quodque statutis diebus tempestive veniant ad
Convocationem. Quodque salaria Clericorum tam Superioris quam Inferioris Domus,
and Janitoris inferioris Domus, juxta antiquam taxationem, quatenus eorum
quemlibet concernit, fideliter persolvant.

ACTA IN SUPERIORE DOMO CONVOCATIONIS INCOEPTAE DECIMO QUARTO DIE APRILIS ANNO
MDCXL. PRAESIDE REVERENDISSIMO PATRE GULIELMO LAUD ARCHIEP. CANT.
Archbishop LAVD's Mandate to the Bishop of London, for Summoning a Convocation
to meet at St. Paul's, April 14. 1640.
GVlielmus Providentia Divina Cant. Archiepiscopus, totius Angliae Primas and
Metropolitanus, Venerabili Confratri nostro Domino Gulielmo eadem Providentia
London. Episcopo, summo Angliae Thesaurario, Salutem and Fraternam in Domino
Charitatem. Breve Illustrissimi in Christo Principis and Domini nostri CAROLI
Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris,
etc. Nobis inscriptum and directum, nuper cum ea qua decuit reverentia,
observantia and subjectione, humiliter recepimus in haec verba. CAROLVS Dei
gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex, Fidei Defensor, etc.
Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Fideli Consiliario nostro Gulielmo eadem
gratia Cant. Archiepiscopo, totius Angliae Primati and Metropolitano Salutem.
Quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis Nos, Securitatem and Defensionem
Ecclesiae Anglicanae ac pacem and tranquillitatem, bonum publicum and
defensionem Regni nostri and subditorum nostrorum ejusdem concernentibus, Vobis
in fide and dilectione quibus nobis tenemini rogando mandamus, quatenus
praemissis debito intuitu attentis and ponderatis, universos and singulos
Episcopos vestrae Provinciae, ac Decanos Ecclesiarum Cathedralium, necnon
Archidiaconos, Capitula and Collegia, totumque Clerum cujuslibet Dioeceseos
ejusdem Provinciae, ad comparendum coram vobis in Ecclesia Cathedrali Sancti
Pauli London, decimo quarto die mensis Aprilis proxime futuri, vel alibi prout
melius expedire videatis, cum omni celeritate accommoda modo debito convocari
faciatis, ad tractandum, consentiendum and concludendum super praemissis and
aliis quae sibi clarius exponentur tunc ibidem ex part nostra. Et hoc sicut
nos and statum Regni nostri and honorem and utilitatem Ecclesiae praedictae
diligtis, nullatenus omittatis. Test meipso apud Westminster. vicesimo die Februarii
Anno Regni nostri decime quinto. Quocira fraternitati vestrae committimus and
mandamus, quatenus omnes and singulos Co-Episcopas Ecclesiae nostrae Christi
Cant. Suffraganeos infra praefatam Provinciam nostram Cantuariensem
constitutos, peremptory citetis, ac per eos, Decanos Ecclesiarum Cathedralium
and Collegiatarum and singula Capitula earundem, Archidiaconosque and caeteros
Ecclesiarum Praelatos Exemptos and non Exemptos, Clerumque cujuslibet Dioec.
Provinciae nostrae antedictae peremptory citari and praemoneri volumus and
mandamus, Quod iidem Episcopi, Decani, Archidiaconi and caeteri Ecclesiarum
Praelati Exempti and non Exempti personaliter, and quodlibet Capitulum
Ecclesiarum Cathedralium and Collegiatarum per unum, Clerusque cujuslibet
Dioec. Provinciae nostrae antedictae per duos sufficientes Procuratores,
compareant coram nobis aut nostro in hac part locum tenente sive Commissario
(si nos impediri contigerit) in Domo Capitulari Ecclesiae Cathedralis S. Pauli
London, decimo quarto die mensis Aprilis prox. futuro post datum praesentium
cum continuatione and prorogatione dierum extunc sequentium and locorum (si
oporteat) fiend. ad tractandum super arduis and urgentibus negotiis statum and
utilitatem, bonum Publicum and defensionem Regni Angliae and subditorum ejusdem
concernentibus, ipsis and ibidem seriosius exponend. suaque sana consitia and
auxilia super eis impensur. ac his quae ibidem ex deliberatione communi ad
honorem Dei and Ecclesie utilitatem salubriter ordinari and statui contigerit,
consensur. ulteriusque factur. and receptur. quod justum fuerit et hujusmodi
Negotii natura and qualitas de se exigunt and requirunt. Vos autem, Venerabilis
Confrater noster, dictum Mandatum quatenus vos and Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae
Cathedralis ac Civitatem and Dioec. London concernit, exequi per omnia faciatis
and eidem pareatis in omnibus cum Effectu. Praeterea tenore praesentium vos
citamus quatenus eisdem die and loco coram nobis aut nostro in hac part locum
tenente sive Commissario uno vel pluribus una cum aliis Venerabilibus
Confratribus nostris dictae Provinciae nostrae Cant. Co-Episcopis compareatis
super hujusmodi negotiis (ut praemittitur) tractatur. necnon factur. and
receptur. quod ad vestram Paternitatem attinet, prout superius continetur.
Volumus insuper and mandamus quatenus intimetis and denuncietis seu intimari
and denunciari faciatis dictae Provinciae nostrae Cant. Co-Episcopis, Decanis,
Archidiaconis and caeteris Ecclesiarum Praelatis suprascriptis; quod eos a
personali compartitione in hujusmodi negotio Convocationis and Congregationis
dictis die and loco (ut praemittitur) Divina favente clementia celebrando
excusatos non habere intendimus ista vice nisi ex causa necessaria tunc and
ibidem allegand. and proponend. and per nos approband. sed Contumacias eorum
qui absentes fuerint Canonice punire. Et praeterea vobis ut supra injungimus
and mandamus, quod omnibus and singulis Co-Episcopis Suffraganeis Provinciae
nostrae Cant. predictae injungatis seu faciatis injungi ut singuli eorum
sigillatim de facto suo quatenus pertinent ad eosdem Nos seu locum tenentem
sive Commissarium nostrum unum vel plures dictis die and loco per literas eorum
patentes nomina and cognomina omnium and singulorum per eos respective
citatorum continentes distinct certificent and aperte. De die veroreceptionis
praesentium, and quid in praemissis feceritis, Nos aut nostrum Commissarium
hujusmodi dictis die and loco debite certificari curetis per literas vestras
Patentes, harum seriem una cum Nominibus omnium and singulorum Episcoporum
Provinciae nostrae Cant. Decanorum, Archidiaconorum and caeterorum Praelatorum
vestrae Dioec. in separata Schedula literis Certificatoriis annectend.
complectent. Datum in Manerio nostro de Lambeth vicesimo secundo die mensis
Febr. Anno Domini juxta computationem Ecclesiae Anglicanae millesimo
sexcentesimo tricesimo nono, and nostrae Translationis Anno Septimo.

Prima Sessio.
DIE Martis, decimo quarto viz. die Mensis Aprilis, Anno Domini Millesimo
Sexcentesimo quadragesimo, Regnique Serenissimi in Christo Principis and Domini
nostri Domini Caroli Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hibernia Regis,
fidei defensoris, etc. anno decimo Sexto, Reverendissimus in Christo Pater, and
Dominus Dominus Gulielmus providentia Divina Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus,
totius Angliae Primas and Metropolitanus, Mane inter horas octavam and nonam
ante meridiem ejusdem diei, a Manerio suo de Lambehith in Naviculo suo dicto
Vulgo a Barge, ad Ripam dictam Paul's Wharfe London applicuit, ibidemque ab
Advocatis and Procuratoribus ac caeteris Ministris Almae suae Curiae
Cantuariensis de Arcubus London. acceptus, in curru sive vehiculo ad Palatium
Episcopale London venit. Ac paulo post, Idem Reverendissimus Pater amictu and
habitu suis vestitus, ab Advocatis, Procuratoribus, and caeteris Ministris suis
Curiae praedictae, ad Ostium boreale Ecclesiae Paulinae juxta Palatium
Episcopale London antedictum, and inde in Ecclesiam Cathedralem Sancti Pauli
London praedict. ductus fuit. Ibique ad dictum Ostium, Venerabiles Viri Thomas
Wynnyff, Sacrae Theologiae Professor, Decanus, ncc non Henricus King and
Johannes Montfort, Sacrae Theologiae Professores, Canonici Residentiarii dictae
Ecclesiae Cathedralis, Caeterique Ministri ejusdem Ecclesiae Superpelliciis
induti, eum praestolabantur, and ad Chorum ipsius Ecclesiae per Occidentale
Ostium ejusdem Chori perduxerunt; Comitantibus eum Episcopis Suffraganeis
Provincia suae Cantuariensis, similibus habitibus indutis, and ibidem in Stallo
Decani collocatus fuit. Caeterisque Episcopis Suffraganeis Provinciae
Cantuariensis, habitibus suis in hujusmodi negotio Convocationis solitis and
consuetis, indutis, Stallis Praebendariorum, ex utraque part dicti Chori,
sedentibus: Ac consequenter decantato per Ministros Chori praedicti Hymno, TE
DEUM LAUDAMUS, etc. in Sermon Anglicano; Venerabilis Vir Thomas Turner Sacrae
Theologiae Professor, Canonicus Residentiarius dictae Ecclesic Cathedralis
Sancti Pauli London. suggestum in medio Chori positum ingressus fuit. Ac ibidem
Concionem venustam and eloquentem Sermon Latino ad Patres ac populum and
Clerum praesentes habuit; accepto pro Themate Versu decimo sexto Capituli
decimi secundum Evangelium sancti Matthaei, viz. Ecce mitto Vos ut Oves in
medium luporum, estote igitur prudentes sicut serpents, and innocents ut
Columbae. Qua quidem Concione finita, ac decantato per Ministros chori
praedicti alio Psalmo sive Hymno, O Lord make thy Servant Charles, etc.
Reverendissimus pater Dominus Gulielmus Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus antedictus
Chorum praedictum egressus, ac Domum Capitularem Eclesiae Cathedralis
praedictae ingressus, comitantibus eum caeteris Episcopis and Cleri Praelatis
Provinciae suae Cantuariensis, pro Tribunali sedebat, assidentibus secum
undique Episcopis Suffraganeis, viz. Gulielmo London', Summo Angliae
Thesaurario, Waltero Winton', Johanne Sarum', Roberto Coven' and Lichen',
Godfrido Gloucestren', Josepho Exon', Johanne Asaphen', Gulielmo Bathon' and
Wellen', Johanne Oxon', Georgio Hereforden', Matthaeo Elien', Roberto
Bristolien', Gulielmo Bangor', Johanne Roffen', Briano Cicestren', Johanne
Petriburgen', and Morgano Landaven', respective Episcopis Personaliter
comparentibus. Cui quidem Reverendissimo Patri pro Tribunali sedenti, post
lecturam Brevis Regii per me Sacvilum Wade Notarium Publicum Registrarii
Deputatum, eidem Reverendissimo Patri in hac part inscripti and directi,
Praefatus Reverendus Pater Dominus Gulielmus London Episcopus exhibuit and
praesentavit Certificatorium super Executione Mandati citatorii and monitorii
dicti Reverendissimi Patris alias sibi praefato Domino Episcopo London directi:
cujus quidem Certificatorii tenor sequitur in haec Verba, etc.

Certificatorium Domini Episcopi London.
Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino Domino Gulielmo providentia divina
Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, etc.

Quo quidem Certificatorio per me praefatum Sacvilum Wade Notarium Publicum
antedictum de mandato dicti Reverendissimi Patris, public lecto,
praeconizatisque public omnibus Reverendis Patribus Provinciae Cantuariensis
Episcopis Suffraganeis, in eodem Certificatorio nominatis, Praefatus
Reverendissimus Pater Verbis latinis concept. Clerum Domus inferioris
Convocationis in domo Capitulari praedicta coram eo and caeteris Praelatis
constitutum, monuit, quatenus ad solitum and consuetum Conventus sui locum sese
conserentes, unum Virum gravem, doctum, and Peritum de gremio suo provideant
and eligant in eorum Prolocutorem sive Referendarium, Ipsumque sic electum
exhibeant and praesentent coram eodem Reverendissimo Patre aut ejus
locum-tenente sive Commissario die Veneris proximo, viz. decimo septimo die
instantis Mensis Aprilis inter horas nonam and undecimam ante Meridiem ejusdem
diei in Capella Regis Henrici septimi infra Ecclesiam Collegiatam Beati Petri
Westminster. Quo Clero dimisso ad locum solitum, scilicet Capellam beatae
Mariae Virginis ad finem Orientalem Ecclesiae Cathedralis praedictae ex part
Australi ejusdem, ad effectum eligendi unum gravem, doctum and peritum Virum de
gremio suo in eorum Prolocutorem sive Referendarium, sese conferebant, and post
aliquem tractatum inter dictum Reverendissimum Patrem and praefatos Reverendos
Patres Confratres suos, Reverendissimus ad se accersiri secit totum Coetum
domus inferioris. Quibus comparentibus, Venerabilis Vir Thomas Wynnyff, sacrae
Theologiae Professor, Decanus Ecclesiae Cathedralis Sancti Pauli London.
praedict. unus dictae domus ad hoc electus, tam nomine suo quam totius Coetus
dictae domus dicto Reverendissimo Patri significavit se and caeteros dictae
domus, Venerabiles Viros Ricardum Steward Legum Doctorem, Decanum Ecclesiae
Cathedralis Cicestren' in eorum Prolocutorem and Gilbertum Sheldon Sacrae
Theologiae Professorem Custodem Collegii omnium animarum fidelium defunctorum
Oxon, in Praesentatorem dicti Prolocutoris respective unanimi consensu
elegisse. Quibus sic gestis, praefatus Reverendissimus Pater pronunciavit omnes
and singulos Decanos, Archi-diaconos, Capitulae, Cleri procuratores, ac
caeteros quoscunque ad interessendum istis die, hora and loco, in hujusmodi
Sacra Synodo sive Convocatione monitos and citatos, and nullo modo comparentes,
notorie Contumaces, poenas vero contumaciarum suarum hujusmodi usque ad and in
praedictum decimum septimum diem instantis Mensis Aprilis, inter horas nonam et
undeciman ante meridiem ejusdem diei, ad Ecclesiam Collegiatam beati Petri
Westminster. praedictam, Reservando; prout in Schedula per eundem
Reverendissimum Patrem lecta before continetur. Schedula contra Contumaces.
Cujus quidem Schedulae tenor sequitur and est talis. In Dei nomine Amen. Nos
Gulielmus, etc. postremo dictus Reverendissimus Pater continuavit and
Prorogavit praesentem Convocationem sive sacram Synodum, etc. omniaque and
singula Certificatoria istis die, hora and loco imroducta and introducenda and
non introducta, in eodem Statu quo nunc sunt usque ad and in praedictum decimum
septimum diem instantis Mensis Aprilis inter horas nonam and undecimam ante
meridiem ejusdem diei ad Ecclesiam Collegiatam beati Petri Westminster, prout
in alia Schedula per eum lecta, tenoris sequentis continetur, Viz. Schedula
Continuationis. Certificatorium Archi-Diaconi Cant Certificatorium Doctoris
Farmery pro Diaecese Lincoln.
In Die Nomine Amen, etc. Nos Gulielmus, etc.

Reverendissimo in Christo patri ac Domino Domino Gulielmo, etc.

Reverendissimo in Christo patri ac Domino Domino Gulielmo, etc.

Secunda Sessio.
DIE Veneris, decimo septimo, Viz. die Mensis Aprilis, Anno Domini, 1640. inter
horas nonam and undecimam ante meridiem, etc. Reverendissimus in Christo pater
Dominus Gulielmus Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus, ac Reverendi patres Domini
Gulielmus London', Walterus Winton', Johannes Sarum', Robertus Coven' and
Lichen', Godfridus Gloucestren', Josephus Exon', Richardus Norwicen', Johannes
Asaphen', Gulielmus Bathon' and Wellen', Johannes Oxon', Georgius Hereforden',
Matthaeus Elien', Robertus Bristolien', Gulielmus Bangor', Johannes Roffen',
Brianus Cicestren', Johannes Petriburgen' and Morganus Landaven' respective
Episcopi, in Capella Regis Henrici Septimi infra Ecclesiam Collegiatam Beati
Petri Westminster congregati, primo and ante omnia preces Deo Optimo Maximo
Flexis genibus humiliter fundebant; Ac finitis precibus, coram praefato
Reverendissimo patre, una cum aliis Confratribus suis praedictis pro Tribunali
sedente, in praesentia mei Sacvili Wade Notarii Publici, etc. comparuit
personaliter Venerabilis Vir Robertus Newell Sacrae Theologiae Professor,
Sub-Decanus Ecclesiae Collegiatae Beati Petri Westminster praedicti, secum
stantibusVenerabilibus Viris, Thoma Wilson, Petro Heylyn, Jonathan Brown,
Griffitho Williams, Gulielmo Haywood, and Georgio Aglionby Sacrae Theologiae
Professoribus, and Ecclesie Collegiatae Praedictae Praebendariis, ac Roberto
Cook Notario Publico, and nonnullis aliis testibus. Qui quidem Venerabilis Vir
Robertus Newell Sub-Decanus antedictus, tunc and ibidem dixit, allegavit,
protestatus est, and caetera fecit, prout in quadam papyri Schedula quam in
manibus suis tunc and ibidem tenens public legebat in haec Verba. Protestatio
Sub-Decani Westminster.
In Dei Nomine Amen, Coram Vobis Notario Publico, publicaque and Authentica
Persona ac testibus fide dignis hic praesentibus, Ego Robertus Newell Sacrae
Theologiae Professor, Sub-Decanus Ecclesiae Collegiatae beati Petri
Westmonasteriensis, etc. Et tunc dictus Reverendissimus Pater pro se and
confratribus suis, ac omnibus and singulis Praelatis and Clero suae
Cantuariensis Provinciae in hac praesenti Convocatione sive SacraSynodo
Provinciali praesentibus ac Jus seu Interesse habentibus, protestatus est, and
caetera fecit, prout in alia Schedula per eundem Reverendissimum Patrem lecta
tunc and ibidem continetur, Viz. In Dei Nomine Amen, Cum haec Ecclesia
Collegiata beati Petri Westminster, etc. Protestatio Reverendissimi.
Praesentibus tunc and ibidem Venerabilibus Viris Domino Nathaniele Brent
Milite and Legum Doctore, dicti Reverendissimi Patris Vicario in Spiritualibus
generali, Domino Carolo Caesar Milite and Legum Doctore, Magistro Rotulorum
Domini Regis and Curiae ad Facultates Commissario, and nonnullis aliis
testibus, etc. Quibus sic gestis, praenominatus Reverendissimus Pater, post
intervallum temporis ad eum ascersiri jussit Praelates and Clerum Domus
inferioris. Qui copiose sese praesentantes, exhiberi and sisti fecerunt
Venerabilem Virum Richardum Steward Legum Doctorem, Decanum Ecclesiae
Cathedralis Cicestrensis, in Prolocutorem sive Referendarium totius Coetus
Domus inferioris praedictae ultima Sessione electum; quem Venerabilis Vir
Gilbertus Sheldon in praesentatorem ista Sessione etiam electus, Vice totius
Coetus praedictae Domus Inferioris, praemissa facunda and eloquenti Oratione
per eum, exhibuit and praesentavit dicto Reverendissimo Patri and caeteris
Episcopis praedictis. Ac facta alia Oratione eleganti per eundem Prolocutorem
sic praesentatum, praefatus Reverendissimus Pater Dominus Archi-Episcopus
Cantuariensis antedictus de consensu Confratrum suorum praedictorum eundem
Richardum Steward electum hujusmodi, and Electionem praedict. per aliam
Crationem Latinam commendavit and approbavit: and tunc idem Reverendissimus
pater in praesentiis Reverendorum patrum Confratrum suorum praedictorum, ac
Prolocutoris and caeterorum de coetu Domus Inferioris Convocationis,
Serenissimum Dominum Nostrum Carolum Regem pro suo amore and favore speciali
erga eos abunde commendans, Literam quandam suam Regiam, Sigillo magno Angliae
sigillatam, de Ordinando and Conficiendo quasdam Constitutiones, Ordinationes
sive Capitula, Statum Ecclesiasticum, Sinceram Religionem, and Vtilitatem
Ecclesiae Anglicanae, concernentes and tendentes, una cum nonnullis
Provisionibus in eadem Licentia insertis, produxit and exhibuit sub tenore
sequenti, Viz.

Licentia prima Domini nostri Regis.
Charles by the grace of God, etc. Qua per me Sacvilum Wade in hac part
Actorum Scribam, public tunc and ibidem alta voce perlecta, dictus
Reverendissimus Pater, and caeteri Episcopi secum assidentes, cum omnimoda
Reverentia, Subjectione, and Humilitate gratanter acceptarunt and receperunt,
and Reverendissimus Pater antedictus, praefatum Prolocutorem and alios de Domo
Inferiori, Decanos, Archi-Diacanos, Capitula and Cleri Procuratores ibidem
praesentes, Voluit ut ipsi inter se convenirent and mature excogitarent de
Subsidiis dicto Domino nostro Regi concedend' and Canonibus and
Constitutionibus Statum Ecclesiasticum and Christi Religionem in Ecclesia
Anglicana concernentibus, concipiendis, and quicquid inde senserint sive
excogitaverint, in scriptis redigant, and coram ipso Reverendissimo and
Confratribus suis Episcopis exhibeant. Tunc dimisso Prolocutore cum coetu Domus
inferioris praedictae, habitoque aliquandiu tractatu inter praefatum
Reverendissimum and caeteros Episcopos Suffraganeos suos (ut praefertur)
comparentes, Reverendissimus Pater de and cum consensu Reverendorum Confratrum
suorum praedictorum continuavit and prorogavit praesentem Convecationem sive
sacram Synodum Provincialem, in statu quo nunc est usque ad and in Diem
Mercurii proximum, Viz. Vicesimum Secundum Diem instantis Mensis Aprilis, inter
horas octavani and duodecimam ante meridiem ejusdem diei, ad hunc locum, cum
uiteriori continuatione and prorogatione dierum and locorum (si oporteat) in ea
part fienda, prout in Schedula per eum lecta before continetur; cujus quidem
Schedulae verus tenor sequitur in haec verba, In Dei Nomine Amen. Nos Gulielmus
Providentia Divina Cantuariensis Archi-Episcopus, etc.

Tertia Sessio.
DIE Mercurii Vigesimo Secundo, Viz. die Mensis Aprilis Anno Domini 1640. inter
horas octavam and duodecimam ante meridiem ejusdem diei, Reverendissimus, etc.
tractatum habuit cum eisdem citra negotia Parliamenti eis and aliis Domus,
superioris ejusdem commissa and isto die expedienda, and consensu mutuo eorum
decretum fuit per dictum Reverendissimum Patrem ut Reverendi Patres Dominus
Gulielmus London', Robertus Coven' and Lichen', Johannes Asaphen', Georgius
Hereforden', Gulielmus Bangor', Johannes Roffen', and Johannes Petriburgen',
respective Episcopi antedicti, a Convocatione hujusmodi recederent, and sese ad
negotia Parliamenti praedicti subeund' applicarent: post quorum recessum,
tractatu secreto inter Dominum Archi-Episcopum and reliquos Episcopos
antedictos secum modo assidentes habito, Reverendissimus ad se accersiri fecit
Prolocutorem una cum toto Coetu Domus Inferioris. Quibus coram eo, and caeteris
Episcopis antedictis, modo (ut praefertur) secum assidentibus, comparentibus,
notum fecit illas per magnas Expensas quae per Regiam Majestatem ex causis
urgentibus erogandae sunt, and illa non minus pericula quae and Statum and
Regnum Angliae hoc tempore imminent, eisque de causis and aliis per ipsum
Reverendissimum expositis, se and Confratres suos praedictos inter se tractasse
and convenisse de sex Subsidiis and majori numero Subsidiorum si aliquo tempore
major numerus per Praelatos and Clerum Cantuariensis Provinciae concessus ex
Registre constaret) Illustrissimo Domino nostro Regi per ipsos concedendis
juxta ratam quatuor Solidorum de qualibet libra sub certis conditionibus and
provisionibus in quodam libro desuper concipiend' and de solvendo dicta
subsidia in tam brevi tempore quam aliqua unquam soluta fuere, eosdemque
rogavit, ut in Testimonium singularis eorum Obedientiae and obsequii erga
dictum Dominum nostrum Regem Concessioni hujusmodi ad Statum eorum praeberent
consensum and responsa darent; habito prius tractatu inter eos de eisdem. Ac
tunc praefatus Reverendissimus Pater in Examinatores and Correctores Libri
Subsidiorum praedict. Reverendos Patres Dominos Josephum Exon', Matthaeum
Elien', and Robertum Bristolien', respective Episcopos, nominavit, and voluit
Prolocutorem and totum Coetum Domus Inferioris praedictae, ad eligendum quatuor
vel sex graviores Viros de Gremio suo, ad idem negotium cum dictis Reverendis
Patribus expediend. Modo, dimisso Prolocutore, cum toto coetu praedicto,
Reverendissimus Pater Dominus Archi-Episcopus Cantuariensis antedictus iterum
secret tractavit cum praedictis Reverendis Patribus; and post Temporis
intervallum Dominus Prolocutor cum toto coetu praedicto reveretens, nomine suo
and eorum dixit, quod ipse and coetus Domus Inferioris de propositis diligenter
tractarunt, and omnes eorum consensum libentissime dederunt Concessioni
dictorum sex subsidiorum, and majoris numeri, si major numerus per Clerum
unquam concedebatur, juxta ratam quatuor Solidorum e qualibet libra; seque and
totum Coetum Domus Inferioris praedictae eligisse in Examinatores and
Correctores Libri Subsidiorum praedict cum praefatis Dominis Episcopis Exon',
Elien', and Bristolien', Venerabiles Viros Isaacum Bargrave and Thomam Wynnyff,
Ecclesiarum Cathedralium Cant. and London. Decanos, necnon Thomam Paske and
Thomam Wilson Archi-Diacanos London and Westminster, ac Dominum Johannem Lamb
militem and legum Doctorem, Almae Curiae Cantuariensis de Arcubus London'
Officialem, unum Procuratorum Clori Lincoln' and Petrum Heylyn sacrae
Theologiae Professorem, Procuratorem pro Capitulo Westminster. Quam Electionem
Dominus Archi-Episcopus and Confratres sui Approbarunt. Et ut Deus, bonorum
omnium largitor, hoc pr sens Parliamentum ita disponeret, quod omnes in eodem
conventi in unum consentirent ad Dei Gloriam and Honorem, Ecclesiae utilitatem
and commodum, ac Regis and Regni pacem and tranquilitatem; praefatus
Reverendissimus Pater Dominus Archi Episcopus, de mandato Regio voluit Divinam
Dei Gratiam implorari, and formulam Precis ad eundem effectum per duos doctos
and Graviores Viros Coetus Domus Inferioris ad hoc per Dominum Prolocutorem cum
consensu totius Coetus dictae Domus eligendos concipi. Quibus sic gestis, ac
Prolocutore cum toto coetu Domus Inferioris praedictae dimisso, Reverendissimus
Pater antedictus Sermonem Secretum cum Episcopis Confratribus suis antedictis
inivit, and post aliquem tractatum inter eos habitum, Prolocutor venit and
dixit, se cum consensu Coetus Domus Inferioris praedictae elegisse Venerabiles
Viros Gulielmum Bray, and Johannem Olliver Sacrae Theologiae Professores,
Sacellanos Domini Archi-Episcopi Cantuariensis praedicti, ad concipiendum
formulam Precis praedict. Vnde dimisso Domino Prolocutore, Idem Reverendissimus
Pater and Confratres sui, Sermonem Secretum iterum inierunt, and Colloquium
inter sese habuerunt. Postmodum vero Dominus Prolocutor cum quinque e Sex illis
Correctoribus sive Examinatoribus libri Subsidiorum dictae domus Inferioris
comparuit; and Reverendissimus Pater Dominus Archi-Episcopus antedictus
Sermonem habuit cum eis de Capitulis Canonum concipiendis, and dixit se and
Confratres suos de duobus Capitulis Eversionem sive Suppressionem Jesuitarum,
Presbyterorum, and aliorum Romanae Ecclesiae, concernentibus, tractasse, and de
eisdem consentiisse, eademque in bonis Schedulis Papyri (ut apparuit)
conscripta produxit; easdemque Schedulas dicto Domino Prolocutori tradidit,
toto Coetui Domus inferioris proponendas, legend. and publicand. cum monitione
quod Copias earum cuicunque tradere minime praesumat. Et si aliquis dictae
Domus aliquid dictis Capitulis contrarium proponat, porrigat in Scriptis and
tradat in manus Domini Prolocutoris, Domino Archi-Episcopo and caeteris
Episcopis Domus Superioris exhibiturum; ut ipsi de eisdem consultarent.
Denique, eis dimissis, habitaque inter Dominum Archi-Episcopum and Episcopos
praedictos communicatione de rebus Convocationis, Reverendissimus pater de and
cum consensu Reverendorum Confratrum suorum praedictorum continuavit, etc.
prout in Schedula per eum lecta before continetur, cujus quidem Schedulae
verus tenor sequitur in haec Verba. In Dei Nomine Amen, Nos Gulielmus
providentia divina Archi-Episcopus Cantuariensis, etc.

Substitutio.
DIE Veneris 24. Viz. die Mensis Aprilis Anno Domini 1640. Reverendissimus in
Christo pater and Dominus Dominus Gulielmus providentia divina Cantuariensis
Archi-Episcopus, etc. In quadam Conclavi superiori infra Manerium suum de
Lambeth in Comitatu Surriae, in praesentia mei Sacvili Wade Notarii Publici,
etc. substituit, and loco suo constituit Reverendos in Christo Patres ac
Venerabiles Confratres suos Dominos Godfridum Gloucestren', and Johannem Oxon',
respective Episcopos, ad interessendum and Praesidendum Vice, Loco, and
Authoritate suis in Sacr Synodo sive Convocatione Praelatorum and Cleri
Cantuariensis Provinciae, Vigore and Authoritate Bre^ Regii in hac part
directi, decimo quarto, Viz. die instantis Mensis Aprilis (Divina favente
clementia) in Domo Capitulari Ecclesiae Cathedralis Sancti Pauli London,
inchoat'. and celebrat'. ac de die in diem usque ad and in instantem Vicesimum
quartum diem Mensis Aprilis praedict' inter horas secundam and quartam post
meridiem ejusdem diei, ad Capellam Regis Henrici Septimi infra Ecclesiam
Collegiatam divi Petri Westminster'. continuat'. and prorogat'. nec non ad
communicandum and tractandum cum Venerabilibus Confratribus suis dictae
Cantuariensis Provinciae Co-Episcopis ac Praelatis and Clero ejusdem suae
Provinciae de and super omnibus and singulis causis and negotiis quae in ea
Sacra Synodo Provinciali sive Convocatione proponenda, tractanda, and
communicanda fuerint: Atque hujusmodi Convocationem sive Sacram Synodum
Provincialem a dicto 24 to die Mensis Aprilis usque ad and in diem Sabathi 25
diem ejusdem Mensis Aprilis ad Capellam Regis Henrici Septimi praedictam
continuand. and prorogand. Caeteraque omnia and singula alia faciend. exercend.
and expediend. quae in eu part necessariae suerint seu quomodolibet opportuna
and requisita Fraternitatibus suis conjunctim and divisim commisit Vices suas
and plenam in Domino concessit facultatem.

Quarta Sessio.
DIE Veneris 24. Viz. die Mensis Aprilis Anno Domini and loco praedictis, inter
horas secundam and quartam post Meridiem ejusdem diei, in praesentia mei
Sacvili Wade Notarii Publici, etc. Reverendus pater Dominus Godfridus
Gloucestren' Episcopus in Substitutione Reverendissimi in Christo Patris Domini
Gulielmi Cantuariensis Archi-Episcopi antedicti, una cum Reverendo patre Domino
Johanne Oxon Episcopo nominatus, etc. intimata Substitutione hujusmodi per me
praefatum Notarium Publicum, assumsit in se Onus dictae Substitutionis, and
decrevit procedendum fore juxta tenorem, vim, for mam, and effectum ejusdem;
and sedendo legit Schedulam Continuationis, etc. in Scriptis, etc. Prorogando
and Continuando hujusmodi Convocationem in Statu quo nunc est, usque ad and in
diem praesentis Mensis Aprilis inter horas Secundam and quartam post meridiem
ejusdem diei, ad hunc locum prout latius in Schedula per eum lecta continetur.
Cujus quidem Schedulae verus tenor sequitur and est talis. In Dei Nomine Amen,
Nos Godfridus, permissione Divina Gloucestren' Episcopus, etc.

Quinta Sessio.
DIE Sabbathi 25. Viz. die Mensis Aprilis Anno Domini 1640, inter horas
secundam and quartam post meridiem ejusdem diei, Reverendissimus in Christo
pater, etc. [ut supra] Sermonem cum eisdem Reverendis patribus confratribus
suis de libro Subsidiorum per quosdam Episcopos and alios clectos Domus
inferioris examinando and corrigendo, and cum Confratrum suorum praedictorum
consonsu decrevit libitum fore aliquibus duobus Episcopis cum quatuor e Coetu
Domus Inferioris aliqu^ tempore ad dictum librum examinandum and corrigendum;
and ulterius pro meliori expeditione negotionum hujus Sacrae Synodi, idem
Reverendissimus, cum consensis and assensu corundem confratrum suorum
Ordinavit, quod nullus Episcopus aut aliquis ^ Clero, Copiam Canonis aut partem
Canonis proposituri and tractaturi, exscribere aut de aliqua hujusmodi Canone
for as fabulare praes^umpserit; donec hac Convocatione sive sacra Synodo
plenarie and finaliter assensum and sacra Regia Majestate approbatum erit, sub
poena Suspensionis cujuslibet e clero per tres Menses, and Synodicae monitionis
pro quolibet Praelato qui ita peccaverit; prout in Actu Synodico sequenti
continetur, viz. -- Quibus sic gestis Dominus Prolocutor venit cum quinque
aliis e Domo Inferiori, and Reverendissimus eis declaravit istum Actum
Synodicum praecedentem, and voluit eundem Dominum Prolocutorem ad declarandum
istum Actum toto Coetui dictae Domus, and habito tractatu per Reverendissimum
cum eodem Domino Prolocutore de Canonibus componendis and faciendis, idem
Reverendissimus dimisit Prolocutorem. Quo dimisso, Reverendissimus iterum
Sermonem habuit cum dictis Dominis Episcopis Confratribus suis; and praefatus
Dominus Prolocutor cum Sex illis Correctoribus sive Examinatoribus Subsidiorum
per Domum Inferiorem ad hoc electis mox revertebat, and dixit se and totum
Coetum Domus Inferioris consensum and assensum suos confectioni dicti Actus
Synodici adhibuisse, and eundem unanimiter approbasse; and tunc dictus Dominus
Prolocutor in sacras manus Domini Reverendissimi quandam formulam precis per
Doctores Bray and Olliver conceptam, omni cum reverentia tradidit in forma
sequenti, viz. Omnipotens and Sempiterne Deus, etc. Quam formulam precis
Reverendissimus and Confratres sui praedicti hoc Verbo (Anglicanae) addito,
approbarunt, and Reverendissimus cum eorum consensu dictam precem in
Convocatione quotidie habendam, and immediate ante benedictionem legendam, fore
decrevit. Tunc dimisso Domino Prolocutore Reverendissimus post aliquem
tractatum inter se and Confratres suos praedictos habitum, continuavit and
prorogavit praesentem Convocationem sive Sacram Synodum Provincialem in statu
quo nunc est usque ad and in diem Mercurii Vicesimum viz. diem instantis Mensis
Aprilis inter horas secundam and quartam post meridiem ejusdem diei ad hunc
locum, prout in Schedula per eum lecta continetur; cujus quidem Schedulae verus
tenor sequitur in haec verba, In Dei Nomine Amen. Nos Gulielmus, Providentia
Divina Cantuariensis Archi-Episcopus, etc.

Sexta Sessio.
DIE Mercurii Vigesimo Nono, viz. die Mensis Aprilis, Anno Domini 1640. etc.
inter horas secundam and quartam post meridiem, etc. Reverendus in Christo
Pater Dominus Guliebmus, etc. Bathon' and Wellen' Episcopus, Reverendissimi in
Christo Patris Domini Gulielmi Cant. Archi-Episcopi, etc. Commissarius, inter
alios conjunctim and divisim legitime constitut. praesentatis literis
Commissionalibus dicti Reverendissimi Patris, eisque per me praefatum Notarium
public lectis, acceptavit in se Onus Executionis earundem literarum
Commissionalium, and decrevit procedendum fore juxta tenorem, vim, formam, and
effectum earundem; and immediate idem Reverendus Pater Commissarius antedictus
judicialiter sedens, Continuavit, etc. Prout in Schedula per cum lecta
continetur, cujus quidem Schedula verus tenor sequitur in hac Verba, Viz. In
Dei Nomine Amen. Nos Gulielmus, Permissione Divina Bathon' and Wellen'
Episcopus, etc.

Septima Sessio.
DIE Sabbathi Secundo, viz. die Mensis Maii Anno Domini 1640. inter boras
secundam and quartam post meridiem ejusdem diei in Capella Regis Henrici
Septimi infra Ecclesiam collegiatam Beati Petri Westminster, in praesentia mei
Sacvili Wade Notarii publici, etc. Reverendus Pater Dominus Johannes Asaphensis
Episcopus Reverendissimi, etc. Commissarius, inter alios, conjunctim and
divisim, etc. constitutus, praesentata Commissione per me Sacvilum Wade
Notarium publicum antedictum, lectaque, etc. ob honorem dicti Reverendissimi
Patris assumpsit in se Onus dictae Commissionis, and decrevit procedendum fore
juxta tenorem, Vim, formam, and Effectum ejusdem; and sedendo legit Schedulam
continuatonis, etc. in Scriptis, etc. prorogando etc. prout in Schedula per eum
lecta continetur; cujus quidem Schedulae verus tenor sequitur and est talis,
Viz. In Dei Nomine Amen. Nos Johannes, Permissione Divina Asaphen' Episcopus,
etc.

Octava Sessio.
DIE Martis quinto, Viz. die mensis Maii Anno Dom. 1640. inter horas secundam
and quartam post meridiem, etc. Reverendus in Christ^ Pater Dominus Johannes
Sarum Episcopus in Commissione Reverendissimi, etc. inter alios conjunctim and
divisim nominatus, etc. praesentata commissione hujusmodi, etc. and lecta, etc.
assumpsit, etc. prorogando, etc. prout in Schedula per eum lecta continetur;
Cujus, etc. In Dei Nomine Amen. Nos Johannes, etc. Sarum Episcopus, etc.

Nona Sessio.
DIE Sabbathi Nono, viz. die Mensis Maii Anno Dom. 1640. etc. inter horas
secundam and quartam post meridiem ejusdem Diei, in Capella, etc. Reverendus in
Christo pater Dominus Johannes Sarum Episcopus and Commissiarius sive
locum-tenens antedictus pro Tribunali sedens, Assidentibus fecum Reverendis,
etc. Episcopis, hujusmodi Convocationem sive sacram Synodum Provincialem in
statu, etc. una cum ulteriori continuatione and prorogatione dierum extunc
sequentium, and locorum si oporteat in ea part fiendis, continuavit and
prorogavit, prout in Schedula per eum lecta before continetur; Cujus quidem
Schedulae verus tenor, etc. In Dei nomine Amen, Nos, etc. Sarum Episcopus, etc.

Decima Sessio.
DIE Mercury 13o. viz. die Mensis Maii Anno Dom. 1640. inter horas secundam and
quartam post Meridiem ejusdem diei, Reverendissimus in Christo Pater Dominus
Gulielmus Cant. Archi-Episcopus, etc. pro Tribunali sedens, assidentibus secum,
etc. post tractatum habitum cum eisdem de temporis instabilitate ac impetu and
tumultu sordidissimae populi sortis prope and circa Civitatem London and
suburbia ejusdem nuperrime confluentis, ac inique and hostiliter sese gerentis;
Voluit and mandavit Prolocutorem and totum Coetum Domus Inferioris ad se
accersiri. Quibus comparentibus, Reverendissimus, in praesentiis Reverendorum
Patrum Confratrum suorum, significavit and intimavit, Serenissimum Dominum
nostrum Carolum Regem ex gratia sua Speciali Licentiam sive Commissionem magno
Sigillo suo Angliae sigillatam de Ordinando and Conficiendo quasdam
Constitutiones, Ordinationes sive Canones, Statum Ecclesiasticum concernentes,
renovandam curasse, ad Regium suum beneplacitum duraturam, and eandem Licentiam
sive Commissionem produxit and exhibuit sub forma Verborum sequentium, viz.

Licentia secunda Domini nostri Regis.
Charles by the Grace of God, etc. Qua per me praefatum Sacvilum Wade in hac
part Actorum Scribam sive Registrarii Deputatum public tunc and ibidem alta
voce perlecta, dictus Reverendissimus Pater and caeteri Episcopi secum
assidentes and Clerus Domus Inferioris praedict, sese coram eis exhibentes, cum
omni Reverentia, Obedientia, Subjectione, and Humilitate gratis Animis
acceptarunt and receperunt: and Reverendissimus Pater antedictus Prolocutorem
and alios de Domo Inferiori, Decanos, Archi-Diaconos, Capitula and Cleri
procuratores ibidem praesentes, voluit, ut ipsi inter se convenirent and
excogitarent de Benevolentia sive extraordinaria Contributione dicto
Serenissimo Domino nostro Regi concedenda; and deinde de Canonibus and
Constitutionibus Statum Ecclesiasticum, and Ecclesiae Vtilitatem concernentib',
componend', faciend', and inter se consentiend'. Et ut ipsi, pro meliori and
celeriori ipsius negotii expeditione, quosdam graviores and doctiores Viros de
gremio suo eligerent, dictum negotium de Canonibus concipiendis Subitur'. Et
subsequenter Magister Willielmus Fisher Notarius Publicus and Domu^s Inferioris
Actuarius, mihi praefato Notario certificavit in fidem Notarii, Venerabiles
Viros, Dominum Prolocutorem, Isaacum Bargrave, Thomam Wynnyffe, and Richardum
Baily Sacrae Theologiae respective Professores, and Decanos Ecclesiarum
Cathedralium Cant. London, and Sarum, Thomam Paske, Andream Binge, and
Radulphum Brownrigg Sacrae Theologiae Professores, Archi-Diaconos London.
Norwicen' and Coven', Johannem Montfort and Gilbertum Sheldon Sacrae Theologiae
Professores; Procuratores pro Capitulis Ecclesiarum Cathedralium Divi Pauli
London', and Gloucester', necnon Dominum Johannem Lamb Militem and Legum
Doctorem, Benjaminum Laney, Thomam Turner, Edwardum Franklin, Sacrae Theologiae
Professores, and Gilbertum Ironside Sacrae Theologiae Baccalaurcum,
Procuratores pro Clero Lincoln', Winton, Norwicen', and Bristolien', esse
electos cum consensu totius Domus ad effectum praedictum. Tunc dimisso Domino
Prolocutore, cum toto Coet^ Domus Inferioris, Reverendissimus Colloquium habuit
cum confratribus suis, ut excogitarent imprimis de Canonibus Novis
concipiendis, and deinde de Veteribus Canonibus percontandis and examinandis;
ad effectum cisdem addendi, vel eos supplendi, si hujusmodi sacrae Synodo
expedire videatur. Et insuper hortatus est idem Reverendissimus, ut Formae
libri Articulorum in qualibet Visitatione posthac Ministrandorum and de
Consecratione Ecclesiarum, Capellarum, and Coemeteriorum concipiantur; and post
res ita gestas, praedictus Reverendissimus Pater, jussit Prolocutorem coram se
and Confratribus suis vocari. Quo Prolocutore, cum Octo Decanis eum
comitantibus, comparente, idem Reverendissimus eos Voluit, ad conveniendum die
Veneris proximo, tempestive, and ad tunc tractandum cum toto Coetu Domus
Inferioris citra Benevolentiam sive Contributionem voluntariam dicto Domino
nostro Regi concedendam: Et ut ipsi Formam Articulorum in Visitationibus
imposterum ministrandis concipiant. Denique eis dimissis, Idem Reverendissimus
Pater cum Consensu Confratrum suorum, continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula per
eum lecta, etc.

The Opinion of the Lord Keeper, and other the Judges, and the King's Council,
for the Continuance of the Convocation.
The Convocation being called by the King's Writ under the Great Seal, does
continue until it be dissolved by Writ or Commission under the Great Seal,
notwithstanding the Parliament be dissolved -- 14 Maij, 1640. Jo. Finch, C. S.
H. Manchester, John Bramston, Edward Littleton, Ralphe Whitfeld, Jo. Banks,
To. Heath.

Sessio XI.
DIE Veneris 15o, Viz. die Mensis Maij, Anno Dom. 1640. inter horas secundam
and quartam post Meridiem, Reverendissimus, etc. Confratribus suis notum fecit,
Quod Serenissimus Dominus Rex honorandum Virum Dominum Henricum Vane Militem,
Vnum e Secretariis suis Principalibus and Thesaurarium Hospitij sui Regij,
tanquam Nuncium specialem ad hanc Domum destinavit; eundemque honorandum Virum
in Capella ex part Australi hujus loci praesentem esse. Ideoque
Reverendissimus Pater, cum Consensu confratrum suorum, ad se accersiri fecit
dictum honorandum Virum, nec non Dominum Prolocutorem and totum Coetum Domus
Inferioris. Qui quidem honorandus Vir domum hanc Convocationis sive Sacrae
Synodi primo intravit, ac deinde Dominus Prolocutor cum toto Coetu Domus
Inferioris; and Dominus Archi-Episcopus, istius Sacrae Synodi Praeses, eundem
honorandum Virum benign recepit, and in Cathedra e manu Sinistra posita eum
locavit. Et tunc idem honorandus Vir eisdem Reverendissimo patri ac Praelatis
and Clero, brevi Oratione declaravit se fuisse per Dominum Regem ad hanc Domum
missum ad Regiam suam voluntatem eidem narrandum, Scilicet, Quod idem Dominus
noster Rex Licentiam sive Commissionem de Ordinando Canones and Constitutiones
Ecclesiasticas, pro meliori gubernatione Ecclesiae, ad Dei gloriam, Regis
honorem, and totius hujus Regni pacem (uti speratur) huic sacrae Synodo, ex
gratia Speciali, concedens, cum Dominis e privato suo consilio consultum
habuit, an hujusmodi sacra Synodus ad hujusmodi Canones and Constitutiones
faciendum procederet necne. Et dicti Domini unanimi Consensu (nullo eorum
dissentiente) Vota eorum exhibuerunt, and tanquam maxim necessarium
adjudicarunt, ut Sacra haec Synodus ad istos Canones juxta potestatem eidem
Synodo datam, faciendum and concipiendum procedat. Ideoque dictus honorandus
Vir nomine and ex part dicti Domini Regis hortatus est, ut tales Canones in
brevi tempore fiant, quales Ecclesiae and praesenti huic statui maxim utiles
sint. Et subjuncta alia brevi Oratione per Reverendissimum Patrem antedictum
Praelatis and toto Coetui praedicto, cum monitione Nomine dicti Domini Regis,
ut nullus eorum a dicta Sacra Synodo discedat, donec omnia juxta mandatum
Regium praedictum perimpleantur, idem Reverendissimus Pater, una cum dicto
honorando Viro, a dicta Sacra Synodo ad Consilium ineund' cum Domino Rege apud
Whitehall recessit: Et post aliquem tractatum inter Dominos Episcopos
antedictos habitum, Reverendus Pater Dominus Johannes Sarum Episcopus and dicti
Reverendissimi Patris Commissarius sive locumtenens, continuavit, etc. prout in
Schedula per eum lecta continetur, Cujus, etc.

Sessio XII.
DIE Sabbathi 16o, viz. die mensis Maij; Anno Domini 1640, inter horas Octavam
and Vndecimam ante Meridiem, etc. Reverendissimus, etc. communicavit cum eisdem
Dominis Episcopis. Et inter hujusmodi communicationes comparuit Dominus
Prolocutor, cum Decanis Cant' and London. and tradidit in Manus dicti
Reverendissimi Patris, quasdam Schedulas Papyri continentes quaedam Capitula
Canonum per eum Prolocutorem and totum clerum Domus Inferioris excogitat.
Quibus receptis, and Domino Prolocutore dimisso, Reverendissimus Dominus
Praeses colloquium habuit cum Episcopis antedictis citra exiguitatem
Exhibitionum e clero indigentiori, in detinendo ab eis, per Proprietarios and
eorum Firmarios, Oblationes and Salaria sive Feoda Ecclesiastica, pro Mulierum
post partum Purificationibus, Matrimoniorum Solemnizationibus, and de Mortuorum
Sepulturis, and etiam de magna illa Injuria Clero per Laicos illata in eligendo
tales Gardianos and Clericos Parochiales, qui eos opponant and inquietant ad
maximum eorum praejudicium and incommodum. Ad quem quidem clerum de hujusmodi
injuriis levand. Reverendissimus Pater Praeses antedictus, de and cum Consilio
and assensu Praelatorum confratrum suorum, Negotium hujusmodi Attornato
Generali Domini Regis significandum fore decrevit; ut ipse de aliquo remedio
pro eis in hac part curaret. Tunc lecto libello sive forma Concessionis
Benevolentiae sive contributionis voluntariae, praefatus Reverendissimus Pater
and Reverendi Patres antedicti de benevola contributione quatuor Solidorum
singulis Annis per Sexennium proxime futurum solvendorum de qualibet libra
annualis reditus cujuslibet Beneficii infra Provinciam Cantuariensem, juxta
ratam and taxam eorundem in libris Primitiarum fructuum Domini nostri Regis sub
certis conditionibus and Provisionibus in isto libro sive Forma contributionis
Specificat', tractatum habuerunt, and desuper consenserunt. Et ideo idem
Reverendissimus Pater, cum Consensu Confratrum suorum, Dominum Prolocutorem,
una cum Sex illis Assessoribus sive Examinatoribus Domus Inferioris pro
Subsidiorum examinatione electis, ad se accersiri fecit. Quo quidem
Prolocutore, una eum quinque e dictis Assessoribus, scilicet Venerabilibus
Viris, Isaaco Bargrave, Thoma Wynnyff, Thoma Paske, Thoma Wilson, and Domino
Johanne Lamb, Milite, hanc Domum superiorem intrante, Reverendissimus Pater
Praeses antedictus eidem Prolocutori intimavit, se and Confratres suos de
Benevolentia sive Contributione voluntaria dicto Domino Regi concedenda
tractasse, and inter sese consentiisse de concedendo quatuor Solidos e qualibet
libra cujusque Beneficij juxta ratam sive taxam, in libris primitiarum Regiarum
singulis Annis per Sexennium proximum solvendos, juxta formam sive librum
Concessionis desuper conceptum. Quam Formam, Reverendissimus Dominus Praeses,
in manus Domini Prolocutoris, per Eum and totum Coetum Domus inferioris
tractand' and consentiend' una cum Copia Canonis contra Recusan' tradidit.
Tunc, dimisso Domino Prolocutore, habitoque aliquo tractatu inter
Reverendissimum Dominum Praesidem, and Confratres suos, ad mandatum
Reverendissimi Domini Praesidis in domum Inferiorem ego praefatus Notarius
descendebam; and Dominus Prolocutor mihi tradidit Formam sive Librum
Concessionis praedict', and dixit se and totam Domum inferiorem super istam
Benevolentiam sive Contributionem voluntariam considerasse, and de eadem
unanimiter consentiisse. Qua per me Recepta, ad Domum Superiorem instanter
revertebam, and humiliter omnia per Dominum Prolocutorem mihi in mandatis data
significavi and intimavi. Deinde Dominus Prolocutor, cum Decanis Cant' and
London. Domum Superiorem intravit, and cum omni Obedientia, dicto
Reverendissimo Canonem pro Brevi e Curia Cancellariae impetrand' De
Excommunicatis capiendis tradidit. Vnde, dimisso Domino Prolocutore, habitoque
tractatu super isto Canone, Reverendissimus Pater Dominus Praeses continuavit,
etc. prout in Schedula, etc. Tenor etiam Instrumenti dictae benevolae
Contributionis sequitur and est talis, viz. Augustissimo and Serenissimo Domino
nostro Carolo Dei gratia Angliae, etc.

Sessio XIII.
DIE Lunae 18o. Viz. die Mensis Maij, Anno Domini 1640. inter horas nonam and
undecimam ante merid', etc. Reverendissimus, etc. post tractatum cum eis
[Reverendis Patribus] habitum, ad se accersiri fecit Dominum Prolocutorem cum
toto Coetu Domus Inferioris: Quibus mox comparentibus intimavit, and eis
public per me praefatum Notarium legi fecit, Literas quasdam Regias sibi and
recolendis patribus Confratribus suis and toto Clero in hac Sacra Synodo
congregatis directas sub Signaculo suo tenoris sequentis. Charles R. Most
Reverend Father in God, etc. Deinde, praefatus Reverendissimus Pater Praelatis
and Clero antedictis haud ineleganter locutus est, Quod multae querelae contra
plures e Clero, and nominatim contra Doctorem Beale unum e Domo Inferiori hujus
Convocationis ultimo Parliamento exhibitae fuerunt, pro Verbis in eorum
praedicationibus prolatis, quae Statum hujus Regni perturbarunt and
inquietarunt. De quibus idem Reverendissimus Pater protestatus est, se nunquam
ante tempus praedictum audivisse; dicit tamen si antea de eisdem audisset, se
velle ea examinare and parts culpabiles punire coram Commissariis Regiis ad
causas Ecclesiasticas, sicut punirentur in hac Convocatione sive Sacra Synodo,
si eadem aliquo tempore competenti continuaret. Sed post hanc Convocationem
dissolut' and dies Privilegiorum finitos, public promisit parts praedictas
vocare coram Commissariis Regiis antedictis, and juxta Juris exigentiam and
eorum demerita contra eos procedere. Tunc dimisso Prolocutore, mox cum Decanis
Cant' and London' and Archidiaconis Middlesex' and Roffen' revertebat, and
Canones concernentes Recusantes penes Reverendissimum antedictum dimittens,
querelatus est Breve de Subpoena e Curia Scaccarij esse executum in Doctorem
Burgis Archi-Diaconum Roffen', and petiit privilegium Convocationis. Vnde
Reverendissimus Pater Dominus Archi-Episcopus antedictus voluit ipsum
Prolocutorem cum consensu Domus Inferioris, ad concipiendum Actum, quid eis in
hoc negotio expedire videbitur, and ad transmittendum istum Actum ad hanc Domum
Superiorem, ut ipse and Confratres sui de eodem considerent. Modo, dimisso
Prolocutore, and habito tractatu inter praefatum Reverendissimum Patrem and
Confratres suos, Reverendissimus cum eorum consensu elegit Dominos Episcopos
Elien' and Bristolien' ad consulendum cum utroque Dominorum Justiciariorum
primariorum citra certas clausulas and Verba in Canonibus antedictis contra
Recusantes; and sic facta fuit continuatio hujus Convocationis sive sacrae
Synodi Provincialis in statu quo nunc est, usque ad and inter horas quartam and
sextam post meridiem, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XIV.
IN Pomeridiano ejusdem diei in loco praedicto inter horas assignatas,
Reverendus, etc. Asaphen' Episcopus ac Commissarius sive locumtenens in hac
part legitime deputatus, assidente secum, etc. in praesentiae, etc.
Continuavit, etc. prout, etc.

Sessio XV.
DIE Martis 19o. Viz. die Mensis Maij 1640. In Capella Regis Henrici Septimi
infra, etc. inter horas Nonam and Vndecimam ante Meridiem, etc.
Reverendissimus, etc. pro tribunali sedens, assidentibus secum praedictis
Reverendis Patribus, praefatus Reverendus Pater Dominus Matthaeus Elien'
Episcopus, certificavit se and Dominum Episcopum Bristolien' consuluisse cum
Domino Edwardo Littleton Milite, Domino primario Justiciario Curiae ad Placita
Domini Regis, juxta assignationem hesterno die factam, circa clausulas and
Verba in Canone contra Recusantes facto, and idem Dominus Justiciarius
consilium dedit, ut quaedam verba in isto Canone per Dominum Episcopum Elien.
specificata, expungentur, and alia verba magis apta in loco eorum
conscribentur. Quibus de mandato Reverendissimi, cum consensu confratrum
suorum, conscriptis, Reverendissimus voluit ad se accersiri Dominum
Prolocutorem cum quibusdam aliis e Coetu Domus Inferioris, qui intravit Domum
Superiorem cum Novem dictae Domus Inferioris, and Reverendissimus eis
declaravit alterationes Verborum in Canone praedict. de consilio and judicio
Domini Justiriarij primarij praedict' factas; and tradidit istum Canonem dicto
Domino Prolocutori, per eum and totam Domum Inferiorem consider and' and
consentiend'. Tunc tradita per Dominum Prolocutorem cum omni humilitate and
reverentia, in Sacras manus Reverendissimi, Schedula continente principium and
conclusionem ad Articulos Potestatis Regiae, Dominus Prolocutor dimissus fuit,
and Reverendissimus una cum Confratribus suis communicavit and consultum habuit
citra Principium and Conclusionem ad Articulos Potestatis Regiae; and post
consultationem cum eis habitam, Reverendissimus cum unanimi eorum consensu
aliqua verba addidit and aliqua expungit. Quibus sic factis, Prolocutor
revertebat, and tradidit Reverendissimo quendam Canonem cum consensu Domus
Inferioris contra Socinianos (ut asseruit) factum, etc. Et Reverendissimus ei
retradidit Schedulam continentem principium and conclusionem ad Articulos
Regiae potestatis, sic (ut praefertur) in aliquo mutatos, per eum and Domum
Inferiorem tractand'. Prolocutore dimisso, Reverendissimus una cum confratribus
suis Consilium habuit super istum Canonem contra Socinianos, and post aliquem
tractatum and emendationem istius Canonis, Reverendissimus cum Consensu
Confratrum suorum continuavit, and prorogavit, etc. Vsque ad and in diem
Mercurij Vicesimum, viz. diem instantis Mensis Maij inter horas Octavam and
Vndecimam ante Meridiem, etc. in hunc locum, prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XVI.
DIE Mercurij 20o. Viz. die Mensis Maij Anno Domini 1640. inter horas Octavam
and Vndecimam ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, Reverendissimus, etc. Praeses hujus
Convocationis sive sacrae Synodi, etc. tractavit cum Etiscopis, and post multum
temporis contritum, consenserunt super Canone contra Socinianos, ultima
Sessione tractato, and super forma Juramenti, etc. hac Sessione per
Reverendissimum producta. Deinde, de mandato Reverendissimi, Prolocutor cum Sex
aliis e Domo Inferiori Domum Superiorem intravit, and Reverendissimus ei
tradidit dictum Canonem and formam Juramenti praedicti per totum Coetum Domus
Inferioris considerandum, tractandum, and consentiendum: Tunc, dimisso
Prolocutore, Reverendissimus mandavit Canonem pro Collectione contributionis
voluntariae per me praefatum Notarium legi. Quibus lectis, denuo comparuit
Dominus Prolocutor cum duobus aliis e Coetu Domus Inferioris, and in manus
Reverendissimi tradidit Schedulam pro Literis de Excommunicatis capiendis
contra Recusantes extrahend'. Eoque dimisso, habitoque tractatu cum Episcopis,
Reverendissimus continuavit and prorogavit, etc. Vsque ad and in diem Jovis
Vicesimam primam, viz. diem, etc. inter horas Nonam and Vndecimam ante
Meridiem, etc. prout in Schedula per eum lecta continetur, cujus quidem
Schedulae verus tenor sequitur, etc.

Sessio XVII.
DIE Jovis 21o. Viz. die Mensis Maii, Anno Domini 1640. inter horas Nonam and
Vndecimam ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, Reverendissimus, etc. post aliquem
tractatum cum eis [Episcopis] mandavit Prolocutor', and totum Coetum Domus
Inferioris ad se accersiri. Quibus comparentibus, Reverendissimus coram eis
produxit Literas quasdam Regias recolendis Patribus and toti Clero in hujusmodi
Convocatione congregato directas, sub Signaculo suo tenoris sequentis, Viz.
Charles R. Most Reverend Father in God, etc. Quibus per me Notarium antedictum
public perlectis, Reverendissimus eis intimavit se and Confratres suos unanimi
consensu fecisse quosdam Canones sive Ordinationes juxta potestatem in dictis
Literis mentionat', eis and toti Clero concessam, pro collectione, levatione,
solutione, and computatione benevolentiae sive contributionis voluntariae
Regiae suae Majestati per eos datae, and Copiam dictorum Canonum dicto Domino
Prolocutori tradidit, per Clerum Domus Inferioris approband' and consentiend'.
Tunc, eis dimissis, Reverendissimus and Confratres sui tractarunt and inter se
consultarunt de quodam Canone sive Declaratione per Domum Inferiorem eis
transmisso, concernente quosdam Ritus sive gestus in Ecclesiis observandos; and
post aliquem tractatum desuper habitum, Prolocutor cum quibusdam aliis e Domo
Inferiori revertebat, and praesentavit Canones sive Ordinationes, ut supra, pro
collectione benevolentiae ei traditas, and humiliter significavit totam Domum
Inferiorem unanimi consensu eosdem approbasse. Vnde, dimisso Prolocutore,
habitoque tractatu inter Reverendissimum and Confratres suos de alio Canone per
Dominum Prolocutorem eidem Reverendissimo tradito, Reverendissimus cum consensu
Confratrum suorum praesentem Convocationem sive sacram Synodum Provincialem
continuavit, etc. Vsque ad and inter horas secundam and quartam post meridiem,
etc. hujus diei, prout in Schedula per eum lecta, etc.

Ordinationes aliquot Synodales factae 21 die Mensis Maij, etc.

Sessio XVIII.
IN Pomeridiano ejusdem diei in loco praedicto inter horas assignatas,
Reverendus pater Dominus Morganus Landavensis Episcopus ac Commissarius sive
Locum-tenens in hac part legitime deputatus in praesentia mei, etc,
continuavit, etc. Vsque ad and in diem Veneris 22. diem, etc. inter horas 9.
and 11, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XIX.
DIE Veneris 22o. Viz. die Mensis Maij Anno Domini 1640. in Capella, etc. inter
horas nonam and undecimam ante Meridiem, etc. Reverendissimus, etc. Praeses
hujus sacrae Synodi, assidentibus secum Reverendis Patribus, etc. tractavit and
communicavit cum eisdem recolendis Patribus Confratribus suis citra Canonem pro
receptione Sacrae Eucharistiae, and locatione Sacrae Mensae; and inter
hujusmodi tractatus Reverendus pater Dominus Godfridus Gloucestren' Episcopus
antedictus, protestatus est, Quod non intendit consentire ad conceptionem and
fabricationem alicujus Canonis in hac Sacra Synodo propositi and tractati, vel
proponendi and tractandi, nisi aliquem antiquum Precedentem de legitimatione
dictae Sacrae Synodi viderit; licet approbavit (ut asseruit) Benevolentiam sive
Contributionem voluntariam, hac Sacra Synodo Domino nostro Regi concessam, and
Canones desuper factos pro collectione and levatione ejusdem; and huic
Protestationi in omnibus adhaerere intendit. Deinde comparuit Dominus
Prolocutor, cum Octo aliis e Coetu Domus Inferioris, and praesentavit formam
Libri Articulorum and tres Canones per istam Domum tractat. et etiam Literas
quasdam petitionales ex part Vnius Clericorum in partibus Walliae, pro errorum
emendatione Liturgiae Wallicae, per falsam impressionem commissorum; and ut
ista forma Precis die Inaugurationis Regiae singulis Annis utendae, in linguam
Wallicam translata sit. Vnde Reverendissimus cum consensu Confratrum suor'
hujusmodi negotium Dom' Johanni Asaphen' Episcopo antedicto retulit. Tunc, eis
dimissis, Reverendissimus cum Confratribus suis, tractavit super Canonibus
contra Sectarios, Separatistas, and alios Recusantes venire ad preces divinas,
and de utenda prece die Inaugurationis Regiae singulis Annis, and de
Consecratione Panis and Vini tempore ministrationis sacrae Eucharistiae,
quoties opus fuerit consecrare; and de alio Canone, etc. Quibus sic gestis,
Reverendissimus, cum consensu Confratrum suorum, continuavit, etc. Vsque ad and
inter horas secundam and quartam post Meridiem, etc. ad hunc locum. Prout in
Schedula, per eum lecta tenoris sequentis continetur. In Dei Nomine, etc.

Sessio XX.
IN Pomeridiano ejusdem diei, in loco praedicto Reverendi Patres, etc.
convenerunt and insimul a hora tertia usque ad post horam Septimam dicti diei
consederunt; and tunc Reverendus Pater Dominus Johannes Sarum Episcopus
antedictus ac Commissarius, etc. praesentem Convocationem sive Sacram Synodum
Provincialem, usque ad and in diem Sabbathi 23, viz. diem instantis Mensis
inter horas nonam and undecimam ante meridiem, etc. continuavit, etc. ad hunc
locum, prout in Schedula sequenti continetur, viz. In Dei Nomine, etc.

Sessio XXI.
DIE Sabbathi 23o viz. die Mensis Maij Anno Domini 1640. inter horas nonam and
undecimam ante Meridiem, etc. Reverendissimus tractavit cum eisdem [Episcopis]
de libro Articulorum Visitationibus Parochialibus ministrand'; and inter
hujusmodi tractatus, Reverendus Pater Dominus Richardus Norwicen' Episcopus
Domum hanc Superiorem intravit; and citra semihoram postea, comparuit
Prolocutor cum septem aliis e Domo Inferiori: deinde, eis dimissis habitoque
tractatu citra Canonem pro ministratione libri Articulorum praedict. and de
addend' eisdem Licentia and Dispensatione Reverendissimi sub sigillo suo,
Prolocutor revertebat, ad id licentiatus, and Secret locutus est cum
Reverendissimo (me praefato Notario semoto.) Eo dimisso, Reverendissimus cum
consensu Confratrum suorum, potestatem commisit Dominis Episcopis Elien', Exon'
and Oxon' ad examinandum librum Articulorum praedict'. Deinde, tractatu Secreto
cum Episcopis habito, Reverendissimus cum eorum consenst praesentem
Convocationem, etc. continuavit, etc. Vsque ad and inter horas secundam and
quartam post meridiem, etc. ad hunc Locum. Prout in Schedula tenoris sequentis
before continetur, In Dei nomine Amen. Nos, etc.

Sessio XXII.
IN Pomerid' ejusd' diei in loco praed', etc. Reverendissimus, etc. post
aliquod cum eis [Episcopis] habit' Colloquium, Prolocutor cum quibusdam aliis e
Coetu Domus Inferioris Domum Superiorem intravit, and praesentavit binos
Canones. Tunc, eo dimisso, habitoque tractatu inter Dominum Archi-Episcopum and
Episcopos antedictos, revertebat cum december aliis dictae Domus Inferioris, and
alios praesentavit Canones. Prolocutore iterum dimisso, paulo post revertebat
cum duobus vel tribus e Domo Inferiori; and Reverendissimus in eorum
praesentiis elegit Dominos Episcopos, Winton', Exon' Elien' and Bristolien' ad
praesentandum cum ipso Instrumentum Benevolentiae sive Contributionis
voluntariae, Serenissimo Domino Regi, and Voluit Dominum Prolocutorem ad
eligendum Sex aut Octo alios Domus Inferioris ad similiter praesentandum cum
ipso Prolocutore dictum Instrumentum. Deinde, habito tractatu secreto cum eodem
Prolocutore (me Notario antedicto semoto) Reverendissimus eundem Prolocutorem
dimisit, and praesentem Convocationem, etc. Vsque ad and in diem Mercurij 27.
Viz. diem, etc. inter horas nonam and undecimam ante Meridiem continuavit, etc.
Prout in Schedula tenoris sequentis continetur. In Dei, etc.

Sessio XXIII.
DIE Mercurij 27o, Viz. die Mensis Maij, Anno Dom. 1640. inter horas nonam and
undecimam ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc. Reverendissimus, etc. ad se
accersiri fecit Dominum Prolocutorem and totum Coetum Domus Inferioris. Quibus
comparentibus, Reverendissimus significavit, Quod die Lunae ultimo mane
Instrumentum Concessionis benevolentiae, sive contributionis voluntariae,
unanimi consensu hujus Sacrae Synodi, Serenissimo Domino nostro Regi concessae,
in ejus Sacras manus per eos utriusque Domus ad hoc electos cum omni
Humilitate, Obedientia, and Subjectione, traditum fuit. Regiaque sacra Majestas
eandem Concessionem gratiose acceptavit, and Voluit ipsum Reverendissimum pro
Domo Superiori and Dominum Prolocutorem pro Domo Inferiori, ad gratias utrique
Domui nomine suo pro eadem referend': Quodque die Martis ultimo, Canones in hac
sacra Synodo tractat' per ipsum Reverendissimum Regiae Majestati in praesentiis
Dominorum e privato suo Consilio lecti fuerunt, Regiaque Majestas, and Domini e
Consilio praedict', eosdem unanimiter and sine haesitatione approbarunt: and
Dominus Rex voluit eundem Reverendissimum ad habendum gratias utrique Domui
hujus Convocationis pro magna eorum cura and labor citra confectionem
eorundem. Inter vero hujusmodi Sermonis prolationem, Domino Gulielmo Bangor
Episcopo comparente, and in hac sacra Synodo una cum Dominis Episcopis
antedictis sedente, Reverendissimus Prolocutorem and totum Coetum Domus
Inferioris praedictae dimisit. Tunc, habito aliquo tractatu inter
Reverendissimum and praefatos Praelatos, Confratres suos, Prolocutor revertebat
and secum introduxit Conclusionem cujusdam Canonis pro suppressione accretionis
numeri Papistarum, and eandem penes Reverendissimum reliquit. Deinde, dimisso
Prolocutore, post aliquod temporis intervallum comparuit Willielmus Fisher
Notarius Publicus and Actuarius Domus Inferioris, and praesentavit Schedulam
concernentem titulos cujuslibet Canonis in hac sacra Synodo usque in horam
praedictam tractat' per Domum Inferiorem (ut asseruit) fact' and assens'. Vnde
Reverendissimus, cum consensu Confratrum suorum, eosdem titulos approbavit.
Denique Prolocutor iterum venit, and exhibuit quosdam Canones contra Judices
Ecclesiasticos and eorum Registrarios and Officiarios; eisdemque in sacras
manus Reverendissimi traditis, and Prolocutore dimisso, Reverendissimus
continuavit, etc. Vsque ad and in diem Jovis 28. viz. diem, etc. inter horas
nonam and undecimam ante Meridiem, prout in Schedula per eum lecta continetur,
Cujus quidem Schedulae verus tenor sequltur. In Dei Nomine, etc.

Sessio XXIV.
DIE Jovis 28o. Viz. die Mensis Maij, Anno Domini 1640. inter horas nonam and
undeoimam ante Meridiem ejusdem diel, Reverendissimus, etc. post aliquem
tractatum cum eis [Episcopis] habitum, Dominus Prolocutor venit cum quinque
aliis e Coetu Domus Inferioris, and exparte aliquorum inhabitantium
Parochianorum Sancti Clementis Dacorum extra barras Novi Templi London and
beatae Mariae Savoy, in Le-Strand, in Comitatu Middlesexiae, exhib^ Literas
quasdam Petitionales manibus suis propriis Subsignatas; and quidam Johannes
Cross Lanio, Willielmus Stevenson Lanio, and... Vxor Rogeri Barton, parts in
dictis Literis mentionatae, obtulerunt se promptos and paratos ad justificandum
suggestiones in eisdem, and nominatim accusarunt Magistrum Johannem Allen
Notarium Publicum Registrarij Deputatum, and Arthurum Coleman Apparitorem
Domini Archi-Diaconi Middlesexiae, tanquam parts in dictis literis criminosas,
and in Officiis suis male se gerentes. Vnde Reverendissimus, cum Consensu
Praelatorum and Cleri, in hac sacra Synodo congregat' decrevit, eos vocandos
fore coram Commissariis Regiis, ac Processum contra eos fieri ex mero Officio,
in ista Curia, etiam decrevit. Tunc, dimisso Prolocutore, Reverendissimus
tractavit cum Praelatis citra istos Canones contra Cancellarios and alios
Judices Ecclesiasticos. and eorum Officiarios. Post istum tractatum, Prolocutor
cum 17. aliis e Domo Inferiori revertebat, and Reverendissimus cum eodem
Prolocutore tractatum habuit citra istos Canones, and in finem tractatus eos
retradidit eidem Domino Prolocutori per eum and totam domum Inferiorem
considerand'. Deinde Prolocutore dimisso, Reverendissimus continuavit, etc.
Vsque ad and inter horas secundam and quartam post meridiem hujus diei. Prout
in Schedula tenoris sequentis continetur. In Dei, etc.

Sessio XXV.
IN Pomeridiano ejusdem diei in loco praedicto, Reverendissimus, etc. post
tractatum cum eis [Episcopis] habitum, Prolocutor venit cum 19. aliis e Coetu
Domus Inferioris, and proposuit quosdam Canones Ecclesiasticos; and eo pro
tempore dimisso, revertebat cum duobus vel tribus e Coetu dictae Domus, and
Reverendissimus in praesentiis Domini Johannis Lamb Militis, Legum Doctoris
Officialis de Arcubus and Doctoris Heath Auditoris Curiae Audien' Cant' qui ad
informandum Reverendissimum and Episcopos vocati sunt, tractavit cum Domino
Prolocutore citra Canones praedictos. Post tractatum hujusmodi finitum,
Dominoque Prolocutore dimisso, Reverendissimus continuavit, etc. Vsque ad in
diem Veneris 29. Viz. diem, etc. inter horas nonam and undecimam ante meridiem,
etc. Prout in Schedula, per eum lecta tenoris sequentis continetur, viz. In Dei
Nomine Amen, etc.

Ultima Sessio.
DIE Veneris 29o. Viz. die Mensis Maij, Anno Domini 1640. inter horas, etc.
Reverendissimus, etc. judicialiter sedens: Prolocutor venit cum quibusdam aliis
e Coetu Domus Inferioris, and proposuit quendam Canonem. Tunc, eo dimisso,
habitoque tractatu inter Reverendissimum Patrem antedictum and Confratres suos,
super eodem Canone, Prolocutor cum toto Coetu Domus Inferioris praedictae
revertebat; and Reverendissimus cum Vnanimi consensu Praelatorum and Cleri
hujus Sacrae Synodi decrevit Regiam Majestatem supplicandam fore, ut Liber
publicarum precum, in Latinum versus, reimprimatur, prout in Actu Synodico
sequenti continetur, Viz. Decernimus insuper, etc. Deinde, Reverendissimus, in
praesentiis dicti Domini Prolocutoris, and totius Coetus Domus Inferioris,
protulit Librum Canonum in hac Sacra Synodo tractat'. continentem septemdecim
Capitula Canonum. Quem Reverendissimus in manibus suis tenens, cum Domino
Prolocutore, alta and intelligibili voce legebat. Quo perlecto,
Reverendissimus, and Reverendi Patres antedicti (Excepto Domino Episcopo
Gloncestren'. antedicto, Subscribere pro tempore denegan') ac Dominus
Prolocutor and totus Coetus Domus Inferioris antedictae, isto die comparentes,
nominibus suis and aliorum pro quibus constituti sunt consensum and assensum
suos eisdem Canonibus praestiterunt, and eorum Nomina manibus suis propriis
eisdem respective subscripserunt. Et Reverendissimus, inter hasce
Subscriptiones, interrogavit dictum Dominum Episcopum Gloucestren' an dictis
Canonibus assensum suum praebere, and nomen Subscribere velit; idem Dominus
Episcopus respondendo denegavit. Vnde Reverendissimus primo, secundo and
tertio, monuit eundem Dominum Episcopum ad Subscribendum. Ipse refutavit, and
sic ad secundam and tertiam monitionem Canonicam respondebat, nisi ad
Subscribendum Negative, petendo beneficium Synodi. Tunc, Reverendissimus eundem
Dominum Episcopum Gloucestren'. ob contumaciam and inobedientiam suam
hujusmodi, ab Episcopatu suo pro part sua deprivandum fore decrevit, ac monuit
and jussit Dominum Johannem Lamb Militem tunc praesentem, ad concipiendum
Sententiam Deprivationis; and ad Vota and Suffragia Praelatorum ad eundem
effectum processit. Post aliquem Processum hujusmodi habitum, major pars
Praelatorum vota sua deprivationi dicti Domini Episcopi praebuit. Tunc
praefatus Dominus Episcopus obtulit ad subscribendum, and de facto Nomen suum
dicto libro apposuit. Quibus sic gestis, dictoque Reverendo Patre interrogato
per Reverendissimum ad rogat um Prolocutoris and aliorum e Coetu Domus
Inferioris, an ipse subscripsit voluntary and ex animo, sine aequivocatione,
animi evasione, and Secreta reservatione; Respondebat, quod ipse subscripsit,
and aliter denegavit respondere. Deinde, dimisso Domino Prolocutore, cum toto
Coetu Domus Inferioris, Reverendissimus and Confratres sui praedicti super
istud grave Scandalum, Ecclesiae Anglicanae, and huic Sacrae Synodo, per dictum
Dominum Episcopum illatum, inter se tractarunt, and unanimiter Vota sua
dedcrunt pro suspensione ejusdem Episcopi ab Officio and Beneficiis suis
Ecclesiasticis. Et mox Dominus Prolocutor cum toto Coetu Domus Inferioris
revertebat, ac nomine suo and totius Coetus praedicti, dixit se and totum
Coetum Domus suae, citra istud Scandalum Ecclesiae huic Anglicanae and Synodo
Sacrae per Dominum Episcopum Gloucestr'. illatum, tractasse, and Vota sua and
little Suspensioni ejusdem Episcopi ab Officio and Beneficiis praebuisse. Et
ulterius Dominus Prolocutor, nomine suo and eorum, Dominum Archi-Episcopum
imploravit, ut dictus Dominus Episcopus Gloucestr. ante recessum suum ab hac
Civitatc, Juramentum in Sexto Canone in hac sacra Synodo tractat' mentionat'
praestaret; and ut Reverendissimus interrogaret eundem Dominum Episcopum an
ipse Subscripsit bona fide sine Aequivocatione and animi evasione. Vnde facta
monitione dicto Domino Episcopo Gloucestren', quod non recedat a Civitate,
donec Juramentum praedictum ei oblaturum praestiterit and subierit,
Reverendissimus cum consensu totius Synodi dictum Dominum Episcopum
Gloucestren'. ab Officio and Episcopatu suo Gloucestr. and ab omnibus
Reneficiis suis Ecclesiasticis Suspendendum fore decrevit, donec Serenissimo
Domino nostro Regi and Sacrae Ecclesiae, ob magnum hujusmodi dedecus and grave
Scandalum illatum, Satisfecerit. Eumque in Scriptis Suspendebat, prout in
Schedula sequenti continetur, Viz. In Dei Nomine Amen. Nos Gulielmus, etc.
Postremo, habito per Reverendissimum sermon gravi and eleganti, Praelatis and
Clero praedictis, Lectoque per me praefatum Notarium Brevi Regio, de mandato
dicti Reverendissimi Patris, de Convocatione dissolvenda, tenoris sequentis,
Viz. Carolus Dei gratia, etc. Idem Reverendissimus Pater, ob honorem and
reverentiam dicti Domini nostri Regis juxta tenorem Brevis Regij praedicti,
candem Convocationem five Sacram Synodum Provincialem dissolvit, prout in
Schedula per dictum Reverendissimum Patremlecta before continetur, Cujus
quidem Schedulae tenor sequitur and est palis. Viz. In Dei nomine Amen. Nos
Gulielmus, etc.

ACTA SUPERIORIS DOMUS CONVOCATIONIS INCOEPTAE OCTAVO DIE MENSIS MAII ANNO
MDCLXI. IN REVISIONELIBRI PRECUM PUBLICARUM ET IN CERTIS CANONIBUS
CONFICIENDIS, andC. USQUE AD DIEM XXVI. SEPTEMBRIS ANNO MDCLXVI.
Archbishop JVXON's Mandate to the Bishop of London, to Summon a Convocation to
St. Paul's, May 8. 1661.
Mandatuus Episcoco London', direct' pro Convocat' summonenda.
GUlielmus Providentia Divina Cantuar Archiepiscopus, totius Angliae Primas and
Metropolitanus; Venerabili Confratri nostro Domino Gilberto eadem Providentia
London. Episcopo, Salutem, and fraternam in Domino charitatem. Breve
Illustrissimi in Christo Principis, and Domini nostri Domini Caroli secundi,
Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei defensoris,
etc. nobis inscript'. and direct nuper cum ea qua decuit reverentia, obedientia
and subjectione, humiliter recepimus in haec verba. Carolus secundus, Dei
gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex, Fidei Defensor, etc.
Reverendissimo in Christo Patri Gulielmo cadem gratia Cantuar? Archiepiscopo,
totius Angliae Primati and Metrotolitano, Salutem. Quibusdam arduis and
urgentibus negotiis Nos, securitatem and defensionem Ecclesue Anglicanae, ac
pacem and tranquilitatem, bonum publicum, and defensionem Regni nostri and
subditarum nostrorum ejusacm concernen. Vobis in side and dilectione quibus
nobis tenemini rogando mandamus, quatenas praemissis debito intuitu attentis
and ponderatis, universos and singulos Episcopos vestrae Provinciae, ac Decanos
Ecclesiarum Cathedralium, nec non Archidiaconos, Capitula, and Collegia,
Collegia, totumque Clerum cujuslibet Dioeceseos ejusdem Provinciae, ad
comparendum coram vobis in Ecclesia Cathedrali Sancti Pauli London. octavo die
Mensis Maij prox. futur. vel alibi prout melius expedire videritis, cum omni
celeritate accommoda modo debito convocari faciatis, ad tractand'.
consentiend'. and concludena'. super praemissis and aliis quae sibi clarius
exponentur tunc ibidem ex part nostra. Et hoc sicut Nos and Statum regni
nostri, ac honorem and utilitatem Ecclesiae praedict'. diligitis, nullatenus
omitratis. Test meipso apud Westm'. Vndecimo die Aprilis, Anno Regni nostri
Tertio Decimo.

Quocirca fraternitati vestrae committimus and mandamus, quatenus omnes and
singulos Co-episcopos Ecclesic nostrae Christi Cantuar'. Suffraganeos, infra
praefatam nostram Provinciam Cant. constitutos, peremptory citetis, and per
eos Decanos Ecclesiarum Cathedralium, and Collegiatarum, and singula Capitula
earundem, Archidiaconosque and alios Ecclesiarun; Praelatos exemptos and non
exemptos, Clerumque cujuslibet Dioeceseos Provinciae nostrae Cantuar'.
antedict'. peremptory citari and praemoneri volumus and mandamus: Quod iidem
Episcopi, Decani, Archidiaconi, and caeteri Ecclesiarum Cathedralium Praelati
exempti and non exempti personaliter; and quodlibet Capitulum Ecclesiarum
Cathedralium and Collegiatarum per unum, Clerusque cujuslibet Dioeces.
Provinciae nostrae antedict. per duos sufficien'. Procuratores compareant coram
nobis aut nostro in hac part Locumtenente sive Commissario (si Nos impediri
contigerit) in Domo Capitulari Ecclesiae Cathedralis sancti Pauli London, 8 die
Mensis Maij prox. futur. post Datum Praesentium, cum continuatione and
prorogatione dierum extunc sequen' and locorum (si oporteat) fiend'. ad
tractand'. super arduis and urgentibus negotiis, statum and utilitatem, bonum
publicum and defensionem Regni Angliae and Subditorum ejusdem concernen'. ipsis
tunc and ibidem seriosius exponend' suaque sana consilia and auxilia super eis
impensur. ac hiis quae ibidem ex deliberatione communi ad honorem Dei and
Ecclesiae utilitatem salubriter Ordinari and Statui contigerit, consensur.
ulteriusque factur. and receptur. quod justum fuerit and hujusmodi negotij
natura and qualitas de se exigunt and requirunt. Vos autem, Venerabilis
Confrater, dictum Mandatum, quatenus Vos and Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae
Cathedralis ac Civitatem and Dioc'. London. concernit, exequi per omnia
faciatis and eidem pareatis in omnibus cum effectu. Praeterea, tenore
praesentium Vos citamus, quatenus eisdem die and loco coram Nobis aut nostro in
hac part Locum-tenente sive Commissario, uno vel pluribus, una cum aliis
Venerabilibus Confratribus nostris dictae Provinciae nostrae Cantuar.
Co-episcopis, compareatis, super hujusmodi negotiis, ut praemittitur,
tractatur. nec non factur. and receptur. quod justum fuerit and quod ad vestram
Paternitatem attinet, prout superius continetur. Volumus insuper and mandamus,
quatenus intimets and denuncietis seu intimari and denunciari faciatis dictae
Provinciae nostrae Cantuar'. Co-episcopis, Decanis, Archidiaconis, and caeteris
Ecclesiarum Praelatis suprascript'. quod eos a personali comparitione in
hujusmodi negotio Convocationis and Congregationis, dictis die and loco (ut
praemittitur) Divina favente Clementia celebrand'. excusatos non habere
intendimus ista Vice nisi ex causa necessaria tunc and ibidem allegand' and
proponend. and per nos approband'. sed Contumacias eorum qui absentes fuerint,
Canonice punire. Et praeterea, Vobis (ut supra) injungimus and mandamus, quod
omnibus and singulis Co-episcopis Suffraganeis provinciae nostrae Cantuar'
praedict'. injungatis and injungi faciatis, ut singuli eorum sigillatim de
facto suo quatenus pertinet ad eosdem, Nos seu Locumtenentem sive Commissarium
nostrum unum vel plures dictis die and loco per Literas little Patentes, Nomina
and Cognomina omnium and singulorum per eos respective citatorum continen.
distinct certificent and aperte. De die vero receptionis praesentium, and quid
in praemissis feceritis, Nos aut nostrum in hac part Locum-tenen' sive
Commissarium hujusmodi dictis die and loco debite certificari curetis per
literas vestras Patentes harum seriem una cum nominibus omnium and singulorum
Episcoporum Provinciae nostrae Cantuar'. Decanorum, Archidiaconorum, and
caeterorum Praelatorum vestrae Dioe^eseos in separata Schedula literis
Certificatoriis annectend'. complecten'. In cujus Rei Testimonium, Sigillum
nostrum Archiepiscopale praesentibus apponi fecimus. Dat. in Manerio nostro de
Lambeth, duodecimo die mensis Aprilis, Anno Domini Millesimo Sexcentesimo
Sexagesimo primo, Et nostrae Translationis Anno Primo, etc.

Sessio Prima.
DIE Mercurij, 8o. Viz. die Mensis Maij, Anno Domini 1661. Annoque Regni Domini
nostri Caroli secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae
Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. 13. Reverendus in Christo Pater and Dominus
Gilbertus Providentia divina London' Episcopus, inter horas nonam and decimam
ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, una cum nonnullis Reverendis in Christo Patribus
Confratribus and Co-episcopis suis, nec non Decanis, Archidiaconis, caeterisque
Clericis and Ministris, nec non Advocatis and Procuratoribus, and caeteris
Ministris Almae Curiae Cant' de Arcubus London', ab aedibus... Berwick in
Medicinis Doctoris intra Paul's Churchyard in Parochia Sancti Gregorij
Civitatis London'. notorie sit' and situat', usque ad and in parvum ostium
australe Ecclesiae Paulinae in Ecclesiam Cathedralem Sancti Pauli London'
pervenit; and ibidem Venerabilis vir Matthaeus Nicholas, in Legibus Doctor,
Decanus, Thomas Turner, Johannes Hacket and Edwardus Laysield, Sacrae
Theologiae Professores, Canonici Residentiarij dictae Ecclesiae Cathedralis,
caeterique Canonici and Praebendarij ejusdem Ecclesiae superpelliciis induti,
eum praestolabantur, and ad Chorum ipsius Ecclesie perduxerunt, comitantibus
eum Episcopis Provinciae Cant' similibus habitibus indutis. Et ibidem dictus
Reverendus Pater in stallo quodam collocatus fuit, caeterisque Episcopis
Suffraganeis Provinciae Cant'. habitibus suis in hujusmodi Convocationis
negotio folitis and consuetis, indutis, stallis Praebendariorum (jam pro
stallis usitatis) ex utraque part dicti Chori sedentibus, ac decantato per
Ministros Chori praedicti Hymno, Te Deum Laudamus, etc. lectoque Capitulo pro
lectione secunda istius diei, and aliis precibus matutinis juxta formam
Liturgiae peractis, and alio Hymno, O Lord make thy Servant CHARLES, etc.
cantato, Venerabilis Vir Thomas Pierce, S. Theologiae Professor, suggestum
usitatum ingressus fuit, ac ibidem Concionem vemustam and eloquentem sermon
Latino, ad Reverendos Patres and Populum and Clerum praesentes habuit, accepto
pro Themate versu 28 decimi quinti Capituli Act' Apostolorum, viz. Visum est
enim Spiritui Sancto and Nobis, nihil ultra imponere vobis oneris, quam haec
necessaria. Qua quidem Concione finita, ac decantato per Ministros Chori
praedicti alio Hymno, O Lord grant the King a long Life, etc. Reverendus Pater
Dominus Episcopus London. tanquam Locum-tenens Reverendissimi in Christo Patris
ac Domini Domini Providentia Divina Cant'. Archi-episcopi totius Angliae
Primatis and Metropolitani, legitime constitut'. Chorum praedict'. egressus, ac
Domum Capitularem (ut dicitur pro hac vice) Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi Pauli
London' praedict' ingressus, comitantibus eum caeteris Episcopis and Cleris
Praelatis Provinc' Cant'. assidentibus secum undique Episcopis Suffraganeis,
viz. Matthaeo Elien', Gulielmo Bathon' and Wellen', Roberto Oxon', Joanne
Roffen', Henrico Cicestren', Georgio Wigorn', Humfrido Sarum, Benjamino
Petriburgen', Edwardo Norwicen', Nicolao Hereford', and Gulielmo Gloucestren'
respective Episcopis personaliliter comparentibus, dictoque Reverendo Patre
Domino Episcopo London' pro Tribunali seden' Venerabilis vir Richardus Chaworth
Legum Doctor, dicti Reverendissimi Patris Vicarius in Spiritualibus generalis,
and Officialis Principalis legitime constitutus, praesentavit dicto Reverendo
Patri Domino Episcopo London' Literas quasdam Commissionales dicti
Reverendissimi Patris, dicto Domino Episcopo London' and aliis Co-episcopis
conjunctim and divisim direct'. Quibus Literis Commissionalibus per me
praefatum Willielmum Fisher, Notarium Publicum and Registrarii deputatum de
Mandato dicti Reverendi Patris public perlectis, dictus Reverendus Pater
Dominus Gilbertus London' Episcopus onus executionis earundem in se acceptavit
and decrevit procedendum fore juxta tenorem earundem.

Deinde Brevi Regio per dictum Dominum Richardum Chaworth praesentato, dicto
Reverendissimo Patri inscripto and directo, and per me praefatum Notarium
publicum antedictum, de mandato Domini Gilberti London' Episcopi public
perlecto, dictus Venerabilis Vir Richardus Chaworth, tanquam Vicarius in
Spiritualibus generalis Domini Episcopi London', exhibuit and praesentavit
Certificatorium super executione mandati citatorij and monitorij dicti
Reverendissimi Patris alias sibi praefato Domino Episcopo London' directi.
Cujus quidem Certificatorij tenor sequitur in haec verba, etc. Reverendissimo
in Christo Patri, ac Domino Domino Gulielmo Providentia divina Cant'
Archi-episcopo, totius, etc.

Quo quidem Certificatorio per me praefatum Willielmum Fisher, de Mandato dicti
Reverendi Patris, public lecto, praeconizatisque public omnibus and singulis
Reverendis Patribus Provinciae Cant' Episcopis Suffragneis in eodem
Certificatorio mentionatis; praefatus Reverendus Pater verbis Latinis conceptis
Clerum Domus Inferioris Convocationis in dicta domo Capitulari coram eo and
caeteris Praelatis constitutum, monuit, quatenus ad solitum and consuetum
Conventus sui locum sese conferentes, unum Virum gravem, doctum, and peritum,
de gremio suo provideant and eligant in eorum Prolocutorem sive Referendarium,
ipsumque sic electum exhibeant and praesentent coram Reverendissimo Patre, aut
ejus Locum-tenente sive Commissario die Jovis prox. decimo sexto die mensis jam
instantis Maij, inter horas 9 and 11, ante meridiem ejusdem diei in Capella
Regis Henrici 7. infra Ecclesiam Collegiatam B. Petri Westm'. Quo Clero
dimisso, ad locum solitum, ad effectum elegendi unum gravem, doctum, and
peritum Virum de gremio suo in eorum Prolocutorem sive Referendarium sese
conferebant, and post aliquem tractatum inter dictum Reverendum Patrem and
praefatos Reverendos Patre: Confratres suos, Venerabilis vir Matthaeus Nicholas
Legum Doctor, Decanus Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi Pauli London' praedictae, una
cum Venerabilibus viris Thoma Turner S. Theol. Professore, and Richardo Bayley
S. Theolog. Professore, a dicta Domo Inferiori ad hoc Electis, tam nomine suo
proprio quam totius Coetus dictae Domus, dicto Reverendo Patri significavit, se
and caeteros dictae Domus convenire, Venerabiles viros Henricum Fearne S.
Theologiae Professorem in eorum Prolocutorem, and Johannem Pearson S. Theolog.
Professorem in Praesentatorem dicti Prolocutoris respective unanimi consensu
elegisse. Quibus sic gestis, praefatus Reverendus Pater pronunciavit omnes and
singulos, Decanos, Archidiaconos, Capitula, Cleri Procuratores ac caeteros
quoscunque ad interessendum istis die, hora, and loco, in hujusmodi Synodo
Sacra sive Convocatione monitos and citatos, and nullo modo comparentes,
notorie Contumaces; poenas vero Contumaciarum suarum hujusmodi usque ad and in
decimum sextum instantis mensis Maij inter horas 9 and 11 ante Meridiem ejusdem
diei ad Ecclcsiam Collegiatam B. Petri Westm' praedict' reservando, and
reservabit, prout in Schedula Schedula contra Contumaces.
per dictum Reverendum Patrem lecta before liquet. Cujus quidem Schedulae
tenor sequitur and est talis. Viz. In Dei nomine, Amen. Nos Gilbertus, etc.
Postremo dictus Reverendus Pater Continuavit and Prorogavit praesentem
Convocationem sive Sacram Synodum, omniaque and singula Certificatoria istis
die, hora, and loco, introducta ac introducenda and non introducta, in eodem
statu quo nunc sunt usque ad and in praedictum decimum sextum diem jam
instantis Maij praedict'. inter horas 9 and 11. ante meridiem ejusdem diei, ad
Ecclesiam Collegiatam B. Petri Westminster. prout in alia Schedula Schedula
Continuationis.
per eum lecta tenoris sequentis continetur, viz. In Dei nomine Amen, Nos
Gilbertus, etc.

Certificatorium Archidiaconi Cant', Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, etc.

Secunda Sessio.
DIE Jovis decimo sexto die Mensis Maij, 1661. inter horas 9 and 11 ante
Meridiem ejusdem diei, Reverendo in Christo Patre ac Domino Gilberto London'
Episcopo, nec-non Reverendis Patribus Guilielmo Bathon' and Wellen', Matthaeo
Elien', Roberto Oxon', Johanne Roffen', Henrico Cicestren', Georgio Wigorn',
Humfrido Sarum, Benjamino Petriburgen', Georgio Asaphen', Guilielmo Meneven,
Hugone Landaven', Edwardo Norwicen' and Guilielmo Gloucestren', respective
Episcopis in Capella Regis Henrici 7. infra Ecclesiam Collegiatam B. Petri
Westm' congregatis, ante preces incoeptas, in praesentia mei Willielmi Fisher
Notarii Publici, etc. Comparuit personaliter Venerabilis vir Johannes Earls S.
Theol. Professor, Decanus Ecclesiae Collegiatae B. Petri Westm' praedict',
secum stantibus venerabilibus viris Matthaeo Nicholas Legum Doctore, Willielmo
Heywood... S. Theologiae respective Professoribus, and Ecclesiae Collegiatae
praedict' Praebendariis, ac Domino... and Johanne Allen Notario Publico, and
nonnullis aliis testibus. Qui quidem venerabilis vir Johannes Earls Decanus
antedictus tunc and ibidem dixit, allegavit, protestatus est and caetera fecit
prout in quadam Schedula Protestatio Decani VVestm'.
in pergameno script' and exarat' quam in manibus suis tunc and ibidem tenens
public legebat, in haec verba, Ego Johannes Earls, S. Th. Professor, Decanus
Ecclesiae Collegiatae B. Petri Westminster. ad comparend', etc. Et tunc Reverendus
Pater Dominus Gilbertus London' Episcopus tanquam Locum-tenens sive Praesidens,
etc: pro se and Confratribus suis ac omnibus and singulis Praelatis and Clero
suae Cant' Provinc' in hac praesenti Convocatione sive sacra Synodo Provinciali
jus and interesse habentibus Protestatus est, and caetera fecit, prout in alia
Schedula Protestatio Reverendi Patris, etc.
in papyro scripta, per dictum Reverendum Paetrem lecta, tunc and ibidem
continetur, viz. In Dei nomine. Cum haec Ecclesia Collegiata B. Petri Westm'
etc. praesentibus tunc and ibidem venerabili viro Richardo Chaworth Legum
Doctore, Reverendissimi in Christo Patris Domini Archi-episcopi Cant' Vicario
in Spiritualibus generali, Francisco Mundy... praefato Johanne Allen, Notariis
Publicis, ac nonnullis aliis testibus, etc. Quibus sic gestis, praenominatus
Reverendus Pater post intervallum temporis ad eum accersiri jussit Praelatos
and Clerum Domus Inferioris. Qui copiose sese praesentantes, exhiberi and sisti
fecerunt Venerabilem virum Henricum Fearne, S. Theologiae Professorem, Docunum
Ecclesiae Cathedralis Elien', in Prolocutorem totius Coetus praedict'. Domus
Inferioris ultima Sessione electum; quem venerabilis vir Johannes Pearson S.
Theol. Professor in Praesentatorem ista Sessione etiam electus, vice totius
Coetus praedict'. Domus inferioris, praemissa facunda and cloquenti Oratione
per eum prolat'. exhibuit and Praesentavit dicto Reverendo Patri and caeteris
Episcopis praedictis. Ac, facta alia Oratione eleganti per eundem Prolocutorem
sic praesentatum, praefatus Reverendus Pater Dominus Episcopus London' de
consensu Confratrum suorum praedictorum eundem Henricum Fearne electum, and
Electionem praedict' de Persona sua in Prolocutorem and Referendarium
praedict'. per aliam venustam and eloquentem Orationem Latinam commendavit and
approbavit. Tunc, dimisso Prolocutore cum Coetu Domus Inferioris praedict';
habitoque aliquandiu Tractatu inter dictum Reverendum Patrem and caeteros
Episcopos suffraganeos suos ut praefertur comparentes, de and super Precibus
specialibus pro die Nativitatis Domini nostri Regis, nec non pro faelicissima
Restauratione ejus ad and in regna sua, viz. 29 die mensis jam instantis Maij,
per quatuor Episcopos hujusmodi Domus, nempe Matthaeum Elien', Robertum Oxon',
Benjaminum Petriburgen', and Humfridum Sarum, respective Episcopos, in ea part
respective elect' and per 8 Praelatos sive Cleros Domus Inferioris eligendos,
concipiendus and Public isto die annuatim perlegendis; nec non etiam de and
super Precibus specialibus and particularibus in 30 diem mensis Januarij in
quolibet anno public peragendis and perlegendis, and per Reverendos Patres
Johannem Raffen', Hemicum Cicestren', Georgium Wigorn', and Edwardum Norwicen'
respective Episcopos in ea part ^aectos; and per octo Praelatos sive Cleros
dictae Domus inferioris in ea part respective el gendos, concipi^dis,
continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Tertia Sessio.
DIE Sabbati 18. Viz. die Mensis Maij, 1661. inter horas 9 and 11 ante Meridiem
ejusdem diei in Capella Regis Hen. 7. infra Ecclesiam Collegiatam Divi Petri
Westm'. Reverendus Pater Dominus Gilbertus London', Willielmus Bathon' and
Wellen', etc. respective Episcopi, congregati, primo and ante omnia preces, Deo
Op. Maximo flexis genibus humiliter fundebant; Precibusque peractis, praefato
Reverendo Patre in praesentia mei Willielmi Fisher Notarij Publici, etc. pro
Tribunali sedente, assidentibus secum praedictis Reverendis Patribus;
Reverendus Pater Dominus Elien' Episcopus tam pro se quam aliis Episcopis, etc.
introduxit Preces de and super Nativitate Domini nostri Regis and Restauratione
sua, etc. per dictos Episcopos ultima Sessione electos, conceptas; and tradidit
eas Domino Commissario sive Locum-tenenti. Et post aliquot tractat'. dictus
Dominus Episcopus London', cum consensu Confratrum suorum hujusmodi, voluit ad
se accesiri Dominum Prolocutorem cum quibusdam aliis e Coetu Domus Inferioris,
qui intravit cum sex dictae Domus Inferioris, and tradidit dicto Prolocutori
dictas preces sic (ut praefertur) conceptas, per eum and totam Domum Inferior'
considerandas and consentiendas. Deinde, Dominus Commissarius intimavit dicto
Prolocutori de Precibus specialibus and particularibus pro baptizatione
nonnullorum Adultorum concipiendis and formandis; and pro conceptione earundem,
dictus Reverendus Pater, cum consensu Confratrum suorum, tres Reverendos Patres
hujus Domus, viz. Dominum Humphridum Sarum, Benjaminum Petriburgen', and
Georgium Asaph' respective Episcopos elegit, and voluit Dominum Prolocutorem
sex Cleros e dicta Domo Inferiori eligere ad procedendum cum dictis Episcopis
in dicto negotio.

Quibus sic gestis, dimissus fuit Prolocutor una cum sex aliis praedict'; and
post tractatum cum Episcopis per dict' Domin' Commissarium habitum, dictus
Commissarius continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Quarta Sessio.
DIE Mercurij, 22o die Mensis Maij 1661. inter horas [nonam and undecimam
ejusd' diei] alias designatas, in praesentia mei Willielmi Fisher Notarij
publici, etc. Reverendus in Christo Pater Dominus Johannes permissione divina
Roffen' Episcopus, etc. Congregati, primo and ante omnia preces, etc. Dictisque
precibus peractis and finitis, dicto Reverendo Patre Domino Johanne Roffen'
Episcopo pro tribunali sedente, assidentibus secum, etc. dictus Reverendus
Pater post aliquot tract. inter dictos Reverendos Patres habit'. continuavit,
etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Quinta Sessio.
DIE Veneris 24o. Viz. die mensis Maij, etc. inter horas 9 and 11 ante Meridiem
ejusdem diei, etc. Reverendus Pater Dominus Willielmus, etc. Bathon' and
Wellen'. Episcopus, etc. post aliquot tractat' inter dictos Reverendos
respective Patres habit'. and fact. etc. continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula,
etc.

Sexta Sessio.
DIE Martis 28o Viz. die mensis Maij, inter horas 9 and 11 ante Meridiem
ejusdem diei, etc. dictus Reverendus Pater, etc. post aliquot tractat' habit'
and fact' inter dictos Reverendos Patres, etc. Continuavit, etc. prout in
Schedula, etc.

Septima Sessio.
DIE Veneris 31o die mensis Maij, inter horas 9 and 11 ante Merid' ejusd' diei,
etc. introducta prius per dictum Episcopum Sarum forma precum publicarum pro
Baptizatione Adult' celebrand' and per me Willielmum Fisher, Notarium Publicum
antedictum, de mandato dicti Praesidentis, public perlect', and per dictos
Reverendos Patres unanimiter approbat'; and lecta tam petitione cujusdam Ogleby
quam literis Regiis hujusmodi domo direct'. de and super commendatione Biblij
impensis dicti Ogleby; and post commendationem ejusdem Petitionis, literarum
Regiarum and libri praedicti Domo Inferiori, etc. and post aliquot tractat',
inter dictos Reverendos Patres, dictus Reverendus Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc.
prout in Schedula, etc.

Octava Sessio.
SEptimo die mensis Junij, inter horas 9 and 11 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei,
etc. comparuit personaliter Richardus Aldworth Armiger, and praesentavit dicto
Reverendo Praesidenti sive Locumtenen' Licentiam quandam Regiam Sigillo magno
Angliae sigillat' de Emendando, reformando, exponendo, and corrigendo,
Constitutiones and Canones alias factas; nec non de ordinando and consiciendo
nonnullas novas Constitutiones, Ordinationes sive Capitula, statum
Ecclesiasticum, sinceram Religionem, and utilitatem Ecclesiae Anglicanae
concernen' and tenden'; una cum nonnullis aliis Provisionibus in eadem Licentia
insertis, sub tenore verborum sequen' viz. Charles by the Grace of God, etc.
Quibus per me Willielm' Fisher in has part Actorum scribam public tunc and
ibidem alta voce coram dictis respective Patribus perlect', dictus Reverendus
Pater and caeteri Episcopi secum assidentes, cum omnimoda reverentia,
subjectione, and humilitate gratanter acceptarunt and receperunt. Eademque
Licentia sic lecta, dictus Reverendus Pater, post intervallum temporis, ad eum
accersiri jussit Prolocutorem, Praelatos and Clerum Domus Inferioris. Quibus
copiose sese praesentantibus coram eo caeterisque Episcopis antedictis, modo
(ut praefertur) secum assiden', and dicta Licentia denuo, de mandato dicti
Reverendi Patris, per me Notarium Publicum antedict' public perlecta, dictus
Reverendus Pater praefatum Prolocutorem, and alios de Domo Inferiori Decanos,
Archidiaconos, Capitula and Cleri Procuratores ibidem praesentes voluit ut ipsi
inter se convenirent and mature excogitarent de Canonibus and Constitutionibus
statum Ecclesiasticum and Christi Religionem in Ecclesia Anglicana concernen'
concipiendis, and quicquid inde senserint sive excogitaverint in scriptis
redigant, and coram ipso Reverendo Patre and Confratribus suis Episcopis
exhibeant. Deinde, dimisso Prolocutore cum Coetu Domus Inferioris, introducta
fuit Copia Proclamationis per Attournatum Regium generalem (ut asserebatur)
concept' and dictis respective Episcopis destinat' pro Jejunio Observando; and
eadem de mandato dicti Reverendi Patris per me Notarium Publicum antedictum
public perlecta, dictus Reverendus Pater dictam Copiam retradidit. Tunc,
habito tractatu inter dictum Dominum Reverendum Patrem and caeteros Episcopos
suffraganeos suos ut praefertur comparentes, de and super precibus specialibus
and particularibus pro Jejunio juxta Proclamationem praedict' 12 die jam
instan' mensis Junij celebrando and observando, per quatuor Episcopos hujusmodi
domus, nempe Matthaeum Elien', Robertum Oxon', Humfridum Sarum, and Benjaminum
Petriburg', respective Episcopos in ea part respective electos, and per 8
Praelatos sive Cleros Domus Inferioris eligend', concipend' dictus Reverendus
Pater, etc. continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Nona Sessio.
DIE Veneris 14o die mensis Junij, inter horas 9 and 11 ante Meridiem ejusdem
diei, etc. dictus Reverendus Pater, etc. post aliquod tractatum, etc.
continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Decima Sessio.
DIE Mercurij 19 die mensis Junij inter horas 9 and 11 ante Merid' ejusd' diei,
etc. Reverendus Pater Dominus Episcopus London' Praesidens in praesentiis
Reverendorum Patrum Confratrum suorum significavit and intimavit, Serenissimum
Dominum nostrum Carolum Regem ex gratia sua speciali Licentiam sive
Commissionem magno suo sigillo Angliae sigillat', ad eundem effectum prout
prior Commissio sive Licentia alias introduct' suit ac erat, curasse, ac
potestatem dedisse Archi-episcopo and caeteris Episcopis ac Clero Provinc'
Cant'. ad procedend', emendand', reformand', exponend', corrigend', ordinand'
and conficiend'. prout in eisdem continetur. Quorum Reverendissimum in Christo
Patrem Dominum Dominum Archi-episcopum Cant', Gilbertum London', Willielmum
Bathon' and Wellen' and Matthaeum Elien', respective Episcopos in dicta
Convocatione pro rebus Ecclesiasticis perficiend'. juxta Commissionem and
Licentiam Regiam praedict dictus Dominus noster Rex uni esse voluit and
mandavit; and eandem Licentiam sive Commissionem produxit and exhibuit sub
tenore verboruta sequentium, viz. Charles by the Grace of God, etc. Licentia
Secunda Dom' notiri Regis.
Qua per me praefatum Willielmum Fisher Notarium Publicum in hac part Actorum
Scriham sive Registrarium deputatum public tunc and ibidem perlecta, dictus
Reverendus Pater Dominus Episcopus London', Praesidens antedictus, una cum
dictis Reverendis Patribus Confratribus suis, tractatum sive colloquium habuit
de and super Examinatione Canonum alias fact'. ac de Jurisdictione Ecclesiae,
nec non de Regulatione Clericorum and Ecclesiasticorum Officiariorum; and ad
eundem effectum, dictus Reverendus Pater, cum unanimi consensu dictorum
Reverendorum Patrum Confratrum suorum, elegit duodecim Episcopos viz. Dominum
Willielmum Bathon' and Wellen'. Matthaeum Elien. Robertum Oxon. Johannem
Roffen. Henricum Cicestren. Humfridum Sarum, Georgium Wigorn. Robertum Lincoln.
Georgium Asaphen. Gulielmum Meneven. Benjaminum Petriburgen. and Johannem Exon.
respective Episcopos, and commisit vices suas eisdem aut tribus eorum ad
procedend' in dicto negotio, and viginti quatuor domus Inferioris per dictam
domum eligend. aut sex eorundem; ad conveniend'. in magna aula Le Savoy die
Sabbati prox. hora tertia post Meridiem, and postea diebus Martis and and Jovis
in qualibet hebdomada dictis hora and loco, donec dictum negotium perficiatur.
Et ordinavit ad introducendum eorum relationem quam primum poterint. Ita tamen,
quod been liceat and licebit omnibus aliis Reverendis Patribus and Clero ad
conveniendum and consulendum cum dictis respective Episcopis, dictis loco and
tempore, de and super praemissis, quando and quoties sibimet ipfis videbitur
expediens. Tunc dictus Reverendus Pater Dominus Episcopus London', cum consensu
dictorum Reverendorum Patrum Confratrum suorum, ad eum accersiri jussit
Prolocutorem, Praelatos, and Clerum Domus Inferioris; quibus copiose sese
praesentantibus coram eo caeterisque Episcopis antedictis modo (ut praefertur)
secum assidentibus, dictus Reverendus Pater omnia and singula praemissa dict'
Prolocutori and Domui Inferiori significavit, and voluit dictum Prolocutorem ad
eligendum viginti quatuor e gremio suo ad conveniendum cum dictis Reverendis
Patribus, sic ut praefertur, electis, dictis diebus and luco de and super
consultatione praemissorum. Dictoque Prolocutore and Coetu Domus Inferioris
dimisso, and post aliquem tractatum inter dictos Reverendos Patres, dictus
Reverendus Pater Dominus Praesidens antedictus, etc. Continuavit, etc. proxt in
Schedula, etc.

Sessio XI.
DIE Veneris 21o die mensis Junij, inter horas 9 and 11 ante Meridiem ejusd'
diei, etc. Reverendo Patre Domino Episcopo London' pro tribunali sedente,
assidentibus secum dictis Reverendis respective Patribus, nec non
Reverendissimo in Christo Patre ac Domino Accepto Providentia divina Ebar.
Archi-episcopo, etc.... Dunelmen' Episcopo, and... Cicestron' Episcopo, dictus
Reverendus Pater Dominus Episcopus London' una cum dictis Reverendis Patribus
Confratribus suis tractatum habuit de conceptione unius libri Articulorum in
Visitatione cujuslibet Episcopi Oeconomis and Inquisitoribus in qualibet
Dioecesi ministrandorum: and ad eunden: intuitum dictus Reverendus Pater, cum
unanimi consensu dictorum Confratrum suorum, sex Episcopos Confratres suos
nempe Willielmum Bathon' and Wellen', Matthaeum Elien', Robertum Oxon',
Humfridum Sarum, Robertum Lincoln', and Willielmum Gloucestren' elegit, and
commisit vices suas ^isdem aut eorum tribus ad concipiend' and formand' dictos
Articulos, etc. ad conveniend' in aula magna in Le Savoy die Sabbati prox. ad
septimanam hora tertia post meridiem, and postea diebus Lunae and Sabbati in
qualibet hebdomada, dictis hora and loco, donec dictum Opus finiatur. Ita tamen
quod been liceat and licebit omnibus aliis Reverendis Patribus ad conveniend'
and consulend'. cum dictis Reverendis Patribus dictis loco and tempore, de and
super praemissis, quoties and quando sibimet ipsis videbitur expediens: Et
dictus Pater, de and cum consensu Confratrum suorum Episcoporum Cant' Provinc',
petiit and rogavit Reverendos Patres... Dunelmen'... Carliolen' and... Cestren'
respective Episcopos infra Provinc. Cant' in the Original, by Mistake.
Ebor. dictis hora and loco, dictis respective Episcopis in dicto negotio esse
interessentes and tunc dictus Reverendus Pater Dominus Episcopus London', cum
consensu dictorum confratrum suorum sibi assiden', misit pro Prolocutore and
sex aliis Domus Inferioris ad introducendum Nomina e gremio suo Elect'. ad
conveniend' cum Episcopis ultima Sessione respective elect'. de and super
negotiis tunc tractat'. Quo Prolocutore, una cum sex aliis dictae Domus
Inferioris advenien', dictus Prolocutor praesentavit dicto Reverendo Patri
Domino Episcopo London' Schedulam quandam in papyro scriptam continen'. nomina
Praelatorum and Cleri domus Inferioris per eos elect', scilicet, Josephum
Henchman Cicestren', Matthaeum Nicholas Legum Doctorem Sancti Pauli London',
Michaelem Honeywood S. Theol. Professorem Lincoln', Robertum Creyton S. Th.
Professorem Wellen', Willielmum Brough, S. Th. Professorem Glom', Henricum
Fearne, S. Th. Professor' Elien', and Willielmum Paul Lichfield. respective
Decanos; nec non Georgium Hall Cant'. Anthonium Sparrow Sudbury, Robertum Pory
Midd'. Grindallum Sheafe Wellen', Johannem Peirson Surr', Marcum Frank Sancti
Albani, Anthonium Hawles Sarum, and Jasperum Main Cicestren' respective
Archidiaconos; nec non Herbertum Thorndike, Josephum Crouther, Willielmum
Brabant, Petrum Gunning, Johannem Sudbury, Johannem Priaux,... Marten,
Willielmum Pulleyn, Willielmum Heywood and... Fleetwood S. Th. respective
Professores, respective Procuratores Cleri infra suas respective Dioeceses.
Quibus nominibus per me Notarium Publicum, de mandato Reverendi Patris
Praesidentis antedicti public perlect', dictus Reverendus Pater acceptavit
eorum respective nomina and personas, etc. and dimisit dictum Prolocutorem una
cum Coetu suo praedict'. and tunc habito aliquo tractatu inter dictos
Reverendos Patres, dictus Reverendus Pater Continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula,
etc.

Sessio XII.
DIE Mercurij, 26 die Mensis Junij, inter horas 9 and 11 ante Meridiem ejusd'
diei, etc. dictus Reverendus Pater, etc. post aliquod tractatum, etc.
Continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XIII.
DIE Veneris 28. die Mensis Junij, inter horas 9 and 11. ante Meridiem ejusd'
diei, etc. dictus Reverendus Pater Matthaeus Elien' Episcopus, etc. post
tractatum aliquod, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XIV.
DIE Mercurij 3o Viz. die Mensis Julij, inter horas 9 and 11 ante Meridiem
ejusd' diei, etc. Reverendo Patre Domino Episcopo London' pro tribunali seden',
assiden' secum Reverendis respective Patribus, nec non... Durham' and...
Carliolen' respective assiden', dictus Reverendus Pater Dominus Episcopus
London', una cum dictis Reverendis Patribus Confratribus suis tractatum de and
super consideratione Actus quoad Impressionem, etc. habuit; and ad eam
intentionem dictus Reverendus Pater, cum una^imi consensu dictorum Confratrum
suorum, octo Episcopos e dicto gremio, nempe... Dunelm', Robertum Oxon',
Humfridum Sarum, Benjaminum Petriburgen',... Carliolen',... Cestren', Edwardum
Norwicen', and Willielmum Glouc' respective Episcopos elegit; quibus, aut eorum
tribus, dictus Reverendus Pater, cum consensu praedict' commisit vices suas ad
effectum praedict'. ad conveniendum in aliquo loco, seu aliquibus diebus per
eos inter sese designandis; and deinde post aliud tractatum inter dictum
Reverendum Patrem and dictos Reverendos Patres habit', and fact', dictus
Reverendus Pater Dominus Episcopus London', etc. continuavit, etc. juxta
Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XV.
DIE Veneris 5o. Viz. die Mensis Julij, inter horas 9 and 11 ante Merid' ejusd'
diei, etc. dictus Reverendus Pater post aliquod tractat. etc. continuavit, etc.
juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XVI.
DIE Mercurij, 10. Viz. die Mensis Julij, inter heras 9 and 11 ante Merid'
ejusd' diei, etc. dictus Reverendus Pater, etc. post aliquod tractat. etc.
continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XVII.
DIE Veneris 12. Viz. die Mensis Julij, inter horas 9 and 11. ante Merid'
ejusd' diei, etc. dictus Reverendus Pater, etc. post aliquod tract. etc.
Continuavit, etc. juxta tenorem Schedulae, etc.

Sessio XVIII.
DIE Mercurij 17. die Mensis Julij, inter horas 9 and 11 ante Merid' ejusd'
diei, etc. precibus finitis and peractis, Reverendus Pater Dominus Episcopus
London', una cum dictis respective Episcopis Confratribus suis secum assiden'
pro tribunali sedebat, and tunc post aliquod tractat'. inter se habit'
Reverendus Pater Dominus Episcopus Sarum tam nomine suo proprio quam vices
geren', etc. introduxit and praesentavit Domino Episcopo Praesidenti nonnullos
Canones in papyro script' and exarat'. Quibus public perlect' and nonnullis
Emendationibus in eisdem factis, Dominus Episcopus London. Praesidens
antedictus, cum consensu Confratrum suorum antedictorum, retradidit dictos
Canones dicto Episcopo Sarum pro ulteriori consideratione desuper habenda: and
post alium paululum tractatum inter sese habit', and fact'. Continuavit, etc.
juxtatenorem Schedulae, etc.

Sessio XIX.
DIE Martis 19. Viz. die mensis Julij, inter horas 9 and 11 ante Meridiem
ejusdem diei, etc. Dominus Episcopus Glouc. praesentavit Domino Praesidenti and
caeteris Episcopis nonnullos Canones conceptos and in papyro script'. Quibus
public perlectis, and nonnullis Emendationibus in eisdem factis, Dominus
Episcopus London' Praesidens antedictus, cum consensu Confratrum suorum,
retradidit eos dicto Domino Episcopo pro ulteriori consideratione and revisione
corundem habend'; and post tractatum aliquod inter se habit' and fact', etc.
Continuavit, etc. juxta tenorem Schedulae, etc.

Sessio XX.
DIE Lunae 22 die Mensis Julij, inter horas 9 and 11 ante Meridiem ejusdem
diei, etc. Nonnullis Canonibus per Reverendos Patres, Willielmum Bathon' and
Wellen', and Johannem Warner Roffen'. Episcopos, tam nomine suo proprio quans
aliis in ea part Vicesgeren' and public perlectis, Dominus Episcopus London'
una cum consensu Confratrum suorum Episcoporum antedictorum, retradidit eos
dictis respective Episcopis, and little Confratribus, pro ulteriori
consideratione super cisdem habend'; and post aliquod tractatum inter sese
habit', and fact', Continuavit, etc. juxta tenorem Schedulae, etc.

Sessio XXI.
DIE Mercurij 24 die mensis Julij, inter horas 9 and 11 ante Meridiem ejusdem
diei, etc. Reverendus Pater, etc. post nonnullum tractatum, etc. Continuavit,
etc. juxta tenorem Schedulae, etc.

Sessio XXII.
DIE Veneris 26 die mensis Julij, inter horas 9 and 11 ante Meridiem ejusdem
diei, etc. Reverendus Pater, etc. post aliquot tractat', etc. Continuavit, etc.
juxta tenorem Schedulae, etc.

Sessio XXIII.
DIE Sabbati 27 mensis Julij, inter horas secundam and quartam post Meridiem,
etc. Reverendus Pater Dominus Episcopus London', Praesidens, etc. una cum
dictis Confratribus suis secum assiden'. pro tribunali sedebat; and facta prius
Subscriptione per dictos respective Episcopos pro Regali benevolentia Domino
nostro Regi prasentanda, and post aliquot tractat', etc. Continuavit, etc.
juxta tenorem Schedulae, etc.

Sessio XXIV.
DIE Mercurij, ultimo, viz. die mensis Julij, inter horas 9 and 11 ante
Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc. Reverendus Pater, etc. post aliquod tractat', etc.
Continuavit, etc. juxta tenorem Schedulae, etc.

Sessio XXV.
DIE Jovis 21 die Mensis Novembris, inter horas secundam and quartam, etc.
Literae Domini nostri Regis Domino Archiepiscopo Cant' direct'. and manu sua,
and sigillo suo privat' communit'. fuerunt introductae, and de mandato dicti
Reverendi Patrispublice perlectae per me Notarium Publicum antedict'; dictusque
Reverendus Pater Praesidens antedictus and caeteri Episcopi secum assidentes,
cum omnimoda reverentia, subjectione, and humilitate, easdem gratanter
acceptarunt and receperunt; and post intervallum temporis, dictus Reverendus
Pater, de and cum consensu Confratrum suorum, ad eum accersiri jussit
Prolocutorem, Praelatos, and Clerum Domus inferioris. Quibus sese
praesentantibus coram dicto Reverendo Praesidente caeterisque Episcopis
antedictis, modo (ut praefertur) secum assiden'. and in praesentiis dicti
Prolocutoris, Praelat', and Cleri Domus Inferioris praedict' dictae literae
Regiae, de mandato dicti Praesidentis per me Notarium Publicum antedictum
fuerant public perlectae. Et deinde, dimisso Prolocutore, cum Coetu Domus
Inferioris, dictus Reverendus Pater una cum dictis Reverendis Patribus
Confratribus suis tractatum and colloquium habuit de Revisione Libri publicarum
Precum, etc. juxta potestat' and Libertat'. per easdem Regias eis concess. etc.
Et ad eundem effectum, dictus Reverendus Pater, cum unanimi consensu Confratrum
suorum, elegit Reverendos in Christo Patres... Dunelmen', Matthaeum Elien',
Robertum Oxon', Johannem Roffen', Humfridum Sarum, Georgium Wigorn', Robertum
Lincoln', and Willielmum Gloucestren'. and commisit vices suas eisdem, aut
eorum tribus ad minus, ad procedendum in dicto negotio; and ordinavit eos ad
conveniendum apud Palatium Reverendi Patris Domini Episcopi Elien'. hora quinta
post meridiem cujuslibet diei (exceptis diebus Dominicis,) donec dictum
negotium perficiatur. Et postea consensum fuit inter dictos Episcopos pro
meliori and citiori festinatione dicti negotij, ut dictus Liber Publicarum
Precum revideatur in hac Domo pro praesenti; and magna part ejusdem perlecta
and revisa usque ad... dictus Reverendus Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta
tenorem Schedulae, etc.

Sessio XXVI.
DIE Veneris 22 die mensis Novembris, inter horas 8 and 9 ante Meridiem ejusd'
diei, etc. Reverendus Pater, etc. post ulteriorem progressum Revisionis Libri
publicarum Precum fact'. etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta tenorem Schedulae, etc.

Sessio XXVII.
Eodem die inter horas secundam and quartam post meridiem, etc. post ulteriorem
progressum Revisionis Libri publicarum Precum per eos fact' dictus Dominus
Episcopus London', etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XXVIII.
DIE Sabbati 23 die mensis Novembris, etc. inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem,
etc. Reverendus Pater, etc. post paululum tractat. de and cum consensu
Confratrum suorum, ad eum accersiri jussit Prolocutorem solum; quo adveniente,
dictus Reverendus Pater tradidit ei partem Libri publicarum precum per
hujusmodi domum examinat'. and revis and in mandatis dedit, ut dictus
Prolocutor una cum Clero dictae Domus Inferioris dictam partem cum omni
celeritate, qua potuit, revideat, and emendet, si sit necessarium. Dictoque
Prolocutore dimisso, and ulteriori in Revisione residui libri publicarum precum
progressu habit' and fact', dictus Reverendus Pater Continuavit, etc. juxta
Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XXVIII.
EOdem die inter horas secundam and quartam post Meridiem, etc. Reverendus
Pater, etc. ulteriorum progressum in Revisione Libri Publicarum precum fecit;
and post aliquod tractat' dictus Reverendus Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta
Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XXIX.
DIE Lunae 25 die mensis Novembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem eiusdem
diei, etc. ulteriori progressu in Revisione libri Publicarum precum [fact']
Dominus Praesidens antedictus, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XXX.
DIE Martis 26 die mensis Novembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusd'
diei, etc. dictus Reverendus Pater, etc. post ulteriorem progressum in
Revisione libri Publicarum precum habit' and fact', etc. Continuavit, etc.
juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XXXI.
DIE Mercurij 27 die mensis Novembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem
ejusdem diei, etc. dictus Reverendus Pater, etc. post paululum tractat', de and
cum consensu Confratrum suorum, ad eum accersiri jussit Prolocutorem solum. Quo
adveniente, dictus Prolocutor retradidit partem libri Publicarum Precum per
Domum Inferiorem examinat'. and revis' una cum notula sive Schedula
Emendationum sive Alterationum per eos fact'; quam notulam sive Schedulam
obtulit Domino Praesidenti pro ejus and Confratrum suorum consideratione and
consultatione, etc. Deinde, acceptata dicta notula sive Schedula per dictum
Praesidentem, dictus Praesidens dedit in manibus dicti Prolocutoris residuam
partem libri publicarum precum, and requisivit dictum Prolocutorem ut ille una
cum domo sua eundem omni cum celeritate revideat; and post revisionem ejusdem
dicto Praesidenti retradat. Eoque dimisso, ac dicta Schedula in part per
dictum Praesidentem and Confratres suos secum assiden' lecta and examinata,
dictus Reverendus Pater Praesidens antedict', etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta
Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XXXII.
DIE Jovis 28 Novembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Schedula sive alterat' alias per Prolocutorem nomine Domus Inferioris
introduct', revis' and examinat' and part Psalmorum Davidis perlect' and
recitat'. idem Reverendus Pater Dominus Praesidens, etc. Continuavit, etc.
juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XXXIII.
DIE Veneris 29 Novembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei,
etc. post Revisionem aliquam libri de Consecratione Diaconorum, Presbyterorum
and Episcoporum habit' and fact', dictus Reverendus Pater Praesidens
antedictus, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XXXIV.
DIE Lunae 2o die mensis Decembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusd'
diei, etc. Praefatium sive Exordium libri publicarum precum fuit introduct' and
public perlect'. and dictus Reverendus Pater Praesidens antedictus curam pro
Examinatione and Consideratione ejusdem Reverendis Patribus Matthaeo Elien',
Roberto Oxon', Humfrido Sarum, and Georgio Asaphen', respective Episcopis,
commisit; and post aliquod tractat', etc. dictus Reverendus Pater, etc.
Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XXXV.
DIE Martis 3o Decembris inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
post paululum tractat', etc. dictus Reverendus Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc.
juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XXXVI.
DIE Mercurij 4o die mensis Decembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem
ejusd' diei, etc. post tractatum, etc. dictus Reverendus Pater, etc.
Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XXXVII.
DIE Jovis 5o die mensis Decembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusd'
diei, etc. Magister Pell introduxit Calendarium libro Publicarum precum
annectendum; and post inspectionem ejusdem, dictus Reverendus Pater Praesidens
antedictus, de and cum cum consensu Confratrum suorum, retulit and commisit
examinationem and revisionem ejusdem Domino Episcopo Carliolen'. Et deinde
habito tractatu de Forma Precum concipienda super alto Mari usitanda and
observanda, idem Reverendus Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XXXVIII.
DIE Veneris 6o. Viz. die mensis Decembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem
ejusdem diei, etc. Praefatio sive Exordio libri publicarum precum, per
Episcopos seu eorum aliquos, quibus cura examinationis ejusdem fuit alias
commissa, introducto, and in part public perlecto, idem Reverendus Pater,
etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XXXIX.
DIE Sabbati 7o die mensis Decembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusd'
diei, etc. habito tractatu, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XL.
DIE Lunae 9o Decembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Nonnullae Emendationes concernentes funera and funeralia personarum super alto
Mari deceden' and sepult', and Comminatione and... mulierum parturien'. fuerunt
introductae and perlectae, in aliqua part; Et hiis peractis, dicti Reverendi
Patres unanimi consensu and assensu in votis dederunt pro unica Forma Precum
tam ante quam post Sermonem sive Orationem praedicatam usitanda and observanda
per Ministros intra Provinc. Cant'. and habito alio tractatu inter eos dictus
Dominus Praesidens, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XLI.
DIE Martis 10 die mensis Decembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusd'
diei, etc. Nonnullis Emendationibus in comminatione in libro Publicarum precum
mentionat' citra Introductione earundem, a Domo Inferiori introduct' per
Episcopos fact. and post aliquot tractat'. desuper, Reverendus Pater Elien'
Episcopus, de and cum consensu Confratrum suorum hujusmodi, voluit ad se
accersiri Dominum Prolocutorem ad Revidend. dictas Emendationes. Quo
adveniente, associat' cum venerabilibus viris Johanne Barwick, Decano Ecclesiae
Cathedralis Sancti Pauli London', and... Brough Decano Glouc', dictus
Locum-tenens ostendit dictas Emendationes, per Domum Superiorem, ut praefertur,
fact', and tunc and ibidem perlect', and ordinavit eum ad consulend' Domum suam
Inferiorem de and super eisdem. Dictoque Prolocutore dimisso, cum Confratribus
suis, idem Locumtenens, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta tenorem Schedulae, etc.

Sessio XLII.
DIE Mercurij 11 die mensis Decembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusd'
diei, etc. post aliquot tractat. etc. Reverendus Pater Dom. Matthaeus Elien',
etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XLIII.
DIE Jovis 12 die mensis Decembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusd'
diei, etc. Dominus Prolocutor cum consensu, ut asserebatur, totius Domus
Inferioris ad Praesiden'. and Domum Superiorem missus est, ad petend' se cum
tribus vel duobus aliis e domo Inferiori admitti ad Conferend' cum Dominis
Episcopis in Domo sua seden'. Dictoque Prolocutore una cum... Brough Decano
Glouc. and duobus aliis Domus Inferioris, admisso, and adveniente, dictus
Prolocutor praesentavit Domino Praesidenti and tradidit in manibus suis
nonnullas papyri Schedas, Emendationes alicujus partis libri publicarum precum
concernentes; quibus perlectis, and habita consideratione diligenti desuper,
and approbatione earundem, dictoque Prolocutore dimisso, idem Praesidens
antedictus, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XLIV.
DIE Veneris 13 Decembris, inter horas 8 and 10, etc. Reverendus Pater una cum
Confratribus, etc. tractatum habuerunt de eligendo personas aptas and idoneas
tam ab hujusmodi Domo quam a Domo Inferiori, pro diligenti Examinatione and
Revisione Libri publicarum precum and administrationis Sacramentorum,
aliorumque Rituum Ecclesiae Anglicanae, debita forma script' and exarat', and
tandem idem Reverendus Pater, de and cum consensu confratrum suorum, nominavit,
and commisit curam pro Examinatione and Revisione ejusdem Reverendis Patribus
Humfrido Sarum, Georgio Asaphen', Richardo Carliolen', and Willielmo Glouc'
respective Episcopis, nomine Domus Superioris; nec non Prolocutor Domus
Inferioris nominat. commisit curam Roberto Pory, Johanni Pearson... Sparrowe,
S. Theol. respective Professoribus, nomine Domus Inferioris; and deinde
nonnullis Emendationibus alias in Praefatio dicti Libri Publicarum Precum, etc.
fact' and introduct', nec non quibusdam novis Collectis public perlectis and
revisis, idem Reverendus Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XLV.
DIE Sabbati 14. Viz. die mensis Decembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem
ejusdem diei, etc. Reverendus Pater Dominus Episcopus Norwicen' introduxit and
in manus Domini Praesidentis tradidit formam cujusdam Precis alias per eum
concept. concern'. Deo gratias pro generalibus Misericordiis public usitand':
qua Prece public perlecta, and post aliquot tractat. desuper habit' and fact',
idem Reverendus Pater Dominus Praesidens antedict', etc. Continuavit, etc.
juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XLVI.
DIE Mercurij 18 Decembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei,
etc. post tractat, etc. dictus Reverendus Vir, Praesidens antedictus, etc.
Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XLVII.
DIE Jovis 19 Decembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
habito tractatu inter eos de Forma Subscriptionis libro Publicarum Precum per
eos faciend'. tandem idem Reverendus Pater, etc. de and cum consensu Confratrum
suorum praedict'. commisit curam and considerationem concipiendi dictam formam
Reverendis in Christo Patribus Johanni Dunelmen', and Humfrido Sarum,
respective Episcopis, una cum Doctore Chaworth Vicario in Spiritualibus
generali Domini Episcopi London. nec non Doctore Burrell, Vicario in
Spiritualibus generali Domini Episcopi Dunelmen' assisten' and tunc post
tractatum, etc. dictus Reverendus Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta
Schedulam, etc.

Postea, nempe inter horas secundam and quartam post meridiem ejusdem diei,
dicti Reverendi viri Dominus Johannes Dunelmen' and Humfridus Sarum respective
Episcopi, una cum dictis respective Cancellar' and Vicariis in Spiritualibus
Generalibus praedict' apud Officium Registrarij Principalis Domini
Archiepiscopi Cant' intra Parochiam S. Gregorij London', sit', Convenerunt; and
in praesentiis mei Willielmi Fisher and Francisci Mundy, Notariorum respective
publicorum, inspectis prius nonnullis Recordis and Libris antiquis, and
Archivis ibidem remanen' and fideliter custodit', dicti Reverendi Patres Formam
Subscriptionis Libro Publicarum Precum faciend', unanimi consensu and assensu
conceperunt, and desuper concordarunt.

Sessio XLVIII.
DIE Veneris 20 Decembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusdem diei, etc.
Librum Precum publicarum, Administrationis Sacramentorum, aliorumque Rituum
Ecclesiae Anglicanae, una cum forma and modo Ordinandi and Consecrandi
Episcopos, Presbyteros, and Diaconos, (juxta literas Regiae Majestatis eis in
hac part directas revisum and... paginas continen'. and per Reverendissimum in
Christo Patrem and Dominum Dominum Guilielmum Providentia Divina Cant'.
Archiepiscopum, totius Angliae Primatem and Metropolitanum prius redact'.
recept' approbat' and subscript';) dicti Episcopi ejusdem Provinciae in Sacra
Provinciali Synodo legitime congregati unanimi assensu and consensu in formam
redegerunt, receperunt, and approbarunt, eisdemque subscripserunt. Et postea
omnes Episcopi praedicti tunc praesen' and congregat', exceptis Reverendis
Patribus Dominis Oxon', Asaphen', and Landaven' Episcopis, ad Domum Parliamenti
sese contulerunt, and dictos respective Episcopos in dicta domo Convocationis
reliquerunt ad videndum Clerum Inferioris Domus Convocationis dicto libro
subscribere; dictoque Clero unanimi consensu subscribente idem Reverendus Pater
Robertus Oxon' Episcopus, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XLIX.
EOdem die inter horas primam and quartam post Meridiem, etc. Reverendus Pater,
etc. post tractatum, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio L.
OCtavo die mensis Januarij, etc. inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem
diei, etc. habito tractatu de and super Revisione Canonum sive Constitutionum
in Anno Domino 1640. edit'; and consideratione desuper, quinam eorundem fuerunt
aut sunt debite and idonee observand' and usitandi, idem Reverendus Pater, etc.
Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LI.
DIE Veneris 10 Januarij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
post tractatum, etc. Reverendus Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam,
etc.

Sessio LII.
DIE Mercurij 15 Januarij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusd' diei, etc.
post tractatum, etc. Reverendus Pater and Dominus Robertus, etc. Oxon.
Episcopus, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LIII.
DIE Veneris 17 Januarij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
inter sese tractatum iidem Episcopi habuerunt de Revisione Canonum and
Constitutionum alias edit'. and provis' and Dominus Episcopus London', de and
cum consensu Confratrum suorum, commisit curam and Revisionem eorundem
Willielmo Bathon' and Wellen', Roberto Oxon', Georgio Asaphen', Benjamino
Petriburgen', Roberto Lincoln', Richardo Carliolen', Edwardo Norwicen', and
Willielmo Glouc. respective Episcopis; and post alium tractat' inter eos habit'
and fact' idem Reverendus Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LIVE.
DIE Mercurij 22 Januarii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusd' diei, etc.
post tractat. etc. Reverendus Pater antedictus continuavit, etc. juxta
Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LV.
DIE Veneris 24 Januarij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusd' diei, etc.
habito tractatu de and super Revisione Canonum and Constitutionum alias ultima
Sessione proposit', idem Reverendus Pater, de and cum expresso and unanimi
consensu omnium and singulorum membrorum dictae Domus Superioris, statuit and
ordinavit, quodomnes caeteri Episcopi non adhuc nominati, Reverendis Viris
Episcopis alias ultima Sessione nominar' and assignat', in diligenti Revisione
and Examinatione dictorum Canonum and Constitutionum praed' adjungerentur; Et
hoc facto, Reverendus Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LVI.
DIE Mercurij 29 Januarij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei,
etc. habito tractatu inter eos de and super Actu Parliamenti Librum Publicarum
Precum, etc. concernen', idem Reverendus Vir, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta
Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LVII.
DIE Veneris ultimo Januarij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei,
etc. quaestio oriebatur inter Episcopos congregatos and assidentes, an tutum,
licitum aut consentaneum fuit pro Dominis Episcopis ad sedend' aut eorum
praesen'. exhibend' in domo Procerum Parliamenti, cum and quando negotium circa
personas condemnatas pro Proditione nefanda, in Domo Parliamenti inter Proceres
agitaretur; and post multa argumenta inter eos habit', and fact', and
concordatum and ordinatum fuit, de and cum consensu totius Domus, ad consulend'
Juris peritos tam in Foro Saeculari quam in Curiis Civilibus and Ecclesiasticis
versatos de and super dicta questione sive argumento praed' erga prox.
Conventionem, and deinde dictus Reverendus Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta
Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LVIII.
DIE Sabbati 1o Februarij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei,
etc. Notitia Domino Episcopo London' de attendentiis nonnullorum Jurisperitorum
in Jure civili data, extra domum Convocationis; dictus Dominus Episcopus
London' de and cum consensu Confratrum suorum, cos ad exhibendum little
praesentias coram Convocatione petiit. Et tunc comparuerunt Dominus Willielmus
Merrick Miles, Robertus King, Dominus Edwardus Lake,... Burrell, and Johannes
Berkenhead, Legum respective Doctores; and post nonnullas quaestiones and
argumenta inter dictos Episcopos and Jurisconsultos habit' and fact' de and
super little praesentiis in Domo Procerum super personis condemnatis, iidem
omnes and singuli Jurisperiti unanimi consensu little respective Opiniones in
scriptis dederunt, Dictos Episcopos in domo Parliamenti una cum Proceribus
circa negotium personarum condemnatarum tutissime and sine ullo detrimento aut
praejudicio sedere, and eorum praesentias exhibere posse; and eidem scripto
manus suas subscripserunt, and dictum scriptum sic subscriptum dicto Domino
Episcopo London' tradiderunt. Et, hoc facto, dictus Dominus Praesidens, nomine
totius Domus, gratias dictis Jurisconsultis agebat; quibus dimissis, Dominus
Episcopus London', etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LIX.
DIE Mercurij 5o Februarij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei,
etc. post tract' etc. Reverendus Pater Gulielmus Bathon' and Wellen' Episcopus,
etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LX.
DIE Veneris 7o Februarij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante meridiem ejusdem diei,
etc. post tractatum, etc. Reverendus Pater Robertus Oxon. Episcopus, etc.
Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXI.
DIE Veneris 14 Februarij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante meridiem ejusdem diei,
etc. post tractatum, etc. Reverendus Pater Robertus Oxon. Episcopus, etc.
Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXII.
DIE Martis 18 Februarij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendus Pater Praesidens, de and cum consensu Confratrum suorum, voluit ad
se accersiri Cleros Domus Inferioris Convocationis, quibus advenientibus,
Dictus Dominus Praesidens antedictus (verbis Latinis conceptis) eosdem Cleros
dictae Domus Inferioris monuit quatenus ad solitum and consuetum Conventus sui
locum sese conferentes, unum virum gravem, doctum, and peritum, de gremio suo
provideant and eligant in eorum Prolocutorem and Referendarium in loco
Reverendi Viri Henrici Fearne S. Theol. Professoris, ultimi Prolocutoris,
ratione Promotionis suae ad Episcopatum Cestren' jam vacan', and ipsum sic
Electum exhbeant coram eo hoc in loco immediate post Electionem suam factam.
Quibus dimissis, ad locum solitum suum, ad effectum eligendi virum gravem and
doctum de gremio suo, in eorum Prolocutorem sive Referendarium, sese
conferebant, and post aliquot tractat' inter Episcopos habit' and fact',
Reverendus Vir Thomas Turner S. Th. Professor, Decanus Ecclesie Cathedralis and
Metropoliticae Christi Cant' and Johannes Earls S. etiam Theol. Professor,
Decanus Ecclesiae Collegiatae B. Petri Westm' una cum coetu Domus Inferioris,
Praesentarunt and Exhibuerunt and sisti secerunt Venerabilem Virum Johannem
Barwick S. Th. Professorem in Prolocutorem totius Coetus praedict. Domus
Inferioris unanimiter electum, vice totius Coetus praedict'; and praemissa
facunda and eleganti oratione per dictum Decanum Westm', and facta alia facunda
oratione in latinis verbis concept'. per eundem Prolocutorem sic praesentatum,
praefatus Reverendus Pater Dominus Episcopus London' de consensu Confratruns
suorum praedict'. cundem Johannem Barwick, S. Th. Professorem electum, and
Electionem praedict'. de persona sua in Prolocutorem sive Referendarium, per
aliam venustam and eloquentem orationem Latinam commendavit and approbavit.
Tunc, dimisso Prolocutore, cum Coetu Domus Inferioris, and habita consultatione
de casu Sacerdotum Catholicorum Romanorum praesentato and perlecto, Dominus
Episcopus London', etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXIII.
DIE Sabbati, 22o Febr. inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendus Pater, etc. tractatum inter eos habuit de and super Revisione
Canonum and Constitutionum alias in Anno Domini 1640. in Convocatione tunc
congregat' edit' and provis' and post aliquot tractat' desuper Dominus
Episcopus London' de consensu Confratrum suorum curam diligentis Revisionis and
Examinationis eorundem Reverendis Viris Domino Roberto Oxon', Humfrido Sarum',
Georgio Wigorn', Georgio Asaphen', Richardo Carliolen', Herberto Herefordien',
and Briano Cestren' respective Episcopis; and pro meliori cura desuper habend'
ordinavit eos ad conveniend' die Lunae prox. in Camera communiter vocat
Jerusalem-Chamber intra Collegium B. Petri Westm', sit' and situat'. Hiisque
sic gestis, and cura concipiendi Articulos in Visitationibus observandos Domino
Johanni Episcopo Dunelmen'. commissa and relata; dictus Dominus, etc:
Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXIV.
DIE Jovis 27. Febr. inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid. ejusdem diei, etc. post
tractaturr, etc. Reverendus Pater Dominus Episcopus Dunelmen' Locumtenens, etc.
Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXV.
DIE Lunae 3. Martij inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc. post
tractat' etc. Reverendus Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXVI.
DIE Mercurij 5 Martij inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid. ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendus Pater Dominus Robertus Oxon. Episcopus, etc. tractatum habuit inter
eos circa nonnullas Emendationes sive Alterationes alias in libro Publicarum
Precum per Domum Parliamenti fact', and dictus Dominus Episcopus London' de and
cum consensu Confratrum suorum, curam Revisionis carundem Alterationum
Reverendis Viris Georgio Asaphen', Richardo Carliolen', Briano Cestren'
respective Episcopis conjunctim and divisim, and eis conjunctim and divisim
dedit potestatem and Commissionem nomine totius Domus Superioris Convocationis
ad emendand' and corrigend' easdem alterationes, etc. His gestis dictus Dominus
Praesidens cum consensu Confratrum suorum, jussit me ad accersend' Dominum
Prolocutorem, etc. Quo adveniente, cum tribus vel duobus Domus Inferioris,
Dominus Praesidens antedictus declaravit ei quid per dictos Episcopos fuerat
actum de and super dictis alterationibus, and quibus cura desuper commissa
fuerat; and instanter rogavit se eadem communicasse Domo Inferiori, ut eorum
consensus desuper habeatur. Vnde dicto Prolocutore, cum ejus Associatis, ad
domum Inferiorem redeunte, and habito tractatu inter Cleros desuper, omnes and
singuli Cleri dictae Domus Inferioris, in praesentia mei Willielmi Fisher,
Notarii Publici, etc. unanimiter eorum Consensum praebuerunt omnibus and
singulis per dictos Dominos Episcopos circa Alterationes praedict' fact',
salvis eorum Privilegiis, etc. Et hiis sic gestis, Dominus Episcopus London',
etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXVII.
DIE Sabbati 8o Martii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendus Vir Dominus Johannes Dunelmen' Episcopus, secundum Mandatum ei datum
and curam ei commissam, introduxit and tradidit in manus Domini Praesidentis
librum Articulorum Visitationem concernen', alias per eum concept'; and
unanimiter assensum fuit, ut iidem Articuli Domino Archiepiscopo Cant'
destinarentur pro ejus perlectione and debita consideratione eorundem, and pro
eorum Emendatione, Reformatione and Correctione sua. Hoc facto, tractatum
inivit de and super Impressione libri Publicarum Precum, and post intervallum
temporis, Dominus Episcopus London, etc. de and cum consensu Confratrum suorum,
constituit and ordinavit Doctorem Sandcroft esse Supervisorem..., and Magistros
Scattergood and Dillingham esse Correctores dicti Libri in Impressione ejusdem.
Hiis peractis, Dominus Episcopus London' Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXVIII.
DIE Martis 11 Martii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusd' diei, etc. post
tractatum, etc. Reverendus Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXIX.
DIE Sabbati 15 Martij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusd' diei, etc. post
tractat'. etc. Reverendus Pater Dominus Robertus Oxon' Episcopus, etc.
Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXX.
DIE Martis 18 Martij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
post tractatum, etc. Reverendus Pater, etc. cum consensu confratrum suorum, ad
eum accersiri jussic Prolocutorem, Praelatos, and Clerum Domus Inferioris.
Quibus advenientibus, dictus Reverendus Pater cum consensu, etc. public
significavit and intimavit eisdem Prolocutori, Praelatis and Clero antedictis
Librum Precum Publicarum, Administrationis Sacramentorum, aliorumque Rituum
Ecclesiae Anglicana, una cum Forma and Modo Ordinandi and Consecrandi
Episcopos, Presbyteros, and Diaconos (alias per Reverendos Patres, and
Praelatos and Clerum Domus Inferioris Convocationis, juxta Literas Regiae
Majestatis eis in ea part directas, revisum) per Proceres and Magnates in
Parliamento congregat', fuisse and esse gratanter acceptatum; and Honorandum
Virum Dominum Edwardum Dominum Cancellarium Angliae, tam nomine suo proprio,
quam nomine totius Domus Procerum and Magnatum in Parliamento (ut praefertur)
congregat', maximas gratias Archi-episcopis and Episcopis utriusque Provinciae,
pro eorum magna cura and industria in and circa Revisionem dicti libri
Publicarum Precum, etc. dedisse and prabuisse. Et insuper dictus Reverendus
Pater declaravit quod dictus Honorandus Vir Dominus Cancellarius Angliae voluit
se Reverendum Patrem, nomine totius domus Procerum and Magnatum praedict', ad
reddend' and praebend'. gratias Prolocutori, Praelatis and Clero Domus
Inferioris Convocationis praedict', pro eorum respective simili cura and labor
in and circa Revisionem libri praedict'. Et tunc, dicto Prolocutore and toto
Coetu Domus Inferioris dimissis, dictus Reverendus Pater, etc. Continuavit,
etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio LXXI.
DIE Sabbati 22 Martii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
habito Tractatu inter eos de speciali forma concipiend' in and circa
Consecrationem Ecclesiarum Parochialium and quarumcunque Capellarum intra hoc
Regnum Angliae, quoties and quandocunque evenerit eas benedicend'. fore; dictus
Dominus Episcopus London', etc. de and cum consensu Confratrum suorum curam in
and circa conceptionem formae praedictae Reverendo Patri Domino Johanni
permissione divina Dunelmen' Episcopo unanimiter commisit; and post alium
tractatum, idem Reverendus Pater Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXXII.
DIE Jovis 27 Martij, 1662. inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei,
etc. post tractatum, etc. Reverendus Pater Dominus Robertus Oxon' Episcopus,
etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXXIII.
DIE Jovis 3o Aprilis, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
post Tractatum, etc. Reverendus Pater Dominus Episiopus Oxon', etc. post
Tractatum, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXXIV.
DIE Mercurij 9o Aprilis, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
post tractatum, etc. Reverendus Pater, [Robertus Oxon' Episcopus] etc.
Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXXV.
DIE Sabbati 12 Aprilis, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Habito tractatu de Subscriptionibus Clericorum Instituendorum and
Ludimagistrorum licentiandorum, and tribus Articulis 36 Canone, etc. Dominus
Episcopus London' Praesidens, etc. de and cum consensu, etc. curam commisit
Reverendis Patribus Dominis Episcopis Sarum, and Coven' and Lichen', ad
consulend' Jurisperitos de concipiend' forma in scriptis in and circa
subscriptionem praedict. Et hoc facto, ulterius tractatum habuit de eligendo
personas aptas and idoneas ad corrigend' Impressionem libri Publicarum Precum;
quodque post impressionem dicti libri factam Episcopi cujuslibet Dioeceseos
curam in sese suscipiunt ad recipiend' eosdem libros, and ad procurand' eosdem
publicari and asportari Ecclesiis Parochialibus separalibus in eorum respective
Dioecesibus. Et deinde Dominus Episcopus London' Continuavit, etc. juxta
Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXXVI.
DIE Mercurij 16 Aprilis, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
post tractatum, etc. Reverendus Pater, [Robertus Oxon' Episcopus] etc.
Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXXVII.
DIE Sabbati 19 Aprilis, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
post tractat', etc. Reverendus Pater [Robertus Oxon' Episcopus] etc.
Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXXVIII.
DIE Lunae 21 Aprilis, inter horas 8 and 10 ante meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendus Pater, etc. tractat' habuit cum confratribus suis de Imprimendo
libro Publicarum Precum ante 24 diem mensis Augusti prox. nec non de
recipiend'. Directionibus a Domino Cancellario Angliae, quibus mediis verbum
Children in loco Persons (not baptized) per Domum Communitatis Parliamenti in
libro Publicarum Precum inseratur. Et hoc facto Dominus Episcopus London' de
and cum consensu Confratrum suorum decrevit and ordinavit, quod Dominus
Episcopus Dunelmen' in loco Domini Episcopi Cestren' modo defunct', Dominis
Episcopis in and circa Alterationes dicti libri Publicarum Precum 5 Martij ult'
elaps'. assignatis, adjungeretur; and ulterius statuit, quod nullae
Ordinationes Clericorum per aliquos Episcopos fierent, nisi intra quatuor
tempora pro Ordinationibus assignata; quodque nullus Episcopus extra Dioecesin
suam aliquos Clericos ad Sacros vel Diaconatus vel Presbyteratus Ordines
admitteret, nisi prius literis dimissoriis a Reverendissimo Patre Cant'
Archiepiscopo obtentis. Et hoc facto, dictus Dominus Episcopus London', de and
cum consensu Confratrum suorum, etc. Curam and Revisionem libri Publicarum
Precum concernen'. 5 diem Novembris, Reverendo Patri Domino Episcopo Dunelmen'
commisit, and continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXXIX.
DIE Mercurij 23 Aprilis inter horas 8 and 10 ante meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
post tractatum, etc. Reverendus Pater Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXXX.
DIE Sabbati 26 Aprilis, inter horas 8 and 10 ante merid' ejusd' diei, etc.
Formae Precum pro 5 Novembris, 30 Januarij, and 29 Maij, fuerunt introductae
and public perlectae, and unanimi consensu approbatae. Et tractatu inter eos
habit' and fact' de Translatione libri Publicarum Precum in sermonem Latinum,
Dominus Episcopus London, etc. de and cum consensu Confratrum suorum, etc.
curam Translationis ejusdem Reverendis Viris Johanni Earl Decano B. Petri
Westm' and Johanni Peirson sacrae respective Theologiae Professoribus commisit.
Et hoc facto, dict' Dominus, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXXXI.
DIE Mercurij ultimo; viz. Aprilis, inter horas 8 and 10 ante merid' ejusd'
diei, etc. post tractatum, etc. Reverendus Pater Continuavit, etc. juxta
Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXXXII.
DIE Veneris 2 Maij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante merid' ejusd' diei, etc. post
tractatum, etc. Reverendus Pater Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXXXIII.
DIE Lunae 5 Maii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante merid' ejusd' diei, etc. post
tractatum, etc. Reverendus Pater Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXXXIV.
DIE Mercurij 7 Maij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante merid' ejusd' diei, etc. post
tractat', etc. Reverendus Pater, [Robertus Episcopus Oxon'] etc. Continuavit,
etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXXXV.
DIE Sabbati 10 Maii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante merid' ejusd' diei, etc. Habito
tractatu ex directione Domus Communitatis Parliamenti de Reverentia solenni
inter Liturgiae Publicae celebrationem, nec non tempore Sermonum and Homiliarum
adhibenda; major pars dictae Domus Superioris Convocationis, in votis dedit, ut
Constitutio in libro Constitutionum sive Canonum Ecclesiasticorum alias in Anno
Domini 1603. sub titulo De solenni Reverentia inter Liturgiae publicae
celebrationem, Edit'. and Provij'. dictae Domui Communitatis Parliamenti
praesentetur; habita prius consideratione de and super dicto Canone per Domum
Inferiorem hujusmodi Convocationis. Et hoc facto, Dominus Praesidens
antedictus, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXXXVI.
DIE Lunae 12 Maii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusd' diei, etc.
Constitutio sive Canon de Reverentia tempore divinorum adhibenda, alias ultima
Sessione in hac domo tractat'. a Domo Inseriori Convocationis una cum nonnullis
Alteratiombus sive Emendationibus per eos factis, fuit introduct', dictoque
Canone, una cum dictis emendationibus public perlectis, eadem Constitutio fuit
unanimi consensu and assensu totius Domus Superioris approbat'. and confirmat'.
Et hoc facto, dictus Dominus continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXXXVII.
DIE Mercurij 14 Maii, inter horaes 3 and 5 post Merid' ejusd' diei, etc. post
tractatum, etc. Reverend' Pater Gulielmus Bathon' and Wellen', etc.
Continuavit, etc. juxta, Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXXXVIII.
DIE Veneris 16 Maii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusd' diei, etc. post
tractat', etc. Reverendus Pater Gulielmus Bathon' and Wellen', etc.
Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio LXXXIX.
DIE Lunae 19 Maii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusd diei, etc. post
Tractatum, etc. Reverendus Pater [Gulielmus Bathon' and Wellen'] etc.
Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio XC.
DIE Martis 20 Maii, inter horas 9 and 11 ante Merid' ejusd' diei, etc.
Exhibito Brevi Regio, nec non literis Commissionalibus Domini Archiepiscopi
Cant', and per me public de Mandato Domini Willielmi Bathon' and Wellen'
Episcopi locum-tenentis, etc. perlectis; dictus Dominus, etc. acceptavit in se
onus Executionis dictae Commissionis, and decrevit procedendum sore juxta
tenorem and effectum ejusdem, etc. and juxta tenorem dicti Brevis Regii
Continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XCI.
DIE Jovis 19 die mensis Februarii, Anno Domini 1662. juxta, etc. inter horas 2
and 4, etc. Reverendus Pater, etc. post tractatum secretum per tres horas aut
eo circiter, etc. Continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XCII.
DIE Mercurij 25 Februarii inter horas 2 and 4 post Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendus Pater Dominus Robertus Oxon' Episcopus, etc. Continuavit, etc. prout
in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XCIII.
DIE Jovis 5 Martii, inter horas 2 and 4 post Merid' ejusd' diei, etc.
Reverendus Pater, etc. Tractatum habuit de and super Compoto de...; dictusque
Compotus fuit relatus considerationi Reverendorum in Christo Patrum Humfridi
Sarum, and Georgii Asaphen' Episcoporum, etc. Et hoc facto, dictus Reverendus
Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XCIV.
DIE Jovis 12 Martii, inter horas 2 and 4 post Meridiem ejusd' diei, etc.
Dominus Robertus Oxon', etc. Continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XCV.
DIE Jovis 19 Martij, inter horas 2 and 4 post Merid. ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendus in Christo Pater Dominus Robertus Oxon', etc. Continuavit, etc.
prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XCVI.
DIE Sabbati 28 Martii 1663. inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusd' diei, etc.
Habito tractatu de and super confectione Libri Grammaticalis tam in lingua
Latina quam Grammaticali in the Original.
Graeca adhibend'. in qualibet Schola Grammaticali; relatum fuit Prolocutori
Domus Inferioris ad concipiend' dictum Librum, and ad consulend'. desuper
quascunque personas, prout ei conveniens fuerit, exceptis cum Ludimagistris and
Paedagogis, etc. Et hoc sacto dictus Reverendus Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc.
prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XCVII.
DIE Sabbati 4 Aprilis inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusd' diei, etc.
habita consideratione de perficiendo Compoto Doctoris Bargrave llcet absen'
usque ad primam Sessionem prox. futur' post Festum Paschae prox. Reverendus
Pater [Robertus Oxon'.] etc. Continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio XCVIII.
DIE Sabbati 11 Aprilis, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusd' diei, etc.
Reverendus Pater Robertus Oxon' Episcopus, etc. Continuavit, etc. prout in
Schedula, etc.

Sessio XCIX.
DIE Martis 14 Aprilis inter horas 2 and 4 post Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Exhibitis literis Commissionalibus, etc. iisdemque de mandato dicti
locum-tenentis per me perlectis, dictus Reverenaus Pater, etc. Onus
Exequutionis earundem in se acceptavit, and decrevit procedendum fore juxta
tenorem earundem, etc. Et continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio C.
DIE Sabbati 2 Maii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusd' diei, etc. Dominus
Episcopus London' Locum-tenens, etc. una cum confratribus suis, etc. habito
prius tractatu de and super impetratione Formae quoad Consecrationem
Ecclesiarum, Capellarum, aliorumque locorum Ecclesiasticorum, etc. tradend'
Domino Episcopo Dunelmen', etc. ad perficiend' dictum opus, etc.) Continuavit,
etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio CI.
DIE Sabbati 9 Maii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendus Pater, etc. Oxon' Episcopus Continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio CII.
DIE Sabbati 16 Maii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendus Vir Dominus Locumtenens [Oxon. Episcopus] etc. Continuavit, etc.
prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio CIII.
DIE Sabbati 23 Maii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusd' diei, etc.
habito secreto tractatu, me absente ex mandato dicti Locum-tenentis, dictus
Dominus, etc. Continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio CIV.
DIE Sabbati 30 Maii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusd' diei, etc.
habito tractatu de and super libro Grammaticali, etc. and vocato Magistro
Syllack, eoque requisito ad conficiend' acquiet antiam legalem pro pecuniarum
summa per eum a Doctore Bargrave recept', and ad introducend'. eandem hoc in
loco prox. Sessione; idem Reverendus Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc. prout in
Schedula, etc.

Sessio CV.
DIE Sabbati 13 Junii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
exhibitis and praesentatis literis Commissionalibus Venerabilium Virorum
Dominorum Decani and Capituli Ecclesiae Cathedralis Christi Cant' (ad quos
omnis and omnimoda Jurisdictio Spiritualis and Ecclesiastica quae ad
Archi-episcopum Cant' sede plena pertinuit, ipsae sede jam vacant notorie
dignoscitur pertinere,) iisdemque literis, de mandato Praesidentis public
perlectis, dictus Reverendus Pater Gilbertus London'. Episcopus, Praeses, etc.
acceptavit in se onus Exequutionis earundem; and decrevit procedend' fore
juxta, vim, formam, tenorem, and effectum earundem; Et hoc facto idem
Reverendus, etc. Continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio CVI.
DIE Sabbati 20 Junii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
praesentata substitutione Domini Praesiden', etc. eaque public lecta, Forma
Consecrationis Ecclesiarum and Capellarum fuit per Praesiden' etc. introducta;
and relata fuit curae Reverendorum Virorum Domini Roberti Oxon', Humfridi
Sarum, Roberti Lincoln', and Johannis Coven' and Lichen', respective
Episcoporum, pro diligenti Revisione ejusdem, and hoc facto dictus Reverendus
Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio CVII.
DIE Sabbati 27 Junij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendus Pater, etc. ad se accersiri fecit Prolocutorem, una cum toto Coetu
Domus Inferioris. Quibus comparentibus idem Reverendus Pater, etc. una cum
Confratribus suis praedict' (ut praefertur) comparent'. Tractatum habuit, and
convenit de quatuor Subsidiis Illustrissimo Domino Nostro Regi per ipsos
concedendis, juxta Ratam quatuor solidorum de qualibet libra, sub certis
conditionibus and provisionibus in quodam libro desuper concipiend'.; ac de
solvendo dicta subsidia infra terminum quatuor annorum proxime sequen'. unum
integrum subsidium eorundem solvendum ad Festum Natalis Domini Nostri Jesu, and
residuum eorundem solvendum quolibet dimidio anni ex tunc sequen'. Eosdemque
Prolocutorem and totum Coetum Domus Inferioris rogavit, ut in Testimonium
singularis eorum obedientiae and obsequii erga Dominum Nostrum Regem,
concessioni hujusmodi eorum consensus praeberent, habito prius tractatu inter
eos de eisdem. Ac tanc praefatus Reverendus Pater, etc. de and cum consensu
Confratrum suorum, in Examinatores and Correctores libri subsidiorum praedict'
Reverendos Patres Georgium Winton', Humfridum Sarum, Georgium Asaphen',
Robertum Lincoln', and Willielmum Meneven', respective Episcopos, nominavit;
and voluit Prolocutorem and totum Coetum Domus Inferioris praedict' ad
eligendum nonnullos graviores Viros de gremio suo ad idem negotium cum dictis
Reverendis Patribus expediendum. Modo, dimisso Prolocutore, cum toto Coetu
praedict' praefatus Reverendus Pater, etc. iterum tractavit cum praedictis
Reverendis Patribus. Et post intervallum temporis, Dominus Prolocutor cum toto
Coetu^ praedict' revertens, nomine suo and eorum dixit and declaravit quod ipse
and Coetus Domus Inferioris de propositis diligenter tractarunt and omnes eorum
Consensus libentissime dederunt Concessioni dictorum quatuor subsidiorum, juxta
Ratam quatuor solidorum e qualibet libra; seque and totum Coetum Domus
Inferioris praedict. elegisse in examinatores and correctores libri subsidiorum
praedict' cum praefatis respective Episcopis, Venerabiles Viros Johannem
Barwick S. Th. Professorem Prolocutorem, etc. Thomam Turner S. Th. Professorem,
Decanum Ecclesiae Cathedralis and Metropoliticae Christi Cant',... Dolben S.
Th. Professorem, Decanum Westm', Michaelem Honywood Decanum Winton', Edwardum
Layfield S. Th. Professorem Archidiaconum Essex', Robertum Pory S. Th.
Professorem Archidiaconum Midd', Philippum King Archidiaconum Lewen', Georgium
Stradling and Richardum Ball, S. Theologiae respective Professores,
Procuratores, etc. Quam Electionem Dominus Prases and Confratres sui
approbarunt. Et tunc Dominus Episcopus London', etc. Continuavit, etc. prout in
Schedula, etc.

Sessio CVIII.
DIE Mercurij 1 Julii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusd' diei, etc. Liber
subsidiorum Regiorum fuit introductus, etc. jussu dicti Reverendi Patris, etc.
public per me notarium publicum fuit perlectus; and post lecturam ejusdem,
missus fuit Prolocutori and Domui Inferiori pro eorum Revisione and
Examinatione. Et tunc Dominus Gilbertus, etc. Continuavit, etc. prout in
Schedula, etc.

Sessio CIX.
DIE Sabbati 4 Julii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Praefatio and conclusione libri subsidiorum Regiorum introductis, and per me
Notarium Publicum public porlectis, idem Reverendus Pater, etc. Continuavit,
etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio CX.
DIE Mercurij 8 Julii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
introducto libro subsidiorum Regiorum in pergameno ingrossat'. and jussu
Praesidentis, etc. public per me Notarium Publicum antedict' perlect'. and per
totam Convocationem approbat'. dictus Reverendus Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc.
in diem Veneris, 10 Julij, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio CXI.
DIE Veneris 10 Julij, inter horas 2 and 4 post meridiem. ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendus Pater Dominus Episcopus Bathon; and Wellen, etc. Continuavit, etc.
prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio CXII.
DIE Lunae, 13 Julij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendus Pater Dominus Episcopus Bathon. and Wellen, etc. Continuavit, etc.
prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio CXIII.
DIE Mercurij 15 Julij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendo Patre Domino Roberto Asaphen' Episcopo assignato ad sedend' cum aliis
Episcopis, etc. alias constitutis ad concipiend'. formam quoad Consecrationem
Capellarum, etc. Reverendus Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc. prout per Schedulam,
etc.

Sessio CXIV.
DIE Sabbati 18 Julij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendus Pater Sarum Episcopus, etc. Continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio CXV.
DIE Veneris 24 Julij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendus Pater Sarum Episcopus, etc. Continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio CXVI.
DIE Lunae 27 Julij, inter horas 2 and 4 post Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendus Pater Sarum Episcopus, etc. Continuavit, etc. usque ad and inter
horas 6 and 9 hujus diei, etc. Eisdem die and loco, inter horas 6 and 9, etc.
Reverendus, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXVII.
DIE Jovis 17 Martii 1663. inter horas 8 and 10. ante Meridiem ejusdem diei,
etc. Reverendissimus Pater, etc. de and cum consensu, etc. ad se accersiri
fecit Prolocutorem Domus Inferioris, una cum toto numero sive Coetu ejusdem.
Quibus comparentibus, dicti Reverendissimus Pater, introducto Brevi Regio sibi
directo, ac in manus suas tradito idem de mandato dicti Reverendissimi Patris
per me Notarium publicum praedictum public fuit perlectum. Ac post lecturam
ejusdem, idem Reverendissimus Pater onus Exequutionis ejusdem in se assumpsit,
and juxta formam and effectum ejusdem procedendum fore decrevit. Deinde,
literis Commissionalibus dicti Reverendissimi Patris, etc. exhibits, and per
me, jussu Reverendissimi Patris public perlectis, Domini Commissarij tunc
praesetes onus Exequutionis earundem in sese acceptarunt; ac post tractatum,
etc. idem Reverendissimus Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio CXVIII.
DIE Jovis 24 Martij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendus Pater London' Episcopus, etc. Continuavit, etc. in diem Jovis
ultimum, viz. diem instant. Martij, etc. prout in Schedula, etc.

Sessio CXIX.
DIE Jovis, ultimo, viz. die Martij 1664. inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem
ejusdem diei, etc. Reverendus Pater, etc. post tractatum, etc. Continuavit,
etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXX.
DIE Mercurij 20 Aprilis, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendissimus Pater ac Confratres respective sui praedict'. tractatum
inierunt de and super Libro Grammaticali introducendum in prox'. and de
Personis tunc eligendis pro Examinatione ejusdem. Et tunc, introducta petitione
Clericorum indlgentium in Insula Vectis remanen'. and residen' relatum fuit
Reverendo Patri Domino Episcopo London' ad deliberand' desuper, and ad
certificand'. etc. in prox' etc. Et tunc dictus Reverendus Pater, etc.
Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXXI.
DIE Mercurij 27 Aprilis, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
introducta petitione per Dominum Episcopum Nonwicensem, eaque public perlecta,
Domini Episcopi duxerunt ad deliberandum desuper; and tunc dictus Reverendus
Pater Dominus Episcopus London', etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXXII.
DIE Mercurij 4 Maij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Liber Grammaticalis per Johannem Peirson S. T. P. unum e gremio Domus
Inferioris fuit introduct' and dictus Reverendissimus Pater, de and cum
consensu Confratrum suorum Curam, Revisionem, and Examinationem ejusdem
commisit Reverendissimo Patri..., Providentia divina Eborum Archiepiscopo,
Reverendis in Christo Patribus Georgio Winton', Humfrido London', Roberto
Wigorn', Georgio Asaphen', Willielmo Glouc', and Johanni Coven', and Lichen'
respective Episcopis. Et postea, de and cum consensu Confratrum suorum, ad se
accersiri fecit Prolocutorem una cum toto Coetu Domus Inferioris quibus
advenien' dictus Reverendissimus Pater, de and cum ratihabitione Confratrum
suorum praedict'. voluit eos ad eligendum certum numerum virorum gravium and
discretorum e gremio suo, ad Revidendum and Examinandum dictum librum
Grammaticalem cum dictis Reverendis Patribus per Domum superiorem nominatis. Et
dimisso dicto Prolocutore cum toto Coetu praedict'. idem Reverendissimus Pater,
etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXXIII.
DIE Sabbati 14 Maij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendus, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXXIV.
DIE Lunae 16 Maij, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendissimus Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXXV.
DIE Mercurij 18 Maii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
introducto libro Precum in latina concept'. relatum fuit curae and revisioni
Reverendi in Christo Patris Johannis permissione divina Sarum Episcopi, and
Johannis Dolben S. T. P. Decani Westm'. Et deinde dictus Reverendissimus Pater,
etc. continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXXVI.
DIE Martis 23 Augusti, inter horas 8 and 10 ante meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendus Episcopus London, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXXVII.
DIE Veneris 25 Novembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei,
etc. Reverendus, Pater London' Episcopus, etc. post intervallum temporis, and
de and cum consensu Confratrum suorum voluit ad se accersiri Clerum Domus
Inferioris Convocationis: quibus advenientibus, etc. cosdem Cleros dictae Domus
Inferioris monuit, quatenus [ad] solitum and consuetum Conventus sui locum sese
conferentes, unum virum gravem, doctum and peritum de gremio suo provideant and
eligant in eorum Prolocutorem and Referendarium, in loco Venerabilis Viri
Johannis Barwick S. T. P. ratione ejus mortis jam vacan', ac ipsum sic electum
exhibeant, and praesentent coram Reverendiss. Patre aut ejus Locumten' sive
Commiss. etc. die Veneris prox. 2o viz. die mensis Decembris prox. futur' inter
horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, hoc in loco. Quo Clero dimisso, etc.
Praeses antedictus, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXXVIII.
DIE Veneris 2 Decembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendus Pater, etc. Winton. Episcopus, etc. post intervallum temporis ad eum
accersiri jussit Clerum domus Inferioris. Qui sese praesentantes exhiberi and
sisti fecerunt Venerabilem Virum Johannem Dolben S. T. P. Decanum Ecclesiae
Collegiatae S. Petri Westm'. in Prolocutorem and Referendarium totius Coetus
Domus Inferioris ultima Sessione electum; quem Venerabilis Vir... Boulton S. T.
P. in Praesentatorem etiam electus, vice totius Coetus Domus Inferioris,
praemissa facunda and eloquenti oratione, per eum exhibuit and praesentavit
dictis Reverendis Episcopis; and facta alia latina oratione eleganti per eundem
Prolocutorem sic praesentatum praefatus Reverendus Pater, etc. de consensu
Confratrum suorum praed' antedictum Johannem Dolben in Prolocutorem electum,
and Electionem hujusmodi per aliam Orationem latinam commendavit and
approbavit. Tunc dimisso Prolocutore, cum Coetu Domus inferioris praedict',
habitoque tractatu aliquandiu inter Episcopos praedict. idem Reverendus Pater,
etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXXIX.
DIE Veneris 9 Decembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendus Pater, etc. Elien' Episcopus, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta
Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXXX.
DIE Veneris 16 Decembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei,
etc. Reverendus Pater, etc. Wigorn' Episcopus, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta
Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXXXI.
DIE Martis 20 Decembris, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusd' diei, etc.
Reverendus Pater Episcopus Wigorn', etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXXXII.
DIE Martis 10 Januarii 1664. inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei,
etc. Reverendus Pater, Episcopus Winton', etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta
Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXXXIII,
DIE Mercurij 18 Januarii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante merid' ejusd' diei, etc.
Reverendus Pater, Robertus Wigorn' Episcopus, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta
Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXXXIV.
DIE Veneris 27 Januarii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusd' diei, etc.
Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXXXV.
DIE Veneris 3 Febr. etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXXXVI.
DIE Sabbati 11 Febr. etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXXXVII.
DIE Sabbati 18 Februarii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei,
etc. Reverendissimus Pater, etc. voluit Episcopos praesentes, cum ad eorum
respective Dioeceses pervenerint, ad destinand' sibi nomina and cognomina
Clericorum intra easdem respective Dioeceses ab eorum respective Curis eject'
and loca eorum respective habitatidnis; and hoc facto, etc. Continuavit, etc.
juxta Schedulam, etc

Sessio CXXXVIII.
DIE Martis 21 Februarii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusa' diei, etc.
Reverendissimus Pater, etc. post tractatum, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta
Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXXXIX.
DIE Jovis 2 Martii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante Merid' ejusd' diei, etc.
Reverendus Pater London. Episcopus, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXL.
DIE Sabbati 4 Martii, inter horas 8 and 10 ante merid' ejusd' diei, etc.
Reverendissimus Pater, etc. voluit omnes Episcopos Confratres suos praesentes,
ad exhibend' omnem quamcunque curam and diligentiam, ut quilibet Ministri vel
Rectores vel Vicarii, seu eorum Curati, cujuslibet Ecclesiae in and per eorum
respective Dioeceses, Divinas Preces juxta formam Libri Publicarum Precum in ea
part stabilit', distinct and plenarie, absque aliqua omissione earundem in
aliqua part, superpelliceis indutis, discreto ordine perlegant. Et hoc facto,
etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXLI.
DIE Jovis 22 Junii 1665. inter horas 8 and 10 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, etc.
Reverendissimus Pater, etc. Continuavit, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXLII.
SEcundo die mensis Augusti, etc. prout in actu annex' etc. No Entry is made of
this Day's Act.


Sessio CXLIII.
DIE Veneris 26 die Mensis Januarii, 1665. inter horas 8 and 11 ante Meridiem
ejusdem diei, etc. Reverendus, etc. London' Episcopus, etc. Continuavit, etc.
juxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXLIV.
DIE Martis 24 Aprilis 1666. inter horas 8 and 11 ante Meridiem ejusdem diei,
etc. Reverendus, London' Episcopus, etc. Continuavit, etc. uxta Schedulam, etc.

Sessio CXLV.
DIE Mercurij 19 Septembris 1666. inter horas 8 and 11 ante Meridiem ejusdem
diei, Reverendissimus, etc. post tractatum, etc. continuavit, etc. in diem
Mercurii 26 diem jam instantis Septembris, etc. juxta Schedulam, etc.

FINIS.
ACTA IN INFERIORE DOMO CONVOCATIONIS, ANNIS MDCLXXXVI and MDCLXXXVIII.
Electio Prolocutoris.
DIE Mercurij, Secundo Viz. die Mensis Novembris, Anno Domini 1586. and Regni
Serenissimae Dominae nostrae Dominae Elizabethae, Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae
and Hiberniae Reginae, fidei Defensoris, etc. Anno Vicessimo Octavo: In
Inferiori Domo Synodalis Convocationis Praelatorum and Cleri Cant. Provinciae,
in Sacello olim nuncupato Beatae Mariae in Orientali part Ecclesiae
Cathedralis Divi Pauli London. notorie Situato; Coram Venerabilibus Viris
Decanis, Archidiaconis, Procuratoribus Capitulorum, Ecclesiarum Cathedralium
and Cleri, tunc ibidem ad hujusmodi Convocationem celebrandam juxta effectum
brevis Regij and praeteriti temporis morem insimul Congregatis, comparuit
Venerabilis Vir Magister Alexander Nowell Decanus Sancti Pauli, London: Cui
praesenti, ex antiquo more and consuetudine dictae Ecclesiae Cathedralis Sancti
Pauli praedictae, Jus dirigendi Electionem futuri Prolocutoris competit. Et ex
part Reverendissimi Domini Johannis, Providentia Divina Cantuar.
Archiepiscopi, significavit, Ut ad Electionem suturi Prolocutoris procedere
licite and libere valiant and possint. Unde mox omnes tunc praesentes uno Ore
Venerabilem Virum Magistrum Willelmum Redman Archidiaconum Cantuariensem, alias
in ultima Convocatione hujus Domus in Prolocutorem electum, ac modo absentem,
denuo sine mora in eorum and dicti Coetus Inferioris Domus Cleri Proloquutorem
and Referendarium concorditer unanimi consensu nominarunt and elegerunt, nemine
contradicente. Et consequenter nominarunt and elegerunt Venerabilem Virum
Magistrum Johannem Still Archidiaconum Sudbury praesentem, ad praesentandum
dictum Proloquutorem Reverendissimo Domino Johanni Cant. Archiepiscopo and
caeteris Praelatis in Superiori Domo, die Veneris proximo inter horas secundam
and quartam post meridiem in Ecclesia Collegiata Westminster, cum debita and
solita Solemnitate; Et moniti sunt omnes praesentes quatenus dictis die hora
and loco conveniant ad effectum praedictum. Acta and gesta fuerunt praemissa ut
supra, in praesentia mei Thomae Barker Notarij Publici in ejusdem Inferioris
Domus Acto [rum Scribam] assumpti.

Nomina praesentium Electioni praedictae, quae mihi Notario praedicto ex
aspectu noti erant, quae ob brevitatem temporis capere potui. Reliquorum vero
quam plurimorum etiam praesentium, quoniam praefatus Dominus Decanus Sancti
Pauli London. noluit ob causam praedictam Praeconizationem fieri, describere
minime potui.

Mr. D. Goodman. Mr. D. Pearne, etc.

Sessio Secunda.
DIE Veneris, Viz. Quarto die mensis Novembris, Anno Domini 1586. inter horas
secundam and quartam post meridiem ejusdem diei, in quodom Sacello ex part
australi Ecclesiae Collegiatae Westminster, in praesentia Edwardi Say and
Thomae Barker, Notariorum Publicorum, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Wood, etc.

Isto die, postquam convenerunt omnes supranominati Venerabiles Viri, ipse
Venerabilis Praesentator una cum caeteris supranominatis ex dicto Inferiori
Coetu, accersiti in Superiorem Domum, eundem Venerabilem Virum Magistrum
Willelmum Redman Prolocutorem electum conduxit ad Superiorem Domum, eumque
dicto Reverendissimo Patri Cant. Archiepiscopo, and caeteris Praelatis
praesentavit; ubi habita and pramissa docta Oratione a praefato Venerabili Viro
Magistro Johanne Still Archidiacono Suffolk Praesentatore, and ea finita,
altera pia Oratione seu praefatione ipsius Venerabilis Viri Domini electi
Proloquutoris; dictus Reverendissimus Pater, cum caeteris Dominis Praelatis
tunc praesentibus, Electionem hujusmodi, and Dominum Proloquutorem Electum
concorditer Approbarunt and Ratificarunt. His expeditis, post aliquem tractatum
inter eosdem Reverendissimos Patres and dictum Dominum Proloquutorem cum alijs
ex dicto Inferiore Coetu, de rebus quibusdam necessariis; dictus Dominus
Proloquutor cum Coetu suo praedicto in dictam Inferiorem Domum revertebatur;
ubi post finitas preces, facta fuit Praeconizatio omnium interesse debentium,
etc. Qua peracta, Dominus Proloquutor assignavit Venerabiles Viros, Decanum
Sancti Pauli, Decanum Westminster, Decanum Elien. Decanum Sarum, Decanum Exon,
Decanum Coven. and Lichen, Archidiaconum London, Archidiaconum Sudbury,
Archidiaconum Bedford, Archidiaconum Taunton, Archidiaconum Darbie; D. Bell, D.
Walker, D. Copcotte, and D. Wythers, in Assessores sibi, tractaturos de rebus
and negotiis in hujusmodi Convocatione tractandis and expediendis. Cui quidem
assignationi omnes praesentes unanimiter consentierunt. Quibus sic gestis,
habita per Dominum Proloquutorem Admonitione omnibus ex hoc Coetu, ut habitu
Clericali incedant, alioquin abstineant ab hac Domo, ac etiam admonitione, ut
si qui sint qui aliquas Scedulas proferre vellent de rebus in hujusmodi
Convocatione Reformandis, easdem sibi traderent in proxima Sessione, deinde
Dominus Prolocutor intimavit omnibus supranominatis, Convocationem hujusmodi
esse continuatam usque in diem Mercurij proximum inter horas nonam and
undecimam ante Meridiem in hoc loco; and monuit omnes ad interessendam, etc.

Sessio Tertia.
DIE Mercurij, Nono Viz. die Mensis Novembris 1586. hora nona ante Meridiem
ejusdem diei, in Ecclesia Collegiata Westminster, praedicta, in praesentia mei
Edwardi Say, and Thomae Barker, Notariorum, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Coldwell, etc.

Isto die, post finitas preces comparuere omnes supra nominati Venerabiles
Viri; ac deinde orta quaestione inter Venerabilem Virum Magistrum Johannem Dey
Legum Doctorem, and quendam Magistrum Johannem Knewstubbs de eorum electione in
Procuratorem unius partis Cleri Norwicen. Dominus Proloquutor ad veritatem in
hac part inquirendam juramento oneravit quosdam Venerabiles Viros, Magistrum
Georgium Gardener, Decanum Norwicen. and Johannem Walker Sacrae Theologiae
Professorem, de modo observato antehac in hujusmodi Electione, necnon quendam
Thomam Nuce -- Theologiae Baccalaureum, de ejus notic^a in hac. re. Qui sic
jurati, dixerunt and deposuerunt prout sequitur in infra-Scriptis. Necnon
Magister Dey exhibuit Testimonium Magistri Johannis Maplezden Archidiaconi
Suffolk, and Roberti Pecke Notarij Publici ejus Registrarij, ac depositionem
Magistri Christopheri Best eorum respective manibus Subscript. and infrascript.
content. Unde Dominus Proloquutor assignavit Magistro Knewstubbs ad proponendum
causas quare Mr. D. Dey non admitteretur in Coetum hujus Domus in proxim. Ac
deinde Dominus Proloquutor continuavit hujusmodi Convocationem quoad hanc Domum
usque in diem Veneris prox. hora nona ante Meridiem in hoc loco, and monuit
omnes ad interessendum, etc.

I Testify, That Mr. Foul was Clerk of the Convocation for the Clergy of the
Archdeaconry of Sudbury.

That, the next Parliament D. Norton was chosen for the Clergy of the
Archdeaconry of Suffolk at Bliburrough in the same Archdeaconry, I being
present at the choice.

That now at this Session, One for Sudbury-Archdeaconry was to be chosen, and
that they were to be chosen of the Archdeaconries alternis vicibus, and so ever
reported for the Custom.

J. Maplezden Archi. Suffolk.

I Testify, That in the xiijth Year of the Queens Majesty's Reign, there came
Warrant from the Bishop of Norwich to the Archdeacon of Suffolk and his
Official, for the Summoning of the Clergy of the same Archdeaconry, to appear
at Hopal within the same Archdeaconry, to make choice of a Clerk for the
Convocation, at which place many of the said Archdeaconry did appear before Mr.
D. Masters Chancellor to the Bishop, and made choice of Mr. Doctor Walker: And
at that time none of the Clergy of the other Archdeaconry did appear, neither
did any of them contribute toward his Charges.

At the next Parliament, which was (as I take it) in the xviijth. Year of her
Majesty's Reign, there was chosen within the Archdeaconry of Sudbury, Mr.
Foul. And at that time, the Clergy of the Archdeaconry of Suffolk neither had
Summons nor bare any Charges. At the next choice, Mr. Doctor Norton was chosen
for the Archdeaconry of Suffolk at Blithburgh, and none of the Archdeaconry of
Sudbury did either appear or pay: And further during my knowledge, and also as
I have heard it Reported of others before my time, the Archdeaconries of
Suffolk and Sudbury have chosen alternis vicibus, and likewise paid.

Robert Pecke Reg. of the Archdeaconry of Suffolk.

Christopher Best, Mr. of Arts, Vicar of Wichambrooke, in the Archdeaconry of
Sudbury, does Testify, that it is accounted to be the Custom in the
Archdeaconries of Suffolk and Sudbury, that they shall choose the Clerk of the
Convocation within those Archdeaconries, alterni vicibus; and at the
Convocation last holden, the Proctor for the Clergy was chosen within the
Archdeaconry of Suffolk; the Clergy of the Archdeaconry of Sudbury not being
Summoned thereunto, and paying nothing toward his charges: And that now at
this time, the Proctor for the Clergy aforesaid, ought according to their
Custom, to be chosen by the Clergy of the Archdeaconry of Sudbury only, without
Summoning the Archdeaconry of Suffolk; Yet notwithstanding, he says that at
this present time of Election, there were chosen by some, Mr. D. Dey, and by
others, Mr: Knewstubbes; the greater number by Pole of those that might
lawfully choose, to this Deponents judgment, appearing to be on Mr. D. Dey's
side. Yet he says, when they were numbered by Scrutiny, the greater number was
on Mr. Knewstubb's side by Eight, viz. of Mr. Dr. Dey's side, there were
Cxxxij. Mr. D. Jones, and Mr. Nuce being reck'ned therein; and on Mr.
Knewstubb's side, Lxxxx. whereof he believes there were xx Parsons, Vicars, or
Curates and more, of the Archdeaconry of Suffolk, with other Curutes, which
according to their Customs, have no Voices in this Election as he has heard.

Per me Christoferum Best.

Mr. Georgius Gardener Decanus Norwicen. juramento oneratus per Dominum
Prolocutorem, and per eum interrogatus quid novit quoad Electionem Procuratoris
Cleri pro Archidiaconatu Suffolk, and Archidiaconatu Sudbury, says, that by
the space of xxv. Years he has known the Order of the same Election, and says
that the Custom is, and by all that time has been, that the same
Archdeaconries have chosen a Clerk alternis vivibus. Johannes Walker sacrae
Theologiae Professor juratus dicit, That he has known the Custom to be as Mr.
Doctor Gardener has deposed, ab Anno quinto Illustrissimae Reginae Elisabetha,
etc. and that he this Deponent was so chosen of the same Archdeaconries.

Thomas Nuce jurat^s dicit, That he has heard, that the Custom is as Mr. D.
Gardener, and Mr. D. Walker have deposed. And touching the Order of this
Election, he says, That upon the nameing of Mr. D. Dey by some, and Mr.
Knewstubbs by others, the House was divided, no number taken by Poll; and in
this Deponent's judgment, the greater number seemed to be on Mr. D. Dey's side.
Wherefore the difference being but small, they fell to a Scrutiny therein,
whereby it appeared, That Mr. Knewstubbs had the greater number by viij. viz.
Mr. D. Dey had Cxxxij. reckoning Mr. D. Jones, and Mr. Nuce, who were
Scrutators; and Mr. Knewstubbs had Lxxxx. Whereupon he says afterward they
reckoned the Curates on both sides, who they took to have no Voices there, and
they found one Curate on Mr. D. Dey's side, and xiij. Curates on Mr.
Knewstubb's side. And also, because he had heard, that by the Custom aforesaid,
none of the Archdeaconry of Suffolk had any Voices there; they also reckoned
how many of that Archdeaconry were there, and they found xxvij. on Mr.
Knewstubbs side, and knows not whether there was any on D. Dey's side or not.

Sessio Quarta.
DIE Veneris xi. die Mensis Novembris 1586. bora and loco alias assignatis in
Inseriori Domo Convocationis, etc. in praesentia mei Edw. Say and Thomae Barker
Notariorum, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Gilpin, etc.

Isto die, post finitas preces comparuere omnes supra nominati; and tunc
Magister D. Dey petiit se admitti and recipi in Procuratorem Cleri
Archidiaconatus Sudbury, juxta Electionem de Persona sua alias factam. Et
deinde quia Mr. Knewstubbs, alias ad ipsius petitionem monitus ad interessendum
istis die and loco, propositurus quae ex part sua habet proponend. comparens
nullas proposuit causas rationabiles pro part sua, quare sit admittendus in
Procuratorem ejusdem Cleri; and quia constat ex depositionibus nonnullorum
fide-dignorum testium, Magistrum Knewstubbs fuisse Superiorem Magistro D. Dey
in Electione praedicta, tantum per Curatos, and alios qui secundum
consuetudinem Electionis infra Archidiaconatus Suffolk and Sudbury in hac
Electione nullam habuere vocem; and eis demptis, compertum est Magistrum Dey
fuisse superiorem; igitur Dominus Prolocutor decrevit dictum Magistrum Doctorem
Dey recipiendum fore in Procuratorem ejusdem Cleri and in Coetum hujus Domus,
eumque sic recepit. Deinde Dominus Prolocutor certior factus de voluntate
Reverendissimi Patris (per Magistrum Thomam Redman ejus Registrarium) quood
controversiam super Electione Clericorum Diaeceseos Norwicen. viz. quod idem
Reverendissimus Pater tulit Sententiam suam pro part Magistri West contra
Magistrum Thorowgood, intimavit haec omnibus praesentibus and monuit eos ad
recipiendum eundem Magistrum West in Coetum hujus Domus. Quibus sic gestis,
dictus Dominus Prolocutor continuavit hujusmodi Convocationem quoad hanc Domum,
usque in diem Mercurij proximum in hoc loco, and monuit omnes ad interessendum,
etc.

Sessio Quinta.
DIE Mercurij, xvjo. die Mensis Novembris 1586. hora and loco praeassignatis in
Inferiori Domo Convocationis, etc. in praesentia mei Edwardi Say Notarij, etc.
assumpti, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Goodman, etc.

Isto die comparuere omnes supra nominati; and post preces finitas Dominus
Proloquutor continuavit hujusmodi Convocationem quoad hanc Domum usque in diem
Veneris proximum hora Nona ante meridiem in hoc loco, and monuit omnes ad
interessendum, etc.

Sessio Sexta.
DIE Veneris xviijo. die Mensis Novembris 1586. hora and loco praeassignatis in
Inferiori Domo Convocationis, etc. and prasente me Edwardo Say Notario Publico,
etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Pearne, etc.

Isto die comparuere omnes supra nominati; and post finitas preces Dominus
Proloquutor accersitus ad Reverendissimum Patrem illuc accessit, Decano Elien.
and Decano Oxon. eum comitantibus. Et post aliqualem tractatum cum
Reverendissimo and caeteris Praelatis, accersiti fuerunt omnes ad eosdem
Reverendissimum and Praelatos, and ibi habita fuit ijs omnibus Admonitio per
dictum Reverendissimum, ut Leges hactenus editae diligenter secundum Canones
Stabilitae observentur. Et ut fiat reformatio in Ecclesiis eorum, etc. Ac
deinde revertentes omnes in Inferiorem Domum, habita exhortatione per Dominum
Proloquutorem, ut reminiscantur Admonitionem Reverendissimi Patris ijs factam,
dictus Dominus Proloquutor continuavit hujusmodi Convocationem quoad hanc
Domum, usque in diem Mercurij proximum, hora Nona ante Meridiem in hoc loco;
and monuit omnes ad interessendum.

Sessio Septima.
DIE Mercurij xxiijo. die Menfis Novembris 1586. hora and loco praeassignatis,
in Inferiori Domo Convocationis, praesente me Edwardo Say Notario, etc.

D. Bulleyn, D. James.

Isto die comparuere omnes supra nominati; and precibus finitis Magister D.
Bulleyn Decanus Lichen. nomine Domini Proloquutoris intimavit omnibus
praesentibus hujusmodi Convocationem esse continuatam, usque in diem Veneris
proximum, hora nona ante Meridiem in hoc loco, and monuit omnes ad
interessendum, etc.

Sessio Octava.
DIE Veneris xxvo. die Mensis Novembris, 1586. hora and loco praeassignatis,
praesente Thoma Barker Notario Publico, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Kennal, etc.

Isto die comparuere omnes supranominati, and precibus finitis accersitus fuit
Dominus Prolocutor ad Reverendissimum in superiori Domo existentem, caeterosque
Dominos Episcopos ibidem; and comitati sunt cum Magistri D. Goodman, and D.
James. Unde paulo post reverten. Dominus Proloquutor intimavit omnibus
praesentibus, hanc Convocationem esse continuatam and prorogatam usque in diem
Luna proxmum inter horas Octavam and undecimam ante Meridiem in hoc loco, and
monuit omnes ad interessendum, etc.

Sessio Nona.
DIE Lunae xxviij. die Mensis Novembris 1586. hora and loco praeassignatis, in
Inferiori Domo Convocationis, etc. praesente Thoma Barker Notario Publico, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Perne, etc.

Isto die, comparuere omnes supra nominati; and post preces finitas Dominus
Proloquutor continuavit hujusmodi Convocationem quoad hanc Domum, in diem
Veneris proximum inter horas octavam and undecimam ante Meridiem in hoc loco,
and monuit omnes ad interessendum, etc.

Sessio Decima.
DIE Veneris 2o. die Mensis Decembris 1586. hora and loco praeassignatis, in
Inferiori Domo Convocationis, etc. in praesentia mei Edwardi Say Notarij
Publici, etc.

D. Goodman, D. Bevans, etc.

Isto die compau uere omnes supranominati, and finitis precibus Mr. Gabriel
Goodman Decanus Westminster, nomine Domini Prolocutoris continuavit hujusmodi
Convocationem quoad hanc Domum, Usque inter horas primam and secundam post
meridium hujus diei, and prorogavit locum hujusmodi, Usque ad and in Sacello
olim nuncupato Beatae Mariae in Orientali part Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi
Pauli London, notarie situato, etc. and monuit omnes ad interessendum, etc.

Sessio Undecima.
EOdem die, inter horas, and loco praeassignat. in Inferiori Convocationis,
praesente me Edwardo Say Notario Publico, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Culpeper.

Quibus horis and loco comparuere omnes supranominati; and precibus finitis,
eum comitantibus Magistris Perne, Mullins and Gilpin, adiit Reverendissimum
Patrem and caeteros Praelatos; and paulo post revertens intimavit omnibus
praesentibus, consultum esse per eosdem Reverendissimum Patrem and Praelatos,
de Reformatione fienda quoad Scedulas eidem Reverendissimo ac Domino
Proloquutori exhibitas, etc. Et quod conventum est inter dictos Reverendissimum
and Praelatos de Exercitijs fiendis per Ministros infra Provinciam
Cantuariensem; Et quod ijdem Reverendi Patres, cum redierint in Diaeceses suas,
Ordinem eorundem significabunt omnibus quibus interest in hac part. Quibus sic
expeditis, dictus Dominus Proloquutor continuavit hujusmodi Convocationem,
quoad hanc Domum, Usque in diem Veneris xvij. viz. diem mensis Februarij
proximi inter horas nonam and undecimam ante meridiem, etc. in hoc loco, and
monuit omnes ad tunc interessendum.

DIE Veneris, viz. 17o. Februarij 1586. secundum, etc. in Domo Capitulari
Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi Pauli London, in praesentia Edwardi Say Notarij
Publici assumpti, etc. ac inter horas nonam and undecimam ante meridiem.

Continuata est hujusmodi Convocatio ab undecimo Decembris 1586. in statu quo
tunc fuit, Usque in hos diem horam and locum. Quibus die, hora and loco,
Venerabilis Vir Magister Wilhelmus Awbrey Legum Doctor, Commissarius
Reverendissimi Patris Domini Johannis Cant. Archiepiscopi, etc. authoritate
sufficienti ad hoc fulcitus, Continuavit hujusmodi Convocationem, in statu quo
^st, Usque in diem Veneris, viz. 24. diem praesentis mensis Februarij, inter
horas nonam and undecimam ante meridiem ejusdem diei, and prorogavit locum
usque ad and in Ecclesiam Collegiatam Divi Petri Westminster, etc. praesentibus
tunc ibidem venerabilibus Viris Magistris Mullyns and Walker ex Coetu
Inferioris Domus, nec non alijs testibus, etc.

Sessio prima.
DIE Veneris, viz. 24o. Februarij. 1586. secundum, etc. in quodam Sacello ex
part australi infra Ecclesiam Collegiatam Divi Petri Westminster, inter horas
nonam and undecimam ante meridiem in presentia Edwardi Say and Thomae Barker
Notariorum Publicorum Inferioris Domus Actorum Scribarum assumptorum, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Episcopus Dovor, etc.

Isto die, omnes supranominati in locum praedictum convenerunt; and postquam
Dominus Proloquutor una cum supranominatis preces divinas peregerat mox idem
Dominus Proloquutor accersitus fuit ad Reverendissimum Patrem caeterosque ejus
Confratres Praelatos in Superiori Domo infra dictam Ecclesiam Collegiatam
Westminster. existen. ad quos se contulit, eumque comitati sunt Decanus Cant.
and Decanus Elien. Ac statim reliqui omnes Inferioris Domus similiter accersiti
erant, atque eosdem Reverendos Patres adierunt; ibique Reverendissimus Pater
Dominus Cant. Archiepiscopus ob paucitatem Comparentium, etc. intimavit Domino
Proloquutori absentes ab eorum Contumacias, etc. suspendendos fore debere, etc.
Ac deinde declaravit nonnullas causas de Subsidio Domina nostra Reginae
praestand, etc. Necnon Reverendus Pater Dominus London. Episcopus querelatus
est de negligentia Magistri Georgij Gardener Decani Norwicen. ac aliorum, in
non concionando in publico Suggestu infra Coemiterium Paulinum situat'. juxta
monitionem eis in ea part factam, etc. Ac postea Dominus Prolocutor ac cateri
Inferioris Domus supranominati redierunt in Domum Inferiorem, ibique elegit
quosdam in Assessores sibi hic in margin hujus Actus nominat'. factaque
publica praeconizatione omnium citatorum, etc. ac monitorum, etc. and non
comparentium Dominus pronuntiavit eos, and eorum quemlibet Contumaces, exceptis
licentiatis discedendi, aut alias isto die infra Civitatem London, aut Suburbia
ejusdem concionantibus, reservata eorum poena in diem Mercurij proxmum, etc.
inter horas pri. mam and tertiam post Meridiem. Et tunc, interrogatis omnibus
per Dominum Prolocutorem utrum consentirent ut ipse Dominus Prolocutor eligeret
ex Assessoribus sibi Sex quorum duo essent Decani, duo Archidiaconi and reliqui
duo ex hac domo prout sibi videretur, qui de libello concipiendo Electi in
Assessores isto die sunt, Rev. Pater Dec. Cant Dec. St. Pauli Land. Dec.
Westminster. Dec. Roffen. Dec. Elien. Dec. Oxon. Archid. London. Archid.
Lincoln. Archid. Sudbury. Archid. Darby. D. Walker. D. Wood. D. Brancrafte.
Magister Wylson. Magister Winter.

pro Subsidio Dominae nostrae Reginae praestando tractarent, Uno Ore consensum
and assensum suos praebuerunt, nemine contradicente. Ac deinde Dominus
Prolocutor intimavit omnibus praesentibus hanc Convocationem esse continuatam
usque in diem Mercurij proximum, etc. inter horas primam and tertiam post
Meridiem in hunc locum, and monuit omnes jam praesentes ad tunc ibidem
interessendum, etc.

Sessio Secunda.
DIE Mercurij, viz. primo die Mensis Martij, Anno Domini 1586. secundum, etc.
in quodam Sacello infra Ecclesiam Collegiatam Divi Petri Westminster, ex part
australi inter horas primam and tertiam post Meridiem, praesentibus Edwardo Say
and Thoma Barker, Notarijs Publicis assumptis, etc.

Dom. Prolocutor, Decanus Cant.

Die praedicto, comparuerunt omnes supranominati: Et post preces finitas
Dominus Prolocutor accersitus fuit ad Reverendos Patres Dominos Praelatos in
superiori Domo, nempe Reverendum Patrem Dominum Winton Episcopum, Dominum
Lincoln. Episcopum, and Dominum Hereforden. Episcopum; eumque comitati sunt
Decanus Cant. and Mr. Johannes Winter. Unde mox reverten', quidam Gabriel
Holte, Verbi Dei praedicator paupertate coactus petiit benevolentiam hujus
Coetus, ac protulit and ostendit Domino Prolocutori literas quasdam
Testimoniales in eundem effectum. Unde statim facta fuit Collectio xxvi s. iid.
quam Summam Dominus Prolocutor tunc and ibidem tradidit eidem Holte. Ac deinde
Dominus Prolocutor intimavit omnibus praesentibus, hujusmodi Convocationem esse
continuatam Usque in diem Veneris inter horas octavam and undecimam ante
Meridiem ejusdem diei, and reservavit poenas Contumacium usque in eundem diem;
Et moniti sunt omnes, etc. ad tunc interessendum in hoc loco, Sess. etc. Isto
die assidebant Domino Prolocutori, Dominus Decanus Cant. D. Wood, D. Walker, D.
Barefoote, D. Coldwell, Mr. Mullyns, Mr. Winter.

Sessio Tertia.
DIE Veneris, viz. tertio Martij, 1586. secundum, etc. in loco Solito
praeassignato, viz. in quodam Sacello infra Ecclesium Collegiatam beati Petri
Westminster, inter horas octavam and undecimam ante Meridiem in praesentia mei
Thomae Barker Notarij Publici assumpti, etc.

Dom. Prolocutor, Decanus Cant. etc.

Die praedicto, convenerunt omnes supranominati, ibique post Divini numinis
implorationem Dominus Proloquutor accersitus fuit ad Reverendissimum Dominum
Cant. Archiepiscopum, Caeterosque Reverendos Patres Dominos Praelatos, in
Superiori Domo: Eumque comitati sunt Decanus Cant. and Deoanus Elien. Unde mox
revertens Dominus Prolocutor in poenam Contumaciarum citatorum, etc. and non
comparentium, etc. decrevit procedendum fore, ac postea narravit praesenti
Coetui hujus Domus, se una cum Assessoribus suis egisse cum praedicto
Reverendissimo Patre ac Praelatis de Subsidio Dominae nostrae Reginae
praebendo; Ac concordatum esse de eodem juxta ratam and formam, alias in ultimo
Subsidio usitatam. Quod factum omnes praesentes tam nominibus eorum proprijs,
quam nominibus reliquorum hujus Domus quorum Procuratores existunt,
ratificarunt and approbarunt. Et ulterius Dominus Prolocutor significavit
supranominatis hujus Domus praesentibus voluntatem Reverendissimi ac aliorum
Dominorum Praelatorum de benevola contributione, ultra Subsidium praedictum
Dominae nostrae Reginae sine longa mora concedend. ac partim solvend. ob
urgentes causas, and maxim propter bellum imminens, and graves minas hostium
Evangelii, viz. de Contributione trium solidorum de qualibet libra annualis
reditus cujuslibet Beneficii infra Provinciam Cant. juxta ratam and taxam
eorundem in libris primitiarum Dominae nostrae Reginae; exceptis Vicarijs
quorum Beneficia non attingunt Summam, xl. juxta ratam praedictam, nec non
Canonicis minoribus Ecclesiarum Cathedralium and Collegiatarum, caeterisque
Ministris Inferioribus, etc. Et quod de hujusmodi libello concipiendo maturior
deliberatio cum Jurisperitorum consilio habeatur. Quibus omnibus sic
declaratis, omnes ut supra praesentes, sine mora aut haesitatione quacunque
consensum and assensum suos praebuerunt. Et tunc ego Notarius antedictus, ex
mandato Domini Prolocutoris, monui omnes isto die comparentes ad exhibendum and
introducendum Procuratoria, si quae habeant, ad comparend. pro absentibus
citatis ad comparendum in hac Sacra Synodo in proxima Sessione, etc. deinde
Dominus Prolocutor ac caeteri omnes hujus Domus praenominati accersiti fuerunt
ad dictum Reverendissimum, ac caetoros Praelatos Superioris Domus; ibique
significarunt, omnia and singula per eos gesta, etc. Ac Dominus Prolocutor
petiit, quod si posthac aliqua alia impositio five taxatio sit in Clerum
imponenda, durante tempore assignando pro Solutione Summarum jam concessarum;
ut eadem taxatio fiat per ipsum Clerum inter se, and quod de eadem liberentur
quoad fieri poterit: Cui petitioni annuerunt. Et tunc public ibidem perlectus
fuit per Magistrum Thomam Redman Notarium Publicum Libellus pro Subsidio
concesso conceptus, and in aliquibus sui partibus emendatus, correctus, and
perfectus redditus. Ac mox in Domum Inferiorem reversi sunt Dominus Prolocutor
Caeterique ejusdem Domus, ibique Dominus pronuntiavit absentes, etc.
Contumaces, reservata eorum poena in prox. etc. Et praeterea, intimavit
praesentibus hanc Convocationem esse continuatam in crastinum inter horas
tertiam and quintam post Meridiem, and in hunc locum, ac monuit eos ad
interessendum.

Sessio Quarta.
DIE Sabbathi, viz. quarto Martii, 1586. secundum, etc. inter horas tertiam and
quintam post Meridiem in Sacello ex part australi Ecclesiae Collegiatae
Westminster, praesente Magistro Edwardo Say Notario Publico, etc.

Dominus Prolocutor, D. Pearne, etc.

Die praedicto camparuere omnes supranominati; and Dominus Proloquutor adivit
Dominos Praelatos in Superiori Domo, eumque comitati sunt Decanus Elien and
Archidiaconus Lincoln. Unde, post aliquam ibidem moram, tandem redierunt,
ibique ex relatione Domini Proloquutoris public perlectus fuit Libellus
pro-benevola contributione Regiae Majestati concessa conceptus, and aliqualiter
emendatus ac perfectus redditus, etc. deinde per totum Coetum praesentem
approbatus. Et tunc Dominus Prolocutor reservavit poenas Contumacium, ut prius,
in proximam Sessionem, etc. and intimavit praesentibus hujusmodi Convocationem
esse continuatam, Usque in diem Lunae proximum, etc. inter horas primam and
quintam, and in hunc locum; and monuit praesentes ad tunc and ibidem
comparendum, etc.

Sessio Quinta.
DIE Lunae, viz. sexto Martii, 1586. secundum, etc. inter horas primam and
quintam post Meridiem ejusdem diei, in Sacello ex part Australi Ecclesiae
Collegiatae Westminster, praesente Johanne Mabill, Notario Publico, etc.

Quibus die and loco comparuerunt Magistri D. Powell, Say, Gilpin, West and
Maxfield, hujus Domus; quibus intimatum fuit hujusmodi Convocationem de mandato
and voluntate Reverendissimi Patris Domini Cant. Archiepiscopi esse
continuandam in diem Mercurii proximum, etc. inter horas octovam and undecimam
ante Meridiem ejusdem diei; prout revera continuata fuit: unde postea
discesserunt, etc.

Sessio Sexta.
DIE Mercurij, viz. 8o. die Mensis Martii, Anno Dom. 1586. secundum, etc. inter
horas octavam and undecimam ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, in loco consueto
praeassignato infra Ecclesiam Collegiatam Westminster, praesente me Thoma
Barker Notario Publico.

Quibus die, hora, and loco, comparuerunt Magistri Marston, Say, Bynam,
Dylworth, Studley, Barret, and Maxfield, ex Coetu Inferioris Domus; and eo quod
satis been norunt hujusmodi Convocationem esse continuatam, in diem Veneris
proximum, etc. viz. decimum diem praesentis Mensis Martii, post aliqualem moram
discesserunt.

Sessio Septima.
DIE Veneris, viz. decimo die Martii, 1586. secundum, etc. inter horas octavam
and undecimam ante Meridiem, in quodam Sacello ex part australi Ecclesiae
Collegiatae Westminster, praesente Magistro Edwardo Say, Notario Publico, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Reneger, etc.

Quibus die and loco, comparuerunt omnes supranominati; and post preces
finitas, Dominus Proloquutor accersitus fuit ad Reverendissimum Dominum Cant.
Archiepiscopum, caeterosque Dominos Praelatos in Superiori Domo, una cum toto
praesenti Coetu; eosque adierunt, atque ibidem aliquandiu morati sunt. Ac
tandem omnes supranominati in Domum hanc redierunt; excepto Domino
Proloquutore, qui cum eisdem Reverendis Patribus post discessum reliquorum
aliquantisper permansit. Ac deinde in hanc Domum revertens, cum consensu omnium
ut praefertur praesentium, elegit Venerabiles Viros Dominum Decanum Elien.
Archidiaconum Lincoln, and Archidiaconum Taunton, ad tractandum and
communicandum una secum cum Reverendis Patribus, de Constitutionibus and
Decretis, licentia and vigore Literarum Patentium per Dominam nostram Reginam
in ea part concessarum stabiliendis, pro collectione benevolae Contributionis
Dictae Dominae nostrae Reginae concessae, etc. Et tunc Dominus Proloquutor
intimavit omnibus praesentibus hanc Convocationem esse continuatam and
prorogatam in crastinum, inter horas primam and quartam post Meridiem ejusdem
diei, in hunc locum; and monuit omnes jam praesentes ad tunc ibidem
interessendum. Ac insuper reservavit poenas Contumacium usque in eosdem diem
and locum.

Sessio Octava.
DIE Sabbathi, viz. undecimo die Martii, 1586. secundum, etc. in Ecclesia
Collegiata beati Petri Westminster, inter horas nonam and undecimam ante
meridiem ejusdem diei, prasente Johanne Mabill, Notario Publico, etc. Quibus
die hora and loco, comparuerunt Magistri Stallard, West, Owens, and Proctor;
quibus significatum fuit, hjusmodi Convocationem esse continuandam in diem
Mercurii proximum, viz. 15. diem praesentis mensis Martii inter horas nonam and
undecimam ante meridiem ejusdem diei, de mandato Reverendissimi Patris Domini
Cant. Archiepiscopi, prout revera sic continuata fuit per Magistrum Lucam
Gilpin sufficeinter and legitime in ea part Deputatum. Unde mox supranominati
ex Coetu Inferioris Domus discesserunt.

Sessio Nona.
DIE Mercurij, 15o. Martij 1586. secundum, etc. in Ecclesia Collegiata beati
Petri, Westminster. inter horas nonam and undecimam ante meridiem ejusdem diei in
praesentia mei Thomae Barker, Notarij Publici, etc.

Quibus die hora and loco, comparuerunt Magistri Bynam, Meredith, Morgan, D.
Dey, D. Freake, West, Webb, Bancks, Studley, Proctor, Maxfeild, Rowland, Owens
and Jones; quibus intimatum fuit hujusmodi Convocationem fore de mandato
Reverendissimi Patris Domini Cant. Archiepiscopi continuandam, usque inter
horas primam and quintam post meridiem hujus diei, ac in locum solitum; prout
revera de certa Scientia mei Notarij antedicti postea sic continuata fuit. Unde
mox omnes supranominati discesserunt.

Sessio Decima.
EOdem die, inter horas praeassignatas; in quodam Sacello ex part Australi
infra Ecclesiam Collegiatam beati Petri, Westminster. in praesentia mei Thomae
Barker, Notarij Publici, etc.

D. Prolocutor, Decanus Cant.

Quibus die hora and loco, comparuerunt omnes supranominati; and post preces
ibidem peractas Dominus Prolocutor accersitus fuit ad Reverendissimum Patrem
Dominum Cant. Archiepiscopum, Caeterosque Dominos Praelatos, in Superiori Domo;
eumque comitati sunt Decanus Cant. and Decanus Elien. Ac post aliquam ibidem
moram revertebant, and tunc Dominus Proloquutor tradidit mihi Notario antedicto
quasdam Constitutiones sive Ordinationes in Scriptis conceptas pro fideli and
justa collectione ac Solutione benevolae Contributionis alias Regiae Majestati
in hac Sacra Synodo per Clerum Cant. Provinciae concessae, quas, de ejus
mandato, statim tunc ibidem alta and intelligibili voce perlegi. Quo facto,
Dominus Proloquutor interrogavit omnes supranominatos, an Decreta, and
Ordinationes hujusmodi sibi placerent; eosque rogavit quatenus eorum consensum
and assensum eisdem, si eis ita videretur, praeberent; and tunc omnes easdem
Ordinationes in omnibus approbarunt, atque consensum and assensum suos tam
nominibus eorum proprijs, quam nominibus omnium aliorum quorum Procuratores in
hac part respective existunt, praebuerunt. Tamen Magister Gilpin petijt, ut
Apparitores Ordinarij infra Provinciam Cant. (quibus incumbit onus monendi
omnes and singulos, huic benevolae contributioni obnoxios, juxta Ordinationes
modo lectas) habeant aliqua Feoda pro eorum laboribus in ea part impendendis:
Et super hoc orta est aliqua disceptatio inter eum and Dominum Prolocutorem. Ac
deinde Dominus Proloquutor una cum Decano Cant. Decano Elien. and Decano Westminster.
iterum adivit Reverendissimum Patrem Dominum Cant. Archiepiscopum, ac reliquos
Reverendos Patres in Superiori Domo, ad certificandum eos de gestis hujusmodi.
Unde brevi reverten. Dominus Proloquutor intimavit hujusmodi Convocationem esse
continuatam in diem Veneris proximum, etc. in hunc locum, inter horas octavam
and undecimum ante meridiem ejusdem diei; and moniti sunt omnes supranominati
ad tunc ibidem interessendum, etc. Magistri Nowell, Walker, Humfrey, Byss,
Powell, and Say, ex Relatione Domini Proloquutoris, isto die sunt licentiati
quoad eorum personalem comparitionem, etc.

Sessio Undecima.
DIE Veneris, viz. 17o. Martij 1586. Secundum, etc. in quodam Sacello ex part
australi Ecclesiae Collegiatae beati Petri, Westminster. inter horas Octavam and
Undecimam ante meridiem ejusdem diei, in praesentia mei Thomae Barker, Notarij
Publici, etc.

Quibus die hora and loco, comparuerunt Dominus Proloquutor nec non Magistri
Marston, R^. Smyth, Dey, West, Bancks, Studley, Freake, Pratt, Proctor, Jones,
Webb, Bynam and Heywood: Quibus Dominus Proloquutor intimavit hujusmodi
Convocationem esse continuatam usque in diem Mercurij proximum, viz. Vicesimum
secundum diem praesentis Mensis Martij, inter horas octavam and undecimam ante
meridiem ejusdem diei, in hun^ locum; and monuit eos ad tunc ibidem
interessendum, etc.

Sessio Duodecima.
DIE Mercurij, viz. 22o. Martij 1586. secundum, etc. in Ecclesia Collegiata
Divi Petri, Westminster. inter horas octavam and undecimam ante meridiem,
significatum erat hujusmodi Convocationem esse continuatam in diem Veneris
proximum, viz. vicesimum quartum Martij praedict. inter boras octavam and
undecimam ante meridiem, and in bunc locum.

Sessio Decima Tertia.
DIE Veneris, viz. 24o. Martij 1586. secundum, etc. Continuata fuit hujusmodi
Convocatio, per Venerabilem Virum Magistrum Willielmum Awbrey Legum Doctorem,
Vicarium in Spiritualibus generalem Reverendissimi Patris Domini Johannis
Providentia Divina Cant. Archiepiscopi, nec non Commissarium in ca part
spectaliter deputatum, usque ad and inter boras primam and quartam
postmeridianas, ac in lecum praedictum. Ac insuper idem Venerabilis Vir jussit
ut omnes hujus Domus qui ad locum praedictum ante meridiem illius diei
venirent, moneantur ad tempestive in locum solitum congregandum praedictum,
statim a prandie, etc. prout ex Relatione Mri. Redman Deputati Registrarij
Superioris Domus, ego Thomas Barker, Notarius antedictus accepi, etc.

Sessio Decima Quarta.
EOdem die inter horas primam and quartam post meridiem in loco solito
praeassignato, praesente me Thoma Barker, Notario, etc. comparuerunt
personaliter omnes and finguli quorum nomina hic Subscribuntur, viz.

D. Prolocutor, Dom. Pearne, etc.

Et tunc precibus prius rite ac debite peractis, de mandato Domini
Proloquutoris facta fuit publica preconizatio omnium citatorum ad comparendum
in hac Domo juxta consuetudinem alias usitatam, and juxta tenores Mandatorum
and Certificatoriorum alias respective coram ipso Reverendissimo Patre Domino
Cant. Archiepiscopo, etc. exhibitorum and introductorum. Eaque praeconizatione
vix completa, Dominus Proloquutor una cum integro Coetu hujus Domus tunc
praesente, accersiti fuerunt ad dictum Reverendissimum Patrem, aliosque
Praelatos in Capella vulgariter dicta Capella Regis Henrici Septimi existentes;
ad quos finita praeconisatione citatorum (ut praesertur) immediate sese
contulerunt; ibique Reverendissimus Pater Dominus Cant. Archiepiscopus
querelatus est de incuria, negligentia, and contumacia citatorum, etc. and non
comparentium, etc. ac etiam de prava and immoderata luxuria and minus vereundo
gestu ac morum intemperie nonnullorum Clericorum Provinciae Cant. ad Fora and
Loca publica concurrentium: Quare monuit Decanos, Archidiaconos and alios jam
praesentes, ad quos correctio delinquentium hujusmodi pertinet, ad severe
procedendum and puniendum obnoxios and culpabiles; and si incorrigibiles
perseveraverint, ad implorandum auxilium and open Episcopi Diaecesani, vel
ipsius Reverendissimi Patris, vel etiam ipsius Serenissimae Dominae nostrae
Regira, ne actionum and morum pravitas istorum obnubilet and obscuret Doctrinam
Evangelij, quod vervis profitentur; quo pluribus pernitiosum siet pessimum
eorum Exemplum. Et tunc porrecta sibi Scedala Suspensionis, una cum Scedula
continente nomina and cognomina contumaciter absentium ab hac Sacra Synodo;
idem Reverendissimus cos^ and singulos in bujusmodi Scedula nominatos a
celebratione divinorum and omnimodo exercitio Ecclesiasticae Jurisdictionis
Suspendit; prout in ipsa Scedula penes Registrarium ipsius Reverendissimi
Patris quoad Superiorem Domum remanente, continetur. Ac deinde Idem
Reverendissimus Pater, vigore and authoritate brevis Regij sibi in ea part
directi, ac penes Registrarium suum praedictum etiam remanentis, Convocationem
hujusmodi dissolvit, etc.

ANNO MDLXXXVIII.
DIE Mercurij, viz. quinto die mensis Februarii, Anno Domini secundum Ecclesiae
Anglicanae computationem 1588. and Regni Serenissimae Dominae nostrae Dominae
Elizabeth, Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae Reginae, fidei
Defensoris, etc. Anno tricesimo primo. Venerabilis Vir Magister Johannes Still,
Archidiaconus Sudbury, ac Sacrae Theologiae Professor, intravit Suggestum in
Cancello infra Ecclesiam Cathedralem Divi Pauli London, ibique apud
Reverendissimum Dominum Cant. caeterosque Dominos Episcopos and Praelatos
necnon nonnullos alios Provinciae Cant. doctam habuit ac edidit Concionem in
Sermon Romano. Qua debite finita per Semihoram ante undecimam horam ejusdem
diei, complures ex Clero Provinciae Cant. praed. recesserunt in Inferiorem
Domum Synodalis Convocationis Praelatorum and Cleri Cant. Provinciae, viz. in
Sacellum olim nuncupatum beatae Mariae in Orientali part Eccles^ae Cathedralis
Divi Pauli London, notorie Situat. Ibique coram Venerabilibus Viris, Decanis,
Archidiaconis, Procuratoribus Capitulorum Ecclesiarum Cathedralium, and Cleri
tunc ibidem ad hujusmodi Convocationem celebrandum juxta effectum brevis Regii
and prae^eriti temporis morem infimul congregatis, Comparuit Venerabilis Vir
Magister Alexander Nowel, Decanus Sancti Pauli London, cui praesenti ex antiquo
more and consuetudine dictae Ecclesiae Cathedralis Sancti Pauli praedicti, Jus
dirigendi Electionem futuri Proloquutoris competit: Et ex part dicti
Reverendissimi Patris Domini Johannis providentia divina Cant. Archiepiscopi
significavit, ut ad Electionem futuri Proloquutoris procedere licite and libere
valiant and possint, and commendavit eis praefatum Venerabilem Virum Magistrum
Johannem Still tunc ibidem praesentem. Unde omnes tunc praesentes uno ore
eundem Magistrum Johannem Still sine mora in eorum and dicti Coetus Inferioris
Domus Cleri, Proloquutorem and Referendarium concorditer unanimi consensu
nominarunt and elegerunt, nemine contradicente. Et consequenter nominarunt and
elegerunt Venerabilem Virum Magistrum Richardum Fletcher, Sacrae Theology
Professorem, Decaenum Petriburgen, praesentem, ad. praesentandum dictum Dominum
Proloquutorem Reverendissimo Domino Johanni Cant. Archiepiscopo, and caeteris
Praelatis in Superiori Domo, die Veneris proximo, inter horas primam and
quartam post meridiem in Ecclesia Collegiata Westminster, cum debita and solita
Solemnitate. Et moniti sunt omnes praesentes, quatenus dictis die, hora and
loco conveniant ad effectum praedictum. Act^ and gesta fuerunt praemissa in
praesentia Johannis Coston and mei Thomae Barker Notariorum Publicorum, in
ejusdem Domus Inferioris Actorum Scrib. assumptorum.

Nomina quorundam praesentium Electioni praedictae qui mihi Thomae Barker
Notario praedicto ex aspectu noti erant; reliquorum vero quam plurimorum etiam
praesentium ob brevitatem temporis capere minime potui.

D. Pearne, D. Bell, etc.

Sessio Secunda.
DIE Veneris, viz. septimo Fabruarii, 1588. secundum, etc. inter horas secundam
and quartam post meridiem ejusdem diei, in loco consueto infra Ecclesiam
Collegiatam Divi Petri Westminster. in praesentia Johannis Coston and Thomae Barker,
Notariorum Publicorum assumptorum, etc.

Quibus die, hora and loco, postquam omnes supranominati Venerabiles Viri
convenerunt, dictus Venerabilis Praesentator (ut praefertur) designatus, una
cum caeteris supranominatis ex dicto Inferiori Domo, accersiti fuerunt in
Superiorem Domum; dictumque Venerabilem Virum Magistrum Johannem Still,
Proloquutorem electum conduxerunt ad Superiorem Domum in Orientali part dictae
Ecclesiae existentem; ibique praefatus Praesentator eundem Magistrum Still
dicto Reverendissimo Patri Domino Cant. Archiepiscopo, and caeteris Superioris
Domus Praelatis praesentavit; ubi habita and praemissa docta Oratione a
praefato Venerabili Viro Magistro Richardo Fletcher, Praesentatore antedicto,
and ea finita, altera docta Oratione seu Praefatione ipsius Venerabilis Viri
Domini Proloquutoris, dictus Reverendissimus Pater cum caeteris Dominic
Praelatis tunc praesentibus Electionem hujusmodi, and Dominum Proloquutorem
electum concorditer Approbarnut and Ratificarunt. Hijs expeditis, Dominus
Proloquutor cum Coetu suo praedicto, in dictam Inferiorem Domum revertebatur;
ubi de ejus mandato facta fuit praeconizatio omnium interesse debentium, etc.
qua peracta Dominus Proloquutor accersitus fuit ad Reverendissimum caeterosque
Dominos Praelatos in Superiori Domo, eumque comitati sunt Venerabiles Viri
Magistri D. Pearne, D. Goodman, D. Coldwell, D. Fletcher, D. Barefoot, and D.
Chamberleyne; ubi aliquantisper commorantes, mox reversi sunt, Dictusque
Dominus Proloquutor universo Coetui significavit voluntatem Reverendissimi
caeterorumque Praelatorum Superioris Domus esse, quod si aliquis hujus Domus
noverit quenquam Ministrum, de quo just conqueri possit, quod contra Leges
Eccles^asticas nunc temporis autoritate legitima receptas and approbatas sese
gessit and gerit, aut si aliquis noverit quenquam qui Canones in ultima
Convocatione approbatos and editos violaverit, eosdem in scriptis denuntiarent
Reverendissimo Domino Cant. Archiepiscopo, caeterisque Dominis Praelatis
praedictis pro debita correctione and reformatione in ea part faciend. Et
ulterius Dominus Proloquutor monuit omnes supranominatos praesentes, ut
decenter incedant habitu Clericali ad evitandum Calumniam and Scandalum hominum
cerebrosorum horum temporum. Ac deinde Dominus Proloquutor intimavit omnibus
supranominatis Convocationem hujusmodi esse continuatam. Usque in diem Mercurij
proximum inter horas nonam and undecimam ante meridiem, and in Ecclesiam
Collegiatam praedictam, and monuit omnes jam praesentes ad tunc ibidem
interessendum, etc.

Sessio Tertia.
DIE Mercurij, viz. duodecimo die Februarii, Anno Domini 1588. secundum, etc.
in quodam Sacello ex part Septentrionali Ecclesiae Collegiatae Divi Petri
Westminster, inter horas nonam and undecimam ante meridiem ejusdem diei in
praesentia Johannis Coston and Thomae Barker, Notariorum Publicorum, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Pearne, etc.

Quibus die, hora and loco, comparuerunt omnes supranominati Venerabiles Viri;
and post preces peractas Dominus Proloquutor elegit sibi in Assessores
Venerabiles Viros, Decanum Elien. Decanum Roffen. Decanum Sarum. Decanum
Lichen. Decanum Petriburgen. D. Bell, D. Barefoot, D. Wythers; quam Electionem
omnes supranominati approbarunt and ratificarunt. Ac mox accersitus suit
Dominus Proloquutor ad Reverendissimum Dominum Cant. Archiepiscopum,
caeterosque Dominos Praelatos, in Superiori Domo; quo sine mora se contulit,
eumque comitati sunt Domini Assessores praenominati. Unde paulo post
revertentes in locum praedictum, Dominus Proloquutor significavit universo
Coetui, consensum and concordatum fuisse and esse inter Dominos Praelatos
Superioris Domus, quod Reverendi Patres Domini Winton Episcopus, Episcopus
Roffen and Episcopus Hereford, tractarent, statuerent, and deliberarent de
subsidio Dominae nostrae Reginae erogando; and in eundem finem Dominus
Prolocutor nominavit and elegit Venerabiles Viros, Decanum Elien. Decanum
Westminster. Decanum Sarum, Decanum Divi Pauli London. Decanum Roffen. Decanum
Cicestren, Decanum Petriburgen, D. Kennal, D. Bell. D. Reneger, D. Wythers, D.
Capcott, Magistrum Mullyns, Magistrum Redman, D. Barefoot, Magistrum Bungey, ut
similiter vice ac nominibus totius hujus Coetus communicarent and tractarent de
subsidio hujusmodi, nec non consensum and assensum omnium supranominatorum
hujus Coetus in Electionem suam hujusmodi petiit, and sine mora obtinuit. Unde
monuit omnes praesentes ne revelarent gesta hujusmodi isto die, donec manifest
notum foret, quid Laici in eorum Domo Parliamenti de Subsidio per eos
praestando prope diem statuerent.

Quibus sic gestis, Dominus Proloquutor intimavit hujusmodi Convocationem esse
continuatam, usque istum diem ad septimanam inter horas nonam and undecimam
ante Meridiem in hoc loco, and monuit omnes jam praesentes ad tunc ibidem
interessendum, etc.

Isto die porrecta fuit Domino Proloquutori Scedula Reformand. per Magistrum
Coton.

Sessio Quarta.
DIE Mercurij, viz. ixo. Februarii, 1588 secundum, etc. in quodam Sacello ex
part septentrionali Ecclesiae Collegiatae Divi Petri Westminster, in
praesentia Johannis Coston, and mei Thomae Barker, Notariorum Publicorum
assumptorum, etc. inter horas praeassignatas, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Bridges, etc.

Quibus die, hora and loco, inter horas praeassignatas comparuerunt omnes
supranominati; and post divini numinis implorationem, Venerabiles Viri Magistri
D. Pearne, D. Bridges, D. Coldwell, D. James, D. Goodman, D. Bulleyn, D.
Barefoot, D. Wythers, and Archidiaconus Cant. ex rogatu Domini Proloquutoris,
sibi assidebant. Ac deinde nuntiatum fuit Domino Proloquutori de voluntate
Reverendissimi Patris Domini Cant. Archiepiscopi and coeterorum Dominorum
Episcoporum in Superiori Domo, quod ad se accederet cum Assessoribus suis
praedictis. Quo mox sese cantuelerunt; ibique aliquantisper commorantes, in
eorum reversu in hujusmodi Coetu, Dominus Prolocutor obnixe rogabat and petebat
a universo Coetu, quatenus intuitu bellorum per Adversaries and hosts hujus
Regni intentatorum, ac mature and provide per Dominam nostram Reginam ejusque
Senatum propulsorum and propellend. and ob alias justas and legitimas causas,
darent and concederent eidem Dominae nostrae Reginae, ultra Subsidium solitum,
Semi-Subsidium solvendum similibus diebus and terminis alias assignatis pro
solutione benevolae Contributionis dictae Dominae nostrae Reginae nuper
concessae successive and immediate post lapsum eorundem terminorum alias (ut
prae^ertur) ossignatorum in uno and eodem libro sive Instrumento aut in
diversis concipiend. Cujus petitioni nonnulli hujus Domus annuebant, ac alii
nonnulli adversabantur; ita quod difficile erat judicare utra pars major esset.
Unde vocatis nominatim omnibus praesentibus, apparuit numerum Consentientium
huic Semi-Subsidio aliquantulam minorem esse quam Dissentientium. Et quoniam
lapsus temporis non pateretur in praesenti ulteriorem tractatum de hac re,
Dominus Prolecutor monuit omnes praesentes, ne public revelarent traclata and
gesta isto die: Et ulterius intimavit eis hujusmodi Convocationem esse
continuatam, usque in Diem Veneris proximum in hoc loco, inter horas nonam and
undecimam ante Meridem; and monuit eos ad tunc ibidem interessendum, etc.

Sessio Quinta.
DIE Veneris, viz. 21o Februarii, 1588. secundum, etc. in quodam Sacello ex
part Septentrionali Ecclesiae Collgiatae Divi Petri Westminster, inter horas
nonam and undecimam ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, in praesentia mei Thomae Baker,
Notarii Publici assumpti, and.

D. Prolocutor, D. Coldwell etc.

Quibus die, hora and loco, comparuerunt omnes supranominati; and post preces
finitas, Dominus Proloquutor obnixe petiit and rogavit ab omnibus praesentibus,
ob causas alias per eum ultima Sessione declaratas, quatenus ipsi darent and
concederent Dominae nostrae Reginae duplex Sabsidium juxta formam Subsidii
ultimi sibi concessi, viz. Summam duodecim Solidorum ex qualibet libra annui
Valoris cujuslibet Dignitatis sive Beneficii Ecclesiastici, juxta Valorem
eorandem beneficiorum in libris primitiarum dictae Dominae nostrae Reginae
expressum, solvend. infra spatium sex annorum post lapsum sive expirationem
terminorum alias pro solatione Subsidii jamdudum concessi assignatorum: Cujus
petitioni omnes supranominati consentierunt. Et mox Dominus Proloquutor
accersitus suit ad Reverendissimum Dominum Cant. Archiepiscopum, caeterosque
Dominos Praelatos in Superiori Domo; quo se contulit, comitantibus eum Decano
Westminster, Decano Roffen, Decano Sarum. Decano Elien. Doctore Bell;
Archidiacono Mullyns, Archidiacono Redman. Unde paulo post revertens, retulit
universo Coetui hujus Domus, se significasse eisdem Dominis Praelatis Consensum
hujus Domus in concessione duplicis Subsidii petiti, nec non eorum petitionem
pro immunitate sua obtinenda ab omni exhibitione sive praestatione munitionum
bellicarum. Et ulterius Dominus Proloquutor ad petitionem quorundam hujus Domus
elegit Magistrum D. Bold, Magistrum Wilhelmum Coton, and Magistrum Bayneham,
ad tractandum and communicandum cum caeteris aliis electis de libro concipiendo
pro Subsidiis hujusmodi. Ac deinde Dominus Prolocutor intimavit omnibus
praesentibus hujusmodi Convocationem esse continuatam, usque diem Mercurii
proximum inter horas nonam and undecimam ante Meridiem in hoc loco, and monuit
eas ad tunc ibjdem interessendum.

Sessio Sexta.
DIE Mercurii, viz. 26. Februarii, 1588. secundum, etc. in quodam Sacello ex
part septentrionali infra Ecclesiam Collegiatam Divi Petri Westminster, inter
horas nonam and undecimam ante Meridiem ejusdem diei in praesentia mei Thomae
Barker, Notarii Publici assumpti, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Pearne, etc.

Quibus die, hora and loco, comparuerunt omnes supranominati; and post preces
celebratas, ex mandato Domini Proloquutoris ego Notarius antedictus public, ac
alta and intellibili voce, perlegi librum conceptum pro duobus Subsidiis
Dominae nostra Reginae concessis; and post lecturam ejusdem omnes praesentes
eundem librum, omnesque Sententias, clausulas, ac provisiones, tam veteres
minime reformatas quam recentiores and novas, nuper ac noviter emendatas and
additas, juxta petitiones and scedulas Domino Proloquutori porrectas unanimiter
approbarunt and ratificarunt. Ac statim postea accersitus fuit Dominus
Proloquutor, ad Dominos Praelatos in Superiori Domo, secumque ad eos transtulit
librum Subsidiorum praedict. comitantibus eum qui sibi assidebant die praedicto
viz. D. Pearne, D. Goodman, D. Coldwell, D. Bridges, D. Fletcher, D. James, and
D. Chamberleyne, and in eorum reversu in hanc Domum, Dominus Prolocutor
significavit omnibus praesentibus, quod Reverendi Patres in Superiori Domo
minime approbarunt quasdam ex Clausis sive Provisionibus in libro Subsidiorum
praedicto, sic ut praefertur lecto, and per totum Coetum hujus Domus approbato;
quodque lapsus temporis non pateretur in praesenti ulteriorem tractatum sive
deliberationem de ea re; Ideoque ulterius significavit continuationem esse
factam usque inter horas secundam and quartam horam pomeridianam in hoc loco,
and monuit omnes ad interessendum, etc.

Sessio Septima.
EOdem die in loco predicto ac inter horas praeassignatas, in praesentia mei
Thomae Barker, Notarij Publici assumpti, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Bell, etc.

Dictis die hora and loco, comparuerunt omnes supranominati; and mox
Venerabiles viri D. Pearne, D. Bulleyn, D. Bell, D. Tyndall, D. Goodman, D.
Coldwell, D. Wylson, Mr. Red. man, Mr. Bungey, Mr. Hutchinson, and Mr. Rilston,
deduxerunt sive comitati sunt Dominum Proloquutorem ad Reverendos Patres
Dominos Praelatos in Superiori Domo; ibique habita inter eos Consultatione sive
Communicatione de modo and forma Conceptionis Libri Subsidiorum praedict.
Domini Praelati declararunt Domino Proloquutori caeterisque supranominatis
nonnullas causas and rations ob quas dictus Liber Subsidiorum reformatur per
eos in quibusdam nuper additis and emendatis per Domum Inferiorem, necnon
rogarunt Dominum Proloquutorem ut causas and rations hujusmodi toto Coetui
Domus Inferioris renuntiaret. Quibus sic gestis, Dominus Proloquutor and
caeteri praenominati reversi sunt in Inferiorem Domum praedictam; and juxta
requisitionem sibi factam, ipse and Dominus Archidiaconus Cant. renunciarunt
causas reformationis Libri Subsidiorum praelict. and eis auditis, ortus est
dissensus de forma conceptionis dicti Libri. Unde, de mandato Domini
Proloquutoris, omnes praesentes per me Notarium Publicum praedictum nominatim
evocati sunt ad reddendum little Suffragia de Forma conceptionis dicti Libri; ac
deinde evidenter constitit numerum consentientium formae dicti Libri per
Dominos Episcopos, ut praefertur, reformati, majorem esse numero
dissentientium. Unde mox Dominus Proloquutor intimavit continuationem hujus
Convocationis esse factam usque diem Veneris proximum inter horas nonam and
undecimam ante meridiem ejusdem diei in hoc loco, and monuit omnes praesentes
ad interessendum, etc.

Sessio Octava.
DIE Veneris, viz. 28o. Februarij 1588. secundum, etc. in quodam Sacello ex
part Septentrionali infra Ecclesiam Collegiatam Divi Perri Westminster. inter horas
nonam and undecimam ante meridiem, in praesentia mei Thomae Barker, Notarij
Publici assumpti, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Chamberleyne, etc. Quibus die hora and loco, comparuerunt
omnes supranominati; and post Divini Numinis implorationem, Dominus Proloquutor
evocatus fuit ad Dominos Episcopos in Superiori Domo; ac Dominus Decanus Westminster.
Dominus Decanus Lichen. Dominus Decanus Roffen. Dominus Decanus Ecclesiae
Christi Oxon. eum comitati sunt. Unde paulo post revertentes, Dominus
Proloquutor public declaravit omnibus praesentibus, praefatos Dominos
Episcopos nuper certiores factos esse de adversa valitudine Reverendissimi
Patris Domini Cant. Archiepiscopi, ita quod non potest sine vitae suae periculo
ad hanc Ecclesiam Collegiatam accedere. Et ideo intimavit quod concessus hujus
Domus continuatur usque inter horas secundam and quartam pomeridianam in
Palatio dicti Reverendissimi Patris apud Lambehith, and monuit omnes ad
interessendum, etc.

Sessio Nona.
Eodem die inter horas secundam and quartam pomeridianas, in Sacello
Reverendissimi Patris Domini Archiepiscopi Cant. infra Palatium suum apud
Lambehith, in praesentia mei Thomae Barker, Notarij Publici assumpti, etc.

Die hora and loco praedictis, comparuerunt omnes infra nominati; and mox
Dominus Proloquutor totusque Coetus hujus Domus accersiti fuerunt ad Dominos
Episcopos existentes in quadam Camera jacente prope praedictum Sacellum; ibique
aperte, distinct, and public, perlectus fuit liber Subsidiorum. Quo sic
perlecto, nullus praesentium dictum librum aut formam ejusdem contradixit. Et
tunc Dominus Episcopus London, vigore Commissionis sibi in ea part factae,
continuavit hujusmodi Convocationem usque diem Mercurij proximum in Ecclesiam
Collegiatam Divi Petri West. inter horas octavam and decimam ante meridiem,
quam Continuationem Dominus Proloquutor intimavit omnibus praesentibus; and
monuit eos ad tunc ibidem interessendum, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Bulleyn, etc.

Sessio Decima.
DIE Mercurij, viz. 5o. die Mensis Martij Anno Domini 1588. secundum, etc. in
quodam Sacello, ex part boreali Ecclesiae Collegiatae Divi Petri Westminster. in
presentia Magistri Johannis Coston, Natarij Publici, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Coldwell, etc.

Quibus die hora and loco, comparuerunt omnes supranominati; and post preces
peractas, Dominus Proloquutor declaravit, quod-quum ex side digna relatione
acceperit, Laici hujus regni quandam Billam sive petitionem pro Provisione
Armorum per Clerum hujus Regni fienda Superiori Domo Parliamenti exhibuere,
ideoque Dominus Proloquutor duxit consentaneum esse, ut integer Coetus hujus
Domus Petitionem sive Supplicationem aliquam eidem Parliamento porrigeret, ad
impediendum seu saltem mitigandum and reformandum formam illius billae quoad
Clerum: Ac mox Dominus Proloquutor Supplicationem quandam in finem praedictum
conceptam tunc ibidem protulit, ac palam and public perlegit; in se
continentem inter alia nonnullas causas and rations, quare Clerus hujus regni
minime oneretur Subministratione and Provisione militum, armorum, and
munitionum bellicarum, prout in dicta billa, (ut praefertur) exhibita, fuit and
est insertum: Quam quidem petitionem sic lectam omnes praesentes approbarunt,
ac express consentierunt, ut eadem nomine totius Domus exhiberctur Dominis
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Baronibus, and Proceribus Superioris Domus
Parliamenti, ad effectum praedict.

Sessio Undecima.
DIE Veneris, viz. 7o. Martij 1588. secundum, etc. in quodam Sacello ex part
boreali infra Ecclesiam Collegiatam Divi Petri Westminster. inter horas octavam and
decimam ante meridiem, in praesentia Magistri Johannis Coston and mei Thomae
Barker, Notariorum Publicorum assumptorum, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Walsal, etc.

Quibus die hora and loco, comparuerunt omnes supranominati; quibus Dominus
Proloquutor intimavit Continuationem hujus Domus Convocationis esse factam in
diem Mercurij proximum inter horas octavam and decimam ante meridiem in hoc
loco, and monuit omnes praesentes ad interessendum, etc.

Sessio Duodecima.
DIE Mercurij, viz. 12o. Martij, 1588. secundum, etc. in quodam Sacello ex
part boreali infra Ecclesiam Collegiatam Divi Petri Westminster. inter horas octavam
and undecimam ante meridiem ejusdem diei, in praesentia Johannis Coston, and
mei Thomae Barker, Notariorum Publicorum assumptorum, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Chamberleyn, etc.

Quibus die hora and loco, comparuerunt omnes supranominati; and post preces
celebratas, Dominus Proloquutor praeconizari fecit citatos ad comparendum in
hac part; and praeconizatione hujusmodi minime finita, Reverendissimus Pater
Dominus Cant. Archiepiscopus, caeterique Domini Praelati in Superiori Domo,
accersiverunt ad se integrum Coetum hujus Domus; eosdemque Dominos Praelatos
adierunt in Ecclesia Collegiata praedicta. Ibique dictus Reverendissimus Pater
reprehendit negligentiam sive contumaciam nonnullorum citatorum and monitorum
ad comparendum in hac Domo, and non comparentium; ac express affirmavit se
velle propter eorum contumacias contra eos procedere juxta Juris exigentiam,
etc. Et deinde post aliquem tractatum de alijs quibusdam serijs rebus,
instanter rogavit omnes praesentes ad contribuendum and praestandum aliquam
pecuniarum Summam, in Sustentationem and sublevamen quorundam Tyrrell and
Tydder Presbyterorum, aliquando seductorum instigationibus and persuasionibus
falsis scelerati Romani Pontificis ejusque adhaerentium, ac nuper Errores suos
public confitentium, nec non sinceram Religionem modo authoritate Regia
stabilitam profitentium. Et mox omnes supranominati in Inferiorem Domum
praedict. reversi sunt, and tunc ibidem finita fuit praeconizatio, ut
praefertur, citatorum, etc. ac etiam facta fuit collectio in usum praefatorum
Tyrrell and Tydder ad Summam 3l. 14s. 10d. Quibus sic gestis, Dominus
Proloquutor intimavit omnibus praesentibus continuationem hujus Convocationis
esse factam, usque diem Veneris proximum in hoc loco, inter horas octavam and
decimam ante meridiem, and monuit omnes jam praesentes ad tunc ibidem
interessendum.

Sessio Decima Tertia.
DIE Veneris, viz. 14o. Martij, 1588. secundum, etc. in Ecclesia Collegiata
Divi Petri Westminster. comparuerunt omnes infraneminati inter horas praeassignatas,
in praesenti Johannis Coston and mei Thomae Barker, Notariorum Publicorum
assumptorum, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Wood, etc.

Dictis die hora and loco, comparuerunt omnes supranominati; quibus facta fuit
intimatio de Continuatione hujusmodi Convocationis, usque in diem Mercurij
proximum inter horas octavam and undecimam ante meridiem, in hoc loco.

Sessio Decima Quarta.
DIE Mercurij, viz. 19o. Martij, 1588. secundum, etc. in quodam Sacello infra
Ecclesiam Collegiatam Divi Petri Westminster. inter horas octavam and decimam ante
meridiem ejusdem diei, in praesentia mei Thomae Barker, Notarij Publici
assumpti, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Bulleyn, etc.

Quibus die hora and loco, convenerunt omnes supranominati; quibus facta fuit
intimatio de Continuatione hujus Convocationis, usque inter horas secundam and
quartam pomeridianas, in hoc loco.

Sessio Decima Quinta.
EOdem die in loco ac inter horas praeassignatas in praesentia Magistri
Johannis Coston and mei Thomae Barker, Notariorum Publicorum assumptorum, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Chamberleyn, etc.

Quibus die hora and loco, comparuerunt omnes supranominati; and mox accersiti
fuerunt ad Reverendissimum Patrem aliosque Dominos Praelatos in Superiori Domo,
eosque adierunt, ibique Reveren lissimus Pater perlegi fecit quosdam Articulos
nuper per Regiam autoritatem approbatos, ac per totam Provinciam Cant.
observatos, quoad pers^m Residentiam super beneficijs Ecclesiasticis, and
Pluralitates beneficiorum, etc. Ac po^ea tractat^m aliquem de (...) re invicem
habuerunt. Quibus sic gestis, reversi sunt in Inferiorem Domum, ibique Dominus
Proloquutor intimavit omnibus praesentibus continuationem hujus Convocationis
esse factam usque in diem Veneris proximum, in hoc loco, inter horas octavam
and decimam ante meridiem.

Sessio Decima Sexta.
DIE Veneris, viz. 21o. Martij, 1588. secundum, etc. in quodam Sacello ex part
boreali infra Ecclesiam Collegiatam Divi Petri Westminster. inter horas octavam and
decimam ante meridiem in praesentia Magistri Johannis Coston and mei Thomae
Barker, Notariorum Publicorum assumptorum, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. James, etc.

Quibus die hora and loco, comparuerunt omnes supranominati; ac eorum plures
intrarunt Domum Convocationis una cum Domino Proloquutore; ubi Dominus
Proloquutor statim intimavit omnibus praesentibus hanc Convocationem esse
continuatam, usque inter horas secundam and quartam pomeridianam in hoc loco;
and monuit omnes praesentes ad tunc interessendum.

Sessio Decima Septima.
EOdem die, in loco ac inter horas praeassignatas, in praesentia Magistri
Johannis Coston and mei Thomae Barker, Notariorum Publicorum assumptorum.

D. Prolocutor, D. Pearne, etc.

Quibus die hora and loco, comparuerunt omnes supranominati; quorum nonnulli
intrarunt Domum Convocations, una cum Domino Proloquutore; quibus intimavit ad
statim Continuationem hujus Convocationis esse factam, Vsque in diem Mercurii
proximum, inter horas octavam and decimam ante meridiem in hoc loco; and monuit
omnes praesentes ad tunc ibidem interessendum, etc.

Sessio Decima Octava.
DIE Mercurii, 26o. viz. die mensis Martii, Anno Domini 1589. in quodam Sacello
ex part boreali infra Ecclesiam Collegiatam Divi Petri Westminster, inter
horas octavam and decimam ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, in praesentia mei
Johannus Coston, Notarii Publici, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Wood, etc.

Illis comparentibus Dominus Proloquutor significavit Convocationem esse
prorogatam in Crastinum diem, viz. diem Jovis 27. diem praesentis Mensis Martii
inter horas nonam and undecimam ante Meridiem in hoc loco. Et monuit praesentes
ad tunc ibidem interessendum.

Sessio Decima Nona.
DIE Jovis, 27. viz. die mensis Martii, 1589. in quodam Sacello infra Ecclesiam
Collegiatam Divi Petri Westminster, ex part boreali ejusdem Ecclesiae, inter
horas octavam and decimam ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, in praesentia mei
Johannis Coston Notarii Publici.

D. Prolocutor, D. James, etc.

Quibus die and loco, Dominus Proloquutor significavit hiis comparentibus
Convocationem hujusmodi esse prorogatam in Crastinum diem, viz. 28. diem
praesentis mensis Martii, inter horas octavam and decimam ante Meridiem ejusdem
diei, ad hunc locum, and monuit, etc.

Sessio Vicesima.
DIE Veneris, 28o. die Mensis Martii, Anno Domini 1589. in loco praedicto in
praesentia mei Johannis Coston, Notarij Publici, etc.

D. Prolocutor, D. Chamberlayne, etc.

Quibus die and loco, Dominus Prolocutor intimavit hiis comparentibus
Convocationem hujusmodi esse prorogatam, in pomeridiano hujus diei inter horas
primam and quartam ad hunc locum, etc.

Sessio Vicesima Prima.
IN Pomeridiano ejusdem diei, in loco praedicto, in praesentia mei Johannis
Coston, Notarij Publici, etc.

D. Prolocutor, Mr. Gabriel Goodman, etc.

Quibus die and loco, Dominus Prolocutor verbo tenus intimavit hujusmodi
Convocationem esse continuatam juxta decretum Domini Archiepiscopi Cant. viz.
in diem Mercurij proximum, viz. secundum diem Mensis Aprilis, inter horas nonam
and undecimam ante Meridiem ejusdem diei, ad hunc locum, etc.

Quo die adveniente, Dissoluta extitit hujusmodi Convocatio ad honorem Dei
celebrat'. etc.

OBSERVATIONS FROM The foregoing Acts of the Upper and Lower House, concerning
the Right of CONTINUING the Convocation, etc.
THIS Question about the Right to Continue, has been considered at large under
all its Circumstances: for a more particular Account whereof, the Reader is
referred to the Vindication of the Archbishop's Right, and the Reflections upon
the late Expedient. At present, I intend to confine my self to the SCHEDULE OF
CONTINUATION, and such short Remarks thereupon as arise more especially from
the Acts of those five Convocations which are here made public. The Acts,
being the most entire that remain to either House, and all along expressing the
Forms at length, are undoubtedly our proper Guide; and the Questions upon this
Head, turn immediately upon the true Meaning and Extent of the Schedule:
however some late Writers, to avoid the force both of the Acts and the
Schedule, have perplexed the Cause, and amused the World, with a variety of
little Circumstances, obscurely entered in some imperfect Minutes.

The Schedule constantly mentioned in the Vpper-house Registers.
In the Upper-house Acts, Anno 1562, 1640, and 1661, the Reader will observe
the Schedule of Continuation all along mentioned at the end of the Sessions, to
specify the Manner of that Act, and of the Execution thereof by his Grace:
Prout in Schedula per eum Lecta, Juxta Schedulam per eum Lectam, Juxta tenorem
Schedulae per eum Lectae: And then the Entry usually introduced in these words,
Cujus quidem Schedulae verus Tenor sequitur in haec verba, In Dei nomine, Amen,
Nos etc. But the original Schedules being deposited in the Registry of the
Archiepiscopal See, the Notaries thought it sufficient to refer to them in that
manner, and have left us no one Copy thereof in all the Acts of Convocation.
Whatever Schedules remained in the Office Anno 1666. were consumed in the Fire
of London; but from that time we have great numbers of 'em, beginning as the
ancient ones did, and without doubt copied from them. Those from the Year 1666,
to 1670 inclusive, have been discovered lately, and will be produced anon, to
prove that the Clause Convocatio Praelatorum and Cleri, is not only a very
material, but also a genuine part of the Archiepiscopal Schedule.

The Antiquity of Schedules in Convocation.
The Use of Schedules in an English Synod, is much more ancient than the
Reformation, or the Division of the two Houses. Under Archbishop Chichele, we
meet with frequent mention of them in the Business of Subsidies, Constitutions,
etc. but I have never observed any Foot-step of a separate Schedule of
Continuation, while the two Houses debated together. In 1438 the Register of
that Year gives us the Copy of a Decree or Sentence against the Absents, See it
at large p. 33. of this Book.
which includes a Prorogation also, with an Admonition to the Members then
present, to attend according to the Tenor thereof, Et praesentem Convocationem
usque in and ad, etc. Continuamus: Monentes insuper omnes and singulos jam
praesentes, ut die praedicto compareant, etc. But whether in those days all the
Continuations were formally drawn in Writing, or only pronounced viva voce by
the Archbishop or his Commissary, the Acts have no where told us; nor do I meet
with any Circumstance upon which a Conjecture on either side may be fairly
grounded. The Registers of the Archbishops say nothing of Proceedings in
Convocation after the Year 1488. from which time we have no Accounts (at least
that I know of) before 1529. when the Extracts out of the Upper-house Books
begin. In some Sessions of that Year, we find it expressly mentioned as a
written Form; and the Form it self directly referred to by the Abridger, as
entered at length in the original Acts. -- Sess. 2. Continuavit, etc. cum
verbis in Scriptis, quod Scriptum ibidem Sequitur. -- Quod fecit in Scriptis,
ut ibidem. Anno 1532. Sess. 1. it is said in the Abstracts with Reference to
the original Register, Item inseritur Tenor Continuationis sive Prorogationis
in diem Martis prox. But within two Years ( Anno 1534. Dec. 16.) express
mention is made of the Schedule, as a separate Paper out of which the
Continuation was pronounced: Episcopus London [Commissarius] Continuavit in
diem Veneris in horam secundam, ut in papyri Schedula quam in manu tenuit.

Till this time, for ought appears, the Form of Continuation was entered at
length in the Registers, as it still is in the Convocation of York, where the
Clergy (if they be retired on any particular Occasion) are sent for to be
present at the Continuation solemnly pronounced out of that Form by the
Archbishop or his CommissAry. And so it probably was (for we can go no farther
than Probabilities) in the Province of Canterbury, for some time after their
Separation. The Inferior Clergy present at the Archbishop' s Continnutions.
Even in these Extracts, express mention is made of the Presence of the
Inferior-Clergy at the Continuations of the President; and there are other
Instances, in which their Attendance in the Upper-house, and the Continuations
there are so expressed, as to make it probable at least that some of the
Clergy, if not the whole Body, were present at them.

Anno 1529. Sess. 14. The Continuation in the Upper-house is made to the Friday
following, Praesentibus aliquibus de Clero, sed paucis Suffraganeis.

Anno 1529. Sess. 2. The Upper-house Book: Monitus est Prolocutor cum Clero --
quod comparerent prox. die Veneris, loco and hora, etc. and sic continuavit,
etc. to the same Day.

Anno 1529. Sess. 17. The Commissaries Continue in the Upper-house,
Praesentibus Prolocutore and multis aliis de Clero.

Anno 1555. Sess. 2. The Lower House having received in charge what they were
to consider against the next Session, Dominus Praeses, absentibus omnibus prius
praeconizatis and nullo modo comparentibus, pro Contumacibus pronunciatis,
continuavit --

Anno 1557. Sess. 8. The Archbishop having admonisht Clerum Domus Inferioris,
not to depart without leave, inde continuavit in diem Mercurij 16. Februarij,
prox. hora 2. post-meridiem, etc. monuitque omnes, etc. ad interessendum.

Anno 1586. Dr. Awbrey, as Commissary to the Archbishop, Continues Hujusmodi
Convocationem in Statu quo nunc est, etc. praesentibus tunc ibidem
Venerabilibus Viris Mris. Mullyns and Walker ex Coetu Inferioris Domus, necnon
aliis testibus, etc. This was done in the Chapter House of St. Paul's, the
Place of the Bishops; and is entered in the Lower-house-Journal as the
Continuation of that House, Edward Say their Actuary being also present.

A short Account of the Schedule.
From the foregoing Observations upon the Form and Manner of Continuation, this
Account of it may (in my Opinion) be fairly collected. While the Custom was, to
enter it at large in the Register, (as we see they did in 1529 and 1532.) the
Convocation was either Continued in a Body, as it still is in the Province of
York, or notice thereof was given to the Inferior-Clergy by the Prolocutor, or
some other Authentic Hand. But the Business of Convocations increasing, and
the Clergy growing thereupon into a more separate State as to their Debates;
the Prolocutor's coming up constantly to receive the Notice might appear
troublesome, and a proper Person by whom to convey it immediately to the
Lower-Clergy might not always be in readiness; and so the Form, which the
Actuary was wont to enter in the Register for the Archbishop's Reading, began
to be drawn upon a separate Paper or Schedule, from whence (as a Notice more
certain and easy) the Prolocutor should Intimate the Continuation to the
Lower House. And then we find that the Notary, instead of Transcribing it into
the Register at length (as he had done at the beginning) thought it sufficient
to refer to that original Schedule, as ultimately deposited in the same Office
with the Acts of both Houses of Convocation.

The deriving our Schedules from the Lateran-Council, an improbable Scheme.
I have been told of a Scheme lately offered, to show that the Use of these
Schedules in our English Convocation, was derived from the same Method in the
Lateran Council under Julius XI. and Leo X. If this Scheme be made more
public, we may expect that the Author thereof show us, either some particular
Constitution in that Council establishing such a Rule for the future
Proceedings of Provincial Synods; or some notice in our Histories that
Archbishop Warham (out of a particular liking to the Model) resolved to make it
a Rule for his own Synods; or at least some evident changes of the manner of
holding an English Convocation, in conformity to that of the Lateran Council,
upon the publication thereof by order of Pope Leo the Tenth.

These are proofs which will be naturally called for to support such a Notion.
And yet (if I am not much mistaken) the Author of that Scheme will not be able
to confirm it by any one of them: And the Form (I am sure) of those Schedules
in the Lateran Council, are as different in all respects from our most early
Schedules of Continuation, as two Instruments of the same design and tendency
can well be conceived.

The reason why so many Schedules appear in the Printed Acts of that Lateran
Council, is plainly this: After it was over, Pope Leo employed one of the
Cardinals, Antonius de Monte, to draw up the Acts and Proceedings Entire;
taking every thing at large, as they lay in the orial gin Instruments and were
entered by the Notaries upon the place. This was afterward made public, by
Authority of the Pope: But I hope this new account of the Original of English
Schedules depends not upon this strange Inference, that because the same
Schedules appear not in the Printed Acts of former Councils (the Matter and
Decrees whereof, were only made public, without the Forms of Proceeding)
therefore such Schedules were not used in the holding of Councils before. And,
as to those that came after, had Pope Leo intended this we speak of, for a
Pattern to future Councils, we might at least expect to find every thing in the
Council of Trent exactly agreeable to that Model: And yet these Methods don't
appear there; and so the same argument (the silence of the Printed Acts) which
makes those in the Lateran Council the first of the kind, will prove them also
to be the last. But as the thing appears to me at present, I see no reason to
doubt whether the Councils both before and after, did not proceed in the same
methods with those we see in the Lateran; only the other Popes hapn'd not to be
so curious as Leo the Tenth, in publishing the Forms of Proceeding, with the
Decrees of their Councils. Though as to this point of the Schedules, even in the
Year 1431. (long enough before the Lateran Council) we find the Legate and the
other Prelates, etc. in the Council of Basil, solemnly met in certa Aula, etc.
in qua soliti sunt pro Conciliis tenendis in unum convenire, and decreeing a
Day for the first Session expressly by Schedule; prout in Schedula, cujus tenor
inferius primo loco describitur, before continetur.

However, what is here said concerning Schedules in the Councils Abroad, I
offer only as my own present thoughts; not knowing particularly enough how that
Scheme, deriving our Methods from the Lateran Council, is laid. The Dispute
depends not upon Proroguing by Schedule, or otherwise
Nor would I have the foregoing account of the use of Schedules in an English
Convocation to be so understood, as if in the present Dispute it were at all
material, whether his Grace pronounced the Continuation from a separate Paper,
or from the Form written in the Register; or yet whether the Prolocutor's
Intimation to the Clergy be upon Notice by the Schedule, or by any other
Authentic Conveyance of his Grace's Act. I only proposed, according to my
Method in explaining the other Heads, to lay before the Reader whatever the
Registers of Convocation afford upon this.

But in the Disputes depending between the two Houses, the Conveyance of this
Notice is no longer a Question, since those of the Lower-Clergy have receded
from their Independent Power of Adjourning to a Day beyond that of the
Upper-house. For as their owning an Obligation to attend at his Grace's time,
supposes a necessity of some kind of Notice to what Day and Hour the
Continuation is made; so if that Notice be but authentic, it is indifferent in
what manner it comes.

The Heads upon which the Dispute turns.
The Questions therefore in short, are these: I. What is it that the Archbishop
or his Commissary pronounces in the Upper-house? II. What is it that is
thereupon intimated or signified to the Lower?

I. What is it that the Archbishop or his Commissary pronounces in the
Upper-house? Is it the Continuation of the Bishops and Clergy; i. e. of the
whole Convocation? or, Is it the Continuation of the Upper-house only?

The Bishops and Clergy jointy Continued in the Upper House.
In the current Style of these three entire Registers of the Upper House, the
Body Continued is hujusmodi Convocatio sive sacra Synodus Provincialis. And as
I may appeal to every unprejudiced Person whether he had ever any notion of
these terms, than as including the Prelates and Clergy assembled in
Convocation; so for a proof that they have constantly the same sense in the
Acts of Convocation, I may safely refer to almost every Page of the Registers,
and to the Account given from thence in a larger Vindication of the
Archbishop's Right. Page 44, 45.
Not to mention, that this is the expression in several remaining Schedules by
which the Convocation is Continued upon the Royal Writ; and in those Cases the
Lower Clergy are acknowledged on all hands to be certainly Included.

The Schedule evidently comprehends both Bishops and Clergy.
But, as I observed before, the Registers only mention the Continuations with
reference to the Schedule, from which the Act is immediately pronounced, and
the meaning and extent thereof is by consequence to be taken. It is well known
that the Schedules before 1666. were all consumed in the Fire of London; and
the most early one that was thought to remain in the Office when I published the
Right of the Archbishop, is in the Year 1670. An entire Copy thereof is given
in that Book; Page 39.
and by it the President (without any mention of the Consent of his Brethren)
Continues praesentem sacram Synodum sive Convocationem Praelatorum and Cleri,
to a certain day, hour and place, all distinctly specified therein.

To evade the force of this, some frivolous Ojections were raised at the first
against the Notary and the Schedule; Right of the A. B. P. 40, 41.
but these have been already considered; indeed, much more particularly than
they deserved.

It has been further urged, that from the Year 1673. the remaining Schedules
usually run in a different Style, Right, etc. P. 44, 45.
Nos, etc. Continuamus hujusmodi Convocationem sive sacram Synodum
Provincialem. But suppose these terms not to include the Lower Clergy so
effectually as those of the Schedules in 1670. etc. The Clause Proel. and Cle^.
a genuine part of the Schedule.
(which yet we have proved they do;) the most Early Schedules must certainly
have a better Title to be thought the true and genuine Forms, than any of those
that come after them. But this Cavil, if it were of any moment, is now
sufficiently answer^d by many more Schedules lately come to light, from the
Fire of London to 1670. fifty three in number, and all in the same terms with
those of 1670, etc. viz. praesentem sacram Synodum sive Convocationem
Praelatorum and Cleri Cant. Prove. This therefore being the genuine Language of
the Archiepiscopal Schedule, and the Continuations of the Lower Clergy having
by our concurrent Registers been ever to the same time and place with those of
the Upper House; let the common reason of Mankind judge, how any scruple can
remain Whether the Clergy have been always comprehended in the Continuations
Above?

The transmission of the Schedule, only a circumstance in this dispute. Reflex.
upon the Exp. P. 19.
The Journals affording no direct Testimonies of the transmission of the
Schedule to the Lower Clergy, this has lately been made another question. In
Answer to which, I have elsewhere shown more at large, that if the Lower Clergy
be Included in the Continuation Above (as we have just now proved they are) it
matters not which way the Notice thereof is conveyed, so long as the Conveyance
is clear and authentic.

Reasons to believe that the Schedule has been ever sent down.
However, 1. It is enough that the Custom of sending down the Schedule is in
Possession; having been constantly practiced in the Convocation of 1689.
without any scruple or opposition from the Lower Clergy. And therefore, by all
the Rules of deciding questions of this Kind, We have a right to plead
Possession, and it lays on Their Side to prove the Practice an Innovation.

But, 2. we urge, according to the foregoing account of the Schedule and the
Rise thereof, that there could be no other end in changing the usual Entry in
the Register into a Separate Schedule, besides the transmission of it to some
other place: Observing withal, that in the Convocation of York, where the
Bishops and Clergy are Continued in a Body, the Form is still Read by the
President out of the Journal it self.

3. That by the tenor of the Schedule, it is the Reading which effects the
Continuation; and therefore the Additional Signing must be in Order to make it
an Authentic Act to some other Body. Accordingly, in the Province of York it
is never Signed, because the Clergy being present, there is no occasion to send
it down.

As to the Attestation, there is this difference between the Schedules before
and after the Year 1670. that those before are usually attested by the
Notarie's adding the Names of the Bishops present, as Witnesses of the Act;
whereas the following ones (when no Bishops seem to have been present) are
attested by the Notary himself.

4. In the Lower House Book of 1588. Sess. 21. the Reader will find an
Intimation thus expressed, Dominus Prolocutor verbo tenus intimavit hujusmodi
Convocationem esse continuatam juxta Decretum Domini Archiepiscopi Cant. This
unusual Addition of the Words Verbo tenus must imply that the usual way of
Intimating was from a written Paper; and having never seen or heard of any such
Paper used in Continuations besides the Archiepiscopal Schedule, I must
conclude (till some other Paper be produced) that this expression is directly
opposed to the Intimations from the Schedule, as the Established way of
Continuing the Lower House at that time. Adding withal, that this transmission
of it is no Act of Necessity on the Archbishop's Side (for his Grace has a
right either to send up for the Prolocutor to receive the Notice, or to send it
down to the House by any other Authentic Hand, and both shall be equally
binding with the Schedule;) but it was designed only for an Ease to the
Prolocutor, and a more sure Conveyance to the Inferior Clergy.

The Prolocutor is judge of the time of Intimating when the President does not
interpose.
The Schedule put into the Prolocutor's hands, is a legal Notice of the Act
above; not to the House, but only to him, who governs the Debates there under
the President, and is bound in this and all other Cases, to signify to the
Lower House the Instructions and Commands of the Upper. The thing to be
signified, is the Continuation of Bishops and Clergy, or of the whole Synod,
pronounced in the Upper-house by the President, who has thereby (in strictness
of Law) a Right to put an end to the Session in the Lower House by an immediate
Intimation, if he see cause to require it of the Prolocutor; See Right of the
Archbishop, p. 98.
and it is this legal Power which I assert in the larger Vindication of the
Archbishop's Right, page 98, etc. But since the President, incapable in this
separate State, to moderate the Debates of the whole Synod, commits that Care
to the Prolocutor in the Lower House; if the Schedule be not accompanied with
any particular Direction as to the Time of breaking up, his Grace is presumed
to leave the Person entrusted with moderating there, to judge when the Business
of that Day is over, and when by consequence the House shall have legal Notice
of the Continuation. Nor can they who plead for a Right in the Clergy
themselves to make this Judgment, show us, that the Consent or Opinion of the
Clergy was ever asked or given in order to this Intimation, before the first
Convocation in 1701.

The Form of Intimating to be taken from the two exact Journals
The true Form of this Intimation can be no where learnt, but from the
Lower House Books of 1586 and 1588, which I have often observed to be the only
exact Journals of that House now remaining; those of 1640, 1661, etc. being
only short Minutes of what passed, in order to be afterward reduced into Acts
by the Addition of the usual Forms and Methods of Proceeding. And when Men
openly decline to follow plain and distinct Directions, and chose rather to be
guided by some imperfect Hints, it looks as if they neither cared nor intended
to keep in the right way.

The ordinary Phrase ought in reason to be the established Form
These two Journals therefore are our proper Guides in this Matter; and if an
established Form were to be settled and agreed on, the most reasonable
Proposition would certainly be, to adhere to the current and ordinary Style,
and to lay aside any accidental Exceptions, upon a Presumption of their having
only been used upon some special Occasions.

Declaring by Intimation, the ordinary Form.
The Forms of Declaring the Continuations in the Lower House during the
forementioned Convocations, are now printed at large; but that the Reader may
be enabled to make a sure and easy Judgment, he shall have the same general
View of them that has been lately drawn in the Reflections upon the Expedient
proposed.

"By INTIMATION expressly, 1586 (the first Meeting) Sess. 2, 7, 8. The second
Meeting, Sess. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11. Anno 1588. Sess. 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8,
9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21. By SIGNIFICATION (of the self-same
Import with the Intimations) Anno 1586. (the second Meeting) Sess. 8, 12. Anno
1588. Sess. 6, 18, 19. -- These, with the Continuations by Dr. Awbrey (
February 17. and March 22. 1586.) and the Departure of the Lower House Members
( March 8. 1586.) upon hearing of the Continuation by the Commissary; make up
the thirty six Instances on the Archbishop's side, which I affirmed to be in
these two Journals of the Lower House. Right of the Archbishop, p. 32.


The Continuations in a different Style, Continuavit quoad hanc Domum, are
seven; all in 1586. (the first Meeting) Sess. 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 11.

Phrase introduced on extraordinary Occasions, not to be the ordinary Form.
From hence, the ordinary way of Declaring appears to be by Intimation: And as
the Continuations quoad hanc Domum are few in Comparison of the others, so the
very Writer who has carried the Independence of the Lower House much higher
than any of his Brethren, assures us at the same time that the Phrase was
introduced upon a very particular Occasion, viz. Power of the Lower House, p.
7, col. 2.
the Archbishop's putting the Prolocutor into his Commission for Proroguing. As
to the present Case therefore, he will not (I hope) propose the Use of an
extraordinary Form, on ordinary Occasions, or in any other Circumstances than
those from which it is known to have taken its Rise. Especially, when the
Declaring by Intimation (which appears to have been the common and ordinary
Form) is so apposite in all respects to the Design and Nature of that Business.
For,

II. The thing to be declared by the Prolocutor to the Lower Clergy, is the Act
of Continuation pronounced in the Upper House: Right of the Archbishop, p. 59,
etc.
And it has been elsewhere shown at large, that the term Intimavit, as well in
its natural notion, as in Convocation language, properly signifies a Conveyance
of the knowledge or notice of a thing from one Body or Person to another; as
this of the Prolocutor is, from the Upper House to the Lower.

The Prolocutor's Intimation refers not to the Consent of the House, but only
to the Act of the Archbishop.
It was warmly pleaded at the beginning, that the Prolocutor's Intimation had
immediate reference to an Act or Vote of the Lower House; but that Notion seems
now to be deserted, both upon an evident absurdity of Intimating to the House a
Notice received directly from the House, and also the want of Proof, or even a
Color thereof, that any such Vote or Consent, of which they supposed this to
be the Intimation, was ever passed or mentioned in the House antecedent to that
Act of the Prolocutor.

And yet the late form Intimamus hanc Convocationem, etc. seems to have been
introduced to give the House a part at least in the Authority of Continuing;
because the Prolocutor can have no such Right, as the President exercises, to
speak of himself and his own Act in the Plural. If that be the intention of
using it (as I see not what else can be meant) I must beg leave to think it an
Innovation highly prejudicial to the Authority of his Grace and the Upper
House; till some footsteps can be shown of the Consent or Vote of the House,
implied in that Form, or at least the Form it self can be justified by
Precedent: For as to the Intimations in 1586, and 1588. it is evident enough
that they were the sole Act of the Prolocutor, Prolocutor intimavit hanc
Convocationem esse Continuatam, Prolocutor intimavit Continuationem hujus
Convocationis, etc.

The Intimation given at the Command of the President.
And it is no less plain (whatever has been pretended to the contrary) that
this Act of the Prolocutor was then understood to be purely an Intimation of
what was done in the Upper House, given in the Lower by the Command and
Authority of the President. To which purpose it is Remarkable all along, and
the Reader himself will observe it, that the Intimation is frequently made at
the Conclusion of other Notices delivered by the Prolocutor from the Upper
House. But in some places it is expressly said to be done by the Decree and
Command of the Archbishop; See Anno 1586. Sess. 5. 8. 9. and 1588. Sess. 21.
and in others to be a direct and immediate Notice of the Continuation
pronounced Above. So, Anno 1588. Sess. 9. Dominus Episcopus London, etc.
Continuavit, etc. Quam Continuationem Dominus Prolocutor intimavit omnibus
praesentibus. Add to these, the instance of the Archbishop's Indisposition,
Anno 1588. Sess. 8.
and the Adjournment thereupon to Lambeth: The Prolocutor coming from the Upper
House, acquaints the Clergy that the Bishops had received notice of his Grace's
illness, ita quod non potest sine vitae suae periculo hanc Ecclesiam
Collegiatam accedere. Et ideo intimavit quod Concessus hujus Domus continuatur
usque inter horas, etc. in Palatio dicti Reverendissimi Patris, etc. To the
same purpose, is that in 1588. Sess. 6. where the Prolocutor at his return from
the Upper House, significavit omnibus praesentibus, Quod Reverendi Patres
minime approbarunt quasdam ex Clausulis, etc. Quodque lapsus temporis non
pateretur in praesenti ulteriorem tractatum sive deliberationem de ea re;
Ideoque ulterius significavit Continuationem hujus Convocationis esse factam,
etc.

After so many and plain testimonies, I suppose it will be ackowledged that the
Intimation in those two Journals was a Notice of the Continuations in the Upper
House, declared to the Lower by the Prolocutor, upon the Command and Authority
of the President. And as to the Question, Whether the Lower Clergy be
determined by such Continuations, this resolves into their being Included in
the terms of them; which I hope is already proved both here and elsewhere, to
the full satisfaction of every impartial Reader. Reflex. on Exp. p. 22.
And I appeal once more to the common reason of Mankind, Whether the Prolocutor
or Actuary of that time (supposing them, according to the new Notion, to mean
the Continuation of the Upper House only) would not at least have expressed the
Intimation in a more general Way, Convocationem esse Continuatam, and have
omitted the Words, which yet they all along express, hanc or hujusmodi; which
might indeed confine it to the Continuation of the Lower House* if the sense of
the Word Convocatio would bear it, but can never imply the Separate
Continuation of the Upper.

A formal Intimation of the Prolocutor, not necessary to Continue the Lower
House.
It may be proper to observe here from the Journal of 1586. that a formal
Intimation by the Prolocutor is not at all necessary to Continue the Lower
House. In the 5th, 8th, and 9th. Sessions of the Second meeting of that Year,
the Prolocutor was absent; and the Continuation must therefore be Intimated by
some other Person coming from the Upper House, who had knowledge of the day.
For the Journal having reckoned by Name all the Lower House Members who were
present on those days, adds, Quibus Intimatum (and, in one Instance,
Significatum) fuit hujusmodi Convocationem esse Continuandam, etc. The 6th.
Session is yet more remarkable to this purpose. Then, seven of the Lower House
appear, but no Prolocutor, Et eo quod satis been norunt hujusmodi Convocationem
esse Continuatam in diem Veneris prox. etc. post aliqualem moram discesserunt.

Can any thing be clearer, than that the Members in all these Instances took
themselves to be comprehend'd in the Continuation Above, and absolutely
determined by it? As soon as they knew what had been, or was to be, done in the
Upper House, they asked no more Questions; but presently departed, and attended
punctually according to the time and place appointed there: Which attendance is
said in the Journal to be inter horas praeassignatas; and it is plain there was
no other Assignment of Time, but what his Grace's Commissary made.

Continuations to be shortn'd at pleasure, shows the Clergy to be Included.
The Continuations by the Archbishop in the Upper House, with a reservation of
power to shorten or alter the Time upon notice to the Bishops and Clergy, are
another evident Testimony that the Clergy in those days were thought to be
absolutely concluded by his Grace's Act. For how could they be otherwise
affected by the Limitations of it, and think themselves under an obligation to
comply therewith? Many Instances of this kind appear in the Extracts out of the
Upper House Registers, between the Years 1532, and 1588. particularly
enumerated and applied in the Right of the Archbishop, etc. p. 48, 49. To which
place I refer the Reader, intending to confine my self as much as may be to
such Observations as arise from the Acts of the Five foregoing Covocations.

The President's Right to Continue the Clergy in the Upper House.
Upon one head only (the President's Right to Continue the Inferior Clergy in
the Upper House) I have before brought Testimonies from other Journals also,
because the Right has been so lately questioned, and the Exercise of it so
freely censured as new and unprecedented.

It is acknowledged on all hands, that while the Bishops and Clergy remained
together, they were jointly Continued by an Act of the President. Rights, etc.
Page 492. Ed. 2.
Doctor Atterbury confesses that he preserved this Power [of Adjourning the
Inferior Clergy] after they were separated: And it has since been abundantly
proved, that they are Included as much as ever in the Continuation Above. They
were therefore, after the Separation, equally affected by the President's Act;
and it made no difference, whether it was declared to them immediately by his
Grace, or by any other Hand legally empowr'd to report the Commands and
Directions of the Upper House. And since it had the self same Effect when
notified by such a hand, and so the attendance of the whole Body of the Clergy
was an unnecessary trouble; therefore the Intimation thereof by the Prolocutor,
became the ordinary Method. But will any Man say, that the President by this
Indulgence to the Inferior Clergy (I mean, an Exemption from Constantly coming
up) could ever intend to preclude his Right of requiring their Personal
Attendance, as often as he saw occasion? Being only a matter of Form, and done
also as effectually by Intimation, and the President intending ordinarily that
the Lower Clergy should not be obliged to break up till they could finish their
Debates: On these accounts, that Right may have been seldom exercised; but yet
not wholly disused, as appears from the foregoing Instances, and would probably
be seen in many more, if our Accounts of Convocation since the Bishops and
Clergy debated apart, were not so very imperfect.

But the late instance complained of, is not only to be justified, as that
Power is legally vested in the President, but also as the Exercise of it in
those Circumstances was indeed the effect of Necessity. The Prolocutor being
indisposed, had made a Substitution to another, who took the Chair without the
Confirmation of the President and Bishops: This was opposed by several of the
Members, as irregular; and as such was represented to the Upper House, who were
of the same Opinion, but resolved however to take the matter into Consideration
against the next meeting. At the best therefore, it was doubtful whether any
one was legally Substituted to exercise the Office of a Prolocutor: But, which
is more, the Intimation of the Act of Continuing is a Referendary-Act (a Report
from their Lordships to the Lower House,) and they who contended the most
Zealously for his taking the Chair, declared it to be their intention that he
should not act in any instance as a Referendary, till he had been confirmed by
their Lordships. To argue upon their own principles, I only suppose this
distinction between a Prolocutor and a Referendary; but no such appears in the
Registers, which style him not only Prolocutor and Referendarius, but
Prolocutor sive Referendarius, implying the names to be of the same Import in
the language of Convocation. But this will be explained more largely under
another head. At present I will pursue my Observations upon the general Right
of Continuing, from the five Journals which are here made public.

The Phrase Continuavit quoad hanc Domum, no Argument for a Separate Power in
the L. House.
The only color that can be drawn from these, of a Separate Power of
Continuation in the Lower House, is the Phrase of some Continuations in 1586,
Prolocutor continuavit quoad hanc domum. But here, no Act or Power is expressed
besides that of the Prolocutor; and they who are so earnest for an Inherent
Power in the House, are yet as zealous as we against all pretenses to a
Personal Authority in the Prolocutor.

The Question therefore is, by whose Authority he must be supposed to Continue
in those Cases? by that of his Grace, or of the Lower House? He had certainly
notice of the Continuations in the Upper House, because these in the Lower are
declared to the same time. And the Advocates for this Inherent Right are at
last brought to Acknowledge an Obligation to attend on his Grace's Day, and by
consequence the necessity of having an Authentic Notice thereof. The
Prolocutor is also known by his Office to be the Referendary or Reporter of all
Messages from the Upper House, and I think sufficiently proved in the 4th
Chapter of this Book to moderate the Debates of the Lower in his Graces stead.
These are natural reasons why Continuations (expressed in such general terms)
should be the pure Effects of the President's Authority; but as to the Vote,
Act, or Consent of the Lower House, there is no mark or footstep of it either
in these or any other Separate Continuations.

The Phrase it self, not to be met with elsewhere in all our Journals of
Convocation, was introduced by the Prolocutor's being put into the President's
Commission to Prorogue. This obliged him to pronounce the Continuation in the
Upper House, at least to bear a part in it; and coming from thence to give
notice to the Lower, the Actuary's use of the ordinary Style Intimavit would
not have been so consistent with the meaning thereof in Convocation Language.
But while he considered him not only as Prolocutor, but as Commissary to the
President, it was natural to change Intimavit, a Ministerial word, into terms
that might better express the Authority he then had as Commissary to his Grace.

The Phrase in Parliament Dom. Canc. Contin. praesens Parl. no argument for the
Lower House. See the Right of the A. Bishop, p. 43, 44.
To this, I will add a short but clear reply to another Suggestion why the
Lower Clergy are not comprehended in the terms of the Archbishop's
Continuations: It is, that in Parliament the Adjournments of the House of Peers
are entered Dominus Cancellarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum; and yet the
Act of the Chancellor Adjourns the Lords only.

But the distinctions in this Case between the two Houses of Parliament and
Convocation, are too remarkable to leave room for such a Parallel. 1. There is
no original Subordination between the constituent Members of the two Houses of
Parliament, nor any Relation but what arises purely from the Usage and
Constitution of the Kingdom: But in the two Houses of Convocation (as the
Bishops make the Upper, and Presbyters the Lower) a Subordination is established
in the Lower by Apostolical Institution, and (in Conformity thereto) by the
Constitution of this National Church: And so, every step made by Presbyters
toward a coordinate or independent Power, is a proportionable Deviation in
the constitution of our Church, from the pattern of the purest Ages. For, 2.
The Adjournment of the House of Peers is pronounced by one who has no Authority
over the Commons, nor any concern even among the Lords, besides that of
Moderating; except he be a Peer of the Realm, and in Right of his Peerage have
a Title to Vote, etc.

But in Convocation, the Continuation is pronounced by the Metropolitan of the
whole Province, and the President of the whole Convocation; who advising with
his Brethren the Bishops, directs the business of Convocation, and is at the
head of Proceedings in both Houses, nay, (which is more) has a final Negative
upon them, and by his Concurrence gives the Sanction to their Acts, in all
matters to the framing and Promulging whereof the Royal License and Authority
are not necessary in Law. 3. That Act of the Lord Chancellor in the House of
Peers is plainly Ministerial, or the effect of an immediate direction from the
House; but his Grace's in Convocation is Authoritative (Nos Continuamus) in
virtue of a Power belonging to him as President of the whole Body. 4. The terms
of the two Continuations or Adjournments are widely Different. In the House of
Lords it is the praesens Parliamentum which the Lord Chancellor Adjourns by
word of Mouth; and it is no extraodinary thing to find the Word Parliamentum
signifying one House, when the standing Clerk thereof is Styled Clericus
Parliamentorum. But the Archbishop in a formal Instrument Continues praesentem
sacram Synodum sive Convocationem Praelatorum and Cleri Cantuariensis
Provinciae, where the Parties thereby Continued (the Bishops and Clergy) are
directly expressed; nor is the Register of the Upper House (though acting by a
Deputy in the Lower also) ever termed Registrarius Convocationum, or the word
Convocatio (much less Convocatio Praelatorum and Cleri) ever applied to one
House Separately. 5. Though those Expressions were used on any other occasions
(which they are not) to signify the Upper House only; yet the known Effect
they have always had in this Case of Continuation, would necessarily extend
them to the Lower as well as Upper House. For whereas the Adjournment in the
House of Lords is never notified to the Commons (who equally govern their own
times of meeting and sitting) and so no Concurrence as to time appears in the
Sessions of the two Houses of Parliament; In Convocation, the Lower House has
express and authentic Notice of the Act in the Upper, and so the Clergy (
according to all the concurrent Books of the two Houses) have ever met again at
the time and place specified in the Act above.

I know no way to determine the Strict and Legal meaning of Words in any Case,
but by the known and ordinary acceptance of them in general, and the effect or
operation they have, and ever had, in particular Cases that may fall under my
Consideration. In this therefore, I refer my self to the Judgment of any
impartial Man: Suppose, 'That by our Constitution the House of Commons in their
Proceedings were bound to receive and follow the directions of the Peers; 'That
both these Houses sat and acted under one common President, the L. Chancellor
or Keeper; 'That all the Adjournments were solemnly pronounced by him in his
own Name, and in Terms directly expressing the whole Parliament, nay specifying
the Lords and Commons; 'That an Authentic Notice hereof were immediately
transmitted to the House of Commons; 'That in fact, according to all the
contemporary Journals, it appeared that the Adjournments Below had been to the
same Day, Hour, and Place, with those Above: Under these Circumstances, I say
(for in Convocation this is the Case) could it be a Doubt with any unprejudiced
Man, Whether that Constant Adjournment of the Commons from and to the same Time
with the Lords could spring from any Cause, but the sending down a Constant
Notice of the Adjournment Above, and a perpetual Persuasion among the Commons
that they were Included in that Adjournment, and absolutely determined by it.

The nec^ssity of Insisting upon it, that the L. Clergy are Included in the
Continuation Above.
As therefore this concurrence of Sessions in the Upper and Lower House, is an
undeniable proof that Authentic Notice of the President's Act has been ever
conveyed to the Inferior Clergy, so the form of that Continuation in the
Schedule and Journals, proves the whole Convocation to have been always
Included in the Act. And whoever reflects upon the Consequenees of their not
being Included, will agree with me, that it is highly necessary his Grace should
insist on it at this Juncture, when the terms of the Schedule have been so
publicly pretended to comprehend the Upper House only, and the Intimation is
reduced to a bare Notice of the Day and Hour to which their Lordships have
Adjourned themselves, without any Authority that shall bind or affect the
Inferior Clergy. Add to this, The asking the express Consent of the House, and,
The Intimating out of a written Paper of their own; both of 'em without
President, and both Intended for a more open and public Declaration that it is
an Act of their own, upon an Inherent Power in the House. A separate Power of
Continuing in the L. House, opens a way to perpetual divisions of the Synod.
A Principle, evidently introducing a Separation of the Synod, both as to
Bishops and Clergy, and of the Clergy among themselves, when Discontents happen
to arise among the Presbyters, or Designs against Episcopacy shall be set a
foot. For if they be not Included in the Continuation Above, it is wholly at
their own Pleasure whether they will attend at the next meeting of their
Lordships: The President can have no right in Law to oblige them to attend, or
to punish them for non attendance, which upon that Supposition of their
Adjourning themselves) is no Disobedience to any Command of his Grace, or
Contempt of His Authority. The present Presbyters of our Church may probably be
content to observe their Lordships Days. But I think Wise Men, in the
Settlement of all Constitutions, are wont to look a little beyond the present
time: And should the Inferior Clergy of the next Age, be disposed to take all
Advantages which these Principles of their Predecessors (supposing them to be
now established) would give, I ^ee not what Fence the Church or Bishops will
have against a Presbyterian Assembly.

The same Principle opens a ready way to Divisions among the Inferior Clergy
themselves: Suppose (for the purpose) that any number of the Lower House
Members should dislike the Proceedings, and refuse to attend in pursuance of
the separate Adjournment of the Majority; neither the House, nor the Prolocutor
have a Right in Law Temporal or Ecclesiastical to oblige them to it. Reflect.
on Exped. p. 10.
"The Effect whereof (as has been observed elsewhere) is a Session, under the
Name of a Synodical-Meeting, protested against by the Archbishop, Bishops, and
any number of the Inferior Clergy under the Majority; and, which is yet worse,
no Provision made by the Laws, either of Church or State, to reunite even the
Clergy themselves. The Archbishop, who Summons the Clergy, has also a Right to
enforce their Attendance according to the Continuations that shall be made in
the Upper-house; which is a coherent Scheme of Government, and will perpetually
secure the Unity of the Synod. The Presbyterian Assemblies also are at least
thus far regular, that the Assembly which Adjourns, is supposed by them to have
a Power of proceeding to Censures in case of non-attendance. But the present
Claim of separate Adjournments made by Episcopal Divines under the Persuasion
of a Want of Power to enforce Attendance, is (in my Apprehension) a very
inconsistent Scheme, and has a direct Tendency to perpetual Distractions and
Divisions, both between the Bishops and their Clergy, and among the Clergy
themselves.

A separate Power takes away all the Means of Re-uniting the Synod.
I will add, That if this Principle (I mean a Right in the Clergy to Adjourn,
though they have no Power to enforce Attendance) were true, it would not only
break the Union of the Synod, but take away all the means of re-uniting it. The
President has the Power of Censures, but he cannot inflict them for
Non-attendance, upon Persons not enjoined upon his Authority to attend: The
Lower House by this Principle are supposed to have the Right of enjoining their
Members to attend, but then they have no Authority in case of Non-attendance to
censure and punish. This Scheme therefore is a very unworthy Reflection upon
the Wisdom of our Constitution: It supposes a Power lodged in the Governors of
our Church over the Inferior Members thereof, for the Preservation of Peace and
Union; and yet that the Inferior Members are exempted from that Power: It
supposes also an easy way left open for factious Spirits to destroy the Union,
and by degrees the Being, of our Episcopal Church, without any Provision made
to repair the Breach, and restore that Union: That is, it makes our
Constitution an incoherent and inessectual Scheme of Government; below the
Wisdom even of Human Policy, and much more unbecoming the Dignity of an
Apostolical Institution.

These Principles, you observe, make all Attendance, whether on his Grace's
Days or their own, a mere voluntary Act of every particular Member of the
Lower House; there being no Coercive Power to reach or censure them for
Nonattendance. The Majority in the last and present Convocations have not yet
exerted the Right which their Principles would give, of denying Attendance when
the Upper-house met; Intermediate Sessions a great Irregularity, and Mischief
to our Church.
but they have held several INTERMEDIATE SESSIONS without their Metropolitan
and Bishops; a short State whereof I will give the Reader out of a late Letter
to the Author of the Expedient proposed: Reflect. on Exped. p. 11.
"You say, (p. 15. c 2.) that you have Precedents for meeting on Intermediate
Days, and threaten to exert that Power, except the Upper-house will submit to
your Method of Continuing. But is it a fair part in you, to leave your Reader
to imagine, that such Meetings, as a House, are warranted by a Number of
unexceptionable Precedents, when you know in your Conscience that no more than
two can be fairly pretended, and that the Invalidity of these two has been
shown at large. The first, that of May 9. 1640. (as you very well know) hapn'd
at a time when neither Bishops nor Clergy were sure of their being a legal
Convocation, and will equally justify the Clergy's Adjourning to a Day beyond
the Appointment of the Upper-house; which yet is a Practice disowned by the
Advocates for Intermediate Sessions. When the second Adjournment of this kind
hapn'd, the Archbishop was in Custody, and the Bishops (justly Apprehensive of
Danger amidst the popular prejudices of those times against their Order) could
not think it safe to come together, nor had they met in Convocation some Weeks
before. These, together with the want of Authority in the Minutes, and some
other Exceptions, have been urged so largely already, that I am ashamed to see
one (who could not but know all this) insisting upon them, without any attempt
to remove the Objections; and also referring to these two in such general terms
as may lead the Reader into a Belief of many more.

"There is another Objection (and that a very material one) equally concluding
against these two Precedents, viz. That no Business appears to have been done
on either of the Days to which the Adjournments were made, when yet the
Preparation for business is the only pretense upon which the Claim of
Intermediate Days is advanced. If therefore Men were serious in their Enquiries
about the Usage of former Times, in order to make it a Rule to their present
Practice; they would consider how the Sessions of the Lower House have stood
with regard to those of the Upper, at times when business of moment was
depending in Convocation: Because then, we may suppose, the Clergy would have
Exerted this Power, if they had thought themselves possessed of it.

The Clergy of former times did not think of Intermediate Sessions.
"Now, this Notice is not to be had, but from concurrent Journals of the two
Houses; the first of which are in the Years 1586, and 1588. when we have no
more than Extracts out of the Registers of the Upper House; but all the
Sessions that are expressed (above 20 in Number) concur exactly with those of
the Lower House, without any Appearance of Intermediate Meetings.

"The next concurrent Books that remain, are those in the two Convocations of
1640, the Minutes whereof express the Days of several of the Sessions, and they
all appear to answer the Continuations of the Upper House; except the two we
just now mentioned, which are so fully and particularly accounted for
elsewhere.

"The Compilers of the late Narrative ( p. 37.) speaking of the two Instances
in 1640, add, We may fairly prefume, we might have found more in other
Convocations, if the Books of both Houses had been extant to have been
compared. Two Instances, so exceptionable and under such singular
Circumstances, could be no fair ground for such a presumption: But if
Intermediate Meetings were any where to be expected, no time so likely as in
the Convocation which begun May the 8th, 1661. the first after the Restoration:
For in that, the whole Common Prayer was Revised, several Prayers and Services
added, many Canons and Constitutions compiled, and other Matters of great
Importance tranfacted. In all this work, the Clergy under Direction of the A.
B. and Bps, had their constant share, as appears distinctly from the Original
Register of the Upper House (from May 8. 1661, to Sept. 19. 1666.) which has
been all along thought to be lost but by great Providence was lately retrieved.

"The Constant Style of Continuations in this Register, is the same with that
of 1640. -- Dominus, etc. de and cum Consensu Confratrum suorum, Continuavit
and Prorogavit hujusmodi Convocationem sive sacram Synodum Provincialem. The
Book contains above 140 Sessions; and all that while the Sessions of the Lower
House are distinctly set down in Mr. Mundy's Minutes. I have made an exact
Comparison of them, and find not the least footstep of an Intermediate Meeting;
though both the Nature and the Length of the business before them, would have
prompted them at that time, more than any other, to hold Intermediate Sessions,
had they dreamt of such an Inherent Power of Adjourning as some of their
Successors have lately taken up.

And yet in the last Convocation, several of these Intermediate Sessions were
held by the Majority of the Lower House, with all the appearance of Synodical
Meetings. Suppose then, that the Members of some Presbyterian Assembly, taking
the Advantage of one of those Sessions, had entered their Claim of Alliance to
that Majority of the Lower House, as meeting, sitting, acting, and departing,
upon the sole Authority of Presbyters, without any Appearance of a Superior
Order; I fear, they would hardly have been driven from their Claim, except the
Lower House Members could have pleaded that they met there by the Authority, or
at least the Permission of their Metropolitan and Bishops; and yet these their
Ecclesiastical Superiors (it is well known) had publicly declared against such
Intermediate Sessions, and against all the business transacted in them, as
Vnsynodical.

Though therefore an Inherent Power of Continuing, with a Right thereupon to hold
Intermediate Sessions, had some countenance from the Practice of former
Convocations, as we see they have none; yet it could be no decent part in
Episcopal Divines to contend with all this Zeal for Privileges so favorable to
the measures of Presbytery. And I hope, before the Majority of the present
Lower House resume these Claims and return to the like Practices, they will
consider how little warrant they have from antecedent Practice, and how
mischievous they are in the Consequences to our Episcopal Constitution.

Observations touching the RIGHT to determine Controverted Elections.
Instances of Controverted Elections occurring in the remaining Acts. An. 1586.
p. 140. App.
THE first instances we find of determining Elections in Convocation, are those
two set down at large in the Journal of 1586, Sess. 3, 4. which need not
therefore be transcribed in this Place. Anno 1586. The Elections of both the
Proctors for the Diocese of Norwich happened to be controverted; and being also
different Choices in the two Archdeaconries, they were thereupon two different
Cases. One was heard and determined by the Archbishop in the Upper House, the
other by the Prolocutor in the Lower.

1. As to that in the Lower House, we find ( Sess. 3.) that the Prolocutor ad
veritatem in hac part inquirendam juramento oneravit quosdam, etc. de modo
observato antehac in hujusmodi Electione, etc. Qui sic jurati dixerunt and
deposuerunt prout sequitur, etc. -- Then the Prolocutor assignavit Magistro
Knewstubbs ad proponendum causas quare Mr. D. Dey, non admitteretur in Coetum
hujus Domus in proxim. -- -- Sess. 4. D. Dey desires: to be admitted, and his
Competitor showing no reasonable Cause why he should not, Dominus Prolocutor
decrevit dictum Magistrum Dey recipiendum fore in Procuratorem ejusdem Cleri
and in Coetum hujus Donus, eumque sic recepit.

2. Concerning the other Election determined in the Upper House; the Index (the
only account that remains of their Lordships proceedings at that time) has this
Note under the Session in which the Prolocutor gave Judgment. Nov. 11. Decided
against Mr. Thorowgood for Mr. West in a Cause of Election to be Clerks in
Convocation. And we find in the Lower House Journal of the same Day, that the
Prolocutor (having notice by the Register of his Grace's Sentence for Mr. West
against Mr Thorowgood) intimavit haec omnibus praesentibus, and monuit eos ad
recipiendum eundem Magistrum West in Coetum hujus Domus.

An. 1640.
Anno 1640. Nov. 11. The Minutes of the Lower House give this Account. Eodem
die orta fuit Contentio sive Disputatio quoad Electionem Procuratorum Cleri pro
Diaeces. Lincoln, and lecta prius -- -- ad audiend. eandem elegerunt tres
Decanos, tres Procuratores pro Capitulis, and tres Procuratores pro Diaeces.
[all named;] quibus commisserunt ad conveniend. prox. die 12 Nov. post meridiem
in dicto loco inter horas secundam and quartam, etc. -- The Committee met
accordingly, and post maturam deliberationem, etc. ordinavit ut sequitur,
Whether Proctors are lawful in the choice of Proctors; and if Lawful, Whether
it does avail non designatis personis; and for ought yet appears to the
Committee, the Custom observed in the Diocese of Lincoln has been, that
Proxies have prevailed. It is desired on both sides, that their Counsel may be
heard in Law.

The next Session, Nov. 14. The Upper House Register says, Reverendissimus
accersiri fecit Dominum Prolocutorem and sex alios Domus Inferioris. Quibus
comparentibus, Reverendissimus cis significavit, quod ipse audivit esse quasdam
discrepantias inter quosdam Clericos citra eorum Electines; and voluit eos ut
ipsi and alii dictae Domus easdem examinarent and determinarent juxta Juris
Exigentiam and Consuetudines cujuslibet Diaeceseos, donec aliter ordinatum
fuerit. Whereupon they proceeded the same day to the business recommended by
his Grace; and the Examinations and final Decisions ran in the Name of the
House, as Commissioned for those purposes. -- Nov. 14. Domini continuarunt
ulteriorem determinationem hujus materiae -- and statuerunt, ut parts hinc
inde introducerent eorum Consilium -- Nov. 21. Coram Dominis Praelatis and
Cleris Domus Inferioris Convocat. etc. comparuerunt Mri. Hirst, Tuckney, and
Palmer, etc. in quorum praesentiis (post Suffragia Domus in ea part fact.)
declararunt and ordinarunt, etc. -- Nov. 25. Domini consenserunt, eo quod Mr.
Porter suit absens, se nolle finem huic Negotio imponere hoc die, sed
declararunt se velle finale suum decretum interponere die Sabbati prox. -- Domi
ni unanimi consensu aequum censuerunt, rebus sic stantibus, nibil statuendum
aut agendum fore debere, etc. Nov. 29. Suffragiis in ea part promulgatis
(nempe 29. pro Mr. Thorowgood and 16 pro Mro. Porter, etc.) Dominus Prolocutor
de and cum Consensu, etc. pronunciavit pro Electione dicti Magistri Thorowgood,
and revocavit, etc. -- Dec. 2. Dominus de and cum consensu, etc. pronunciavit
pro Electione Doctoris Sanderson and Hirst, etc. and admisit, etc. -- Jan. 27.
Upon a Petition for a Review of the Election for the Diocese of Lincoln, habita
prius matura consideratione Contentorum in petitione mentionat'. Domini
Praelati dictas respective parts interrogarunt, etc. [Whether they would
finally acquiesce in the Sentence upon that Review'] They agree to acquiesce;
Unde Domini ex causis and promissis praedict. decreverunt pro Revisione and
Re-examinatione dicti Negotii, and ad interponend. finale Judicium in prox.
etc. -- -- Feb. 3. After this Review, dicta Domus ad eorum finale decretum
processit; and according to the Majority upon a Division then made, Dominus
Prolocutor ratificavit and confirmavit Electionem D. Sanderson and Hirst.

Anno 1689.
Anno 1689. Sess. 11. In the Upper-house-Book: Comparuit personaliter Johannes
Cawley Sacrae Theologiae Professor, Archidiaconus (ut asseruit) Archidiaconatus
Lincoln, and introduxit and exhibuit supplicem Libellum sive Petitionem in
Scriptis concept'; in qua querelatus est, quod licet se fuisse per 23 Annos ac
in praesenti esse Archidiaconum Archidiaconatus Lincoln, ac per Episcopos
Lincoln pro tempore Existen' tanquam Archidiaconum Lincoln citat'. ad
comparend'. in Convocationibus: Praemissis tamen non obstantibus, Reverendus
Pater ac Dominus Dominus Thomas, Permissione Divina Lincoln. Episcopus, quendam
Thomam Oldys in Legibus Baccalaureum tanquam Archidiaconum Archidiaconatus
Lincoln. citasse ad comparend. in hac Convocatione sive Sacra Synodo
Provinciali in praejudicium Juris and Tit^li fui and in hac Convocatione nunc
sedere. Quare humiliter petiit Jus and Justitiam sibi in hac part fieri and
ministrari. Unde Reverendus Pater Praeses antedictus, cum consensu Confratrum
suorum Episcoporum praedict', hanc Petitionem recepit and legi mandavit: Qua
lecta, dictus Reverendus Pater Praeses antedictus mihi in mandatis dedit, ad
tradend'. Copiam ejusdem Petitionis praefato Magistro Oldys, and ad eum
informand'. quod compareat die Veneris prox. cum Responsis suis dictae
Petitioni in Scriptis concept'. and decrevit ut dictus Doctor Cawley tunc
compareat.

Sess. 12. Venerabilis Vir, Thomas Oldys Clericus, Archidiaconus (ut asseruit)
Archidiaconatus Lincoln'. comparuit, and dedit responsum suum in Scriptis
concept'. Petitioni sive supplici Libello alias contra eum ultima Sessione
hujus Convocationis ex part Johannis Cawley Sacrae Theo. Profess. asseren se
esse Archidiaconum Lincoln. exhibit'. Quod responsum, de mandato dicti
Reverendi Patris Praesidis antedicti, fuit per me Notarium Publicum antedictum
public lectum: Quo lecto, and dicto Magistro Oldys pro praesenti dismisso,
dictus Reverendus Pater Praeses antedictus and caeteri Episcopi super petitione
and responsis praedict. mature deliberdrunt, and postea decreverunt dictos
Doctorem Cawley and Magistrum Oldys intromittend'. fore. Quibus comparentibus,
dictus Reverendus Pater Praeses antedictus, cum Consensu Confratrum suorum
Episcoporum praedict. eo quod eis constat duas Sententias Definitivas fuisse
contra dictum Doctorem Cawley in eodem latas, unam in alma Curia Cant. de
Arcubus, and alteram in suprema Curia Delegatorum; and quod Commissio pro
Revisione dicti negotij fuit per Serenissimos in Christo Principes ac Dominos
nostros Dominos Willelmum and Mariam Dei Gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and
Hiberniae Regem and Reginam fidei Defensores, etc. ad petitionem dicti Doctoris
Cawley concessa, and quod idem negotium per Judices Revisionis non est adhuc
decisum, dimisit dictum Magistrum Oldys ab omni ulteriori Judicij observatione.

The foregoing Instances are all the Light we have from our Books, touching the
Determination of Controverted Elections: And I observe from them,

No question, whether the Archbishop have a Right to determine Elections.
1. That it is no part of the Question, Whether the Metropolitan at the Head of
his Suffragan-Bishops, have a Right to receive Petitions touching controverted
Elections? or, Whether he may proceed to the Examination and final Decision of
them in the Upper-house? The Exercise of all these appears evidently in the
Instances of 1689, where we see a Petition is offered, received and considered;
and of 1586, where Sentence is actually given by his Grace. And what can be
more reasonable, than that the Archbishop who by his Mandate orders the
Election of Members, and has the Returns of all Elections made ultimately to
him; who also at the Opening, appoints his Commissioners to examine those
Returns, and during the Convocation, presides over the Lower as well as the
Upper House; what (I say) can be more natural than that he should have a direct
and immediate Right to take Cognizance how far such Elections, with the Returns
thereupon, are duly and regularly made? But I could never learn how the
Lower House could have a Power to Interpose about Returns (whether made unduly
or not at all) otherwise than by Petitioning the Metropolitan, upon some
extraordinary Occasion, that he will please to demand or examine them, as of
right to be made to him, and none else. But in the Acts of the last
Convocation, Anno 1700. Sess. 4. The Lower House have no Right to intermeddle
in Returns.
I find an Instance of the Lower-house's taking Cognizance of a Return, and
that in a very singular manner: The Words are these, Propositum fuit per Guil.
Bincks S. T. P. etc. ad effectum sequen. That whereas there has been no Return
made from the Chapter of Litchfield of a Member to serve for them in this
present Convocation; and whereas the said William Bincks being a Member of that
Chapter, informed this House, that the Defect of such Return was occasioned by
a Dispute that hapn'd before the said Chapter, concerning the Election of a
Proctor to represent them: That therefore this House would order a Letter to be
sent, signed by Mr. Prolocutor in the name of this Lower House, to the Dean and
Chapter of the said Cathedral Church of Litchfield, desiring them forthwith to
transmit the whole Proceedings concerning the said Election, under their common
Seal, to this House: Cui consensum fuit.

This so Solemnly passed and entered thus circumstantially, may be a temptation
to Presbyters (if the same Spirit should hereafter arise) to take the
cognizance of Returns, and thereby the Jurisdiction over the Members, out of
the hands of the Metropolitan. But care (I hope) will be taken to leave some
public testimony of the offense it gave to his Grace and the Bishops, whose
Rights were jointly invaded by this Act of the Lower House. For it is very
plain, both in Law, Reason, and Practice, that the Enquiry after such a Return,
ought to have gone by the same Course or Chanel, through which the Return it
self (if made) was to have passed, viz. from the Archbishop to the Bishop, and
from the Bishop to the Dean.

2. It is no part of the Dispute, Whether the Metropolitan may enjoin the
Inferior Clergy to Examine and Determine Controverted Elections? His Grace's
Power to require their Assistance, and their Obligation to pursue his
Directions, are both sufficiently expressed in that remarkable Instance from
the second Convocation of 1640.

3. Nor can it be a question, Whether his Grace, having Commissioned the
Prolocutor or Lower House, to examine any doubtful Election, may not take it out
of their hands into his own immediate Cognizance, if he see Cause. This (I
think) is a Rule in most Commissions; and an Express Reservation to that
purpose is made in this of 1640, empowering them to proceed donec aliter
ordinatum fuerit.

Thus, the Archbishop's Right to determine Controversies about Elections, is
uncontested: But the Question is, Whether the Right be solely in his Grace,
exclusive of the Inferior Clergy, or, Whether the Lower House have not a
concurrent Right?

The Arguments for a concurrent Right in the Lower House, considered. Anno 1586
In behalf of a Concurrent Right, two Instances are pleaded.

I. That of 1586. Sess. 3. 4. Where we find the Prolocutor examining Witnesses
upon Oath, appointing the Parties a time of Appearance, and then giving the
final Sentence or Judgment. But we must observe, as to the Point before us,

1. That the Upper-House-Books of that time are not in being; nor can it
possibly be known whether he had not such a Commission from his Grace, as we
are sure was given afterward to the Prolocutor and Lower House in 1640. Two
Elections of the same Diocese were determined the same day, one by the
Archbishop, the other by the Prolocutor: And I think it is not likely that one
of these Appellants should make original Application to the Upper, and the
other to the Lower House; but much more probable, that the Petition in both
Cases was first offered to his Grace, and that he divided the Work of Examining
and Determining, between himself in the Upper, and the Prolocutor in the Lower
House.

2. The Prolocutor (we see) examins the Witnesses upon Oath; and the very
Writer, who in all other respects is the main Advocate for the Independence of
the Lower House, solves the Prolocutor's giving an Oath, by an Authority
derived immediately from the Archbishop. The Words are these: P^er of the
Lower House, p. 7. c. 2.
The Prolocutor was on that Day put into the Archbishop's Commission for
Proroguing the Upper House, in order (I suppose) to empower him to give Oaths,
as he did at the trial of an Election that day below. I know the Narrative
says, P ^4.
in the Name of the Majority, That they are well assured that the Prolocutor
has this Power by Virtue of his Office. This is roundly spoken; but to make
others also assured, it had been kind to offer some Reasons why the Prolocutor
of the Spiritual Commons is in this Particular above the Speaker of the Commons
Temporal? And such Reasons had been the more necessary, when they took upon
them to dissent from the express Judgment of a Writer, who understands the
Value of his own Opinions too well to be easy under Contradiction.

But leaving that Point to be disputed between this Author and the Majority of
the House; the Circumstance upon which I chiefly insist in this Matter, is,

It was not the House, but the Prolocutor, who determined the Election.
3. That those of the Lower Clergy contend not for this Power of determining
Elections, as lodged in the Prolocutor, but in their House; and not the least
Mention is made of the House or any Member of it in determining this Election
of 1586. but the Proceeding and Sentence run solely in the name of the
Prolocutor. The Question therefore is, By whose Authority was that Sentence
given? It must be either from his Grace, or from the House. The Journal, though
very exact and particular, makes not the least mention of the House's
interposing; which Silence is the stronger Argument that they had no Right to
interpose (the Matter in all appearance being committed to the Prolocutor
alone) because in the other Instances of 1640. when the Prolocutor and Lower
Clergy were all equally concerned, the whole Proceeding was carried on in the
name of the House; Coram Dominis Praelatis and Cleris comparuerunt; Domini, and
Domini Praelati interrogarunt, determinationem continuarunt -- consenserunt,
censuerunt rebus sic stantibus nihil statuendum, etc. And when they came to
Sentence, Domus ad eorum finale decretum processit, and, Post Suffragia Domus
in ea part fact. declararunt and ordinarunt -- Suffragiis in ea part
promulgatis, Dominus Prolocutor, de and cum consensu, etc. pronunciavit. --

Considering how distinctly the Minutes of 1640. express the part which the
House had in these Proceedings, I leave it to the Opinion of every Reader,
whether the complete Journal of 1586. would not have left us some Footsteps at
least of the Houses's Concern at that time, either in the Course of the
Proceeding, or at least the final Sentence, if the Cause had not been committed
to the sole Examination and Decision of the Prolocutor. And if the Power was
solely in him, it can be no Question, whether he derived from the House (who
were present, and might as well have proceeded by their own immediate
Authority, if any such had been lodged in them) or from the Archbishop, who
could not be there in Person, whose Absence the Prolocutor supplies in all
other Respects, and who was also hearing a like Cause in the Upper-house at the
same time.

The Instance of 1640. considered.
II. The other Instance of a Right in the Lower House to take Cognizance of
Elections, concurrent with that of his Grace, is in some respects more full to
their purpose than the foregoing Testimony. In the Year 1640. Nov. 11. the
House appointed a Committee upon a controverted Election in Lincoln-Diocese;
which Committee met Nov. 12. and yet the Archbishop appears not to have
interposed till Nov. 14. nay, the Preface to the Order he then gave, shows that
to have been the first time of his interposing, Reverendissimus eis
significavit, quod ipse audivit esse quasdam discrepantias, etc. As far then as
a single Instance can affect the Rights of a Judicial Court, and alter the
natural Course of legal Proceedings, and establish a concurrent Jurisdiction;
so far is this Instance before us a Testimony of the Lower-house's Right to
enquire into the Circumstances of doubtful Elections. I say, to Enquire; It
goes no farther than Enquiring-
for this Precedent goes no farther than an Enquiry about the Custom of the
Diocese in their Election of Proctors; and a Right founded upon a single
Precedent, can never be extended beyond that Precedent. It proceeds not to a
formal Examination of Witnesses upon Oath, and much less to a final Judgment.
These, and all the other marks of a Judicial Proceeding, commence upon his
Grace's Special Order to the Prolocutor and House, ut examinarent and
determinarent juxta Juris Exigentiam, and Consuetudines cujuslibet Dioeceseos,
donec aliter ordinatum fuerit.

From which Order (I think) these three things are fairly inferred, 1. That if
Archbishop Laud had thought the Lower House to have an inherent Power of
Examining and Determining Judicially, he would not have interposed in that
Matter, after they were actually entered upon their Enquiries. 2. That if the
Clergy themselves had believed such a Power to be lodged in their House, they
would have declared against that Interposition, as an Invasion of their own
inherent Authority. 3. That in Virtue of the Reservation (donec aliter
ordinatum fuerit) it still remained in his Grace's Power to revoke that Order,
and either to put a stop to the Proceeding, or to remove it (as he should see
cause) to his own immediate Cognizance.

III. An Additional Account of the Substitution of a Prolocutor.
IN explaining the Election and Office of a Procutor ( Chap. IV.) I took
occasion to consider how far he had a Right to make a Substitution in cases of
Sickness or Business. For though the Speaker of the House of Commons, as
executing that Office upon a Royal Confirmation, never pretended to depute
another; though also the Confirmation of the Archbishop and Bishops be no less
necessary, in order to execute the Office of a Prolocutor; and though (lastly) it
appear that Applications for leave to substitute in those Cases have been
actually made to the Upper-house; yet against all these it had been confidently
affirmed, that the Deputations of this kind might be made without the
Archbishop's Consent or Privity; Power of the Lower House, p. 9. c. 1.
and the manner of making them is farther urged, to give the Prolocutor some
such Figure in the Lower House, as the Archbishop is known to have in the Upper.

The late Substitution in 1701.
That Writer had concealed all the Instances of Application for Leave made to
the President and Bishops; but he was afterward put in mind of them by the
Author of the Right of the Archbishop. p. 66, 67.
Very lately, a Substitution being made by the Prolocutor upon the Authority of
a Precedent (already considered) in the Year 1640, V. Sup. p. 76.
the Person so deputed was actually put into the Chair, without the Approbation
or Knowledge of the Archbishop and Bishops.

The Account of it in a Paper marked Numb. 1.
To justify the Proceedings of the Majority in this and some other Particulars,
a Paper came out, marked Numb. 1. in the way of a News-Letter; and in Truth much
of the same Authority, both in the Relation of Facts, and the Reasonings upon
them, with the flying Intelligence of other kinds. Only there is this
difference in the Case of our Ecclesiastical News-Writer and his Brother
Intelligencers; their imperfect Representations are usually the Effects of
Ignorance and Haste; but his savours too much of Partiality and Design.

God knows, it is a sad Omen to our poor Church, that any of her own Ministers
can thus triumph in her Misfortunes, and comply with such mean methods to
proclaim her Breaches, and make her the public scorn of her Enemies. For the
sake of our Church and Religion, may the Author of these Methods be once
brought to such a Spirit and Temper, as shall at least oblige him to common
Decency, or however restrain him from such open and virulent abuses of his
Ecclesiastical Governors. Orders made in Convocation against the Publication of
Debates while depending*
He seems to have overcome the obligations of Duty, but may remember that in
some former Convocations particular Orders have been made against Revealing the
Debates, even in Discourse, till finished; and that upon Penalties, which he is
taking great Pains to Deserve.

Anno 1529. Sess. 3. Reverendissimus monuit omnes sub poena Excommunicationis,
ne aliquis revelet extra-Domum aliquibus personis cujuscunque Status; nisi
inter Semetipsos.

Anno 1529. Sess. 19. Reverendissimus omnes and singulos admonuit ne quicquam
revelent de hujusmodi Communicatione.

Anno 1529. Sess. 20. Episcopus London Commissarius, etc. monuit omnes ne
quicquam Revelarent ibi dictum vel recitatum, sub poena Excommunicationis latae
Sententiae.

Anno 1541. Sess. 8. Accessit Prolocutor cum quibusdam de Electis a Clero, and
exposuerunt querelas suas, etc. ubi Reverendissimus praecepit ne quid
effutirent de rebus ipsis expositis.

Anno 1557. The Archbishop having explained to the Bishops and Clergy the
Causes of the Convocation, viz. the Reformation of Abuses in the Church, etc.
enjoins them to consider of proper methods, Et quid sibi videatur, Voluit cos
sibi servare.

Anno 1588. Sess. 4. The Prolocutor (having been in the Upper House to receive
directions about the Subsidy, which was afterward considered and debated
below) monuit omnes praesentes ne public revelarent tractata and gesta isto
die.

Anno 1640. Sess. 5. Apr. 25. Et ulterius, pro meliori Expeditione negotiorum
hujus sacrae Synodi, idem Reverendissimus, cum consensu and assensu corundem
Confratrum suorum, ordinavit, Quod nullus Episcopus aut aliquis e Clero Copiam
Canonis aut partis Canonis proposituri and tractaturi exscribere aut de aliquo
hujusmodi Canone for as fabulare praesumpserit, donec hac Convocatione sive
Sacra Synodo plenarie and finaliter assensum and sacra Regia Majestate
approbat. erit, sub poena Suspensionis cujuslibet e Clero per tres menses, and
Synodicae monitionis pro quolibet Praelato qui ita peccaverit, prout in Actu
Synodico sequen. continetur, viz. etc. -- Dominus Prolocutor venit cum 5 aliis
e Domo Inferiori; and eis declaravit istum Actum Synodicum praeceden. and
voluit eundem Dominum Prolocutorem ad declarand. istum Actum toto Coetui dictae
Domus. Mox revertebat, and dixit se and totum Coetum Domus Inferioris consensum
and assensum suos Confectioni dicti Actus Synodici adhibuisse and eundem
unanimiter approbasse.

The Convocations in which those strict Provisions for Secrecy were made, would
without doubt have animadverted severely upon such a shameful Method of sending
the Debates (I am sorry to say, the Divisions) Session by Session, into all
parts of the Kingdom. But after a general request to this Writer, that in the
manner of venting his Resentments, he will at least have a greater regard to
the honor of our Church; I will consider the Matter of his Paper so far as it
concerns the Substitution of a Prolocutor, and affects the Account I have given
of this Point. Chap. 4. p.
His Insincerity in the other parts of that Relation has been already laid
open; and this about Substitutions (as depending upon the Registers of
Convocation) is the only Head that falls under my Consideration.

Reasons why a Sub-Prolocutor ought to be confirmed in the Upper House.
In the fourth Chapter ( p. 74.) I infer a necessity that the Substitute be
admitted and confirmed by the Upper House, because without this, he is not the
Person agreed on between the Bishops and Clergy for the mutual conveyance of
their Messages; nor can their Lordships receive any thing from him as the Sense
of the Inferior Clergy, and much less Return their own Pleasure by him. Add to
this, that at the Opening of Convocation, and in the middle upon Death or
Promotion, the Clergy cannot proceed to an Election without his Grace's leave;
nor was he ever thought to be qualified for the Exercise of any part of the
Office, before Confirmation. He blames me for a further observation to the same
purpose (Right of the Archbishop, p. 67.) that neither the Speaker of the House
of Commons, nor the House it self have the Power to Substitute a Speaker. But
however I had declared all along against inferring an Independence of the Lower
House from the Independence of the Commons, it was (I hope) no unseasonable
Suggestion to those who so much desire to make the Proceedings in Parliament
their Rule, that in this point of Substitutions they go beyond their Rule, It Is
true, the Dignitaries of the Lower House have a personal Right to be Summoned,
and as such are capable of appearing by Proxy; but cannot actually appear so,
without the consent and approbation of the President. Nor is it at all to the
purpose, to talk of the ordinary Substitutions of Proxies, unless that Power
inferred an absolute and immediate Right to Substitute a Prolocutor or Speaker;
See Chap. 3.
which he must needs know to be otherwise in the House of Peers, where the
Nobility Substitute their Proxies, but not a Speaker.

Instances of Substitutions o^ Authority of the Upper House, defended against
the late. Paper, Number 1.
These Considerations from the Reason of the thing, and the Nature of the
Office, are confirmed ( p. 75.) by Instances of Application to the Upper House
upon the Substitution of a Prolocutor for the Lower. The first, that of
Archdeacon Wolman, is too express to be evaded. Anno 1533. Sess. 3. in the
Upper House Book, Ibidem Dominus Prolocutor D. Wolman affirmavit se aegrotum
esse, and petiit ut durante infirmitate ejus, Mr. Fox si vellet adesse, vel Mr.
D. Bell exerceret officium suum, and concessum est. And this instance is made
more full and clear by the Additional Remark he brings out of some other
Extracts, which are yet concealed. Another Extract from the same Register (says
he, p. 8.) gives this further Account of it. -- "Which done, the Prolocutor
being Sick, desired that Mr. Fox, Archdeacon of Leicester, and Mr. Bell
Archdeacon of Gloucester, might be Substituted in his Place." Ad cujus
Petitionem, dictus Dominus Praesidens, cum consensu Dominorum Episcoporum, and
Praelatorum, and Cleri, tunc praesentium, licentiavit dictum Ri. Wolmannum
abesse pro tempore Infirmitatis suae.

I know not certainly in whose hands these Extracts are, but must beg leave to
think that in the Course of this Controversy we should have heard more of
them, had they been to the Advantage of that side of the Cause. And considering
that the present Disputes in Convocation have been chiefly owing to the want of
Registers, the Proprietor (whoever he be) had an opportunity of showing his
affection to truth and unity, by bringing forth these Extracts e're now; in
imitation of his Grace the Lord Archbishop, who so freely laid before the two
Houses an entire Register he lately retrieved.

Till it be known in whose hands they are, I must hope for no other light from
them in this or any other particular, besides the Citation he has been pleased
to produce. Supposing it therefore fairly and entirely repeated, the
Observations I make upon it are, 1. That the Prolocutor evidently applys
himself to his Grace and the Bishops, for leave to make the Substitution. 2.
That we cannot conceive he would have made this Application, if the
Substitution had been valid without it; or that he would have been suffered to
make it, had the Lower House thought their own Consent and Authority
sufficient. 3. That a Sub-Prolocutor is regularly constituted in the same
manner as a Prolocutor, i. e. by the concurrence and agreement of both Houses;
the formal Conveyance of the Authority belonging to his Grace.

This Writer may refine, as nicely as he pleases, upon the Prolocutor's dislike
of Archbishop Cronmer; but it is no part of the question, whether Sickness was
the real Cause of his desire to make that Substitution, or only a pretense for
Absence. Supposing it only a pretense, it must be carried on in the usual form;
and it is enough in the present Case, that he actually applied to the Upper
House, and pleaded his Indisposition, and had their express Leave to Substitute.

2. The next Testimony of Application to their Lordships, is grounded upon a
Memorandum of a Substitution, entered in the end of the Upper House Acts, Anno
1554. which (as I observe in the forementioned Chapter) Vid. supr. p. 75.
could no way have come into that Register, but as the Upper House had their
share in the Substitution. Nor does the late Paper offer any thing to
invalidate the Authority of this Testimony or my Inference from it, besides a
precarious Supposition that it might possibly be taken from the concurrent
Lower House Books; when in all the Acts of that Convocation, there are no signs
that the Extracter had ever seen a Lower House Book of that time; much less
that he had it then before him, or that omitting all the other Matters, he
singled out this Substitution, as the only thing worthy of his Notice. It Is a
sign the Case is Desperate, when Suppositions so very groundless are the best
Defense that an Artful and Evasive Writer can find.

3. I produce a third Instance from the Minutes of the Lower House in another
Convocation of the same Year: Die Jovis, 5o. Aprilis, Praesidente Episcopo
London, praesentatur praedictus Prolocutor per N. Harpsfield and Jo. Wimblesey,
ubi tractarunt de Eligendis quibusdam de Clero qui Vice totius Cleri
mitterentur Oxoniam ad tractand. cum Domino Cranmero, Domino Ridleo nuper
praetenso Episcopo London, and Hugone Latymer, de quibusdam Articulis
Religionem concernentibus; and delecti sunt D. Weston, Oglethorp, Chedsey,
Seton, Cole, Jefery, Fecknam and Harpsfield, ad effectum praedictum. Et quum
praedictus Prolocutor non potuit adesse dictae Convocationi, Substituit N.
Harpsfield and Johannem Wimbleseys, conjunctim and divisim in loco suo.

The late Paper urges this instance in behalf of the Power of the Lower House,
because it was entered in the Acts of that House: When the Writer could not but
know, that as often as the Lower Clergy appear before the President and Bishops,
the business thereof (particularly (...) the Presentation of their Prolocutor)
is entered of Course in the Lower House Journal as well as that of the Upper.
And I have given the Acts of the Day entire (which for good reasons he did not
think fit to do,) that no doubt may remain with the Reader, whether the
Presentation of a Prolocutor, the Choice of Persons for the Dispute, and the
Substitution immediately made upon the Prolocutor's being named for one, were
not all done in the same Place; that is, in the Upper House.

I take these three Instances to be full for the Power of the Upper House;
especially the first, as it is more circumstantial than the other two. To these
I will add a fourth, which makes not directly for either side; but is
confidently urged by that Paper in favor of the Lower House.

Anno 1562. Feb. 24. The Archbishop and Bishops Surrogatum Prolocutoris (dicto
Prolocutore Absente) ad se accersiri jusserunt. It is not said, that their
Lordships sent for the Prolocutor, and that he being absent, his Surrogate came
up, but that they sent for the Surrogatus Prolocutoris; which must imply, that
they knew the Prolocutor had made a Substitution; and how can we more naturally
account for that knowledge, than from the usual Application for Leave to do it?

The Arguments for an Independent Power of Substitution in the Lower House,
answered.
The Arguments opposed to these Testimonies, arise, 1. from the Want, and 2.
from the silence of the Upper House Registers, at times when the Journals or
Minutes of the Lower House make mention of a Sub-Prolocutor. But none of the
Instances under either head speak of a Substitution, as made by the Prolocutor
(one excepted, which is already accounted for, p. 75.) and they did not
therefore properly come into that Account of the Election and Office of a
Prolocutor: Nor are they at all serviceable to the Power of the Lower House,
unless they mentioned the House as the sole Authors of the several
Substitutions. For where the Registers of the Upper House are wanting, it is an
equal doubt whether they did or did not Apply to their Lordships; and I hope,
in some other Cases, the bare silence or omission of the Books of the Upper
House (of the Debates whereof such Substitutions are not strictly a part) will
not be set against positive Testimonies proving an actual Application for
Leave. A bare Omission may be easily accounted for, upon the Negligence or
Forgetfulness of a Register, or from his opinion that this matter (as a thing
of Form) was not necessary to be inserted in the Acts; or lastly (which was the
Case of three of these Instances) they might not happen on days of business,
and so nothing was entered besides the Continuation in Form. By all, or any of
these Suppositions, the Confirmation of a Sub-Prolocutor by the President and
Bishops, becomes consistent with the Silence of the Registers: But where the
Journals speak of Substitutions actually made Above, no room is left for
Suspicion that they were not made there; nor can any reason be assigned why
they should be made and entered there, besides a persuasion in the Clergy of
those times, that of themselves they had no Power to make such Substitutions.

But to descend to the Particulars:

Instances, where we want the Registers of the Upper House, of no force.
1. In some of the Instances which speak of a Sub-Prolocutor in the Lower
House, we Want the Registers of the Upper. Anno 1586. Nov. 23. the Dean of
Lichfield, and Dec. 2. D. Goodman, are said to Intimate the Continuations
Nomine Domini Prolocutoris. The Writer of the late Paper observes upon these,
that a good Abridgement of the Contemporary Registers of the Upper House, etc.
mentions nothing of the Archbishop's Approving either of these Substitutions.

This Abridgment has been very differently described on that Side; and the
Designs of those different Characters are obvious enough. When its mentioning
no License was to be an Evidence for D. Atterbury, Rights. etc. p 647. 662.
that such Licenses in those days were not thought necessary in order to treat
or debate of Canons, it is reputation run high; it was a good Abridgment of the
Journals of the Upper House, and not only so, but a full and particular
Abridgement, giving an account of the Acts, etc. day by day, and leaf by leaf.

Afterward, it hapn'd to be urged (in Concurrence with the Journals of the
Clergy) Right of the Archbishop, p. 101.
against the Lower House and their Intermediate meetings; and the fullness and
goodness of the Abridgment did evidently Enforce the Argument against that
Claim. Upon this, it fell into disgrace with the Writer of the Power of the
Lower House, etc. P. 13. c. 1
and presently shrunk into a short Abstract or Index of the Bishops Journal.

Of late, since this Question about Substitutions arose, it is Silence as to any
Confirmations in the Upper House, was to make these two Deputations in 1586.
the Sole effect of a Power in the Lower: Now therefore it has recovered its
former Credit, and is restored to it is ancient Title of a good Abridgment, and
is to keep it, so long as it continues in the Service of that Side.

In the mean time, what unsufferable Shifting and Glossing is this! To make the
same Notes good and bad, a short Abstract and a full Account, now an Index and
then a particular Abridgement; as the several Characters will help to disguise
a defenseless cause. The truth is, this Abridgment is little more than an
Index; but specifying in about twenty Instances the Days on which the Sessions
were, and those the same with the Sessions in the Lower House; so far they
became a proper proof against Intermediate Days. But I think the silence of
Index's or Abridgments so very lean, are not usually thought a proof, that this
or that particular matter was not in the original Book. Not to observe, that
the first of these two Instances which speak of a Sub-Prolocutor, hapn'd on a
day when the Upper House did not meet, but the Convocation was Continued by
Commission.

The bare Silence of the Upper House Books of no authority against positive
Evidences.
2. In other places where the Minutes of the Lower House speak of
Substitutions, their Lordships Register is silent; and that Silence is the only
argument pretended for their having no share therein.

Anno 1661. June 14. Substitutus est Decanus Cicestrensis in locum
Prolocutoris, durante absentia ejusdem.

Anno 1662. May 5. D. Franck nominatur and eligitur in Vice-Prolocutorem.

At both these times we have the original Registers of the Upper House: But, 1.
It happens that the business transacted there on both Days is entered in gross,
Reverendissimus post aliquod Tractatum cum Confratribus Continuavit, etc. and
what particulars passed on either day, we cannot tell. 2. These Minutes don't
say (any more than the Journal of 1586.) by whom or upon whose Authority these
Substitutions were made. The Acts of 1586. speak of other Persons Continuing
nomine Prolocutoris, and these Minutes speak of a Prolocutor's being
substituted, and named, and chosen; but where and in what manner these things
were done, Whether in the Upper or the Lower House? by the Bishops and Clergy,
or by the Clergy alone? neither the Acts nor Minutes have told us. We have
therefore no way to come to any knowledge about the manner of making these, but
by interpreting such general Expressions in accommodation to other
Substitutions, the Circumstances whereof are more particularly expressed. Such
is that of Archdeacon Wolman recited above: And such also, as to the present
Case, are the two other Substitutions in the Upper House; the Entries thereof
in the Register of that House being a Circumstance which sufficiently proves
Application to have been made there; and that Application, is the thing we
contend for, as necessary to enable a Substitute to Act.

The Precedent of 1640. particularly considered.
The only particular Entry upon the Lower House Books in any Convocation, is
that of 1640. May 2. (repeated in short May 5.) Die Sabbati, 2. Maii 1640.
Dominus Prolocutor apud ejus aedes in Westminster. me praesente, constituit and
ordinavit Doctorem Bargrave and Doctorem Nevil and eorum alterum conjunctim and
divisim prose and ejus nomine pro hac Sessione, ad legend. preces in Domo
Inferiori, etc. and vetum and Suffragium suum reddere pro Prorogatione prox.
Sequent. etc. Et sacta declaratione Constitutionis hujusmodi Clero Domus
Inferioris, Cleri eandem approbarunt.

Here, the dispute is not, whether this be an Authentic Precedent as it stands
in the Minutes of 1640. We question not it is Authority, nor deny the Lower
House any advantage that it will fairly Yield; but own (on the contrary) that
in virtue hereof the Prolocutor's Proposal of the Person or Persons, and the
Approbation of the House, are both Regular. But the only question is (and I
once more leave it to the decision of every Reader) Whether the mere Silence of
the Upper House Register, be a sufficient Argument that their Lordships
Confirmation is not necessary in such Substitutions? 'When this Silence can but
amount at most to a probable proof that it was not given even in that Instance,
'When we have clear and certain testimonies of it is being desired and given in
other Instances, 'When also no account is to be given of the Application to the
Upper House in those Instances, besides a persuasion among the Clergy, that it
was the regular way; and lastly, 'When the contrary is attended with so many
absurdities, as 'That a Prolocutor who himself cannot act till he be confirmed
by the President and Bishops, should have Power to Commission another to Act
without Confirmation, 'That a Person who is to be the common Inter-nuncio
between the two Houses, shall not first be approved by both, That their
Lordships, who are to receive the Sense of the House, and to return their
Pleasure to the House by his Hands, shall neither have previous Notice that he
is the real Representative and Organ of the House, nor any Assurance that the
House will reckon their Commands (if conveyed by him) obligatory and authentic.

The Paper (Numb. 1.) speaks against the Sense of the House.
Notwithstanding these Absurdities, as well as the positive testimonies of
Application to the Upper House; the Writer of the late Paper affirms in the
name of the Majority, That they were thoroughly satisfied of their Right to
depute a Prolocutor in such an Exigence as this, without acquainting his Grace
and the Bishops at all with it. But if he should be mistaken in the Sense of
that side or in his own Opinion that they will be governed by his Notions; it
will not be the first Instance of his reckoning too hastily upon their implicit
Concurrence. While the Generality continued in the Dark, they were glad to put
themselves under the first Guide they could find; but as new Light broke forth,
and the Constitution and Usages of an English Synod came to be more clearly
seen, the Scheme which had been laid by a certain Author, appeared too
extravagant for Practice; and he has had the Mortification to see his
Principles tacitly dropped and disowned by his very Friends, in a Refusal to act
and proceed upon them.

So, upon this Head of Substitutions, the Writer of the late Paper proceeds all
along upon a Power in the House independent on his Grace and the Bishops: And
yet it is said (and he himself hints it) that a considerable Member on the same
side declared openly, that they had no Intention to make a common Referendary
without the Approbation of his Grace: which reduces the Point under Dispute,
from that absolute Exclusion of the Cognizance of the Upper-house, to a
Distinction between the Office of a Prolocutor and Referendary.

No difference between a Prolocutor and a Referendary.
According to all the Observations I have been able to make upon this Office,
and the mention of it in the Registers, I could never see the least difference
in the Import and Meaning of these two Terms. The Prolocutor, or (as the Acts
before the Reformation more usually write it) the Praelocutor, was the Person
who spoke in the name of the Clergy, and reported to their Lordships their
Resolutions and Answers, the whole Body of the Clergy being all the while
present. From hence he was called Organum Cleri; and as that was originally the
only Business of the Office, so the Person executing it is most commonly
mentioned under the single Name of Prolocutor.

His other Style is Referendarius; the most natural Interpretation whereof, is
the Reporter of the Sense or Resolutions of a Body; and so it is used in our
Registers before the Application of it to a Prolocutor. Anno 1411. Dec. 2. The
King's Commissioners come to the Convocation, and the Chancellor who was
empowered to speak for the rest, is called Referendarius: Per dictum Dominum
Referendarium devocius Supplicatum; and again, dicto Domino Referendario and
Dominis temporalibus qui intrarunt, se paululum retrahentibus. But that no
Doubt may remain, whether this Name and that other of Prolocutor did imply the
self same thing, the first formal Choice we find at the beginning of
Convocation, was upon a Direction to the Clergy Anno 1425.
Ut unum Referendarium sive Praelocutorem ex seipsis eligerent, qui vice eorum
omnium and singulorum causas exponeret and responsa. Again, Anno 1536, they are
ordered to choose one of their Members in Referendarium and Prolocutorem, qui
eorum nomine loqui possit. Anno 1562. Ut eligant in eorum Prolocutorem sive
Referendarium, etc. and they present the Dean of St. Paul's in Prolocutorem sive
Referendarium Domus Inferioris electum. -- Anno 1586 and 1588, they have leave
to proceed ad Electionem futuri Prolocutoris, only; and yet the Journal
mentions the Presentation conjunctively under both Titles. Anno 1640, in both
Convocations, they are directed to choose Virum, etc. in eorum Prolocutorem five
Referendarium; and at the Presentation upon both Choices the Register repeats
the very same words.

But to show that it makes no difference in the Language of Convocation,
whether the Expression be Prolocutor, or Prolocutor and Referendarius, or
Prolocutor five Referendarius; observe the promiscuous use of all the three in
a Choice upon the Promotion of a Prolocutor, Anno 1661. Feb. 18. The Clergy are
directed ut unum, etc. eligant in eorum Prolocutorem and Referendarium: They
retire ad effectum eligendi, etc. in eorum Prolocutorem sive Referendarium:
They present Dr. Barwick in Prolocutorem totius Cleri Domus Inferioris
unanimiter Electum: The President and his Brethren confirm him in Prolocutorem
sive Referendarium.

The Duties belonging to the Office of Prolocutor, are all annexed to that of
Reporting.
We see then, the promiscuous Use of these two Terms is as ancient as the first
Election of a Prolocutor; and upon what Authority they are now made two
distinct Offices, I know not. It Is plain, that the Reporting (or in other words
the being a Referendary and a Speaker at the Head of the Body) was originally
intended in the Office, and the only thing implied in both the Names; and the
Business of Reading Prayers, and being the standing Moderator in their Debates,
came in afterward, when they grew into a separate House. So that these were
the Consequences of the Referendary's Office, and annexed to it, and lodged in
the Person of the Prolocutor, as first chosen and confirmed for the original
End, that of Reporting. And therefore, at the beginning of Convocation, though
his Grace actually direct the Choice of a Prolocutor, and a Person accordingly
be Elected in form by the Clergy, yet he is not thought capable either of
Moderating, or Reading Prayers, till he be Confirmed in the Office of
Prolocutor or Common Referendary, and by Consequence in the other Offices
annexed to it. Which Confirmation it is, that puts the Clergy in a Capacity to
Act as a House, and the whole Convocation to proceed to business, upon that
forma Establishment of a Correspondence between the two Houses. As therefore
the Prolocutor is obliged to be always in readiness within the Synodical Hour
to attend the Upper House and bring their Instructions to the Lower, so in Case
of any Inability to pay such Attendance, it must certainly be his duty to give
timely notice thereof to their Lordships; that either the Sitting of
Convocation may be intermitted for the time, or (if business require) another
Person may be chosen by the Clergy, and confirmed by the President and Bishops,
to put the Lower House in a condition to proceed, and to be for that Interval
the known Internuncio between the two Houses.

One thing more I would observe upon this head, That if the appointment of a
Person to read Prayers, and moderate their Debates in the Chair, and so to make
them a House, be in the Power of the Lower Clergy; and if the sole concern of
the Upper House be afterward in the confirmation of a Common Referendary; all
the complaints against the Government for not suffering them to become a House
by the choice of such a Person, turn directly upon themselves. For it was in
their own Power (upon this Principle) to become a House when they pleased, and
not the less so for his Grace's Delaying the Appointment of a Common
Referendary. But in truth, since the Separation of the two Houses in their
Debates, the title of Prolocutor has comprehended all the Offices of the Place,
as the Confirmation of his Grace and the Bishops, has been ever thought to
Instate him in the Office, and make the Lower Clergy a House, to act in a due
Subordination to those their Superiors.

And this new division of the Office is evidently framed to Support the notion
of their being a Separate House, and in a Condition to debate business of their
own, antecedent to this Act and the Authority of their Lordships: Which being
once allowed, would quickly establish them in a Coordinate State, and open a
way to any degrees of Independence they should hereafter please to insist on.

IV. Additional Observations touching the AUTHORITY of the SUMMONS to
Convocation.
The Authority of Summoning applied both to the King and the Archbishop.
P. 189. The title of the Convocation of 1562. (as of others since the Act of
Submission) runs thus: Convocatio Praelatorum and Cleri Cantuar. Provinciae
inchoat. in Domo Capitulari Ecclesiae Divi Pauli London, Auctoritate Brevis
Regij Reverendissimo, etc. in hac part directi, etc.



P. 1. App. The form of holding a Convocation, drawn by Archbishop Parker for
that of 1562. begins thus: Sciendum est quod omnes qui Auctoritate
Reverendissimi Domini Archiepiscopi Cant. citantur ad comparendum coram eo in
in Domo Capitulari Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi Pauli London, etc.



The Titles of our Convocations before and since the Reformation agree in the
first Clause, Convocatio Praelatorum and Cleri Cantuarlensis Provinciae; which
shows that by our Protestant Constitution they are no less an Ecclesiastical
and Provincial Synod of Bishops and their Clergy under one common head the
Metropolitan of of the Province, than in the times of Popery they were. If
therefore the Clergy (as has been pleaded of late) be not comprehended in that
Phrase Convocationem Praelatorum and Cleri in the form of Continuing, they are
by the same rule no Members of an English Convocation.

But whereas the Convocations before the Reformation are generally said in the
Title to be Factae per Reverendissimum, etc. upon the Submission Act the Style
seems to have been changed, because the first title we have entire after that
Act (this, I mean, of 1562.) makes the Convocation to be begun Auctoritate
Brevis Regij Reverendissimo etc. direct. And yet we see that Archbishop Parker
looked upon the Convocation of that very Year to be Cited or Summoned,
Auctoritate Reverendissimi, etc.

Hereupon a question arises about the true meaning of the term Authoritas, as
used in these titles and on some other Occasions: In what Sense the Bishops and
Clergy are said to be Summoned to Convocation by the King's Authority, and in
what, by the Authority of the Archbishop?

The Archiepiscopal Summons Authoritative before the Act.
It is agreed on all hands, that before the Act of Submission, an English
Convocation was Summoned by the Sole Authority of the Metropolitan: Nor do we
deny that Act to have been a confiderable Abridgment of the Liberties of the
Church in the matter of holding Synods, but only that it did not so far affect
the Ecclesiastical Power as to change them into Civil Meetings, i. e. Meetings
Summoned and acting in virtue of that Summons, immediately upon a Civil
Authority.

The Civil Summons, an argument of the Papists against our Reformation.
This Civil Summons and the Authority of it has been warmly asserted by two
sorts of Persons, 1. By the Papists, who ever since the Reformation have taken
the Advantage of that Act of Submission to asperse our Protestant Synods as
Civil Meetings, and the Canons etc. made in them as of a Secular Original. 2.
By some late Opposers of the Metropolitical and Episcopal Authority in
Convocation: One of whom forms this New and very Uncanonical Scheme of
Summoning and Holding Synods, upon that Expression in the Submission-Act.

The Authority by which the Convocation meets, is now purely Royal: Power of
the Lower House. p. 3. c. 1.
The words of the Act are express in the case -- which shall always be
assembled by Authority of the King's Writ. -- So that since this Statute, the
Archbishop's share in Convening them is not Authoritative but Ministerial. And
when therefore, he frames his Mandate upon the King's Writ, he does it as the
King's Instrument only, and the proper Officer who is to execute the Royal
Summons. -- The Argument arising from hence is, that his Grace has now no
Authority to Convene the Body of the Clergy.

Again, Ibid. p. 17. c. 1. 2.
An English Metropolitan, Presiding over a Synod, etc. called together not any
way by his, but purely by Royal Authority. And in another place, Ibid. p. 20.
c. 2.
The Convocation Subsists by the King's Writ.

Let the most virulent Adversary of this Protestant Church, frame (if he can) a
description of its Synodical Meetings, that shall be a deeper Reproach to our
happy Reformation.

Against the first sort of Adversaries, the Papists (and Protestants, one would
think, should be as easily answered,) a full Vindication of our Reformed Church
has been built upon the Genuine meaning of the Act of Submission interpreted
according to the true intent thereof, and the antecedent and subsequent
Practice, with other Circumstances; all which we have been forced more
particularly to Urge and enforce of late, to defend the honor of our
Constitution against the Second sort of Adversaries also. As,

The intent of the Statute, no more than to restrain the Archbishop from
exerting his Authority without the Royal License.
That the Crown did not want the Assistance of any Act, to have a Convocation
at pleasure; because the Right of enjoining the Archbishop to Summon it in due
form as our Princes saw Occasion, was always thought a Power Inherent in the
Crown, and was all along practiced in England, both before and since the
Reformation; and is indeed a Right belonging to Christian Princes in general.

But till the Act of Submission, the Archbishop also had a Power of Summoning
Convocations (according to the Exigencies of the Church) without the permission
or direction of the Royal Writ.

And King Henry VIII. apprehending that the Archbishop, Bishops, and Clergy in
Convocation might protest against or obstruct his Measures of Reformation, got
a sufficient Security against that danger, by making himself (in virtue of that
Act) the Sole Judge when a Convocation should be Summoned.

As the King neither gained nor wanted more than this; so nothing was taken
from the Archbishop but the ancient Right of Exerting his Summoning Authority
AT PLEASURE; the Authority it self remaining Entire, and as full and effectual
as ever, when that Restraint is taken off.

The Power which the King gained, and the Archbishop lost, is expressed by the
Statute in the word Always -- Which shall Always be assembled by Authority of
the King's Writ. Before that Statute, the Convocation had been sometimes called
at the sole Motion and Pleasure of the Archbishop, and sometimes upon the Royal
Writ; but since, the Archbishop is confined to wait for the Direction of the
Royal Writ.

The Intention therefore of directing the Royal Writ to the Archbishop, is
twofold. 1. To signify the Pleasure of the Prince, that at that particular time
his Grace shall exert the Summoning-Authority inherent in his See; as it has
been ever exerted at the Command of the Kings of England. 2. To be a legal
Discharge from the Restraint of this Statute, and a Security against the
Penalties of Summoning without the Royal License.

The word Authority in the Statute only implys a le- Leave or License.
For that the word Authority, as it stands in the Act, was intended for no more
than a Leave or License to Summon, is evident from the very Submission (upon
which the Act was immediately founded:) -- We will never from henceforth, etc.
unless your Highness by your Royal Assent shall License us to assemble our
Convocation. -- And from the Dedication of the Clergy to the King, prefixed to
the Institution of a Christian Man. -- Without your Majesty's Power and License
we acknowledge and confess that we have not Authority to assemble together for
any Pretense or Purpose, etc. And lastly, from the Style given to the
Royal-Writ by Queen Elizabeth. -- Cum Nos, etc. Archiepiscopo mandaverimus,
eidemque Licentiam Concesserimus quod Convocari faceret singulos Episcopos, etc.

As therefore the Bishops and Clergy in Convocation, apprehensive of the
Penalties of the Statute, have taken care to use the very Expression of it,
with Reference to the Royal-Writ; so that Expression being directly taken from
the Statute, is of course to be interpreted according to the Extent and Meaning
thereof.

The Archbishop's Summons Authoritative, from the Style of the Mandate and
Returns.
The Methods of Summoning, antecedent and subsequent to that Statute, are a
clear Argument that the Archbishop's Authority therein remained entire. That
all his Summons before it (though issued upon a Royal Writ, and that expressly
recited in the Mandate) were yet Authoritative, is not denied: And if this Act
of Submission had been intended to change the Archiepiscopal Summons into a
Ministerial Office, it would have given Directions for changing the
Authoritative into a Ministerial Style; at least such a Change must of course
have been made. But no such Alteration appears either in the Mandate or the
Dean of the Province's Certificate of the Execution.

The Writ comes to the Archbishop (for it can be directed to none else) in the
same Style and Manner, as before the Statute it did; and is now no otherwise
inserted in the Archiepiscopal Mandate than was usual before the Reformation.
The Archbishop, directing that Mandate to the Dean of the Province, goes on,
Breve Regis, etc. recepimus in haec verba. -- After a recital of the Writ, he
proceeds, Quocirca ( i. e. having received this Royal Permission and Direction
to exert the Summoning-Power inherent in the Sea) Fraternitati vestrae
COMMITTIMUS and MANDAMUS -- VOLUMUS and MANDAMUS -- INJUNGIMUS and MANDAMUS. --
All express Terms of Authority, in his Grace's own Name, and under the
Archiepiscopal Seal.

Accordingly the Dean of the Province's Certificatorium or Return declares his
Execution of every particular Branch thereof to have been in Virtue and by
Authority of his Grace's Mandate: Literas vestras Reverendissimas Citatorias
and Monitoriales jam dudum nobis sab sigillo vestro directas, cum ca qua decuit
Reverentia humiliter recepimus; Quarum literarum VIGORE pariter and AUTORITATE
-- AUTORITATE and per receptionem Literarum vestrarum -- juxta VIM, FORMAM, and
EFFECTUM earundem -- secundum FORMAM and TENOREM Literarum Vestrarum.

In like manner the Returns of all the other Suffragans are made immediately to
his Grace, and ultimately lodged (where they ever were before the
Submission-Act) in the Registry of the Archiepiscopal See: Whereas all
Executions by the King's Authority, are returnable of course into the Offices
belonging to the Crown.

Right of the Archbishop, p. 9. etc. Hist. of Con. p. 14.
This Point (of the Metropolitan's Authoritative-Summons) has been more largely
proved and explained elsewhere: But the contrary Doctrine of its being
Ministerial, is attended with Consequences so very dishonorable to our
Reformed Church, that I could not leave the Reader under any Danger of being
missed into that Opinion by this general Expression of the Statute, transcribed
from thence into the Titles of our Acts, and into some of the Instruments of
Convocation. For if that new Notion were true, the Proceedings of Convocation
would be so far from agreeing to the Principles of an Episcopal Church, that
they would not be the Proceedings of any Church at all. The Ecclesiastical
Power must then be swallowed up in the Civil; and the Methods of Proceeding
would not be influenced by the ancient Synodical Rules, or the Distinction of
Bishops and Presbyters, but founded entirely upon a Model framed and established
by the State.

Enough (I think) has been said to expose and overthrow that Uncanonical
Scheme; but because it is come in my way, I will take the Opportunity of adding
an Observation or two:

1. That at the Opening of Convocations, as well since as before the Act of
Submission, the first step in certifying the due Execution of the Summons, has
been the Exhibiting and Reading the Dean of the Province's Certificatorium or
Return, directed to the Metropolitan alone; in pursuance of whose Command and
Authority every particular (as we have seen) is said to be duly executed. Nor
has any more Notice been taken of the Royal-Writ, than as it is recited in the
Archiepiscopal Mandate, just as it was before the Statute at the Opening of all
Convocations which were Summoned upon the Writ.

2. The Contumacy pronounced thereupon is merely for not attending according to
the Tenor of his Grace's Mandates to the several Bishops, with their Lordships
Certificates to his Grace of the due Execution; and the Censures for Absence
being all purely Canonical, show them to be inflicted for an Act of
Disobedience to the Authority of their Canonical Superior.

3. Cardinal Pool held a Convocation in the Year 1557, the latter end of Queen
Mary's Reign; and the Title of it is Convocatio sive Sacra Synodus Convocata
auctoritate Brevis Regis Philippi and Mariae, etc. Now, it is not to be imagined
that either the Queen or the Cardinal (so remarkably tender of the Privilegdes
and Immunities of the Church) would have given way to a Convocation upon that
Foot, had it been the Opinion of those Times that the Authority of the Royal
Writ destroyed that Authoritative Summons which the Archbishops before the
Reformation had always exercised.

The Case of the Convocation's being Dissolved by the Death of the Prince.
The same Convocation is said in the Extracts out of the Upper-house Books to
be Soluta per mortem Reginae Mariae; as we find afterward ( Anno 1624.) that
the Convocation was dissolved by the Death of King James the First.

On the contrary, before the Reformation, Anno 1412. we find that Archbishop
Arundel summoned a Convocation in Obedience to the King's Writ; and yet it was
continued for some time after the Death of Henry the Fourth. Again, Anno 1460.
Archbishop Bourchier issued his Summons in a like Obedience to the Royal Writ;
but the same Convocation, not expiring with the Death of Henry the Sixth,
continued in the Reign of Edward the Fourth.

The difference in this Matter, before and since the Reformation, naturally
arises from the foregoing Construction of the Submission-Act. Before that was
made, the Archbishop had a Right to hold Convocations independent of the
Prince, and was by consequence under no Obligation to discontinue them upon the
Death or Demise of the Prince: He was bound to obey the Royal Writ (as often as
it was sent him) by exerting the Summoning-Authority according to the Tenor
thereof; but he was not absolutely confined to wait for and receive such Writ,
in order to Summon or Hold; nor was a Convocation, holden by the Archbishop
independent of the King, an illegal Assembly by the Laws then in being.

But by the Statute of Submission, interpreted in its most genuine Meaning, an
absolute Restraint is laid upon the Archbishop from holding his Convocation,
unless authorized so to do by the Royal Writ. By this means, any such Meeting
of the Bishops and Clergy, holden by the Archbishop without such Writ, is
become an illegal Assembly. Now the Force of the Writ (directed to the
Archbishop to take off the Restraint laid upon him by the Statute) must cease
and expire with the Prince, in whose Name and under whose Seal it was issued:
And when that happens, the Archbishop is by Law reduced to the same Inability
to hold a Convocation, as he was under before the Reception of such Writ.

A Dissolution by the King's Death, no Prejudice to the Archiepiscopal
Authority.
That therefore a Convocation dies in Law with the Prince, resolves wholly into
that Incapacity which is acknowledged both in this Section and elsewhere to be
laid upon the Ecclesiastical Power by the Statute of Submission. And so the
most that such a Dissolution can infer, is, that the Archbishop is now
incapable in Law to hold a Convocation, unless authorized by the King's Writ to
hold it, or (in other words) that without the Force and Warrant of such Writ he
cannot now (as before the Statute he could) give Subsistence to a Convocation.
But to argue from hence; That the Convocation subsists by the sole Authority of
the Crown, and that the Authority of the Archbishop is wholly lost, and so his
share in summoning and holding is purely Ministerial; these Inferences are a
direct Violence to the Statute, such as one would naturally expect from some
Advocate of an Erastian-Church, or a declared Enemy to our Reformation, but
it is strange to see a professed Member, and which is more, a Minister of our
Reformed Church, wresting the Statute into a Sense so very injurious to her
Liberty and her Honor.

The Statute, as it lodges in the Civil Power the sole Right of judging when
our Synods shall be held, is an Abridgment of the Liberties of the Church; and
we must be content: But let us bless God, that the Power of the Church is not
so affected either by this or any other Statute, but that the Metropolitans of
both Provinces have a Right (after the Writ has given them the Liberty of
exerting their Power) first to Summon their Convocations in an Authoritative or
Canonical way, and then to hold them by the ancient Ecclesiastical Rules. A
Blessing, for which they are very ungrateful, who can so much delight in saying
and even pleading that the Convocation subsists by the Royal Writ, exclusive of
the Archiepiscopal Authority; when the Dean of the Province's Certificatorium
or Return (with the exhibiting whereof the Convocation properly opens) declares
and recognizes in every particular the immediate Authority by which they
assemble.

The Archiepiscopal Authority directly recognized in the Dean of the Province's
Certificatorium.
I have before repeated some of the Terms, in which that Instrument recognizes
the Archiepiscopal Authority; but for a more full Satisfaction to the Reader, I
will here subjoin it at large.

REverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino Domino Thomae Providentia Divina
Cantuar. Archiepiscopo, totius Angliae Primati and Metropolitano, vestrove in
hac part Locum tenenti sive Commissario vel Commissariis, Henricus permissione
Divina London Episcopus omnimodam Reverentiam and Obedientiam tanto
Reverendissimo Patri debitam cum Honor: Literas vestras Reverendissimas
Citatorias and Monitoriales, jamdudum Nobis sub sigillo vestro direct. cum ea
qua decuit Reverentia humiliter recepimus exequend. sub tenore verborum
sequentium, videl. Thomas Providentia Divina, etc. See the Form of the Mandate,
p. 9, 57. Quarum quidem Literarum vigore pariter and authoritate, Nos praefatus
Henricus London. Episcopus, omnes and singulos Confratres nostros Co-Episcopos
Ecclesiae vestrae Christi Cant. constitutos, peremptory citari and premoneri,
ac per eos Decanos Ecclesiarum Cathedralium and Collegiatarum, and singula
Capitula earundem, Archidiaconosque, and alios Ecclesiarum Praelatos Exemptos
and non Exemptos, Clerumque cujuslibet Dioec. Provinciae vestrae Cantuar.
antedictae peremptory citari and praemoneri respective fecimus; Quod iidem
Episcopi, Decani, etc. compareant coram Peternitate vestra Reverendissima aut
vestro in hac part Locum tenente sive Commissario vel Commissariis die and
loco in eisdem vestris Literis Reverendissimis before specificat. and
designat. cum Continuatione and Prorogatione dierum extunc sequentium and
locorum, si and quatenus expediat: Ad tractandum super arduis and urgentibus
negotiis, etc. [ut prius in Mandato.] Ulteriusque, Authoritate and per
Receptionem Literarum Destrarum Reverendissimarum Citotoriarum and
Monitorialium praedictarum, fatemur Nos Henricum London. Episcopum antedictum
peremptory fore and esse citatum ad comparendum coram vestra Reverendissima
Paternitate aut vestro in hac part Locum tenente sive Commissario vel
Commissariis hujusmodi, die and loco praecitatis de and super Negotiis
memoratis tractatur'. Et nos iisdem Literis vestris Reverendissimis hujusmodi
juxta vim, formam, tenorem, and effectum carundem debite parebimus. Intimavimus
insuper and denuntiavimus, and intimari and denuntiari fecimus dictae
Provinciae vestrae Cantuar. Co-episcopis, etc. quod eos a personali
comparitione in hujusmodi negotio Convocationis and Congregationis dictis die
and loco, ut praemittitur, divina favente clementia, excusatos Reverendissima
vestra Paternitas non habere intendit ista vice nisi ex causa necessaria tunc
and ibidem alleganda and proponend. and per Paternitatem vestram
Reverendissimam approband. sed eorum contumacias qui absentes fuerint canonice
punire. Et sic Literas vestras Reverendissimas antedictas quatenus ad Nos
attinet and in nobis est fuimus Executi. Dat. in Palatio nostro apad London.
ultimo die mensis Januarij Anno Domini ( stylo Angliae) millesimo
septingentesimo, nostraeque translationis vicesimo sexto.

If this Instrument (the Exhibiting and Reading whereof opens the Convocation)
be not a pl^in Declaration of the Authority by which it is immediately
summoned, and subsists, I know not where Words will be found to declare or
express it. Nor can I conceive, either how the issuing a Mandate in the Name
and under the Hand and Seal of the Archbishop, or the certifying to his Grace
an Execution in Virtue and by the Authority of his Mandate, can consist with
the late Notion of his Grace's issuing that Mandate in a mere Ministerial way.

V. Observations upon the Table of Fees, and the Catalogue of Members, prefixed
to the Registers of Convocation.
AT the beginning of the Upper-house Registers, we generally find a Catalogue
of Fees due to the Officers in Convocation from the Members of each House,
according to their several Degrees and Stations. Which Catalogue is Copied,
word for word, from a larger Table signed and established by Archbishop
Whitgift, containing the Fees due to the Officers of his Grace's Courts, for
every particular Business to be executed therein. The Title of the Table is as
follows:

A Table of Fees of the most Reverend Father in God, John, by the Providence of
God Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, his
Grace's Chancellor, Vicar General, Register-Principal, Apparitor-General, and
other Ministers.

Among these, the several Officers in Convocation, belonging to the Lower as
well as the Upper-house, have their Fees assigned (as Members of his Grace's
Court) according to the Proportions which Archbishop Whitgift found to be their
customary Allowance.

The part of that Table which relates to Convocation, and is therefore usually
transcribed into the Registers thereof, is as follows:

Feoda Solvenda Registrario Primario, and Apparitori Generali Domini
Archiepiscopi Cant. in Convocatione Provinciae Cant. juxta antiquum morem
ejusdem Convocationis.

Registrario. s. d. Inprimis, Quilibet Episcopus Provinc. Cant. Solvit
Registrario praedicto, 6 8 Et si absens fuerit toto, 13 4 Item, Quilibet
Decanus comparens per Procuratorem, 5 0 Item, Quilibet Archidiaconus comparens
per Procuratorem solvit 5 0 Item, Procurator cujuslibet Capituli solvit 5 0
Item, Quilibet Procurator Cleri solvit xx d. viz. duo Procuratores, 3 4

Apparitori. Item, Quilibet Episcopus solvit Apparitori, 6 8

Similia Feoda solvenda sunt qualibet Sessione, cum Convocatio prorogetur
authoritate Brevis Regij.

Feoda Actuario Domus Inferioris Convocationis solvend.

Actuario. s. d. Inprimis, Quilibet Decanus solvit 2 8 Item, Quilibet
Archidiaconus, 1 8 Item, Quilibet Procurator Capituli, 1 8 Item, Quilibet
Procurator Cleri, 1 4

Ostiario Domus Inferioris.

Ostiario. Inprimis, Quilibet Decanus solvit 1 4 Item, Quilibet Archidiaconus,
1 0 Item, Quilibet Procurator Capituli, 1 0 Item, Quilibet Procurator Cleri, 0
8

Observations upon the Table of Fees.
1. These Particulars, as rankt among the Fees for the Office of Vicar General,
and usually entered at the beginning of the Journals of each House, show all
the Officers of Convocation to be under the immediate Jurisdiction of the
Archbishop and Members of his Court.

2. We may observe also, that in the Provision made for the Appearance of a
Dean or Archdeacon by Proxy, the Fee for exhibiting the Instruments is directly
assigned to the Archbishop's Register, as it is the sole Right of his Grace to
admit, and by consequence of his proper Officer to receive them.

3. Provision being only made for exhibiting the Procuratorial Letters of the
Cathedral and Diocesan Proctors, and none for Proxies in case of their Absence;
it is plain, that in those days none was thought to have a Right of substituting
his Proxy, but who had a Right to be Personally Cited, viz. Bishops, Deans,
and Archdeacons.

The Catalogues of the Members of Convocation.
II. The Table of Fees is usually followed by a Catalogue of the Members; to
which the General Title of the Convocation is prefixed: The Title of that in
1640, is as follows:

Convocatio Praelatorum and Cleri Cantuar. Provinciae, inchoata in Domo
Capitulari Ecclesiae Cathedralis Sancti Pauli London. Autoritate Brevis Regij
Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac fideli Consiliario suo Domino Gulielmo
Providentia Divina Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, totius Angliae Primati and
Metropolitano in hac part direct. inchoata die Martis, decimo quarto, viz. die
mentis Aprilis, Anno Domini millesimo sexcentesimo quadragesimo, Regnique
Serenissimi in Christo Principis and Domini nostri Domini Caroli Dei Gratia.
Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis Fidei Defensoris, etc. Anno
decimo sexto.

The same Title, with the necessary Variations as to Time, etc. is also put
before the Register of 1661. After which, in both the Convocations, the Members
of the Upper-house are severally entered under the following Head:

Nomina Reverendorum Patrum Episcoporum modernorum Cant. Provinciae, citatorum
and monitorum ad comparendum in Convocatione praedicta.

And after them, come the Members of the Lower House, according to their
several Churches, Dieceses, and respective Stations therein, under this Title:

Nomina citatorum ad comparendum in Inferiore Domo Convocationis Praelatorum
and Cleri Cant. Provinciae, inchoat. die and loco praedict.

Observations upon the Catalogues.
Upon the foregoing Account of these Introductions to the Upper-house Acts, I
observe,

1. That this Entry of the Inferior Clergy (together with the Bishops) in the
Books of the Upper-house, is the Consequence of that House's being properly the
Locus Synodi, and of the Convocation's being one Body consisting of Bishops and
Presbyters as the Members, and assembled under one common Head or President,
the Metropolitan of the Province. Vid. Supr. Cap. 2.
It further implies a Right in the Archbishop to take Cognizance of the Members
of the Lower House as to their Attendance in Convocation: For why else should
the Names of the Persons cited upon the Archiepiscopal Mandate, be so
distinctly entered in the Registers of the Upper-house?

2. The whole Convocation is not only expressed in general under the Name
Convocatio Praelatorum and Cleri Cantuariensis Provinciae, but the Lower House
in particular, as a Member thereof, is styled Domus Inserior Convocationis
Praelatorum and Cleri Cant. Provinciae. Upon what ground therefore it can be
pretended, that the Lower House is not included in a Schedule of Continuation
running in the self same Terms, is to me very unaccountable.

3. As in the Years 1640. and 1661. the English Clergy in general were
remarkably zealous for the Rights of the Church; so many of the Members in the
two Convocations, were some of the most eminent Assertors of those Rights, that
our Church or Nation has known. Not to mention more, we find,

Anno 1640. in the Upper-house, Archbishop Laud, with the Bishops, Juxon, Wren,
Davenant, Mountague, Duppa, Warner, etc. In the Lower, we meet with Dr Lancy,
Potter, Brownrig, Frewen, Heylin, Sheldon, Feil, Hammond, Steward, with many
others, distinguished soon after by their eminent Sufferings in Defense of the
Rights and Discipline of the Church.

Anno 1661. in the Upper-house, Archbishop Juxon, and the Bishops Sheldon,
Wren, Duppa, Sanderson, Henchman, Morley, Warner, Laney, etc. In the Lower, Dr.
Gunning, Earl, Sudbury, Pearson, Fell, Dolben, Thorndike, Lamplugh, Oliver,
Ward, Sparrow, Blanford, Fleetwood, etc.

It will not (I hope) he said, much less believed, That the Members of these
two Convocations did not understand and pursue the true Interests of the
Church, or that they either knew not or did not regard the established Methods
of Proceeding in an English Convocation. Nor do the Characters of the Members
in each House suffer us to imagine either that the Bishops were in the least
Disposition to Invade the Liberties of the Clergy, or (if they had) that the
Clergy would have given way to any Violation of the Rights of their Order, and
the Privileges of their House.

It has been the Care of our present Prelates, to govern their Proceedings by
the Practice of former times, and particularly of such Convocations as had
before them the Registers now consumed and consisted of Members so deservedly
celebrated among us for a strict Regard to the Interest, the Rights, and
Discipline of the Church. It may therefore be justly expected, that the Persons
who on account of these Proceedings have so freely charged my Lords the Bishops
with Designs of subverting the Church and oppressing the Clergy, that they (I
say) should produce the Instances in which their Lordships have deviated from
the Example of those their Predecessors, whose Affection to the Church and
Clergy was never questioned, till struck at in some late Censures of our
present Prelates for imitating them in the Canonical Method of holding a
Convocation. Nor can they of the Lower House, who desire to act in a dutiful
Subordination to their Ecclesiastical Superiors, be liable to any Censures for
this their Submission, which will not equally make those Learned and Orthodox
Presbyters in 1640 and 1661, the Betrayers of the Rights of their Order,
whether through Negligence or mean Compliances for Secular Ends.

4. If it be objected against the Authority of the Register of 1661, that the
difuse of Convocations during the Civil-Wars might make the Clergy less
acquainted with the true Methods of holding them, the Answer is obvious; That
they had then the Direction of all the Registers entire, and appear in Fact to
have followed the Methods in 1640, as that (without doubt) proceeded by the
Pattern of former Convocations. Add to this, That several of the Persons in
1661 had been Members also in the Convocation of 1640, and must therefore be
presumed to have a sufficient Knowledge of the Manner of Proceeding. By
comparing the Lists of these two Convocations, I find (besides the Archbishop)
that six of the Bishops ( Duppa, Pierce, Wren, Warner, Roberts, and Skinner)
were Members of the Upper-house in both; and four more, viz. Sheldon, Floyd,
Griffith, and Ironside (advanced to the Dignity of Bishops at the Restoration)
to have been Members of the Lower House in 1640. And as to the Lower House it
self, D^, Oliver, Fleetwood, Rives. Baily, with several others, at least twenty
in all, appear to have been Members thereof in both these Convocations of 1640
and 1661. and (suppose all former Registers to have been lost, as they then
remained entire) it would not be suggested that in 1661 these ancient Members
were either unable to direct their Brethren, or willing to mislead them.

FINIS.
AN INDEX REFERRING To the most remarkable Matters in the foregoing Registers
of the Vpper-house, and Journals of the Lower.
A
ARticles (XXXIX.) debated, page 193, 194. Passed, 196.
Archbishop's going from Lambeth to St. Paul's, the first day of Convocation,
1, 9, 61, 194. Assessors to the Prolocutor, vid. Prolocutor.
B
Beale (Doctor) a Member of the Lower House, threatened with Censures by the
Archbishop, upon a Complaint against him in Parliament, 38. Benevolences of the
Clergy to the King, over and above the ordinary Subsidies, 31, 33, 36, 43, 82,
154, 170.
C
Calendar of the Common Prayer revised, 89. Canons begun, 23, 31. finished, 43.
laid before the Council, 48. read, and passed by Subscription, 52.
Canons of 1640, revised in 1661. 96, 97, 98, 102. Catechism examined by a
Committee of Bishops, 206. confirmed by the Lower House, 215.
Causae Convocationis explained to the Bishops and Clergy by the President, 3,
196. Certificatorium of the due Execution of the Mandate, exhibited to his
Grace by the Dean of the Province, 2, 63, 195, Certificates of the other
Bishops exhibited to a Commissioner appointed by his Grace, 197.
Commination-Service in the Liturgy, 90. Committees of both Houses appointed and
ordered in the Upper-house, 22, 26, 47, 67, 68, 72, 74, 92, 124, 125, 168.
Committees of Bishops, 39, 45, 47, 76, 79, 84, 88, 94, 97, 102, 103, 107, 108,
110, 114, 116, 118, 120, 158, 206, 213. Committees of the Lower House ordered
by the Archbishop, 23, 32. Committee of the whole House ordered by the
Archbishop, 33. Committees (i. e. the Names of the Members chosen) notify'd to
the Upper-house, 22, 23, 32, 76, 119. Common Prayer, V. Prayer. Conference, 92.
Consecration and Ordination of Deacons, Presbyters and Bishops, the Form
revised, 88. Consecration of Parish-Churches; a Form thereof compiled, 107,
116, 118, 121. Constitutions for collecting a Subsidy, 158. passed, 160.
Contumacy for Absence, and the Schedules thereof, 2, 16, 64, 197. executed by
the Archbishop upon the Inferior Clergy, 151, 153, 163. threatened to be
executed, 170, 2.
Contumacy pronounced in the Lower House by Dr. Yale, as his Grace's
Commissary, 211. Convocation; the opening thereof, 1, 2, 13, 61, 137, 164, 194.
Sitting after the Parliament, 33. divided into two Houses, 3. Council advised
with in Convocation, 36, 39, 40, 51, 99, 108, 154. Courts (Ecclesiastical)
reformed, 49, 50, 74.

D
Disciplina (Capitula de) brought in, 196. completed, 213. Additions made,
214, 215.
Dissolution of the Convocation, 54, 164, 176.
E
Elections tried, one in the Upper house, another in the Lower by the
Prolocutor, 140, etc. Excommunicat. capiend. (Breve de) 37, 42. Exercises to be
performed by Ministers, 149.
F
Fees unjustly detained from the Clergy, 36.
G
Goodman (Bishop of Gloucester) protests, 44. suspended for not subscribing, 52.
Grammars to be used in all Schools, 115, 117, 123, 124.
H
Habits of Convocation. 1.
I
Jesuits; Canon against them, 23.
K
King's Thanks to the Convocation, for their Care and Pains in preparing
Canons, 48. his Letters to the Convocation, 38, 42, 83.

L
Licenses from the King, 19, 31, 34, 71, 73, 83. Lower House directed to
proceed upon particular Business by the Archbishop and Bishops, 5, 20, 22, 24,
37, 39, 40, 42, 50, 68, 70, 72, 85, 87, 91, 104, 118, 210. Lower House go up
voluntarily, 22, 37, 41, 45, 46, 50, 174, 207, 213, 214, 215. Lower House bring
up and return Business, 27, 35, 37, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 45, 47, 49, 51, 91, 92,
112, 119, 155, 160, 173, 206, 213, 214, 215.
M
Mandates from the Archbishop for Summoning a Convocation, 9, 57.
N
Notice given to the Upper-house of Persons chosen for Committees in the Lower.
V. Committees.
O
Oblations unjustly detained from the Clergy, 35. Offertory at the Opening of
Convocation, 2. Ogleby's Bible, 70. Ordinations determined to the 4 Seasons,
109. not to be performed out of the Diocese without Letters dimissory from the
Archbishop, 109.

P
Parliament; Prayer for it made in Convocation, 23, 27. Thanks from the Lords
in Parliament to the Bishops and Clergy, for their Care and Labor in Revising
the Common Prayer, 106. Point, whether lawful for Bishops to sit in Parliament
in Cases of Blood, considered, 99.
Petition presented to the Lower House, laid before the Upper, 45, 50. from the
Clergy in the Isle of Wight, 123. by the Bishop of Norwich, 124. from the
Lower-Clergy to the House of Lords, in the Case of a Money-Bill, 176, 177.
Pluralities, 172, 2. Praeconizations, 139, 163, 167, 170. Prayer (Common)
revised, 84, 85, 86, 87, 92. Preface to it, 90, 93. General Thanksgiving, 93.
General Revisal of the whole, 93. Subscriptions to it, with the Preparation of
a Form, 94, 95. Act of Parliament for establishing the Common Prayer, debated
in Convocation, 98. Alterations made by Parliament in the Common Prayer,
debated in Convocation, 103. Orders for Printing the Book of Common Prayer,
104. Appointment of a Supervisor, and Correctors, 105. Thanks to the Bishops
and Clergy from the House of Lords, for their Care and Labor in Revising the
Common Prayer, 106. Method of dispersing the Books of Common Prayer, 108.
Prayer [Form of] for the King's Restoration, 67. for the 30th of January, 67.
for the 5th of November, 110.
The three ^oregoing Forms brought in and approved, 110. Prayers at Sea, 89,
90. Prayer before Sermon [unica Forma Precum] 90. Privilege (Breach of) 39.
Prolocutor or Referendary chosen (by Order or Leave from the Archbishop) at the
beginning of Convocation, 3, 4, 5, 16, 63, 137, 165, 196. chosen in the middle
of Convocation, upon the Promotion of another, 101. chosen upon Death, 126.
Prolocutor recommended by the Archbishop, 196. presented to the Archbishop and
Bishops, 19, 67, 101, 126, 139, 166, 199. Office, 6. Assessors appointed by
him, 139, 151, 153, 168, 170. comes alone to the U. house, 23, 35, 37, 155.
confers in private with the President, 46, 47. confers with the Presid. and
Bish. 157.
Prolocutor sent for (alone, with a certain number, or with the whole House) to
the Upper-house [ Reverendissimus, etc. Voluit and mandavit Prolocutorem ad se
accersiri, Fecit ad se accersiri, Jussit Prolocutorem coram se and Confratribus
suis vocari, -- Nunciatum fuit Domino Prolocutori de voluntate Reverendissimi,
etc. quod ad se accederet, etc.] 18, 21, 31, 33, 36, 38, 40, 42, 46, 48, 67,
68, 69, 71, 75, 76, 83, 85, 87, 91, 101, 104, 105, 118, 122, 125, 126, 146,
147, 150, 152, 153, 154, 157, 159, 167, 168, 170, 171, 175, 176, 170, 2, 172,
2, 198, 206, 210. Prolocutor dismis'd by the Archbishop and Bishops [ Dimisso
Prolocutore, Eis dimissis, etc.] 20, 22, 23, 24, 27, 32, 35, 37, 38, 39, 41,
42, 43, 45, 46, 47, 49, 50, 51, 53, 67, 72, 75, 83, 85, 87, 91, 92, 101, 102,
119, 124, 126, 199, 210. acting by a Deputy, 147, 148, 212.
Protestation, 44, Proxies ordered to be brought in by the Archbishop, 154.
Psalms revised, 88.
R
Recusants, Canon against them, 39, 45. Residence enjoined, 172, 2.
S
Schedules of Continuation. At the Conclusion of every Session in the
Upper-house-Books. Schedules of Reformation, 140, 149, 167, 193. Silence
enjoined, 24, 26, 169. Socinians (Canons against) 41. Subsidies, 20, 21, 118,
120, 206, 212. Subsidy-Bills reviewed and corrected by Committees, 23, 26, 118,
151, 154. read, 156. passed in Form, 212.
Subscription to the Book of Common-Pray. 94, 95. Subscriptions to the 39
Articles debated, 108. Substitution of a Presid. 24, 62, 192, 193, 205, 217.
V
Visitational-Articles, 75, 102, 104.
W
Welsh Common Prayer, 45. Westminster (Dean of) protests his Appearance in
Convocation to be with a Salvo jure to the Rights of his Church, 196.
Protestation of the Church of Westminster, 18, 65, 192. Writ of Prorogation,
113, 122. of Dissolution, 163.

Y
York, the Archbishop and Bishops of that Province in the Convocation of 1661.
75, 76, etc.
Addenda and Emendanda.
IN the Catalogue of Convocation Acts, add, 1st. (after the Year 1380.) 1382 --
Nov. 18. -- Courtney fol. 33. a. -- 2 ly. At the Year 1554. add, The Acts of
the Upper House are Entered in Bishop Bonner's Register. -- 3 ly. At the Year
1562. add, A fragment of the Proceedings in the Lower House ( Febr. 13. 1562.)
is in the hands of Mr. Petyt. -- 4 ly. Concerning the Index in Dr. Atterbury's
hands, it is to be observed, that the few passages Cited in this Book, are
immediately taken out of a late Extract from thence of such things as concern
the present Controversy.

[ Page 34.] After the Sentence of Contumacy by Archbishop Chichele, add, But a
much elder than this, is entered in the Register of Archbishop Courtney, Anno
1391. -- Dominus contra [Absentes] sub hac Forma processit -- Nos Willelmus
permissione Divina Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus, totius Angliae Primas, and
Apostolicae Sedis Legatus, etc. omnes and singulos -- ad praesens Concilium
nostrum legitime and peremptory citatos, praeconizatos, and diucius expectatos
and non comparentes, reputamus and pronunciamus Contumaces, and in paenam
Contumaciarum suarum hujusmodi Decernimus, Declaramus [and] Pronunciamus omnia
and singula, in praesenti Concilio habita atque facta, suum debitum sortiri
debere effectum, ipsorum Contumacijs in aliquo non obstantibus in hac part;
poenam aliam Canonicam eis and eorum singulis infligendam Nobis seu Commissario
nostro quem ad id duxerimus deputandum, nihilominus specialiter Reservantes.

[Pag. 47. lin. 23.] Paena sibi reservata is not the express language of the
present Schedule; but sufficiently appears to be the meaning of it, both from
the frequent mention, in the Registers, of such Reservations to the Archbishop
singly, and the no less frequent Inflictions of such Canonical Punishment upon
the Lower Clergy; and that by the President, without any interposition or
concurrence of the Bishops or Clergy.

[ Page 53. lin. 16.] Add, To which purpose, the Extracts out of the Upper
House Books, ( Anno 1541.) conclude with the following Note, 'Memorandum, in
fine Libri Inseruntur Constitutiones, and Substitutiones in Convocatione
praedicta ex Licentia Reverendissimi; ubi habentur Scripta diversarum
Absolutionum eorum qui Absentes erant.

[ Page 61. lin. 19.] for Suspend, read Supersede.

[ Page 183. lin. 12.] To the Chapter Of the manner of Passing Business in
Convocation, add, And even in Canons, and all other matters Passing by
Subscription, the Metropolitan's ancient Authority remains thus far entire,
that without his Concurrence, the Agreement of all the rest is not the Act of
Convocation, nor can be presented as such to the Prince for his Royal
Confirmation.

[ Page 186. lin. 12.] For 1434. read 1534.

[ App. p. 131.] For 1686 and 1688. read 1586, and 1588.

[ Page 233. lin. antepe^] I am since assured, That in York-Province, the
Archbishop or his Commissary always Sign the Instrument of Continuation after
Reading.

[ Page 295. lin. 8.] Read their Church. -- lin. 13. add, They knew the Kings
of England had often directed their Writs to the Archbishop before the Act of
Submission was thought of, and were as constantly obeyed: And the Writ being an
immediate Direction to the Archbishop, and not to any particular Member of
Convocation, they were so far from thinking that a Summons upon the Authority
of such Writ destroyed his Grace's authoritative Summons, that we see they use
the Term even while the Act was repealed, and they were by consequence under no
Obligation to use it.

Throughout the Book, wherever mention is made of the Last Convocation, it is to
be understood of that which began Febr. 10. 1700/1, wherein these unhappy
Differences between the two Houses first arose.

P. 138. l. 32. read Domum Superiorem. P. 165. l. 1. read de uniendis parvis
Beneficiis. P. 169. l. 1. read Not but. P. 228. l. 13. for Julius XI. read
Julius II.


