THE PAPACY OF Paul the Fourth. OR, THE RESTITUTION OF ABBEY LANDS AND
IMPROPRIATIONS, An indispensable condition of Reconciliation to the Infallible
SEE, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty.
1673.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
The Publisher, to my Lord Viscount Mountague.
MY LORD,
I Once thought to have dedicated these papers, sent me by a friend, to some of
the most eminent of our Protestant Clergy: but I considered the Roman Church
had carried their interest higher by much than any other, and therefore it must
be singular Piety, an high Self-denial, and a sincere love of God, that must
secure their opposition to the growing greatness of Rome amongst us. I
therefore quitted that thought, and in the next place designed to address my
self to some person of great Quality of the Protestant Religion: but then I
considered that great ^ffices, Favor and Interest with some great Men might be
preferred to their concer^s in Abby-lands, and render them cooler than cur
cause requires. My last refuge then was to cast this small thing into your
Lordships Arms and Protection, a Noble man of a great and ancient Extraction,
and therefore I hope not willing to exalt, more than needs, the dominion of the
Priests.

Besides, though your Religion be of the Romish Faith, yet your dependence is
not on Offices and Preferments, nor can they countervail so great an Estate in
Land; and you may be content to be saved in the private exercise of your own
Religion, though the Protestant be uppermost, nay much better saved, than if
the Church of Rome, returning triumphant, reduce you from an Estate in Land of
ten thousand pound per annum to a Lease from an Abbey of two or three hundred
pounds a year; which however it may exalt your Faith, must undoubtedly destroy
your Charity.

What terms you are certainly to expect if England ever submit its self to the Sea of Rome, the Author out of whom these papers are extracted, a man of
unquestioned Credit, and of your own Religion, will inform you; which your
Lordship, of all other persons, has reason to believe, because one of your
Ancestors was employed to Rome in the very Ambassy here mentioned, and you must
needs have amongst the papers of your Family (if they are extant) authentic
proofs to confirm it,

Your LORDSHIPS most Humble Servant, I. S.

THE EPISLE to the READER.
Reader,
I Am abundantly satisfied that the strenuous attempts aagainst the Religion of
Roman Catholics, made by the zealous Assertors of the Protestant Cause, do
amount to but little more than an Endeavor to fortify these two Objections:

First, that it is, in not a few instances, manifestly different from, and
repugnant to the Doctrine of our Savior and his Apostles delivered in the New
Testament.

Secondly, that it is highly prejudicial to the Secular interest, violates the
due Liberty, and infringes the rights of Princes and their Subjects.

Now, how well they have quitted themselves as to the former of these Charges,
I leave those to determine, who with an unbiassed and impartial mind, have
oonverst with their Writings: but as to the latter, thou will be sufficiently
enabled to pass a true judgment concerning it, by putting thy self to the small
pains of perusing this short Narrative.

From hence thou will as thoroughly understand what obligation lies upon this
Kingdom especially, from the consideration of its Civil interest, to return
into the bosom of our Holy Mother, as thou will, from the Doughty defenses of
of her Sons against the Assaults of her troublesome Adversaries, what necessity
our Consciences, and the concerns of our Souls, do impose upon us to persevere
in our Separation. Thou will clearly perceive by these few leaves, how much
Princes consult the security of their Government, and advancement of their
Sovereignty, and Subjects, the preservation of their Estates and Fortunes, by
their filial obedience, and entire subjection to the Apostolic See.

And that thou may not have the least suspicion concerning the truth of the
following Narrative, I assure thee, I have most faithfully taken it from Father
Paul, a person of unquestioned integrity, and that lived and died in the
Communion of the Roman Church: As thou may be satisfied by comparing it with
his relation of the Government of Pope Paul the Fourth, in his exact History of
the Council of Trent. For which, as the Christian Church is highly obliged to
him upon many other accounts, so particularly for the Life of this Zealous
Pope, in which his extraordinary kindness for two things is more especially
remarkable, because they seem to stand in no small need of so Great an
Authority to recommend them, viz. Perjury and an Inquisition. Besides that, we
may learn from this Pope, how exceedingly convenient Infallibility is for the
Catholic Church; when we see that it may sometimes fall out, that a Pope may
be but little better than a madman: In which case Infallibility must needs be a
very great Security to the Catholic Faith.

E. A.

THE PAPACY OF PAUL The FOURTH.
IN the Year of our Lord One thousand five hundred fifty and five Marcellus
Cervinus was Created Pope, and retained his Name; but, having sat no more than
twenty two days, died: The Cardinals being assembled again in the Conclave, he
of Ausburg, assisted by Morone, made great instance, that among the
Capitulations which the Cardinals were to swear to, one should be, that the
future Pope should, by Counsel of the College, call another Synod within two
years, to finish the Reformation begun, to determine the Controversies of
Religion that remained, and to find a means to cause the Council of Trent to be
received in Germany. And the College of the Cardinals being full, it was
capitulated that the Pope should not Create more than four within two years.
The three and twentieth day of the next month. John Peter Caraffa, who called
himself Paulus Quartus, was Created.

He took it for a great glory, that the three English Ambassadors, dispatched
in the time of Julius, entered Rome the first day of his Papacy: and the first
Consistory after the Coronation was public. The Ambassadors were brought into
it, who, prostrating themselves at the Popes feet, did in the name of the
Kingdom, acknowledge the faults committed; relating them all in particular, (for
so the Pope would have it) confessing they had been ungrateful for so many
benefits received from the Church, and humbly craving pardon for it. The Pope
did pardon them, took them up from the ground, and embraced them: and, to
honor their Majesty's who sent them, gave the title of a Kingdom to Ireland,
granting them this Dignity by the Authority which the Pope has from God, being
placed over all Kingdoms, to supplant those that are Contumacious, and to build
new. But it did not then seem a fit time to say; he had power from God to build
up, and overthrow Kingdoms.

Henry the Eighth, after his separation from the Pope, made Ireland a Kingdom,
and called himself King of England, France and Ireland; which Title continued
by Edward, was assumed by Mary and her Husband. The Pope so soon as he was
Created, entered into a resolution, that the Title of Ireland should not be used
by those Princes, affirming constantly that it belonged only to him, to give
the name of a King. But it seemed hard to induce England to quit that which two
Kings had used, and the Queen, not thinking much of it, had continued.
Therefore he found a temper; that is, to dissemble the knowledge of what Henry
had done, and himself to erect the Island into a Kingdom, that so the World
might believe that the Queen had used the Titles as given by the Pope, not as
decreed by her Father. And the Popes have often given that which they could not
take from the Possessors; and, to avoid contentions, some have received their
own goods as gifts, and some have dissembled the knowledge of the gift, or of
the pretense of the giver.

In the private discourses between the Pope and the Ambassadors, he found fault
that the Church was not wholly restored, saying, that by no means it was to be
tolerated, and that it was necessary to render all, even to a farthing; because
the things that belong to God can never be applied to humane uses, and he that
withholds the least part of them is in continual state of damnation. That if
he had power to grant them, he would do it most readily, for his Fatherly
affection that he bears to them, and for the experience he had of their
filial Obedience, but his authority was not so large, as that he might profane
the things dedicated to God, and let England be assured that this would be an
Anathema, and a Contagion, which, by the just revenge of God, would hold the
Kingdom of England in perpetual infelicity. He charged the Ambassa^ors to write
thereof immediately, and was not content to speak of it once, but repeated it
as often as there was occasion. He said also plainly, that the Peter Pence
ought to be paid, as soon as might be, and that, according to the custom, he
would send a Collector for that purpose; that himself had exercised that Charge
three years, having been sent into England for that end, wherein he was much
edified, by seeing the forwardness of the people to contribute, especially
those of the meane^ sort; and told them often that they could not hope that
Saint Peter would open Heaven unto them, so long as they usurped his goods upon
Earth. This relation made unto the Queen, with many other Treaties continued
successively from Rome, caused her to employ all her Spirits herein; but
nothing could be done, because many of the Nobility, and of the Grandies had
incorporated many of these revenues into their houses. For her self she
restored the tenths, and all other Ecclesiastical goods annexed to the Crown by
her Brother and her Father. The Ambassadors parted from Rome, with much praise
and favor from the Pope, for their submission; a means by which his good will
is easily gained.

In the mean space the Diet of Germany was prosecuted, not without contentions;
which would have been greater, if Cardinal Morone had remained there, as well
for the negotiations he would have made, as for the suspicions conceived by the
Protestants, that he was sent only to oppose their Commodities. And it was
already published every where that Rome was full of hope, that Germany would
quickly come under the Yoke, as England had done. After the Cardinals
departure, the first difficulty was; whether the points of Religion should be
discussed first of all; which, though the Ecclesiastics did contradict in the
beginning, yet it was finally resolved by common consent to begin there.
Wherein there were two contrary Propositions; one to treat of the means to
reform it, the other to leave every one to his liberty: about which Point there
was very great Controversy. But in the end all inclined to the second
Proposition, not knowing how to root out the evil which did still move, only
hoping that when the humors were quiet, and the differences and suspicions
removed, many easy and commodious ways might be found out. For this, it was
necessary to establish a Peace, that for cause of Religion there might be no
more War, and that it might be lawful for all the Princes and States of the
Empire to follow and cause to be observed in their Dominions what Religion
pleased them best. And the five and twentieth day of September the Recess was
made, that a General or National Council (neither of which could be assembled
in regard of many difficulties) being necessary to determine lawfully the
Causes of Religion, until a way might be opened to a friendly agreement
throughout all Germany, the Emperor Ferdinand, the Catholic Princes and States
should not force the Princes, Orders and States of the Augustan Confession to
forsake their Religion and Ceremonies already instituted, or to be instituted
in their Dominions, not should do any thing in contempt thereof, nor hinder
them in the free use of that Religion: and those of the Augustan Confession
ought to behave themselves in the same sort toward Caesar, Ferdinand, and the
other Princes and States of the old Religion as well Ecclesiastical as Secular,
every one having power to establish in his own State what Religion he will, and
to forbid the other. And if any Ecclesiastic shall abandon the old Religion,
it shall be no infamy unto him, but the shall presently lose his Benefices,
which shall be conferred upon others by the Patron; and the Benefices, which
the Protestants have already annexed to Schools and Ministries of the Church
shall remain in the same State. That Ecclesiastical jurisdiction shall be
exercised no more against those of the Augustan Confession; but otherwise shall
be exercised according to the ancient Custom.

Pope, Paul, understanding of this Recess of Ausburg, was exceeding angry; He
complained thereof to the Emperors Ambassador, and to the Cardinal of Ausburg,
reprehending Ferdinand for suffering a Treaty in matters of Religion, without
the knowledge of the Apostolic See, and threatening that in due time he would
make the Emperor and that King know, to their grief, how they have offended
him: he exhorted them to prevent it, by revoking and disallowing the things
granted, that he might have no occasion to proceed, as he meant to do, not only
against the Lutherans, but even against them also as Abettors: offering to
assist them, in case they should do it by authority and arms; and to command
all Christian Princes, upon pains and censures, to aid them with all their
Forces. He was not satisfied with the Ambassadors answer, who alleged the
strength of the Protestants, the War against Caesar, in which he was like to be
Prisoner in Ispru^, and the Oaths taken. For the Oaths he answered, that he
freed and absolved them, yea, commanded not to observe them. To the rest he
said, that in God's Cause one must not proceed according to humane respects.
That the Emperor was in danger, by God's permission, because he did not what he
could and ought to do, to reduce Germany to the obedience of the Apostolic
See: that this is but a token of God's anger, and that he must expect greater
punishment, if he take not warning by it: but carrying himself as a Soldier of
Christ undauntedly, and without worldly respects, he shall obtain all manner of
Victory, as the examples of the times past do demonstrate.

Paul, being of an high spirit, and vast thoughts, did assure himself that he
could redress all the disorders, by his Papal Authority only, nor had need of
any Prince herein. Therefore he never spoke with Ambassadors, but he thundered
in their ears, that he was above all Princes, that he would not that any of
them should be, too domestical with him, that he could change Kingdoms, that he
was Successor of him who has deposed Kings and Emperors, and did often repeat,
for a beginning of authority exercised by him, that he had made Ireland a
Kingdom, and went on so far, that in Consistory, and at his Table publicly, in
the presence of many, he said he would not have any Prince for his Companion,
but all Subjects under his foot, (so he said, striking it against the ground)
as it is fit, and as it is his will who has built the Church, and has placed
them in this degree. And sometimes he would say, that rather than he would do
any thing basely, he would die, overthrow all, and set the whole World on fire.

Paul the Fourth was naturally of a lofty mind and courage, and trusted much in
his knowledge and good fortune, which did accompany him in all his actions:
whereunto the power and fortune of the Papacy being added, he thought every
thing was easy. But two humors did flote in him by turns; one, which by custom
to make use of Religion in all his attempts, did induce him to employ his
Spiritual Authority. The other was put into him by Charles Caraffa his Nephew,
who, being valiant, and exercised in War, made Cardinal of a Soldier, did
retain his martial Spirits, and persuaded him to use his temporal power,
saying, that the one without the other is despised, but being joined, are
instruments of great matters. The circumspect old man knew well that the
Spiritual is made weaker, when it is manifested that there is need of the
Temporal. But being ever intent to make his name great, sometimes he gave ear
to his Nephew, and sometimes he believed himself more. In the end he concluded
to use the Temporal secretly, and the Spiritual openly, that, proceeding in
this, he might add or omit the other, as he should be advised by events.
Therefore he treated most secretly by his Nephew, with the Cardinal of Loraine,
a League with the French King, which being almost made, Loraine parted from
Rome to take away suspicion, and the Cardinal Torrnon went thither, with whom
it was concluded with the same secrecy. The principal Capitulation whereof was,
the gaining of the Kingdom of Naples for a younger Son of the King, with great
enlargement of the bounds of the Ecclesiastical state.

The Pope also, that he might have a prop to lean on in both courses, thought
it necessary to make a promotion of Cardinals, dependents on himself, men of
courage, who would not be afraid to prosecute his designs, and employ
themselves in any hard enterprise. He began to speak of this promotion but a
few days before he made it; which grieved the Cardinals, for that he would
contradict the Capitulation which he had sworn. The twentieth of December, the
Pope, being entered into the Consistory, said, so soon as he sat down, that he
would not give audience to any that day, because he had greater matters to
propose. Every one understanding by this, that his meaning was to create new
Cardinals, the Cardinal of St. James went to his Seat to speak with him; and
the Pope refusing, and the Cardinal not desi^ting, he set his hand on his
breast, and thrust him from him. All being sat, the Pope began to complain of
those who reported he could make but four Cardinals, in regard of that which he
had sworn in the Conclave, and said, that this was to bind the Popes authority,
which is absolute; that it is an Article of Faith that the Pope cannot be
bound, and much less can bind himself; that to say otherwise was manifest
heresy; from the guilt whereof he did absolve those that were faulty, because
he thought they did not speak obstinately: but hereafter if any shall say the
same, or the like, against the authority given him by God, he will give order
that the Inquisition shall proceed. He added that he would make Cardinals, and
would not have any contradiction, because he wanted persons for employment,
which he could not put upon them, because every one had his proper faction:
that it was fit to promote men of Learning, and of Exemplary life, to employ
them for reformation of the Church, especially in the Council, whereof it was
high time to treat seriously* which he would propose with the first occasion.
But now he would name unto them the persons to be promoted to the Cardinality,
that they, having a consultive voice, might put to his consideration what was
for the good of the Church, wherein they should be heard, and that they should
not believe they had a decisive voice, because that belonged only to him. He
proposed seven persons, in which number only one was his Kinsman, and another
of the Theatine Congregation: the others were men of much fame either for
Learning, or for the negotiations of the Court. The Cardinals were created the
next Sunday before the League was concluded with France, which was the 15th. of
that month.

At this time Cardinal Poole (who, for many respects of succession, and to show
he was not so obliged to the Papacy, would not receive Ecclesiastical Orders;
these causes being ceased) went out of the number of the Deacon Cardinals, and
was ordained Priest: and four months after, the Archbishop of Canterbury
being burnt, having been first degraded with many Ceremonies, he was put into
his place.

The people of Au^tria, in regard of the Recess made in the Diet, and of
Ferdinand's declaration, entered into hope that themselves also might retain
liberty of Religion. Therefore he having called a Diet of his Subjects, to have
a contribution against the Turks, who made War against him, they demanded
permission to live in purity of Religion, and to enjoy the benefit which was
granted to the Confessionists, and that they might not be in verse estate than
other Germans, and that Ministers of the Church might teach and distribute the
Sacraments according to the Evangelical and Apostolical Doctrine.

Ferdinand answered, that he could not grant their demand, not for want of will
to gratify them, but because he was bound to obey the Church, but to yield to
their desires as much as he could, he was content to susp^nd that part of the
Edict which concerns the Communion of the Cup, yet with condition that they
should change nothing in the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, until the
Decree of the future Diet. And they, desiring nothing else, were content to
contribute readily against the Enemy.

The Bavarians also desired of their Duke liberty of Religion, demanding a free
preaching of the Gospel, marriage of Priests, the Communion in both kinds, and
to eat flesh every day, protesting that otherwise they would not pay the heavy
Subsidies and Contributions against the Turks. The Duke seeing that Ferdinand
had granted his people the Communion of the Cup, did likewise grant them that
Communion, and leave to eat flesh, if there were necessity, on Fasting days,
until the causes of Religion were composed by Public Authority.

But the Pope having laid the foundations before rehearsed, applying himself to
Spiritual matters, thought it necessary to gain Credit with the World; which
could not be done, if it did not appear by deeds, not by words only, that the
Court of Rome was reformed. Therefore, being wholly bent to this, in the end of
January, 1556. he erected a Congregation, to which he committed the discussion
of all the doubts in matter of Simony; which he Printed, and sent Copies of
them to all Princes, and said, he had published them, that they might come to
the knowledge of the Universities, of general Studies, and of every Learned man,
that all might have occasion to make known their opinions, which he would not
openly desire, because it was not honorable for that See, which is Mistress of
all, to go about and beg them. He said, that for himself he had no need of the
instruction of any, because he knew what Christ did command, but that he had
erected the Congregation that, in a matter wherein all are interested, it might
not be said that he had proceeded of his own head. He added, that having purged
himself and his Court, it could not be said to him, Physician cure thy self:
And that he would make Princes know, that there is greater Simony in their
Courts, which he would take away, being Superior to Princes as well as Prelates.

Some told him that it was necessary to handle such a thing in a General
Council, which he heard with great indignation, and said, he had no need of a
Council, himself being above all. And Cardinal Bellai saying that a Council was
necessary, not to add authority to the Pope, but to find a means for Execution,
which cannot be uniform in all places; he concluded, that if a Council were
necessa^y, it should be held in Rome, and that it was not needful to go
elsewhere; and that he never consented that the Council should be held in
T(...), because it was in the amidst of the Lutherans, that the Council is to
consist of Bishops only; that other persons might be admitted for Counsel, yet
only Catholics, otherwise the Turks also ought to be admitted: That it was a
great vanity to send into the Mountains sixty Bishops of the least able, and
forty Doctors of the most insufficient, as was twice done already; and to
believe, that by those the World could be better regulated than by the Vicar of
Christ, with the College of all the Cardinals, who are the Pillars of all
Christendom, Elected for the most Excellent of all Christian Nations, and by
the Counsel of the Prelates and Doctors which are in Rome, who are the most
Learned persons in the World, and more in number than, by any diligence, can be
brought to Trent.

But when news came to Rome of the grant of the Cup, made by the Duke of
Bavaria to his Subjects, he entered into a great rage against him: and he put
this among other things, for which he designed to make provision at once, being
full of hope that every thing would be easy unto him, if the Court were
reformed, and was not troubled, though he saw the number of abuses to increase.
For a few days after the Ambassador of Polonia, coming expressly to
congratulate his Holiness for his assumption to the Popedom, made five demands
in the name of the King and Kingdom, viz. To Celebrate the Mass in the Polonian
Tongue. To use the Communion in both kinds. The Marriage of Priests. That the
payment of Annates might be taken away. And that they might call a National
Council to reform the proper abuses of the Kingdom, and to reconcile the
variety of opinions. He heard these demands with unspeakable impatience, and
set himself to detest them most bitterly, speaking against them one after
another, with infinite vehemence. And for conclusion he said, that a General
Council in Rome would cause the heresies and bad opinions of many to be known,
alluding to what was done in Germany, Austria, and Bavaria. And being for these
reasons almost resolute in himself, (or at least willing to seem so) that it
was necessary to call a Council, he told all the Ambassadors, that they should
signify to their Princes his purpose to make a Lateran Council, like unto that
which is so famous. And he sent Nuncii to the Emperor and the French King, to
exhort them to Peace, though in France he had a more secret negotiation. He
gave commission also to treat with them of the Council, and said in the
Consistory, that it was necessary to Celebrate it quickly, seeing that besides
Bohemia, Prussia and Germany, which were much infected; Polonia also was in
danger. That in France and Spain they were well affected in Religion, but the
Clergy were badly used. That which he principally reprehended in France, was
the exaction of the Tenths, which the King made the Clergy ordinarily pay. But
he was more incited against Spain. For Paul the Third, and J^lius, having
granted the Emperor Charles the halt and quarter Fruits, for a Subsidy of the
War of Germany, and he having revoked the grant, because he was not satisfied
with the Recess of Ausburg, yet they persevered in Spain, and forced the Clergy
to pay by Sequestrations and imprisonments.

He did not forbear to say that the Emperor was an Heretic; that in the
beginning he favored the innovators of Germain, to depress that holy See, and
to make himself Lord of Rome, and of all Italy; that he held Paul the Third in
perpetual trouble, and that he should not do the like to him. He added, that
although he might remedy all these inconveniences by his own Authority, yet,
not to lay so great a burden upon himself alone, he would not do it without a
Council; that he had called it in Rome, and named it the Lateran; that he had
given commission to signify it to the Emperor and French King in courtesy,
but not to have their consent or Counsel, because his will was they should
obey: That he was assured it would please neither of them, because it is not
for their purpose, living as they do, and that they will say many things
against it, to disturb it. But he will call it whether they will or no, and
make known what that See can do, when it has a Pope of Courage. The 26th of
May, the Anniversary of his Coronation, all the Cardinals and Ambassadors
dining with him, according to custom, he began after dinner to discourse of the
Council, and that his resolution was to celebrate it by all means in Rome, and
that, in Courtesy, he gave notice thereof to the Princes, and that the
highways may be made secure for the Prelates. But if no Prelates would come
thither, yet he would hold it with those only who are in Court, because he well
knew what Authority he had.

While the Pope was busy about the Reformation, news came to Rome, that a Truce
was concluded the 5th of February between the Emperor and French King, by the
mediation of Cardinal Pool, who did interpose in the name of the Queen of
England; which made the Pope amazed, and Cardinal Caraffa much more, it having
been treated and concluded without them. The Pope was displeased principally
for the loss of reputation, and for the danger which it brought, if those two
Princes were joined, at whose discretion he must needs stand. Yet the Pope, not
losing courage, made show of joy for the Truce, but said he was not fully
satisfied with it, because a Peace was necessary in regard of the Council,
which he purposed to celebrate, which he was resolved to treat; and, for that
end, to send Legates to those Princes, being assured to conclude it, because he
would employ his Authority: for he would not be hindered in the government of
the Church, committed to him by Christ. To the Emperor he sent Scipio Rebiba
Cardinal of Pisa, and to the French King, Cardinal Caraffa his Nephew. This
went with all speed, and to the other, order was given to go slowly. Rebiba had
instruction to exhort the Emperor to amend Germany, which was not done till
then, because none had proceeded aright in that enterprise. He knew the defects
of his Predecessors, who, to stop the Reformation of the Court, did hinder the
good progress of the Council. But contrarily he was resolved to promote the
Reformation, and to celebrate a Council in his own presence, and to begin with
this point; assuring himself, that when they should see the abuses taken away,
for which they separated themselves from the Church, and remain contumacious
still, they will desire, and run to receive the Decrees and Constitutions which
the Council will make; where shall be reformed, not verbally, but really, the
Head, Members, Clergy, Laity, Princes, and People. To do so good a work, a
truce of five years is not sufficient, because there are no less suspicions in
Truces than in War; and one must be ever providing against the time when they
end. That a perpetual Peace is necessary to remove all malice and suspicions,
that all may bend themselves jointly, without worldly respects, to that which
concerns the union, and reformation of the Church. He gave the like
instructions to Caraffa, and was content it should be published by giving out
some Copies of it.

He gave his Nephew a large instruction to try the Kings mind, and, if he saw
him resolute to observe the Truce, to thunder into his ears the same lesson of
the Council: and to Rebiba he gave order to govern himself as he he should
receive advice from his Nephew. Caraffa carried to the King the Sword and Hat
which the Pope had blessed on Christmass-day at night, according to the custom.
Of the Peace he made no mention, but represented to the King, that howsoever
the League was not violated by the Truce of five years, yet it was made of no
force, to the great danger of his Uncle, and of his Family, and that they had
already some taste th^reof, by that which the Spaniards had done. He
recomm^nded to him, in most effectual terms, Religion and the Papacy, to which
his Predecessors gave singular protection, and the Pope himself and his Family,
much devoted to his Majesty. The King was not averse, but remained doubtful,
considering the Pope's age, who might die when he should have most need of him.
Caraffa perceived this, and found a remedy, promising that the Pope should
create so many Cardinals partial for France, and Enemies to Spain, that he
should ever have a Pope on his side. The Cardinals persuasions, and the promise
of the Promotion, and the Absolution from the Oath of the Truce, which he gave
in the Popes name, together with the negotiation of the Cardinal of Loraine,
and his Brother, made the King resolve to move War, though the Princes of the
(...), and all the G^andies of the Court abhorred the infamy of breaking the
Truce, and receiving Absolution from the Oa^h. The conclusion being made,
Caraffa recalled the Legate sent to the Emperor, who was arrived at Ma^^ri^,
and caused him to come into France, though he was but two days journey distant
from Caesar: which made the Emp^ror and the King his Son believe, that, in
France, something was concluded against them.

The Pope's distastes against the Emperor and his Son did daily increase. He
made a most severe pro^^ss against Ascanius Colonna, and Marcus Antonius his
So^, for many offenses which he pretended to be done (...) the Apostolic See,
excommunicated them, and deprived them of all dignity and fee, with censures
ag^^^st those that gave them assistance or favor; and did confi^cate all their
possessions within the state of the Church, and gave them to the Count
Montorius his Nephew, with the title of Duke of Pagliano. Marcus Antonius
retiring into the Kingdom of Naples was received, and sometimes made excursions
upon his own lands, which much provoked the Pope; who thinking his nods were
commandments unto all, able to terrify every one, he could not endure to be so
little esteemed at Naples, his Country, where he would have been thought to be
Omnipotent. He thought in the beginning, by talking lavishly of the Emperor,
and of the King, to make them desist from favoring the Colonnesi, and
therefore spoke very often disgracefully of them, in the presence of all sorts
of persons, but most willingly when any Spanish Cardinal was present, and, at
last, commanded it should be written unto them.

None of these proofs taking effect, he proceeded farther, and the three and
twentieth of July made the Fiscal, and Silvester Aldobrandinus, the
Consistorial Advocate, appear in the Consistory, who declared, that his
Holiness having excommunicated and deprived Marcus Antonius Colonna, and
prohibited, under the same censures, all sorts of persons to assist or favor
him, and it being notorious that the Emperor, and King Philip his Son, had
furnished him with horse, foot, and money, they were fallen into the
punishments of the same sentence, and had lost their Territories, which they
held in Fee. Therefore they desired that his Holiness would proceed to a
declaratory Sentence, and give order for Execution. The Pope answered, that he
would advise upon it by the counsel of the Cardinals, and proposed in
Consistory what was fit to be done in a case of so great importance. But the
Consistory being dismissed without a resolution, the Pope knew that either he
must yield, or come to a War, from which being not averse, advice came fitly to
him from his Nephew, of what was concluded in France. So that the discourses of
Reformation and Councils were turned into parlies of Money, Soldiers, and
Intelligences. The Pope armed the Citizens and Inhabitants of Rome, to the
number of 5000. caused many of his Cities to be fortified, and put garrisons
into them; and the French King sent him, at his instance, 3000 Gascons by Sea,
that he might subsist while the Royal Army was prepared.

In these negotiations the Pope imprisoned many Cardinals, Barons, and others,
upon suspicion; as also the Ambassadors of Philip King of England, and the
Emperors Postmaster. And to the Duke of Alva, (who sent to protest against
him, for maintaining in Rome the fugitives of the Kingdom of Naples, for laying
hands on, and keeping in Prison public persons without reason, and for having
opened the Kings Letters,) he sent back this answer: That he was a free Prince,
and Superior to all others, not bound to give any account, but to demand it of
any wha^soever; that he might entertain any persons, and open any letters which
he thought to be written against the Church: that if Carallasso (Philip's
Ambassador) had done the office of an Ambassador, nothing should have been done
against him; but having made Treaties, moved Seditions, plotted against the
Prince to whom he was sent, he had offended as a private man, and as such he
should be punished; that no danger should make him be wanting to the Dignity of
the Church, and defense of that See, referring all to God, by whom he was made
Shepherd of the Flock of Christ. And the Pope still continuing to make
provision; the Duke of Alva sent another protestation against him, that the
King having endured so many injuries, knowing that the intention of his
Holiness was to dispossess him of the Kingdom of Naples; and being assured that
to this end he had made a League with his enemies; therefore, in regard his
Holiness did desire War, he did denounce it against him, protesting that the
Calamities thereof could not be imputed to him, and laying the blame upon the
Pope. The Pope mak^ng show to desire Peace, but answering only in general
terms, to gain time, the Duke began to make War the fourth of September, and in
the year, 1556 possessed himself of all Campania, holding it in the name of the
next Pope, and came so near to Rome, that he put City in fear, and made them
strengthen and fortify it. But the greatness of the City, and other respects
and dangers, counseled him, not assailing Rome, to undertake smaller
enterprises.

It gave much matter of discourse, that, this year Charles the Emperor parted
from Flanders, and passed into Spain, to betake himself to a private life in a
solitary place, so that they made a comparison between a Prince trained up from
his infancy in the negotiations and affairs of the World, who at the age of
little more than fifty years, resolved to quit the World, and only to serve
God, changed from a mighty Prince, to a mean religious person; and one, who had
formerly abandoned the Episcopal Charge, to retire into a Monastery, and now,
being at the age of eighty years, and made Pope, did wholly addict himself to
Pomp and Pride, and endeavored to set all Europe on fire with War.

In the beginning of the year, 1557. the Duke of Guise passed into I^aly with
his Army, in favor of the Pope, who, to observe the promise of his Nephew made
to the French King, made a promotion of ten Cardinals; which not being
according to the meaning and the end agreed on, neither for the number, nor
quality of the persons, his excuse was, that he was so nearly conjoined with
his Majesty, that his dependents would be as serviceable to the King as the
Frenchmen themselves: and that he could not then make a greater promotion,
seeing the number already arrived to 70. which would quickly be diminished by
removing some Rebels, which he meant of those that were already in the Castle,
and others against whom he had a design, as well for matter of State, as of
Religion: for he was not so intent on the War, as to abandon the business of
the Inquisition, which he said was the principal Secret and Mystery of the
Papacy. He had information against Cardinal Morone, that he held intelligence
in Germany, and imprisoned him in the Castle, and the Bishop of Modena as
confederate with him.

He deprived also Cardinal Pool of his Legation of England, and cited him to
appear in the Inquisition at Rome, and created Cardinal William Peto Bishop of
Salisbury, and made him Legate in Pool's place. And although the King and
Queen, testifying what service he had done to the Catholic Faith, made earnest
intercession for him, yet the Pope would never remit one jot of his ^igour.
Cardinal Pool obe^ed, laying aside the administration and ornaments of a
Legate, but parted not out of England, alleging the Queens commandment that he
should not go. In England many were scandalized at it, and allienated from the
Pope, and many in Rome thought it a calumny, invented to revenge himself for
the Truce between the two Kings, treated by him without imparting it to him.

The Duke of Guise being come into Italy, made War in P^^mont, with purpose to
continue it in Lombardy, and so to divert the Arms taken up against the Pope:
but the Pope's ardent desire to assail the Kingdom of Naples did not permit
him. The Frenchmen knew the difficulties, and the Duke of Guise, with four
principal Commanders, went to Rome by Post, to make the Pope understand what
the reasons of War did persuade. In whose presence all being consulted on, and
the Pope's resolution not giving place to any other deliberation, it was
necessary to yield unto him. Yet they did nothing but assault Civitella, a
place situated at the entry into the Provinces of Abruzzo, where the Army had a
repulse. In sum, the Pope's Arms, as well his own as Auxiliary, were not much
favored by God: But in the midst of August, the Army of the Duke of Alva
approaching Rome, and the Pope understanding the surprise and sack of Signea,
the slaughter of many, and the danger in which Pagliano was, he related all in
Consistory, with many tears; adding, that he did undauntedly expect Martyrdom;
the Cardinals marvelling that he should paint out the Cause to them, who
understood the truth, as if it had been of Christ, whereas it was profane, and
proceeded from ambition, and that he should say it was the principal Sinew, and
mystery of the Papacy.

When the Pope's affairs were in greatest straits, the French King's Army had
such a great overthrow near S. Quintin, that he was forced to recall the Duke
of Guise and his Forces, letting the Pope know his inevitable necessity; the
Pope refused to let Guise return, whereupon there being a great contest between
them, the Pope not able to keep him, bad him go, seeing he had done little
Service to the King, less to the Church, and none at all to his own honor. In
the end of the month, the Duke of Alva approached Rome, which he had taken but
for want of courage. Finally, a composition was made the 14th of September
between Alva and the Caraffi, the War being continued a whole year.

In the Capitulation the Pope would not have Colonna, nor any of his Subjects
comprehended, nor any word inserted to show that he had offended in imprisoning
the Emperors Ministers, but maintained most constantly, that Alva ought to come
to Rome to ask pardon, and receive Absolution, saying plainly, that before he
would lose one jot of his due, he would see the whole World ruined: that the
question was not of his own, but of Christ's Honor.

With this condition, and the restitution of the Cities taken, the Controversy
was ended.

It was esteemed a Prodigy, that the very day that the Peace was concluded,
there was such a great inundation of the River Tiber, that all the plain of
Rome was drowned, and a great part of the fortifications of the Castle S.
Angelo was overthrown.

The Duke of Alva went personally to Rome to submit himself to the Pope, and
receive Absolution in the Kings name and his own. So it happened that the
Conqueror bare the indignity, and he that was overcome, triumphed more than if
he had been victorious. And it was no small favor that the Pope received him
with humanity, though he forbear not his usual haughty state.

The War was no sooner ended, but new troubles came upon the Pope. For advice
was sent out of France, that the fifth of September at night, in Paris, about
two hundred persons were assembled in an house to celebrate the Communion;
which being discovered by the common people, the house was assaulted, and some
fled, but the women and weaker sort were taken, of whom seven were burned, and
the greater part of the others reserved for the same punishment, to be
inflicted when the Accomplices were found out. The S(...)es made intercession for
these, and the King, in regard of his War with the King of Spain, having need
of their assistance, gave order that the proceedings against them should be
moderate. The Pope was ins(...)tely angry, and complained in Con(...)story, and
said, it was no marvel if the affairs of that King did not succeed well,
because be more esteemed the as^i^tance of Heretics, than the favor of God.
The Pope had forgotten that, in the time of his War, the Cardinals of the
In^ui^^tion complaining that the Protestant G^^sons, which were brought to his
pay for the defense of Rome, used many scorns against the Churches and Images,
his Holiness did reprehend them, saying, they were Angels sent by God, for the
Custody of the City, and of his person, and that he had a strong hope that God
would convert them. So men judge diversely of their own interests, and of the
facts of others. The Pope took occasion hence to call to mind two Constitutions
which the King had made the same year, which, he said, were against the liberty
of the Clergy, and therefore was resolved they should be abrogated. The one was
published the first of March, that Marriages made by Sons before the age of
thirty years complete, and of Daughters before twenty five, without consent of
the Father, or of him in whose power they are, should be void. The other, the
first of May, That all Bishops and Curates should reside, upon pain of loss of
the Revenues, with an imposition of an extraordinary Subsidy, besides the
ordinary Tenths, to pay five thousand foot Soldiers. The Pope thought not of
these things when the news came, because he was then in War, and had need of
the King: but this reason ceasing, he complained that the King had meddled even
with the Sacraments, and unsupportably burdened the Clergy: He said it was
necessary to provide against these disorders by a Council, which were greater
than could be objected against the Clergy, that it was fit to begin the
Reformation from hence: that the French Prelates durst not speak so long as
they were in France, but being in a Council in Italy, free from fear of the
King, their complaints would soon be heard.

Among these distastes the Pope received some joy, that the Colloquie begun in
Germany, to compose the differences in Religion, (which troubled his Holiness
and the Court, as all Colloquies had done) was resolved into nothing.

The Pope perceiving that, by the War past, he was deprived of the credit with
which he thought to daunt the whole World, thought to regain it by an heroical
action, and did the 26th of January, in Consistory, deprive Cardinal Caraffa of
the Legation of Bolonia, and of all government, and confined him to Civita
Lavinia, and took from John Caraffa, the Cardinal's Brother, the command of the
Army, exiling him to Galessi. He deprived the other Nephew of the government of
Borgo, and banished him to Monte-Bello, commanding that their Wives, Families
and Children should depart from Rome. He deprived also all those of their
Offices, to whom he had given them in contemplation of these. He instituted a
new government in Rome, and in the State of the Church, giving the Charge of
all businesses to Camillus Orsinus, unto whom he joined the Cardinals of Trani
and Spoleto, affecting a fame of justice in these actions, and laying the blame
of all the grievances which the people suffered upon the Nephews. Being thus
disburdened of the Government, he applied himself wholly to the office of the
Inquisition, saying, it was the true Ram to beat down heresy, and defend the
Apostolic See. And, not regarding what did befit the time, he published a new
Constitution, dated the 15th of February, which he made all the Cardinals
subscribe. In this he renewed every censure and punishment pronounced by his
Predecessors, and every Statute of Canons, Councils and Fathers, in what time
soever, published against Heretics; ordaining, that those that were disused,
should be brought in use again. He declared, that all Prelates and Princes,
even Kings and Emperors, fallen into heresy, should be, and should be
understood to be deprived of all their Benefices, States, Kingdoms, and
Empires, without farther declaration, and incapable to be restored to them,
even by the Apostolic See: the their Good, States, Kingdoms, and Empire, shall
be understood to be common, and to belong to those Catholics that can get
them. This did minister much talk, and if it had not been presently disesteemed
by the World, it would have kindled a fire in all Christendom.

Another accident made the World know that he had not moderated the haughtiness
of his mind. The Emperor Charles, in the year, 1556. by his Letters written to
the Electors and Princes, did absolutely give to Ferdinand all the
administration of the Empire, without reserving any thing to himself,
commanding that he should be obeyed by all. Afterward he sent William Prince
of Orange, with two Colleagues, to the Diet in Germany, to transfer the Name,
Title, Crown and Dignity upon Ferdinand, as if himself had been dead; which not
seeming fit to the Electors, was deferred until the year, 1558. in which, the
4th of Feb. the day of the Nativity, Coronation, and other felicities of
Charles, the Ceremonies of the resignation being made by his Ambasadors, in
presence of the Electors, Ferdinand was installed with the usual rites. The
Pope hearing this, fell into an excessive rage. He pretended, that as the
Pope's Confirmation does make the Emperor, so the resignation cannot be put
into the hands of any but himself; in which case it belonged to him to make
what Emperor he pleased; alleging, that the Electors have power granted them
by the Popes's favor, to Elect the Emperor in place of him that is dead, but
not in case of resignation, in which it remains still in the power of the
Apostolic See; as also to the disposition thereof, are annexed all dignities
resigned unto it. Therefore the resignation of Charles is void, and the whole
authority to choose an Emperor, is devolved to him, and was resolved not to
acknowledge the King of the Romans for Emperor.

Ferdinand sent Martin Gusman his Ambassador to the Pope, to give him an
account of his Brothers resignation, and his own assumption, to testify unto
him the reverence he bare him, to promise him obedience, and to signify to him
that he would send a solemn Embassage to treat of his Coronation. The Pope
refused to hear him, and referred the discussion of the matter to the
Cardinals: who related (for the Pope's will was they should do so) that the
Ambassador could not be admitted, before it did appear whether the resignation
of Charles were lawful, and the succession of Ferdinand just. For he being
Elected King of the Romans, and the Election confirmed by Clement, to succeed
after the death of the Emperor, it was necessary the Empire should be void by
death. Besides, there was a nullity in all the Acts of Francfort, as made by
Heretic, who have (...) authority and power. Wherefore it was necessary that
Ferdinand should send a Proctor, and renounce whatsoever was done in that Diet,
and beseech the Pope, that he would graciously be pleased to make good the
resignation of Charles, and his Assumption to the Empire, by virtue of his
plenary power, from whom he might expect all Paternal grace and favor. The
Pope resolved according to this counsel, and so declared himself to Gusman,
giving him three months to put it in execution, beyond which time he would
hear no more speech of it, but himself would create a new Emperor. Neither was
it possible to remove him, though King Philip, to favor his Uncle, sent
Francis Vargas expressly, and after him John Figaroa, to entreat him. Ferdinand
understanding this, gave order to Gusman, that, if within three days after the
receipt thereof he were not admitted by the Pope, he should depart, and protest
unto him, that Ferdinand, together with the Electors, would resolve of that
which should be for the honor of the Empire. Gusman desired audience again,
which the Pope granted in private, not as to an Ambassador of the Emperor; and
hearing him what he had in his instructions, and that which was wrote unto him
from the Emperor, he answered, that the things considered by the Cardinals,
were very important, and that he could not resolve on them so soon; that he
would send a Nuncio to the Imperial Majesty of Charles the Fifth, and, in the
mean while, if he had commission from his Master to depart, he might do it, and
protest what he thought fit. Therefore the Ambassador having made his
protestation, departed. And although Charles died the same year the 21th of
September, yet it was impossible to remove the Pope from this resolution.

The Religion of England was much changed this year. The Queen died the 17th of
November, and Cardinal Pool the same day; which stirred up many who were not
satisfied with the former Government, to restore the Reformation of Edward, and
to separate themselves wholly from the Spaniards: which they did the rather,
because King Philip, to hold a foot in England, had treated to marry Elizabeth,
Sister and Successor of Mary, to Charles his Son: and when there was little
hope of the life of Mary, had also cast forth diverse words, that he would take
her for his own wife. But the new Queen being wise, (as she showed herself to
be in all her Government) did first secure the Kingdom by Oath, that she would
not marry a stranger, and was Crowned by the Bishop of Carlisle, an adherent to
the Church of Rome, not making any open declaration what Doctrine she would
follow, designing, so soon as she was settled in her Government, to establish it
by the Counsel of Parliament, and of Learned and Godly men, and to make a
constant reformation of the State of Religion. Therefore she exhorted the chief
of the Nobility, who desired a change, to proceed without tumult, assuring them
that she would not enforce any. She caused presently an account to be given to
the Pope of her Assumption, with Letters of Credence written to Edward Cerne,
who was Ambassador to her Sister, and was not departed from Rome.

But the Pope proceeding according to his usual rigor, answered, that England
was held in Fee of the Apostolic See; that she could not succeed, being
illegitimate; that he could not contradict the declarations of Clement the
Seventh, and Paul the Third, that it was a great boldness to assume the Name
and Government without him; that, for this, she deserved not to be heard in any
thing; yet, being desirous to show a Fatherly affection, if she would renounce
her pretensions, and refer her self wholly to his free disposition, he will do
whatsoever may be done with the honor of the Apostolic See.

But the new Queen understanding the Pope's answer, and wondering at the man's
hasty disposition, thought it not profitable, either for her, or the Kingdom,
to treat any more with him. So that, the cause ceasing, she gave the Nobility
leave to consult what was fit to be done for the service of God, and quiet of
the Kingdom.

A Disputation was held in Westminster, in presence of all the States, between
Learned men, chosen on both sides, which began the last of March, and lasted
until the thirtieth of April: and, a Parliament being assembled to this end,
all the Edicts of Religion made by Mary were abolished, those of her Brother
Edward restored, obedience taken away from the Pope, the title of the Head of
the Church of England given to the Queen, the revenues of the Monasteries
confifcated, and assigned some to the Nobility, and some to the Crown, the
images taken out of the Churches by the people, and the Roman Religion banished.

Another accident happened also: For in the Diet of Ausburg, it appearing by
the Acts of the Colloquie, the year before dissolved without fruit, that there
was no hope to do any good by that means, Ferdinand told them he would procure
the General Council to be restored, exhorting all to submit themselves to the
Decrees thereof, as being the way to remove differences. The Protestants
answered, that they would consent to a Council, called, not by the Pope, but by
the Emperor, to be held in Germany, in which the Pope should not preside, but
should submit himself to the judgment thereof, and release the Bishops and
Divines of their Oath; in which also the Protestants should have a deciding
voice, and all should be determined according to the holy Scriptures, and
whatsoever was concluded in Trent, should be re-examined: which, if it cannot
be obtained of the Pope, yet the Peace of Religion should be confirmed,
according to the agreement of Passau, having known by too manifest experience,
that no good can be drawn from any Popish Council. The Emperor knowing the
difficulty to obtain of the Pope a grant of the things proposed, and that now
he had no means to negotiate with him, in regard of the Controversy about the
Resignation of Charles, and his Succession, he confirmed the accord of Passau,
and the Recesses of the Diets following.

The Pope having cut off all means to treat with the Emperor and Germany, knew
not what to say to this. Yet he was more displeased with their discourse
concerning the Council, than with the liberty granted by the Recess, being
resolute not to call any Council but in Rome, whatsoever should happen.

In this respect another accident was as grievous as the former, that is, the
Peace made at Cambray the third of April, between the Kings of France and
Spain, which was well confirmed by the Marriages of the Daughter of Henry to
the King of Spain, and of his Sister to the Duke of Savoy. In which Peace,
among other Capitulations, it was agreed, that both the Kings should make a
faithful promise to labor jointly that the Council should be Celebrated, the
Church Reformed, and the differences of Religion Composed.

The Pope considered how goodly a show the title of Reformation, and the name
of a Council did make; that England was lost, and all Germany also, partly by
the Protestants, and partly by his difference with Ferdinand; that these two
united Kings were much offended by him, the Spaniards by deeds and words, the
French by words at the least, and there remained none to whom he might have
refuge. These cogitations did so afflict the Old Pope, that he was unfit to
rule. He could not hold the Consistories so often as he was wont, and when he
did hold them, he spent the most part of the time in speaking of the
Inquisition, and exhorting the Cardinals to favor it, as being the only way to
extinguish Heresies.

But the two Kings did not agree to procure the Council for any ill will or
interests, which either of them had against the Pope or Papacy, but to provide
against the new Doctrines which did exceedingly increase, being willingly
heard, and received by all men of Conscience: and, which was of more
importance, the male-contented put themselves on that side, and did daily,
under pretense of Religion, make some Enterprises, as well in the
Low Countries, as in France, in regard those people did love their liberty, and
had commerce with Germany, as bordering upon it. In the beginning of the
troubles some seeds were sown, which that they might not take root, the Emperor
Charles the Fifth, in the Low Countries, and the French King in his Kingdom,
made many Edicts, and commanded diverse Executions. But after that the number of
Protestants did increase in Germany, and the Evangelicks did multiply among the
Suisses, and the separation was made in England, by reason of the often Wars
between the Emperor and French King, either Party was forced to call in
Auxiliaries out of these three Nations, who publicly professing and preaching
the Reformed Religion in their quarters, by their example, and by other means,
diverse of the people became of their Religion. And although in the
Low Countries, from the first Edict of Charles, until this time of the Peace,
there were hanged, beheaded, buried alive, and burned to the number of fifty
thousand, and very many put to death in France, yet both places were then in
worse case than ever. This made the Kings to think jointly of finding a remedy.

The Pope, as he was much discontented with the Progress of the new Doctrine in
the States of both the Kings, so he was pleased that those Princes did think of
it; and moved them by his N(...)ii to do so still. But he would not have any
other means than that of the Inquisition, which he thought the only remedy, as
he said upon all occasions, judging that the Council would do as formerly it
had done, that is, reduce all into a worse state.

While he was possessed with these cogitations, and weak of body, the King of
France died the second of July, by a wound in the eye, running at Tilt; for
which he seemed very sorrowful, and was so indeed. For although he suspected,
and with reason, the intelligence between the two Kings, yet he had still hopes
to separate them. But the one being dead, he saw he was at the discretion of
the other alone, whom he more feared, because he was more offended by him, and
was of a more close nature, hard to be sounded. He feared also, that in France
a gate would be set wide open to let in Sects, which might be confirmed before
the new King could get so much wisdom and reputation, as was necessary to
oppose so great difficulties. He lived some few days, afflicted with these
cogitations; but now laying aside all hopes, which had until then kept him
alive, he died the eighteenth of August, recommending to the Cardinals nothing
but the Offic^ of the Inquisition, the only means, as he said, to pr^serve the
Church, exhorting all to employ all their endeavors to establish it in Italy,
and wheresoever else they could.

FINIS.

