AN ANSWER TO ALL THE EXCUSES AND PRETENSES Which Men ordinarily make for their
not coming to the HOLY COMMUNION.

Fitted for the Meanest Capacities, And very proper to be given away by such as
are Charitably Inclined. Price 3 pence.

By a Divine of the Church of England.

The Second Edition Corrected.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Sare, at Gray's-Inn-Gate; in Holborn. 1697.

AN ANSWER TO All the Excuses and Pretenses which Men ordinarily make for their
not coming to the Holy COMMUNION.
A Certain man made a Luke 6. etc.
great Supper and bad many; And sent his Servant at Supper time, to say to them
that were ^idden, Come, for all things are now rea^y. And they all with one
consent began ^O MAKE EXCVSE: etc. ^he design of this Parable is to repre^^nt
the manner of Gods dealing with ^^e people of the Jews, upon their re^^cting
the Faith of Christ and refusing to embrace the Gospel. The Apostles of Christ,
who were the Servants of God, were sent and commanded, in the first place, to
Preach the glad tidings of the Gospel to them; and to invite them to come, and
partake of that Blessing and Happiness, which was offered them by God, through
Faith in, and Obedience unto, his Son Christ Jesus. But they, generally, having
their hearts, wholly in a manner addicted to the Love of this World; had no
inclination to receive so pure and Spiritual an Institution; and did not only
themselves reject, but also persecuted others for embracing, the Christian
Profession; despising and treading under foot the Son of God, and counting the
Blood of the Covenant, wherewith they should have been Sanctified, an unholy
thing; and even doing despite unto the Spirit of Grace, which would have
wrought upon their hearts in order to their Conversion. As therefore the Man in
this Parable, who made the Supper, was offended with those who did not come
when they were Invited; and therefore wholly Excluded them from his Table; and
sent his Servant to call others in their room (as you may find it in the latter
part of it:) So did Almighty God cast off the People of the Jews, upon their
obstinate rejecting of Jesus Christ; giving them up to be destroyed and
scattered by the power of the Romans; And commanded the Apostles to go out into
all parts of the World, to gather a Church, and a peculiar People, unto him
from among the Gentiles. But my present aim in Reflecting upon this Parable,
lies clear Another way; namely, to represent, and reprove, those Excuses and
Pretenses, which so many men do make, for their gross neglect of the Holy
Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ notwithstanding that God, by the
Mouth of his Ministers, does so frequently call, and earnestly invite them
thereunto. And indeed this matter is, in so lively a manner, represented in the
whole design of it that I think it is scarce possible to draw a more exact
Parallel.

For here, In the first place, we have Almighty God making a Supper for us; for
the feeding and nourishing of our Souls, in Virtue and Piety, through the
Passion, and Death, of our Savior Christ Jesus, which he has appointed for
ever to be commemorated by our Eating of this Bread and Drinking of this Cup,
in Remembrance of him. To this Supper we are, not once only, but, often,
bidden; by the frequent Admonitions and Exhortations of God's Ministers
addressed unto us, that we should come and be partakers of this Holy Communion:
And as the Guests who were invited in this Parable had framed some weak, and
impertinent excuses, for their not coming; One had bought a piece of Ground,
another five Yoke of Oxen, and a third had Married a Wife; none of which things
needed to have hindered them from accepting of the good man's kindness. Just so
we, when from Month to Month, and from Year to Year, we continually turn our
backs upon God's Holy Table; have yet some sort of pretenses wherewith we
endeavor to satisfy our Consciences, and to excuse this gross and scandalous
neglect of which we are Guilty.

That our Savior Christ Jesus died for our Sins; that it is only for the sake
of his Merits and Sufferings, that we can hope for Pardon and Eternal Life at
the hand of God; That, before his Death, he left this command with all that
should be called by his Name, that they should Eat of this Bread, and Drink of
this Cup, in remembrance of him; whereby we are obliged to show forth his Death
until his second coming: And lastly, that this ordinance is the Communion of
the Body and Blood of Christ; or, in other terms, the means whereby we do
Communicate in the Benefits of that Sacrifice, which Christ offered, and in the
merits of that Death and Passion, which he underwent in his Body, and by the
sheding of his Blood for us; and, consequently, that the Receiving hereof, if
duly performed, is not only our duty but also a great advantage and benefit
unto us; All these things, I say, are so universally owned by all who profess
Christianity, that I need not offer any thing for the proof of them, or any
part of them. But then surely one would think that when men, who are thus
persuaded, do so often, and for so long a time, absent themselves from this
ordinance, there must be some insuperable difficulties, and obstacles in their
way, which it is beyond their strength or power to remove; or else that they
would never, at the same time, both neglect their Duty, and forego their
Interest. And yet I doubt not but to make it appear, as plainly as any thing
can be, that there is nothing which we can, at any time, pretend as a
hinderance of our coming to the Holy Communion; but what either is really, or
ought to be, no hinderance at all; or else is such as it is in our power, by
that grace and assistance which God never denies to those who seek it, wholly
to remove and put out of the way.

To come to the matter then, and that I may proceed in an orderly method; I
shall reduce all the impediments, which men do ever allege for their not
coming unto the holy Communion, to these Five heads: that is to say, either,
First, that they are Sinners, and therefore dare not come; or Secondly, that
they are so continually engaged, and taken up with Business, that they have not
time to prepare themselves for it; or, Thirdly, that when they do endeavor to
prepare themselves, they find they cannot do it as it ought to be done; or,
Fourthly, that having formerly received the Communion, they find themselves
never the better for it, and therefore think it to no purpose to come again;
or, Lastly, that they are not well satisfied with the manner of Celebrating,
Administering, and Receiving this Ordinance in our Church, and therefore cannot
join with our Congregations in it: Nor is there, I think, any thing that can be
urged by way of Excuse for not coming to the Holy Communion, but what I shall
fairly examine, and I hope effectually confute, under some one or other of
these Particulars.

1. Then, some Men may say, that they are great Sinners, and therefore, upon
that account, dare not come to the Holy Communion, for fear least they should
be unworthy Receivers, and so, instead of obtaining any Benefit thereby, should
only Eat and Drink their own Damnation.

To this I answer, that if a Man lies under the guilt of any Sin, and does not
repent of it, and Heartily resolve to forsake and amend it; it is indeed a
Presumption and a Sin for such a Person, whilst he continues in that state, to
come to the Communion. But then I must tell him also, that not only his coming
to the Holy Communion, but even his very Prayers are an Abomination to God
Prove. 28. 9. For what is it else but a perfect Affront, and even a Mocking of
the Divine Majesty, for a man to make a show of Worship and Honor to him,
whilst, at the same time, he goes on in willful disobedience to his known
commands? Which I wish were well and seriously considered by those men, who
make no scruple of addressing themselves to God in Prayer, whilst, by reason
of their sins, of which they have not repented, they dare not approach unto his
Holy Table.

But whatever sins a Man has been Guilty of in times past, if he truly repents
of them, and Heartily forsakes them for the time to come; God has, so often and
so plainly, promised in this case to grant a full and free Pardon of them, that
they cannot justly be pretended as any obstacle, which should hinder us from
approaching to him in any of his Ordinances.

Since then it is in the Power of every Man (at least of every one who by a
long course of Wickedness has not provoked God wholly to withdraw his Grace
from him) by that Grace and Assistance, which God continually offers unto us,
to repent of his sins, and amend his Life: If such a Man looks upon his sins as
a Bar between him and the Holy Communion; yet it is plainly such a Bar as is in
his Power to remove, and therefore can never justly be pleaded as an excuse in
his behalf.

But some man perhaps may say, that though he should beg God's pardon for his
sins past, and sincerely resolve to forsake them; yet he fears, that, being
frail, he may some time or other be prevailed on, by his own weakness or the
strength of a Temptation, to break those resolutions which he has made, and
return again to his sins. And if this should ever be the case with him, he
doubts whether God would ever again admit him to Pardon and Reconciliation. And
therefore he thinks it safer to abstain from the Holy Communion, rather then to
run the hazard of being for ever excluded from the hopes of Heaven.

In answer to this I shall offer these three things.

First, Although a Man does plainly foresee, that hereafter he shall be most
likely sometimes to fall into some Sins of frailty and infirmity, (such as a
hasty Word or a sudden and unadvised Action) yet this ought not to hinder him
from coming to the Holy Communion: For as St. James tells us, that, In many
things we offend all, Ja. 3. 2. So is there not any man upon the face of the
Earth, who can be Absolutely sure that he shall always hereafter keep himself
free from all manner of sin whatsoever. On the contrary as there is no man but
what has his share, more or less, of human infirmities, so is it most
reasonable to conclude, that, in the course of his Life, these will sometimes
unavoidably surprise and betray him into some Sins. Against these our
Infirmities therefore we must continually strive: And we may reasonably hope,
that, by God's grace, and our own diligent and careful Endeavors, we may every
day more and more prevail against them: But if this were a good Reason for
abstaining from the Holy Communion, because a Man cannot, at once, get a full
and perfect Victory over them; I cannot see how, even the best of men, (who
cannot pretend to absolute perfection) could safely venture to partake of it:
And consequently, this would be the way wholly to lay aside, and abolish the
very Ordinance it self.

Secondly, but as for willful and deliberate Sins, or returning again unto an
habitual course of wickedness; there is no man but, by the grace of God, and
his own endeavors, may, if he pleases, for ever secure himself against it. For
however God may think it fit, for our greater humility and a farther trial of
us, to leave us still exposed to some of the common infirmities of our Nature;
yet, in respect of all habitual or deliberate Sins, we may assure our selves
that he is faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are
able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that we may (if
it be not our own fault) be able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10. 13. Nor will he fail to
draw nigh unto us, whilst we continue careful to draw nigh unto him. Jam. 4.
8. Let us then but steadfastly resolve, that we will be hearty and industrious,
in doing what lies in our own power; and we need not be discouraged by any such
fears as these, as long as we are secure that God will never let us want his
assistance.

But Thirdly, let us put the case as bad as may be; that, after a serious
Repentance, and most steadfast Resolutions of Amendment, ratified and confirmed
by the reception of the Holy Communion; a Man should be so far prevailed upon
by the temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, as to return again
to his former wickedness, in as high or a higher degree than before; Yet even
in this case we cannot conclude that such a person is forever excluded by God
from all possibility of pardon and reconciliation. There are indeed some
passages of Scripture, that do represent the condition of such an one, to be
very dreadful and dangerous: As Heb. 6. 4, 5. 6. and Chap. 10. 26. 27. 2. Pet.
2. 20. 21. But if, on the other side, we consider how often, and how highly,
the Mercy of God is set forth and magnified, even toward the greatest Sinners,
upon their true Repentance, that he has no pleasure in the Death of the Wicked,
but that the Wicked turn from his way and Live. Ezekiel. 33. 11. that he is
long-suffering to us ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to Repentance. 2. Pet. 3. 9. that though our Sins be as Scarlet, or
as Red as Crimson, yet God is most ready, upon our Repentance, to make them as
white as Wool or Snow. Isai. 1. 18. From these and many such passages of
Scripture I think we may well gather, that if the most Profligate and Relapsed
Sinner, does, even after a long time, come at last to such a sense of his own
Condition as thoroughly to turn from the Wickedness that he has committed, and
to Live the remainder of his days in the practice of Virtue and good Works,
doing that which is Lawful and right, and notwithstanding all his failures, yet
at last continues and Perseveres therein, that even such a Person as this shall
Save his Soul alive. Ezekiel. 18. 27. Although, at the same time, it stands with a
great deal of Reason, that the greater a Man's Sins have been, and the oftener
he has relapsed into them, the deeper his Sorrow, and the more laborious his
Repentance must be, in order to obtain his Pardon. But since a possibility of
Pardon there is, even in this case it self; we must not make the contrary fear
a pretense for keeping our selves back from any of the Ordinances of God, and
from a more immediate and intimate Communion with him.

And thus much for the first Impediment.

But Secondly some men pretend that they are so continually engaged, and taken
up with Business, that they have not time to Prepare themselves for the Holy
Communion, and therefore do not come to it.

To such men as these I answer, that this Business, which they pretend, is
either Lawful business or Unlawful: If it be Unlawful Business, and such as
cannot be followed with a good Conscience, it must be renounced and wholly laid
aside. And to plead this as a Reason for not coming to the Holy Communion, is
altogether to aggravate, instead of excusing, our neglect. But if the business
be it self Lawful, and followed in a Lawful way; if it neither contains, nor
engages us in, any thing, which is dishonest, or any way contrary to the Law of
God; such Business as this is so far from unqualifying a Man, that really it
rather renders him the more fit to Receive the Holy Communion. For as Idleness
is it self a Sin, and the Mother, or at least the Nurse, of all manner of
Wickedness; so Honest and Lawful business is a Duty which every man is obliged
to be diligent in; 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11. Ephesians. 4. 28. And certainly the performance
of a Man's duty will never render him the less Acceptable to God, or unfit to
draw near unto him in this or any other of his Ordinances.

But there is one particular sort of Business, in which some men think that
whilst they are engaged, they cannot be well prepared for the Holy Communion;
and that is a Law Suit. But to this the very same Answer must be given that is
already returned to the pretense of Business in general. If a man engages in a
Suit of Law, with a design to wrong, or defraud, another; If in the management
of it he has recourse to any base and Wicked arts or contrivances; If, not
contented fairly to try the Merit of the cause, he strives, by all ways, to
cast Personal Reflections upon his Adversary; or, in a word, if herein he
proceeds in such a way as is contrary either to Justice or Charity; such a Law
Suit as this, I confess, renders a man altogether unfit to approach unto God in
any way whatsoever; not only whilst he is engaged in it, but also until he has
made Restitution, and Satisfaction, to the best of his Power, for all the Wrong
which he has thereby done to his Neighbor. But then why will any Man who
pretends to Christianity, engage in such a matter as this; which is contrary to
common Honesty and a good Conscience? Or if Unadvisedly he has engaged himself,
before he knew what he did; Why does he not withdraw, and forbear to Prosecute
an unjust cause, or a just one in an unjust way? Why does he not make
Satisfaction to his Neighbor, if he has done him any Wrong? And how can he
think to plead that as an excuse for not coming to Gods Holy Table, which it is
in his Power to lay aside and to Remedy whenever he pleases?

But on the other side, if he designs no more but Fairly to make use of the Law
of the Land, and the Power of the Magistrate (who is ordained of God) either to
Defend, or Recover, what in Conscience he is verily persuaded is his just and
Lawful right; if in the mannagement of his Business he proceeds Honestly, and
without any Fraud or Juggle; And lastly if he bears no Malice, nor offers any
way to vent his Spleen against the Person of his Adversary, but is always free
and ready to do him any reasonable Office of Kindness or Friendship; In such a
Law suit as this there is nothing which is contrary to the Duty of a Christian,
nor consequently any thing which needs be, in the least, a Hinderance to his
coming to the Holy Communion.

But some perhaps will say that although there is nothing Sinful or Unlawful
either in the Business they are about, or in their way of managing or following
it; yet their time is so wholly taken up thereby, that they have not leisure
for the Performance of those solemn, and Particular Devotions, which are
necessary in order to their due Preparation. Nay such may be the condition of
some, that they have not, it may be, so much as a place of retirement for their
private Devotions (which may be the case of many Servants, and private
Soldiers, and such like) and how can they prepare themselves as they ought, or
how shall they venture to come if they are not so prepared.

To this I answer, that it is a mistake, which some well meaning Men have
entertained, that they think they must not venture to Receive the Holy
Communion except they say so many Prayers, and spend so many hours in
Retirement and Meditation, for some days immediately before the Celebration of
it. Where a man indeed is at his own Command, and Master of his own time; he is
much to be approved of and commended, if, upon such an Occasion as this, he
spends more hours, than at other times, in private Prayer Reading and
Meditation; that he may trim his Lamp before he goes to meet the Bridegroom;
and cleanse and Adorn his Wedding garment, before he comes to the Marriage
Feast. But where the Public service of a Man's Country, or the Private
necessities of himself or his Family, do engage him in so much Business as that
he has not such leisure for Retirement; If in the midst of his Affairs, he
ever takes care to have God in his thoughts, and often to lift up his Heart to
him by private Ejaculations; and when he has neither Chamber nor Closet, Garden
nor Field, to withdraw himself into, if he but seriously retires into his own
thoughts (which a Man may do in any place; upon his Bed at midnight, and even
in the midst of the greatest Crowd in the day time) and there enquires into his
Past Sins, and renews his Resolutions of Amendment; and if all this proceeds
from an honest and well meaning Heart, truly and affectionately disposed, to
the service of God, and the practice of Piety: no doubt but it shall be as well
accepted by God, as the more solemn Devotions of those, who have better
opportunity for such performances.

And thus much for the Second Impediment.

Thirdly, Some pretend that when they do endeavor to prepare themselves for
the Holy Communion, they find they cannot do it as it ought to be done, and
therefore they do not come: To the several Scruples of which sort of Men I
shall return brief and distinct Answers.

Some then do apprehend, that they are not fit to come, because they are
Ignorant, and not well grounded and instructed in the Principles of Religion.

To this I Answer, that, indeed, if a Man be Ignorant of those things which are
ordinarily necessary to the Salvation of every Christian; it is, evidently not
fit that he should come to the Holy Communion, until such time as he be better
Instructed. But such Instruction as this is so easy to be had (at least amongst
us) that it must be every Man's own fault if he wants it. For how easy is it
for every Man, who either reads the Scripture, or hears it read and Expounded
in our Congregations, sufficiently to learn all the great and necessary things
of Christian Religion; As for Example, that God Created all things; that Jesus
Christ is the Son of God, that he came into the World and took our Nature upon
him, to Suffer for our Redemption; that, after he had Suffered, he rose again
from the Dead, and Ascended into Heaven, where he remains for ever in the Glory
and Majesty of God, making Eternal Intercession for us; and that he shall come
again at the end of the World to Judge both the living and the dead; (who shall
at that time be raised again) and to sentence every man either to Everlasting
Happiness or Eternal Misery: That every Christian is to be admitted into the
Church by Baptism; that it is his Duty to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly,
in this present World; and that it is by the assistance of the Holy Ghost, who
is the giver of Spiritual life unto us, that we are alone enabled to perform
these Duties. And Lastly, that, in remembrance of the Death and Passion of our
Savior Jesus Christ, we are Commanded to Eat of that Bread, and Drink of that
Cup, which he has appointed; and which is the Communion of his Body and Blood,
that is to say, the means whereby we do Communicate in the benefits of the
Sacrifice which he offered, and in the merits of his Passion, which he
underwent in his Body, and by the sheding of his Blood for our sakes, as I have
already said. All this, I say, is so easy to be learnt and understood, that it
is a great shame for any one who Lives in a Christian Country to be Ignorant of
any part of it. And he who is thus far Instructed in his Religion; and
endeavors, according to his ability, to increase his knowledge of Divine
things; and hereunto adds the Honest and Sincere Practice of what he
understands; needs never fear that God will reject him for want of more
knowledge. For although we must, according to our Capacity, add to our Virtue;
Knowledge; yet it is not abundance of Knowledge, but much Honesty, Charity, and
true Piety, that renders us acceptable and Pleasing to God, see 1. Cor. 1. 19.
to the 7th verse of the 2 d. Chapter.

Again some do find their Faith to be weak and wavering; and perplexed with
doubts, and Scruples, in matters of Religion; and therefore are afraid to come.

To this I answer, that indeed the stronger and Firmer, a Man's Faith is, so
much the better; and we ought to endeavor, as much as in us lies, that our
Faith may ever be built upon sure and solid Principles, as well for our own
comfort and satisfaction, as that we may be the better able, upon occasion, to
give an Answer to every one who shall ask us a Reason of the hope that is in us
1. Pet. 3. 15. But when a Man has done what he can to strengthen and Confirm
his Faith, if it still continues Infirm and weak; yet if he be Honest and
Pious, in his Life and Practice; he is never the less acceptable to God for the
weakness of his Faith. For strength of Faith is not a thing in our own Power;
and therefore not so much a Duty in us, as a Reward which God is pleased to
bestow, in such a measure as he thinks fit, upon those who are sincere and
diligent in his Service: And he that is weak in the Faith, may yet be a very
good Christian, and fit to be Received into the Church of Christ; although he be
not qualified for doubtful Disputations To. 14. 1. As long as a Tree continues
to bring forth plenty of Fruit, we are sure it is alive, nor do we presently
cut it down and cast it into the Fire, because it is not altogether so well
fixed at the root, and therefore, it may be subject to be shaken by the
violence of the Wind: And the weakest Faith, if it produces abundance of good
Works, shall be accepted by God; when the strongest Faith, if barren and
unfruitful, shall be rejected and set at naught by him. See Jam. 2. 14. etc.
Whenever therefore an honest and well disposed Man finds his Faith to be any
way weak and wavering, let him take up the good Man's speech in the Gospel Lord
I believe help thou mine unbelief. Mar. 9. 24. And let him never fear but that
God who is infinitely gracious and merciful will accept of him.

Some, again are afraid that they do not love God as well as they ought; and
the reason of this fear is, because they do not find in themselves such warm
and affectionate motions of their mind toward him, as they apprehend to be
suitable to his infinite excellency and goodness: And for this Reason they dare
not venture to come.

To this I answer that, indeed, the more ardent and Affectionate our love to
God is, so much the better is that, as well as our Faith, for being strong and
unshaken. But as our Faith is to be judged of by its fruitfulness rather than
its Firmness (as I have just now shown) so the Holy Scripture teaches us That
the Love of God consists altogether in Keeping his Commandments 1. Joh. 5. 3.
Some people are Naturally of such a temper as more easily to be moved with a
Passionate affection toward those they Love then others are: And yet others,
who do not find such warm Motions within themselves, may be as ready and
willing as they, to do acts of Kindness where they profess a Friendship. Nor is
the Love of the later sort ever the less to be Valued, because it appears to be
Seated and fixed more in the Judgment and will, which are Subject to less
alteration, than the Affections: As the true Love of a Wife to her Husband, is
to be measured by her readiness to obey and please him in all things, much
rather then by the fondness which she expresses to his Person. If therefore a
Man finds himself steadfastly resolved, with full purpose of Heart, to cleave
unto God, and upon all Occasions to do what he Commands; ever preferring the
pleasing of him before any, or all, the Honors, Profits, or Pleasures, of this
World; he may assure himself that he is a real and true Lover of God; nor need
he absent himself from the Holy Communion, for want of that Ardency and
Liveliness of affection to God, which the very best of Men perhaps do oftener
wish for than enjoy, or find within themselves.

Others there are who Fear they are not in perfect Charity with all the World:
They have sometimes had to do with Men of Base and Unjust dealings, who have
broken their promises, and, it may be, their Oaths; and thereby betrayed them
who have depended on them; or have otherwise been Guilty of wicked and unworthy
Practices. And although, in Obedience to God's commands, they would not do any
thing by way of Revenge, even against these very Men; yet as often as they see
them, or do but think of them, they find their very Blood to rise against them,
and cannot possibly Suppress that Anger, and Indignation, which springs up in
their Minds against such persons; and therefore they Fear that their Charity is
Defective, and so dare not come to the Holy Communion.

To this I answer that our Charity toward Man, as well as our Love to God, is
to be Measured by the purposes and Resolutions of our will, and our Actions
consequent thereto; and not by the sudden Motions of our Passions and
Affections: Which in the Case above mentioned, may be scarcely so much in our
Power, as wholly to be Conquered and stifled by us. But whatever Passionate
resentments may force themselves into our minds, upon such occasions as these;
if we do not suffer them to break out into Bitter and Reproachful expressions,
or Malicious and Revengeful Actions: And if in Spite of our Anger we do firmly
resolve, in Obedience to God's command, to return Good, and not Evil, for Evil:
In a word if, as St. Paul directs us, when we are Angry, we take care and watch
over our selves that we Sin not, Ephesians. 4. 26. (which is certainly in our Power
through the Grace of God and our own Endeavors;) we need not fear that any
such inward motions of our Passions, as we cannot wholly suppress, but yet do
not suffer to break out into any Sinful words or Actions; shall ever be imputed
to us as a Breach of Charity.

Others again are afraid that they are not sorrowful enough for the Sins which
they have Committed, because they do not find their Grief so quick and pungent
as they think it ought to be; nor strong enough even so much as to bring a Tear
from their Eyes; and therefore they dare not venture to come.

To this I answer that true it is, indeed, that we can never grieve too much
for our Sins, whereby we have offended our good and gracious God: And if even
Rivers of tears could run down our Eyes, on this occasion, they would all be
but little enough. But yet, after all; our sorrow for sin, is not to be
measured by the Passionateness of it, which is soon over; or the tears it
produces, which are as soon dried up; but is altogether to be estimated by the
Amendment which it causes in our Lives. It is a never failing rule which St.
Paul gives us to know Godly Sorrow by, which is, that it works Repentance, 1
Cor. 7. 10. If then a Man has so true and serious a sense of his Sins, as that
it brings him to Repentance, that is to say, to a thorough and lasting
Reformation of his life; this Sorrow, though it never affects him in a Passionate
way, or draws any Tears at all from his Eyes; yet is certainly true godly
Sorrow, and such as shall be accepted by God; because it works Repentance,
which is the only End for which godly Sorrow is either required or valued.

Others yet again there are who complain, that when they would set themselves
to prepare for the Holy Communion, they in a little time grow so tired with the
length of those Devotions which are thereunto required, that they are not able
to accomplish what they proposed. And when they would even force themselves to
continue their Prayers and Meditations; they cannot, with all their care, keep
their Minds fixed, and attentive, upon what they are about; but their thoughts,
will unavoidably wander upon other things that are Idle and Impertinent. And
this they apprehend to be the Sin of drawing near to God with their Mouths, and
Honoring him with their Lips, when their Heart is far from him, Isai. 29. 13.
And therefore They dare not come unto his Holy Table.

To this I answer, that whenever we address our selves unto God in Prayer, we
ought certainly to use our utmost endeavor so to fix and compose our Minds, as
that our thoughts may not wander and go astray, if we can Possibly hinder them.

And he who pretends to Pray with his Lips, and does not withal strive that
his Heart and mind may be Devoutly affected, is undoubtedly Guilty of a great
slight put upon the Majesty of God; and may justly be taxed with some part of
that Sin which I but just now made Mention of. But when a Man has done the best
he can to fix his thoughts, and to keep his mind from wandering in Prayer; If
after all this, idle and Impertinent imaginations, do, against his will, crowd
themselves upon him; and like Flies, tho'continually beaten off, yet still
Return again and molest him; In this case he may well Assure himself that God
who is Gracious and Merciful, will never impute that to him as a Sin, which,
with all his endeavors, he cannot help: But it shall only be Reckoned upon the
score of his Infirmities, against which indeed he must ever strive; but it may
be shall never be able wholly to Conquer them as long as he Lives.

But there is one piece of advice which I think very proper to offer unto those
that are in these circumstances; which is, that they should comprise their
private devotions in as few words as conveniently they can; and then they will
neither be so apt to be tired, nor their thoughts to wander therein, as when
they are drawn out to a greater length. It is not much Speaking that makes our
Prayers the more acceptable to God, or the sooner heard by him, Mat. 6. 7. And
it is easy to comprehend all, that is ordinarily necessary to be said in
Prayer, in a few words. The Lord's Prayer is but short; and yet very full; and
certainly a form most acceptable to God. The Publicans God be merciful to me a
Sinner, Luke 18. 13. was as well received, coming from a sincere and honest
heart, as if he had made his confession in more words. And there is no manner
of doubt but that short and devout Ejaculations, frequently offered up to God,
by a truly pious Soul, shall effectually prevail at the throne of Grace, when
they come from such a Person, as by Reason of his natural frailty and
infirmity, is not so well able to make longer prayers.

Again some there are who are given to mirth and company keeping; and know not
how well to become serious, and reserved enough, to be fit for the Holy
Communion, and therefore they do not come.

I answer, that a Cheerful and Pleasant Disposition is so far from being
unlawful, or any way displeasing to God; that, on the contrary, where it is
rightly managed, and kept within due bounds, it is commonly very serviceable to
the promoting of peace and love in the world, which is one of the great ends of
Christian Religion. Let then a man but take strict care, that his mirth be not
sinful in it is self, nor instrumental to promote wickedness in the world: Let
him not droll upon Religion and piety, nor make a mock at Sin: Let no jest that
is bitter or sarcastical, or tends to the discredit or undervaluing of his
Neighbor, or which is any way profane, filthy, or obscene, come forth of his
Lips; nor let him show any manner of delight or satisfaction when such things
are vented by others: Let him abstain from all debauched Songs or Stories,
which seem to be contrived on purpose to corrupt the World: And let him never
promote, but always, as much as he can, discountenance all manner of Rioting,
Drunkness, Lewdness and Profaness: In a word, let him be sure that his mirth
betrays neither himself, nor others, to any thing which is contrary to piety,
charity or Sobriety; And as long as he keeps himself within such bounds as
these (which is plainly very possible to every Man who will heartily resolve
it) he needs not fear that a cheerful, and facetious behavior, will render him
ever the the worse a Christian, or the less fit to receive the Holy Communion.

And last of all (that I may conclude what I have to say under this Head) some
there are who, having met with many crosses and afflictions in the World, have
their minds so discomposed and their thoughts distracted with care, grief, or
trouble, that they cannot settle their minds, as they think they ought, for the
Holy Communion; and therefore they do not come to it.

To this I answer, that if any trouble or affliction provokes a Man to
Impatience, and prevails so far as to make him murmur and repine against the
providence of God; this, indeed, is a Sin, and must, and may, as all other
Sins, be repented of, as I have already said under the first Head of this
Discourse. But if there be no more in it then this, that the crosses and
vexations under which a Man lies, do so discompose his Mind, as that he can not
keep his thoughts from wandering when he is at his Devotion; to this case I
have but just now spoken, and need not repeat what I have said upon it.

And thus I have at last done with the Third impediment; upon which I have been
forced the longer to dwell, because of the many scruples, and objections, which
it affords.

I shall need to speak but a word or two, to the Fourth impediment, which some
Men pretend; namely that, having formerly received the Holy Communion, they
find themselves never the better for it; and therefore think it to no purpose
to come again.

To which I answer that if a Man reaps no Benefit by the reception of the Holy
Communion, the fault is altogether his own; because either he does not duly
prepare himself for it, or else does not receive it so often as he should. Some
bodies are so distempered, and stomachs vitiated, that they turn the best Food
into corrupt and evil Nourishment: And if a Man of the most healthy
Constitution should eat but one Meal in a Week, it would never keep him in
health and strength. But let the Stomach be cleansed, and the Body brought into
good order; and then let the Man eat his constant and daily meals; and he shall
find both his health and strength increase upon him. And the Case is just the
same with this Spiritual Food, which is exhibited to us in the Holy Sacrament.
Whilst the Soul is polluted and distempered with Sins unrepented of, it will
certainly rather do us hurt than good to receive it: And when Men partake of it
but once in a year or two, or, it may be, not so often; whatever strength or
refreshment their Souls begin to find thereby, is lost and forgot before it
comes again to be renewed by the same ordinance. But let a Man thoroughly
cleanse and purge his Soul from Sin by a sincere repentance; and with an honest
heart, and mind well prepared, let him come as often as he can to God's Holy
Table; and by the frequent and constant use of this Holy Sacrament, he need not
doubt but he shall find himself continually to grow more and more in Grace;
becoming still better and better enabled to resist all temptations, and daily
finding more and more quiet, and comfort, in his mind and conscience.

And thus much for the Fourth impediment.

I come now, in the Last place, of all to speak a word or two to those who are
not well Satisfied with the manner of celebrating the Holy Communion in our
Church, and therefore will not join with our congregations in it.

Two things there are, which they chiefly object against us in this case: One
that we make use of such Ceremonies as they cannot comply with; and in
particular, that the holy Communion is amongst us to be received in the posture
of Kneeling: And the other is that we administer it to a mixed congregation,
without a strict enquiry into the qualifications of all those who are admitted
to it.

To the first of these I answer that no man can say that either Kneeling at the
Holy Communion, or any other of the Rites or Ceremonies which we use at the
celebration of it, are Sinful or unlawful; because it does not appear that God
has any where Forbid them. The utmost then that they can pretend, is only that
they are improper, and inconvenient. Now, besides that others, who may be as
good Judges, are of a different opinion; I would desire to know whether such
things as are not Sinful, but only improper and inconvenient, can be a
sufficient warrant to any Man to separate himself from the Communion of an
Orthodox, Established Church? If not; then they have no just reason upon this
account to separate from us. But if they be, then I would farther demand, which
is the greatest inconveniency, to kneel at the Communion, or to make a Schism
in the Church? And of the two inconveniences whether we ought not always to
make choice of the least?

To the other objection I answer, that where any Man openly appears to be
wicked and scandalous in his Life and conversation; By the Discipline of our
Church, we are required to exclude such a Person from the Holy Communion,
until he gives good evidence of his repentance and reformation. But where
nothing outwardly appears against a Man, who lives in the profession of the
true Religion; what have we to do to enquire into the secrets of his Heart, for
which he is accountable only to God? And if our Savior Christ did not exclude
even Judas himself from the Holy Communion, because, at that time, he had done
nothing openly; although Christ well knew that he had made a private agreement
with the chief Priests to betray him; Why should we take upon us to be more
strict in this matter? Or who has given us any Authority so to be?

And thus have I Examined, and I hope sufficiently Answered, all the Pretenses
which Men do ordinarily make for neglecting the Holy Communion. I have but this
one thing to add, and I have done; namely, that as it is a great Sin to receive
the Holy Communion unworthily, that is to say without true Repentance; so
certainly is it no less a Sin, to slight and neglect that Ordinance, which
Christ himself has expressly appointed and commanded, in remembrance of that
Death and Passion which he under went for us. Let us therefore take the matter
into our serious consideration; and whilst we are so very cautious to avoid
the danger on the one hand; let us not be so foolish as to run our selves into
as great a hazard on the other. For as he who presumed to come to the Nuptial
Feast; without a Wedding Garment, was severely punished for his Presumption,
Matt. 22. 13. So they who neglected to come at all, and slighted the invitation
which was given them, were accounted as unworthy Persons, and received their
doom accordingly: v. 7. 8.

FINIS.

