A DEFENSE OF THE Peaceable and Friendly ADDRESS TO THE Non-Conformists:
AGAINST THE ANSWER Lately given to it.

In which the Obligation to Conform to the Constitutions of the Established
Church is Maintained and Vindicated. The Answerers Objections Solved; And his
Calumnies Refuted.

Thou shall not bear false Witness against thy Neighbor, Exodus 20. 16. DUBLIN:
Printed by J. B. and S. P. at the back of Dick's Coffee-House in Skinner-Row,
for John Foster, Bookseller, School.

ERRATA.
IN Epist. Ded. near the latter end, for disiagenious read disingenuous. p. 14.
l. 12. for preposition read proposition, l. 30. for Auther tell read Author
tells. p. 15. l. 16. for professions read profession. p. 22. l. 24. for
forbidded read forbidden. p. 24. l. 26. for other read others, l. 40. for these
read those. p. 31. l. 31. no comm^ after presses. p. 48. l. 1. for payly read
daily. p. 50. l. 1. for places read place. p. 56. l. 23. for ungrateful read
ungratefully, l. 38. for bulldle read bundle.

To His Grace Michael, Lord Archbishop of Ardmagh, Primate and Metropolitan of
all Ireland.
My Lord,
WHen I writ my Peaceable and Friendly Address to the Nonconformists, it was my
design to ^^press my self so clearly as to give no just occasion for mistake or
cavil; and so calmly as to give no Offense to any Man, except he would be
angry with me, either for being of a disserent opinion from him, or else for
fairly offering my Reasons why I am so.

I was therefore in hopes, that if any of our Nonconforming Brethren should
think fit to answer what I had written, he would lay aside all heat and
animosity, and all such Exceptions as are manifestly trifling and impertinent;
and only urge what might be of some real strength and moment in the
Controversy; and that with the same Mildness and Charity as I had endeavored
to do before him.

But instead hereof an Adversary has lately appeared against me, who, as he
seems to have but very little regard either to Charity, or even to Truth; so
has he taken very much pains to perplex and tangle, instead of clearing and
^^plaining the dispute that is between us. And as he has raked together
whatever dirt he could to throw at the Church, the Law, and Your Grace, as well
as at me (but still without any just ground for all his Calumnies) so has he,
by the ambiguity of his Expression^, the int^ic^cy of his way of Reasoning, and
his Mis^^egati^ is of the Holy Scripture, Raised such a mist of Sophistry in
thi^ Controversy, as may p^rhaps dazzle the eyes of an un^^ry Rea^er, or impose
upon some of his own Party, whose pr^judic^ will not permit them impartially to
consider things, but c^nnot, as I c^^ceive, have any manner of Influence upon
any sober and understanding Man; Except it may be to move him to have the worse
opinion of that Cause, which is maintained and uph^ld after this manner, and of
that Person, whoever he be, that thus violates the plain Laws of God, while he
pretends his Conscience to be so tender as that he cannot Conform to the
Constitutions of the Established Church.

To this disingenious Man I have here returned an Answer; And have done it with
as much mildness as I thought the Case would hear: Yet not forbearing sometimes
to express a just Indignation against such palpable prevarications as I have
Convicted him of. And whatever my performance is I humbly submit it to your
Graces censure: And with my most hearty Prayers for your Graces both Temporal
and Eternal Happyness, I remain,

Cork, October 1. School. Your Graces Most Obedient Chaplain and Most Obliged
Humble Servant Edward Sing.

A DEFENSE OF THE Peaceable and Friendly ADDRESS TO THE NON-Conformists:
AGAINST THE ANSWER Lately given to it.
THE whole Book, against a part of which I am to make my Defense, consists of
three parts: first, A Preface to the Protestant Reader. Secondly,
Animadve^sions on the Defense of the Answer, etc. And thirdly An Answer to my
Peaceable and Friendly Address to the Nonconformists. With the Second of these
I am not concerned; And therefore shall set my self to consider only the first
and third.

In the first Paragraph of the Preface I am represented as one of those who
judge it their Interest to misrepresent to the World them they are pleased to
call Nonconforming Brethren, as a ^^^^^ous and S^hismatical People; And as a
Man who am inclined to be wise in my own conc^^^ (a case more desperate than
that of a fool) which therefore the Author out of Compassion to me, and such as
I am, endeavors in this his Book to prevent. But since he does not offer any
instance of what I have said or done to justify this odious Character which he
ventures to insinuate of me; I think it is enough for me to say that they who
know me better than he can possibly do (amongst whom I believe I may reckon
some of my Nonconforming Neighbors) have I hope a different opinion of me. And
I entreat him to consider that as he ought not to suggest such things to the
prejudice of another without very good proof (for assirmanti incumbit probatio,
as he observes page 98.) so has our blessed Savior pronounced a very severe
Sentence against those who are so ready to give such sort o^ Language to their
Brother, Mat. 5 22. Which title I hope I shall never justly forfeit,
notwithstanding that he is pleased to let me know that he is not ^ond of that
Relation to me, page 96.

Having thus suggested a very i will Character of me, which I hope I do not
deserve; In the next place he gives a very good one of the Nonconformists,
which I never denied but they may, and I hope they do, very well deserve. But
however I think he should have taken a little better care to prevent some
uncharitable misapprehensions which may be apt to arise in Men's minds, through
the uncautiousness of some of those Expressions which he here makes use of. As,
for Example, when he tells us that the Nonconformists are not the idle and
consuming Caterpillars of the Nation; Does not this seem to look as if he would
insinuate, either that we were such our Selves, or else had so accounted and
misrepresented them? For if no one had ever thought either them or us to be
idle and consuming Caterpillars, to what end and purpose should he so
particularly inform the World that they are not such? And again (to omit other
instances) when he tells us that their fear toward God is not taught by the
Commandments of Men; would not some Men be apt to collect from hence that, in
his Judgment at least, our fear toward God is taught by the Commandments of
Men? For when Men do thus give Negative Characters of themselves, it is usually
construed as if they intended them for positive ones of those from whom they
seem thus to distinguish themselves. I am unwilling to believe that he
purposely designed these and some other no less groundless than odious
Insinuations against those of the Established Church, which seem to lie couched
in this Paragraph: But when we consider how prevalent passion and ill nature
are in some Men of all Persuasions; I think we cannot be too careful to avoid
such Expressions as may any way serve to administer false pretenses to them.

But supposing this account which he has given of the Nonconformists to be no
more than what in justice belongs to every sincere and well meaning Man among
them; Yet may not even such Men as these be mistaken in some things? And since
I have only endeavored fai^ly to lay their mistakes before them (without
designing in any other thing, in the least, to detract from them) and that in
such soft and gentle Language, that even this Author allows that there is a
studied Temper and Calmness in my words, page 96. I will appeal to the
Co^^cience of every sober and peaceable Christian whether what I have done does
any way deserve such severe and bitter Resentments as this Answer carries in it
against me.

In the third and last Paragraph of his Preface he briefly sets forth the
Modesty, as he supposes, o^ what the Nonconformists desire. In the former part
whereof I for my part do, and always did, fully agree with him. I would indeed,
i^ it lay in my power, persuade them all to Comform themselves to the Worship
and Discipline of the Established Church; because I am of opinion that they are
bound in Conscience so to do; for which I have briefly suggested my reasons in
my late Address to them. But since all that has been said and written in this
Controversy does not convince them, I think it is very sit that they should be
left to sland or fall to their own Master: And that a full and free Liberty
should be granted them to serve God according to those Principles which he
mentions, with a relie^ from all Penal Laws whatsoever; As long as they are
ready to give the Civil Government the same assurance that other Subjects do of
their Loyal and Peaceable demeanor: And this Author does me very much wrong in
endeavoring to make the World believe that I have said or suggested any thing
to the contrary; as we shall more fully see hereafter. But as to the other
Clause of their Petition; viz. That no new ones be forged to their prejudice;
He has left the meaning of it so doubtful, having set it down only in those
general terms; that it is not to be answered, until the sense of it be first
determined. It then his meaning be that no new penal Laws be forged against the
Non-conformists; they need not at this time make that their request; because
they know very well that the contrary is not so much as thought of, or in the
least proposed by any one. But if it be that no new Laws whatsoever be forged
or contrived any way to their prejudice (which seems to be the literal purport
of his words) no, not to cut them short in any thing, but that they should to
all intents and purposes enjoy all manner of Privileges, and be equally
quallified with those of the Legal Church for all places and employments
whatsoever (Episcopal Grandeur, Jurisdiction and Revenue for their Ministers,
being all that he has excepted). If this I say, be the thing they would have;
they may perhaps think their demands to be but just, because they apprehend
themselves to be in the right: But it seems strange that they should give this
out for so modest a Petition as this Author would insinuate; as if herein they
asked less than what in reason they might; And if this be their modest
Petition, what more with they or their successors in the next Generation
proceed to demand, if ever they should venture to assume a little Confidence.

Having thus done with the Preface, I pass by the second part of his Book, as I
said, and address my self to the third. And here the Doctor (as in contempt he
is pleased to call me, for I never took the degree or passed by that Title) in
the entrance is taxed of downright Disingenuity, as having, under the Title of
a Peaceable and Friendly Address to the Non-Conformists, published a Libel
against them; and under a studied Temper and calmness of Words, designed a
windy Storm and Tempest; with good Words and fair Speeches lying in wait to
deceive; Having war in his heart while his words are smoother than butter;
which though they were softer than Oil, yet are as drawn Swords, while by them he
is stirring up those who bear not the Sword in vain to employ it against his
Nonconforming Brethren, as he calls them, page 95. 96. But since he does not so
much as offer the least show of proof to make good this heavy Charge; I cannot
think that any sober man will have the worse opinion of me for all this that he
has alleged against me. God, who is the only searcher of hearts, knows that in
my heart there is no war against the Non-conformists; Except I must therefore
become their Enemy because I tell them the Truth: Nor have I the least design
to deceive them; But on the contrary, to make them truly sensible of what I am
persuaded is their Duty. There is not one railing or scurrilous Expression in
all my Address to them; and therefore why it should be called a Libel, I cannot
see: As for the Stormy wind and Tempest he talks of, I know not where it is,
except in his own imagination; and if my words be as drawn Swords, it can be
nothing but the Evidence of Truth, which touches his Conscience, that makes
them seem so to him; for I am sure there is no manner of sharpness in the Style
or Language. But whereas he accuses me of stirring up the Magistracy to employ
the Sword against them; I desire him to produce but one single passage or
expression in my Address, which does but look that way, and I promise him that
I will publicly retract it: But if he cannot do this (as it is most evident he
cannot) I leave it to his conscience whether he ought not to beg Gods pardon
for inventing so soul a slander against me, for which, I bless God, I never
gave the least occasion: For to persecute or punish men that are peaceable and
obedient to the Civil Government, on account of their mistakes in matters of
Religion or the Worship of God, is what I have never failed to declare against
whenever there was any occasion for it. And God is my witness, that I had not
the least thought or design tending that way when I writ or published my
address to the Nonconformists: Nor can I imagine how any man who impartially
considers what I have therein offered, can from thence pretend to lay the
contrary to my charge.

Having formerly had the honor of being a Servant to my Lord Primate, I
thought it might not be improper, when I put forth that small piece, to make a
public acknowledgment of that honor and respect which I bear to his Grace, in
a short Epistle which I prefixed to it; Wherein amongst other things, I judged
it sit to take notice what an Eminent example of Temper and Moderation his
Grace has always been, as to all men in general, so to the Dissenters in
particular: Of which I mention his mildness and lenity, even in those times
when it was most in his Power to use severity toward them, as a very evident
Demonstration. Now although one chief design of this Passage was to recommend a
mild and gentle Temper toward the Dissenters, as a thing to be approved of,
and imitated by all the World; yet this Author cannot let this pass without his
Animadversion; And therefore he denies the matter of Fact, and gives this as a
reason for it, namely, because the Non-conformists in the North never met with
greater severity, than when the Primate of all Ireland and Chancellor rode both
upon one Horse, as in a courtly manner he is pleased to phrase it. page 96.
Now, besides that, I have no great reason to believe any thing upon the
testimony of that man, who can lay such ill things to my charge, o^ which I
know my self to be altogether innocent, as I have but just now remarked;
suppose that what he says were true, yet still his inference plainly appears to
have no more Logic than good nature in it: For if the Dissenters were more
hardly used, whilst his Grace held both those honorable Stations of Lord
Primate and Lord Chancellor, than they had been at other times (which yet I
never heard before) yet will it not follow, but that he might bear a very mild
and gentle temper toward them: For it is very possible that severe methods may
be used by a Government, and yet neither the Lord Primate, nor the Lord
Chancellor, be the Promoter of them; But rather, it may be, mitigate that
rigor of Law, which others perhaps might be inclined to the utmost to put in
execution.

But he seems in a manner desirous page 97. to be put upon the proof of what he
has so odiously suggested against my Lord Primate. Now how well such a
spightful Task may agree with his disposition, I know not: But if there were
any necessity for saying such ill things as he has done, both of his Grace, and
of me; more then raising the passion, and embittering the temper of his Party;
I think he ought to have proved them, and that beyond exception, at the same
time when he published them to the World. For if he would not have these things
to be believed, why does he assert them? But if he would, what reason is there
why he should not prove them? It cannot be any tenderness to his Grace's
reputation, or mine; For he has endeavored, as much as he can, to wound them
by accusing us; and what else it should be, except the want of clear and
sufficient Evidence, I cannot imagine,

I have heard and read of grievous complaints, which both the Episcopal and
Nonconforming Parties have made of having been hardly dealt with, either by
other, as they have had the Power in their hands. Now although the former in this
Kingdom have ever had this to plead in their Justification, that they have been
warranted by the Law in what they did, which the latter cannot pretend to; yet
what good there can be in ripping up past Stories of this nature, I know not.
Methinks the business of every good Christian should rather be to heal, than
unnec^ss^rily to rub and fret such old sores; that peace and charity, at the
least, may be established between us, if we cannot all come to be of one
oppinion and judgment in all things. But this Author may do as his charity and
discretion shall prompt him: My Lord Primate is not afraid of him; only let him
say no more against him, than what he clearly proves to be true.

As a good effect of my Lord Primat's moderate and gentle behavior while he
was Bishop of Cork, I took notice that several Nonconforming Ministers were won
by him to receive Ordination at his Hands, and Conform to the Worship and
Discipline of our Church. Agai^^t which our Author suggests such things as have
neither Truth nor Charity in them. For he takes it for granted that those
Ministers renounced their former Ordination, which was by Presbyters; and
therefore censures this whole matter as the effect not of moderation; but
rather in his Grace o^ Prelatick Domination, and an uncharitable condemning of
the Foreign Reformed Churches, who want Episcopal Ordination: And, in the
Ministers that were so Ordained, of the love of the World more than any other
Arguments that were used to convince them, page 97. But sure if this
uncharitable Man did not take some extraordinary delight to put always the
worst Construction upon things, where any of the Established Church are
concerned, he would never take upon him at this rate to judge the Hearts and
Consciences of other M^n, which can only be known to Almighty God; And he would
have contented himself in saying that however my Lord Primate and those
Ministers who were so Ordained might possibly act according to the genuine
dictates of their own Persuasion; Yet that they were guilty of a great Error in
what they did; which would have been as much as was necessary to be ossered on
his part; without an uncharitable condemning of his Brethren, who ought not,
without evident reason, to be thus judged of insincerity; being to stand or
fall to their own Master.

But what if (after all) this matter of Fact, viz. that these Ministers
Renounced their former Ordination, which he so considently supposes; be a mere
Fable and Invention, without any other ground but some Men's Uncharitable
Imagination? I have heard indeed this Matter, of Renouncing their former
Ordination, sometimes urged in the behalf of Presbyterian Ministers, as
sufficient alone to justify their Refusal to be again Ordained by a Bishop: But
upon the best enquiry that I could make I could never find that this was any
more than a false Story Invented by some unpeaceable Men, in order to make a
breach between the Foreign Reformed Churches and ours. For as such a
Renu^^iation is not the least required by any Law or Canon of our Church, that
I know of; so could I never yet have any credible Information that any one of
our Bishops ever insisted upon any such thing: And the Reader may assure
himself that upon this occasion, which is now under consideration, nothing of
that nature was required or thought of.

But here perhaps I shall be told that our Author's meaning was no more than
this, that they who submitted a second time to be ordained to that Office which
they before had Exercised, did thereby, at least implicitly renounce, and
acknowledge the nullity of their former ordination. If this were all he
intended, methinks he should plainly have said so, without seeming to insinuate
a matter of ^^ct which is altogether false; However, this pretense it self is
easily answered. If a Man who has a good Title to an Estate, to obviate some
scruples, or prevent some differences which might perhaps arise, should ^ccept
of a new conveyance of what before was in his possession; does it fo^^ow from
hence that such a man thereby renounces and disowns his former right, and
acknowledges himself to have unjustly detained what really was not his own If a
Woman who has been lawfully married, should for the Satisfaction of her
Friends, who might have some doubts lest all things might not have been
performed as the Law required; consent to be married again to the same Husband,
would this be a charitable inference, from t^ence to conclude, that therefore
she acknowledged the nullity of her former m^riag^; and consequently owned her
self to be a Whore? Or if a man has for some time h^d ^ sufficient Commission
for any employment, and afterward, for the preventing of some occasional
controversy, which he for sees may be raised, should accept of a new one for
the same thing, with a proteslation that he did not thereby renounce or disown
that which he formerly had; and this protestation allowed of, would any honest
or even modest Man p^etend that this Man had yet renounced his former
Commission; (...) thereby owned all that he had done, thereby to be null and
void? But that this was and is in effect the case of those who, having been
formerly ordained by Presbyters, did or do submit themselves again to be
Episcopally ordained as our Law requires, I think does most evidently appear
from the Sense which my Lord Primate Bramhall had of the thing, and his
proceeding therein (with whom I presume it will easily be allowed that the
present Lord Primate, and all the rest of our Bishops did, and do still
concur) For, as we are told in his Life, when he required those, in his
Diocese, who before had been ordained by Presbyters, to receive Episcopal
Ordination; they pleaded for themselves that they were already Ministers of the
Gospel, and therefore needed not again to be Ordained such; which was the same
thing as a Protestation against Renouncing their former Ordination. Now this
their Plea or Protestation His Grace was so far from disallowing, or requiring
them who had made it to retract it; that on the contrary he rather expressed
his approbation of it on their part; In that he caused it to be inserted in the
Letters of Orders of one Worthy and Reverend Gentleman (And therefore I suppose
of all the rest who were in the like Circumstances) that he did not take upon
him to annihilate his former Ordination, nor to determine the validity or
invalidity of it; much less to condemn all the Ordinations of the foreign
Resormed Churches, whom he leaves to their proper Judge. But (observe) only to
supply what was formerly wanting, which the Canons of the English Church
required; and to provide for the Churches peace, that Schism might be avoided,
and satisfaction given to the Consciences of the faithful; that they might not
any way have a doubt of his Ordination, or reject his Pastoral performances as
if they were invalid. And I very well remember that one of those Ministers who
were reordained by the present Lord Primate, gave me once an account of what he
had done much to the same purpose, and in words to this effect, viz. That when
he first received Ordination from the Presbytery (in the time of the Troubles)
he did it because it was the best Authority that then he could get to empower
him to serve God and the Church in the Office of the Ministry. But when the
Ecclesiastical as well as Civil Laws were restored to their Force throughout
the Kingdom, and Bishops Established in every Diocese for the Government of the
Church; he submitted to be again Episcopally Ordained, not that he renounced
his former Ordination, or thought he had any reason to repent that, as the
times then were, he accepted of it: But because he looked upon it to be his
Duty (now he had it in his power) to become conformable to the Laws and Canons,
not of this Church only, but, as he apprehended, of the whole Ancient universal
Church throughout the World. And now upon a due Consideration of this whole
matter I will appeal to the Conscience even of any sober and Charitable
Nonconformist, whether either my Lord Primate, or those Ministers who are
reordained by him, do deserve so severe and bitter a Censure, as our Author has
ventured to pass upon them, upon the account of this Transaction.

Having thus animadverted upon my Title page and Epistle Dedicatory, he
proceeds to apply himself to the Address it self. In which the first thing that
I laid down, as the main Foundation of what I had to offer, was, that it is the
Duty of every Christian to promote the Peace and Unity of the Church. In answer
to which, because it was impossible, to make any exception to the principle it
self; he tells me page 97. That though it has ever been the honor of peace to
be well spoken of by all men, yet is it the unhappiness of many men to be under
the Dominion of such Lusts as disenable them to pursue it. Now if it was his
design to include me amongst those many men he speaks of (as ev^^y man I think
will be apt to construe this insinuation) I think, in common Justice, he ought
to have brought some solid proof to have made it good: But if it was not his
intent to reckon me in this number, methinks, in Charity, he ought to have said
so, and not to have given such an occasion to the world of fastening an unjust
aspersion upon me. But however he might imagine hereby to bring my Person under
an odium; yet what this has to do with the merit of the Cause which is in
Dispute, I know not; and therefore have no farther to say to it.

In the next place, in my Address I take it for granted, as a thing which is
too apparent; that there is a separation between the Non-Conformists and us;
and thereby a Schism made in our National Church. For the latter of which
assertions our Author taxes me with Confidence, and tells me that the
Consequence is not good, when I would infer it from the former; Because, says
he, there may be a separation without Schism (as there is between all the
Parochial Churches, which are locally separate) And Schisms where there is no
separation of Churches, 1 Cor. 3. 1. page 98. But instead of justifying this
consequence, which he thus finds fault with, I shall only tell him that I never
designed in those words to advance any Consequence at all. That all Separation
does not necessarily imply Schism, I readily grant: but yet that some
Separations are certainly Schismatical, in one or other of the separating
Parties, is what I presume no man in his Wits will deny. Now that there is such
a Separation between the Non-Conformists and the Established Church as does
imply a Schism, was, most apparently, all that there I intended to say; Nor did
I think it necessary by any deduction of Consequences to prove that which I
thought so evident as not to be denied or doubted of.

But our Author, it seems, will not allow that there is a Schisin between them
and us; because the Presbyterians in the North never joined with the
Established Church in those things in which we now differ; to wit, Church
Government, Liturgy and Ceremonies; and all Division pre-supposeth a prior
Union. To which I Answer, that wherever there is an Obligation to the
maintaining of Union and Communion; if that Union and Communion be not
accordingly maintained, but denied and renounced; from thence results what I
mean by a Schism. Which word I understand to signify not only the Action of
Dividing or separating what once was joined and united; but also the State of
Separation between such Parties as stand obliged to Religious Union, although
they never were actually united. Now that all Christians are by the Law of God
obliged, as far as lawfully they can, to maintain Union and Communion one with
another, is what I never yet heard denied by any one: And since this Union and
Communion is not maintained between the Non-Conformists and us, it will follow
that there is a Schism between us; and that either we are guilty of a Sin, in
giving them a just ground of keeping themselves separate from us; or they, in
keeping themselves so separate without any just ground for it. But if, after
all, our Author will not allow the word Sch^sm to be a term proper enough to
denote such a State of Separation; I am contented that he should put what other
word he pleases in the room of it, as long as the thing intended is
sufficiently plain, viz. That such a State of Separation necessarily implies a
Sin in one or other of the Parties.

For the clearer discovering at whose door the Sin of this Schism which is
between us lies, I have in my Address proposed several things to be considered:
Against the manner of which, first, our Author takes this exception, that I
rather Catechize the Non-Conformists by asking them Questions, than convince
them by Reasons, page 97. To which I Answer, that there is not any Question put
in my whole Address, but what, I think, as plainly carries in it the force of
an assertion, as if I had set it down, not in an interrogation, but a
preposition. Nor have I there delivered or suggested any assertion but what I
have given or sufficiently intimated my reason for, except the thing were so
evident as to need no proof. But yet, to take away all pretense of Cavil, I
shall in this Defense reduce my Questions into such Propositions as are
naturally employed in them; and fairly examine which are strongest, my Reasons
for them, or his against them.

The first Proposition then which, on this occasion, I have advanced (though
under the form of a Question) is, that in the Communion of our Church there is
nothing wanting which is necessary to the Salvation of a Christian: And as I
have constantly served my Cure in my own Person. (Notwitstanding our Authors
uncharitable Insinuation to the contrary, page 98.) So have I in my Address
suggested such proof of this assertion, as not to stand in need of him for my
Curate or Delegate to prove it for me, viz. Because our Church Teaches all the
Fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith, requires all Men to lead Virtuous
and Holy Lives, and omits no part of Christ's Institution, either in Baptism or
the Lord's Supper; which things are all that are required, as of necessity, to
any Man's Salvation. Nor did I think it proper to offer any further Confirmation
of these things, besides the notoriety of them; because I was not Disputing
with Jews or Pagans; to whom our Auther tell us Christ and his Apostles proved
their Doctrines; But with the Non-Conformists, who do not deny what I have
hitherto asserted (as the others did the Doctrines of the Gospel) but give
other Reasons altogether for their separation from us: And therefore why our
Author would have me stand to prove these Points, before they are gainsaid, I
know not; except it may be to divert the Reader from attending unto that which
is the knot and difficulty of the controversy; if any real difficulty at all
there be in so very plain and evident a Case.

Where an assertion is laid down in any Controversy, there can be but two ways
of returning an Answer to it, viz. either first, to deny the Truth of it; or
secondly, to show that though it may be true, yet is it impertinent to the
purpose for which it is alleged. The former of these, our Author, I suppose,
knows he cannot do in relation to the abovementioned Proposition. (Although,
according to his way, he seems to suggest something like it, by urging me to
undertake the proof of it. For the only reason why a man should produce his
Arguments to prove a thing, is because it may be denied or doubted of.) But in
order to the latter, without distinguishing between the case of our Church, and
that of Rome, he produces, page 99. a passage of the Learned Chillingworth,
which though levelled by its Author only against the Roman Church, yet, he sets
down as equally applicable against that Church also of which Mr. Chillingworth
himself was a Member; And that without taking any care to caution his own Party
against an unjust and false Opinion, that some of them have seemed to be
inclined to; ^s if the Church of Rome and the Established Church were in a
manner equally culpable. The substance of what he recites out of Mr.
Chillinwarth, is comprised in the first words of the Quotation it self; All,
says he, that we forsake in you is the Belief, Profession and Practice of your
Errors, etc. Let but these Errors be taken away, and in all the rest we shall
agree very well. In Answer whereunto, I grant with that Learned man, in what
follows, That to believe an Error, knowing it to be an Error, is absolutely
impossible; and for a man to profess what he does not believe, is Hypocritical
and Sinful; and therefore ever to be avoided. But although this bears close upon
the Church of Rome, which requires the Belief and Profession of diverse things,
which from plain Scripture and Reason we abundantly prove to be false; yet is
it altogether wide from our case, except our Author had plainly told us (as we
do the Papists) what those Errors or false Doctrines are, the Belief or
Profession of which we require among the Conditions of our Communion: Which
till he undertakes to do, he must, I think, acknowledge that what Mr.
Chillingworth says, as to the Believing and Professing of Errors, is no way to
his present purpose, except it be to amuse and keep up the prejudice of his own
Party against us.

But that Learned man excepts against Practicing, as well as against Believing
or Professing of Errors. Now if by Practicing an Error be meant the doing any
thing which is contrary to God's Law; such as praying to Saints, or worshipping
the Host or Images, to which, and such like things, undoubtedly he had an Eye
In that Expression; I grant that it is a cause abundantly sufficient to refuse
the Communion of any Church, if she requires any such Practice as a Condition
of it: But then it must be shown that some such Practice is so required by our
Church, or else this Clause will be as little to the purpose as the former. But
if by Practicing an Error be meant the doing of a thing which is not Sinful,
but yet is apprehended to be improper o^ inconvenient; and therefore may be
accounted an Error in Point, not o^ lawfulness, but of prudence, decency or the
like; If any Church requires the practice only of such an Error as this;
however it may be proper to desire, and with a modest earnestness to press for
an alteration in such things for the better, yet I cannot see how upon this
ground it can be justified to renounce or refuse the Communion of such a
Church: But of this, anon.

As to Mr. Chillingworth's Proposal to the Papists, that he was ready to join
with them in any such Form of Worshipping God, as should be wholly taken out of
the Scriptures. If the same be made to us; I Answer, that if by a Form of
Worship wholly taken out of the Scriptures be meant such an one, every of whose
Words and Expressions are immediately and in terms contained in the Scriptures;
the thing is hardly practicable: For as it is possible that the very Words and
Phrases of Scripture may be so joined and put together, as to wrest and pervert
the sense and meaning thereof, which might easily occasion new Disputes: So I
believe will it be very difficult (nor certainly is it necessary) for any
Church so to contrive all her Forms of Worship, as to use no word or action in
any of them: but what is expressly contained in or prescribed by the Scripture.
But if such a Form be meant, which, for substance, is wholly taken from the
Scripture, and has nothing, either in its concomitant actions or expressions,
which is contrary to the Scripture; which I believe was all that Learned man
intended; I accept the proposal; and offer our Liturgy as such a Form of
worship (as undoubtedly Mr. Chillingworth judged it to be, or else he would not
have conformed to it). And if then our Author cannot show that there is
something therein contained, and thereby required, which is contrary to the
holy Scriptures; he must, I think, by his own Confession, be judged guilty of
Schism, for refusing to join with us in the use of it.

The second proposition which in my Address I offer (and that also couched
under a Question) is that nothing which is Sinful is required by us from those
who communicate with us. For which I there offer this as my reason, namely,
because none of our constitutions are forbidden by the Law of God, and nothing
can be a Sin but what is so forbidden. To this he Answers, page 100. that there
are such things required by our Church as to them are sinful; and some of our
constitutions which to them do appear to be contrary to God's Law. For the
proof of which he lays down, p. 101 a distinction, rational indeed in it self,
but here, I think not rightly applied, namely that things are forbidden either
expressly, or by just and necessary consequence. That some of our constitutions
then, though not expressly, are yet by good consequence forbidden, he endeavors
to prove, because being not commanded by God, they are yet required by men, as
parts or means of the Worship of God. Which as he pretends is contrary to the
Word of God; and, for the proof of what he says, he produces some Texts of
Scripture, and then confirms all by the Authority of my Lord Bishop of Derry,
in his late Discourse of Humane Inventions, etc.

In that Paragraph of my Address, now under consideration, I had called those
Rites and Ceremonies, which by Authority are appointed to be used, by the name
of Circumstances of God's Worship; and as such asserted the lawfulness of them.
Now whereas he would prove the unlawfulness of these things as being required,
not as Circumstances, but as parts and means of the Worship of God: He ought
very clearly and distinctly to have told us what he meant by a Circumstance,
what by a Part, and what by the Means of Worship; and how these are
distinguished one from another: For as long as these terms, in which he seems
to place the knot of the Controversy, remain obscure, it is not possible to
clear the Dispute, or rightly to apply the proofs which he brings: And yet
without any explication o^ these terms, or showing wherein the things signified
by them do differ one from another, he proceeds to prove, page 102, that our
Rites and Ceremonies are with us both Parts and Means of God's Worship. But
that we may not be like men who are scuffling in the dark, and not distinctly
knowing what it is we contend about; I must, as I proceed, endeavor to do what
he has thought fit to leave undone; I mean to state the signification of these
words, that thereby we may know the difference of the things one from another.

(It being then premised, what all, I suppose, will grant, that the true
Worship of God consists in those things, and in those only, which he himself
has commanded) That (and nothing else but that) is properly to be called a Part
of any thing, without which the thing would be in it self imperfect and
defective. Thus every Limb of a Man is a Part of him, because the want of any
of them would be a defect in the Man himself: But his garment, though a decent
ornament, is yet no part of him, because if he were stripped stark naked, or
clothed in an undecent garb, though this might perhaps expose him to the scorn
of some men; yet would he in himself be never the less a perfect and complete
man upon that account. Thus also Prayer, Thanksgiving, Consession, the
Susception of Baptism, and the receiving the Lord's Supper, are each of them
Parts of God's Worship; because he who omits any one of them, in its proper
season, thereby renders his Worship, in it self, defective and imperfect. But
the outward Modes or Ceremonies, which may be annexed to this Worship or any
part of it, are not themselves any part of the Worship (although they may be a
decent ornament of it) because the absence of them (although it might perhaps, in
some men's eyes, render the Worship mean and contemptible, yet) would not make
it, in it self, to be ever the less complete, perfect, or acceptable to
Almighty God. If then our Author can prove, that it is the Judgment of our
Church that the laying aside of any of her Ceremonies would render the Worship
of God, in it self, imperfect or defective then, and not till then, he may
truly lay it to her charge that she requires these Ceremonies as a part of
God's Worship.

But the Liturgy, says he, is a part of the Worship of God, and these
Ceremonies are a part of the Liturgy, therefore, etc. I answer, that the
substance and purport of our Liturgy, viz. Consession, Prayer, Thanksgiving,
etc. are indeed parts of the Worship of God; for without any one of them the
Worship would be imperfect: But the particular words, in which these Devotions
are there expressed, and the concomitant Ceremonies which are prescribed to be
used, are not, nor ever were, by our Church esteemed as parts of Worship; but
only as the Modes, Regulations and Method of it, alterable in themselves by
humane authority, and variable in diverse particular Churches, without making
thereby any alteration or variation in the substance of the Worship. Although
therefore, our Author's proofs, as he has managed them, are but very lame; yet
because the thing is true, I freel^ grant, that to require any thing as a part
of God's Worship, which he himself has not commanded, is utterly unlawful; But
then it is most evident from what I have said, that our Liturgy or Ceremonies
are no way concerned herein.

Well, but if they are not to be esteemed as parts, yet he will prove that they
are required as means of the Worship of God, which is altogether as bad. Let us
therefore enquire into the sense and signification of this word also.

To explain this word means, he adds, p. 102, the word ways to it; and tells us
that our Liturgy and Ceremonies are reputed ways and means of the Worship of
God: Now the way of doing a thing always denotes, not directly the action it
self, but the method and manner of performing it; one and the same action for
substance, being often capable of being performed after diverse ways or manners.
I agree with him therefore that our Liturgy and Ceremonies are to us, as the
Directory to him, the way, means or method of our public Worship of God: But
yet the premises out of which he infers this conclusion, are so crude and
confused, that they are by no means to be admitted into discourse, much less
granted as truth, until their meaning be distinctly cleared, viz. because, says
he, no solemn public Worship can be performed, nor Sacraments administered
without them: By which if he means that our Church has such an opinion of her
Liturgy and Ceremonies, as to think it impossible, in it self, rightly to
Worship God or administer the Sacraments without them; it is notoriously false:
But if he means no more than this, namely, that we judge that every man, who is
subject to the authority of the law of the Land, is bound in Conscience always
to perform the public Worship of God, and Celebration of the Sacraments,
according to that manner prescribed in our Liturgy; this obligation arising not
from the nature of the particular Forms and Ceremonies there enjoined, nor from
any particular command of God appointing them; but only from the general Law of
God, which requires Obedience to be paid to our lawful Superiors, and from the
Laws of the Land consequent thereto; and therefore lasting no longer than such
Laws of the Land shall remain in force: If this, I say, be all he means, we
grant it, and are ready to justify our Judgment in this matter.

But here he presses me with a great absurdity as he thinks; If all Ministers,
says he, should refuse to say Common Prayer or administer the Sacraments, with
all these Ceremonies, then, according to the Act of Uniformity, it would be
unlawful to Woship God publicly in this Kingdom. Now if he would infer from
hence, that therefore our Liturgy ought to be abolished; by the same reason it
will follow, that no Law whatsoever must any where be made for the Regulating
the Worship of God, or administration o^ the Sa^raments. For if ^ll Ministers
should refuse to celebrate the public Worship, and administer the Sacraments
according to that Law; then, according to that Law, it would be unlawful to
Worship God publicly in that Kingdom or Commonwealth where any such Law
should be Enacted. A consequence fit only for such wild Sectaries as would
reject all rules of order and decency, and follow their own extravagant fancies
only in maettrs of Religion and the Worship of God.

But let us for once put this mad supposition with him that all Ministers
should refuse to officiate according to our Liturgy: What would be the
consequence? or what must be done in such a case? I answer if such a refusal
should proceed from wilfulness, it would be a great sin in the Ministers that
refused; but if from want of information or due apprehension, it would only be
a sin of Ignorance, and therefore more easily pardonable before God. But in
such an extraordinary case, the necessity of things would probably put the
Government upon some speedy Resolution, either of providing other Ministers, if
all those lately in office should, on a sudden, lose their Wits; or else of
altering their Ecclesiastical Laws, in condescension to the infirmity of their
Ministers, rather than the public Worship of God and administration of the
Sacraments should cease among them.

But because I call the Ceremonies prescribed by our Liturgy circumstances in
the worship of God, which he will not allow that they are; it will not be amiss
to explain what is meant by the word circumstance. Whatsoever then is a means
or concomitant of any action, but no part of the action it self; that I call
(and so I thing do all People) a circumstance of it. Thus for example: To
travel from Dubl^n to Drog^eda is an action; but to go either on foot, or on
horseback, or in a coach, to wear a cloak and b^^^^, (...) wear them, and the
like, are only circumstances of this Journey: for a (...) is said never the
more or the less to travel, whatever convenienci^s he (...) have or want for
the performance of his Journey. Thus also to Worship God is an action; but to
perform this Service either by a Printed Form of Words, or by no set Form at
all, to wear a black or a white garment, to kneel or to stand at the time of
doing it, and such like things, are no more but circumstances of this Worship;
because a man may truly and acceptably Worship God in any of these ways, if the
substance of his Worship be right, and his heart be rightly disposed (although,
for decency sake, it is very sit that in a Congregation there should be some
settled Uniformity in these things), and an aggregate of these circumstances
taken together, is what is usually called the way of doing a thing. Thus if it
be asked which way (I do not mean by what road, but in what manner) did such a
man travel to Drogheda? It may properly be answered, he went on foot, with a
coat to keep him from the rain and cold, and carried his provision with him; or
he went on horseback, or in a coach, and had such and such conveniences for
his Journey. Thus also if we were inquiring after the Worship of any Church or
Party whatsoever, the natural order of our Questions would be this: First to
ask whom they Worshipped? viz. whether the true God or a false God, or any
other Person besides God: And if it appeared that they Worshipped the true God,
then the second thing to be asked would be wherein does that Worship which they
pay to God consist? Do they confess their Sins, and Pray to him, and give him
Thanks? Are they Baptized, and do they celebrate the Lord's Supper according to
God's own command? And if we should find that in all this they followed the
rule of God's word; then in the third place this Question would fall in, viz.
After what way and manner, or by what means, or in what method, do they pay and
perform this Worship? What time, what place, what words, what gestures, etc. do
they appoint or use in the several parts of it.

Thus far then our Author and I are agreed, viz. First, That to prescribe any
thing as a part of God's Worship which he himself has not commanded, is a sin.
But then I have shown that our Forms and Ceremonies are not by us made such
parts of the Worship of God. Secondly, I agree with him, that our Liturgy and
Ceremonies are the way, means or method of performing our public Devotions:
But then I have also shown that this signifies no more but that these things,
which are thus by humane Law prescribed, are the circumstances which do
accompany and regulate the manner of our Worship. Now if our Author's proofs do
evince, that to require any thing, which God himself has not commanded, as a
way or means of Worship, renders the thing it self unlawful, and in effect
forbiden, without any other prohibition of it; then I must confess he has not
only sufficiently answered my Address to the Non-Conformists, but also
over-turned all the Liturgies and Rituals, not of our Church only, but of all
other Churches also: Nay, I do not well see how the Directory it self will
escape the stroke of so strict a Censure; except he were able to show, that
every Punctilio which is there prescribed, is no more than what is (I must not
say allowed and left at liberty but) positively commanded by God.

And as those Arguments, upon the strength of which we renounce the Communion
of any Church, and refuse Obedience to the Law of the Land, ought to be both
very clear and very solid; so, that I may not abate the force of those which
our Author brings, I shall set them down in his own words, without omitting a
syllable.

First then, says he p. 101. whatever [part or] means of divine Worship is not
commanded, is forbidden, is evident from that reason given Lev. 10. 1. why God
destroyed Nadab and Abihu, for offering strange fire; which is this: For I
commanded them not. Now (besides that he perverts the Text by adding the word
for to make the words run in an argumentative Style, which are only part of an
Historical Narration; and by putting the word I instead of he, as if those
words were immediately spoken by God himself, whereas they are only a part of
that Relation which Moses makes of the matter of fact). The Case of Nadab and
Abihu was plainly this: God had commanded that when Incense was to be burnt
before him, it should be done with Fire taken from off the Altar, as appears
from Lev. 16. 12. But these men, neglecting the Command of God, put other
Strange Fire into their Censers; for which they were destroyed by Fire from the
Lord. Lev. 10. 1, 2. All then that can be inferred from hence, is, that
whosoever shall omit to do what God Commands, as Nadab and Abihu did, to take
Fire from the Altar; and instead thereof, shall do another thing which God has
not commanded, as they did in putting strange Fire in their Censers; is guilty
of a sin: But where nothing is omitted which God has commanded, it does not
follow from hence, that the doing of any thing which is uncommanded, in the
Worship of God, is therefore unlawful, because it is not commanded. But if he
shall tell me that the Command for taking fire from the Altar was not given,
for ought that appears, till after the death of Nadab and Abihu; I shall desire
him to let me know, if there were no certain sort of Fire at that time ordained
and appointed for the burning of Incense; how could that Fire which these men
offered be termed Strange Fire? For the word Strange necessarily implys that
there was some other Fire which was not Strange, which they ought to have
offered, that is to say, some certain sort of Fire particularly appointed for
this purpose.

His next Argument is this. The reason, says he, of Gods rejecting what was
offered, Is. 1. 12. is given; Who has required these things at your hands. To
which I answer, that the things there spoken of, and which God at that time
rejected, were such as he had positively commanded and required from the people
of Israel; namely, Sacrifices, burnt-Offerings, Incense, etc. as every man that
reads the precedent and following Verses may plainly see. The reason then why
God rejected them could not be, as our Author would insinuate, because he had
not required them (for it is plain that he had required them in the Mosaic
Law). But because the People rested in these outward performances; and were not
truly sanctified in their hearts, nor holy in their lives, which was what he
chiefly, and so in a manner only, required from them, as in comparison thereof
almost not to regard those outward Performances, although of his own appointment.
That this is the plain and only purport of that place, appears so evidently
from the Context and whole design of that Chapter, that it is not to be
imagined how any man could mistake it, except he did it wilfully: And all that
can be inferred from this whole Passage, is, that outward Performances, although
of God's own Appointment; are yet of no esteem with him, if they are not
accompanied with true Holiness of Mind and Actions. Which how it can be applied
to our present Controversy, I am at a loss to find.

His next Argument is this, The cause of God's Judgments on false Prophets Jer.
14, 14, 15. is, I sent them not, neither have I commanded them. Now observe the
Consequence: God Almighty denounces a heavy Judgment upon those pretended
Prophets, who, being not sent nor commanded by him, did yet presume, not only
to tell Lies, but also to Prophesy them in his Name, which was a most
abominable Sin; and from hence our Author would infer that therefore whatsoever
is not commanded in the Worship of God, is forbidded to be used, as a way or
means of it. But how this Inference, or any thing like it, can be justified, I
know not.

His last Argument is this; Fear or Worship of God taught by the Commandments
of Men is not only vain, Matthew. 15. 9. but brings Plagues on them who abuse
their wisdom that way. Is. 29. 14. Where though he very crudely and indistinctly
represents the meaning of the former of these two Texts which he alleges; yet I
freely grant the truth of what he asserts, if the thing be rightly understood.
But where the fear of God proceeds from an awful sense of his Greatness and
Majesty; and the Worship of God is such as he himself has taught and
prescribed; consisting in Confession, Prayer, Thanksgiving, and the Celebration
of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, without omitting any thing which is of divine
institution; And Men are taught and urged thus to Fear and Worship God, because
God himself has commanded them so to do; And the Law of the Land (which may be
termed the Commandment of Alan) interposes no farther, but only to enforce, and
not to alter, the Law of God, and to settle and regulate the outward
Circumstances of this Worship; which the Law of God has not determined; I
cannot see what from either of these Texts can with any color be objected
against such a constitution of things as this; except it be where prejudice,
and not sober and impartial reason, is the Interpreter of them.

To strengthen these his proofs from Scripture (which of themselves I am sure
are very weak) our Author adds, that we are lately taught what he has asserted,
to be the Doctrine of the Established Church, by the Bishop of Derry, in his
Vanity of Humane Inventions. And after having recited some of His Lordship's
words out of the Introduction of the Book mentioned; he concludes thus: Now, if
Cross, Ring, etc. be not expr^sly contained in Scripture, or warranted by the
Examples of holy Men therein, they must, according to the Bishop of Derry's
reasoning, be displeasing to God, and so forbidden by him. p. 101, 102. But
here sure our Author cannot but know that he is guilty, in a most palpable
manner of a double piece of disingenuity. For neither does my Lord Bishop of
Derry there teach us that what is contained in those words is the Doctrine of
the established Church, but only offers his own judgment of those things, as
being highly reasonable; nor does our Author faithfully recite what his
Lordship has said; but omits part of the last Sentence, without which it is not
possible fully to understand the meaning and design of that Paragraph. His
Lordships Conclusion is this, Since God has vouchsas^d us a certain Direction,
or his Worship in the holy Scriptures; it is to be supposed that all ways of
Worship are displeasing to him that are not ^^pres^ly contained, or warranted
by Examples of holy Men mentioned therein; OR MAY NOT BE DEDUCED BY PLAIN
CONSEQUENCE, OR BY PARTTY OF REASON FROM THEM (which last words our Author has
very unfairly left out) so that although our Ceremonies (...) ^xp^^sly contained
in the Scriptures, or warranted, in particular, by the ^xamp^^^ of ^oly Men
therein; Yet still, according to my Lord Bishop of (...), (in that very
Paragraph which our Author quotes) they may (...) be (...) to God, if they can
be deduced by plain Cons^^^^rce, or by (...) of (...). And that all our Forms
and Ceremonies are justified by plain (...), or an evident congruity and parity
of Reason. either from the Rules or ^^amples of holy Men in Scripture, is what
his Lordship has partly proved in the Seq^^l of that Book, and may very
e^^ectually be made good touching those other things of which he has not there
had ^ccasion to speak.

From what our Author has hitherto been discoursi^^, he p. 1^2. ins^rs an
Answer to this Question which I had put, viz. Can a^y thing be called a Sin
which God has not sorbid? And he tells me, It may (...), ^a^s he, uncommanded
Worship is Sin. Now see how an ill cause runs a man into Perplexities and
Contradictions: He had just before been proving that uncommanded Worship is
^^rbidden; and, yet, almost in the same breath he gives it as an Instance of a
thing that is a Sin, although it be not (...). But although I have already granted
that the use of any uncommanded thing, (...) part of God's Worship, is unlawful
(and the only reason why it is so, is, because it is forbidden) yet neither
does it follow from hence, nor has our Author proved that uncommanded
Circumstances of Worship are sinful: And upon a Supposition that they were
sinful; yet upon what other account they could be so besides their being
forbidden, I should be very glad to learn from him.

But he gives another Instance. To Baptize, says he, without the Sign of the
Cross, Communicate without Kneeling, etc. are not forbidden of God, and yet the
Established Church account these Sins. To which the Answer is very easy, viz.
That the Established Church accounts these things to be no farther Sins than as
they are forbidden by God. Disobedience to lawful Authority, in such things as
are in themselves lawful, is most certainly forbidden, since then the Cross
after Baptism, Kneeling at the Communion, etc. are in themselves lawful, and
commanded by lawful Authority; For any man, wilfully, to omit any of these
Circumstances, in the performance of these Offices, as long as the Laws for
them do stand in force, is an Act of Disobedience to the higher Powers; and,
upon this account, and no other, is reckoned as a Sin by us.

But, Nonconformity, with us, is punished more severely than some gross
Immoralities! I answer, that though this were true, yet makes it nothing to our
present Controversy; nor can it any way be proved from thence, that Conformity
is unlawful; and therefore, for what purpose this is here mentioned, except it
be to raise the passion, and thereby more effectually to cloud the reason, of
his own Party, I cannot imagine. What ever errors there may be in the
Discipline of a Church (as no Humane Constitution perhaps was ever thoroughly
perfect) if some part of it be too strict, and other too loose; or whatever
else the fault may be; I think it is the Duty of every good Christian, fairly
to represent such things to those who are in Authority, that they may in a due
manner be rectisied. But as such defects as these, are no just ground to refuse
the Communion of any Church whatsoever; so to upbraid her with them upon an
improper occasion; and when such a reproach makes nothing to the Argument in
hand; in my apprehension, seems not altogether agreeable to the true Christian
spirit of meekness and Charity.

That this hint then which he here gives is not to the direct purpose of our
present Dispute, is most plain. But what if, after he has affirmed it so
positively, and that too with an Asseveration, it should not appear to be so
clear and evident a truth as he supposes it. He tells us, that for
Nonconformity Men are to be Excommunicated, Ipso sacto, But not for some gross
Immoralities. Now besides that the Ipso sacto, upon which he lays such a
Stress, is wanting in these Canons of the Church of Ireland, which are made
concerning this matter (which is enough to render his Allegation false, because
our present controversy is confined within the bounds of this Kingdom). Let him
but consult the second and third Paragraphs of the Rubric, which is placed
immediately before our Communion Service, and there he shall find that
notorious evil livers, who are the same with those who are guilty of gross
immoralities, are to be excluded from the Holy Communion; and an account of
them to be forthwith given to the Ordi^ary, who is to proceed against such
Persons, according to Canon; which I think is much the same thing with an
Excommunication ipso facto.

But, it may be, I shall be told that though our Ecclesiastical Laws may perhaps
be found to be equally severe against immorality and Nonconformity, yet we do
not find that the former has been so strictly punished amongst us as the
latter. To which I answer, that if this were true it may be indeed justly
accounted as a great fault in those whose Office it was to put those Laws in
Execution; but ought not to be charged upon the Constitution of the Church it
self. And, besides this, it is not so easy a matter legally to punish many
immoralities, as at the first one would be apt to think. For without sufficient
proof, punishment ought not to be inflicted; and not only are People generally
very unwilling to appear, as witnesses against others in such cases as these;
But Men also do commonly take care, so far to hide their Act, of wickedness, as
to make it very difficult to produce any legal proof of such things against
them, although at the same time they may labor under great suspicion (...) much
Scandal upon that account: Which I take to be the great cause why sometimes the
best of Men, when they have been in Authority, have not been able, with all
their care and diligence, to suppress vice, as both the Laws have empowered and
their own inclinations led them. To conclude this digression: As every honest
Man ought sincerely to desire and heartily to (...) his endeavors that true
piety may be promoted, and all wickedness suppressed; so^ for my part am fully
of opi^ion that no sober and peaceable Man should at all be punished, on
account of the mistakes of his Conscience, ^or which reason I am altogether ^or
having the penalty of our Laws against Nonconformity wholly relaxed: Which yet
I think ought to be done with that ^^utions prudence, as that all public
disturbances, both now and hereafter, may, as much as is possible, be
prevented; And, under the pretense of (...) tender Consciences, a fr^e liberty
ought not to be given to every one at pleasure who want only to insult and
trample upon a legal (...) ^^shment.

Our Author proc^eds and tells us that O^le, Salt, C^ri^m, Sp^^le, etc. are no
more forbidden than the S^^n of the Cross: Why then says he has the Church
rejected them? To which the Church has long since given a clear and
s^tisfactory answer, in a short discourse pr^fixt to the Book of Common Prayer;
which bears this Title Of Ceremo^^^^ why some be abolished and ^eme reta^ned;
with which if he were not satisfied, he ought to have made his exceptions
against it, before he had again renewed the Question. But the same Arguments
are used by the Papists for all their Ceremonies; I answer if the Arguments are
bad, let him refuse them; But if not, why are they the worse because the
Papists make use of them? And as the Papists, to run down Protestancy, do not
scruple vigorously to plead the Cause of the Socinians; by racking their Wits
to show that the Doctrine of the blessed Trinity is liable to as many and as
great seeming absurdities as that of Transubstantiation, so it seems some
Nonconformists, in order to gain their point against the Established Church, do
perform no mean picce of Service for the Church of Rome, in endeavoring to
persuade the World that the case of that Church and that of our Established
one, are very near of kin. But as I have already shown that what our Author has
quoted out of Mr. Chillingworth against them is no way to be applied to us; so
between their Ceremonies and ours, both as to the excessive number and great
abuse of them, there is such extraordinary difference (as our Church takes
notice in the place, but now quoted) that I wonder how any Ingenuous Man could
offer to make a Paral^el between them. And as for what he adds in the
Conclusion of this Paragraph, that, selling Doves and changing Money were not
forbidden, yet Christ drove all out of the Temple; I answer, that thus to make
a Market of that place which was dedicated and appropriated to the service of
God, was, if not in express words, yet by very good consequence, forbidden; As
our Savior shows, Matthew. 21 13. Or if it were not forbidden, I desire to know
upon what account were they to be blamed, who there sold Doves and changed
Money. And let him but prove that any of our Ceremonies are equally forbidden,
and I will renounce them. Or if he cannot do this; to what purpose is this
instance given, except it be to keep up an unreasonable prejudice against our
way of Worship?

To vindicate our selves from the imputation of Superstition in the use of
Ceremonies, as well as our Ceremonies themselves from that of unlawfulness, I
took notice, in my Address, that we have sufficiently declared that we place no
holiness in them; but only use them as things in themselves indifferent,
ordained by authority for decency and order, and alterable at any time by the
same authority. From whence our Author, smartly, as he thinks, infers upon me,
page 103. that if our Ceremonies be not holy, they are not civil, nor natural
ones, and therefore must be propha^e. But is not this mere trifling, thus to
perplex a dispute with variety of terms, without explaining and determining the
sense of them? For had he but laid down the definitions and distinctions of and
belonging to these things this pretense would immediately appear to be vain and
ridiculous, Whatever Ceremony is com^anded by God to be used; as long as the
obligation of that command lasts, may properly be called holy; whatsoever such
is commanded by the Law of the Land only, although to be used in the exercise of
Religion, may, yet, if you please, be called a civil Ceremony. And, where the
Christian Religion is not upheld by the Civil Authority, whatsoever is
appointed by the Church it self may reasonably be termed by the name of
Ecclesiastical: And, to give no more instances, where bare custom without any
other institution has introduced the practice of any such thing; if there be
nothing therein which is sinful, why may it not bear the name of customary?
From whence it will evidently appear that if either our Author's Logic or
Charity had not been something defective, he needed not so hastily to have
concluded our Ceremonies to be Profane, because we place no holin^ss in them;
but might have found out some other appellation for them. But since the
pretended Popery and Idolatry of our Ceremonies has been so shamefully
confuted; it may perhaps be a pretty new hint to give those People who are
disasfected to them, to tell them that we do in effect own them to be Profane,
because we place no holiness in them.

But still, says he, they cannot be free from Superstition, if they are
superadded as parts of Worship! But I have shown that they are not superadded
as parts of Worship: And if he had but enquired into the true notion of a part
of Worship, as it is distinguished from the Circumstances of it, he could not
in modesty have insisted upon such a poor pretense.

In the remaining part of this paragraph he offers three things more, by way of
answer to what I had above affirmed. The first is, That though the nature of
Ceremonies may, yet the use of them cannot be indifferent; because the end of
using them must be either good, evil, or impertinent, and our actions are
specified by their ends. Which is as much as to say, that to use indifferent
Ceremonies for a good end, is a good action; to use them for an evil end, is an
evil action; and to use them for an impertinent end, is an impertinent action:
All which things I freely grant; and though something may be inferred thereout in
favor of our Church; yet what they here serve for, except it be for amusement
and perplexity, I am not able to discover. Secondly, he tells us that things
indifferent can make nothing decent or orderly; seeing they have nothing of
decency or order in them; for if they had, they would be really good, and not
indifferent. To which I answer that things indifferent, in their own nature,
may yet contribute to the decency and order of a good action; not by any
intrinsic goodness which is inherent in themselves, but as they are signs of
the good intention of the persons who prescribe and practice them in the
performace of such an action. Thus for Example, to bow the body, to kneel, to
sing, and that in a stinted meter are things in their nature indifferent: For
neither are they any necessary part of the Law of Nature, nor do we find that
they were ever commanded by God, until pious and good men took up those customs
of themselves in the Worship of God: And yet I believe our Author will not
deny, but that these things may conduce to the more decent and orderly
Performance of such Worship, where they are sincerely intended as outward marks
of that inward Devotion and Reverence which men do truly pay to God. And why
may not the same thing be said of any other lawful Ceremonies or Ci^cumstances,
which are sinc^^^ly intended and made use of to the very same purpose?

But thirdly, he comes in with a dilemma; If, says he, these Ceremonies are
necessary means of decency and order, then Christ and his Apostles, who used
them not, baptized, prayed and communicated und^cently. If not necessary, why
is all this needless contention about them? To the first part of which argument
I Answer, that our Church never pretended that these particular Ceremonies;
were absolutely necessary to order and decency: But only (as things stood at
the time of the Reformation) highly convenient to be ^etained; and, all things
considered, not so convenient to be altered. But to the second I reply more
distinctly; First, that to alter the whole frame of our Liturgy (as some would
have it) would, in my apprehension, be a thing of very ill consequence, as well
upon the account of those plansible pretenses is would give the Church of Rome
against us; (who would be sure to make their advantage of it) as of the ^candal
it would give to a multitude of our own weaker members, who either having heard
the manner of our Worship so often decryed by the Non-conformi^^s as Popi^h,
Superstitious, and even Idolat^ous: would be apt to think that all this
accusation was true, if all the things which were so ^oun^^ ^^^lt with, should
wholly be laid aside; or else perhaps would be much dissa^^sied to have those
things abolished, which to them do appear to be so orde^ly and decent, and such
others s^b^^tuted in the room thereof as would not be so well ple^^^^ to them.
But secondly as for some Alterations and improvements which mi^ht, I think, be
very well made in our cons^iautions; I am altogether of opinion that no sober
and well meaning Man of our Church would be against them, if it d^d but any way
appear that the Noncon^o^misls, or any member of them, would thereby be won to
our Communion. But while they seem to demand all, or else will be satisfied
with nothing; it is feared by many ^^^t even such alterations as are out
inconsiderable in themselves, would yet be o^^ i^co^venient conseqa^nce. But if
our Governors should be gr^^^ted to be to blame in insis^ing ^^o ^^istly upon
things which are not necessary; Yet still I do not see how this con be ple^ded
as a just excuse for refusing that obedience to them, which the l^^^ of the
Land requires, and the law of God does ^ot forbid. For there are cases where
though it may be a ^ault in Legi^^^ors or Parents too strictly to command, yet
still it would be the duty of the Subject or the Child to obey.

In the next paragraph he grants, with me, that Worship cannot be perform^^
without Circumstances, and that all outward Circumstances of Worship are not
expressly prescribed by God: From whence it demonstratively follows, that same
Circumstance of Worship may be used (and therefore why not by lawful authority
appointed and determined) which God himself has not commanded. What then can
justly be said against our Ceremonies, which ^^ have so evidently proved to be
Circumstances only, and not parts of (...) Why this, says our Author here, that
they are mys^^cal Rites and Cerem^^^s, and not Circumstances, which things, in
his opinion, are very different; though craftily or ignorantly they be consounded
Now whether it may be our Author's eras^ or ignorance, I know not; but this I
am sure of, that to lay such a stress, as he does, upon hard words, without
distinctly explaining their signification, is the way eternally to confound,
and perplex all, and never to determine any Disputes or Controversies: And
therefore if he would have avoided that Censure which here obliquely he casts
upon us, he should have desined and carefully distinguished those things, which
in his opinion, we consound; and have told us particularly what was to be
understood by a Mystical Rite; and wherein it dissered from a Circumstance. And
what those same mysteries are, which he supposes to be comprehended under any
of our Ceremonies. And lastly, whether all such mysteries are absolutely
unlawful; or if not, for what reason ours are so: For my part I know no other
mysticalness in any or our Ceremonles, save only that we use them as apt and
proper marks of what we inwardly intend: We uncover our heads, and kneel on our
knees in the Worship of God, for no other reason, but to denote that profound
Reverence which we ought always to have for his Majesty; and something of the
like nature we design in all the rest of our Ceremonies: And if he will call
this a Mystery; yet I think he ought c^ early to prove the thing to be
unlawful. And not take it for a sufficient contutation of us, that he has
improperly applied a hard word upon this occasion, without any distinct
explication of its meaning.

But time, place, person, etc. which are Circumstances of humane actions
cannot, says he, be called Rites or Ceremonies. I pray, why so? were not the
time of the Jewish Sabbath, and other Festivals, the place Jerusalem, and the
^e^^ ^^ where they kept their Feasts, and performed much of their Worship; And
the persons of the particular Tribe of ^evi, who were immediately appointed to
minister to God in their public Service; were not the observation of all
these, I say, parts of the Ceremonial Law of Moses? And if they were, why may
not the particular (...) pl^^e and pe^^^ appointed ^or the performance of an
action, be called Ceremonies of it as well as the p^^i^^ I^^dy or the (...) in
which the same is to be do^^.

But if Ceremony and Circumstance do thus in a manner signify the same thing,
Ceremonies should be necessary and not indifferent, seeing it is impossible to
do any thing without Circumstances! I Answer, That though to do an action without
all Circumstances be impossible, yet this or that particular Circumstance may
b^ indifferent, and not necessary; because it may be changed for another: and
if we will be nice in distinguishing these words Ceremony and Circumstance, one
from the other; all the difference that I know between them ^^ ^^is, viz. That
as every thing which is a concomitant of an action, is ordi^^^ily called a
Circumstance of it; so those Circumstances, which by any Law or Custom
generally observed, are particularly determined and a^^exed to the performance
of that action, are usually termed the (...) of it. And accordingly there may
be Ceremonies of Divine, Civil, Ecclesiastical, or b^re customary Determination
and Appointment, as I have but now said.

But if a Ceremony in Worship, which I a^^rm to be but a Circumstance, be not
natural and necessary for a decent performance of the action, nor comprehended
in any general Law of Christ; it must be an addition to his Institutions, and
contrary to that precept, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. But here again is a great stress laid
upon doubtful expressions, without so much as one word offered toward ^^ea^ing
the meaning, and removing the ambiguity of them. For neither has he told us
what he means by these words, Natural and Necessary; which sometimes are taken
in a strict Sense, to denote such things as are absolutely and indispensably
required, or dictated by the mere instinct ^^ (...), and sometimes, in a larger
Sense, to signify such things as are only very proper and convenient: Nor has
he informed us what (...) by b^ing Comprehended ^n a General Law of Christ: For
^ th^^g may be thus comprehended in a general Law, either immediately and (...)
(as every dire^t Act of Sin is comprehended under some ge^^^^ p^^hilition; and
every positive and direct Act of Duty under some of the General Commands) or
else more remotely and reductively, (as the means of performing a Duty, or
resisting a Temptation, and also some of the most Congruous and proper
Circumstances of Action; which though variable in themselves, according to the
various cases which fall out; yet according ^^ the rules of Prudence and
Congruity are often Reducible, though more ^^mot^ly, and not so directly, to some
of the general rules of Duty, because from such things as these the goodness of
Actions may be enhans^^, (...) aggravated). Nor lastly has he fixed the
signification of this (...). An Addition to Christ's Institutions: By which if
he (...) the doing any thing more in the performance of a Duty, than what
strictly and ex^^^ly Christ has Commanded; Either he must prove that Christ has
Comm^nded every Punc^^^^^ of what is prescribed in the Directory, or else he
must condemn that as well as the Liturgy, as an Addition to Christ's
Institutions. But if by this Expression he means the enjoining and enacting an
uncommanded thing, as if God himself had immediately Commanded it; and so
counterfeiting and stamping the Divine Authority, upon that which is no more
but a humane Tradition, or Institution (which to me seems the very utmost
intent of that part of the Precept which he quotes Deuteronomy. 12. 32.) He cannot but
know that no manner of guilt can be fastened on our Church upon this account:
Because she plainly and fully distinguishes between the unalterable Commands of
God, and her own Ecclesiastical institutions, which she acknowledges to be
alterable, and not of Eternal Obligation.

Toward the end of that Paragraph o^ my Address which we are still upon, I had
desired to know, since Cerem^^^s might be used without Superstition; how we
could more effectually d^scl^ (...) the use of them, than we already do? To
which he returns me th^^ (...) more effectual way is to disclaim all use of
them: Which is just as if (...) said, that the best way to use Ceremonies
without Superstition is (...) at all; And if that be not a Contradiction, I
know not what is. But here I must tell him that as there is no manner of
Superstition, either in prescribing or practicing a thing which God has le^t in
it sel^ indifferent, as long as we retain and profess the true Opinion of its
indifferency; so to disclaim wholly the use of any thing, which in it self is
lawful, as if it were forbidden by God, when really it is not so; is in my
apprehension a gross piece of Superstition: And therefore to disclaim all use
of Ceremonies is not so effectual a way to avoid Superstition, as our Author
would have us believe; but rather the quite contrary: For to lay any Weight
upon, and to be guided by, groundless imaginations of our own, in matters
relating either to God's Providence or Religion is what I take to be the proper
and true notion of Superst^^^^n. And as this Practice of disclaiming all our
Ceremonies in the Worship of God would Evidently be Superstition; so the
Principle upon which our Author presses, it is, as plainly as can be, no less
than the Addition of a Negative Precept to the Law of God. For he tells us that
whatever i^ not Commanded by God, and is required by Men, as a means of the
Worship of God, is forbidden by God; Upon which he would have us lay all our
Ceremonies aside. But no such Prohibition as this appears in the Law of God,
either in express words or by a fair and just consequence, (as I have plainly
shown by examining all the plac^s of Scripture (...) him). I (...) therefore
^^a^ this is an Addition of his own; And there one let him see to it how he can
avoid or excuse the breaking of that (...) which he Quotes, Deuteronomy. 12. 32.

The ^^rd main propo^^^^ (...) I have (...) in my Address, is a Corollary wh^^^
(...) the two pr^^^ding ones; viz. If in the Communion of our Church there be
neither any thing wanting which is necessary to Salvation (which was my first
proposition) nor any thing prescribed in it which is sinful (which was my
second Proposition) then certainly our Communion is at least innocent, and not
unlawful: In which sequel if the Premises hold good (as I think I have
justified them against all our Authors Objections) the conclusion cannot be
denied or doubted of. But because men's Actions are generally regulated, not so
much according to the Reallity of things, as according to their own Judgment
and Apprehension of them; I proceeded to consider whether it might be a just
cause for men to refuse communion with us upon either of these accounts; viz.
That they judged our Communion unlawful; although really and in it self it were
not so; or else that they doubted whether it were lawful or not; and therefore
thought it the best way not to join with us as long as this doubt remained
unresolved.

As to the former of these; who judge our communion absolutely unlawful; I in
my Address refer them to what I had before said; And tell them that except they
can show wherein the Sin of our Communion lies; their Judgment must needs be
false and uncharitable: And as our Author desires that what he has said upon
this Subject may be considered, so I entreat the Reader likewise to consider
the Answers which I have now returned to every material thing which he has
urged.

As to the other sort, who do not absolutely judge our Communion unlawful, but
only doubt, or are not well assured concerning the lawfulness of it; I propose
to them the common rule which is given in doubtful cases; viz. That they should
choose that way which is most safe and free from the danger of Sin. But how,
says our Author shall a Person who is not able to clear his doubts, about which
is the most safe way, yet choose the most safe way? I answer that such a Person
indeed, while the doubt is equal on both sides, has no certain rule to choose
by. But if the doubt on the one side be very strong, and founded upon the plain
principles of Scripture or reason; and that on the other side, upon a strict
Examination, appears to be no more but a Scruple or groundless fear arising
from fancy or prejudice, and not from any clear and rational Judgment of
things; in such a case as this, although some sort of doubt may yet remain
concerning the lawfulness of the Action; yet may it plainly appear which is the
safest way, and lest liable to the danger of Sin. For though I allow with Cicer^,
whom our Author quotes as agreeing with St. Paul, (...) a Man ought not to do
any thing, concerning the lawfulness of which (...) doubt; yet still I will
venture to affirm with Dr. Ames De Cous^. (...) 6. That many s^rrples there are
which, (...) cannot be removed (...) to the contrary, ought, by a s^r^ of
^^rce, to be laid aside, and not to (...). And I presume o^r Auth^^, will allow
this Doctor to be as (...) as the Pa^an Ci^^^^; (...) to acquaint the (...) I
do not deserve the (...) so.

In Order then to find out which is the safest way, for such doubting Persons
to take, and to show that the scruples, from whence such doubtfulness arises in
them, are groundless. I very briefly, yet I think plainly, urged these
following things, viz. That no man ought to deviate from a plain and evident
law of God on account of such Suggestions as he owns to be but obscure and
doubtful: That to promote the Peace and Unity of the Church, and to give
Obedience to the Commands of Lawful Authority, are very plainly and evidently
commanded by God: That in this present case, the Suggestions, upon which such a
doubting Person refrains from our Communion, are supposed to be but doubtful
and obscure. (For if they were clear and plain, it would alter the Case; and
the Person of whom we are speaking would no longer remain in doubt; but be
absolutely determined in his Judgment) And lastly, that a doubt in Point of
Conscience which, after a reasonable time for enquiry, never comes to any
positive Determination, is more probably the effect of fancy or prejudice than
of any Sober and impartial Reasoning; And therefore ought not to be put into
the Ballanco against such plain Commands of God; as do not admit of any doubt
at all. Now he that has as little Reason and Divinity, as our Author will allow
me to have, may yet see, that he gives a very illogical Answer to these things,
which I have thus offered. For without the lest offer made to confute my
premises, or show they are unconclusive, he falls directly foul upon the
conclusion it self; and repeats the same Objection which I had before made;
viz. That to conform doubtingly either for Peace, or in Obedience to the
Magistrate, is Sinful Conformity: For he that doubts is damned, if he eat,
and whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin, p. 105. To which I Answer, that a doubt
concerning the lawfulness of Obedience, to any humane Command is a very just
reason for a man to suspend acting, until such time as he has made enquiry into
the matter: But if after all he can find no solid and rational Foundation for
this doubt; he ought to look upon it as no more but a mere Scruple, and to deal
with it according to the direction which I have just now quoted out of Dr.
Ames: For i^ we must forever forbear Acting, upon account of such sort of
doubts as these; the consequence will be almost perpetual perplexity of
Conscience, to all those who are not able clearly and distinctly to Solve all
the little Scruples, which either the Devil or their own weak fancies, may at
any time raise in their minds; which would render Religion unto such Persons,
as a yoke impossible to be born.

And here by the way, I desire the Reader to take Notice, how dexterously our
Author perverts my words, only by the omission of one Syllable in his recital
of them. In that part of my Address now under Consideration, I have these
words; If after a reasonable time for enquiry, be is not able to determine this
doubt, so as positively to satisfy himself upon solid grounds, that such
Conformity is unlawful; what reason can be given, why such a doubt should be
put in the Balance; against those plain Commands of God which I have
mentioned. Now in the recital of these words of mine, our Author instead of the
word unlawful, puts the word lawful, p. 105. So that whereas my Argument in
effect, runs thus, viz. Because a Man is no way convin^'d that such a thing is
unlawful, therefor be ought to do it, if lawful Authority commands it, (which
I take to be very Reasonable,) Our Author would insinuate to the World, as if I
had me^nt that, because a Man is not convinced that such a thing is lawful;
therefore he ought to do it if Authority requires it: which is altogether
absurd and void of Cons^quence.

But why, say I, is it not as much a Sin doubtingly to refuse Conformity, as
doubtingly to conform? To this Question, he returns me, page 106, back to S.
Paul for an Answer; who says, that he that doubts is Damned if he eat; But
does not say, that he who doubts is Damned, if he refuse to eat. But I find
that a little more Reason and Divinity, would do our Author no more hurt than
it would me; which if he had, it would have taught him, that in the Case
proposed by S. Paul, the doubt could only be upon one side of the Question,
because there was no Law, either of God or Man, which Commanded them to eat the
things there spoken of; and therefore there could be no suspicion of Sin, in
refusing to eat them: For, where there is no Law, there is no Transgression.
But in our Case there are two plain Laws, viz. That of Peace and Union in the
Church, and that of Obedience unto the higher Powers; both of them enacted by
God, and both of them requiring our Conformity to the Established Worship,
except we can assign something therein, which is unlawful: And therefore here
the doubt must be as well on this side of the Question as the other; And why a
man's doubts in such a Case as this, should determine him to Disobedience, and
not rather to Obedience; (the later being plainly and expressly required, and
the former being only grounded upon some dark and obscure suggestions) is what
I believe all our Authors Reason and Divinity, will not be able plainly and
clearly to account for.

But our Author will not allow those who so halt between two Opinions, as
neither to follow God nor Baal, to be Nonconformists, or of his Party any more
than of ours! The plain English of which seems to be, that to be a
Nonconformist, is to follow God; But, to be of the Established Church is a
following of Baal. And if such little scruples and doubts as may arise, upon
what he has above insinuated concerning Nadab and Abihu, etc. do keep a Man
fixed in Nonconformity, it shall be well approved of: But if the Peace and
Unity of the Church, and Obedience to the Law of the Land, shall have so much
influence upon him, as to put him! but in suspense concerning what is best to
be done; Away with him, he halts between God and Baal; And since he gathers
not with our Author, he is to be rejected as one that scatters. But I must
return to the preceding Paragraph, in which, as I said, he endeavors to run
down my Conclusion, without so much as offering to refute my Premises.

And here he goes on, and tells me, that a little more Reason and Divinity,
would have taught me that Negative Precepts bind ad semper, But positive
precepts bind only Semper. I Answer, that I have indeed met with this in my
small reading in Divinity; but how to apply it to his Purpose, my Reason does
not instruct me. And therefore since he was so sensible of my defects herein,
he should have informed, and not amused me. All that ^urge is, that the
positive precepts, of the Churches Unity, and Obedience to the Laws, may be
allowed to oblige us so far, as not to Act contrary to them without a real
necessity: And that a Negative precept, of not acting with a doubting mind, may
not be so far extended beyond its due intent and meaning, as that little and
groundless scruples should be allowed, to out-ballance the plain and evident
commands of God: And how our Authors School Notions do any way contradict this
reasonable offer, I protest I cannot find out. He tells me, 2. That a Rule
against which there is no Exception, will overbalance that which is limited
by Exceptions. But if the former of these Rules which concerns a doubting mind,
presses with equal force upon both the Scales; and makes as much against
refusing Conformity, as against Conforming, (as I have shown it does) then I
hope the latter Rule, which enjoins Peace Unity, ^and Obedience to Authority,
and inclines to one side only, ought in all Reason to turn the Balance. But 3.
he tells me, that if my Episcopal brethren in Scotland, should doubt of the
lawfulness of submitting to Presbytery, now by Law Established there; by my
Rule they are bound to Conform for Peace, and in Obedience to Authority, and
why don't I preach this to them. To which I answer that a bare doubt, which
never comes to a positive determination on the one side or other, (and
therefore, in my Opinion, must proceed from fancy or prejudice only, and not
from sound Reason) ought not, I think, to be put in the Balance against the
Commands of lawful Authority: But to apply this general Rule, to the
Constitutions of any other Church, except our own, I conceive to be none of my
business. But if our Author has a mind, to have my Doctrine Propagated in
Scotland; he may if he pleases send my Address into that Kingdom. But, says he,
by this Rule if a Man in France or Spain, should be in doubt ^^^ether Popery,
or Protestantis^^ were the safest, he ought to be a Papist in Obed^^nce to
Authority. I answer, that the consequence will not hold. For although it may be a
Man's duty to obey, such Commands of Authority, a^ are in themselves lawful, not
withstanding some doubts or scruples which he has to the contrary; yet will it
not follow from hence, that therefore he is equally obliged to obey such
Commands, as are in themselves unlawful; which is what he would fasten upon me:
But how far even in this Case, a man may be obliged to follow the dectates of a
Conscience; which is but imperfectly informed is none of my business here to
enquire.

Our Author tells us, that we may not follow Peace or obey superiors, except in
Faith; And therefore to conform doubtingly is a Sin. From whence I may
certainly, a Fortiori, infer, that therefore we ought not to b^cak Peace, or
disobey Superiors, except in Faith; and therefore, doubtingly to refuse
Conformity, will be a greater Sin; which is what I offered in my Address, He
tells us also that our Obedience to Superiors, is limited by lawfulness,
possibility, expedience, and edification. Now that no Authority can lay an
obligation upon any Man, to do a thing, which is either unlawful or impossible,
is very certain: But where the thing Commanded, is both lawful and possible;
for a Subject to resuse Obedience, because it is not Expedient; or does not
tend to Edification; is what I cannot so readily approve of, except I have some
better Argument for it than our Author's bare Assertion. And I would fain be
informed by him, who in this Case, is to be judge of the expediency and
edification of the thing commanded? If the Superiors; then since our
Legislators have judged our Constitutions, to be expedient and edifying, no
Argument can be drawn from hence, against our Conformity to them. But if every
Subject must herein be a Judge for himself; since the Expediency and
Edification of things, cannot always be brought under certain and fixed Rules,
but are many times very variable in diverse Cases, and different circumstances;
And since the Apprehensions also of different Men, are herein very various,
according to their diverse Fancies, Prejudices or Inclinations; What is this but
to set up, not only the Conscience, but even the sickle Imagination of every
private Man to control Authority, whenever the Humor shall take him, or any
crafty Man, who would gain him to his Party, shall impose upon him? Which is
much more easy to do, in relation to the Expediency or Edification of a thing,
than the lawfulness or possibility of it.

Having dispatched the Objection against our Communion, which is drawn from the
doubts and scruples, which some men have entertained, concerning the lawfulness
of it; I proceed in the next place in my Address, to propose and answer that
which is taken from the pretense of Christian Liberty: And because our Author
seems to have taken more than ordinary care to perplex this part of the
Dispute; I must crave the Readers patience, while I take a little pains fai^ly
to open and clear it.

As God Almighty had by Moses given a Written Law unto the Children of Israel;
so, in process of time, the Scribes and Pharisees had not only introduced
diverse Traditions of their own, (some of which might possibly in themselves
have been innocent, though unnec^ssary) but also required the observation of
these Traditions, not only as immediate parts of the Law of God; but also, in
some cases, to be preferred even before the precepts of the written Law,
whenever they should come in competition one with the other; of which we have a
pretty full account in the former part of the 7th Chapter of St. Mark's Gospel.
Now when many of the Jews began to receive the Christian Faith; some there were
who either out of a secret design to obstruct the progress of the Gospel, or a
profound veneration for that Institution, under which they had been brought up;
taught this Doctrine in the Christian Church, viz. that Circumcision and the
Observation of the Law of Moses, were absolutely necessary to Salvation,
notwithstanding that Christ was come into the World, as we are informed, Acts
15. 1. 24. And as they had generally received the above mentioned Traditions
with an equal, and in some cases a greater respect than what they had for the
written Law; so did they no less endeavor to obtrude the one than the other
upon all those who had, or should Embrace Christianity. And notwithstanding
that the Apostles and Elders upon the first broaching of this Doctrine,
endeavored to suppress and put a stop to it, Act. 15. 6, etc. yet, for all
this, we find that it took root and prevailed, more or less, in diverse of the
Christian Churches.

To ease the Consciences therefore of all the Faithful from such an unnecessary
and unsupportable burden, and also to free Christianity from such a clog as
must needs very much retard the progress of it; the Apostles of Christ,
wherever there was occasion, took constant care to inform all who had received
the Faith; of that freedom which Christ had given them from the Ordinances of
the Mosaic Law, as well as from all other uncertain Traditions, which some
men, without any other Authority but their own groundless fancies, would impose
upon them; and also to exhort them to maintain, and by no means betray that
liberty which was thus vouchsafed unto them: Of which I need not stand to
produce any Instances, because the thing is not only confessed on all hands, but
also most notorious to all who do but read the Epistles of St. Paul, and
particularly those to the Galatians and Colossians.

Thus far then the Scripture does, undoubtedly, require every Christian to
assert and stand fast in his liberty; viz. Not to ^d^it or own any thing as an
essential part of Religion, and therefore necessary to S^lv^^ion, which God has
not directly required and prescribed as such. For which, the Reason I have
given in my Address, is unanswerable; namely, that if way be given to such s^rt
of impositions, so many things, through pride or ignorance, may be introduced
into Christianity, as to make it a yoke too heavy ^o be born.

Two things then I think there are, which, if fainly stated and cleared, must,
one way or other, put an end to the difference between our Author and me,
concerning this point: Namely, first, whether the obligation which lies upon us
to maintain our Christian Liberty, ought to be extended any farther than those
bounds which I have now set toit? And if not, then secondly, whether this
obligation (even as I have stated it) can, either by the letter of Scripture,
or parity of Reason, be-justly so construed as to restrain any man from
yielding Conformity to any of the Constitutions of the Established Church? upon
which two things I desire the Reader still to have an eye, whilst I am
examining what our Author has said, which may relate to either of them: For I
cannot so well handle them each apart, because I am confined to follow that
path in which he has thought fit to lead me.

He tells me then, page 107. that I have not faithfully framed the
Non-Conformists Objection; For their Notion, it seems, of Christian Liberty,
and the obligation to maintain it, is some what different from mine; and if
things in their own nature indifferent are imposed (tho not as essential parts
of Religion, or necessary to Salvation) but only as parts or means of Worship,
or Conditions of Communion in it; this, according to him, is an infringement of
that Christian Liberty, in which we are bound to stand fast. To which I answer,
First, That since the Worship of God is an essential part of Religion; to
impose any thing as a part of Worship, would be to impose it as an essential
part of Religion: For (as he has thought it necessary to inform me, p. 102.)
quod est pars partis est pars totius. As therefore he has, thus far, said no
more than what I had said before him; so have I already shown that those
indifferent things, which by our Liturgy are required in the service of God,
are not imposed as parts of Worship; and therefore there ought on this account
to be no Controversy about them. Secondly, To submit to such indifferent
things as are imposed expressly not as parts of Worship, but only as the means,
way or manner of performing it (provided that such imposing proceed from Lawful
Authority) I have already shown not to be unlawful, and have answered all our
Author's pretenses to the contrary: Nor can I upon his assertion believe that
such a submission for peace and unities sake, is any way a giving up of our
Christian Liberty, until I see some good proof for it, either expressly
contained in, or evidently consequent from God's Words; of which I believe he
would not have been so sparing, if the Bible would have afforded him any Texts,
upon which to have grounded an Argument. Or if our Liturgy be, on this account,
an infringement of Christian Liberty, not only all other Churches are guilty of
the same, but even the Directory it self, which imposes some things in
themselves indifferent, cannot be excused from it. Which passage of my Address
he has thought sit to slip over, with a very lame and imperfect Answer.
Thirdly, To impose any indifferent things as Conditions of Communion, if it
were done either with an express declaration, or any evident implication or
supposition, that no Communion could lawfully be kept up in, or held with, any
Church whatsoever, without the use of those things which were so imposed; this
indeed would be to impose such things as essential and necessary parts of
Worship and Religion; and consequently, on the imposers part, an unlawful
attempt upon Christian Liberty. But as I have shown that this is none of our
Churches case; who expressly owns such her Constitutions to be alterable as
just cause shall require; and neither rejects the Communion, nor condemns the
Practice of any other Church which differs from her in such things as these: So
if the matter were even thus it self; yet if any private Christian should, for
Peace and Unity, so far comply with the Church, as to submit to what she had
required, and practice what she had thus Prescribed; but yet with an Express
Declaration and open Protestation, that he did this not out of any necessity,
which was supposed to be in the things themselves, which he still asserted to
be in their own Nature indifferent; but only for peace sake, and, as far as in
him lay, to prevent all Schisms or Divisions; I cannot see how such a Man as
this could be condemned, as therein guilty of any Sin, or any way a betrayer of
his Christian Liberty. And if in this my Opinion, I am perhaps mistaken, I
shall be very glad to be better informed; provided it be done with Clear and
Solid Arguments from plain Scripture and Reason, and not with such perplexed
and trisling Suggestions, as we have hitherto met with from our Author. But
Fourthly, Since (as our Author grants, p. 103) without Circumstances, Worship
cannot be performed, and all outward Circumstances of Worship are not
prescribed by God. It must follow, either that some outward Circumstances of
Worship may be determined and appointed by Man, or else the Worship of God
cannot possibly be performed. Suppose then that the Church appoints and
determines some indifferent things, as Circumstances in Gods Worship; and
requires them to be observed by all her Members; And yet that some are so
Obstinate and Refractory, as that they will not submit to her Authority in
these things: What is to be done in such a Case as this? must every particular
M^n be left to his liberty, to introduce what Circumstances he pleases into the
Worship of God, according to his own Fancy or Inclination? This would be the
direct way to confound that Order, and destroy that Decency, for which the
Apostle particularly provides, 1 Cor. 14. 40, as I have said in my Address; And
to exclude the Directory as well as the Liturgy. Or must the Church from time
to time, alter and new model her Constitutions, concerning the Circumstances
of God, Worship until matters are so settled, as that every one may be pleased
and fully satisfied? This I confess were a most excellent way, if the thing
were at all practicable or possible to be performed: But when it is considered
that in such matters as relate to Order and Decency only, we have not always a
fixed and certain Rule, as to particulars; but Men have different Opinions of
such things, according to the difference of their Customs, Tempers, and
Educations; I believe it will be found a very hard, and perhaps an impossible
thing, so to frame all the Circumstances of Divine Worship, as that all sorts
of Men, how different soever in their Temper or Education, shall be well
pleased and satisfied with them. And if this be not to be done; then, it may
be, if any Church should go about to make alterations in such things, to please
and gratify some People; they might hereby displease and disgust many others;
and so in the end do more hurt than good by such Alterations. What then
remains? but that every Church in such things as these must act according to
the best of her prudence; And if men will still be refractory and not submit to
such Constitutions as lawful Authority enjoins, and are no way contrary to the
Law or Word of God; I would gladly know what other course is at last to be
taken with them, but to exclude them from the Communion of the Society, who
thus obstinately refuse to conform to the Rules and Orders of it? And if our
Author judges this to be an infringement of Christian Liberty, I desire he
would not only say it, but also clearly and solidly prove it.

But Christ has freed us from all parts and parcels of Worship which are not of
his own Institution! He has so: But what is this to those Ceremonies which I
have plainly proved to be no parts (or parcels) but only Circumstances of
Worship? He has freed us also from all Conditions of Communion but those of his
own Prescribing! very right: But then we must remember that one Condition of
Communion which Christ prescribes unto us, is to obey them that have the rule
over us, and submit our selves, Heb. 13. 17. To be subject to the higher
powers, Romans 13. 1. And to submit our selves to every ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2. 13. And whosoever obstinately refuses to perform this
condition, is justly to be excluded from the Communion of the Church, as a
disobeyer of Christ's Commands. Now the Question is, Wherein and in what sort
of things is this obedience and subjection to be shown? Not in things
immediately or directly commanded by the Law of God: For in such things as
those our obedience is paid to God alone, and not to our Earthly Superiors;
And the obligation is the same, if my Inferior informs me that such is the
Will of God, as if my Superior lays his commands therein upon me. Nor yet in
such things as are contrary to God's Law: For if our Superiors should command
any thing of that nature, we ought to obey God rather than man, Acts 5. 29. It
remains then, that things in their own nature indifferent, when required by
lawful Authority, are the proper and adequate matter wherein our obedience to
our Superiors, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, is to be shown. And as all
Superiors ought to exercise their power of commanding with Prudence and
Charity, as they shall answer for the same before the Throne of God; so are all
inferiors most evidently obliged in Conscience to be conformable and obedient
to such commands, when the matter there^ is lawful in it self: nor is such
conformity any way inconsistent with our Christian Liberty.

But Christ, says he, has allowed us the use of indifferent things
indifferently, as Christian Prudence and Charity shall determine! I grant it.
But then I would know why the use of such things may not, in some cases, as
well be determined by the Christian Prudence and Charity of the Church for the
whole Society, as in other cases by those of every private man for himself?
Except it be that some men have a very strong inclination to be guided by their
own fancies, rather than by the will of their Superiors. But this, says he,
would be so to determine our practice, as to destroy its indifferency! I
Answer, that this indeed would make it the duty of every private man to conform
his practice in such indifferent things, to the Law that is over him, as long
as that Law remains in force (in which I see not the least inconvenience or
absurdity): but would not so far destroy the indifferency either of the thing,
or our practice; but that, upon the repeal of that Law which bound us, we
should be as much at liberty as ever we were. But our Author tells us, that the
main violation of Christian Liberty lies in a fixed, stated and perpetual
compulsion, to do what God has permitted us to omit; or a prohibition to do
what he has made lawful for us. I Answer; if, 1. The subject matter of this
Compulsion or Prohibition be in its own nature lawful or indifferent; If, 2.
The Compulsion or Prohibition proceed from lawful Authority; And if, 3. It be
by that Authority sufficiently declared, that this same Compulsion or
Prohibition is not to be esteemed as anexpress or immediate part of Gods Law;
but only as a humane constitution, to which, while it remains in force (and no
longer) we are in Conscience obliged to give obedience, on account of the
general Commands of God, which require us to be subject to our lawful
Governors: Such a Compulsion or Prohibition as this, is no manner of violation
of Christian Liberty.

But he will prove that it is, and that by the Authority of St. Paul; For thus,
says he, the Apostle teaches, 1 Cor. 6. 12. All things are lawful for me, but
I will not be brought under the power of any person or thing in matters
indifferent. But, I say, the Apostle does not thus teach: And it is not only a
most disingenuous, but even an impious presumption in this bold man thus to
falsify the Text of St. Paul, and to add unto the Word of God, whatever his
design therein may be. The words of St. Paul in the place quoted, are neither
more nor less than these, All things are lawful unto me, but all things are not
expedient: All things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the
power of any. Where it is evident from the following verse, that he speaks only
concerning the eating or forbearing of such Meats as some indeed scrupled out
of weakness; but which were not commanded or enjoined by any Law or
Constitution either of God or Man. And our Author could not but see that it was
impossible so far to extend St. Paul's own words, as to bring them in the least
to countenance Disobedience to lawful Authority; and therefore that he must
either add to them, or else not be able to produce so much as one Text of
Scripture to prove that which with so much assurance he had asserted. But if he
has a power given him to make Scripture where he has it not ready to serve his
purpose, I must confess it will be hard to dispute with him. Nor can he here
pretend that he sets down the last words of the above mentioned quotation, not
as a part of St. Paul's Text, but only as his own Paraphrase upon it: For
(besides that in the Apostles own words, there is no manner of foundation for
the inserting of the word person) the whole Sentence, as I have above recited
it, is all a-like printed in the Italick Character, and all of it equally
referred to those foregoing words [thus the Apostle teacheth]: which I think
most plainly shows that it was our Author's design, that the whole Sentence
should pass upon his unwary Readers, as if it were every Syllable taken out of
the place from whence he has quoted it.

But I ought not thus to bind up my self from opportunity of using my Christian
Liberty for the Spiritual good of another! I Answer that, where a humane Law is
made concerning any thing which otherwise were indifferent; Obedience
ordinarily and generally ought to be given to that Law; Nor ought any man to
swerve from it to gratify the humor of such as only resolve to be perverse
and obstinate. But where a case arises to which the intention of the lawmakers
either did not or ought not to have extended, and where by acting otherwise
than the Law prescribes, some great good may be done, or evil avoided or
remedied; If all even seeming contempt of Authority be meekly and prudently
avoided, and just occasion of scandal carefully prevented and obviated; I, for
my part, should no way condemn that man, who upon such an emergency, in such a
manner, and with such caution as this, should act otherwise than the letter of
the humane Law should prescribe. In which opinion the generality of Learned
Casuists that I have happened to look into, do unanimously concur with me. And
therefore what presently follows, is spoken without any other ground but his
own fancy, viz. that by such imposing and determining in matters indiffirent,
more is attributed to the positive precepts of Men, than to the moral Laws of
God. For I challenge our Author to produce me but one man of any repute of the
Established Church, who ever maintained that obedience to our Ecclesiastical,
or to any humane Laws, may not pro hic and nunc be suspended to give way to a
greater good, as well as obedience to the positive moral Laws of God. And as
for making that a sin which God has made lawful by not forbidding it, which is
another of his objections, I have already answered it: And it is enough to say,
that God has not made it lawful to disobey lawful Authority in such things as
are indifferent.

From what I have hitherto been discoursing upon this subject, I think it may
clearly be gathered, that notwithstanding all that our Author has said to the
contrary, the obligation of maintaining our Christian Liberty is no farther to
be extended than as I had set the bounds and limits of it. But what follows in
the next Paragraph, is designed to show, that allowing my notion of Christian
Liberty to be just and good, yet still our Ceremonies are destructive of it,
because they are made essential parts of Religion, and necessary to Salvation;
which if he can but prove as clearly as he has confidently affirmed it, then
indeed, and not otherwise, he might have reason to say that my Answer is not
sufficient to the Objection, even as I my self had framed it.

Now here I must desire the Reader to take notice what a poor and disingenuous
piece of Sophistry our Author endeavors to put upon the world. To convince the
Non-Conformists that our Ceremonies were no infringement of Christian Liberty,
I gave them to understand, in my Address, that our Church did not impose them
as essential parts of Religion, and necessary to Salvation: In opposition to
which, he undertakes to prove that they are by us made essential parts of
Religion, and necessary to Salvation; and therefore destructive of Christian
Liberty: But when he comes to produce his Arguments, he cunningly conceals the
main and fundamental part of the conclusion which he was to prove; and as for
the other part of it, which was but an appendage to, or superstructure upon the
former, he perverts and plainly alters the sense and meaning of it.

The fundamental part of the conclusion which he undertakes to prove, is, that
our Ceremonies are by us made essential parts of Religion. But in order to make
this good, he does not so much as offer the least word or syllable. The other
part is, that we make them necessary to Salvation: which indeed he attempts to
prove; but in a clear different sense from that in which I denied it. My
meaning was plainly this, that our Church did not pretend that her Ceremonies
were immediately derived from the essence of Religion, or upon that account
necessary to be observed; which I grant would be an encroachment upon Christian
Liberty: But all that his, Arguments can pretend to prove, is, that our
Ceremonies, being imposed by the Laws of the Church, the use of them is
esteemed necessary to Salvation; not as being essential parts of Religion, or
so reputed by us, but only as they are the matter wherein we ought to show our
conformity and obedience to the commands of lawful Authority. In Answer
therefore to all his Arguments at once, I shall only tell him, that obedience
to the lawful commands of lawful Authority, is one of those Duties which God
has made necessary to Salvation: And as far as any Ceremony is the matter of
such obedience, so far it is, by consequence, in its proper degree, also
necessary, although it be no essential part of Religion: Nor is there any thing
herein which is any way destructive of Christian Liberty. But that which he
should have proved, was, that we esteem our Ceremonies to be necessary to
Salvation, even antecedently to the commands of the Church and the Law.

That therefore our Author's Arguments, which he here urges, are all of them
wide from the point in Controversy, is as evident as may be: But because in
some of them he has a sly design, not so much to prove what he had just before
undertaken, as to render the Established Church as black and odious as may be
in the eyes of his Party; It will be necessary before I proceed, to wipe off
that dirt which here he rakes together to throw at her.

In the first place then, I must tell him, that what I have hitherto read of
his Book, has not begot in me such an opinion of his veracity, as, upon his
bare word, to make me give credit to what he supposes, viz. that the bare
omission of Ceremonies, though out of tenderness of Conscience, is by us judged
Schism, Sedition, and Rebellion; and made worthy of Fining, Imprisonment, and
Excommunication: Nor have I any reason to think his good nature toward us to
be so abundant, as that he would have omitted to quote some passages of our
Laws or Canons, if any such there had been, to make good this charge to the
utmost, which he thus aggravates against us. That Consciences which are truly
tender, ought ever to be used with the greatest gentleness, is the unanimous
opinion of all sober and good men that ever I remember to have met with, either
of our own or any other of the Reformed Churches: And although in the Letter of
Humane Laws, an exception or dispensation for tender Consciences is no way
proper to be expressly inserted; because every man being able to make this
pretense, and none but God, who knows the hearts of men, being able to confute
it, where it is falsely, but craftily made; this would be the way wholly to
enervate the sanction and force of all such Laws, and so to leave it at every
man's pleasure, whether he would observe them or not: yet in the execution of
them (at least of all such as concern Religion and the Worship of God), I
freely grant, that a due regard ought to be had to the invincible mistakes of
all such as appear to be well-meaning men; because it ought ever to be
presumed, that the intention of the Lawmakers was not, or ought not to have
been, that such sort of men as they should be severely dealt with. And if any
particular men have ever pressed the Execution of our Ecclesiastical Laws beyond
this; Let them answer for themselves; for I am sure I shall never appear in
their defense. But where there are most strong presumptions that it is not real
tenderness of Conscience, but some other principle, which prompts a man not
only himself to refuse obedience to lawful Authority, but also to persuade as
many as he can to join with him therein; Where a man can without remorse or
scuple break some of the most known Laws of God; can confidently vent such
slanders and calumnies, as are not only contrary to charity, but also to truth
it self; and can pervert and misquote, not only the Writings of a Man, but even
the Word of God; and yet all this while shall refuse to obey such commands of
Authority, as he cannot show to be either expressly or by good consequence
contrary to any Law or Command of God; (which I have plainly shown to be our
Authors case). If such a Man as this shall yet plead the tenderness of his
Conscience, for refusing conformity to the Laws of the Land, (which yet it
seems is tough enough to dispense with the violation of the above mentioned
Laws of God) I would gladly know whether such a plea, and in such a case, is to
be admitted: And if the penalty of the Law be not put in execution against a
man who plainly appears to be of this temper, I think he has more reason to
thank the mildness of the Government, than to attribute it to any justice which
he may pretend to be on his side, or favor that ought to be extended to him,
on account of the tenderness of his Conscience. But let a man's Consciences be
disposed as it will; the bare omission of Ceremonies is not by any of our Laws
so severely censured as our Author pretends; but was so wife as not to produce
his proofs; nor is any man thereby condemned of Schism, except he makes or
keeps up a separation in the Church; nor of Sedition or Rebellion, except he
helps to maintain a faction, or takes up arms against the Civil State; nor,
lastly, made subject to Fining, Imprisonment or Excommunication, except it be
for public Opposition to the Establ^shed Laws. And if our Author had not
consulted more with passion or ill nature, than with sober reason or charity,
he would never have so strained things beyond their due pitch, as he has most
evidently done in the above mentioned suggestion, which he brings in charge
against us.

Nor, Secondly, do I any where find it to be the Judgment of our Church, that
every one who comes under the sentence of Excommunication, must necessarily be
supposed to be delivered to Satan; which is another of his good natured
insinuations. That those Persons, who, by public disobedience and opposition
to the lawful commands of lawful Authority, do cause divisions and ^ffences in
the Church, should be avoided, and excluded from her visible Communion, is no
more than what I think to be sufficiently warranted by the Apostle St. Paul,
Romans 16. 17. But because it is possible, and sometimes probable enough, that
many men are thus missed, not so much by wilfulness or obstinacy, as by some
great mistakes or strong prejudices which they have entertained, or, it may be,
by a real zeal of God, but not according to knowledge, we are so far from
concluding any of them to be absolutely given into the possession of the Devil,
that, on the contrary, we charitably hope that the generality of them will
obtain mercy at the hand of God; not do we at all doubt it, where the
disobedience to Authority pr^c^eds not from perverseness, but ignorance of
their Duty in this particular.

Thirdly, Whereas he would have the world believe that the omission of
Ceremonies, makes a Minister more liable to deprivation than Whoredom,
Drunkenness, etc. If he means, that it is commonly more easy to convict such
an one of Nonconformity, which must be open and notorious, than of immorality,
which may be kept so secret as, in many cases, scarcely to admit of legal
proof; I desire to know how is this to be helped, or the Church to be blamed for
it? Or, if he means, that immorality in Ministers has not been so strictly
prosecuted and punished as Nonconformity: Besides that he offers no manner of
proof even of this; the utmost it could amount to, if true, would be to fasten
a just blame, not upon the Laws of the Church, but upon those Persons who
should have put them in execution; wherein I will join with him, with all my
heart, if he can but furnish me with sufficient proof of the matter of fact.
But if he means that, by our Ecclesiastical Laws, a Minister, who is convicted
of such immorality as he mentions, is not as liable to deprivation as he that
is found guilty of Nonconformity, (which I think is the only meaning of his
words, that can be any way to the purpose). I challenge the abominable
falsehood of this assertion, and demand the proof of it from him.

Fourthly, Whereas he suggests that the refusers of Conformity, are judged
worse than Idolatrous Papists: This is an imputation so notoriously unjust and
immodest, that none but a man of such a tender Conscience, as our Author would
ever lay it to our charge. But it is no matter for that, his party will probably
believe that he would never affirm a thing so extraordinary if it were not so;
And if he does but calumniate stoutly, something perhaps may stick. But
methinks this man, who so solemnly in his Preface, appeals to the Judge that
stands at the door, should remember the account, which one day he must give
of his words as well as actions, unto that same Judge.

And lastly, Whereas he accuses us, that we esteem our Ceremonies to be more
necessary than the Peace and Unity of the Church. I Answer, that if any man
were once convinced that the abolition of any Ceremonies, which lawfully may be
laid aside, would generally conduce to the Unity and Peace of the Church; and
that without doing any other hurt, which might overballance this good; and if,
in this case, he should refuse to have these Ceremonies abolished; it might
indeed justly be said of him, that he preferred them before Peace and Unity.
But where it no way appears that men are thus convinced: But on the contrary,
that there is much reason to fear that the prohibition or disuse of such
Ceremonies, would not only give a very plausible advantage to the Churches
enemies, and scandalize a multitude of her own weak Members; but also encourage
those that causelessly dissent from her to insult and triumph, and to demand
other things, which are yet more unreasonable. Where men, I say, are under
these or such like apprehensions (as many sober and prudent men of our Church
are); although a man should be of opinion that they were mistaken, yet could he
not, with truth or charity, affirm, that they preferred their Ceremonies, or
thought them more necessary than the Peace and Unity of the Church. For in this
case, bare Ceremonies are not put into the Scale against Peace and Unity, as
our Author would insinuate: But all the evil consequences, which would attend
the abolition of our Ceremonies, are balanced against the uncertain
satisfaction which might be given to some mistaken men, whose principles, if
they are followed, must continually lead them into new scruples and exception,
against all humane establishments, in matters of Religion and the Worship of
God.

In the conclusion of this point of Christian Liberty, I had said in my
Address, that if our Liturgy were an insringement of Christian Liberry, not
only all other Churches were guilty of the same; but even the Directory, which
imposes some things which in themselves are indifferent, cannot be excused from
it. To which, all the Answer that our Author gives, is, p. 109. to deny, and to
demand proof from all who assert, that the Directory requires any Ceremonies
of mystical signification; or imposes any indifferent thing, save such
Circumstances as nature and reason direct. But is not this mere shuffling, thus
to take no notice of the thing which I had asserted, and to require me to prove
that which I had never affirmed, or so much as insinuated? I had no occasion to
speak of any such thing as mystical Ceremonies or improper Circumstances to be
prescribed by the Directory: Nor therefore should he have amused the Reader
with the mention of them. The whole force of my Argument lay plainly in this
alone, that if it be a violation of Christian Liberty, for order and decency's
sake, to settle and determine any thing, in the manner or circumstances of
God's Worship, which God by his own immediate Law had not determined. From
hence it would follow not only that all other Churches, but even the Directory
it self, which does determine some things which God had left indifferent, must
be guilty of the violation of Christian Liberty: To which, he does not think
sit to return any manner of Answer.

However, that our Author may not complain that I accuse the Directory, as
equally culpable with our Liturgy in the violation of Christian Liberty,
without giving any instances to make good what I say; It will not be amiss
here, to give an Example or two of such things as I hint at for the Readers
better satisfaction.

A sixth stated and perp^tual compulsion to do what God has permitted us to
omit, or a prohibition to do what he has made lawful sor us, is, according to
our Author, the main violation of Christian liberty, p. 107. Now as it was
lawful for the People of the Jews, to Worship toward Gods Holy Temple, where
they daily Sacrifice was offered, 2 Chro. 6. 26. Ps. 5. 7. and 138. 2. And for
Daniel to Worship toward Jerusalem, Dan. 6. 10. As being the place where their
solemn Devotions wereto be paid, whenever they could there be person^lly
present. By a fair parity of reason it is undoubtedly Lawful, for a Christian
to Worship God toward the reading desk, from whence the Prayers of the
Congregation are offered up, and the Word of God read unto the People by the
Minister; or toward the Pulpit, from whence the Word of God is opened and
explained for our Use and Instruction; or toward the Communion Table, where we
often receive the Holy Symbols of the Body and Blood of Christ, which are the
means appointed by him, whereby we are to Communicate in the Merits of his
Passion. Nor is there any Law of God which, either in Words or by good
Consequence, in the least forbids us to express this Worship, by the bowing our
Bodies. But the Directory, p. 10, does positively prohibit Adoration (that is
Worship) or bowing ones self toward one place or other: which is not only to
forbid what God has made lawful; But also seems to require that which is in it
self Impossible. For in all Acts of Adoration, as long as we have Bodies, we
must of necessity turn our selves toward some place or other; And I desire our
Author, if he can, to show me such a prohibition in any part of our Liturgy.
Again God has undoubtedly permitted us to omit the posture of sitting at the
Reception of the Holy Communion; because it neither appears that this was the
very posture, in which Christ and his Apostles received it; nor if it were, is
there any Command that we should imitate them in that Circumstance, any more
than in the time or place wherein they performed that Office; which was after
Supper and in an Upper Room: But, by the Directory, Men are as much compelled
to sit, as by the liturgy to kneel, at the Holy Communion; The words of the
former p. 51, that the Table is to be so conveniently plated, that the
Communicants may orderly sit about it, being altogether as directive, as the
Rubric of the Latter; that the Minister shall deliver the Communion in both
kinds to the People, all meekly kneeling; And the words of the Ordinance of
Parliament, for the Establishing and putting in Execution the Directory, viz.
That the Directory shall be used, pursued, and Observed in all Exercises of the
Public Worship of God, in every Congregation, etc. Being though Illegal, yet as
injunctive as any Clause in either of the Acts of Uniformity, for the Using of
the Liturgy; And lastly, the posture of sitting (if I am rightly informed)
having been as ex^ctly observed and kept to by the Nonconformists, in the
receiving of the Holy Communion, as that of kneeling by those of the
Established Church: And therefore the Directory, according to our Author, must
be as much an infringement of Christian Liberty, in this also, as our Liturgy.

Having done with the Objection which was drawn from the pretense of Christian
Liberty; In the next place I proposed that which is raised from the pretended
numerousness and burden of our Ceremonies; to which I Answered, that the
utmost that this could amount to, if it were true, (as I do not conceive that
it is) would be only an inconvenience, and not a sin. To which he Replies, p.
109, that God's word tells us, that to do what is not convenient is sinful,
Romans 1. 28. Ephesians. 5. 4. But is not this still mere trisling and playing with
the ambiguity of a word, which I plainly take in one sense, and he wilfully
mistakes in another? For whereas a thing may be said to be inconvenient, either
first because it is troublesome; or secondly, because it is unlawful: Nothing
can be more manifest, than that here I take the word inconvenient in the former
sense only, and St. Paul, in the places he assigns, only in the latter. If our
Ceremonies were too numerous and burthensom (as I cannot see why they should be
so thought) yet this would only render them troublesome, and upon that account
inconvenient, but not unlawful: Whereas it is plainly the unlawfulness and not
the troublesomness of unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness,
etc. and of filthiness, and foolish talking and jesting, which makes the
Apostle in the above mentioned places, to call them by the name of inconvenient.

But, says he, Was not this the sin of the Pharisees, Mat. 23, 4. that they
burdened men's Consciences with their own inventions? To which I Answer, that
the sin of the Pharisees in that place must needs be one or both of these, viz.
either, first, the imposing of humane Traditions, as a part of God's Law, of
which I have already spoken, under the Objection about Christian Liberty; or,
secondly, the requiring a much more strict and exact obedience to God's Law
from other People, than what they themselves performed (as appears from the two
proceeding verses) which was a piece of most gross Hypocrisy. But what relation
this has to Rites and Ceremonies, appointed by Authority for order and decency
in the Worship of God, our Author must inform me, for of my self I am not able
to find it out.

In my Address I had taken notice, that though St. Austin complained of the
number and burden of Ceremonies in his time, yet ^^ never find that he looked
upon that as any cause for separating from the Established Church: Upon which
he thinks he has caught me several ways: And first he demands, why the
Dissenters may not now complain as well as St. Austin did in his time? To which
I Answer, because they have not the same reason; the number of Ceremonies,
which were brought into the Church in his days, being much greater and more
perplexing than what is now in use amongst us. But yet if they now made their
complaint, as he did, without breaking the Unity of the Church, or causing any
Schism in it; although I should think that there were no reason for their so
complaining; yet should I not ^erein acc^se them as guilty of any sin. But our
Author tells us, that if St. Austin had lived in some places of the world, and
complained of such a lu^then, there is a Canon called the tenth, by which he
had been, Ipso fa^^^, shut out of the Church. To which I Answer, that neither
are the w^^^^ Ipso f^cio (upon which he lays such weight) in the Tenth Canon of
the Church of England; nor is the Excommunication there threatened, but upon a
supposition that such a complaint is made and published for the abetting and
justifying of such as make a Schism in the Church, by taking to themselv^s the
name of another Church, not Established by Law: which farther ^hews how
disingenuous a man this is in quotations. In the next place, he demands how do
I know that St. Aus^in did not separate? But was ever such a Question asked? Or
is there the least intimation either in his own or any other of the Books of
that Age, that ever he did separate? And if such a man as he had separated, is
it to be imagined that great notice would not have been taken of it? Or lastly,
do I pretend to know positively that he did not separate, or to say any more,
but that we never find that he did? But our Author has a dilemma, to prove St.
Austin either to have separated or sinne^: For if he refused to use those same
Ceremonies, of which he complained, then he separated as well as the present
Non-consormists: but if he used them after his complaint of the^^ le^ng
burdensome and too numerous, it would be hard to excuse him from sin. To this
I Ans^er, first, that many Ceremonies in St. Austin's days, being probably
introduced by mere custom, without any Law or Canon to establish and confirm
them; it was certainly lawful for him, in his own Church and Diocese, ^o
re^r^n^h the use of such Ceremonies as these, as in prudence he might think
sit; because in strictness there lay no obligation upon him at all to make use
of them. But, secondly, if he had renounced and absolutely refused to
communicate with any Christian Church whatsoever, against which he had no other
Objection, but only that they required the use of some Ceremonies in the
Worship of God which God had not commanded, nor yet had any way forbidden;
although these Ceremonies might have been too numerous; and upon that account
troublesome; yet i^ he had no other j^s^ plea to bring against them, I cannot
see how this alone could have justified him in breaking the Unity of the
Church, which every Christian is b^^nd, as far as in him lies, to preserve: But
that ever he did any thing like this, does not in the least appear. But,
Thirdly, if St. Auslin, for the sake of Peace and Unity, was content to submit
to the use of so many Ceremonies as, in his opinion, were too numerous, and
therefore burdensome; I desire our Author to inform m^, by what Law of God he
can on this account be taxed, or with any reason so much as suspected of sin:
^^^ though it is not lawful to do evil, that ^^^ may come, Romans 3. 8. Yet that ^^
should b^ any ^ay unlawful, to do a thing which is not evil, but only
troublesome and uneasy; when the ^^^ a man has in doing it is really good; is
what no man, I think, of common sense, will offer to say.

The last Objection of the Nonconformists, which under this head I proposed in
my Address was, that Our Ceremonies are unnecessary, and therefore ought not to
be imposed. To which I there returned a two fold Answer; First, That what some
may think unnecessary, others may judge Expedient: Secondly, supposing, but not
granting, that our Governors were faulty in imposing some needless things upon
us, Yet that our Compliance even with such things for Peace and Unity's sake,
would rather be a Virtue than a Sin. In return to which he tells me first, that
what I d^oiously suppose, is a plain Truth, and in effect con^est by us, viz.
That our Ceremonies are unnecessary, because we declare them to be indisserent.
But will this Man never leave Trifling with the Ambiguity of Words? If by
unnecessary, he m^ans not absolutely and perpetually necessary to Salvation; I
grant, that every indifferent thing is in this Sense unnecessary: But if by
unnecessary, he means altogether useless and insignificant to any good purpose;
I deny that what is in it is own nature indifferent, is always thus to be judged
unnecessary. For there may be such Circumstances of things and Persons, wherein
such things may be Instruments and occasions of much good: And accordingly, it
is very evident, that the retaining of the use of some indifferent things in
our Church, did not a little contribute to the advancing of the Reformation
amongst us, and bringing over many thereto, who otherwise would not probably
have to easily forsaken Popery: And I have already given my Reasons why it is
not sit or proper, as matters stand, wholly now to lay all such things aside.

In the next place he tells me, That he knows of no Command of Christ for
comply^ng with Governors, in their unnecessary impositions, for the sake of
Peace and Unity; and therefore he will not own it to be a Virtue rather than a
Sin. I am sorry that he is so ignorant of the Laws of the Gospel: But,
seriously, has he never heard of a Command of Christ, which the Apostle thus
delivers to us, If it be possible as much as lies in you live Peaceably with
all Men: Romans 12. 18. If then a thing be otherwise never so unnecessary, yet if
it be possible; and if no Law of God has forbidden it, but that it lies in us,
and we are at liberty to do it; we ought to comply with it, if it be necessary
in order to Peace. Or has he never met with another Command, which S. Paul thus
sets down, Romans 13. 1. I^^t every Soul be subject to the higher Powers; And S.
Peter thus, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, 1
Pet. 2. 13. And to which there is no other exception made in the whole word of
God, but only this, that we ought to obey God rather than Men? A^ts 5. 29. If
then a thing be commanded by the higher Powers, and Ordained by the Authority
of those Men, in whom the Legislature resides; However unnecessary it may be
thought to be; yet still it is to be submitted to, except it appears to be
forbidden by some Law of Almighty God. But our Author it seems would bring
Government to a very Fine pass, when he would make every private Man to be
Judge, not only whether the thing Commanded be agree^ble to the Law of God; but
also whether there were any n^cessity for issuing such a Command at all; before
he shall lie under any Obligation to give Obedience to it.

But Church Governors, says he, are obliged to teach us, to observe no more
than what Christ Commanded them, Mat. 28. 20. Acts 10. 33. I grant it. But what
can be more plain than that the Apostles, who were the first Governors
appointed by Christ to his Church, did teach all men to observe the Lawful
Commands of Lawful Authority? And will our Author say that they had no Command
from Christ for doing this? But says he again, they have no Power to impose
things needless. I answer, that they who have the Power of making Laws, ought
not indeed to enact such Laws, as impose things altogether useless to any good
purpose: Nor are there any of our Church Constitutions, but what, if they were
duly respected and observed, would tend very much to Order and Decency; and
also to keep out unnecessary Innovatious; and therefore they cannot justly be
termed needless things. But if I should Judge them to be altogether needless;
Yet, as long as they are innocent, this would be no good Reason, why I should
refuse Obedience to them; as well because I have no Warrant from Gods word for
so doing; as that the Government in their Wisdom, may have very good reason for
Commanding such things, although, it may be, I am not able thoroughly to
comprehend it. And that such a modest compliance as this should be judged no
less than a Conspiracy with Men usurping Power, is such an imagination as no
Man of Reason or Charity could ever entertain.

Well! But did not Paul withstand Peter to the Face, in his imposing
unnecessary things on the Jews, Gal. 2. 11. But will this Man never make any
Conscience of imposing, not only impertinent but false Allegations of the Holy
Scripture, upon his unwary Reader? S. Paul in the place mentioned, did indeed
withstand S. Peter: But not on account of his Imposing any thing on the Jews
(of which there is not there the least shadow of a suggestion) But purely for
his Dissimulation, in that by withdrawing and separating himself from the
Gentiles, for fear of them which were of the Circumcision; he laid a stumbling
Block before the Gentiles; And, though not by his Doctrine, yet by his Example
seemed to put a sort of Compulsion upon them, to live as did the Jews; to which
no Law either of God or Man did oblige them. And, as to what he immediately
Adds; I grant with him that the Authority which the Lord has given unto the
Church is for Edification, 2 Cor. 10. 8. To which I must tell him, that a
settled Decency and Order in the Circumstances of Worship, does not a little
conduce. I grant also, that where a Church ceases to follow Christ, we ought
not therein to follow that Church, according to the Apostles Doctrine, 1 Cor.
11. 1. But where the Church is careful to follow Christ in all manner of things
that are n^cessary, and therein to the utmost to promote the Edification of all
her Members, why it should be a Sin to Comply with that Church, for Peace and
Unity's sake, in such things as are indifferent, and therefore Lawful; or why a
Man should Renounce the Communion of such a Church, on account of such things,
even in case they were needless; I cannot in the least gather from either of
those places: And, whereas he tells us that the Synod of Jerusilem, Acts 15,
thought fit to impose nothing but necessary things, Verse 28. I desire to know
in what Sense was the abstaining from Meats offered to Idols, and from blood,
and from things strangled, at that time necessary? If they were absolutely
necessary as essential parts of Gods Law, how comes S. Paul to teach the
lawfulness of eating that which had been offered to an Idol, provided it were
done without any Worship to the Idol, or Scandal given to weak Brethren? 1 Cor.
chap 8. and chap 10. And how came our Savior so expressly to assure us, and in
such general Terms, that not that which goes into the Mouth desil^th a Man?
Matt. 15. 11. But if they were in themselves indifferent, and necessary only in
order to reconcile the Jews, (who laid great Weight upon these things) and to
bring them to a more favorable opinion of the Gentile Christians, which I
believe our Author will not deny; how can the Example of this Synod be alleged
to Condemn, and not rather to justify, the practice of the Established Church;
which has retained and kept up the use of some things, in themselves likewise
indifferent; because they conceived them necessary and proper to reconcile
those of the Church of Rome (who by long custom had entertained a great respect
for them) and to beget in them a better opinion of the Reformation? And lastly,
as to what he quotes out of my Lord Primate Bramhall's Vindication; I freely
grant, that no man ought to suffer an Erroneous Opinion to be imposed upon him,
because as it is impossible for him to believe what he judges to be Erroneous;
so to prosess what he does not believe, would be a lie and a sin: But the
consequence which he would suggest from a supposed parity, between an Erroncous
Opinion and an Indifferent (and therefore innocent) Ceremony or Circumstance,
is altogether weak and groundless.

The fourth main Proposition which I have insisted on in my Address is, that
since the Communion of our Church is lawful and innocent in it ^^^ (which, I
hope, I have now abundantly proved against all that our Author ^^s Objected to
the contrary) there cannot be any just reason why the Nonc^^ sormists should
refuse to join with us in it. And although our Author nibbles a little, a^ some
of those things which I have touched under this head of my Discourse; yet since
every thing, which he there says, is either not to the purpose, or else
proceeds upon a supposition that our Communion is not lawful and innocent in it
self (which clearly alters the state of the case, and the contrary whereto I
have hitherto been asserting against all his weak and trifling Objections), I
will not give either my self or the Reader the trouble of making any Remarks
upon the particulars of what he offers on this occasion; only as to that
passage of Dr. Holden's, which he cites out of my Lord Primate Bramhall, p,
113. I think it enough to say, that although it may be less criminal for one
National Church, upon account of some doubtful Opinions, or such (...) things,
to refuse the Communion of such another Church (the obligation of whose
particular Laws or Canons can only extend to its own members), than for
subjects to disobey those Laws which are Enacted by their own lawful superiors;
and thereby to make a Schism in the very body of that National Church, of which
they are or ought to be members: Yet since the obligation to Ecclesiastical
Union and Communion is universal, and extends unto all Christians and Churches
whatsoever; wherever there is any separation or breach of Communion, made
between any Persons, Churches, or Congregations, there must of necessity be a
sin on the one side or other; namely, on their part who give a just cause for
breaking Communion, or on theirs who break it without any such cause given: And
this sin is what I call by the name of a Schism.

Having thus abundantly vindicated my Doctrine, I come now, in the last place
of all, to that which our Author calls the use of it: In which my design was
not (as he he suggests) to dissuade the Non-Co^formists from the thoughts of a
Legal Toleration; but only from the thoughts of such a Toleration as might
probably prove to be of dangerous consequence to the Established Church; if not
to the Civil State also. And therefore, in Answer to all that our Author has
offered upon this occasion, I think it is enough for me to say, that I am not,
nor ever was, against their having a full and free allowance to Worship God in
their own way; or for cutting them short in any advantages, which are
consistent with the public peace and security of the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Establishment; and if they desire more than this, I appeal to all indifferent
men whether it be reasonable for the Government to grant it to them.

But before I make an end, I must take the pains to wipe off a little dirt,
which our Author here also endeavors to cast, as well upon me in particular,
as upon the Establiblished Church in general.

First then he tells me, p. 115. That I have low thoughts of Salvation; and
rate it lower than employments of trust and pro^it upon Earth: For the former I
seem to grant them liberty to se^k; But the latter I would Monopoliz^ to our
own Party. But where I pray is the consequence of this Argument? That I
apprehend it as a thing of more dangerous consequence to our safety and
security, to admit the Nonconformists to a share in the Government, than barely
to permit them to seek for Eternal Salvation in their own way; is a truth that
may well be gathered from what I have suggested in my Address. But that
therefore I set a greater value upon Temporal Employments, than upon
everlasting Salvation, is what no Man but one of our Authors Logic and
Charity, would pretend to infer from any thing that I have said. But that I
would deprive them of the Ordinary means of subsisting and serving God and
their Country; which he there also lays to my Charge, but does not pretend to
prove; is such a barefaced calumny, as no one but a Man that wanted Conscience
or Consideration, would ever offer to load me with: For he who has but half an
Eye, may very plainly see that it is very possible, and very ordinary too, for
Men to subsist comfortably and grow Rich, and serve God and their Country
faithfully in a private Station, without ever being put into any place of Power
and Authority.

He tells me, presently after, That the Church may stand, though she don't
inhance all Offices of Power, Trust and Pro^it. These are not the Rock, on
which Chirst built his Church. But whoever said they were; Or to what purpose
is this uncharitable insinuation? I do not doubt or distrust the good
Providence and protection of Almighty God: But I cannot think it Reasonable
willingly to put a Power into any Man's hands, which I have reason to fear that
he will employ to my hurt, whenever he has a fair opportunity for it. Well! but
that their design is not to overthrow our Church, is evident; because they have
not moved for the withdrawing either Power or Profit from us. But how shall we
be secure, that they or their successors never will make such a motion, or
entertain such a design? If they judge our legal Establishment to be lawful,
why do they not con^orm to it? But if unlawful, are they not then in Conscience
bound to use their best endeavors to get it altered.

But whereas I had objected that the Presbyterian Party had formerly in all the
three Kingdoms; and again lately in one of them, actually overthrown the
Established Episcopal Church; And that therefore there is much reason to fear
that, if not at present, yet in succeeding times they may, if not carefully
prevented, do the same thing again in this Kingdom; our Author, instead of
offering us any manner of security against such an impendent evil; freely
supposes the truth of what I have said, and tells me, p. 117. That though all
this should come to pass, yet it is severe justice to punish the Predecess^rs,
for the probable faults o^ the Successors, not as yet comm^tted: In ^ell there
is more justice, where Men are only punished for real and past Crimes. Which is
plainly in other words to say, that though we clearly foresee the ruin of our
selves, or our Posterity, by granting all that the Nonconformists desire; yet
we must not take any care to prevent it. Here is a sample of those modest
Petitions of which our Author speaks in his Preface. But the Objection it self
is most weak and foolish. For although it is not just to pun^sh any Man ^^r a
Crime not as yet committed; yet to prevent Men from committing a crime into
which ^^ is likely that they may run; and by such prudent caution, to save the
Church and State fro a confu^ion or ruin; was never, I believe, accounted as a
piece of Injustice: And more than this I never thought of, or pleaded for.

But, says our Author, the Consequences of denying this Toleration desired,
will be burtful, viz. 1. The discouraging of many industrious and prositable
Subjects. 2. The alienating the affections of all sober men from Churchmen,
who are the sole opposers of this desire. 3. An impossibility ever hereafter to
induce the Non-Conformists to join with us, if there should be occasion for
their service. All which I grant might have a fair appearance of truth, if so
be that a Toleration were really denied to the Non-Conformists. But since the
case is quite otherwise, and that a free and legal Tol^ration is offered them,
upon the very same terms with which those of their persuasion in England are
well satisfied; which is as great an encouragement as can be to every thing,
except the ambition of a few Leading-men among them: If this Toleration be
refused by themselves; and if the Penal Laws, which are still in force in this
Kingdom, should ever liereafter come to be put in Execution against them; I
desire to know who but their own Leading-men will be to be blamed for it? Who
it seems are not contented to have their industrious Laborers, ingenious
Artists, and honest Traders (as our Author speaks of them in his Preface,
secured from trouble, and encouraged in their honest employments; if they at
the same time must be excluded from offices of power and trust in the Civil
State. So that the true and only reason why an Act of Toleration is not here
passed as well as in England, is because a few men among the Non-Conformists do
obstinately refuse to sacrifice their ambition to the peace and safety of their
Brethren.

But our Author taxes us with ungrateful breaking the promises which we made to
the Non conformists, and discovering heart-enmity against them. But when he
thus draws up his Indictments, he ought to produce his proofs; for he has
hitherto given us no great reason to believe him upon his bare word. It was,
and I think i^ still, the opinion of all sober men among us, that the
Non-Conformists ought to have a free Tol^ration upon such terms as may be
consistent with the safety of the Established Church and Civil State; (which
shows that we bear no heart-enmity against them) and it is, I think, their own
fault if they refuse it. But if more than this was ever; promised them by us; I
desire our Author to let us know when, and by whom, and what Authority they had
to make such promises to them.

As for the buffoon story of a sool, a quart of ale, and a gallows at the
Bridge of Stirling, with which our Author concludes his Book: All that I can
gather from it is, that, notwithstanding all his pretenses to Sanctity and
tenderness of Conscience, he is not a man of that seriousness which becomes a
Minister of the Gospel: Otherwise he would never have so impertinently pulled
in such a nonsensical piece in a matter of such weighty concern as the Peace
and Unity of the Church. And thus I likewise conclude that there can be no harm
done by his Answer to my Address; except men will be so foolish as to be
imposed on by a bu^dle of Sophistry and Calumny, without any manner of sound or
solid Proof.

FINIS.

