Licensed,

July 20th. 1689. J. FRASER.

THE OPINION OF Padre Paolo, OF THE Order of the Servites, Consultor of STATE,
GIVEN To the Lords the Inquisitors of STATE. In what manner the Republic of
VENICE Ought to govern themselves both at home and abroad, to have perpetual
Dominion.

Delivered by Public Order, in the Year 1615.

LONDON: Printed for R. Bentley, in Russel Street in Covent Garden. 1689.

TO THE Right Honorable HENRY, Viscount Sydney,
Gentleman of the Bedchamber to His Majesty, Colonel of the Royal Regiment of
Foot-Guards, and one of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
THough your designed Favors to me might justly claim this offer of my
Respects in a Dedication, yet I must own, That it is on of the next Age, than
your Lordship.

In your Negotiation in Holland, during the close Intrigues of the latter end
of King Charles his Reign, you strove to keep both him and us happy and quiet,
by promoting the true Interest of both: But when the Ferment of our Affairs
forced you to more sensible demonstrations of your thoughts, you Nobly chose
rather to appear an ill Courtier, than be thought an ill Man to your Country.
The Protestant Interest carried it with you, while the Roman Faction thought
their designs as secure as they were deeply laid. It Is rare to find such
Conduct and Courage in a Public Minister: But what could be expected less from
one ready to venture his Life in the Field at the Head of our Nation abroad,
against that unquiet Monarch who was then invading all the Liberty Mankind had
left.

Heaven, My Lord, has at last blessed these constant endeavors for England's
Prosperity, and we see you in the Councils and Privacy of a Prince born for our
Felicity.

The Great Queen of this Monarchy, who so loved her People, and understood
their Interest, had a Sydney for her Favorite, and such a man as she admired
living, and lamented dead; and our King, who has begun with restoring this
Nation to its true Interest, and will, no question, advance its Glory to the
highest pitch, has your Lordship in his Councils and Arms, Guarded by you in
the day, he sleeps often under your care in the Night, safe in your Loyalty,
and pleased in your attendance.

To whom then could I more properly offer these Arcanums of a Wise Government,
than to one who must be a good Judge of all Writings of that kind; and
therefore with repeated Offers of my humble Respects, and readiness to obey
your Lordship's Commands, I take leave, and am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Humble and most Devoted Obedient Servant, W.
Aglionby.

THE PREFACE.
THat Padre Paulo Sarpi, of the Order of the Servites, is the Author of this
Treatise, there needs no other proof than the reading of it; for whoever is
acquainted either with his style, or his manner of thinking, must of necessity
acknowledge, that they are both here. And indeed we may say, that this is not
only a true representation of the Government of the Venetian Republic, but
that the Author also (like great Painters, who in all their Works give us their
own Genius with the mixture of the Representation) has likewise drawn the
truest Picture of himself. He was one of the greatest men of his Age, of vast
Natural Parts, to which he had added all the acquired ones that great Study and
much Conversation with Men could give him: It was he who defended the Republic
in the dispute they had with Pope Paul the 5th; which he did so solidly, and
yet so modestly, that his Subject never carried him either to Invectives or
Railleries, unbeseeming the Gravity of the Matter, nor the Dignity of the
Persons whose Cause he managed; that Quarrel being accommodated by the
interposition of the Kings of France and Spain, in which the Republic had all
the advantage possible: The Senate, very sensible of the Obligation they had to
P. Paulo; made him Consultor of State, and added an Honorable Pension for his
Life, giving him at the same time Order to view all their secret Records, where
all their Papers and Instruments of State were laid up; all which he reduced
into such a new order, as that they might be recurr'd to with the greatest ease
imaginable upon all occasions. The Esteem they made of his Abilities was so
great, that they never had any important debate in which either by public
order, or by the private application of some of their Senators, they did not
take his advice; which most commonly was assented to afterward. Toward the
latter end of his Life, the Inquisitors of State seeing that they could not
hope long for the continuation of those Oracles, resolved, that once for all he
should impart them his thoughts upon the whole Constitution of their
Government, and withal, add his Opinion touching their Future Conduct both
within and without; and that is this Piece with which I now present the
Public. As it was made for the perusal of those only who were the participants
of all the Arcanums of the Empire; it is writ with less regard to the Public
Censure, to which he supposed it would never be subject. All other Writers of
Politics may in one thing be justly suspected, which is, that when they write
with a design of publishing their Works to Mankind, they must have a regard to
many considerations both of the times they write in, and Opinions that are then
received by the People, as also to the Established Forms both of Government and
Religion; besides that Self-love too will not let them forget their own Glory,
for the sake of which they often swerve from the true Rules of writing; but
here all these considerations ceased; the Work is directed to those whose
Interest it was to conceal it: And for the Author himself, it may be said, it
was rather his Legacy than any desire of showing his Abilities, which by other
Pieces of his were already sufficiently published to the World. But what an
Idea must we have of that Man whom a Venetian Senate not only admitted to their
Debates, but consulted upon the whole Frame of their Government; a Senate, I
say, justly deserving the Titles of Wise and Great; who have maintained their
State for 1200 years, with little alteration; who have been a Bulwark to the
Christian World against the most potent Invader that ever was; who at the same
time have struggled with all the Christian Princes united, and headed, even by
Popes, whose spiritual power alone has been able to subvert greater Empires:
This Senate, or at least the wisest of them, the Inquisitors of State, who have
the whole Executive Power in their hands, cannot let this Subject of theirs
leave the World without having from him a Scheme of their present Affairs, and
a prospect of the Occurrences to come: Nothing certainly can give us a greater
Idea of Padre Paulo, nor show us how great Abilities in the most retired and
concealed Subjects, will break out in all wise Governments, and cannot long be
concealed.

As to the work it self, I shall say little, it being improper to forestall the
Reader's Judgment by mine; but I think I may venture to give him some cautions
against a surprise, from some bold Maxims and arbitrary Positions which he will
meet with, and perhaps not expect from one of our Author's Profession, nor in
the Methods of a Government which carries the specious and popular Title of
Liberty in the Head of it. As to the Author, tho he were a religious man, and a
very strict observer of that Life; yet being above ordinary methods, and having
a Mind elevated beyond his sphere, he thought, that not only he might, but that
he ought to go to the Extent of his Capacity, when he was to advise those whom
God Almighty had invested with Sovereign Power. I his makes him lay down that
great Maxim, That all is just that contributes to the preservation of the
Government; and in a natural deduction from this, advise in some cases not to
stand upon common proceedings. I remember the Author of his Life says, That he
had adapted most of the Aphorisms of Hippocrates, about the Diseases and Cure
of the Body natural, to those of the Body politic; and if so, he could not
forget that of, Extremis Morbis extrema Remedia,
which alone would warrant all uncommon proceedings.

Most people have an Idea of Commonwealths, not unlike that which Poets and
young people have of the Golden Age, where they fancy, that without either
labor, solicitude, or chagrin, people past their time in the Innocent
Pleasures of Love and Music, and other soft Delights; so the World imagines,
that a Popular Government is all sweetness and liberty, precarious, and
depending upon their Votes, free from oppression and slavery, and constant to
known methods: but all this is a very wrong Conception; they are invested with
Sovereign Power, and must and do use it for their own preservation, as
absolutely as any Sovereign Prince in the World; and whoever shall seriously
consider the Machine of this Venetian State, must own, that neither the
Governors themselves, nor the people governed by them, have any such Excellent
and Inviting Prerogatives, as can justly give them a Superiority to the
Government of a wise Prince, and well disposed People in a limited Monarchy.
But I have said enough of this; the Reader will best judge, whether the reading
of this Book will enamour him of a Republican Government or not.

I have no more to say, but that this is a very faithful Translation from an
Original Manuscript communicated to me in Italy, where it begins to creep
abroad; and if we had in England the convenience of Workmen that could Print
Italian correctly, I would have published both the Original and my Translation
together.

The words of Quarantie and Avogadore, may puzzle some people; but they will
easily understand, that the first is a kind of Bench of Judges deligated out of
the Body of the lesser Nobility, for the Trial of Civil and some Criminal
Causes; and the other is the Name of a great Magistrate in Venice, who among
other Privileges, has that of carrying the Sentences of the Council of Ten
before the great Council.

THE OPINION OF Padre Paolo,
Most Illustrious and Excellent Lords, the Inquisitors of State,
I Write by Obedience to your Lordship's Commands, without Reflection upon my
own small Abilities, because the Chief Consideration of a Subject ought to be
to obey his Prince.

Your Excellencies have commanded me to deliver my Opinion, how the Venetian
Republic ought to regulate it self, to hope for a perpetual Duration. To
obtain a true Notion of this, it will be necessary to distinguish, and first to
regulate the Government of the City, in which will be comprehended the manner
of keeping the Nobles and the Citizens to their Duty; then look abroad to the
rest of your Dominions: and lastly give some Form to the dealing with Foreign
Princes.

To begin with the First, I might in short put you in mind of the Saying of St.
Bernardino of Siena, to the Doge M^ro, who said, That the Republic should
continue so long as they should keep to the Rule of doing Exact Justice; but to
come nearer to the matter, and the Condition of these Times, we must reduce
under that Head of Justice, all that contributes to the Service of the State;
and, to speak yet more succinctly, we will lay it down as a Maxim, That all is
just which is any ways necessary for the maintaining of the Government.

In the particular Government of the City, it is an excellent Custom to lay the
Impositions as well upon the Nobility, as the rest of the Citizens. First,
Because the Burden is less when it is general: And, Secondly, Because it is just
when it is without Partiality. There is no doubt but it lessens something of the
Splendour of the Nobility to see them taxed particularly, since in many
Governments the Nobility and Gentry, though they are Subjects, and not part of
the Government, do nevertheless enjoy a Freedom from Taxes, and contribute more
with their Sword than Purse, toward the Public Charge: But since the Ancient
Simplicity of our Ancestors has patiently submitted to this Yoke; and because
the Privileges of the Sword are dangerous in a Commonwealth, I think it is
advisable not to innovate in this Point, because such a change would give too
much offense to the rest of your People, and too much Haughtiness to your own
Nobility. It Is true, that when the Taxes are upon the Lands, so as to be
unavoidable, it would be convenient to give the Nobility all the advantage of
time for payment, and at last, if they are insolvent, it will not be amiss to
neglect the rigorous Exaction of the Law, that so the Nobility be not ruined,
because Extremes are always dangerous, and the Republic may suffer as much
from having too many poor Noblemen, as from having too many rich ones; besides
the Envy and Jealousy that must be in the hearts of those who shall find
themselves naked, and their Equals clothed with their Garments, and that only
for not having been able to pay an Imposition laid upon them by other Peoples
Contrivance.

There are some, who not making a right Judgment of things, do inveigh
extremely against a Custom of this Republic, which is the having so many
Offices and Places of so small Revenue, that those who enjoy them are almost
necessitated to be corrupt; and so after they have been Judges and Governors,
forced to come under the lash of the Law, or to justify their Integrity, if
they can: This seems a notorious Abuse, and carries with it some appearance.
But however, I should never advise to make these Employments better, because
there results from this another greater advantage to the State, which is to
keep the small Nobility under; for they may be compared to the Adder, which
cannot exert its Poison when it is numm'd with Cold: And if these Nobles, who
are by inclination discontented, should once arrive but to a Mediocrity in
Fortune, they would presently contest with the great ones, and by strength of
their Numbers play some ill Trick to the Government: whereas now they are kept
to their Duty, not only by Poverty, which clips the Wings of Ambition, but also
by being subject to the Censure of the great ones, for having misbehav'd
themselves in their Governments. Indead I could think it prudent to proceed
against them something coldly, unless they are guilty of very great Enormities,
such as scandalize the generality of your Subjects; for then it is necessary to
show a public resentment: But otherwise I would have them handled gently, it
being a kind of punishment to lie open to a Prosecution: And indeed I would
never have any Nobleman, though never so guilty, be condemned to a Public
Infamous Death, because the Damage that results from thence upon the whole
Order of the Nobility, when they are seen to pass through the Hands of an
Hangman, is greater than the Good of a Public Example can avail. Neither on
the other side would I have these Noblemen, thus guilty, to walk the Streets,
and be seen in public, because then your Subjects would conceive a sinister
Opinion of your Justice; but they should be kept in Prison, or, if it be
necessary, be privately dispatched.

If these Criminals fly from Justice, then you may use the utmost severity in
your banishing of them; because then it appears, that if nothing more be done,
nothing more was feasible; and let the same Rigor be observed in keeping them
out: for since they are, as it were, gangreen'd Members cut off from the Body,
it will not be expedient to unite them again to it with deformity of the whole.

Here I foresee I shall be censured by some, as a bad Pilot, who endeavoring
to shun Scylla, runs upon Carybdis; that is, while I aim at keeping the small
Nobility under, I forget the danger may arise from the Great, and the Rich of
that Order. I see the Objection, but do not value it; and my Reason is, the
long Observation I have made of the Nature of this City, by the strength of
which I dare boldly affirm, that the Republic of Venice will never come to its
end by that which has ruined all other Republics, to wit, when the power has
been reduced first into a few hands, and then their Authority devolved upon one
who has erected a Monarchy. The strange Emulation that reigns here among the
great ones, even among those of the same Family; nay, that is between Brothers
themselves, does secure the Government from this danger; and if by a
Supposition, almost impossible, all the Brothers of one Family had the power
given them of making a Dictator, I am confident they would never agree to choose
one among themselves, but would rather choose to be a part of the Government,
divided among a Thousand Gentlemen, than to be Princes of the Blood, and
Subjects.

The Great Governments, called Governments of Expense, and so contrived on
purpose by our prudent Ancestors, to give an occasion to those who are too rich
to lessen their Riches; ought to be disposed of according to the Intention of
their first Institution: That is to say, not to those who have no means to
sustain such a Burden, and must be forced by consequence to compass them per
fas and nefas; and if they are Honest, must do it foolishly, because they are
not wicked enough to do it knavishly, and so either acquire the Hatred of those
they govern, or be laughed at, and contemned by them. This is a Point of great
Importance; and he who goes through such an Employment meanly, and without
Expense, demerits extremely of his Country, because he renders the Person that
represents the State contemptible; and all Rebellions of Subjects have had
their first Original Rise from the Contempt of the Prince.

The Contests that happen between Nobleman and Nobleman of equal Fortunes, and
are followed by Attempts upon one another, may be connived at when they are
reconciled; but if the thing be between a Nobleman of the Better sort, and one
of the Lesser, let it be chastis'd with some appearance of Severity at least,
for fear the Humors of the small Nobility should be stirred; But if one of
these shall attack a Nobleman of the First Rate, let him be punished with a
heavy hand, lest the Party injured, being potent in Friends, go about to do
himself Justice, to the great detriment of the Public Authority: But if a
Nobleman do commit an Enormity toward a Subject, first let there be all the
endeavor possible used to justify him; and if that cannot be, let the
punishment be with more Noise than Harm; But if a Subject insults a Nobleman,
let the Revenge be sharp and public, that the Subjects may not accustom
themselves to lay hands upon the Nobility, but rather think them Venerable and
Sacred.

In Civil Judicatures it would be requisite to act without Passion, to take
away that ill Opinion that Men have of the Partiality of Justice, in favor of
the Great. This Belief must be destroyed; for a Subject that once thinks
himself prejudged by the Quality of his Adversary, will never be capable of
seeing whether his Cause has been decided according to the merit of it or no:
Therefore there can never be too much diligence used in the Administration of
Civil Judicatures, which are one of the greatest Foundations of Government; for
when a Subject can say to himself, That he shall have Justice, if his Case
deserves it, he submits to a great many other Grievances without repining: And
on the contrary, though after an unjust Sentence, he should be indulged in some
Criminal Matter, he will never have a Love for the Government, because the
Injury received, will stick in his Memory, and the Indulgence will vanish out
of it.

The Quarrels between the Plebeians may be judged according to the common
course of Justice, which may there appear in its Natural Being, there arising
no Politic Grounds to disturb the Course of it; nay, rather their little
Animosities are to be fomented, as Cato used to do in his Family; and for this
Reason, wise Antiquity permitted the Encounters and Battles that are still
practiced in this City, between several Parties of the People; But all
Assemblies of numerous Bodies are to be avoided as the Plague, because nothing
can sooner overturn the Commonwealth, than the Facility the People may meet
with in getting together to confer or debate about their Grievances; Nay, this
thing is so dangerous, that it is to be detested and abhorred, even in the
Nobility, because that there being in all Bodies some ill Humors, if they are
not united, either they do not work at all, or do not work ill; But if they
once are in a Mass, and take their course one way, they not only are hard to
cure, but often prove mortal to the Body. Let there be a careful watch upon all
Seditious Discourses, nay, upon all Speculative ones that seem any way to
censure the Government; and set before your Eyes the Example of Heresies, which
have never so much wasted the Church as when they have had their Beginnings
from Curiosity and Jests.

Let the City Arsenal be kept up, though there be not present occasion for it,
because things that depend upon Time, must be anticipated by time. Let the
Masters and Tradesmen of the place be kept satisfied, and upon any Fault
committed, let the Punishment be Paternal; that is, with seeming Rigor, but
not such as to make them run away; for, if possible, they are to believe the
Fable of the Mouse, who thought its hole to be all the World.

Let the Public Secretaries, and all other Officers that must be informed of
the Public Concerns, be chosen with care, as like to be faithful and diligent;
but when once admitted, though they should prove otherwise, let them be born
withal, because there is need of but a few to do well: But every single Officer
can do hurt; and it is much easier to defend ones self from a Potent Foreign
Enemy, than from an illmeaning Servant.

Let the Manufactures which are peculiar to Venice, be preserved; and to that
end let them not be loaded with many Impositions, because that Profit and Gain
which has made Men venture through a Thousand Difficulties, to discover New
Worlds, will still carry the Merchant, if he cannot have it at home, to seek it
abroad, though he go to the Antipodes for it. Preserve the Artists therefore,
remembering that most Arts are a kind of Fantastic Being.

The Marriages between Noblemen and Women of the City, may be tolerated, if the
Women are very rich; because it often happens that the Industry of many Years
of the Plebeians, serves only to enrich the House of a Nobleman; and it is a
gentle Imperceptible sort of Usurpation; it is true, it is something abating of
the Luster of the Noble Families; but that is only in abstract and in general,
but in reality it advantages the Nobility; and there need be no fear that the
Children be degenerate and base, because nothing so debases a Nobleman as
Poverty: Besides, there results from this another great advantage, which is, to
make the Plebeians concerned by Affection for the Nobility, and bound to study
their advantage by a much sweeter tie than that of Obedience.

Let the Considerable Honors of the Commonwealth be disposed of to those who
may naturally pretend to them, for having gone through the many Employments,
which are steps to the highest Dignities, making always an allowance for
extraordinary Merit, in which the State can never be too prodigal: For
otherwise to prefer those who cannot reckon themselves among the Lawful
Pretenders, gives just Offense to the others his Equals, and likewise
strengthens the pretensions of the unworthy, who not seeing any thing in that
Fortunate Man that exceeds their ordinary Talent, cannot imagine why he should
be preferred, and they excluded from the like Dignities. The Subject on the
other hand is hardly brought to pay Excessive Reverence where they never used
to give but ordinary Respect; and from this argues, That the Dignity it self is
not of so much value, since it is bestowed upon so inconsiderable a Person.

And because it is in the Nature of all sublunary things to have a mixture of
Imperfection, I must own, that the Republic of Venice has likewise its
Defects; and the Chief one is, That the Body of the Nobility is too numerous to
be Aristocratical; therefore it will always be expedient to contrive, by all
Arts imaginable, that the Great Council do delegate the greatest Authority that
may be to the Senate and the Council of Ten: But this must be done by secret
imperceptible ways, such as shall not be discovered till after it is done,
because when they have once for all parted with their power, it will be a happy
settlement of the deliberating part, and if the same can be composed in the
Judiciary and distributive Power, it may be hoped, that the Constitution of the
State will be more vigorous: It cannot be denied but the Great Council does
relish very much of the Mobile, and by consequent, subject to impetuous
Deliberations, not always weighed in the Balance of Prudence and Experience.
And truly I admire, that wise Antiquity did not gain this Point, it being easy
for them to take advantage of the simplicity of their times; or at least to
have prolonged the time of the great Magistratures further than from Year to
Year, at the end of which they now must have a new Confirmation from the
Senate; For this being designed to prevent the falling into the Tyranny of the
great ones, does unawares run the State into that of the meaner sort, so much
the more odious by how much it is more numerous and unexperienced; We should see
more vigorous Resolutions in the Senators, if they were not continually obliged
to court the Favor of the Piazza.

The Office of Avogadore is to be disposed of with extreme Circumspection, and
that to Persons of Eminency, such as have no need of fawning upon the Multitude
of the Great Council, and then the Senate and Council of Ten might make some
steps beyond their Natural Authority, which would be born with patience, and
Time would give them Prescription: Whereas, if an Avogadore, to make himself
Popular, shall carry these Deliberations to the Great Councils Censure,
immediately out of Jealousy they are annulled, though never so expedient.
Therefore if that Office of Avogadore cannot be placed in the hands of one who
inclines more to the Patritian than to the Popular side, it would be well to
give it to one of mean Spirit, and a quiet Temper; or if it be disposed of to
an unquiet bold man, let him be one who lies under some infamous imputation of
Corruption, or other Enormity, to the end that the first may not be able, nor
the latter dare to affront, and try it with the Grandees of the State;
Otherwise an Avogadore of Parts, Integrity and Malignity, may easily set fire
to the Four Corners of the Commonwealth.

For the same Reasons it will always be well to lessen the Authority of the
Quaranties, they being naturally popular. They were constituted numerous, to
prevent the Venality of Justice; but on the other hand they are subject to
gather peccant Humors, and afford too much nourishment to a Feverish Temper:
They may be born with in the administration of Civil Justice, but in Criminals
their power should be lessened, which may be done by the Council of Ten's
taking to their Cognizance all Criminal Cases that they can any ways draw to
them, and by leaving off the Custom of deligating the Power of the Senate and
Signoria to these Quaranties, as is now practiced but too often. If these
Quaranties were quite taken away, it would be better for the Government, but
then it would be as necessary to provide some other way for so many necessitous
and idle persons.

It were well to use all means to take from them the Authority of judging
Noblemen in Criminal Cases; for so by degrees they will lose many of the
Privileges affected to the Nobility, as also I could wish they were totally
excluded from the Senate; But that is more to be wished than hoped for.

As for the People, let them always be provided for by plenty of things for
sustenance, and as cheap as may be: For the Nature of the Rabble is so
malicious, that even when scarcity of Provisions comes from the failing of the
Crops, they nevertheless impute it to the Malice or Negligence of the Great
ones: So there is no way to make them hold their peace, but to stop their
Mouths. Employ as many of the People as may be in the Service of the Public,
that so drawing their Livelihood from the Government, they may have affection
for it, and the Numbers of the Necessitous will thereby be lessened: for if
Hunger and Want can make strong Towns yield, it will likewise incite Men to
venture their Lives in desperate Attempts, rather than linger in misery. Yet
still I would not advise to take any into Office that had not first gained
wherewithal to subsist in a mediocrity; for else it will be but giving him a
kind of leave to cheat, to the great damage of the Public.

As for the Married Women of the City, let there be care taken to keep them
honest; and to have them so, they must be kept retired, remembering, that the
Beginnings of all Corruption in that kind are slight, and proceed from a Look
or a Salute.

Let one Modern Abuse be reformed, which is, that the Noblemen do take upon
them to force the People to make Agreements, Payments, or Marriages, and not
dare to have recourse to the Public Authority, upon which this is an
Usurpation: If this be not remedied, it is enough to cause another Sicilian
Vespers: Besides, that it is likely to set all the Nobility together by the
Ears, while each will maintain his own Friends and Dependants.

In all Occurrences where the Public Faith is engaged, let it be inviolably
kept, without minding any present advantage that might accrue by the breaking
of it; for that is but momentaneous: whereas the Benefit of keeping Faith is
eternal; and a Prince that breaks his Word, must invent a new Religion to make
himself be believed another time, seeing the Oaths he made in the Religion he
professes have not been able to bind him.

Let the Nobles forbear all Trading; for a State that will have Merchants, must
not have their. Governors exercise that Profession, because the Merchants will
always be afraid of being Brow-beaten in Bargains, and over-awed in their
Dealings. The Spaniards, who have so little kindness for the Venetian
Government, have not a more odious Name than to call it, A Republic of
Merchants. By an Ancient Law, a Nobleman taxed with Trading, cannot enter into
a Turnament, as not being fit Company for Cavaliers. Merchandise may in a short
time either extremely enrich, or totally ruin a Family, both which are
dangerous for the Commonwealth. Besides, a Merchant is of a necessity in some
measure a Foreigner, while his Trade and Interest lies abroad, and a Nobleman
ought to have no Interest nor Affection but at home. If Politicians have
taught, that it is not safe for a great City to have too sumptuous Palaces and
Villas in its Territory, lest the fear of losing of them should incline them to
yield the very City to a potent Enemy: What shall we say of those Nobles, who,
being engaged in Trade, may have many Thousands of Crowns in an Enemies
Country? In the beginnings of a Commonwealth, Merchandising was necessary to
get out of Poverty, and now it is dangerous, as being the Fomenter of too much
Luxury. The Genoueses who have continued the Trading of their Nobility, have
but small Respect showed them by other Princes, and are more valued one by one
than altogether.

Let superfluous Pomps be forbidden, though if they were only followed by the
Rich, it would be of use to the Government, because it would bleed those who
are too sanguine; but by reason of the Emulation which is between those of the
same Degree, the permitting of them would prove ruinous to many Families, who
could neither avoid them, nor go through with them: And whoever by a Punctilio
of Honor is brought to the necessity of doing more than he is able, must use,
to compass it, such means as he ought not to employ.

Before a Law be made and promulgated, let it be well thought on and debated:
but being once made, let it be observed, and the non-observance of it punished;
because whoever suffers Disobedience in small matters, teaches it in greater:
And that Nobleman who thinks to distinguish himself by slighting of the Laws,
offends both his Country and himself by such* an Example, more than by any
dissoluteness he could be guilty of, because he directly strikes at the Public
Authority; and besides, such a Custom once taking Root in a Commonwealth, and
being an inveterate Abuse among the Nobility, it is not to be reformed with
less than the loss of the Lives of half the Body.

If there be an occasion of coming to some Resolution that may be thought
unpleasing to the generality, particularly in point of Justice, let it be given
out, That it was carried by a thin Majority, that at least they who were
against it, may please themselves in thinking they had many of their Opinion.

Let the Secrets of the Government be kept inviolably, and do not forget that
Ancient Record of the Venetian Circumspection, which was, That when the general
Carmagnuola was condemned, the Resolution (though taken by Three Hundred and
Fifteen Senators) never took Air for Eight Months together before the
Execution; which is a thing that the most absolute Princes could not have met
with in the Fidelity of Three or Four State-Ministers, though bound by
excessive Rewards to Secresy. And what a wonderful thing was the deposition of
the Doge Foscari, concealed by his own Brother? Certainly one cannot without
Tears observe, that in our Times so great a Quality which seemed to be proper
to the Venetian Commonwealth, is something altered by the inconsideration of
the young Nobility, who, not out of Disloyalty, but too much Freedom, do let
things slip from them which ought to be concealed. I think every Venetian
Nobleman ought to teach his Children the use of Secrecy with their Catechism;
but the better way were to forbid all talking of Public Concerns out of the
place where they are properly to be deliberated on, and much less among those
who are partakers of the Secret.

Let the Honors and Dignities of the Commonwealth be dispensed regularly, and
by degrees, avoiding all sudden Flights, because they are dangerous: To see a
Cloud enlightened of a sudden, is most commonly a sign of a Thunderbolt to come
out of it; and he that from a private man leaps in an instant to the Port of a
Prince, has something of the Player. Honors given by degrees keep the young
Nobility from attaining them before they are ripe for them; and we may observe,
that as in Physic a man moderately Learned, but well Experienced, is safer for
the health of the Body Natural; So in the Government of the Commonwealth, a man
often employed, though, perhaps of less acuteness, succeeds best. All Matters
of Benefices are very properly under the Cognizance of the Great Council, but
it would be as proper to take away all Appeals to the Quaranties, and place
them in the Senate, because it often happens, that these Causes are to be
decided according to reason of State; and those Quarantia Judges put little
value upon those Politic Reasons: And besides, it seems a great incongruity,
that a Sentence, where the Person of the Doge, and the whole Signoria, both
intervene, should afterward be liable to the Censure of Forty Persons of
lesser value. I believe if it were observed to chastise rigorously, but
secretly all those Lawyers and their Clients, who carry these Appeals to the
Quarantias, the use of them would be less frequent, and in time they would be
forborne, as if they were forbidden.

If it should fall out, that any of your Subjects should procure a Decree in
the Rota, or Court of Rome, you must rigorously command from him a Renunciation
ab Impetratis, else all beneficiary Causes will be devolved to Rome, where they
are looked upon as Sacred, and so a fourth part of all Civil Causes would be
lost for your own Courts: Auditors of the Rota are to be with the Commonwealth,
like Bishops in partibus Infidelium, a thing of Title, but without Subjects.

Let the Bishops of the Venetian State be always praecogniz'd in the Consistory
by a Venetian Cardinal, without the Circumstance of creating him Special
Procurator; but as Protector, which he really ought to be as other Cardinals
brag they are so, for other States. For the Court of Rome, to avoid these
procurations to Venetian Cardinals, would perhaps desist making any of that
Nation, that so they might oblige the State to have recourse to Strangers,
which in time would also prejudice the pretense of being treated as Crowned
Heads. If the preconisation be made otherwise, let the State seize the
Temporalities of the Bishopric, and stop all Pensions laid upon it: It Is true,
that if the Cardinal Nipote should make the Preconisation, and enjoy at the
same time the privilege of a Venetian Nobleman, it could not well be rejected.

If it should ever happen that there should be a Pope, I will not say a Venetian,
for that would be of more danger than advantage to the Government, but a
Foreigner well inclined to the Venetian Republic, then would be the time to
obtain once for all the Grant of the Tenths upon the Clergy, as once it was got
under Clement the Sixth, whose Bull is unfortunately lost; for it is troublesome
to get it renewed every Five Year or Seven Year; and it would be a Point gained
which still would more and more equal the Republic with Crowned Heads; as also
if in the Titles given by the Pope to the Doge, there could be gained the
Superlative, as Carissimo or Dilectissimo, as is usual to Crowned Heads, it
would be a new luster to the Republic, which for want of these things, and
also because that never any Venetian Nuncio was promoted to be Cardinal, is
looked upon at Rome as a kind of Third Power between Crowned Heads and the
Ducal State. If, I say, all this could be gained by the State from a Pope,
there might be some return made, by making a Law, That Churchmen in Criminals
should not be judged by any Tribunal but the Council of Ten, or Delegates from
that Council. And now I am speaking of that Council, I cannot but inculcate,
That all means possible should be used to hinder an Avogadore from daring to
carry the Decrees of the Council of Ten to be re-view'd or censured by any
other Council: but rather, if there ought to be any Change made in them, let it
be by the same Power that made them; otherwise the Consequence will be a
constant annihilation of their Decrees, and a manifest depression of the great
Nobility, with an Exaltation of the lesser.

Touching the Authority of this Council, I have this more to say, That I could
wish, that the Delegations of its Power were less frequent, with great regard
to the Dignity of the Persons, as well as to the Splendour of the Government,
which is always more reverenced when it is least communicated, like the
Sunbeams, which in that glorious Body are of Gold, but communicated to the
Moon, are but of Silver. Indeed our Ancestors would have deserved well of us,
if they had lengthened the time of this Magistracy: but because that which was
not done in those Old Times, can hardly be hoped for in these Modern ones, the
only Remedy would be to obtain a Continuation of the same persons for another
year, under pretext of avoiding so many various Elections in so short a time as
must be made by a Scrutiny in the Pregadi: It Is true, that would exempt the
persons continued from the Governments of Expense; but as long as that
Exemption did not extend beyond a year, there would be little Inconvenience in
it: And if it be objected, That this would too much strengthen the Authority of
the great ones, I answer, That it lasting but a few months, could not be of ill
Consequence: and on the other side, those hands are, as it were, tied up, which
ought to be at liberty to do Justice, while every week they may be canvass'd
and teas'd by a Party of mean Persons, both for the Conditions of their Mind
and Fortune: I have often admired how the Council of Ten (having already all
the Criminal Power, and a good part of the Judiciary in Civil Causes, as well
as in State Affairs) have suffered themselves to be thus fettered, it seeming
to me almost impossible that the Inferior sort should at the time of this
Modification have so far prevailed over the middling Nobility, as to make them
forget, that it is much better obeying a few Great Ones, than a Multitude of
Inferiors. The Prudence of the Great Ones must be awaked, to take all secret
advantage to repair these past Omissions by means not easily penetrated.

Let Virtue be esteemed wherever it is; and if it be Eminent in one who is not
Noble, let it find a Regard; for he has made himself Noble; and all Hereditary
Nobility has had its beginning from some personal Eminency. And thus much for
the First Head.

The Second Head, which is concerning the Government of your Subjects, may be
divided into those who confine upon the Sea, and in your Islands, and those of
Terra Firma.

As to the first, there needs not much Speculation; for they confining only
upon the Turk, and there being among them but few Persons of Note or Riches,
there remains nothing but to show your selves just by giving them good Rulers;
and there you ought to be very careful: for if they have Justice and Plenty,
they will never think of changing their Masters: Those few of Istria and
Dalmatia, that confine upon the Emperor, have not in themselves any Qualities
to waken your Jealousy, and are besides well affectioned to the Government of
the Republic.

For your Greek Subjects of the Island of Candia, and the other Islands of the
Levant, there is no doubt but there is some greater regard to be had of them,
first, because that the Greek Faith is never to be trusted; and perhaps they
would not much stick at submitting to the Turk, having the Example of all the
rest of their Nation before their Eyes: These therefore must be watched with
more attention, lest, like Wild Beasts, as they are, they should find an
occasion to use their Teeth and Claws; the surest way is to keep good Garrisons
to awe them, and not use them to Arms or Musters, in hopes of being assisted by
them in an Extremity: for they will always show ill Inclinations proportionably
to the Strength they shall be Masters of, they being of the Nature of the
Gally-Slaves, who, if they were well used, would return the kindness, by
seizing the Gally, and carry it and its Commander to Algiers: Wine and
Bastonadoes ought to be their Share, and keep Good Nature for a better occasion.

As for the Gentlemen of those Collonies, you must be very watchful of them;
for besides the Natural Ferocity of the Climate, they have the Character of
Noblemen, which raises their Spirits, as the frequent Rebellions of Candia do
sufficiently evidence. The use of Colonies was advantageous to the Roman
Commonwealth, because they preserved even in Asia and Africa, Roman
Inclinations, and with them a kindness for their Country. If the Gentlemen of
these Colonies do tyrannize over the Villages of their Dominion, the best way
is not to seem to see it, that there may be no kindness between them and their
Subjects; but if they offend in any thing else, 'twill be well to chastise them
severely, that they may not brag of any Privileges more than others: It will
not be amiss likewise to dispute all their Pretensions to any particular
Jurisdiction; and if at any time their Nobility or Title be disputed, it will
do well to sell them the Confirmation of it at as dear a Rate as possible: and,
in a word, remember that all the Good that can come from them, is already
obtained, which was to fix the Venetian Dominion; and for the future there is
nothing but Mischief to be expected from them.

As for the Subjects of Terra Firma, there is required a more abstruse way of
governing, by distinguishing those who by an ancient Inclination are well
affected to the Republic, as those of Brescia, Crema, and Bergamo, and also
those of Vicenza; for to them there ought to be suitable returns of kindness
made upon occasion to the others, who only have a kindness of Obedience, such
as are the Veroneses, Padouans and Trevigians, it will be good to make show of
great Justice toward them, but not let slip any occasion of keeping them low:
It is good to wink at the Fewds and Enmities that happen among them, for from
these two benefits arise to the Commonwealth, to wit, Private Discord among
themselves, and good Confiscations to the Public.

Let all Extortions and Oppressions committed by the Gentry upon the People, be
severely punished, that the People may be affectionate to the Government, as
being particularly protected by it: In all occasions of Taxes and Impositions,
suffer not any Remonstrances, remembering how in 1606. there had like to have
been a League between the Brescian and Veroneze, in order to obtain an
Abolition of Imposts, and with what boldness the Brescian Ambassadors made
their Complaints in the Senate: It was a very previous Disposition to a
Rebellion; Therefore it will be fit to let them know, That if the State think
good to lay a Tax, there is no way of avoiding it. Those who in the Councils of
these Towns, are of a resolute Nature, and somewhat refractory to the Orders of
the State, you must either ruin or oblige, even at the Public Charge: For a
small Leven is enough to ferment a great Mass of Bread.

The Brescians have a Privilege which you must infringe upon all fit
opportunities, which is, That no Estates of Brescians can be bought but by
Brescians themselves: For if the Venetians could extend themselves in that most
fertile Country, in a few years it would be as it is now with the Padouans, who
have scarce a Third of their own Country left them. In the Case of a Rich
Heiress, it will be well to endeavor, by all fair means, to marry her with
some of the Venetian Nobility, to enrich them, and impoverish the others. Let
their Governors be chosen among those of the highest Spirits of the Venetian.
Nobility, that they may in them venerate the Prince: for every man naturally
gives more Credit to his Eyes than to his Ears. Observe however this Caution in
Taxing, That you do not thereby hinder Plenty: For though men may be persuaded
to part with Superfluities, yet not with what is necessary for Life. As for
Employments, if there be room, omit not to give them to the Natives, but still
in places remote from their own Dwelling, and keep them there as long as may
be, that they may lose their Interest at home. If there be Heads of Factions
among them, they must be Exterminated any way; but if you have them in Prison,
it is better to use Poison than the Hangman, because the advantage will be the
same, and the odium less. You must have an Account of the Taxes that their
Neighbors the Milaneses undergo, and still let those of the Venetian Subjects
be something lighter in comparison; and moreover let them be free from
quartering of Soldiers, which is in it self the heaviest of all Tyrannical
Oppressions.

Let the great Crimes be still brought before the Council of Ten, that the
Veneration for the Power at distance may be greater, and likewise because the
Ministers of Justice will be less subject to be corrupted, when the Criminals
are in the Prisons of the State. Let the Process against them be tedious, that
so the slowness of proceedings may be some part of punishment: But for the
Banditi, if they dare to appear in the State, let them be Extermined with all
Industry; for there cannot be a greater Demonstration of Contempt in the
Subject, and Weakness of the Prince, than for a Condemned Man to dare to come
into the Dominions out of which he has been banished, as if one should frequent
another man's House in spite of his Teeth. The Bishoprics and other
Church-Preferments may be conferred upon the Natives, first, to avoid the
Imputation of too much Avarice in the Venetian Nobility, if they should take
all Preferments to themselves. Secondly, In order to debase the Spirits of the
Natives, and turn them off from Arms to an idle Life: Besides, it will be a
kind of a Shadow of Liberty, to make them bear their Subjection the better. But
as much as it may be convenient to let them attain the Degree of Bishops, so
much would it be dangerous to let them arrive to that of Cardinal; for then
they will be sure to abhor the Quality of Subjects, since those who wear that
Purple have usurped the Precedence even over Princes.

Let every City have the making of their own Gentry by their Common Council;
for that will make it so much the meaner; but still let them be bound to have
the Confirmation from the Senate.

Let all those Families who apply themselves to the Service of Foreign Princes,
be upon all occasions slighted, and not at all countenanced by the Government,
intimating to them by that silent notice, That he deserves little of his own
Prince who seeks Employment with a Foreign one: And if any of these who have
served abroad, should be so bold, as to contend with a Venetian Nobleman, if it
be at Venice, let the Punishment be severe, if he be in the wrong; but if it is
in his own Country, let it be gentle, that the Opinion of the Public Justice
may be advantageously insinuated to the People; and likewise, that the Noble
Venetians themselves may avoid Contests, where they are not more immediately
protected.

Let the Citadels of the Chief Cities be well provided, as much against a
Foreign Enemy, as to chastise a Rebellion at home, nothing so much inclining to
offend, as the hopes of Impunity: and it may indeed be said, That if Men were
certain of a punishment to follow, they would never offend at all; but a Prince
that is sufficiently provided, is sufficiently safe. Remember, that as it is
very hard to find either a Wife or a Monk, that one time or another have not
repented the loss of their Natural Liberty, so the same may be said of
Subjects, who fancy that they have parted with more of that they were born to
than was necessary for their well-being. And let this suffice for the Second
Head.

Coming now to those several Princes with whom the Venetian Republic may have
Concerns, we will begin with the Pope, as being the first in Dignity, if not in
Power.

And here we must have a Twofold Consideration, he being to be looked upon as a
Spiritual and as a Temporal Prince. There has been some Advertisements given
already about his Spiritual Power: We will add here what was then omitted:

First, We must admire the wonderful State of that Monarchy, which from a mean
and persecuted Condition, for the Series of many years, in which the very
Exercise of Religion was punished with Death, is arrived to so much Greatness,
that all Regal Dignities of the same Communion, pay Homage to this Spiritual
Monarch, by the kissing of his Feet. God Almighty has been pleased this way to
show the Reward of Christian Religion, by raising to the Supreamest Greatness
the Institutors and Ministers of it; but the Piety of Christian Princes has
very much contributed to it; and the first was Constantine: This Emperor not
only embraced the Christian Faith, but enriched the Church extremely, and since
his time several other Emperors and Kings have, as it were, vied with one
another, who should give most: But that which is most inscrutable is, how with
their Riches they came to give away also their Jurisdiction and Power.

For six hundred years after the coming of Christ the Popes were always
confirmed by the Emperors, or in their steads, by the Exarcks of Ravenna; and
in the very Patent of Confirmation there was always written these Words,
Regnante Tali Domino Nostro. In the year 518. the Emperor Justinus sent from
Constantinople his Ambassadors to Pope Hormisda, to confirm the Authority of
the Apostolical Sea, and to announce Peace to the Church. In 684. Constantine
the Second gave to Benedictus the Second a Concession, by which, for the
future, the Election of Popes should be made by the Clergy and People of Rome,
and should not need the Confirmation of the Emperor, nor of the Exarck, not
reflecting, that the holiness of those times might come to change it self into
an Interest of State. Bonifacius the Third obtained of the Emperor Phocas,
that all other Christian Churches might be obedient to the Roman. After this,
in the year 708. Justinus the Second was the first that submitted to kiss the
Pope's Feet; and that Pope's Name was Constantine: But Adrian the first having
received great Favors from Charles the first, King of France, did in a Council
of One Hundred and Fifty Three Bishops, confer upon him the Authority of
choosing the Popes, which was about the year 773. a Privilege which his Son
Lewis the Pious knew not how to keep, but parted with it for the imaginary
Title of Pious; to which might be added that of Simple. Howsoever scandalous
the Emperors were in their Lives, the Popes did use to bear with them,
referring to God Almighty the punishment of them: But in the year 713. Philip,
Emperor of Constantinople, being fallen into Heresy, was Excommunicated by
Pope Constantine, and had the Reward due for all the Honors and Privileges
given by his Predecessors to the Popes. This was the very first time that the
Imperial Power was forced to stoop to the Papal; and yet at the same time the
Church of Milan claimed an Independency from the Roman, and maintained it for
above Two Hundred Years, being countenanced by the Emperors, who often came
into Italy, and in their absence hy the Exarcks of Ravenna, till at last in the
year 1057. it yielded up the Contest to Pope Stephen the Ninth. In the year
1143. Celestin the Second was the first Pope chosen by Cardinals in Exclusion
to the People.

I have made this Narration, that it may appear by what Degrees this Spiritual
Monarchy has increased; and in it, the Goodness of Christian Princes is not
more to be admired than the Dexterity of the Popes, in not omitting any
occasion to gain ground.

At present the Emperor is chosen by a Pontifical Bull, where the Power of
Election is committed to the Three Ecclesiastical, and Four Secular Electors,
with an Obligation nevertheless in the Emperor chosen, to receive his
Confirmation and Coronation from the Pope; so that the Subject is at last
become Prince over his own Prince, not without some reflection of Weakness upon
Otho the Fourth, Emperor of Germany, who in the year 994. agreed with Pope
Gregory to settle the Election in this manner, for the Honor (as he thought)
of the German Nation, but with great Diminution of the Imperial Dignity. To
this Grandeur of the Papacy, if we add that of having subjected to its power
all the other Bishops of Christendom, and obtained to be owned the first of all
the Patriarchs, who long contested its Primacy. I say, so high a Power ought to
make all other well-governed States very wary in their proceedings with it, and
to have a careful Eye upon all those occasions wherein the pontifical Authority
may be still enlarged, because it is observed, that all Courtesies and Favors
of Princes are in that Court turned to Debts and Claims in the space of a few
years; and to obtain the possession, they do not spare for Exorcisms and
Anathema's.

There is one Custom, or rather Abuse introduced in that Court, which deserves
great consideration from Princes, which is the power the Pope has assumed of
deposing Princes and Sovereigns, and giving their Kingdoms and States to
others, under pretext of ill Government. The Prodigal Son in the Gospel did not
lose his Right to his portion, though he was resolved to dissipate and consume
it viciously, because that Title which we receive from Nature can never be lost
in our whole Life. The Kings of Navar were sain to go Vagabonds about the World
for the sake of a Bit of Parchment which Pope Julius the Second put out against
them, whereby King John the Second lost his Kingdom, which was given to
Ferdinand of Arragon; and had not providence brought them to the Crown of
France, there would have been no mention in the World of the Kings of Navar.

From this Liberty of taking away Kingdoms, the Popes assume that of Erecting
them. Pope Paul the Fourth made Ireland a Kingdom, and Pius the Fifth Erected
Tuscany into a great Duchy. Queen Elizabeth of England, was deposed by Paul
the Third, and according to the usual custom, her Kingdom given to Philip the
Second of Spain, who was to execute the Papal Sentence; but he met with the
Winds and Seas, and the English Ships, which quite defeated his Armada. In
France, by a privilege of the Gallican Church, they admit of no Bulls that
contain Deprivation of Kings, but keep to the Right of Succession: and indeed
to depose an actual King, and give away his Kingdom, is not only to destroy a
supposed Delinquent, but to punish an Innocent Successor, and likewise to
prejudice the Right of Election in those who have it.

On the other hand England has often thought fit to make it self Tributary to
the Sea of Rome by the Peter Pence, the first time under Pope Leo the Fourth,
and more remarkably under King John, in 1214. to avoid the Invasion from
France; but Henry the Eighth delivered himself once for all, and not only
refused the Tribute, but made himself amends by seizing the Church Lands. The
fresh Example of Paul the Fifth toward this Republic is never to be forgot,
who charitably would have governed another bodies House, under pretext that the
Master did not understand how to do it himself: And the constancy of the
Venetian Republic will have given fair. warning to the Court of Rome, how they
undertake such Quarrels, since they were forced to come to an agreement with
very little satisfaction or Honor on their side, having been obliged tacitly
to give up their claim; for to demand peremptorily, and then relinquish the
Demand, is a sign it was not well founded in Justice; and the Absolution
resus'd, was proof enough, that the Excommunication was void in it self: So
that the advantage that has accrew'd to the Venetian Government from the
Contest, has been much greater than the damage sustained in it.

If ever for the future. which I scarce believe, there should happen an
occasion of an Interdict from the Court of Rome to the Republic, I should
advise presently to post up in Rome an Appellation to the future Council, which
is a cruel blow to them: For first, it insinuates the Superiority of the
Council over the Pope; and secondly, it revives the memory of Councils, and
lets them see they are not things quite forgot all the World over. If there be
care taken to examine well all Bulls that come from Rome, and the Observation
of what has been hitherto practiced, be strictly continued, it may be hoped,
that the Republic shall not undergo any greater Subjection than other Princes,
but rather shall have some Liberty above them, particularly more than the
Spaniards, who find their account in complying with the Tyranny of Rome,
because they receive at the same time great Favors from it, and are proud of
maintaining its Authority. To say truth, the Popes hitherto have showed little
kindness to the Republic, and except the Privileges granted by Alexander the
Third, which serve more to register to the World the Action of the Republic,
in restoring and protecting him, than for any thing else: For the Doge might of
himself without the Papal Concession, have assumed those other little Ornaments
of the Ombrella, the Standard and the Sword: So that bating the Concessions of
the Decimes upon the Clergy, and the Nominations to the Bishoprics, this
Country of ours feels but slender Effects of the Pontifical Kindness, which may
be an advantage upon all Occurrences of Interest of State to stick the closer
to that, because there needs no Complements where every one desires. but his
own.

In considering the Secular Power of the Pope, we will do it upon Five Heads,
which may serve to examine all other Princes Interests with the Republic.

First, If it be advantageous to the Republic to have the Church grow greater.

Secondly, What Title, Inclination or Facility the Popes may have to acquire
any part of the State of the Republic.

Thirdly, What Inclination, Title or Facility the Republic may have to acquire
any part of the State of the Church.

Fourthly, If the Church may unite with the Republic, to acquire the State of
any other Princes.

Fifthly, If the Church can unite with other Princes, to hinder the progress of
the Arm of the Republic.

To begin with the First, we will answer with a General Rule, which is, That it
never is advantageous to a Prince, who desires to remain free and powerful, to
let another grow great, except it be to lessen a Third, who is greater than
them both; and if he that is thus agrandiz'd be a Neighbor, his advancement is
so much more to be feared: These Alterations indeed may not be so dangerous to
a little Prince, who does not fear depending upon a great one, to avoid being
molested by one who is already too strong for him.

But to come closer to the Case of the Republic, we will say, That if the
Church could make it self Master of any part of the King of Spain's Dominions
in Italy, where he is the greatest Prince, they might hope for the consent of
the Republic, which is the Second Great Italian Potentate, because by that
means the Republic might become the First; and however, the strength of the
Church will always give less jealousy to the Republic, than the Spanish Power
in Italy; for the Nature of the Pontifical Principality is Elective and
Temporary, and the Aims and Designs of that Court vary according to the Genius
of the several Popes; and sometimes it is subject to long Vacancies: whereas
the Monarchy of Spain is successive, and, as one may say, Eternal, and governed
by standing lasting Maxims.

But if the Church be to grow great by the Spoils of any other Italian Prince,
it would be the Interest of the Republic to oppose it, because the Damage
thence resulting is evident, and the Advantage dangerous. It ought to be well
considered, how the State of the Church is increased in this last Century. The
custom that was in the Church before, to give Infeodations upon slight
Acknowledgments, had brought that power to be more of show than real strength;
but Julius the Second, succeeding Alexander the Sixth, made Borgia, Duke of
Volentine, Nephew to Alexander, who had seized upon all those Infeodations in
Romania, refund them to the Church, and added to them the conquest of Bologna,
and got also from the Republic the Cities of Cervia, Rimini, Ravenna, Faenza,
Imola, and others, to which, under Clement the Eighth, was added the whole
Duchy of Ferrara, and lately that of Urbin: So that these. Acquisitions alone
would make up a great Principality: and the Church seems to want nothing
toward the making of it the most considerable power of Italy, than the
addition of Parma and Piacenza, and some little Independent Castles in the
Territories about Rome: Besides, it can never more be lessened by Infeodations,
that being quite left off by that Court: So that to let the Church grow any
greater in Italy, generally speaking, cannot be for the Interest of the
Venetian Republic.

To the Second Point, What Title, Inclination or Facility the Church may have
to acquire any portion of the State of the Republic, we shall say, That since
the Court makes profession of the Extremest Justice, and that likewise they
are loath to begin the Example of Princes usurping* upon one another, I think
they can hardly set up any Title but upon the Polesine of Rovigo, which they
say was formerly annexed to the Duchy of Ferrara; and in the times that the
Dispute was between the Dukes of Ferrara and the Republic, the Popes always
showed themselves smart Defenders of the Dukes: Of Four Interdicts published by
the Church against the Venetians, Two of them were for this very cause, the
first in the year 1305. the Second in the year 1483. under Sixtus the Fourth,
at which time indeed the Republic had taken the whole Duchy of Ferrara, by
the Instigation of the Pope himself; but he being Friends with the Duke,
commanded them to restore what they had taken, which they refusing to do, he
sulminated his Excommunication and Interdict; but a Peace following, the
Republic kept by agreement the Polesine of Rovigo: The Third Interdict was in
1505. under Julius the Second, because the Republic had several Cities of
Romania in their possessions, and the last of all was now lately under Paul the
Fifth: So that if the Popes showed such a concern for the thing when it was
only belonging to the Dukes of Ferrara, much more would they do it now when the
profit would be their own: So that we may believe that as to this they do own a
Title, and have likewise inclination enough to regain this bit of Territory
that is lopped off from them. We are therefore to consider what Facility they
have to do it; and I do not believe that ever of themselves they will kindle
the fire, but make advantage of one ready kindled by some other, as it happened
under Julius the Second: Nay, if they reflect upon the great Rule of preserving
the Liberty of Italy, they will not for so small a matter enter into a League
against the Republic; for it is of greater concern to them not to break the
Balance of Dominion in Italy, lest the Tramontani should take advantage of it,
and subdue all.

But this very Reason was strong in Pope Julius the Second's time, and yet was
without Effect in a Mind bent all upon particular Interest; wherefore I
conclude, that we are not to expect greater Temper in the Modern Popes, but
ought to rest satisfied, that if a powerful Foreign Prince should promise them
the acquisition of the State of the Republic, they would embrace the motion
without delay.

To the Third Question, I say, That the Republic might have just Reason to
make themselves amends for the Country they lost in Romagna, it not being a
thing they had usurped from the Church, but a voluntary Dedition of those
Cities who were tyrannized over by little Tyrants, that had taken occasion from
the Negligence of Popes to make themselves Masters of those places: They were
yielded up by the Republic, to take off Julius the Second, who was the great
Fomentour of the Fire which was kindled against the Venetians in the League of
Cambray, where the Forces of all the Princes of Christendom were united against
them; and without doubt, upon good circumstances the Republic might justify
the re-taking of these Towns; and I believe there is Inclination enough to do
it, all Princes being willing to extend their Territories; but the point is the
Facility of doing it, which I think altogether remote; for all other Italian
Princes, if not out of conscience, yet out of Ostentation of Religion, would be
backward to fall upon the Church; and except it should happen that some one of
them should grow too powerful for all the others united, and so be able to
right himself, I think the State of the Church need not fear being lessened.

To the Fourth Question, I answer in the Negative, and do not believe that the
Church would join with the Republic, to acquire the State of any other Prince,
except it were such a one as the Church had a pretense upon, and then they
would keep all, which would not please the Republic: Besides, we ought to
reflect upon the Genius of the Popedom, which being Elective, most commonly the
Popes have no other aim than to keep all quiet, and preserve the general
Respect of Princes toward them, that in that decrepit Age they may make their
Families, their thoughts being far from enlarging a Dominion which they expect
to leave every day; and in the mean time, all the ready Money, which else they
might lay up, would go upon projects of a very uncertain Event: And it is a
wonderful thing that Julius the Second, being of a very mean Birth, should have
had so great a Sense of the Public Interest of the Church, as to forego all
his private concerns, and take the Empty Praises of his Courtiers in payment
for the loss of such real advantages as he might have made to his Family.

The last Query depends, in a great measure, upon the others. I do not think it
would be easy to concert the Union of the Pope with other Princes, in order to
attack the Republic, because it will never be advantageous to the Church to
increase the power of that other Prince, neither will it look like the Justice
they profess, to take to themselves alone the Spoils, except it be upon a
Country on which they have a pretense: It Is true, that in those noysie
Excommunications where they deprive Princes of their Dominions, and give them
to others that can take them, there might be some danger; but they are seldom
practiced but in an Attempt made by a Prince upon the Church, which is never to
be feared from the Piety and Moderation of the Republic. There is no doubt but
the Church would enter into a League to hinder any progress of the Republic,
particularly against any Dependant of theirs; and also in case the Republic
attacked some small Prince, the Popes, to affect the protection of the weak,
would declare; but if the Republic had to do with a strong Prince, the Church
would look on, for fear of greatning too much that Prince, the rather, because
the Republic can lay claim to none of those Old ticklish Titles which some
other Princes might set a-foot against the Church. And so much for the Pope.

Now let us come to the Emperor: The Republic must never forget that Maxim
which is common to all Princes bordering upon the Empire, which is, That it is
not convenient for them to see the Emperor made more powerful, lest he renew
those antiquated Titles he has to most Dominions near him, and particularly in
Italy.

The power of the Roman Commonwealth, which extended almost over all the known
World, being at last usurped by Julius Caesar, and from him derived to a long
Series of succeeding Emperors, might give the German Emperor a pretext to
reckon with all the Princes of Europe, if he were strong enough; and perhaps
many who wear Crowns, would be reduced to Beggary; therefore it is best to keep
him in his cold Country of Germany, where men's Spirits are benumbed, and less
undertaking. The Republic has Reason to distrust him upon many Heads; as
Emperor he has pretenses upon the Duchy of Frioul, and the Marca Trevisana,
besides the Cities of Trevisa, Padoua, Vicenza and Verona: As Archduke, he
pretends to Istria: As King of Hungary, to Zara, and the neighboring Country:
So that his Titles and Neighborhood are considerably dangerous; all these
Countries are besides of greater Antiquity than the City of Venice it self: So
that their being subject to a Metropolis of a younger standing, gives some
suspicion of the Lawfulness of their Subjection. All these pretenses were
renewed in the League of Cambray; Therefore I think, without hesitation, I may
pronounce, That it is the Interest of the Republic that the Emperor should be
kept low, both for General and Particular Reasons.

From these Reflections we may also conclude, that the Emperor to these Titles
does not want Inclination to acquire a part of the Territories of the
Republic; particularly it being yet a complaint of that Prince, of the little
Respect showed him by the Republic, when taking advantage of his Distractions,
they Erected the Fortress of Palma Nuova just under his Nose.

There remains therefore to see what Facility he might find in such an Attempt.
In the present State of his Affairs, while the Faction of the Protestants is so
strong in Germany, I cannot think that he can quarrel with the Republic, which
is as powerful in Money as he is in Men: For in length of time it is certain,
that he who has Money may have Men, and they who have many Men must consume
much Money: It Is true, he being so near a Borderer upon the Republic, it may
give him the more confidence, because a lesser Number will be necessary to make
the Invasion; but if the Enterprise be not in the Name of the whole Empire, in
which case the whole German Nation would be a party, I believe, with the help
of his own Patrimonial Dominions, he will not do any great matter, the rather,
because many great Heretical Princes and Cities of Germany have the same
Interest to keep him low: So that as he might perhaps be pretty smart upon an
Invasion or Incursion, at length of time he would prove as weak to hold out a
War: And indeed this was the true cause of Erecting the Fortress of Palma
Nuova, to obviate a sudden Incursion of his Forces, and provide a Retreat for
the Country people; so to gain time, which is always as advantageous to the
Republic, as dangerous to such an Enemy, who if he have not some body to
furnish him with Money, will get but little ground, tho his Army be numerous,
as it was in the time of Maximilian.

Now whether the Republic has any Title, Inclination or Facility to acquire
any part of the Emperor's Territories? I answer, That without doubt the
Republic has pretenses upon Goritia and Gradisca, which formerly belonged to
the Family of the Frangipani, and for a little while was under the Government
of the Republic: There are likewise some Castles in Istria, and upon the Coast
which the Republic claims; and for an Inclination to acquire these, we need
not doubt but the Republic has it, it being either the Virtue or Vice of
Princes never to be without it: But still the great consideration lies in the
Facility of doing it; for if there be that, it is above half the Title; and if
that is wanting, it is Imprudence to own any part of a pretense that must remain
without Execution. I believe by Sea it would prove easy to take Trieste, and
some other places, but it would be as hard to maintain them; and to go further
into the Land, would need great preparatives on the side of the Republic:
whereas on the Emperor's side, the Defense would be easy, he having a command
of Men: So that except in an open War, there is no thinking of any strong
Attempt that way, and then it were not amiss to put a good strength to it, that
at the end of the War, which always must one time or another be succeeded by
Peace, some of the Country might remain by Treaty in the Venetians Hands, for
the charges of the War; for to begin a War only for the acquisition: of these
places, would not be a Deliberation besitting the Wisdom and Gravity of the
Venetian Senate: It would be better to watch the occasion of some Extremity or
Pinch of an Emperor, which often happens, and buy these places; but then be
aware that if it be not a Patrimonial Estate, the consent of the Diet is
necessary to the purchase, to cut off all claims in time to come.

It Is as hard, that the Emperor should unite with the Republic, to acquire
the State of any other Prince in Italy, because, first, for Spain, they are the
same Family with the Emperor; Against the Church he will declare as little,
professing a great Zeal for it, and calling himself, The Churches Advocate;
Modena, Mantoua and Mirandola are Fiefs of the Empire; Savoy and Florence are
remote from him, and to come at them he must overcome greater Princes that are
between him and them: so that this Union would prove difficult. If the Emperor
should fall out with some of these Dukes, his Vassals, and depose them, it
might happen that if Spain were busy elsewhere, and the Emperor loath to take
the trouble of chastising them himself alone, he might then unite with the
Republic, upon condition to have the best part of the Spoil; but if the
Emperor should, as formerly, come to a great Rupture with the Church, and
employ heartily his power in the Quarrel, it is not impossible but he might be
willing to engage the Republic by a promise of some part of the conquest. I
think in any other way it is not probable to make any advantage of the Imperial
Assistance.

The last Question is, Whether he can unite with others against the Republic?
And of this there is no doubt: For if Maximilian, tho infinitely obliged to the
Republic, made no difficulty to unite in a League with Lewis the Twelfth of
France, his Competitor and Enemy, whom, for Injuries received, he had declared
a Rebel to the Sacred Empire (tho Lewis laughed at that Imaginary
Jurisdiction): I say, if he could submit to join with so suspected a power,
much less would the Emperor now scruple the uniting either with Spain or the
Pope, or any other Princes of Italy, not only for to acquire Territory, but
even for bare Money, if it were offered him. With France I believe the Union
would not be so easy as it was then, because now the Emperor, being partial
for Spain, if their Interest did not concur, they would hinder him from being
drawn away by any hopes or promises: But this will appear better when we come
to treat of Spain: For if Spain will have a League against the Republic, the
Emperor will never stand out.

Now let us come to France: It Is not above Fifty years ago that the Republic
thought themselves obliged not only to desire, but to procure the Greatness of
France, because being under the frenzy of a Civil War, it threatened little
less than the dissolution of that Monarchy: The Succession of Henry the Fourth
to the Crown, who had his Title from Nature, and the Possession from his Sword,
revived it, and at last gave it such vigor, that from deserving Compassion, it
came to move Envy; and if a fatal blow of a mean hand had not cut off that
Prince's Life, and Designs, there would have been requisite great Dexterity, or
great Force to defend the Republic from them. The Count de Fuentes, Governor
of Milan, used to brag, that he had such Music as should make those dance who
had no mind to it: Henry the Fourth might have said so with much more reason,
and he used to affirm, That at the pass things were, the Neutrality of the
Republic was a Coin that would no longer be current. If he had given career to
his no ill-founded Designs, half a World would not have sufficed him; but we
must not be frighted if we see the Raging Sea swell in Billows, and look as if
it would swallow up the Earth, since a little Sand stops all its Fury. Death
has a Scythe that most commonly cuts off all the Noblest Lives: If Henry the
Third of France, had brought the Siege of Paris to an end; if Philip the Second
had not had the Winds and Seas against him, England would have been in Chains,
and Paris would have been a Village. In conclusion, the Fatality of Humane
Affairs is such, that most great undertakings are disappointed by unexpected
causes. At present the constitution of France is such, that there is little
danger from them; for during the Minority of their King, they will have enough
to do not to lose ground, there being so many Jealousies and Factions afoot:
It Is true, that the common people have opened their Eyes, and begin to be weary
of spending their blood for the ambition of the great ones; and amongst these,
the chiefest are old, and at their ease, so that they will think chiefly of
keeping themselves in those Posts they enjoy. The Duke of Maine, who is Head of
the Catholic Party, is very ancient and very rich; wherefore if in the time of
the great troubles, he either could not or would not aspire to make himself
King, when even he had all but the Name of it, it is not to be imagined he
thinks of it now; and if he will be content with the State of a Subject, he is
as great as he can be. The Duke of Mercoeur, who in his Wife's right pretended
to Erect Britany into a Kingdom, is at last dead in Hungary; the Duke of
Epernon is more studious of good Husbandry than Soldiery; the Duke of
Montpensier has always been true to the Royal Family; the Capricios of the
Marchioness of Aumale, will hardly have any Followers; and it will be well if
she can clear her self of the late King's Death: On the other side, the Prince
of Conde, the first Prince of the Blood, is young, and of a mild Nature; he has
besides before his Eyes the Example of his Father, Grandfather, and Great
Grandfather, who all perished unfortunately in civil Broils, and has in his own
person experimented the Spanish Parsimony, in his Retreat from Court to
Brussels: So that if he desires a greater Fortune, he may compass it in France,
from the hands of the Queen her self, who is so ill a Politician, as to try to
put out Fire with pouring Oil upon it. The Hugonots are weary; the Duke of
Bovillon, their Head, well pleased with his present Fortune; and if he have a
mind to be a Hugonot out of Persuasion, and not Faction, there is no body will
hinder him; but most of these great men have Religion only for a pretext, as
it is reported likewise of the Duke de Lesdiguieres, which if it be true, they
will never be quiet till the King be of Age; and by consequence, there will be
little protection to be hoped for from that Kingdom. Our Speculation therefore
may more certainly conclude, that the Greatness of France is at a stand, and
cannot in the space of some years make any progress, and till it come to an
Excess not to be thought on for these fifty years, it can give no Jealousy to
the Republic.

As to the Title, Inclination and Facility that France may have to acquire any
part of the Republick's Dominions; I say, we need not doubt of their
Inclination, because Princes are like Wolves to one another, always ready for
prey. As for Title, they can set up none till they have conquered the Duchy of
Milan; and Facility they have as little, because they cannot come at the
Republick's Territories, without first passing over those of other Princes,
which they will never consent to, lest they prove the first conquest
themselves: Whereupon I conclude, that for a long time the power of France can
give no jealousy to the Republic.

And on the other side, the Republic can have no pretenses, as things stand,
upon any part of the French Territories, as long as they are totally Excluded
from Italy; and if there be no Title, there is less Inclination and Facility.

The Union of France with the Republic, to acquire the State of any other
Prince, will always be easy when France is in a condition to mind such
acquisitions; the past Examples prove that sufficiently; but they do
sufficiently bear Testimony likewise of the danger of such Union: Now that the
French are totally excluded Italy, they would agree to very large conditions
with the Republic, and allow them a great share of the Kingdom of Naples and
Duchy of Milan; but they would no sooner have made the acquisition of their
share, but they would begin to cast their Eyes upon that of the Republic, and
enter into a League against them with some other Prince, just as it happened in
the time of Lewis the Twelfth, when to gain Cremona, he was the first that
consented to the League of Cambray, deceiving all the while the Venetian
Ambassador at Court, and affirming (even with Oaths), That he would never
conclude any thing to the prejudice of the Republic, tho he had signed the
League above six weeks before the War began, which he exercised likewise in a
most barbarous manner, hanging up the Noble Venetians that were Governors of
the Towns he took.

I believe France, to get footing in Italy, would engage with any other Prince
against the Republic, except with the Spaniard; and if that should happen, it
would be necessary to stir up the Factions of that Kingdom, and bring upon them
some powerful Neighbor, such as England: The Friendship of Savoy would
likewise be useful, to hinder the Passes of the Mountains, and make some
diversion in Provence and Dauphine, if there could be any relying upon this
present Duke; but he is a Proteus, that turns himself into many forms, and with
his Capricio's and Humors, would soon empty the Treasures of S. Marc: But
these are things so remote, that they may be left to the prudence of those who
shall live in those times; for according to the Times there must be alteration
of Councils. And so much for France.

Now let us turn to Spain,

A Family that from low beginnings, is come by Marriages to the possession of
Twelve Kingdoms, and several Dukedoms in Europe, besides what it has in the
Indies, does certainly evidence a great Favor of Fortune, joined with great
application and industry: So that if it be not stopped by Fatality, may bid
fair for an Universal Empire: If Charles the Fifth had had as much prudence in
his youth as he had in his old Age, he would not have separated the Empire from
Spain, but would have made his Son Philip have been chosen King of the Romans,
instead of his Brother Ferdinand: He understood his Error, and repented of it
at last, trying to persuade Ferdinand to a Renunciation; but he showed as much
prudence in keeping what he had got so wonderfully into his Hands, as Charles
would have showed folly in going to deprive him of it by Force. Charles was not
less unhappy in the other Act of Moderation he showed, when he renounced all
his Kingdoms to his Son, and retired to a private Life; For to one who on the
Anniversary Day of that Famous Action, congratulated King Philip for his
Felicity, he answered, That Day was likewise the Anniversary of his Father's
Repentance: So that Actions of Moderation in Princes, are but like that Insect
called the Ephemera, which lives and dies the same day.

The Greatness of Spain is therefore to be suspected; it has Two Wild Beasts
that follow it always close, one on one side, and the other on the other, which
is the Tark by Sea, and France by Land; and besides that it has that Issue of
Holland, as witty Boccalini calls it, which will sufficiently purge it of all
its ill Humors; and it must be owned, that all the Spanish Sagacity has not
hindered them from following the Fable of the Dog, who forsook the Substance
for the Shadow: For, for Forty years together, France was sufficiently taken up
with their own* Intestine Broils, during which time Spain might with great
advantage have made a Truce with Holland; and having likewise humbled the Turk,
by the Battle of Lepanto, they might have applied their whole Force to Italy,
which had no Defense but its own Natives, and not of them above half: So that
in all probability they could have met with no considerable opposition.

One might say, That it was an Effect of King Philip's Moderation, if he had
not showed as great an Ambition of Dominion as possible, in endeavoring first
to unite France to Spain by conquest, then to have his Daughter chosen Queen,
and lastly, seized upon as many Towns as he could; Therefore we may give the
Italians Joy, that half an Age of so much danger passed without the least loss
of their Liberty. Now by reason of the French King's Minority, the Jealousies
against Spain are a-foot again, but, I think, not with so much ground; For if
not France, at least England, would raise their old Enemies, the Dutch
particularly, if the Italians should help with Money: So that if Italy can but
resist the first brunt, it may hope for all sort of Relief; for France has
Forces, and they would soon have a will to succor Italy against Spain: Neither
do I believe, that Spain would hazard the Truce with Holland, it having been
compassed with such Difficulties, even to the loss of much of their Honor and
Fast. It Is enough, that to all other Christian Princes, except the Emperor,
the Greatness of Spain is of ill Consequence; And therefore to be opposed by
all secret means first, and if need be, at last openly, and without a Mask.

If Spain has any Title, Inclination or Facility to acquire part of the
Republick's Dominions, there will be little Difficulty to answer: Their Title
would be upon Brescia, Crema, and Bergamo, ancient Members of the Duchy of
Milan: And these Three Cities are so considerable, that with their Territory,
they would perhaps make up as rich a Duchy as any in Lombardy, except Milan:
So that we need not doubt, but the Spaniard looks upon these Cities with an
Amorous Eye, and with great Desire to enjoy them; there remains only the
Facility of doing it, which is always the most important of the Three Points:
Upon this Subject we must distinguish whether they will make the Attempt by
themselves, or in Conjunction with others: If alone, and that the Republic
have any Great Prince, either Italian, or Foreigner on their side, they will
meet with little Facility in their Designs, because the Republick's Money,
joined to the Forces of another Prince, can give check to almost any great
Power, and particularly to that of Spain, whose States and Possessions are
large, but disunited; and they cannot but be afraid, that while they are busied
in Lombardy, others would try to attack them in a more sensible part: If Spain
should therefore unite with any other Prince, provided the Republic had France
on their side, they would not much hurt it, because the Inundation of the
French into Lombardy, uses to be both powerful and sudden, provided they be
called in by an Italian Prince of some Figure; and by that means the Spaniard
being attacked on Two sides, would go near to lose his Duchy of Milan.

But if we consider the Republic united only with some Italian Prince, and the
French to stand Spectator, as might happen in the Minority of a French King,
particularly if the Spaniard had the Pope and Emperor of his side, I doubt the
Republic would be hard set; for that other Prince in League with them, cannot
be of any great Force; the most useful would be Savoy; but besides, that he
would be bought very dear, he would be always wavering, if the Spaniards
tempted him strongly: The Richest would be Florence; but his Territories not
joining upon those of the Republic, there is little good to be expected from
his assistance. Lastly, If Spain will fall upon the Republic alone, and the
Republic be likewise alone, I say, That as to the State of Terra Firma, it
would go near to be lost; but by Sea the Republic would make a stout
Resistance.

But if it be asked, whether the Republic have either Title, Inclination or
Facility to acquire any part of the Spanish Dominions in Italy? I answer, the
Title would be upon Cremona in Lombardy, and upon Travi, and other Ports of La
Puglia, in the Kingdom of Naples, the Republic having been in Possession of
all these places before ever Spain had footing in Italy: So that there wants
nothing but Facility; and there is but one Case that I know in which the
Republic might hope to get Possession again; and that is, in case the
Republic were in League with France, and the Emperor busied by the
Protestants of Germany, then some of these Expectations might be fulfilled, but
still with the same Jealousy, that your Friends should at last join with your
Enemies to fall upon the Republic, as it happened in the League of Cambray.
And this answers the other Question, to wit, Whether Spain can unite with any
other Power against the Republic? It Is very true, that I can hardly believe,
that the Spaniards would, without any precedent broil, attempt a League with
France against the Republic, because the Damage of one City's remaining in the
French Hands, would be greater to them than the profit of taking all the
Republic has in Terra Firma would amount to.

Whether the Spaniard may unite with the Republic, to acquire conjoyntly in
Italy; I say, That if it be against an Italian Prince, they will not, because
it is not their Interest that the Republic should be greater, and already
almost all the lesser Princes are Dependants of that Monarchy: and as for the
Pope, they would certainly help him, rather than join against him, being used
to make a great show of their protecting the Church: The only case that would
make them bear patiently any new Acquisitions of the Republic, would be, if
France should make any progress in Italy.

After all, amidst so many wellgrounded suspicions, it must be confessed, that
the Neighborhood of Spain has proved of less disturbance to the Republic,
than that of any other Prince who had those Countries before them; for the
Dukes of Milan were perpetually either quarrelling, or, finding themselves too
weak, were inciting of other Powers underhand against the Republic.

There may be an Union likewise of the Republic and Spain by Sea, against the
Turk, and by Land against the Grisons, or any other Heretics. And this is
enough for Spain.

Now by reason of Vicinity, we will speak of the other Italian Princes: It
would be the Interest of the Republic to see them greater, if it could be done
at the Expense of Spain, and by their Spoils, as also by getting from the
Church: But both those Cases are next to impossible, if first the World be not
turned topsy turvy, which can never be, but by a League with France; and then
if any part of the Spaniards Dominions could be shared amongst them, it would
not injure the Republic at all: but for any of these Princes to grow great by
spoiling one another, I should not like it; for the advantage would be
inconsiderable, and in the mean time the fire would be kindled in Italy, the
property of which is to go not where you would have it, but often where you are
most afraid of it.

Whether any of these Princes have Title, Inclination or Facility to acquire
from the Republic, the consideration will be short, because Facility will be
wanting. Mantoua has some pretenses upon Valesa and Peschiera; Modena upon the
Town of Este, from whence the Family comes: But all these little Princes united
without the Pope and Spain, could hardly give a disturbance to the Republic,
because the Two powerfullest of them, to wit, Savoy and Florence, are not
immediate Borderers.

Whether the Republic have either Title, Inclination or Facility to acquire
from them in the State they now are in; I answer, That the House of Este not
having Ferrara, the Republic has no Title to either Modena or Reggio: There
would indeed be a good Inclination against Mantoua, because he lies, as it
were, in the Bowels of the Republic; but there would be but an ill Title,
except the Republic should bear the Charges of his Education, while they were
his Guardians; and then the Facility would be small; for no sooner would the
Republic have begun the Dance, but others would come in, and perhaps it would
not end as it begun. Of the other Princes I have little to say, the Republic
having had no disputes with them; for the Genoueses, who formerly set the
Republic so hard, have done as the Horse in the Fable, lost their own Liberty,
in hopes of being victorious of their Enemies, and are by that means out of
power to hurt the Republic.

As for Leagues these Princes will be ready to make them either with or against
the Republic, because their Fortune, as Princes, being but small, they will
let slip no occasion of mending it, either by acquisition of new Territory, or
by receiving Subsidies and Pensions. Florence only would hardly be moved by
that last motive, because he is not needy, being at this time perhaps the
Richest Prince in ready Money that is in Christendom; and his Riches always
increase, because the Princes of that Family do yet retain their Ancestors
Inclination to Merchandise, and that enriches the Prince without damage to the
Subject. The Dominions of the great Duke are considerable, as well because they
are placed as it were in the Navel of Italy, with a fertile Territory, all
united together, as also because the States of other Princes are, as it were, a
Wall and Defense to it; and it is besides, to be valued by the Communication it
has with the Sea by Leghorn, and some other Maritime Fortresses: So that if one
were to reckon upon any Italian Prince, I know none that deserves so well, as
being exempted from the temptation of being bought, and having yet some of that
punctual mercantile Faith.

If the Republic will have a League with any of the other Italian Princes,
there will be no difficulty in it, provided they pay them; but withal, one must
not forget the witty Reflection of Boccalini, when the Italian Princes are
willing to be taught manners out of the Galateo, provided that it may not look
like ill breeding in them, to eat with both Jaws as fast as they can.

With Poland the Republic can have no other Concern than that of defending
Christendom, and by some diversion from that Crown, bear the more easily the
weight of the Ottoman Power: Therefore it would be well for the Republic to
have that King and Kingdom grow more powerful. As for any thing else, the great
distance that is between that State and the Republic, takes away all matter of
any further Consideration. The same thing may be said of the Moscovite.

England being the greatest of those powers that are separated from the Church
of Rome, is a Kingdom of great strength, particularly since the Union of
Scotland; and the Kings of England have nothing left to desire as to Territory:
All that Island is now under the Dominion of one sole Monarch, and has the Sea
for a Wall: So that if England be not disunited within it self, there is no
power to overcome it: We see the Example in the Invasion of Philip the Second
of Spain (and yet then the Union was not so great as might have been) who lost
his mighty Armada that he had been so long preparing at such vast Expenses.
Queen Elizabeth, who has showed the World how far a Woman's ability can go in
Government, did likewise enlarge her Dominions by Navigations to the Indies,
and wounded Spain in that tender part; She likewise had some Ports of the
Low Countries consigned to her, so that she seemed to be hardly contained in
that separate World of hers. The Island is fertile and delicious, producing all
necessaries for Life, and though the Natives go abroad and buy the Products of
other Countries, it is more as Superfluities, and out of Luxury, than want, and
amongst the rest, they have a Trade for Grapes called Currants, which they buy
in the Dominions of the Republic. Henry the Eighth, who was the King that
Apostatized from the Church of Rome, did use to concern himself in the Affairs
of Italy, and several times the Popes have had good Protection from the ancient
Kings of that Country, who were most devoted to the Sea of Rome; to say truth,
Religion has had a great Loss, and the Court of Rome a greater, I cannot well
say, whether out of the great Lust of Henry the Eighth, or the little
consideration of Clement the Seventh, at present that King will not hear of
Rome, and has but small Curiosity for the Affairs of Italy.

If this King could grow greater, it would be advantageous to the Republic,
because it might obtain his Alliance, and by that means a greater respect from
other Crowned Heads; but however, even without this consideration, it is a Power
to be courted, because the Nation having an ancient Antipathy to France, and a
modern one to Spain, it cannot but have a good inclination for the Republic.
It Is true that the present King is more inclined to Wars with his Pen, than
with his Sword, having a mighty Love for Disputes, and valuing himself upon the
Character of a Notable Divine; so much has the Quarrel with Rome influenced
that Country, that even their Princes study Controversy; but however I should
not think the Republic ought to mind any of those Circumstances, because where
there is strength, there is always hopes of making use of it, that depending
only upon raising of Passions.

The best means would be (besides the continuation of those Offices already
introduced of mutual Embassies) strictly to command the Governors in the
Levant to show all good usage to the English Merchants, and particularly
observe punctually all Treaties and Engagements with them, because there is no
Nation that puts a greater value upon their Word than the English do, and the
Kings of that Island have not yet learnt the modern Policy that gives them
leave to break their Faith in order to reigning more absolutely.

With the Seven United Provinces 'twill be good to cultivate Friendship, and to
increase it by a mutual defensive League, particularly at this time, that the
Truce is but newly concluded with Spain; for it will be a Curb upon the
Spaniard, if he should attempt any thing against the Republic, for fear his
old Wounds should be set a bleeding again, they being but just bound up, and
not healed.

It Is feasible likewise to procure something more of Trade with the Hollanders,
because they are extremely ingenious, and addicted that way; and moreover,
since both the Republics stand in awe of the same Power, it will not be
difficult to unite their inclinations; and they have made on their side a
sufficient Advance, by sending an Embassy to the Republic, which though of
Complement, yet it has showed great esteem and inclination to an Union.

Besides the Advantage of a solid diversion of the Forces of Spain, there is
another Essential consideration, which is, That from them might be had a
considerable Body of well disciplined Soldiers, and that with admirable
celerity, besides several Regiments that might be raised in a Country so well
used to War, if there were occasion, and all the inconveniences of
Transportation are not to be valued; for the Republic will always have a
greater scarcity of good Soldiers, than of good Money.

With the Princes of Germany of a different Religion, there can hardly be any
Concerns, if there is no room for Quarrels. As the World stands now, if it be
not well, they should grow greater, at least it is not amiss, they are already
great enough, because they are a Check upon the Emperor, who else would be a
most formidable Potentate to all Princes, but more particularly to the
Italians, and more to the Republic, than to the rest of Italy; but now by
their means his Power is not only balanced, but almost quite oppressed to the
common benefit of other Princes. With these Princes it will be easy for the
Republic to have an Engagement: First, because they know that the Republic is
not a blind Adorer of the Interests of the Court of Rome: And, Secondly,
because they see the Jealousies that are between the Republic and the
Emperor, from whence they conclude, that there is no danger of a League
between them and the Emperor, and by consequence, they have not the Republic
for a suspected Power; and upon all Occurrences, it will do well to show an
Inclination to Friendship with them, first, because they may make a potent
diversion; and, secondly, because their Country being a Nursery of Soldiers,
the Republic upon occasion may make Levies there; and it is a point of high
importance for the Republic to be certain of their Levies; for in a time of
need they can hope but for small help from the Italian Militia.

I have not yet said any thing of the Duke of Bavaria; and he is not to be
omitted, being so much a dependant of the Emperor, from whom he has received
the Electoral Dignity, upon the Exclusion of the Elector Palatin: This Prince
has had the boldness to contest the Precedence with the Republic at the
Council of Trent; and therefore no good Correspondency can be between him and
the Republic. It would not be amiss to see him lessened; for it is always to be
wished, that he who has no good Intentions, should have as little power to
offend as may be.

The Order of Malta, who are Pyrating Princes, is likewise to be minded; and
their growth in Power can be of no use to the Republic: They do nothing but
waken the Ottoman Power, when it is almost lulled asleep; and therefore are
dangerous: Their Friendship, in time of open War with the Turk, will be easily
had, upon the Hopes of a good Booty.

It remains for us now to speak of the greatest Prince of this known World,
formidable to all other Princes, I mean the Turk; but we cannot speak of him by
the Rules we have laid down for the others; for with him all Arts and Policies
are vain: He makes no League with any, neither has he any Residing Ambassadors
in any Court, scorning to descend to inform himself of other Princes Intrigues:
He owns his Greatness, and relies upon it, like the Elephant, who by reason of
his great strength, is never observed to use Cunning: Perhaps it may be an
Arcanum of the Alchoran, to hinder his Subjects from contracting the Manners
and Customs of other Nations, and bringing them home at their return: Perhaps
likewise that he is unwilling their Wits should be refined in Politics: His is
an Empire built upon the Ruin of all other Empires, founded in force, and
scorning Titles and Claims of Justice. If he can acquire a Country, he has
always Right to it; and when he has conquered it, he assumes all the power to
himself, suffering no Usurpations where he himself usurps all: His Ministers
make open profession of Ignorance, which is propagated industriously amongst
his people, who are sufficiently learned, if they know how to obey: They are
told openly of their Slavery, and it is expected they learn the Obligations of
it: not but that they will dispute with Christians for their Emperor, and
allege, That he succeeds to all the Rights of Constantine, whose City he has
conquered. In his Religion the Prince is loose, and the Mufti, which is the
High Priest, tied up, who must speak complacently to the Ends of the
Government, and in conformity to the Will of him that rules, or pay his
disobedience with his Life. In this Monarchy all the Qualities of the Mind,
both speculative and practick, are despised and suspected, which made one of
their Emperors send back the Musicians sent him by Francis the First, lest
with their Harmony they should have molified the Iron Temper of those fierce
Natures: They value strength of Body, and the Arts of War, in which none are
sooner preferred than those who show the greatest Fierceness and Inhumanity in
their dispositions: They are intent upon conquering the rest of the World, and
in order to it they have infinite Numbers of Men, and infinite Treasure: His
yearly Revenue exceeds Twenty Millions of Crowns; he inherits the Estates of
all his Subjects, whose Children can lay claim to nothing but their Father's
Horse and Arms. In the midst of all these Riches his thirst of Gold still
increases: so that often his Fury is laid with the Charms of that Metal: Out of
that has been said, It Is evident that his Greatness must be the Ruin of all
other Powers, and that it would be an unspeakable Felicity to see him lessened;
but the hopes of that are so remote, that they are next to impossible.

As for any Title upon the Territories of the Republic, he can have none;
Inclination and Facility he has but too much, designing the Ruin of all
Christendom; and considering the Disunion of Christians, more intent upon
Jealousies at home than upon an Union against a Foreign Invader, his Design is
not above his Force: He fears nothing but an Union of Christendom against him;
and that he may not be negligent in providing against it, that cunning and
wicked Mahomet has left him a Prophecy to keep him awake, by which, the Ruin
of his Empire is to come from such an Union: The Turks never mention it but
with Cries and Groans; and the Government strives to avoid it by being
invincible, not considering, that if the Prophecy be true, it is unavoidable. As
for the Republic, he is a terrible Neighbor to them, always encroaching, and
setting no bounds to his pretenses, till he has swallowed all.

The Republic, on the other side, cannot want a Title against him; for what he
has taken from them, would make up a great Principality: Cyprus, Negrepont,
Modon, Coron, Caramania, all the Archipelago, Bossina, Scutari, Albania, part
of the very Imperial City of Constantinople, and in short, half his Empire in
Europe has been at several times extorted from the Republic: but to get any of
this back is the difficulty; and 'twill be well if he is content with what he
has, and that we can save what remains. The only good thing the Republic can
hope for, is, that the Turk will not enter into League with any other against
the Republic, because he scorns all Leagues: It Is true, that in the time of
Lodovico Sforza, Duke of Milan, he was by him drawn to invade the Republic,
and before that, by the Visconti, Dukes of Milan, likewise with promise to
busy the Venetians in Italy, by a War on his side: It Is said also, That Lewis
the Twelfth strove to draw him into the League of Cambray: But all these are
rather Subornations than Leagues, and spurring of a Horse that is free enough of
his own Nature.

He would easily unite with the Republic, to conquer other Princes; but then
the Republic must reckon, that he would take all to himself, he not
understanding any Accounts of dividing: So that it would only be a madness, and
by ones own Expense of Blood and Treasure, promote his Tyrannical Empire. The
Turk has often offered Succors to the Republic in their Wars with others; but
our wise Ancestors always disliked such a Protector, but were glad he did not
take the opportunity of their Troubles to fall upon them.

There is no other Politics to be used with this Empire, than to profess
Friendship, and reckon upon sudden Enmity; and therefore be always provided,
that the weakness of the State may not be an Invitation to him to use his
Natural Rapacity; for the Peace will be always the longer, when the readiness
for War shall be visible.

In case of a Rupture, one should try to make a diversion by the King of
Persia, the Moscovite and the Pole: but that will be a long uncertain business,
and of slow benefit; to corrupt the Ministers of the Port in open War, will be
a very hard thing, they will rather suffer a temptation in time of Peace, and
by that means one may penetrate their Designs, and retard their Deliberations,
provided the person gained be of the Divan, and particularly the Grand Vizier,
if possible; but they often take Bribes, and deceive one; besides, their being
subject to continual Changes, and those very sudden, according to the
Emperor's Capricio, and the Calumnies of their Competitors, the Friendship of
the Queen Mother, and of the Wife of the Grand Signior, as also of the Mufti,
may help: But if the Prince himself be of a resolute Nature, their Offices will
be but weak: And all violent sudden Resolutions of War made by the Emperor
himself, are always welcome to the Janissaries, who are the Soul of that Empire:
So that, as I said at first, I must conclude, That Prudence and Politics can
be of little use against Rage and Fury, and a Nation that depends not upon
Reason, but upon Might.

I can say nothing then but what the Angel said to Gideon, Comfortare and esto
Robustus; and with this good Omen that comes from Heaven, and which I offer
with a most affectionate Mind,

I take leave, having accomplished the Task was imposed upon me, if not
according to the full Extent of my Duty, at least in proportion to my weak
Forces, and small Talent.

FINIS.

