SOME QUERIES Proposed, to the Monthly Meeting of the Quakers at ABERDEEN; the
sixth Day of June, 1700.

By ROBERT SANDILANDS:

With their ANSWERS thereto; together with some Remarks thereupon.

Published by Authority.

To which is Prefixed a Letter from GEORGE KEITH, sent to the Quakers in
ABERDEEN, Containing a very serious and Christian Expostulation with his Old
Friends, etc.

Gal. 4. 16. Am I therefore become Your Enemy, because I tell You the Truth.
ABERDEEN, Printed by JOHN FORBES, Printer to the CITY and UNIVERSITY.

To the Right Honorable THOMAS MITCHEL, Lord Provost. Bailies.
ALEXANDER RAGG, ALEXANDER FORBES, ALEXANDER KER, ALEXANDER PATON,
JOHN LESLIE, Dean of Gild, WILLIAM CROWDEN, Thesaurer. And to the rest of the
Honorable Council of the City of ABERDEEN.

RIGHT HONORABLE,
THE Hereditary Ties I am under to the City of Aberdeen, (of which my Father
was Recorder several years) wherein many of my Friends Live, and some whereof
have been Honored with the most eminent Posts in the Magistracy, and of which
I my self am a Native and Burger, are so strong, that they need no new motives
to raise and preserve in me, the greatest Honor, and the most sincere Love for
the Place: And ye who are the present worthy Governors hereof, have surpised
me with such new favors and Personal Obligations, since my last Return to your
City, that nothing but a public acknowledgment, can secure me against the
Reproach of Ingratitude.

Those Shelves on which, I and many well designing, but seduced Christians had
Shipwrack'd the true Faith, could not be sufficiently guarded against, nor
those who are already fallen into fatal delusions recovered and restored,
otherwise, then by exposing to the impartial view of the World, the gross and
vile Errors, that ly couched under the mask of Divine Illuminations, and the
palpable Contradictions that are maintained by different parties of that
Society, which pretends to be guided and influenced in every point, by the
unerring Spirit of Infinite Wisdom. And as Love to Christianity and Charity to
the Souls of others, has induced me first to Propose, and then to publish the
following Queries and Remarks, so I cannot in Justice conceal your Forwardness
and Zeal, to Countenance and encourage me in vindication of the Truth, and to
allow what ever might be of use to me, in defense of the Truth, which I have
endeavored to do, with the greatest simplicity. And that GOD may strengthen
you and raise up others, to be valiant for Truth and Holiness, shall ever be
the hearty Prayer of,

Right Honorable, Your Most Obliged and Obedient Servant, ROBERT SANDILANDS.

To the Christian Reader.
SEEing, it has graciously pleased Almighty GOD, in his Infinite Mercy, to
discover to me as well as many more in England, (who for sometime had lived in
communion with the People called Quakers) those many gross Errors, that were
maintained in Print, by their Chief Teachers; which nevertheless, I my self
never owned, but always sincerely believed the most necessary fundamental
Truths of Christianity, professed in common by all PROTESTANTS; though I must
confess I was so far misled, as to believe that more stress was to be laid on
the Light within, then on Faith in an outward Crucified JESUS; etc. I therefore
judged my self bound in Conscience, not only to separat from them, but also to
return to this my Native Country, where I first joined with them, and there
give a public Testimony to the Truth, and endeavor in the Strength of the
LORD, to satisfy my old Friends and Relations, that as I erred through
ignorance and unbelief, never knowing nor being any way persuaded, till of late
that such gross Errors were owned by them, which if I had in the least
suspected, I think I should never have been prevailed with to have joined with
them: So I hope, that the Quakers both here and else where (who are sincere and
honest hearted) when they are made sensible of and discover the same (which
they may do, by impartially searching, as I have done their own authentic
writtings) shall be of one mind with me, and with me also obtain mercy, so as
to have reason to magnify the Infinite Goodness and Love of GOD in CHRIST
JESUS our LORD; Of this I conceive the more hopes, since I got the Answers of
the Principal Quakers, of the last Monthly Meeting at Aberdeen, given to some
Queries proposed by me at that Meeting, both which, together with some Remarks
on their said Answers are here Printed by Authority of the Magistrates of
Aberdeen, and at the desire of some of them, as well as the entreaty of my
Friends in this place, I have been induced to make a short Narrative of what
passed before the giving, in or Answering the said Queries.

Soon after my arrival at Aberdeen, I had occasion to meet with some of the
Quakers, whom I discoursed, and more particularly A. Jaffray their chief
Teacher in this place, and in our Conferences together, I mentioned some gross
passages in W. Penn's Books etc. But he being dissatisfied, proposed that
himself and I, with some friends of each side should meet, and after these
Books were produced, it might be seen, whether such palpable and gross Errors
were vouched in them yea or not. Having so soon as possible I could, got some
of them, I wrote to the said A. J. desiring to know, when we should meet, in
answer to which he sent me a very passionat and indiscreet Letter, entirely
declining the Meeting (though he himself first proposed the same) and therein
acquainted me if I had any thing to say against them, I should give it, in
Write or Print: I therefore went to their Monthly Meeting, where Alexander
Forbes of Craigie and Alexander Patton of Kinnaldie (Bailies in Aberdeen) with
a great many more Persons of good Note were present, and there, after some
short discourse, I read the Queries (as they are here Printed) of which I left
a signed Copy with the Quakers, and gave another to Bailie Paton; to which
after some time I at length obtained the Answers, which I have hereafter
subjoined. And that it may appear how groundlesly they lay claim to the
immediate and infallible illuminations of the Spirit of GOD, which is in all
times, places and persons, the same without contradiction or variation; I have
annexed some Quotations out of their most approved Writters, which most plainly
contradict the Doctrine now seemingly owned by A. J. and his Friends. These
passages I have here adduced are not to be looked upon, as the opinions of
private Authors among the Quakers, but as the Doctrine and Principles
maintained by the whole Body of that people in England; For their Books are not
allowed to be Printed or Reprinted, till first they are approved off, by the
second days Meeting at London, and all such Books so approved off, are by an
order among them, transmitted to other Monthly or Quarterly Meetings etc. and
there is none that I have made use of, have ever been rejected or publicly
disapproved by them, (so far as I know.)

One thing more I must say, which is, that as it is well known to diverse in
this place, that no outward prospect ever moved me to leave the Protestant
Religion and join with the Quakers, so I can say in the sight of Almighty GOD,
and in the sincerity of my heart, that no Worldly interest induced me, now to
leave their communion, but plain conviction and full persuasion of those many
gross and pernicious Heresies which were very clearly discovered to me in their
Writtings. And as I am convinced, that many sober and serious Persons among
them, do not believe or so much as imagine that such unchristian Doctrines were
ever broached or mantained by their chief Ieachers, so I heartily pray that the
LORD would enlighten their minds that they may both discover and acknowledge
their Errors and abhore them as much as I do.

GEORGE KEITH'S Letter.
My Old Friends, Andrew Jaffray, John Robertson, Robert Gordon, John Forbes of
Achortes, etc.
HAving the occasion of the Bearer, I thought fit to send you my fourth
Narrative, and another late Book of mine called the Deism of William Penn, etc:
which I desire you to read impartially and without prejudice. I hope ye will
not be so strait as not to read them, for as ever I could and did very freely
read the Books of any against me, so I still can, and do readily read them. The
said Narrative as to the truth of the Quotations, is attested by men of Credit,
and beside I suppose, many of the Books that I have quoted in the same, ye may
have by you, and some others ye may easily procure, whereby to find whether my
Quotations be true and just, and if you find them so to be, I hope you will
calmly and seriously consider them, and Compare them with the Holy Scriptures,
which I beseech you more diligently to search, with earnest Prayer to God
Almigty, that he would give you a good understanding, by His Divine
Illumination, by which you will see that the chief Teachers of the Quakers
(whom both Ye and I have in our Ignorance owned for true Teachers) have Taught
very false Doctrines, contradicting the Holy Scriptures; in diverse of the
great fundamentals of Christianity.

I shall not here expostulat with You, for your unkindness to me,
Uncharitableness and rash Judgment against me in your Letters and Papers, sent
up here to London against me some Yeasr ago. But my Prayer is to God, both for
You and others thereaway, that he may give You a better Understanding, and make
You more Charitable in Judgment, both to me and others, and more humble in
Your own Conceits. I freely own with sorrow and deep Repentance that I have
been injurious to You and others thereaway, not in any Wordly matter, but while
I was with You, and in my ignorant Zeal, thinking that I did God good Service,
that I was any ways instrumental to mislead and misinform You, and turn You
out of the way in any of the least Principle or Practice of Christian Religion.
For this I acknowledge that I am a great Debtor to You, and would willingly
make restitution and be at as great and greater Pains to undeceive You, and
bring You out of the Mire, as ever I was to lead You into it, but if You refuse
my offer, God (I doubt not) will forgive me, and not lay it to my Charge, and
the Sin will ly at your Door. I hope I can say as Paul said, I have obtained
Mercy because I did it ignorantly. The main things wherein I Charge my self to
have misinformed You, and any others, either by my Words or Books, are, in
leading You into great Unchatitablene^s toward all other Protestant Societies,
and into too high an Esteem of the People called Quakers, and their Leaders and
Teachers and Way of Practice in diverse things, both Religious and Civil, and
more especially to the rejecting of the Holy Institutions of our Blessed Lord,
of Baptism and the Supper, and setting up Humane Institutions in room of them,
as George Fox his orders of Women's Meetings and Government in Church Affairs,
the Condemning all other Protestant Teachers, (though more sound in Faith, and
of more Religious Practices) and Professors of Christianity, as Priests of
Baal, and Worshippers of Baal, crying out against their Congregations for their
Mixtures: Whereas alas, there has been all along a greater Mixture among the
People called Quakers, both as to Unsoundness of Doctrine and Practices. Ye
Your selves know how little God is Worshipped with Prayer and Thanksgiving in
the Families of the Quakers generally, (very few excepted) excusing all by
pretense of mental and inward Prayer, and want of Divine Motions to carry them
forth in external Acts of Worship. So that to my certain knowledge (possibly to
Yours also) too many high Pretenders to Spirituality, among the People called
Quakers, who are Masters of Families and have Wives and Children and Servants,
yet rarely Bow their bodily Knees to God in their Families. And Set-times of
Prayer and Thanksgiving, either for the Closet or Family Worship have been
generally laid aside.

These are the Chief Things for which I have blamed my self, in being
instrumental in former Times to have misinformed you though I think all along,
I was generally more Charitable in Judgment toward many others of other
Societies then many were, or now are among the People called Quakers. But it is
a great Comfort to me that upon a strict Examination of my former Persuasions
and Principles, as extant in my former Books (for which I think I can appeal to
You) as well as what I have declared among You, I was never guilty of that
Horrid Unbelief and Antichristian Errors and Heresies, contradicting the chief
Fundamentals of Christianity, that I have found the Chief English Teachers
among the Quakers guilty of. I desire to Bless God my Preserver, who all along
has Preserved me sound in the Faith, as touching all the twelve* Articles of
that called the Apostles-Creed, the God Head and Man hood of Our Blessed Lord
JESUS CHRIST, His Person and Offices. For which I desire You to Read and
Consider the Answer given by me and my dear and Worthy Friend Alexander
Jaffray, (now with God) to the thirty Questions sent to him by Bishop Scougal,
if that Worthy Man had Lived to this Day in the Body, I Question not but he
would have been a Strength to me in my Opposition, to those Vile Errors held by
the English Leaders among the Quakers. Viz. G. F. G. W. F. B. and many others.
I hoped also that ye had been better Principled against these vile Errors, and
that in good Measure by Means of my Labor among You. So that it was no small
Surprise to me, to find you join in a Combination against me, with my
Adversaries here as you know, ye and Your Friends generally did, soon after my
Arrival into England from America. Your pretense then was that ye could not
believe, that Friends either in America or England, were guilty of the Errors I
had Charged them with, but if you will give your selves the Liberty to Read my
late Books, and particularly the two, I now send you, I hope ye will be
convinced of the Truth of my Charge, as diverse hereaway both in City and
Country, through the Mercy of God are so convinced, but I fear that some among
you are too deeply guilty of some of the same Errors. And if ye in particular
are not, how can ye in Conscience, own them to be your Christian Brethren, whom
I have proved so evidently guilty of them, as particularly the chief Teachers
among the Quakers hereaway, some Living and some Deceased.

And I earnestly request you to distinguish betwixt any good things, either in
Doctrine or Practice; which ye have seen or observed in me, and whatever was
contrary thereunto, so as to cleave unto the former and only reject the latter.
What Honesty or Sobriety and Christian Practice ye ever saw in me, I hope to
persevere in it and increase in the same, and I desire you to do the like; but
reject your Errors, your Uncharitableness of Judgment toward others, your
Spiritual Pride, and over high Esteem of your selves. Believe not every Spirit
either in your selves or others, but try the Spirits, and bring all Doctrines
and Practices, to the Test of the Holy Scriptures, and pray God, to give you
that True Light and Discerning, to help you to make an Impartial Examination.
It has been a great default generally among the people called Quakers, and
remains among them too much to Countenance Ignorant Persons, if they pretend to
the Spirits Teachings and Motions to Preach and Pray, and Travel from Place to
Place as Teachers of others, when yet they want to be taught the first
Principles of Christianity, and its to be feared ye have such ignorant Teachers
among you. I am sure I remember when some of you used to blame it in my
hearing, and as I desire you to make a distinction betwixt what is right and
wrong, in any of my former Doctrines or Practices, (I hope none of you could
ever charge me with any Immorrality or Scandalous Conversation when among you,
but that if I wanted an Attestation to that, I think ye would do me that
Justice to give me an ample Testimony) so I would have you to know, that I
continue grounded and firmly persuaded as to that most necessary and excellent
Doctrine of Gods Inward Teachings, by his Holy Spirit Light and Grace, and his
gracious operations and Assistances to enable us, and all good Christians to
perform every acceptable Service to him. And whatever ye or any others, may or
do judge of me, I bless my Gracious God, that I feel my self a living member
of CHRIST's Body, by partaking daily of the Life and living Virtue of the Head,
JESUS CHRIST our Lord, and a Living branch upon that living Vine, and my care
is and ever I hope shall be, to abide in him, which I bless God for, I find by
true experience, that I can remain and abide such, and yet be reformed in many
things in my judgment, and diverse practices, from what I formerly was. It
has been a great mistake in us, to think that we could not be more holy, or
soholy as we think we are, or were, without being so excessivly uncharitable
toward others, and so contrary to them in our Persuasions and Practices, when
as many of their Persuasions and Practices were better then ours, and others of
them more inoffensive. I hope ye will excuse my writing thus largely unto you,
for it is in true Love and good will, however you receive it, and as I have
said I do not expostulat with you, for your injuring me, for I have more
injured you (though not by any Immorality,) but by being instrumental to have
in any ways misinformed you. I pray God forgive you and me, I remain your
truly welwishing Friend,

George Keith.
London 17th 2d Month, 1700.
To Andrew Jaffray, John Robertson, Alexander Gellie, John Forbes, Robert
Gordon, John Glennic; And the rest of the Monthly Meeting of the people called
Quakers at Aberdeen. Something of weighty importance, modestly proposed to your
serious Consideration.
FRIENDS, Forasmuch, as there has been, and is some just cause given, to
apprehend, that many among the People called Quakers, have not a found Faith,
touching diverse great and weighty Doctrines, and principles of the Christian
Religion; plainly delivered in the Holy Scriptures: for both mine and others
satisfaction, and also for your own vindication, if so be (which I should be
truly glade of, and rejoice in) that ye manifest your selves to be really
innocent and clear of those gross Errors and Heresies, which the chief English
Teachers, among the Quakers have been and are still charged guilty of, and upon
which account, only I have in good Conscience been concerned to leave communion
with them: not finding that they have in the least as yet cleared themselves of
the same, which they can never well do, without a public and ingenuous
retractation of those many unwarrantable and unsound passages in their Books.
You are therefore earnestly desired, and requested to give your plain and
candid Answer in writing to these following Queries.

Querie 1. Whether the Holy Scriptures containing the Old and New Testament
called the BIBLE in their plain and literal meaning? Or the Light within, be
the certain fixed and standing Rule, whereby to judge and determine matters of
contraversie as to Religion?
Here followers the Quakers Answer.

Ans. We believe, that the Holy Scriptures, containing the Old and New
Testament (called the BIBLE) as having come from the Spirit of GOD, and being
written by Men Divinly inspired, (which we most firmly Believe they were) when
they are opened and explained by the same Spirit of GOD which gave them forth,
(they being of no private interpretation, 2 Pet. 1. and 20.) are an Infallible
Rule of Faith and Life, unto all to whom GOD has in his Providence been
pleased to communicate them, for they being the things of GOD cannot be
understood, but by the Spirit of GOD, 1 Cor. 2. 11.

Remark, This Answer to the 1 Q. being in all appearance sound and orthodox,
(if they have no secret reserved meaning) and agreeable to the sense of all
sound Protestants, I am heartily glade, that they have deserted the unsound and
hetrodox Doctrine, that some of their principal Teachers, both in Scotland and
England have vouched in their writtings, in relation to the Holy Scriptures
being the Rule of Faith, and therefore the Reader may be pleased to compare
this their Answer with what Robert Barclay says (tho I confess that he and G.
K. were the soundest and m^st Orthodox Writters among the Quakers) in See R.
Rs. works page 299.
his explanation of his 3d proposition among his Theses Theologicae. The
principal Rule (says he) of Christians under the Gospel, is not an outward
Letter nor Law outwardly written and delivered, but an Inward Spiritual Law
engraven in the heart, the Law of the Spirit of Life, the word that is nigh in
the Heart, and in the Mouth, but the Letter of the Scripture is outward of it
self a dead thing, a mere declaration of good things, but not the things
themselves; therefore it, nor is, nor can be the Chief or Principal RULE of
Christians. But least any should mistake him and think that tho he owned them
not to be the principal Rule, yet at least he acknowledged them to be a RULE,
he immediately adds 3 That which is given to Christians for a RULE and Guide,
must needs be so full, as it may clearly and distinctly Guide and Order them in
all things and occurrences, that may fall out. But the Scriptures are not such
(as he instanceth in several particulars) therefore the Scriptures cannot be a
RULE to them. And as they are not a RULE, so nor the Rule, (as he says in
another place) As for CHRIST and his Apostles, using the Scriptures for
convincing of their Opposers, so do we, and yet this proves not that either he
or we judge them page 15. near the end
to be the Rule whereby to try all things and Spirits etc. The Reader may
plainly observe the great inconsistency betwixt what R. B. says and what Andrew
Jaffray and his Friends say; They affirm the Scriptures to be an RULE, an
Infallible RULE, and an Infallible RULE of Faith and Life, in which they are
very orthodox, and I must in Charity believe that in so far are our Modern
Quakers Reformed, and very justly laid aside their former Doctrine. Which is
yet more plainly and explicitly delivered by William Penn in his Appendix to
the Christian Quaker, for after endeavoring to prove that the Scriptures were
never the General RULE, he at last by way of Objection says. Page 136
But is not the Scripture the RULE of our Day, he answers if the RULE, then the
general RULE for page 137.
whatsoever is the RULE of Faith and Life excludes all other from being
general, they being but particular in respect of it self, therefore not the
RULE of Faith and Life, but besides, their not being general, I have several
Reasons to o^ter, and he brings no less then nine or ten Reasons, why they
cannot be the Rule of Faith and Life. See George Keith's Book called the Deism
of William Penn, etc. Wherein there is a full examination and confutation of
William Penns Discourse of the General RULE of Faith and Practice, and Judge of
Contraversie, Printed Anno 1699.

Observe also, what is said in one of their Books, called the Quakers Refuge,
p. 17. Whether the first Penman of the Scriptures, was Moses or Hermes, or
whether both these are one? or whether there are not many Words, contained in
the Scriptures, which were not spoken by INSPIRATION of the Holy Spirit. And in
a Book, called Truths Defense, by G. F. and R. H. p. 2d. You may as well
Condemn the Scriptures, to the Fire as our Queries.

Q. 2. Whether the Light within, be sufficient of it self, to Salvation,
without any thing else?
A. Unto such, as are under a moral impossibility, of coming to the knowledge
of the Incarnation, Life, Miracles, Crucifiction, Death, Resurrection and
Ascension of our Lord JESUS' CHRIST, the Light wherewith he inlighteneth every
Man, coming into the World, is sufficient to Salvation, Ioh. 1. 9. Tit. 2. 11.
But where the outward knowledge of the Scriptures is attainable, or the outward
History of our Savior, it is altogether damnable not to believe the same.

R. This Answer to the second Querie, is in my opinion no Answer at all, but a
down right shifting the Question, which has no respect to such, as are under a
moral impossibility, of knowing the Life, Death, Miracles, etc. of our Blessed
Lord JESUS CHRIST, but to such, as have the means of knowing them, and tho to
such it be certainly Damnable, not to believe them, yet that tells us not,
whither the Light within, be of its self sufficient to Salvation, without any
thing else yea or not, and therefore, I must again entreat, that they may be
pleased, Heartily, and sincerely, to give a plain and direct Answer to the
Querie? and this I have the more reason to demand, because Robert Barclay of
Urie, at the first giving in of their Answers, being ^ressed to declare,
whether to such as have the means of knowing the Life, Death, Miracles, etc. of
the Holy JESUS, the Light within, was of it self sufficient to Salvation? He
answered negatively that it was not, and carried away the Answers to have that
insert, as their Answer to the Querie, which after all was not done. From
whence it appears, that either they are not agreed amongst themselves, about
the resolution of this Querie, and so shift the Answering it: Or else, that
they are afraid to own the Truth plainly, least thereby they contradict their
Ancient Friends. And particularly George Whitehood, who plainly asserts in his
Antidote, p. 28. That the Quakers are offended with G. K. for saying, the Light
within is not sufficient to Salvation without something else. The which
Proposition, seeing he blames as false, he must hold the Contradictory to be
true, that the light within is sufficient to Salvation without any thing else.
Yea G. W. has granted in his Antidote, p. 28. that CHRIST as outwardly
Considered, is that something else which G. K. means. And W. P. in his appendix
to the Christian Quakers, page 158.
plainly affirms, that the belief of the History of CHRIST's Birth, Death, etc.
is none of the absolute necessaries to our Salvation. And in his Quakerism a
new Nickname, etc. He saves, That Faith in the History of CHRIST's outward
page 6
manifestation, is a deadly poison, these latter Ages has been infected with:
and he says also in his Rejoinder to I. Fa^do, that CHRIST in the Gentiles, is
a greater mystery, then CHRIST as he was made manifest in the Flesh, it is
strange, that should be counted most misterious, which was the introduction to
the mystery, and these transactions, counted most difficult, that were by the
Divine Wisdom of GOD, ordained as so many facil representations, of what was to
be accomplished in Man, it is to le^en. if not totally exclude the true mystery
of Godliness, which is CHRIST manifested in his Children, their hope of Glory.
p. 335
Like to this, is his saying in his Preface to the Collection of Robert
Barclays Book 's. O Reader, (says he) great is the mystery of Godliness, and
if the Apostle said it of the manifestation, page 36.
of the Son of GOD in the Flesh. if that be a mystery (and if a mystery, it is
not to be spelled out, but by the revelation of the Spirit) how much more, is
the Sea also His Christi an Quaker page 12.
work of Regeneration a mystery, that is wholly inward and spiritual.

Q. 3. Whether the Holy Three, the FATHER, SON, and HOLY GHOST, that bear
record in Heaven, be not threedistinct Persons of one Substance, Power, Glory
and Eternity? Or are they only three manifestations, or operations, and is
there not some Incommunicable, as well as Communicable Attributes, belonging to
the Persons of the Holy Trinity?
A. We believe according to the Scriptures, that there are three, that bare
record in Heaven, the FATHER, the WORLD, and the HOLY GHOST, and these three
are One, 1 John 5. 7. And we do not find our selves obliged, to express our
selves, in other terms than the Wisdom of GOD, saw meet to express that great
mystery in the Holy Scriptures: But we do believe, that there are
incommunicable, as well, as communicable Attributes, in the said Holy three as
is witnessed, Joh. 1. 14. And the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us,
which cannot be said of the other two.

R. In this Answer to the third Querie, it is said, there are incommunicable,
as well, as communicable Attributes, in the Holy three etc. And yet G.
Whitehead, says in his Truth defending the Quakers. We deny the Popish terms
page 2.
of three distinct Persons, which you call GOD the FATHER, GOD the SON, and GOD
the HOLY GHOST, which tends to the dividing GOD and to the making three GOD's,
and do not you Priests, in your Divinity, as you call it, affirm that a Person
is a Single, Rational, Complete Substance, and differing from another, by an
INCOMMUNICABLE PROPERTY; and art thou so blind, as to think, that there is such
a difference in the God head, seeing CHRIST is equal with his FATHER, who is a
SPIRIT, then what INCOMMUNICABLE PROPERTY, can he differ in from the FATHER,
that is not COMMUNICABLE to the one as well as the other? And Geo Fox (one of
the greatest account among them) in his disputing against C. Wade, for saying,
that GOD the FATHER never took upon him, Human Nature, which (says he) in his
great mystery is contrary to the Scripture. This was the Error of the Old
Heretics, page 246.
called Patripassians, who held that GOD the FATHER was born of the Virgin,
suffered, dyed, etc.

Q. 4. Is not the promised Seed of the Woman, that should bruise the Serpents
Head, Genesis 3. 15. The Man CHRIST JESUS, that was born of the Virgin at
Bethlehem, in the Land of Judea.
A. We Answer affirmatively, it is he and he alone, we never in the least
doubted it, what ever malice may suggest without the least ground.

R. This Answer may be compared, with what W. P. says in express words in his
Christian Quaker, p. 97 98. One outward thing (saithhe) cannot be the propper
figure of another, nor is it the way of Holy Scripture, so to teach, the
outward Lamb shows forth the inward Lamb. The SEED of the promise, is an Holy
and Spiritual Principle, of Light, Life and Power, that being received into the
Heart, briuses the Serpents head, and because the Seed, which cannot be the
Body, (viz. that was outwardly born of the Virgin) is CHRIST, as testify the
Scriptures, the Seed is one, that Seed CHRIST, and CHRIST GOD over all blessed
for ever. The Reader may see, that its not malice, but that there is too much
ground, to suggest the Quakers unsoundness as to the foresaid Querie.

Q 5. That seed of Abraham to which the Promise was made, that in him all the
Nations of the Earth shall be blessed, according to Genesis 22. 18. Gal. 3. 16 Was
it not the Man CHRIST JESUS who according to the Flesh, was the Son of Abraham,
and the Son of David, Matt. 1. 1.
A. We Answer affirmatively, yea it was he and none else.

R. With this Orthodox Answer, the Reader may compare what G. W. says, in his
Truth defending the Quakers, it is Queried thus, did Richard Hubberthorn will,
page 21.
in writing that CHRIST'S coming in the Flesh, was but a Figure, G. W. Answers,
could CHRIST have been said to have been transfigured, if his coming in the
Flesh, had not been a Figure. And in his Christian Quaker, he positively denies
that CHRIST Consisted of visible Flesh and Bones. page 139. 140.
It is (says he) both unscriptural, and assurd, to assert that JESUS CHRIST
consists of a Human Body, of Flesh and Bones, (how then can he be properly
the Seed of Abraham, and the Son of David I distinguish (says G. W.) between
considing, and having. (CHRIST had visible Flesh and Bones, but he did not
consist of them, as a Man has a Coat or a Garment, but he does not consist of
it.)

Q. 6 Had not this Man, a real Soul, that was not the Godhead, and a real Body
also, that was not the Godhead?
A. We answer affirmatively, yea he had both.

R. This Answer may be compared with what G. W. says, in his Appendix to the
Divinity of CHRIST aganist T. D. as to T. Ds telling us of the Son of GODs
incarnation, page 18.
the creation of his Body, and Soul, the parts of that Nature he subsisted in,
(note, that Nature, plainly denotes CHRIST's Manhood Nature, that T. D. meant,
which had a created Body and Soul) to this I say, (says G. W. if the Body and
Soul of the Son of God, were both created? does not this render him a fourth
Person, again where do the Scripture say, that the Soul was created?

Q 7 Is not that outward Man who was born of the Virgin, and suffered without
the Gates of Jerusalem, properly and truly the SON of GOD, having no immediate
FATHER but GOD.
A. We Answer affirmatively, and fully believe he is so.

R. This Answer to the seventh Querie, being in all appearance sound and
orthodox, and agreeable to the sense of all sound Protestants, (if they have no
secret reserved meaning in this and their other orthodox Answers) wherein they
dissent, from the unsound Doctrine of some of their chief Teachers, and
therefore the Reader may be pleased, to compare this their Answer, with what W.
P. saves, in his serious Apology: page 146. viz. But that the outward Person
that suffered, without the gates of Jerusalem, was properly the SON of GOD we
utterly deny. (Is not this a plain contradiction to what A. J. etc asserts And
also W. P. in his Rejoinder, page 304 305 Says that outward Person that
suffered at Jerusalem was CHRIST by a M^tonomy, of the thing containing, having
the name of the thing contained.

Q. 8. Is not JESUS CHRIST, both GOD and Man, and yet but one CHRIST, so that
his Godhead is not his Manhood, though the Nature of his Manhood, is most
highly, and wonderfully united to his Godhead?
A. We Answer affirmatively, and fully believe the same.

R This Answer to the eight Querie, the Reader may compare it, with what one of
their Ancient Teachers, Christopher Atkinson says, in his Book called the
Sword of the Lord drawn page 5. Your imagined GOD, beyond the Stars, and your
carnal CHRIST, is utterly denied. To say this CHRIST, is GOD and Man in one
Person, is a Lie, and G. W. says in his Book, called the Life and Light etc.
page 39. As for those expressions, GOD Man, being born of MARIE, we do not find
them in the Scriptures, nor do we read, that MARIE was the Mother of GOD, but
in the Popes Canons, Articles, etc. And what nonsense, (says he page 47.
ibidem.) and unscripture Language, is this, to tell of GOD being cocreated with
the Father, or that GOD has Glory with GOD, does not this imply two GODS? and
that GOD had a Father? let the Reader judge? and (page 24.) To tell of the Word
GOD, cocreator with the Father, is all one as to tell of GOD, being cocreator
with GOD, if the Father be GOD, and this is to make two GODS, two Creators,
etc. And thus G. W. opposes the Godhead of CHRIST, as he does his Manhood in
other Quotations, he also denies, the Glorious Hipostatical Union, that it
consists of a Human and Divine Nature, or that they are hipostatically one. See
his Christian Quaker, page. 141. And their Book called, A Testimony for the
true CHRIST, page 8. Whereof G. W. is supposed to be the Author, they deny the
Humanity of CHRIST, as Humanity signifies the Earthly Nature of Man's Body, as
coming from Humus the ground; but as Humanity signifies Meekness, Gentleness,
Mercifulness, as opposite to Cruelty, in this last Sense, they own CHRIST's
Humanity, See the Quotation at large cited in G. Ks. fourth Narrative p. 70.
but deny it in the former, which is the true Sense of Scripture, and of all
true Christians. And, as they deny the Humanity of CHRIST, so they deny Divine
Worship and Honor to be given to him, and consequently denies his Divinity, as
William Shown a noted Writer among them, expressly says, in his Book called a
small Treatise concerning evil thoughts, p. 37. Not to JESUS the Son of
Abraham, David, and Mary, Saint or Angel, but to GOD the FATHER, all Worship,
Honor, and Glory is to be given.

Q. 9. Did CHRIST's Natural Body, which was Crucified and was Buried, rise
again? And did that Body after his Resurrection, ascend into Heaven? And is
that Body now in Heaven?
A. We believe, that CHRIST's Body, which was Crucified and was Buried, did
rise again; and did after his Resurrection (being wonderfully glorified) ascend
to Heaven, and is now at the Right Hand of the Majesty on high, Heb. 1. 3.

R. This Answer, if they have no secret reserved meaning in it, in all
appearance seems Orthodox, and agreeable to the Sense of all sound Protestants.
But the Reader may Compare it, with what G. W. says, in his Nature of
Christianity; page 41. What Scripture proof (says he after his socratical way
of writing) is there that CHRIST subsisteth outwardly, Bodily without us, at
GOD's Right Hand? and where is GOD's Right Hand? is it visible or invisible?
within us or without us only? And is CHRIST a SAVIOR, as an outward Bodily
existence, or PERSON without Us, distinct from GOD, and on that Consideration,
to be Worshipped as GOD, yea or nay? But John Whitehead a very eminent and
ancient Preacher among them, is more explicit, in his Postscript to a Book
called the Quakers Refuge, p. 90. I have several times says he denied, that
CHRIST has now a Body of Flesh and Bone, Circumscript or limited in that
Heaven which is above, and out of every Man on Earth* And G. W. in his Light
and Life, page 38. is very plain, where he expressly says, the Quakers see no
need, of directing men to the type for the Antitype, viz. Neither to the
Outward Temple, nor yet to Jerusalem, either to JESUS CHRIST or his Blood,
knowing that neither the Righteousness of Faith does so direct, Romans 10.

Q. 10 Is that Heaven, into which CHRIST has ascended, in the true Glorified
Nature of Man consisting of Soul and Body) without us, or within us only? And
do you own the Man CHRIST JESUS to be without you, as well as His spirit and
Light within you?
A We firmly believe that, that Heaven, unto which CHRIST has ascended in the
(...) Glori^^ed Nature of Man (...) of Soul and Body, is without i^: and u^ do
own the Man CHRIST JESUS to be without us, as well as His Spirit and Light
within us: Rom 8 34. Heb. 8. 1.

R. This Answer may be compared with what G. F. says in his great mystery p.
214. There is none have a glory and a Heaven but within them. Now, if there be
no glory nor Heaven without us? Then how can CHRIST be ascended into a Heaven
without us? And W. P. redicules the locality of both Heaven and Hell, and says
in his Rejoinder, p. 179. To deny it, is not very offensive, and that it looks
too Carnal, indeed Mahomitan, viz. to assert it W Smith an Ancient and Eminent
writter among them, in his Catechism, p. 57. has this Question, And is that
which is within you, the only foundation, upon which you stand, and the
principle of your Religion; answer, that of GOD within us, is so; for we know
it is CHRIST, and being CHRIST it must needs be ONLY and PRINCIPAL, for that
which is ONLY admits not of another, and that which is principal, is greatest
in being, and thus we know, CHRIST in us to be unto us the ONLY and the
PRINCIPAL. Q But do ye hold that this foundation and principle within you is
sufficient to eternal Life? A. Yes we do so* And G. F. in his great mystery p.
248 says to C. Wade, The Devil was in thee, and thou says, thou art saved by
CHRIST without thee: And G W, says in truth defending the Quakers p. 65, That
Faith in CHRIST without men, is contray to the Apolles Doctrine. Is this to own
the Man CHRIST JESUS to be without us, as A. J etc, asserts they do in their
answer.

Q. 11. Are we Justified and Cleansed from Sin, by the Blood of CHRIST that was
outwardly shed? And are we sanctified by that Blood meritoriously, as by His
Spirit, Grace and Light in us, efficiently?
A. We answer affirmatively.

R. With this affirmative answer may be compared R. Bs 7 proposition in his a
pology p of his works 264, As many (says he) as resit not this Light viz. the
Light within, but reserve the same, it becomes in them a Holy, Pure and
Spiritua (...) bringing so the Holiness, Righto^sness (...) and all those (...)
fruits which are acceptable to GOD, by which Holy Birth, viz, JESUS CHRIST
formed within us, and working His works in us, as we are Sanctified, so (...)
in the ^ight of GOD according to 1 Cor. 6. 11. Here Justification and
Sanctification are entirely (...) to CHRIST the Light within, and there is not
one word of the outward CHRIST, or his outward Blood outwardly shed. Let the
Reader also consider what he delivers as his 3 position in p. 370 viz That
since good works as naturally flow from this Birth, as heat from Fire,
therefore are they of absolut necessity to Justification, as Causa sine qua
non, i. e. tho not as the Cause for which, yet as that in which we are and
without which we cannot be Justified. But G. W. is a little more distinct in his
2d part of the Christian Quaker p. 126. (where he says) But what proof has
he from Scripture that the sheding of CHRIST'S Blood was the meritorious Cause
of Justification? so through that whole 3d chap. he labors to prove that
properly speaking it is by the Spirit and Light, or CHRIST within, we are
Justified. And in his Antidote p. 39 He affirms, that the blood of his, viz.
(CHRIST'S outward blood) as well as the water that came out of his side, had an
allegorical and mysterious signification as well as an outward and literal,
even of the Spiritual blood and water of Life, which being compared, with what
he says in his Light and Life p. 59, in which he plainly denis that the
material blood of the Sacrifice, was a type of the material Blood of CHRIST,
for that were to say (says he) that material Blood was a type of that which
was material, this is to give the substance no pre-eminence above the type. So
that tho (as G. K. observes in his 3 Narrative p. 73) G. W. etc. grant, that a
man called CHRIST, was outwardly born, dyed, had his blood shed etc, yet all
this was an allegory, and had an allegorical signification, of CHRIST truly and
really (without an allegory) born within them, crucified and dead within them,
his blood shed within them, buried, risen, ascended within them, atonement,
reconciliation etc. within them: And seeing they deny the merit and efficacy of
CHRIST'S death, and blood without, and of what he did and suffered without us,
they are justly charged to allegorize it away, that is, to make no other
account of it, then of the History of Hagar and Sarah, and other types,
Symbols, and allegories of the Old Testament. W. P. is yet more express
speaking of our Justification by the Righteousness which CHRIST has fulfilled
in his own Person for us, he says in his serious Appology p. 148, And indeed
this we deny and boldly affirm it, in the Name of the LORD to be the Doctrine
of Devils, and an Arm of the Sea of Corruption, which does now deluge the whole
World. I could quote many more Passages, but I refer to these following, G. Ws.
Light and Life, p. 38. 40. etc. W. Batlies Coll. p. 22, 23. 577.

Q. 12. Is it altogether, and wholly, as necessary for us to believe in CHRIST
without us, for our Eternal Salvation, as to believe in his Spiritual Light
within us? and is not the Faith in the Man CHRIST, as he dyed for our Sins, and
rose again, and is at the Right Hand of GOD, and makes intercession for us,
according to Romans 8. 34. necessary to be Preached frequently, as well as his
inward appearance, by every true Minister of CHRIST?
A. We believe, (as in our Answser to the second Query) that its altogether
necessary, for us to believe in CHRIST without us, for our Eternal Salvation,
where the means of the knowledge thereof can be had: And also that the Faith in
the Man CHRIST JESUS, as he dyed for our Sins, and rose again, and is at the
Right Hand of GOD, etc. is necessary to be Preached by all true Ministers, as
they are led thereunto by the Spirit of GOD, and which is frequently practiced
amongst us, as may be witnessed by such as come to our Meetings, according to,
1 Cor. 1. 23.

R. The Limitation in this Answer is useless, for I speak only of such as have
the means, and as to our Faith in CHRIST without us, R. Bs. says in page 9.
of his works and whereas thou say, you see the Apostles judges the knowledge
of CHRIST Crucisied to be that one thing necessary, we deny (says R. B.) that
the knowledge of His being outwardly Crucified is that one thing necessary, for
People must know him in them. And as a confirmation of this, in the second
Proposition of his Apology, page 269. (he says) Which Revelation of God by
the Spirit, whither by outward voices, or appearances, dreams, or inward
objective manifestations in the heart, were of old the formal object of their
Faith, and remains yet so to be, since the object of the Saints Faith, is the
same in all Ages, and in Consequence to this last part, he says page 279. that
which now comes under debait, is what we have asserted in the last place, viz.
that the same continues to be the object of the Saints Faith to this day, etc.
here is not one Word of Faith in CHRIST without us, but on the Contrary, the
formal object of the Saints Faith, in all Ages is inward Revelations, and the
Light within. G. F. says in his great mystery, p. 47. The Light which every
one has that comes into the World, is sufficient unto Salvation, without the
help of any other means or discovery. W. P. says, Quakerism, a new Nickname,
page 12. And since they believe that outward appearance, (i. e. JESUS at
Jerusalem,) they need not preach what is not to be again. So then by this the
Birth, Life and Death, etc. of the Holy JESUS needs not to be Preached, and
indeed a great deal of the Bible, is to be laid aside and not Preached,
according to this Maxim of W. Ps. and W Bailie, an ancient Writer among them
says, see his Goll. p. 308. and so he taught them to Pray, Our Father, etc.
Not to look at his Person, and to pray to him as a Person without them, but bid
them pray to the Father. Then by the same Rule, if not pray to Him, we are not
to believe in Him, as a Person without us. But the Reader may observe, that
however orthodox A. J. etc. seems to be in their Answer, in affirming that
Faith in the Man CHRIST JESUS as he dyed, etc. (where the means of the
Knowledge thereof can be had etc) is necessary to be Preached by all true
Ministers, yet it is (with this Proviso,) as they are led thereunto by the
Spirit, which clause seems to destroy that obligation, which immediately before
they had acknowledged, for suppose any or all the Preachers, among the Quakers
be indifferent in this matter, and so quite neglect (as generally they do)
Preaching the Necessity of Faith in the man CHRIST without us, here is a shift
ready, they may plead this for their excuse, and say they are not led thereunto
by the Spirit of God.

Q 13. Do you Believe that all that were saved in any Age of the World, had
their Sins forgiven them, for the Man CHRIST JESUS his sake, and on the account
of his most Holy, and perfect obedience unto Death, and that what Light and
Grace, all Men ever received from GOD in former Ages, or now receive, or shall
her after receive to the Worlds end, it is given to Men, for the Man CHRIST
JESUS his sake, by his Purchase and Merits, and Continual Mediation and
Intercession?
A. We Answer affirmatively and firmly believe it, Acts 4. 12.

R. This Answer the Reader may be pleased to compare with the Quotations in the
Remarks on the 10 and 12. Answers.

Q. 14 Did not the LORD JESUS CHRIST by his most perfect obedience and
sacrifice of himself, which he offered up unto GOD, fully satisfy the Justice
of his FATHER, and so pay the Ransom for the sins of Mankind?
Q. 15. Did CHRIST suffer the punishment due for the sins of fallen Man? and
did he make full payment in man's stead, for the debt contracted by sin?
A. To both which last Queries we answer, that we believe that the LORD JESUS
CHRIST did freely offer himself an acceptable Sacrifice for the sins of
Mankind, and that the FATHER (of his great mercy) accepted of that Sacrifice as
a sufficient expiation for the sins of the whole World as in these Scriptures,
1 Pet. 1. 19. 1 Pet. 2. 24. 1 Pet. 3. 18. John 10. 14, 15, 17, 18. Verses.

R. This Answer to the 14, and 15. Queries may be compared with the 11th
Question in G. Ws. Appendix to the 2d part of the Christian Quaker, p. 242.
where it is asked, whether Divine Justice did propperly and strictly require a
full payment and punishment upon CHRIST in man's stead, for all the debt
contracted and injury done by fallen man? to which it is answered, No, CHRIST'S
sufferings were not of that nature or intent etc. and thereafter he says, p.
244, and see p 240, All these Scriptures relating to CHRIST'S sufferings, as
Isa. 53 etc. do all intimat GOD'S great kindness and Condescension in CHRIST
JESUS, and his humiliation and deep suffering under the weight and burden of
sin, and as by the Grace of GOD, he tasted Death for every man, all which fall
greatly short, of proving our adversaries charge against him, viz that GOD
poured down his Wrath and Revenge on his innocent SON, for satisfaction to
Divine justice in man's stead that have done the injury I say all the Sciptures
alleged by them, can never prove this etc. Here we have a positive answer, to
the Queries, and no shuffling or shifting the matter, as A. J. and his Friends
do in their answer And W. P. in his Rejoinder to Io. Faldo p. 284 and 255,
Justifyeth W. Smiths saying CHRIST in us offers himself a living Sacrifice to
GOD for us, by which the Wrath of GOD is appeased to us. And G. W. in his Light
and Life p. 44. does also justify the same, but what he says is too large to
be here inserted, and therefore I refer the Reader to the Book it self, and to
G. Ks. 3 Nar. p. 24. W. P. in his reason against Railing, p. 9. says, That if
it is our duty to forgive without a satisfaction received, and that GOD is to
forgive us as we forgive others, then is a satisfaction totally excluded. See
also his Sandy foundation wherein he expressly argues against CHRIST's
satisfaction, and insists largely on it. I have not the Book at present by me,
so cannot quote exactly any passage out of it. But above all, that which I
think is most horrible and blasphemous and undervaluing the sufferings of our
Blessed LORD. E. B. of great esteem among them says in his works p. 273
printed 1672, and which his friends reprinted and approved of: the sufferings
(says he) of the People of GOD called Quakers in this Age, is greater
suffering and more unjust then in the days of CHRIST, or of the Apostles, what
was done to CHRIST or the Apostles, was chiefly done by a Law, and in great
part by the due execution of a Law, etc.

Q 16. Do the best works, that any are enabled to perform, even by the
assistance of the Spirit; merit pardon of sin and eternal Life?
A We answer negatively, we have no merit, all is of free Grace and mercy
through CHRIST Tit. 3. 5.

R. This Answer seems to bespeak a humble and self denied frame of spirit, and
I am very glade to find such come from A. I. etc. But I am sure their Friends
books are filled with a great deal of self exaltation, and abasing of all
others, and too much spiritual pride and boasting of their faithfulness, (as
that by and for which they merited or hoped to attain eternal Life) may be too
much observed in most of their preachings, and as an evidence for what I say,
let the Reader consider what Samuel Fisher says in his Rusticus, etc. p 90.
that because evil works (says he) are the meritorious cause of our
Condemnation, therefore good works are the meritorious cause of our
Justification. See also, p. 84. 88. ibid. and see also G. Ws Voice of Wisdom p.
36.

Q 17. Shall the Man CHRIST JESUS come again and appear without us to judge the
Quick and the Dead?
A. We answer affirmatively, yea, He shall, according to these Scriptures Mat.
25, 31. Acts 17, 31.

This Answer may be compared with what G. W. says in his Light and Life, p, 41.
but three comings (says he) not only that in the Flesh at Jerusalem, and that
in the Spirit, but also another coming in the Flesh yet to be expected, we do
not read of, but a 2d coming without sin unto Salvation which in the Apostles
days was looked for. And in his CHRIST ascended etc, p. 21. 22. etc. not only
denies any personal coming of CHRIST yet to be at the end of the World, but
denies him to have a Personal Existance in Heaven without the Saints and
charge it to be Anthropomorphism and Muggletonism. See also W. Bailies Coll:
p. 29.

Q. 18. Is there any Resurrection of the Dead, that all or any of the Deceased
Saints wait for? and does the same Natural Body, that Dies rise again, or is
the Resurrection nothing else, but what ye have already or what ye shall have,
immediately after Death?
A. We believe that there shall be a Resurrection both of the Just, and of the
Unjust, according to the Scriptures Acts 24, 15 1 Cor. 15, 5. also the same
Chap. from 35 to 38 verse, and we believe that the Resurrection is not already
past nor is that which we shall immediately enter into after Death.

R. By this answer to this 18 Q. A. J. and his friends shift the question
entirely, for I know, that verbally they seem to own a Resurrection, but that
our Natural Elementary bodies shall rise again they utterly deny and oppose. So
G. W. argues most violently against it in the second part of his Christian
Quaker, p. 352. 353. etc. and so does W. P. in his reasoning against, railing
p. 134, 137. If the thing (says he) can be the same and notwithstanding
changed for shame let us never make so much stur against the Doctrine of
transubstantiation, for the absurdity of it is rather out down then equalled by
this carnal Resurrection. And R. Hubberthorn says, Coll. p. 121 these are they
that plead for a life in sin, while they are here, and that say that the Saints
glorified in Heaven do yet hope for the Resurrection of their Bodies etc. See
also, W. P. his Invalidity of I. F. vindication p. 373 etc.

Q 19. Whither outward Baptism with Water, and the outward Supper called the
LORDS Supper, be not Divine Institutions and Ordinances of our Blessed LORD
JESUS CHRIST commanded by Him to be continued and practiced to the end of the
World?
A. First, as for Baptism we believe, that as there is one LORD and one Faith,
so there is one Baptism Ephesians. 4, 5. which is not the putting away the filth of
the Flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience before GOD, by the Resurrection
of JESUS CHRIST. 1 Pet. 3, 21. And this Baptism is a pure and Spiritual thing,
to wit, the Baptism of the Spirit and Fire, by which we are buried with him,
Romans 6. 4. And puts on CHRIST, Gal: 3, 27. that being purged and washed from
our sins we may walk in newness of Life, being risen with him through the Faith
of the Operation of GOD: Collos. 2. 12. Of which the Baptism of John was a
figure, whose ministry was to decrease, but CHRIST to increase, John 3. 30. and
who said himself, I indeed Baptize you with Water to repentance; but He that
comes after me is mightier then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear, He
shall baptize you with the HOLY GHOST and with Fire. Mat. 3. 11. Here are two
Baptisms mentioned, whereof certainly John's was the figure, and CHRIST'S the
continuing substance, and though John's was continued or practiced for a season
yet Paul that great Apostle who was not a whit inferior to the chiefest
Apostles, 2 Cor. 11. 5. expressly affirms, that outward Baptism was not within
his Commission from CHRIST, read 1 Cor. 1. 17. As for the sprinkling of Infants
called Baptism we find neither Precept nor Practice of it in all the Scriptures
of truth; and therefore judge it to be a mere humane Tradition. And as for the
Outward Supper, we do believe that the communion of the Body and Blood of
CHRIST is inward and Spiritual (as to the substance) which is the participation
of his Flesh and Blood by which the Inward man is daily nourished in the Hearts
of those in whom CHRIST dwells; 1 Cor. 10 chap. 16. 17. verses John 6. 32. 33 35
Of which things the breaking of Bread by CHRIST with his Disciples was a figure
which they even used in the Church for a time who had received the substance
for the sake of the weak, even as abstaining from things strangled and from
blood, the washing on another feet, and the anointing the Sick with Oil, all
which are commanded with no less authoriy and solemnity then the former, and
the two last of them, as true outward Signs or Simbols of Inward Grace, as the
Bread and Wine, yet, seeing they are but the shaddows of better things, they
cease in such as have obtained the substance. Acts 15. 20. John 13, 14 Ja. 5,
14. Where these forementioned things are commanded or institute.

R. It is indeed to be much lamented, that the whole Body of the Quakers every
where, is too well agreed as to their disowning and Contempt, of our Blessed
Savior's Institutions, especially Baptism and the LORD's Supper. But A. J.
etc. might have given a shorter Answer, for I designed not by these Queries,
that either they should prove what they hold, or that I should disprove the
same. And therefore for a full Reply, to what either they have here alleged,
or what R. B. and others of the Chief English Teachers, among the Quakers have
argued against the Continuance and practice of outward Water, Baptism and the
LORD's Supper. I refer the Reader to Geo Keith's Book, called the Arguments of
the Quakers against Baptism, etc. wherein they are entirely consuted and fully
Answered: And which Book I do not know, that the Quakers have so much as
pretended to Answer.

Q 20 Lastly, if ye be realy sound and sincere in the Faith, of the great
fundamental Truths, of the Christian Religion, are ye not then bound in
Conscience to manifest the same, and that both by disowning and condemning, by
a public Testimony, all those gross Erroneous and Unchristian passages, which
have been and may still more and more be discovered, out of your ancient and
chief Friends Printed Books: (Observe so far only A. J. etc. recited this last
Querie, and wholly omitted all the rest.) And I do hereby offer to prove the
same before any Judicious Indifferent Persons, as it shall please GOD to give
me an opportunity, by producing such Palpable Quotations out of the said Books,
directly contradicting the plain Testimony of the Holy Scriptures, and contrary
to the necessary essential point of Christian Faith and Doctrine, and if ye be
clear and Innocent, (as I said already) ought ye not likewise to disown all
such, for your Christian Brethren, that have opposed, and who do still
continue to oppose any of those precious Truths of the Gospel, which have been
universally received by all true and sound Christians.

I do expect your positive and candid Answer, by your plain and simple
Affirmation or Negation, to each of these Queries (by which you may prevent any
Suspicion of quibling or equivocating) to be sent with all Convenience to

Aberdeen the 5th day of the 4th Month called June 1700. Your Real Welwisher,
ROBERT SANDILANDS.

A. We are realy sound and sincere in the great, and fundamental Truths of the
Christian Religion, and we are ready to manifest the same, but we are not bound
in reason to receive the Testimony of an avowed Adversary against our Brethern,
and if he have any thing to charge against them, among whom he resides, he
wants not opportunity to do it face to face. and we doubt not but they can
clear themselves sufficiently

This Answer to the above written Queries, was drawn upon the 7th day of the
4th month called June 1700: And signed as follows. Alexander Gelley, Robert
Barclay, John Forbes, George Forbes senior, Robert Gordon, William Tailor,
Andrew Jaffray, John Robertson, Robert Gerard, Daniel Simson, John Somervaile,
William Glenny, James Wallace, John Merser, Robert Keith.


Yet at the desire of some of the Magistrates, so many of our Number as are
present, have again signed the same with their own hands.

Observe. They first gave a Copy of their Answer unsigned, and which they
brought to the Public Market place, and Copies thereof given to diverse
Persons, afterward they brought their Answers much Corrected, with large
Additions, with several names at them, but all write with one hand, and that
not being satisfactory, it was returned to them again: At last, they delivered
it Signed Authentically, by severals of their own Hands. Andrew Jaffray,
Alexander Gelley, William Tailor, Daniel Simson, Robert Keith, John
Sommervaile, Robert Gordon, George Forbes Senior, John Merser, John King.


R. I should truly rejoice, and be heartily glade to find both, A. J. etc. And
all others among the People called Quakers, manifest themselves to be realy
sound and sincere, not only in some but in all the fundamental Truths of the
Christian Religion; but whether A. J. and his Friends have evidenced themselves
to be such, by their Answers, to the Queries before recited, I leave that to
all impartial and judicious Readers to judge. And for a manifest Trial of the
sincerity and soundness of their Faith, in those points wherein they seem
orthodox, and that they have no secret reserved meanings, but what is agreeable
to the Sense of all sound Protestants, it is here proposed to them, (and which
is reasonably expected) that they give a public Testimony in Writing, against
those erroneous passages and positions, as they are here set down as before,
and quoted out of their approved and ancient Friends Books, which plainly
contradicts their own orthodox Answers. They are obliged (I think) either to
own, or else to disown these errors: the latter I hope they will ingeniously
do, as being no Respecter of Persons. For the Truth must be owned and
preferred before all things and persons, tho never so near or dear to us. And
unless A. J. etc. do this; their sincerity will still be suspected,
notwithstanding all their great Pretenses. As for their saying, we are not
bound in Reason to receive the Testimony of an avowed Adversary, against our
Brethren; as I would not be imposed upon in such weighty concerns, so I do not
impose my Testimony upon them, but have fairly and sincerely laid before them,
their own ancient and most eminent approved Friends Testimonies, both in
England and Scotland: And I could have produced many more Quotations, if they
had been so candid to have granted me the use of their Friends Books, which I
had not by me here, (and I being a Traveller could not be other ways provided
with) however, I offer this to them, let the Books be produced, out of which
the Quotations are taken, and let them be perused by any judicious and
indifferent Persons, and see whither they are justly and fairly quoted, and I
shall submit the same to their censure. And whoever it is they mean, to be
their Brethrens avowed Adversary: I bless GOD I can sincerely say, that I have
no Personal enmity or Prejudice against them, or any Persons whatsomever; its
true, I detest their vile errors, but I still love and respect their Persons,
and what I have herein done may show, that it was not through Malice, etc. I
could also have given an account, of many very Unchristian and unsavory
Passages, which were Preached publicly in their Meetings at Reading in England
where I live, which occasioned diverse to leave them. And whereas they say, and
if he have any thing to Charge against them, among whom he receeds, he wants
not opportunity to do it face to face, and we doubt not but they can clear
themselves sufficiently. I should be very glade, as I have said before, they
would do so indeed, but I am sure, they have never in the least yet done it, as
they ought to do, notwithstanding of the many opportunitis, and that
publicly, to have cleared themselves, of what has been charged against them,
and still lies at their door uncleared and unanswered by them; and I am fully
satisfied, that notwitstanding of their many late new Creeds, they can never
well clear themseves, until they publicly, and ingeniously Retract those
Errors in their Printed Books; and when they once do that, I think there is
none will be so Unchristian, as to Charge them any more therewith. There is one
or two Quotations more, which I think fit to add. G. F. and R. H. says in
Truths defense, p. 89, and 109 Our giving forth papers and printed Books, it is
from the immediate, eternal Sipiritual GOD. (...). Now I leave it to the serious
Consideration, of A. J. (...). and the rest of his Friends, whether in their
Consciences they realy believe, that the foresaid Passages quoted out of their
Friends Books, were given forth from the Immediate Eternal Spirit of GOD. And G.
F. pleads for the same degree of the Spirit, to know the Scriptures by, as the
Prophets and Apostles had. See his great Mist. p. 213. etc.

FINIS.

