THE DECLARATION OF COL: EDWYN SANDYS, In Vindication of himself from those
calumnious Aspersions cast upon him by the Lord Falkland and Secretary
Nicholas: Published and subscribed with his own hand at the Randevouze at
Worcester, October. 11. 1642. in the presence OF Sergeant Major Berry: Thomas
Cox, Doctor of Physic: Captain Walter Long: Captain Robert Long: Lyonell
Copeley, Mustermaster General: John Rushworth Clerk, Assistant to the Commons
House of Parliament.
Die Sabbathi, 15. October. 1642.

IT is this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, That this
Declaration of Colonel Sandys, to vindicate himself from the Imputation laid
upon him by the Letters of the Lord Falkland and Secretary Nicholas, shall be
forthwith Printed and published: H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Printed for E. Husbands and I. Franck. October. 17. 1642.

The Declaration of Col Edwyn Sandys, in Vindication of himself from those
calumnious Aspersions cast upon him by the Lord Falkland and Secretary Nicholas.
IT pleases God yet to detain me in that condition, that my pen, and not my
sword must vindicate me from the aspersions, which the Letters of the Lord
Falkland and Secretary Nicholas, have cast on my Reputation, and fidelity in
that cause in which I was lately, and still stand engaged. Both these persons
charge me that I should say, That death did not so much trouble me, as that I
had endeavored to defend so bad a Cause, which I was drawn unto, as well by my
own Ambition, as by persuasion of other men; and that I wished that all the
Actions of the Parliaments Forces might hereafter be unsuccessefull; and
especially that I should desire God and the King to forgive me this great sin
of Rebellion, etc. They that know me well, know that I have not so much vanity,
as to think any discourse necessary for my defense in this case; yet that I may
stand clear, as well in the thoughts of strangers as of my friends, I thought
fit to render this account to the world. The apprehension of death never
hitherto so nearly touched me, but that if God shall once restore me to my
former strength, I shall by his help with as much alacrity, and I hope
courage, endeavor to defend and maintain with my dearest blood, this so good a
cause, as ever I was at first engaged in it. Not my Ambition prompted me unto
it, but a legitimate and ardent desire of advancing that cause, which I
conceive honors the meanest of them that are employed therein; nor was I drawn
into this business by any Persuasions, but such as were backed by the best of
Arguments, the maintaining of the true Religion, the honor and security of my
Prince, the Rights and Privileges of the Parliament, and the whole Kingdom;
Such a success I pray for to the designs of the Parliament, and in particular
to this Army under the Command of his Exellency the Earl of Essex, as by the
best of men can possibly be desired, both on His Majesty's Person, and this
whole Kingdom. And lastly, I profess to the whole World, that my conscience
did when I was in the greatest danger of death, and does still clear me from
the guilt of rebellious or tumultuous thoughts and that the most puissant
motive which carried me on to this Action, was, loyalty to my Sovereign, and
love to my Religion and Country: They certainly thought me dead when they writ
these Letters, and by this means hoped to have served their ends, upon some
feeble unresolved spirits. But I wonder they should write there are so many
hundreds of our men slain, when it is most apparent, that the number both of
them that dyed in the place, and since, never amounted to thirty persons; and
their loss no way inferior to ours, considering their great advantage of
place, and that they were at least double for number. There was indeed a
Divine, who I think was the Dean of Worcester, who came to me to the house
where I was first taken up, and accompanied me to the place where I now lie, he
continually urged and pressed my conscience, how great a sin I was guilty of in
taking up Arms against my Sovereign, I was not then in case to entertain him in
discourse, only at last answered him, I never had, nor ever would take up Arms
against my Sovereign, but ever should be ready to lay my life and whatsoever
was dear unto me at His feet: of this judgment and resolution I still am, and
solemnly make this Protestation in the same sense I have here already declared,
and according to the sense of the Parliament in all their Declarations, of
which I hope with Gods blessing upon my recovery, to give further testimony to
the World, by the continued engagement of my life and fortune, in this so just
and honorable a cause.

Edwyn Sandys.
At the Rendevouze at Worcester, the 11 of October, 1642. Subscribed and
published in the presence of Sergeant Major Berry: Thomas Cox, Doctor of
Physic, Captain Walter Long: Captain Robert Long: Lyonell Copley Mustermaster
General. John Rushworth Clerk, Assistant to the Commons House of Parliament.


FINIS.

