A GENTLEMAN's RELIGION: In THREE PARTS.

The 1st. contains the Principles of Natural Religion.

The 2d. and 3d. The Doctrins of Christianity both as to Faith and Practice.

With an Appendix, wherein it is proved, That nothing contrary to our Reason
can possibly be the Object of our Belief: But that it is no just Exception
against some of the Doctrins of Christianity, that they are above our Reason.

London, Printed for A. and J. Churchill in Pater noster Row; and R Sare at
Gray's Inn gate in Holborn, School.

A GENTLEMAN's RELIGION: WITH THE Grounds and Reasons of It.

IN WHICH The Truth of Christianity in general is vindicated; Its Simplicity
asserted; And some Introductory Rules, for the discovering of its particular
Doctrines and Precepts, are proposed.

By a Private Gentleman.

LONDON: Printed for A. and J. Churchil, at the Black Swan in Paternoster Row,
School.

A GENTLEMAN'S RELIGION: WITH THE Grounds and Reasons Of It.
PART I.
I. SInce almost all Men (however different in other Opinions and Interests)
have ever agreed in this, That there is a God, to whose Power all Things are
subject; That the true Service and Worship of God (which is called Religion)
shall be rewarded with Future Happiness; and, That the Neglect and Contempt of
Religion shall be punished with Future Misery; Every Man surely has reason to
believe thus much at least, That what is so generally and firmly believed may
be possibly, nay and is probably, a Truth. And wheresoever there is a
possibility, and much more where there is a probability, of a great Good on the
one hand, and a great Evil on the other; there certainly every Man is contented
to enquire into the reality of the thing; that he may not miss of the one, if
it be attainable, nor fall into the other, if it be avoidable. I conclude
therefore, That it is a very great folly for any Man to give over searching
after the True Religion, until he has found it; Except he were able to
demonstrate, either that there is no God; or else, that there is no Worship or
Service due to him.

II. In all Matters of great and serious Consequence, no Man that is wise, will
act by chance, and at random, without being able to give some Reason for what
he does. For he that does any thing, and knows not why, is more likely to do
himself Hurt than Good; because there are more Ways to the former, than to the
latter. Since therefore Religion is a thing of the greatest Moment and
Importance that can be, I conclude, that no Man ought to choose his Religion
blindly, and by chance; but that every Man ought to have some Reason for what
he professes. Whatever Religion, therefore, a Man is bred up in from his Youth,
it certainly is very fit for him, when he comes to Years of Discretion, to
enquire into the Grounds and Reasons of it. For otherwise it is not possible
for him to know whether he be in the Right, or the Wrong; in the way to Heaven,
or Hell.

III. If there be a God, and if he requires any service or worship (i. e. any
Religion) from us, it is undoubtedly for this End, that it may be a Trial of
our Faithfulness and Obedience to him. Now, whosoever has a mind to prove his
Servant, whether he will be faithful and obedient, he will not give him such
dark and intricate Commands, as shall puzzle him to find out the meaning of
them; (For, how can a Servant approve himself faithful and obedient, if he be
uncertain what it is that his Master requires from him?) But he will surely
give him such Commands and Directions as are easy enough to be understood,
however difficult they may be to be enterprized, or accomplished. I conclude
therefore, That all the Duties of Religion, which God requires of any Man, must
needs be easy enongh for him to understand, however hard they may be to be
practiced. For, otherwise, Religion would be a Trial rather of a Man's Wit and
Cunning, than of his Faithfulness and Obedience. And therefore also I cannot
but conclude, That most, if not all the Controversies about Religion, which at
this Day distract the World, do not proceed from any Difficulty in or about the
Determination of all things necessary in Religion it self; but partly from the
Pride of some Learned Men, who have loved to strat new and difficult Questions,
and to impose their private Sentiments upon the World, that they might be
admired for their Wit and Subtilty; partly from the Covetousness and Ambition
of some, whether Learned, or Unlearned, who have found that their Worldly
Interest will be better served by some Doctrins (no matter how false and
precarious) than by others; and partly from the Prejudice of most Men, who are
apt, with great Zeal and Eagerness, to contend for all those things which, from
their Childhood, they have been taught to have a Reverence for. And I farther
conclude, That whosoever has a sincere desire to embrace True Religion, must
lay aside Pride, Ambition, Covetousness and Prejudice, which would mis-guide
him; and follow his sober and unprejudicate Reason, which will ever lead him in
the right Way.

IV. There are different sorts, or rather degrees of Assurance, which Men have
concerning Things. Some things are evident of themselves, without any Proof;
some things we are assured of, by the Testimony of our senses; some things we
receive as Truths, because we find them to follow from other Truths already
received; and some things we believe only upon the Testimony of others.
Moreover, some things we are persuaded of, without any Doubt or Diffidence;
whereas other things do seem, at best, to be but likely or probable, and that
too in a different degree, according as their Evidence is stronger, or weaker.
Now, every sober Man, where he has certain Evidence of a thing, there he acts
with Assurance; where the Matter is but probable, there he proceeds with
Caution: But where a Man is under a Necessity of doing one way or other, and
where the Matter appears doubtful on both sides, there it becomes him to weigh
the Reasons on both parts with due Consideration; and according as he finds the
greater Probability to be on the one hand rather than the other, so to square
his Actions accordingly. Since therefore every Man must necessarily either live
religiously or not live religiously; I conclude, that if upon a serious
Consideration of the matter, there appear to be more probable Reasons and
Arguments for Religion than against it, every wise and sober Man must embrace
Religion. This I say, not but that I think there are even demonstrative
Arguments for Religion; and not so much as one probable one against it: But
because that which to me seems demonstrative, to another may appear but
probable, I thought it fit to note, That every Man in point of common Prudence
is obliged to follow Religion, if it does but appear more likely and probable
to him than Irreligion.

V. Whether it is possible for any Agent to produce a new Being purely out of
nothing, may with much show of Religion be doubted: As also Whether mere Matter
alone, without any other Agent or efficient Cause, can ever be able to work it
self into any different Species or Forms. But this appears as certain as any
thing can can be; That where there is neither any Agent or efficent Cause to
work, nor any Matter or Subject to be wrought upon, there it is utterly
impossible for any thing ever to be produced into Being. Since therefore I find
that there are many things which actually have a Being and Existence, I
conclude, That of absolute necessity there must be something or other which has
been from all Eternity, and never had a Beginning. For otherwise, if we suppose
that ever there was a time when nothing at all did exist, it follows, from what
has been said, that it would be utterly impossible that any thing ever should
be produced into Existence.

VI. Since of necessity we must acknowledge something to have been Eternal, I
cannot but conclude, That the Eternity of such a Being as God is described to
be, is much more probable and fit to be believed, than the Eternity of such a
Being as I see this World to be. For when I go about to convince a Nation of
the Eternity of the World (I mean in the like Posture that now it is in) there
do occurr to my Mind such Difficulties, or rather Impossibilities, as I think
no Man can digest. For he that affirms the World, as now it stands, to have
been Eternal, must of Necessity grant that there has been an Eternal Succession
of Men, Beasts, and Vegetables, and that to a number actually infinite: (for if
the number be not infinite, how can the Succession have been Eternal?) And yet
a number actually infinite to me appears to be a plain Contradiction. For that
which is infinite cannot be made bigger, whereas there is no number but may be
made bigger by the Addition of Units. Again if any one shall affirm that an
infinite number is no Contradiction; and that there has been a Succession of
such a number of Beings in the World; then thus I argue, That if there has been
a Succession of an infinite number of Men, Beasts, etc. then, by a Parity of
Reason, there has been also a Succession of an infinite number of Days and
Nights; and if so, then likewise of an infinite number of Years too; (for if
the number of Years can be limited, so can that of Days too, since every Year
contains just such a certain number of Days.) Now this I suppose must be
granted me, That infinite numbers are equal: (for if one number be less than
another, how can it be infinite?) And if so, then it must follow that in the
Eternity of the World the number of Years is equal to the number of Days, which
is absurd; because every Year contains in its self a number of 365 Days. These
Difficulties, or rather Impossibilities, I say, do make the notion of the
World's Eternity (I mean as the World now is) to appear to me as an absurd and
unreasonable Supposition. But then as to God, Although I confess it to be
difficult, and perhaps impossible, for Man to comprehend the manner, how he is,
or can be, eternal without beginning; yet since the thing it self is so
uncontrollably evident that something is so eternal, (though the manner how is
to me incomprehensible) I find no other Scruple or Difficulty in admitting the
Eternity of God. For though it seems contrary to all reason to affirm an
eternal Succession of diverse things, one after another, without a Beginning;
yet I can find no manner of Repugnancy in maintaining that there is one
immutable Being (i. e. God) which never began to be.

VII. Whether the matter, of which this visible world is framed, has existed
from all Eternity, or whether it were produced out of nothing by the Almighty
Power of God, is a Question which reason alone, I think, can never determine.
But when I contemplate and consider the great Variety, Order, Beauty, and
Usefulness, which do evidently appear in all the Parts of the World, as they
are placed together, and answer one another; I cannot but conclude, That the
whole World, and all its Parts, are contrived, framed and fashioned, by a wise
and powerful Being, whom we call God: As when I see a curious Clock or Engine,
I presently conclude that it was made and contrived by some Artist; and should
laugh at that Man who would offer to say that it was formed and fashioned only
by chance.

VIII. That Miracles (i. e. wonderful Works, surpassing the ordinary course of
Nature and Power of Art) have been wrought for confirmation of the Truth of
Religion, is a thing that I shall take for granted at present, because it will
appear to be proved beyond any just Exception in the Sequel of this Discourse;
And from thence, I think I may most reasonably conclude, That there is a being
Superior to Nature, who can command and control it as he pleases, i. e. in
other Terms, That there is a God.

IX. The Histories of all Ages, and Travelers into all Countries, do
universally concur in this Testimony, That there is no Nation or People,
whether learned or unlearned, but what do own the being of a God. And those few
Persons who have presumed to deny it, have ever been looked on as Prodigies and
Monsters of Mankind. Furthermore, even those few who have denied the Being of
God, have ever beeen Men of such debauched and profligate Lives, that we have
great Reason to believe that they first have wished that there might be no God
to punish them; and then, without any other ground or Reason, have believed, or
rather pretended to believe, what they have wished. For it is almost ever
observed, that when debauched and atheistical Persons do draw near to Death,
they do either rerenounce their Atheism, own the being of a God, and make
Supplication to him; or at least have their Minds possessed with such doubts and
fears, as plainly show that they have still a strong Suspicion that there
likely may be a God, for ought they know, who will call them to an Account for
all their Wickedness. Since then all sorts of Men, both learned and unlearned,
and all Nations of Men, both civil and barbarous, have always owned the Being
of God; since his being has never been denied but by very few indeed; since
that denial has rather proceeded from their Wishes and Desires, than from their
Reason and Understanding; and lastly, since they have not been able wholly to
extinguish the Belief of a God out of their Minds although they have earnestly
endeavored it; I conclude, That the Belief of a God, in Man, is neither the
Effect of Chance, because it is Universal, nor of Ignorance, because it
possesses the most Learned, nor of State Policy, because it is received among
the most barbarous and unciviliz'd People; but that there is a God, who has
made all Men, and has (as a Token of his Work) stamped and engraved this his
Mark and Character upon them.

X. There is no Man of common Sense, who builds a convenient and goodly
Structure, but he takes care likewise to keep it in good Order and Repair,
after it is built. And there is no Fabric but, in Tract of Time, will visibly
decay, if constant care be not taken of it. Since thefore, God has erected and
framed this goodly Structure of the World; and since in so long a time there is
no Manner of decay to be found in it (as is abundantly proved by Hackwell, in
his Apology on this Subject) I conclude, That God, not only made this World by
his Power, but also governs it by his Providence. And for the only Objection,
which seems to be of any Force against God's Providence; namely, that wicked
Men do often thrive and prosper, whilst good and Virtuous Men are oppressed
with Misery; it is most easily and naturally solved, by supposing, (what shall
anon be proved) That there are abundant Rewards for good Men, and sufficient
punishments for the wicked, to be distributed in a Life which is to come; which
will bring all things to be equal at the last.

XI. Every Parent, who begets and brings up a Child; every Master, who feeds
and pays a Servant; every Prince, who governs and protects his Subjects; and
every Benefactor, who does any act of Kindness for another; may very
reasonably, and do always, expect a Return of Love, Obedience and Gratitude, in
due Proportion to the Benefits received from them. Since then God is more than
a Parent to us, for he made us and our Parents too; since he is so kind a
Master, who gives us our Food, and all the Conveniences of Life; since he
governs and protects us, by his overruling Providence, more effectually than
any earthly Prince does his Subjects; And lastly; since he is our greatest and
supreme Benefactor, who has given us all the good which we possess and enjoy; I
cannot but conclude, that he expects a return of Love, Obedience and Gratitude
from us (I will not say proportionable to the Benefits received from him, for
that, perhaps, may exceed our Ability; but) proportionable unto our Ability or
Capacity.

XII. That God is wise and powerful, I gather from his Work, which I
contemplate in the Visible World. And from thence I conclude, That he will
sufficiently punish those Persons who despise him, so far as not to love, thank
and obey him, according as he expects and requires from them. That he is also
good and gracious, I gather from those good things which he has bestowed upon
us, relating both to our Bodies and Minds. And from thence I conclude, That he
will abundantly reward all those persons who take care to pay him that Love,
Gratitude and Obedience which he expects.

XIII. That these Rewards and Punishments are not finally distributed in this
Life is very evident; Because we often see Men, that are notoriously wicked,
enjoy all the pleasures; and others, that are conspicuously virtuous, undergo
almost all the Calamities of this World, even unto their very Graves, I
conclude therefore, That there is another Life, after this, in which these
Rewards and Punishments shall be duly distributed.

XIV. When a Man is once convinced that there is a God, to whom there is a
Service due; and that there are Rewards and Punishments to be dispensed to all
Men, according as they have performed or neglecting that Service; the grand
Enquiry that every Man is concerned to make, is, What he must do to avoid these
Punishments, and to be made Partaker of these Rewards. And here I think I may
most easily and naturally make these following Conclusions; viz. 1. He who does
what God requires from him shall not be punished but rewarded. 2. God requires
from every Man that he should use his honest Endeavor, by all means, to know
and understand his Will as perfectly as he can. For this is but Reason for
every Master to expect from his Servant; much more for such a Master as God. 3.
If a Man does his heartiest and best Endeavor, first to know and then to
perform the Will of God; God will require no more from him. For to me it seems
utterly inconsistent, with the Wisdom of God to expect, and with his Goodness
to require, any more from a Man than what he is able to perform; i. e. any more
than his best and most hearty Endeavors.

XV. There are, in the general, but two ways of finding out, knowing the Will
of God. The one is by the use of our natural Reason and Understanding; the
other is by attending to that Revelation which God has made of his Will, to the
World. Here then I conclude, I must make it my Business, sirst to enquire into
the Truth and Reality of this Revelation; and then, to make use of that, and my
Reason together, in order to find out what is God's Will.

XVI. That there was such a Person as Jesus of Nazareth, in Galilee, in the
time of Tiberius Caesar, the Roman Empetor; That he had a Company of poor Men
for his Disciples; That He and his Disciples went about the Country of Judea,
Teaching and Preaching; That he was put to death upon the Cross, after the
Roman manner, under Pontius Pilate, the Roman Governor of Judea; That after his
Death, his Disciples went about into all, or most, Parts of the then known
World, Teaching and Preaching that this Jesus was the Christ, the Son of God,
and Savior of the World, and that he was risen from the Dead, and gone into
Heaven; That in a few Years they converted a very great Number of People, in
all places, to this Belief; That the Professors of this Belief were called
Christians; That they were most cruelly persecuted, and many Thousands of them
put to death, and that with most exquisite Torments, for no other Reason, but
because they were Christians; That these Persecutions were several times
renewed againg them, for the space of about Three Hundred Years; And yet, for
all this, that the Number of Christians daily increased, and that not only
Idiots and Unlearned Men, but great Scholars and Philosophers were converted to
Christianity, even in the Times of Persecution; All this, being merely Matter
of Fact, was never yet denied by the greatest Enemies of Christian Religion.
And, indeed, these things are so abundantly testified by the Histories, and
other Writings, of those Times; and have been so generally received for Truth,
as well by the Opposers, as Believers of Christianity, by a constant,
universal, and uninterrupted Tradition, from those Days, even unto this Time;
that a Man may as well deny the Truth of any, or of all, the Histories of the
World, as of this. Now, since all Men generally have a strong Inclination to
retain and stick to that Religion (whatever it be) in which both they and their
Fathers have been brought up; and no less an Aversion to all causeless
Innovations in Matters of Religion; Moreover, since all Men, without exception,
who are in their Wits, have naturally a most earnest desire to preserve their
Lives as long as they can, and to keep themselves free from Pain and Trouble; I
think I may reasonably conclude, that there must have been some extraordinary
strong, and even irresistible Motive, which could prevail upon such Multitudes
of People to forsake theirs and their Ancestors old Religion, and to embrace
Christianity, which then had but newly appeared in the World, and which, in
those Days, did seldom fail to involve its Proselytes in most grievous Troubles
and Persecutions.

XVII. That this Motive could not be the Hopes of any Profit or Advantage in
this Life, is most evident: Because Christianity was, in those Days, most
commonly persecuted, even unto death. It must therefore, of necessity, be the
hopes of some Benefit or Happiness which should accrue to them, after this Life
was at an end. And this Benefit or Happiness could not seem small and
inconsiderable to them; nor could the Hope which they conceived of it be weak,
or doubtful: For there is scarce any Man, or ever was, in the World, who would
run himself into certain Misery and Persecution, even to the losing of his
Life, only upon a weak and doubtful Hope of some small and inconsiderable
Benefit or Happiness to be enjoyed in a Life to come. I conclude therefore,
That the Primitive Christians were undoubtingly possessed with a strong Belief,
and most firm Persuasion, That whosoever should truly embrace, profess, and
live according to, the Christian Religion in this Life, was certainly to be
made Partaker of some great and inestimable Happiness in the Life to come.

XVIII. That this Belief and Persuasion did not proceed from any Frenzy, or
Madness, (which sometimes possesses Man with very strong Imaginations,) is very
evident; both because there was such a Multitude of them, who exactly agreed in
the same Sentiments; and also, because it appears, both from the Writings and
Actions of the Primitive Christians, that they were Men of Reason and Sobriety,
and some of them Persons of great Learning. As evident also it is, that it
could not proceed from the Force of any Argument. drawn from the Principles of
bare Natural Reason, without Revelation. For, What Man in his Wits, without
pretending some Revelation from Heaven, could ever be persuaded, that the
Embracing of the Religion taught by such a particular Person, more than
another, would make him happy in the Life to come? I conclude therefore, That
the Disciples of Jesus, who preached Christianity abroad in the World, did
convince and satisfy their Proselytes, that it was revealed by God from
Heaven, that whosoever would believe on Jesus, and receive, and live according
to, his Religion should be made very happy in the next Life,

XIX. The main Argument which the first Preachers of Christianity made use of,
to convince the World that this was a Divine Revelation, was this; viz. Because
that Jesus, in his Life time, did perform such and so many Miracles, and
wonderful Works, as sufficiently showed, that he had his Commission and Power
from God; and because his Disciples (whom he had appointed to teach his
Religion to the World) for many Years after his Death, did likewise continue to
work many Miracles in the Name of Jesus; Which showed, that God was with them
in what they did and taught. The things by them alleged to have been performed
by Jesus, were such as these: That he healed all manner of Diseases and
Distempers with a Touch, or barely with a Word speaking; That he gave Sight to
the Blind, Hearing to the Deaf, Speech to the Dumb, and Strengh and Agility to
the Lame and Maimed; That he raised several Persons from the Dead; and that he
himself arose from the Dead, after he had been Crucified, and a Spear thrust
into his Vitals, and had lay'n dead in a Sepulcher unto the Third Day; And
lastly, That, after his Resurrection, having several times appeared to his
Disciples, and conversed with them, for the space of Forty Days, he was, at
last, openly, and in their sight, taken up alive into Heaven. The things
alleged to have been done by his Disciples, were, The Healing the Sick, the
Lame, the Maimed, etc. and, in a particular manner, their Speaking all
Languages, although they never had learned them. That all these things were
pretended by the first Preachers of Christianity, is confessed on all Hands.
And, undoubtedly, they must needs, at least, pretend something that was very
extraordinary, or else they never could have converted such vast Multitudes,
under so many Disadvantages as they and their Religion labored. That these
things were not only pretended, but really and actually performed, is, to my
Opinion, uncontrollably evinced from the Testimony of the Disciples themselves,
Who declared these things for Truth unto the World; Who could not themselves be
deceived in those Matters of Fact, of which they pretended to have been
Eyewitnesses; Who never would go about to impose a Lie upon the World, by
which they could propose to themselves no manner of Advantage in this Life, nor
(if it were a Lie) in the Life to come; Who never would have exposed themselves
to Poverty, to Racks, to Gibbets, to Fire and Faggot, (in a Word) to all sorts
of Torments and Deaths, only for the sake of a fruitless and unprofitable
Fable; Who being Men of unblameable Lives, for their Morality, had, doubtless,
more Honesty and Integrity, than to affirm those things for certain Truths,
which they must needs know to be mere Inventions; Who were too many in Number,
and too void of Craft and Guile, to combine together in framing a false Story,
and none of them ever to betray or discover the Cheat; Who could never hope to
impose the Belief of such a Story upon a curious and inquisitive Age (such as
that was wherein they lived) if it had been false, and therefore would
certainly never have attempted it, if they had not known it to have been true;
And, Lastly, who, instead of convincing such Multitudes as they did, must needs
have been palpably discovered, and exposed to the World for a Company of lewd
Cheats and Impostors, in pretending that such and such things were done in the
Land of Judea and Jerusalem, (and done openly too, in the Face of the World,)
when it was so easy a matter to go or send to the place, to make Enquiry, and
so to find out the Cheat, if a Cheat it had been. But that these same Miracles,
and wonderful Works, did far surpass both the Course of Nature, and the Power
of Art, is very evident; That they were not performed by the Assistance of any
wicked Spirit, does sufficiently appear; because the very Intent and Design of
them was to propagate a Doctrine in the World, which, by all, must be allowed
to teach the purest, and most strict Morality; to which it cannot be imagined,
that any Impure and Evil Spirit would contribute any help. It remains
therefore, that these things must needs have been performed, either by the
immediate Power and Assistance of God, (who is both the Framer and Controller
of Nature) or (which is the same thing in effect) by the Mediation and Ministry
of good Spirits, who always act obediently to his Will. So that (whether
mediately, or immediately) it is God who is to be looked upon as the Original
and Author of all those wonderful Things, which were done by Jesus, and his
Disciples. Now then; Since God did interpose his Power, to work such strange
and stupenduous things, for the Propagation and Confirmation of that Doctrine
which was taught by Jesus and his Disciples; This I think, is a sufficient
Demonstration, that their Doctrine was certainly true. For, Who can imagine
that God should make use of his extraordinary Power, only to cheat and deceive
the World into the Belief of a Lie? I conclude therefore, That the Primitive
Christians had sufficient Reason to believe, that it was revealed by God from
Heaven, that whosoever would believe on Jesus, and receive, and live according
to his Religion, should be made very happy in thenext Life; this very thing
being the grand Point of Doctrine, which Jesus and his Disciples taught and
preached to the World. And if we are sure that the Primitive Christians had
Reason sufficient to believe this; from hence it follows, That we have
sufficient Reason to believe it also.

XX. But Jesus himself being long since ascended into Heaven, and his
Disciples, who first preached the Gospel, departed out of the World; here, I
think, it is necessary to enquire, to whom, or to what I must apply my self,
that (amidst the several Parties in the World, who all call themselves True and
Orthodox Christians, each condemning all others but themselves) I may be truly
and surely informed what is the true and genuine Religion or Doctrine of Jesus,
which I ought to receive, and live according to, in order to my future
Happiness. For, if I do not this, I must either reject the Doctrine of Jesus,
and so lose my future Happiness; or else take it altogether upon Trust, and by
chance, and then it is odds but I light upon the wrong, and must needs run a
very great hazard. And though he who is in a Mistake, and cannot tell how to
help it, will, doubtless, find an easy Pardon from God; yet he who falls into
Error, for want of moderate Care and Diligence to find out the Truth, has, I
think, no pretense either to Pardon, or so much as to Pity.

XXI. The Roman Catholics do tell me, that I must apply my self to the Church.
This Church they define to be, that Society of Persons who prosess Faith in
Jesus Christ, and live in Subjection to, and Communion with the Pope, or Bishop
of Rome. This Church they say is infallible; and not only does not, but cannot
err in any Doctrine of Religion, Go then, say they, to this Church, and receive
the Doctrine which she teaches; and there you have, certainly and infallibly,
the true and pure Doctrine of Jesus Christ. But I cannot give my Assent to
follow this their Direction, because I find such great Difficulties in my way
as, I think, are insuparable; at least, I am sure, such as I am not able to
overcome. For, First, Although it may be a certain Truth, that there shall
always be a Church, that is to say, a Company of People, some where or other,
professing the true Christian Religion, as long as the World shall last; yet
what solid Proof can be brought, that this particular Society of Men, who live
in Communion with the Pope, or Bishop of Rome, are alone the true Church, and
shall always keep and maintain amongst them the true and incorrupt Doctrine of
Jesus Christ? This Matter being a Question of Revelation, and positive
Institution, is incapable of being proved by any Argument drawn from Natural
Reason. And, as for the Texts of Scripture which they allege, it is even
ridiculous to think, that any sober and unprejudiced Person should be convinced
by them; (as will evidently appear to any one, who impartially reads what the
Romish and Protestant Divines have written on this Controversy:) For there are
none of those Texts, but are fairly and naturally capable of another
Interpretation; and must be very much strained and wrested, to make them
countenance the Romish Doctrine. Besides that, the Divines of the Church of
Rome do generally teach, That no Man can be sure of the Authority or Sense of
any Text of Scripture, (especially if it appear to be any way doubtful,) except
he receives the Proposal and Interpretation thereof from this their Church,
which they say is infallible. So that a Man must of necessity believe the
Infallibility of their Church, before he can any way be sure of the Credit, or
even of the Sense, of those Texts of Scripture which they bring to prove it.
And then, What need is there of Scripture-Arguments to prove a thing, which
must be acknowledged, before the Arguments can have any force, or even be as
much as certainly understood? And if they tell me, that the Fathers, and
ancient Christian Writers, do testify thus much of the Church of Rome; I can
only say, that the Protestant Divines (who seem to me to be Men of as much
Learning and Integrity as the Romish) do declare, that it is far otherwise. Nor
have I Skill enough in Language and Antiquity, to take upon me to judge of this
Dispute. Neither do I understand, by what Authority the Writings of those
Persons, who are acknowledged to have been subject to Errors, should be
obtruded on me as a Rule of my Faith, or as a sufficient Argument to determine
my Assent in so weighty a Matter. Secondly, Supposing, but not granting, that
in the Church of Rome the true and pure Doctrine of Jesus Christ was preserved;
yet still it is granted, that particular and private Men, who live in the
visible Communion of that Church, may teach false and corrupt Doctrine. Here
then I demand, How shall I certainly distinguish the Doctrine of the Church,
from the Opinions of private Men? And how shall I certainly know what is the
true Meaning of the Church's Doctrine? They of the Church of Rome are not
agreed who it is, that has Authority to declare and expound the Doctrine of
their Church; whether it be the Pope, or a General Council; or neither alone,
but both together. Or if they were unanimous in this Point, yet how shall I
know whether such a particular Person, who possesses the Chair, be a true and
lawful Pope; or such a particular Assembly, a true and lawful General Council?
Or, Suppose they could satisfy me in this Demand, yet there is no Council now
sitting, nor, if there were, could I go to them, or to the Pope, to receive
Instruction; nor can the Pope, or a Council, be at leisure to satisfy the
Demands of every private Enquirer. How then can I be sure that this or that
particular Person does both rightly understand, and faithfully propose the
Doctrine of the Church to me? Especially, since there have been, and still are,
eminent Members of the Church of Rome, who have accused each other of corrupt
Doctrine, and even of Heresy it self. But, Thirdly and Lastly, There do appear
to me to be much stronger Arguments to prove that the Church of Rome has
actually erred, and corrupted the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, (in the Case of
Transubstantiation, and some other her Tenants,) than any that can be brought,
to prove her to be infallible. And until I can be otherwise convinced, I cannot
but conclude, That to follow the Guidance of the Roman Church, is not the way
to embrace the true and pure Doctrine of Jesus.

XXII. Some there are who tell me, that, to find out the true and genuine
Doctrine of Jesus, I must have recourse to the Tradition of the Church: And
thus they set forth the Matter. First, They suppose that the true and genuine
Doctrine of Jesus was undoubtedly taught by his Apostles, and first Disciples.
Secondly, That if any one did, or should have gone about to spread any false or
spurious Doctrine, whilst these Apostles and Disciples were yet alive; They who
were sent on purpose, by Jesus, to preach his Doctrine, and were owned, and
submitted to accordingly by all Christian Churches, both could and would
immediately convince all Churches of the falseness and spuriousness of such
pretended Doctrine. Thirdly, That the Doctrine of Jesus being in all Churches
publicly and constantly taught and preached, every succeeding Age and
Generation must needs know, and could not possibly be ignorant, what their
Fathers, and immediate Predecessors owned and taught as such. Fourthly, That
therefore, if, at any time whatsoever, any new or spurious Doctrine was, or
should be, vented, by any Person or Persons, as the Doctrine of Jesus, all
Christians must presently know that this was none of his Doctrine, because it
was not taught them as such, by their immediate Predecessors. Fifthly, That
therefore it is impossible that any new and spurious Doctrine could ever be
broached in the World, as a part of the Doctrine of Jesus, but it must needs
meet with great Opposition: For all Christians do maintain, That it is a Sin to
teach, or knowingly to own, any thing as the Doctrine of Jesus, which is not
really so. Sixthly, That however some Men, out of Pride or Interest, may own
and contend for any such novel Doctrines, yet it is impossible that any such
Doctrine should ever come to be universally received by the whole Church,
except we could suppose, either that the whole Church should join together to
involve themselves and their Posterity for ever in a Sin; or else, that a few
Men, who first should vent an Opinion, could so impose upon the whole World, as
to make them believe, that what they all must know to be a new and upstart
thing (because they received it not from their Fathers and Predecessors) was a
part of the ancient Doctrine of Jesus, which was all along, from Hand to Hand,
delivered down to them: Both which things are absurd to conceive or imagine.
And Lastly, That no part of the Doctrine of Jesus, once delivered, could ever
be obliterated, or wholly forgot in the World; because every Age of Christians,
from the very first, who undoubtedly received the whole and entire Doctrine of
Jesus, knew themselves to be indispensably obliged, both by God's Command, and
also by that Love and Charity which they owed to their Posterity to teach the
same full and entire Doctrine which they received, unto their Children and
those who were to come after them. Go therefore to the Church (that is, to the
Church of Rome, say the Papists; to the Universal Church, i. e. to all
Christians, say some Protestants,) and see what are the Doctrines which are,
and have been universally maintained; of whose Beginning no other Account can
be given, but that Jesus and his Apostles taught them to the World: And there
you have the entire and uncorrupted Doctrine of Jesus. But to this I answer,
That, indeed, where there is an universal, or a very large and general
Tradition concerning any thing; and where; from the nature of the thing it
self, it appears to be highly rational and probable, that there is not, or
could not be, any Error or Mistake in the matter; in such a Case as this, no
Man, I think, but an obstinate Sceptick, will offer to withstand the Evidence
of such a Tradition. But, let a Tradition be ever so general, or even
universal; yet, if it can be shown, that there is not only a possibility, but
also a fair likelihood, and probability, that there may be a mistake in the
business; then, I think, no Man can justly be blamed, if he refuses or suspends
his Assent, until the Testimony of such a Tradition be cleared and vindicated
from those rational Prejudices and Exceptions which may lie against it. Now, if
it were so, that all Errors and Mistakes did ever immediately appear in their
perfect Form, and full Growth, at their very Beginning; then it were most
rational to conclude, that all Men must needs take notice of their first
Appearance; and consequently, that, in all likelihood, any such Error must
needs meet with many more Opponents, than Abettors. But, on the contrary; it
may well be supposed, that Errors may have sprung up in the World, from such
small beginnings, and by such slow and unperceivable degrees, that, after some
Ages, it may be impossible for a Man to discover them to be Errors, except he
has some other Rule, besides Tradition, to try them by; viz. either the Rule of
common Reason, or some ancient and unaltered Writing. As for Example; It is not
rational to conceive, that, in the first Ages of Christianity, they who
preached and writ popular Discourses, might, very innocently, and to good
purpose, make use of Rhetorical Flights, and Figurative Expressions, to strike
the Fancies, and move the Affections of the People to Virtue and Piety? And is
it not likely enough, That those who came after them, might not only strive to
imitate, but also to outdo them, in bolder Flights, and more strained Schemes
of Expression? And is it not also probable enough, That, in long process of
Time, Ignorance, generally overspreading the Face of the World, and being
joined with a profound Veneration for those ancient Preachers and Writers,
might begin to interpret some of these Rhetorical and Figurative Expressions in
a Literal and Logical Sense; and then conceive, that such their Interpretations
were really and truly the ancient Doctrines delivered down to them? Especially
if we consider, that there may have been some Men of great Power and Repute in
the World, who might have taken a pride and delight, or whose Interest it might
have been, to amuze the People with mysterious Notions and Fancies, and to keep
them ignorant of the Truth. And thus it appears to be, not only possible, but
also probable enough, That Errors and Mistakes, as to the ancient Doctrine of
Jesus, might come to be generally received, without any considerable or
notorious Opposition given to them; or that such Opposition might soon be
suppressed and overruled by the Power and Reputation of such prevailing Men.
From all which I cannot but conclude, That though the general Tradition or
Testimony of the Church may be a good Help, yet it may not always be a certain
Rule, to lead me to the entire, and unaltered Doctrine of Jesus.

XXIII. Other there are, who tell me, That, to find out the true and entire
Doctrine of Jesus, I must apply my self to the holy Scripture; that is to say,
to the Books commonly called the Old, and the New Testament. And because I look
upon this to be the right Way, I shall briefly and plainly deliver my Thoughts,
in relation to these Books. And first, of the New Testament. That the New
Testament, as it was extant in the Greek Toegue, has been ever universally
owned by all Christians, as containing a true (though some deny it to be a
full) Account of the Life and Doctrine of Jesus, is a thing so notorious, and
so universally acknowledged, that I cannot find the least Ground or Reason to
question it. Now the History and Doctrine of Jesus being so well known unto the
first Christians, by the Preaching of the Apostles and Disciples; and they
being so ready, upon all Occasions, to lay down their Lives for the Truth of
Christianity; it cannot be imagined that ever they would so readily and
universally receive and own such a Book, if it had contained any thing in it
which was dissonant from that Doctrine which they had received. It is
confessed, indeed, that some of those Books which make up the Volume of the New
Testament, (that is to say, the Epistle to the Hebrews, that of St. James, the
Second of St. Peter, that of St. Jude, the Second and Third of St. John, and
the Revelations,) were not so soon, and so universally received, throughout the
Christian Church, as the rest of the Books were. The Reason of which,
apparently, was not, That these Books contained any thing in them contrary to
what was delivered it the other Books of the New Testament, (for he that reads
the whole, will plainly find, that there is a very complete Agreement between
them; the only seeming Discord, of St. Paul's Justification by Faith, and St.
James's Justification by Works, being exactly and fully reconciled, by
considering, That St. Paul means no other Faith, but such as works by Love,
Gal. 5. 6. and St. James, no other Works, but such as proceed from Faith, Jam.
2. 22.) But because it was not at first universally known, who were the Authors
of them. Which abundantly shows the Care and Caution of the Christian Church,
in not being hasty to receive and admit any Books, as authentic Records of
their Doctrine, without very good Warrant for so doing. And therefore, since
these same Books were, in a very little time after, received, and owned to be
of equal Authority with the rest of the New Testament; I cannot but from thence
conclude, That those Churches which, at the first, doubted concerning those
Books, did soon receive most full and ample Satisfaction in that matter, from
those who had before received them. I conclude therefore, That the Book of the
New Testament, as it was extant in the Primitive Times, in the Greek Tongue,
did contain a true Account of the Doctrine of Jesus.

XXIV. That innumerable Copies of the New Testament were, in a very little
time, dispersed through all places where Christianity was planted; That it has
heen, at different times, and in very distant places, translated into all (or
almost all) Languages; And that Copies, both of the Original, and many of the
several Translations, have been preserved with much Care, in a great many
distant Parts of the World, is allowed by all, and denied by none. From whence
I think we may gather, First, That where the Generality of the Greek Copies of
the New Testament do agree in the very same Words, there we have, undoubtedly,
the true and authentic Words of the New Testament. For, although some Mistakes
might creep into some Copies, either through the Wickedness or Negligence of
some particular Men; yet, where so many Copies of a Book have been so carefully
preserved, and in such distant Parts of the World, it is not to be imagined,
that the selfsame Error, in any Expression, should ever be propagated through
the Generality of them. Secondly, That where the Words or Expressions of diverse
Greek Copies do differ one from another; yet if the Sense and Meaning be
exactly the same in all, or almost all; there we have certainly the true Sense
and Meaning of the New Testament. For it is easy to apprehend, that a
Transcriber might, by a small Mistake, put one Word or Expression of the same
Signification, in stead of another: But that the same Sense should be
punctually preserved in all, or almost all, Copies is not to be imagined,
except it were the true Sense delivered from the Beginning. Thirdly, That if
there may be found any different Readings in diverse Copies of the New
Testament, which disagree in Sense, as well as in Words, (which scarce ever
happens in any thing which is accounted a material Point of Religion) then it
seems to be most fit and proper to admit of that Reading and Sense which best
agrees with the Tenor of the whole; with the ancientest, and best esteemed
Translations; and with the evident Principles of sound Reason. And if any place
be so obscure, as that none of these Ways will afford any Light into its
Meaning, then I think that no stress ought to be laid upon it in any necessary
part of Religion.

XXV. But some will demand, How are we sure of the Sense and Meaning, even of
those places of the New Testament, where there is no difference about the
Words? In Answar to this, I have already shown, (. 21.) that we are not to
follow the Guidance of the Church of Rome, to know the true Doctrine of Jesus;
Nor therefore, consequently, to know the true Meaning of the New Testament, in
which his Doctrine is owned to be contained. I have shown also, (. 22.) That
though general Tradition may be a good Help, yet may it not always be a certain
Rule to lead one to the unaltered Doctrine of Jesus; nor therefore,
consequently, to the true and genuine Interpretation of the New Testament.
Since therefore there is no other way to be found, I conclude, That the New
Testament is to be interpreted the same way that other Books are; that is, by
considering the Sense and Property of the Words and Sentences, and the ordinary
Figures of Speech, as they are commonly used in the same Book, and in others
written in the same Language, and about the same, time; together with the
Scope, Drift, Coherence, and Occasion of the Discourse. To which End, every Man
that is learned, being bound to use his best Endeavor to know the Will of God,
(as I have shown,. 14.) is obliged, according to the measure of his Learning,
to consult Lexicons, Commentators, and ancient Writers, and to use all other
Helps; that he may both satisfy himself, and also be able to inform others.

XXVI. But perhaps I shall be told, That when a Man has done all this, to the
best of his power* yet, after all, he may be mistaken; as it appears, that many
Learned Men are; since (...) oppose and contradict one another about the
Meaning of the New Testament. To this Ianswer, That since I have shown, (. 3.)
that all necessary things (whether as to Belief, or Practice) in Religion, are
easy to be understood; I must from hence conclude, That a sober and honest
Enquirer cannot easily be mistaken in the Interpretation of those places of the
New Testament, which do contain any necessary part of Religion. And as for
other parts and passages of it; if Men would be but peaceable, (which is
plainly enough commanded in the New Testament,) their Mistakes about them could
do no harm. And, again; Since I have shown, (. 14.) That God requires no more
from a Man, but his best Endeavors to know and perform his Will; I do hence
conclude, That if a Man be mistaken in his Interpretation even of any such
place as contains some necessary part of Religion; yet, if this Mistake be
purely an Error of the Understanding, and does not proceed from any Neglect,
or wilful Fault of the Person so mistaking; God will never be offended with him
for it. And then, What hurt can there be in such a Mistake as this?

XXVII. But it may be demanded, What shall they do to find out the Meaning of
the New Testament. who do not understand any thing of the Greek, which is the
only authentic Language of this Book? Which is evidently the Case of much the
greatest part of Mankind. I answer, That he who is ignorant of the Greek
Tongue, being yet obliged to use his best Endeavor, (. 14.) must do the best
he can, by reading some Translation, or Translations of it; (or, if he cannot
read himself, by hearing them read;) and by asking and enquiring from such of
his Acquaintance as he believes to be Persons of Sincerity and Knowledge, to
know what is the Sense and Doctrine of the New Testament, and the Will of God
therein contained. And, since God requires no more from any Man, but his best
Endeavor, (. 14.) it follows, That if such a Man be mistaken, and cannot help
it, God will not be offended with him neither for it.

XXVIII. And one thing more let me add, for the sake of those who are not
skilled in the Greek Tongue; viz. That since there have many Translations been
made of the New Testament, most of them by Persons well skilled in Languages,
of good Repute for their Honesty and Integrity, and who could not but know
beforehand, that their Translations would be narrowly sifted and examined by
learned Men; (which must needs make them careful to commit as few Faults as
they could;) and since all those things which God requires from Men, must needs
be easy enough to be understood, (. 3.) and therefore easy to be translated
and expressed in any Language; I cannot but conclude, That a sober and
impartial Enquirer may be very well assured of the Doctrine of Jesus, even from
the Translations of the New Testament, though he does not understand the Greek
Original. And, for as much as I can understand of the matter, if Men did stand
only upon the honest and downright Sense and Meaning of plain Places, (which
only can stive us good Assurance in Religion,) and would not quarrel about
critical Niceties in such Texts as are confessedly obscure, I believe there is
scarce any Translation of the New Testament so defective, but might be a
sufficient Guide to any sober Man, to lead him to the Doctrine of Jesus.

XXIX. Having thus spoken what I designed of the New Testament, I come to say
something of the Old. And here, that the Jews, in the Days of Jesus, had among
them a Book, written in the Hebrew, and some small part of it in the
Chaldee-Tongue, which we now call the Old Testament, which they called the Holy
Scripture, and esteemed as the Word of God, is a thing beyond dispute. That
this Book was owned and acknowledged, quoted and referred to, and all People
exhorted and encouraged to search and study it, as the Word of God, both by
Jesus himself, and also by his Disciples, is most evident to any one who reads
the New Testament. From whence I must conclude, That the Doctrine of that Book,
as it was then extant, is to be esteemed as part of the Doctrine of Jesus; and
that those Laws and Commands which are there to be found, are to be kept and
observed by all Christians, the Followers of Jesus; except where it can be
shown that Jesus has freed us from the Obligation of them.

XXX. Moreover, since this Book has been Translated into as many Languages, and
as many Copies of the Original have been carefully kept, in distant Parts of
the World, as of the New Testament; I do conclude, That the very same things
which just now were said concerning the Words, the Meaning, and Way of
interpreting the New Testament, will hold good concerning the Old Testament
also, as far as they can be accommodated to it.

XXXI. There are some certain Books and Fragments, which among the Protestants
are well known by the Name of Apocryphal, to which the Papists give the Title
of Deuterocanonical. These Pieces the Papists contend to be a real part of the
Old Testament, and of equal Authority with the other Books of it: But the
Protestants will not allow their Authority to be sacred, although they grant
that there are many useful and profitable things contained in them. Now, he
that is not able to search into Antiquity, for the Resolving of this
Controversy, may by another way be satisfied about it. For, since the Jews
(from whom the Christians originally received the Scriptures of the Old
Testament) do all of them, and ever did, unanimously reject these same
Apocryphal Books and Fragments, as being no part of their Holy Scripture; I
think it may from hence be sufficiently concluded, That, as to the Controversy
about the Apocryphal Scripture, the Protestants are in the right, and the
Papists in the wrong. And yet, if the Authority of those Pieces were as great
as the Papists would have it, I see not how it could make any Alteration in my
Religion. For I do not find any thing in them, but what is easily reconcilable
with the rest of the holy Scripture.

XXXII. But there are some Difficulties which seem to arise concerning what I
have discoursed, to which it will be necessary to give a full and satisfactory
Answer. And, First, If all be granted that has hitherto been said; yet, how
shall I be sure that the Book of the holy Scriptures contains, not only truly,
but also fully and entirely, the Doctrine of Jesus; so that nothing is to be
esteemed as a part of his Religion, but what is contained in the Scripture? To
this I might answer, That there are several Passages in the Scripture it self,
which do give us to understand, that the whole Law and Will of God, as far as
it is needful for Man to know them, are contained in those holy Writings; (as
the Protestant Divines do sufficiently make appear, in the Management of this
Controversy against the Papists.) But, waving this, I think it is enough to
say, That it is not, indeed, impossible in it self, but that Jesus might have
made known other Particulars of Doctrine, and of the Will of God, besides what
is consigned to us by the Scripture. And if any Man can effectually prove, that
any such Doctrine or Precept was delivered by him; I think, that whosoever is
convinced of the Proof, ought to believe that Doctrine, and obey that Precept,
which appear to be so delivered. But he that does his hearty and sincere
Endeavor to find out the Doctrine and Will of God, delivered to Man by Jesus,
and is not able, with all his Diligence, to discover any more of it, than what
is recorded in the Scripture; if he faithfully keeps and observes as much of it
as he is able there to discover, it is plain that God requires no more from
him, (. 14.) and therefore certainly will not punish him, for want of any thing
farther.

XXXIII. Secondly, It may be objected, That in Reading these Books, there do
appear to be some Passages which are in themselves absurd, and contrary to the
plain Dictates of every Man's Reason and Understanding; and some which are
irreconcilable with one another. Now, that the Doctrine of Jesus is certainly
true, must be allowed, because it is confirmed by God. That both parts of a
Contradiction cannot be true, is acknowledged by all Men: And no Man, I think,
can own that for a Truth, which is contrary to the plain Dictates of his Reason
and Understanding; which to every Man is, and must be, the Standard of all
Truth whatsoever. For there can be no Reason why any Man receives and owns any
thing for a Truth, but only because he apprehends it to be conformable unto the
plain and selfevident Notions which are already planted in his Mind. Here then
it may be demanded how it canbe possible that these Scriptures should contain
the true and uncorrupted Doctrine and Religion of Jesus? To this I answer:
First, That I cannot find any appearance of a Contradiction, throughout the
Holy Scriptures, in any Point of Doctrine, or Rule of Manners, but what is so
easy and obvious to be reconciled, that no Man, I think, of Candor and
Ingenuity, but would be ashamed to object it. Secondly, And, as for those few
seeming Discordances, which do occurr in the Circumstances of some Historical
Narrations; though I, perhaps, am not able to reconcile them, yet it may be
that the things themselves may not be absolutely irreconcilable. But suppose
they were, yet it is no derogation to the Truth of the History, (as to the main
substance of it,) or of the Doctrine contained in the holy Scriptures, that
some of the Sacred Writers have been mistaken in the Relation of some small and
inconsiderable Circumstances. There are several Historians and Chroniclers,
which give an Account of the Life and Reign of many of our Kings of England;
and although they differ in many Circumstances of things, yet this was never
made an Argument to doubt of the Truth of the main History, wherein they all
agree. And why may not the Scripture-Historians be as favorably censured as
all other Historians in the World are? Thirdly, There are many things which are
above my Reason and Understanding which I cannot comprehend in my Mind, nor
frame a clear and distinct Notion of; which yet I cannot say, are contrary to
my Reason: Because (though they are above my reach, yet) I do not find that
they do contradict any of those plain and self-evident Principles which are
implanted in my Understanding. For Example, I am not able distinctly to
apprehend how the smallest Particle of Matter, which can be assigned, is yet in
it self capable of being for ever divided; so that no part of Matter, though
ever so small, can ever be so much as convinced to be absolutely invisible. And
yet this is so far from being contrary to my Reason, that my Reason it self
does fully satisfy me that the thing is so, though I am not able to comprehend
the manner of it. The same thing also may be said concerning the necessity of
some thing being without any Beginning. (of which, see. 5, 6.) Now if I meet
with any thing in Scripture which is thus above my Reason, but not contrary to
it, I cannot refuse my Assent unto it. (I mean always, upon a Supposition that
the Words do appear evidently to carry such a Sense.) For I cannot conclude
such a thing to be impossible: Because I do not find it contrary to my Reason,
though above it. And if it be a thing in my Apprehension possible, I must
believe it to be true, when I find that God has declared it so to be. Other
things, again, there are, which are directly contrary unto those self-evident
Notions and Principles, which my Reason finds to be connatural with it self.
For Example; That a Part is equal to the Whole; and such like Absurdities. Now,
if any such Propositions as these, which are contrary to my Reason, should
occurr to me in Scripture, I cannot possibly believe them to be true in a
Literal Sense; (for that were to renounce the clear Dictates of my Reason and
Understanding, upon which the Certainty of all things which I believe or know,
is ultimately built; and without which, I could have no Certainty of the Being
of God, or the Truth of any Religion;) and therefore I must needs understand
them to be meant figuratively. And that Figure which best agrees to such Words,
according to the most common Custom of Speech, and is most conformable to
common Sense and Reason, I think, is always to be preferred. I never read any
Book, to my knowledge, but in it I found many Expressions which, taken
literally and strictly, were absurd and ridiculous; but, taken figuratively, as
it is evident they were intended, did contain very good Sense and Meaning. Since
then the Holy Scriptures were written in such Words and Expressions as were
commonly used among Men in Speaking and Writing, why should we think that
strange in them, which is so usual in all other Books?

XXXIV. Thirdly, It may be objected, That this Doctrine which I have taught,
leaves every Man entirely to his own Reason and Understanding, to find out the
true Religion, and the Way to Heaven. Now, since there is so great a difference
between the Notions and Sentiments of different Men, it must needs follow,
that, all Men being left wholly to themselves, there must necessarily be great
Variety, and even Contrariety, of Opinions among them concerning Religion. And
if God requires no more from every Man, but to do his best Endeavor, and to
choose that way which he thinks to be the truest; from hence it will follow,
That two Men who are contrary one to another in the Point of Religion, may yet
both be in the right Way to Heaven; and a Turk, or a Heathen, may be saved, as
well as a Christian, if they are but strongly persuaded that they are in the
right. I answer; First, That if the Objection means, that I leave every Man to
his own Reason and Understanding, without any other help, to find out the Trut
of Religion, it is a mistake. For I have asserted, That every Man, according to
the Measure of his Learning, ought to make use of all the Means and Helps he
can, to understand the Scriptures, and the Will of God. (See. 14. and. 25.) But
if the Meaning be, That I leave every Man to choose that Religion which, after a
serious Enquiry, appears to him to be the best; (which is all that I contend
for;) In this I say no more than what all Men must, and do, say, as well as I.
For, either a Man must never enquire into the Truth of his Religion at all,
(and then he chooses his Religion by mere chance; and since there are many false
Religions, and but one true, it is great odds but he lights upon a wrong one;)
Or, if he does enquire. either he must choose that which he thinks not to be the
best, (and then he acts against his Conscience,) or that which he thinks is the
best; Which is what I assert, and what every Man of Sense professes himself to
do. Secondly, As there are many Differences in the Notions and Sentiments of
Men, concerning those things which are, in some measure, abstruse and obscure;
so, on the other side, there are many things so apparent, and evident, that Men
who are sincere and unbyassed, if they have but common Sense, can never differ
about them: Amongst which, I think, I may reckon all those things which God
requires of necessity to any Man's Salvaton (. 3.) And whereas the World has,
for these many Years, found, that compelling Men to this or that Religion,
contrary to their own Sentiments, has been so far from begetting Unity of any
sort, that, on the contrary, it has even distracted Mankind, not only with
Variety of Opinions, (each Party taking a delight to thwart other,) but also
with War and Confusion; If every Man were left to himself, to follow what
Religion he pleases, (as he shall answer to God for his Sincerity,) it is very
probable that most Men, having no Worldly Interest to serve by this or that
Religion, would in time, be brought to agree in all the great and necessary
Truths of Religion; which are plain and evident to every sober and inquisitive
Person. And as for things not absolutely necessary, and of an inferior sort,
(as I have said,. 26.) if Men would be but peaceable, their Mistakes, and
consequently their Differences about them, could do no great harm. But if Men
will still differ even about the essential and necessary Parts of Religion, I
know no Remedy for it upon Earth; but must refer the Matter wholly to the
Judgment of God in Heaven. Thirdly. I do not maintain, That he who is in an
Error, that is, a Turk, or an Heathen, (whatsoever the strength and sincerity
of his Persuasion may be,) is in as sure a Way to Heaven and Salvation, as he
who is an Orthodox-Man, and a Christian. How God will deal with those that are
mistaken, and cannot help it, I do not determine. All that I would insinuate (.
14.) is, That he will not punish any Man for any Error, or Mistake, which he
falls into, through a pure Desect of his Understanding, and not through any
Fault or Neglect of his Will. But how far he will reward such a Person for his
good Meaning, is more than I can tell.

XXXV. Fourthly, It may be objected, That this Doctrine does, in effect,
undermine and enervate the Force and Power of all Civil Government, by opening
a Way for all Malefactors to escape Punishment, how great soever their Crimes
may be. If such a Person should plead thus for himself, That he was fully
persuaded in his Mind and Conscience, that it was the Will of God, that he
should commit such a Thest, or Murder, of which he is accused; and that
therefore, according to this Doctrine, it was his Duty, in the sight of God, to
act according to this Persuasion; The Magistrate, who knows not the Hearts of
Men, can never be able certainly to discover, but that this is a real Truth,
that he was so persuaded. And if every Man, in all the Duties of Religion, is
bound to act according to his own Sense and Persuasion of Things; with what
Conscience can a Magistrate punish such a Person for that Fact, which, for
ought he knows, it was his Duty to commit? I will not say, but that it may so
fall out, that a Man may think it to be his Duty to commit the most horrid
Villainies, since Jesus Christ himself assures his Disciples, That the Time
would come, that whosoever killed them, would think he did God Service, Joh. 16. 2.
And how far God Almighty will be merciful unto such Persons who commit such
Facts out of pure Ignorance, and not out of Malice, I had rather St. Paul
should determine than I. (See 1 Timothy 1. 13.) But to the Objection, I think it
sufficient to answer, That the Civil Magistrate, as well as other Men is bound
to act according to the clearest Conviction, and strongest Persuasion of his
own Mind. If therefore, upon the Examination of all Circumstances, he be well
satisfied, and really believes, that such a Plea from a Malefactor is no real
Truth; but only a mese Trick, and Pretense, in hopes to escape Punishment; he
ought to take no notice of it, but to pronounce his Sentence according to the
Law. But that which comes up close to the Objection, and which, I think, is the
fullest and truest Answer, is this; viz. That the Civil Magistrate has nothing
to do to enquire or regard how the Matter stands between God and the Conscience
of the Transgressor of the Law of the Land; so as to be thereby any way
influenced in the Passing his Judgment. It is enough to him, if he be well and
thoroughly convinced, that the Laws by which he acts are no way contrary to the
known Law of God. There are many Cases wherein a Man offends highly against the
Law of God, in which the Civil Magistrate has no Power to inflict any
Punishment on the Offender; because the Fault which he may have committed, does
not, it may be, any way tend to the damage or disturbance of the Civil Society;
Which, and which only, is committed to the Care of the Magistrate. Such, for
Example, are many Acts of Covetousness, or of Prodigality, and other Sins;
against which it is not possible to provide by any Humane Laws. And, on the
other side, There are some Cases, wherein a Man may stand absolved before the
Tribunal of God, and yet be very justly condemned by the Magistrate. Thus, for
instance, If a Man has committed Theft or Murder, and, upon a sincere and
hearty Repentance, has obtained the Pardon of his Sins from God; yet,
nevertheless, if such a Person be accused, and legally convicted, of such
Crimes before the Civil Magistrate; He not only may, but ought to put the Law
of the Land in Execution agninst him, though he believes him to be ever so
penitent; That it may be a Terror unto others. For, if this ought not to be
done, every Malefactor, by a pretense of Repentance, (which cannot certainly be
discovered by any but God,) might escape the Lash of the Law: By which Means
all wicked Men would be encouraged to commit all sorts of Crimes. Thus also
when the Children of Israel were commanded by God to conquer the Land of
Canaan, we read how they sent Spies to make a Discovery of the Land, that they
might the more easily invade it. Now it is most certain, that these Spies did
nothing but what they had God Almighty's Warrant for; and yet, if they had been
taken by any of the Canaanitish Magistrates, and legally convicted of their
Design; Who doubts but that it had been lawful for them to have punished them,
according to the Law of War, and the Law of Nations? For it is none of the
Magistrates Business, to enquire who keeps or transgresses the Laws of God;
(for the Law of God extends to many Cases, where the Magistrate's Authority has
nothing to do;) but they who transgress the Laws of the Land, and thereby
disturb the Peace of the Commonwealth, are, upon a due Conviction, to be
punished by the Magistrate, (without any farther Enquiry;) it being his
Business to do every thing which appears to be necessary for the Preservation
of the Weal-Publick, provided that he does nothing which is contrary to the
known Laws of God, who is the supreme King and Lord of all.

XXXVI. But Fifthly, it will be objected, That whatever becomes of the civil
Magistrate's Power, yet this Doctrine which here is taught, must certainly
defeat and cancel all that Authority with which the Church is endowed and
invested. For, though the civil Magistrate has no more to look after but only
the Peace and Preservation of the Commonwealth; yet surely it is the Duty of
the Church to take Cognizance of those things which are committed merely
against the Law of God. But how can the Church call any Man to an Account for
any Sin or Transgression, when a Man may plead for himself, That he thought it
was his Duty; which Plea, if really true (and who but God can disprove it?) is
sufficient according to this Doctrine, to justify him before God; and
consequently to indemnifie him from all Censures of the Church. To this I
answer, That the Authority of the Church (i. e. of a Christian Society) is
twofold: viz. Either that Authority wherewith it is invested immediately by
God, or that which is conferred on it by the civil Laws and Constitutions of
the Kingdom or Commonwealth. The latter of these is a civil Authority, though
exercised by Ecclesiastical Persons, because it is derived altogether from the
civil Power, And therefore, the Consideration of it must be referred to what is
but now said touching the civil Magistrate. But as for that Authority which is
given to the Church immediately by God; it is evidently no more than this, viz.
An Authority to preach the Gospel, and to persuade Men every where to receive
it; and an Authority to exclude those Men out of the Society (that is, out of
the visible Communion of it) who do not profess the true Christian Faith, and
live according to the Christian Law. Other Authority than this does not appear
to be given to the Church by God. And nothing that I have said, does in the
least tend to abridge them any way as to the Exercise of this Power. The Church
may and ought to preach the Gospel, and persuade men to embrace it. And however
any Man may be excused before God by invincible Ignorance, yet he is not to be
suffered in the visible Communion of the Church, if he does not believe and
live as a Christian.

XXXVII. Sixthly, it may be objected that I have several times in this
Discourse made use of a Distinction, which Distinction is nevertheless rendered
altogether useless and impertinent by the main Design of the Discourse it self.
The Distinction is between necessary Matters of Religion and such as are not
necessary. (which is referred to, ^. 26. and elsewhere) But if no Man can be
obliged in any Matter of Religion, any farther than to do his best Endeavor,
from thence it must follow, That all things are alike necessary in Religion.
For whatsoever is within a Man's Power, according to this Doctrine, is
necessary for him; and whatsoever is not within his Power is not necessary; so
that the very same thing may be necessary in Respect of one Man, and not
necessary in Respect of another; which confounds the Distinction and renders it
useless. To this I answer, That by things necessary I mean all such as it is a
Sin for a Man to be ignorant of, if the Knowledge of them be within his Power.
Such as are, That Jesus is the Son of God, That God is to be worshipped, etc.
By things not necessary, I mean, Such as a Man is not obliged so much as to
search after; the lgnorance whereof shall not be accounted sinful before God,
although it might have been in a Man's Power to have known them. Such are a
great many curious Speculations, which Divines do trouble themselves and the
World with; which they themselves do yet confess, are not necessary to any
Man's Salvation; and consequently, which a Man is no more obliged to trouble
his Head with, than with any Problems, either in Geometry, or Natural
Philosophy.

XXXVIII. Seventhly, It may be objected, That this Doctrine must needs
encourage Men to continue in their Ignorance, and not to take any Care or Pains
to inform themselves concerning the Truth of Religion, or any of the Duties of
it. For, Why should a Man take any Pains to get more Knowledge, (which will, it
may be, bring Trouble in the Practice of it,) when Ignorance is no manner of
Bar to his Salvation? For, let him but live according to the Knowledge which he
already has, and God, it seems, requires no more from him. To this I answer,
That for a Man to act according to the best of his Knowledge, will not serve
his turn; except he has used his best Endeavor, by all Means, to know and
understand the Will of God as perfectly as He can. (as I have shown, all Men
are bound to do,. 14.) Which, though it is a Comfort to those who are ignorant,
and cannot help it; yet is no manner of Encouragement or Excuse for those whose
Ignorance is their own Fault or Neglect.

XXXIX. My Reason having thus brought me to embrace the Christian Religion, and
directed me where and how to seek for the particular Doctrines of it; it
follows now, that I should put this Speculation into Practice; that I would
search the Scriptures with all the diligence I can, and set my Mind, with all
its Faculties, on work, to find out as much as I am able of the Will of God,
that I may the better conform my self unto it. This, with God's help, I design
speedily to do: And the Result of my Thoughts shall be published to the World,
if what I here write prove acceptable. But in the mean time, I think it not
improper here to add some general Considerations, which may serve as Rules and
Guides to me, or to any other Person, who shall set himself upon such an
Enquiry; to direct our Judgments aright, to the true Doctrine of Christianity,
and to keep us from all Mistakes about it.

XL. First, Then, I take it for granted, That the Christian Religion is
calculated for Men of Reason and Understanding; that is, That it is fit to
satisfy and convince every sober Man, who seriously considers the Arguments on
which it relies; and is not led astray by Passion, by Prejudice, or Worldly
Interest. That this is so, appears very evidently from hence; Because both
Jesus and his Appostles do appeal to the common Reason and Understandings of
Men, to judge of what they taught. Yea, and why, even of your selves, judge ye
not what is right? says Jesus, Luke 12. 57. Prove all things, hold fast that
which is good, says St. Paul, 1 These. 5. 21. Be ready always to give an Answer
to every one that asks you a Reason of the Hope that is in you, says St.
Peter, 1 Pet. 3. 15. Believe not every Spirit; but try the Spirits, whether
they are of God, says St. John, 1 John 4. 1. Hence then I conclude, That there
can be nothing in Christian Religion, which contradicts the clear and evident
Principles of Natural Reason. For otherwise, a Rational Man could not be a
Christian. (See. 33.)

XLI. Secondly, It appears plain to me, that Christian Religion was calculated,
not only, nor chiefly, for Men of great and deep Learning; But also for those
of ordinary, plain, and mean Capacities: That is to say, That there is nothing
necessary in Christianity, but what may be as well understood by every
ordinary, illiterate Man, as by the greatest Scholars. If this were not so, it
would not be possible for an unlearned Man to be as good a Christian as one
that is learned: Whereas the contrary is most apparently declared in the New
Testament. I thank thee, O Father, because thou have hid these things from the
Wise and Prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes, says Jesus, Matthew. 11. 25.
To which, the Words of St. Paul do exactly agree, 1 Cor. 1. 19. to Verse. 7. of
the Second Chapter. And the same St. Paul gives us a Caution, That Philosophy
should not corrupt our Christianity, Col. 2. 8. And warns Timothy against
Science, falsely so called, 2 Timothy 6. 20. But there is nothing so much as
intimated throughout the whole Bible, that Philosophy, or any other Humane
Learning, will qualify a Man ever the better, to become a Christian. I
confess, indeed, That, as things stand at this time in the World, it is highly
convenient that the Teachers and Preachers of Christianity should be
competently skilled in Humane Learning; that they may be the better able to
defend their Religion, and the Purity of it, against those who use so much Art
and Skill, either to corrupt, or oppose it. But where a Man sets up, not for a
Teacher, but only for a true Believer, it is evident, from what has been said,
that he has no need of Scholarship; but only of a plain and sober
Understanding, to make him capable of all necessary Instruction for a good
Christian. Or else, Why should the Gospel be preached so particularly to the
Poor, Matthew. 11. 5. who are commonly illiterate? And how should the Poor in
this World become so rich of Faith, as St. James tells us? Jam. 2. 5. From
whence I think I may conclude, That all such Doctrines, the Understanding and
Proof whereof depend either on the subtle Spcculations of Humane Philosophy,
or the Niceties and Criticisms of Grammatical Learning, or the curious
Knowledge of History and Antiquity, are not to be esteemed as necessary Parts
of Christianity.

XLII. Thirdly, It is no less evident to me, that the main Design of Jesus, and
of his Disciples, whom he sent to preach the Gospel, was, to make Men, not
wiser as to Matters of Speculation; but better, and more virtuous, as to their
Lives and Actions. Knowledge puffs up; but Charity edisieth, says St. Paul,
1 Cor. 8. 1. Thus also, Chap. 13. of the same Epistle, he gives us to
understand, that the Gift of Tongues and of Prophecy, the Understanding of all
Mysteries, and all Knowledge, and Faith, are of no value before God, without
Charity. And that by Charity, he means a Life led in the Practice of Virtue and
Piety, susficiently appears by the Sequel of that Chapter. The same St. Paul
tells us, Tit. 2. 13. That the Grace of God that brings Salvation, has
appeared unto all Men; (For what End? To make them more wise, more learned, or
more losty in their Speculations? No such thing: But,) teaching us, That,
denying Ungodliness, and Worldly Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously,
and Godly in this present World. And, to omit a multitude of Texts, which might
be alleged in so plain a Matter; I shall only add what we are told, Romans 2. 6,
etc. That God will render unto every Man according to his Deeds, etc. Which is
a plain Demonstration, that it is our Deeds, that is, our Practices, our Live
and Conversations, that we are chiefly obliged to take care of. I grant,
indeed, that God may, if he pleases, command things that are purely Ceremonial,
and such as have no manner of Influence upon Virtue and Morality; As
undoubtedly he did unto the Children of Israel: And if he does command any such
things, it is certain that we owe Obedience to them by virtue of that Authority
which God has over us. He may also reveal such Truths as are merely
speculative, and have nothing practical in them: And whosoever is convinced of
any such Revelation, is undoubtedly bound to give his Assent to the things so
revealed, although they are beyond the Reach of his Understanding; (as I have
said,. 33.) But from what I have here said, I think I may conclude, That since
Virtue and Morality are undoubtedly the chief Design of Christianity, they
ought to be chiefly regarded, and attended to by all Christians. Nor ought any
thing which is purely Ceremonial, or Speculative, to be reckoned as a necessary
Part of Christian Religion; except it appears very evidently, that God has
revealed, or commanded it. Very evidently, I say: For, when a thing is
conceived in dark and doubtful Expressions, it is very liable to be mistaken;
and he that is guilty of such a Mistake, can very hardly be charged with a
Fault.

XLIII. Fourthly, That the Knowledge of God Almighty, his Attributes, and his
Law, may, in part, be gathered from the Light of Nature (antecedent to any
Revelation) is evident from Reason, and acknowledged by St. Paul. For the
invisible things of him from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made; even his Eternal Power and Godhead.
Romans 1. 20. (See Psalm. 19. 1.) And when the Gentiles, which have not the Law,
do by Nature the thiugs contained in the Law, these having not the Law, are a
Law unto themselves; which show the Work of the Law written in their Hearts,
their Conscience also bearing Witness, and their Thoughts the mean while
accusing or else excusing one another, Romans 2. 14, 15. Now although all things
relating to Religion, which may be known by the Light of Nature, are, I think,
again repeated and farther explained by the Holy Scripture; Yet because it may
be that this will not appear so plainly to every one, I think it necessary here
to Note, That we are obliged to give our Assent to those Truths, and our
Obedience to those Laws of of Religion which we are able to discover by our
Natural Reason, although the same should not appear to us to be again repeated
in Scripture. For, for this very reason St. Paul pronounces the ancient
Gentiles to be without Excuse, because that when they knew God, that is, had
some Knowledge of him by their natural Understanding, they glorified him not as
God, by owning and obeying him. Romans 1. 20, 21, etc. And what is it else but an
Appeal to the natural Notions of Mankind, when he exhorts us, That whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are Lovely, whatsoever things are
of good Report, if there be any Virtue, and if there be any Praise, we should
think on these things, Phil. 4. 8.

XLIV. Fifthly, He that writes a Treatise upon any Subject, whatsoever he has a
Mind that his Reader should particularly observe and be convinced of, he will
be sure to lay it down plainly as a main Conclusion; nor will he fail (if he be
discreet) as often as Occasion requires, to repeat and referr to it, that the
more Notice may be taken of his Meaning and Design. Such things as are
mentioned only occasionally and collaterally and not as any part of the main
Subject of the Discourse, are not always expressed with so much Care and
Exactness, but that often even the meaning of them may be misunderstood. Nor
can we be always certain what is the true Sense and Opinion of a Writer, from
such accidental Expressions; (which sometimes may be used figuratively,
sometimes by way of Allusion or Accommodation, sometimes with Reference to the
Capacity of People, without any Regard to the litteral Truth of them) except he
gives us foam farther Explication of his Mind. From whence I think I may
conclude, That the necessary Doctrines and Precepts of Christian Religion, are
not to be gachered from those collateral and occasional Expressions which are
scattered up and down in the Scriptures; but from the main Scope and Design of
the whole Bible in general, and of each Book of it in particular.

XLV. I have thus briefly and plainly given, I hope, a rational Account of
Religion; and of Christianity in general. If I find that what I have here writ
is likely to do any good in the World, I shall proceed, with God's Assistance,
to draw out and publish a particular Account of the Doctrines to be believed,
and Duties to be practiced, by a Christian.

FINIS.
Errata to the 2d. and 3d. Part.
PAge 48. l. 16. read my own. p. 59. l. 12. for of r. and. p. 82. l. 11. for
Love r. live. p. 110. l. 3. dele it. p. 113. l. 12. for every r. very. p. 254.
for that r. than. p. 260. l. 16. r. Office in a settled Church.

Books Printed for, and Sold by A. and J. Churchil, at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row.
TItus Livius's Roman History. Boccacio's Novels and Tales. Sir Paul Ricaut's
Lives of the Popes of Rome. Rushworth's Historical Collections. Lloyd
Dictionarium Histor. Poeticum Geographicum. Statutes of Ireland. Bolton Justice
of Ireland. Leybourn's Dyalling. Buchanan's Chronicle and History of the Kings
of Scotland. Machiavil's Works. Sir Simon D' Ewe's Journal of Paliament, Queen
Elizabeth. Dr. Brady's Introduction to the History of England. Milton's
Paradise Regained. Leybourn's Cursus Mathematicus. Sir. Roger L'Estrange's
Aesop's Fables. Clark's Praxis Cur. Ecclesiasticis. Dr. Gibson's Anatomy.
Monsieur Le Clerc's Logica, etc. Drelincourt of Death. Leybourn's Arithmetic.
Protestant-Reconciler. Complete. Homer's Iliads. Poetae Minores. Royal Grammar.
Gibbon's Heraldry. Patridge's Treasury of Physic. -- Opus Reformatum. Bishop
Wilkins of Prayer and Preaching. Thibault's Chemistry. Glasier's Chemistry.
Valerius Maximus, English. Two Treatises of Government. The Three Letters for
Toleration. Some Considerations of the Consequences of Lowering Interest, and
Raising the Value of Money. Sir William Temple's Observations on Holland. --
Miscellanea. Dr. Burnet's Travels. Plato Redevivus. Selden's Table-Talk.
Debates of Oxon and Westminster-Parliaments. Livill Orationes selectae. 12o.
Sleidan de Quatuor fummis Imperiis. Aristotle's Rhetoric, English Dr. Whitby's
several Pieces. Patridge's Astrology. Isoratis Oration. Large 12o. Guide to
Heaven, 24o. Latin-Testament, the Cambridge-Edition 12o. Boyl's General History
of the Air A Gentleman's Religion. Two Treatises of Rationa Religion. 8o. Common
Prayer in Greek. Salmon's Dispensatory. -- Dorn. -- Synopsis Medicinae.
Salustii Historia. Weekly Preparation: II. Part Bunnian's Sighs from Hell.
Archbishop Layton's Sermons Gunter's Line. Ciceronis Epistol. Familiar. Mr.
Talent's Chron. Tables.
A GENTLEMAN'S Religion.

Part II. and III.

In which the Nature of the Christian Religion is particularly enquired into,
and Explained.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Sare at Grays-Inn-gate in Holborn, 1697.

A Short PREFACE To the whole.
SOme Men slight Religion, whilst others corru and perplex it with things
either false or unnecessary; the later of which I look upon to be much the
cause of the former.

Many will not take the pains to read much; and many do not thoroughly consider,
nor will digest what they read; which renders their Notions confused, and
themselves uncertain what to conclude.

I have theresore endeavored to make such a short and easy Draught of
Christianity and the Grounds of it, as every Man of a moderate Capacity may
read without Tediousness, and understand without Difficulty; And which, if it
does not wholly satisfy him, may yet serve to put his Thoughts into a Method,
and himself upon seeking for farther Satisfaction.

The first Part of this small Work I put forth some time since; and, finding
that it has not proved altogether unacceptable to Men of Judgment and
Moderation, I have been encouraged to finish and publish the Second and Third
Parts also.

My Design is certainly good; and if I have not well performed what I have
undertaken, I hope at least that what I have here done, may move some more able
and Judicious Person to take the Work in hand, and supply those Defects of
which I have been guilty.

THE CONTINUATION OF A Gentleman's Religion.
Being the Second PART.
1. THE Holy Scriptures being the only authentic Record that I am able to find
of the Christian Religion, I take it for granted that they do express Divine
Matters really and truly as the things are in themselves: And therefore I
cannot but believe that all the Doctrine therein delivered is mostcertainly
true, although many times I am not able to understand the Design and. Meaning of
some Expressions and Passages which do occur therein. I think it indeed to be
very proper, that Men of any reasonable Learning and Prudence should modestly
offer their Thoughts to the World, in order to the explaining of such Places of
the Scriptures as appear to be abstruse and difficult: But he who speaks his
own Words (and not those of Scripture) can therein only offer his own
Apprehensions; to which no Man can be obliged to subscribe, any farther than as
he is in his own Reason convinced of the Truth of them, and their Consonancy
with the Scriptures.

2. I do not apprehend that an implicit Faith is due to the Church of Rome
which challenges it (Part 1.. 21.) much less sure to any other Church which
does not require it. When, therefore, any Church, much more when any private
Men, do offer me any Doctrine of Religion in their own Words, I think I ought to
consider, First, Whether what they say is intelligible: (For tho we may be
obliged to believe such things as are above our Understanding to comprehend,
(Part 1.. 33.) yet it is impossible for any Man to give an explicit Assent to
any Form of Words, if he does not Know the meaning of them.) Secondly, Whether
it is agreeable to the self-evident Principles of Reason, for, If I apprehend
it to be otherwise, it is impossible for me to believe it. (Part 1.. 33.) Nor
must any Text of Scripture be interpreted above the Level of plain and
self-evident Reason, whatever the literal Sense may seem to be. And, Thirdly,
whether the Truth of it can be proved by any solid Argument, either from Reason
or Scripture: for tho a Doctrine be both intelligible and possible, yet still it
may be false; and therefore is not to be believed except it can be proved.
These Rules I have endeavored strictly to observe in the Trial of those
Doctrins which I am now about to propose; and I desire my Reader carefully to
make use of the same, in the Examination of all that I shall offer unto him.
But here I must desire him to take notice, that I do fuppose him to be well
acquainted with the Holy Scriptures, and also with the common Arguments, upon
which the several Parties of Christians do ground and maintain their Opinions:
And therefore, for his Ease, as well as my own, I shall save my self the Labor
of mentioning such Arguments and Places of Scripture, as are usually brought to
prove those Points which are generally acknowledged by all Christians, and even
in those Points which are controverted between different Parties, I shall
ordinarily think it enough to hint at some of those Texts, and Arguments, which
are used on either side; of which I can scarce suppose any Man to be ignorant
that is but moderately acquainted with the Principles of Christianity, and the
several Parties that profess it.

3. To believe what God makes known, and to do what he commands, is what all
Men call Religion: But things that are impossible, it is certain that God
requires from no Man (Part 1.. 14.) When therefore Damnation is denounced in
Scripture against those who receive not the Gospel, it must needs be understood
only of them in whose Power it was to have received it; and not of such who are
invincibly ignorant; either for want of Capacity, John 9. 41. or of the means
of Knowledge, Joh. 15. 22. But for a Man who has both the Capacity and Means of
Knowledge, through Negligence, to continue in Ignorance of God's Will, my
Reason tells me is a very great Sin; besides all those Places of Scripture
which do require us diligently to seek after Knowledge.

4. That there is a God, is sufficiently to be proved from our own Reason and
Observation: But fully to comprehend his Nature, or declare in all Points what
he is, is by all allowed to be impossible to us.

5. That God never had a Beginning, I think I have sufficiently concluded (Part
1.. 6.) And, if the holy Scripture had not told me that he is from Everlasting
to Everlasting; yet my own Reason would have inferred that he is subject to no
Decay, nor ever shall have an Ending.

6. The Nature of every Material Being seems necessarily to imply a Possibility
of having its Parts disjoined and separated one from another; and consequently
of being dissolved and destroyed: And theresore I conclude, that the eternal
God does not consist of Matter; and that Being which is intelligent, and does
not consist of any material Parts, I call a Spirit: And this is what I mean
when I say that God is a Spirit. As for those Expressions the Eyes of the Lord,
the Arm of the Lord, and such like, which do occur sometimes in Scripture, and
seem to imply Bodily Parts, it is manifestly obvious that they must be purely
metaphorical.

7. Our Experience does sufficiently testify that whatsoever is visible to us,
is ever material. Since therefore God does not consist of Matter, I conclude
that he is invisible to Mortal Eyes, as the Scripture positively declares him
to be: And all those Texts which seem to say, that he has been seen by Man, I
think must of necessity be interpreted some other way, viz. either, 1. Of an
Angel appearing in a glorious and majestatick manner: Or 2. Of the eternal Son
of God assuming a Bodily Appearance, as after he took our Nature upon him: Or,
3. Of some visible and extraordinary Signs and Tokens that the invisible God
was there present in an extraordinary Manner: Or, 4. Of those mystical and
Hieroglyphical Representations which God has sometimes been pleased to make of
himself, not to the Senses, but to the Imagination and Understanding of his
Prophets, in their extatick Dreams and Visions.

8. Amongst all those things which I can conceive possible to be done, i. e. to
imply no Contradiction, I can find nothing which to me appears more difficult,
than what God has already done in the Structure of the Universe: And therefore
I conclude, that God can do whatsoever in its self is possible to be done,
which is what I mean when I say, that he is Almighty: Nor is there any one,
sure, who will venture to say, that God can do such things as imply a
Contradiction, either in themselves, or to his own Nature and Attributes.

9. That God, who made all things, should be ignorant of any thing, appears to
me most absurd to imagine. But when I say, that God is Omniscient; If there is
any thing, the Knowledge of which would manifestly imply a Contradiction, it
could surely be no greater Irreverence to say, that God could not know, than
that he could not do such a thing. But whether the Knowledge of a future
Contingent would imply a Contradiction or not, is a very abstruse and
metaphysical Dispute; and except the contrary can very clearly be made appear,
I know not how to imagine that God is, or can be ignorant of any thing past,
present, or to come, however contingent.

10. If God were or could be confined to, or circumscribed in any determinate
Space or Place, it would be hard to conceive that his Knowledge and Power
should be infinite, and extend to all Places. But I cannot suppose God to be
present in all Places aster the same manner, as the Air is every where present
throughout its Region, or the Light throughout its Hemisphere, for that would
imply local Extension; and consequently, that he were a material Being,
contrary to what I have said,. 6. But that God can in an instant exert his
Power in any, or all Places, whenever he pleases, (as the Soul can on a sudden
move the extremest Joint of the Body) is, I think, an evident Consequence of
his Omnipotence; and that manner of Existence whereby he is able to do this, I
call Omnipresence; and this is all that I am able to conceive when I say that
God is every where present.

11. That God is most wise, that is to say, most perfectly knows what is always
fittest and best to be done, and which is the properest way to bring what he
pleases to pass, is an evident Consequence from his Omniscience, or rather
indeed a Branch of it.

12. From God's Wisdom it necessarily follows, that his Counsel is
unchangeable. For he who alters or repents of any thing, which he has once
positively determined, plainly shows his Foresight to be imperfect, and his
Wisdom defective. When therefore we meet with some Passages in Scripture which
seem to suggest that God has decreed one thing, and yet afterward done
another; we must of necessity understand such Decrees to have been not
absolute, but merely conditional (a Condition being in many Cases implied, and
supposed, where it is not in Words expressed.) And when he is said to have
repented of some things which he has done, or to have been grieved thereat, we
must needs interpret such Places in a metaphorical Sense, with an Allusion to
those Motions and Passions in Mankind; just as Hands, Arms, Eyes, etc. are on
the same account sometimes ascribed unto him, tho really he has no such
Members, no more than he has the Passions, which belong to Men.

13. I do most evidently find in my self a Power to choose at all times what I
please, and to determine my own Actions as I will my self: And this I look upon
to be a greater Perfection in me, than if I were absolutely necessitated and
determined by somewhat without my self, in every thing which I should do. Since
therefore I derive this Perfection originally from God, who is the Contriver
and Author of my Being, (Part 1.. 7.) I cannot but ascribe the same in the
highest Degree to him, who must be the Fountain of all Perfection. And
therefore I most readily believe that God is a free Agent; and works all
things after the Counsel of his own Will.

14. How Justice, in a strict Sense, is to be ascribed unto God, who ows
nothing to any one, and has a supreme and most absolute Dominion over all
things, as having made them purely at the Motion of his own Will, I look upon
to be a nice and useless Disquisition: But the common Rules of Justice, which
Men are obliged to observe one to another, to me do appear to be so very
reasonable, that I cannot apprehend why any one, of Knowledge and
Understanding, should ever vary from them, except thereby he might propose
either to advance his Interest, compass his Pleasure, or wreck his Malice;
neither of which I can imagine to have any Place in God. I therefore conclude
that God is Just, even according to the common Rules of Justice and Equity, as
far as they can be applied to him.

15. Veracity to me appears to be no less agreeable to Reason than Justice, if
it be not rather a Part of it: And since I am able to imagine no Shadow of a
Reason why God should declare any thing which were false; I cannot but believe
that he is most true in all that he says.

16. That God should hate those Creatures which he has made (except they by
their evil Actions and Disobedience do deserve it) is not to be conceived: And
as he who loves another is always ready to pardon his Faults (especially if
they have any way proceeded only from Frailty and Infirmity) upon his true and
sincere Repentance; so if the Person beloved continues obstinate and
incorrigible in his Transgressions, he, with all the Reason that can be,
sorseits that Love which he once enjoyed, and justly incurs such Penalty as may
be suitable unto the Obligations which he has broken, and the Quality of the
Person he has offended. I therefore conclude, That God has originally a Love
for all Mankind, and that he will be always merciful unto such Sinners as are
truly penitent; but strict and severe in the Punishment of those who go on in
the Breach of his Laws without Repentance.

17. Nor are those Calamities which so often follow us in this Life, or God's
visiting the Sins of the Fathers upon the Children (which can be understood
only of temporal Afflictions) or his punishing the wicked with extreme and
everlasting Misery, any manner of Derogation, either to his Justice, or his
Love and Mercy toward Mankind, since temporal Afflictions may well be looked
on as the Effects of his Love, as being designed to wean and purge us from the
Love and Filth of this World, and to make us more fit for Heaven; and Eternal
Damnation (of which we have fair warning given us, and may therefore avoid it
if we please) is as little as can be threatened (and often is but too little)
to keep us back from all manner of Sin and Wickedness.

18. That some sort of Actions are eternally and essentially good, that is to
say, to be approved of by every impartial rational Being (e. g. to love him
from whom we derive our Existence, to perform our Promise, and such like) and
that the contrary Actions hereunto are therefore essentially and eternally
evil, is to me from hence sufficiently evinced, because that if all Beings,
which are endowed with Reason and Understanding, should universally set
themselves to do those things which now are accounted evil, and to omit those
things which now are esteemed good; the Consequence of this must necessarily-be
universal Confusion and Misery. Now that God loves and approves of all Actions
that are good, does evidently appear, because such Actions do tend to the
general Happiness of his Creatures, whom he loves,. 16. and for the contrary
Reason it will follow, that he hates and abhors all Actions that are evil. And
this is what I mean when I say, That God is most holy.

19. All possible Excellency or Perfection that I can conceive, is reducible
unto these Five Heads, viz. 1. Perfection of Being, which consists in perpetual
Duration, without any Decay or Infirmity. 2. Perfection of Understanding, which
consists in such Knowledge and Wisdom as is free all Mistake or Ignorance. 3.
Perfection of the Will, which consists in a free Liberty to choose or refuse,
without any Constraint or fatal Necessity. 4. Perfection of Power, which
consists in an Ability to do every thing. And 5. Moral Perfection, which
consists in an inflexible Resolution always to do and encourage that which is
morally good, and to avoid and discourage whatsoever is morally evil. Now,
since all these Perfections are in God in the most absolute manner; as I think
I have shown in the foregoing Paragraphs, from hence it will follow, That God
is most absolutely perfect.

20. And since he who is absolutely perfect can stand in need of nothing; it
must also follow, that God is most perfectly happy in Himself.

21. As my Reason does evidently demonstrate unto me the Being of a God, so
does it not in the least suggest to me any Argument to conclude that there is
any more but One God: And it is absurd and unreasonable to multiply Beings
without any Ground or Reason for it.

22. That there is a real, and not only a nominal Distinction, between the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost or Spirit; that they are frequently spoken
of in the Holy Scriptures in such Terms as we ordinarily use when we speak of
Three Persons (although sometimes this Expression, Holy Ghost or Holy Spirit, may
be put to signify not so much the Person, as the Power, Effect or Energy of
God's Spirit) That, although the Son be often spoken of as really and truly a Man,
yet many things are said of him which cannot agree to a mere Man, or to any
created Being whatsoever; and that there are such things also spoken of the
Holy Ghost, as cannot be accommodated unto a Creature: Moreover, that the Son
derives his Being from, and always depends upon the Father, as the Holy Ghost
does from, and upon the Father and the Son: All these things, I say, in my
Opinion, are not to be denied by any one, who will but interpret the Holy
Scriptures according to the ordinary Sense and Signification of the Words
thereof, and not according to his own Prejudices or preconceived Opinions. And
although the Socinians do clearly enough expound some of those Texts of Scripture,
which, with more Zeal than Reason, are sometimes urged against them; yet, as to
the principal Passages, which are alleged to prove what I have now asserted. I
think their Interpretation of them not only to be harsh and strained (which in
a manner is acknowledged even by their own acute and brief Historian, in the
last Paragraph of his second Letter) but also, many times, to be utterly
irreconcilable unto the Words and Context. And now (to explain those
Conceptions which arise in my Mind upon the Consideration of the Texts here
hinted at, as well as, in a Matter so abstruse and remote from my Senses, I am
able) since I cannot find a more proper Term to express the Distinction of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost by, I call them Three Persons; and, not knowing
what other Title to give a Divine Person who is no Creature, I call each Person
God: But I give the Title of God in a more emphatical manner unto the Father
than unto the Son or Holy Ghost, because the Father depends on none, but they
do depend on him: And, since both my Reason and the Holy Scriptures do teach me
to own no more than one God, I am of necessity compelled to say that these
Three are so united together (tho in such a manner as is above my
Understanding) as to be but one God. And although it argues a great deal of
Imperfection in Humane Speech, that, for want of other fit and proper Terms, we
are forced to give the same Appellation to each Person singly, and to the Three
conjointly; yet this does not imply any manner of Contradiction, as some do
object; because, when we apply the Word God to one single Person, it has not
the same exact and adequate Signification, as when we ascribe it unto the Three
Persons conjointly (for that would imply that each single Person were, at the
same time, the Three Persons; and so confound that Distinction which the Holy
Scriptures do so often and apparently make between them:) And this analogical
Difference, in the Signification of the Word God, will easily solve most of
those Objections which the Socinians do bring against the Doctrine of the
Trinity. And because I know no better Word to express that Unity which I
apprehend to be between the Three Persons; I therefore say, that they are One
in Essence or Substance. For Unity of Concord or Consent alone, does not seem
enough to me to denominate them to be One God. And because I find that the Son
is said to be begotten, and the Holy Ghost to proceed, or be sent, or emitted;
I therefore make use of these Terms, without pretending to assign the
Difference between Generation and Procession: And although the Son and the Holy
Ghost, being each of them God, are, and must needs be, of the same Nature, and,
upon that account, equal with the Father; yet it is manifest that this Equality
must be understood with an Allowance for the absolute Independence of the
Father, and the Dependence of the Son and Holy Ghost upon him.

23. All the Objections that I can remember to be made against the Doctrine of
the Trinity thus stated, I think, are easy enough to be solved by what I have
now said, excepting Two, which must be particularly answered. The first is
taken from Joh. 10. 33. etc. But tho our Savior did not here assert his
Divinity when there seemed to be occasion for it, yet it will not follow, that
therefore he is not God: Especially if we consider, that it was not always his
Custom to give full and complete Answers unto such captious Questions and
Objections as were put to him: But sometimes he contented himself only with
showing the Unreasonableness of those who proposed them; of which we have one
Instance, Mat. 21. 23. etc. and another Joh. 8. 3. etc. and, as some think,
another, Mat. 22. 17. etc. And we may as well conclude, that he had no
Authority for what he did, because he did not declare it when the Chief Priests
and Elders questioned it, Mat. 21. 23. as deny his Divinity, because he did not
expressly maintain it, when on that account he was charged with Blasphemy. The
other Objection is drawn from Mar. 13. 32. But to it I answer, That our
Savior's Design, in that Place, being only to represent the Day there spoken
of as a Secret not to be made known unto Men until it should come upon them;
that they might always stand upon their Guard, watch, and prepare for it: Let
but the Word know be taken to signify to make known (which fully answers the
Design of the Place, and, as it is evident, St. Paul uses the same Word, 1 Cor.
2. 2. Idetermined, says he, not to know, that is, not to make known or teach,
any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified: and then the most
natural Paraphrase of that Place will be this, But that Day and Hour there is
no one who shall or can make known unto you; no not the Angels which are in
Heaven; (who may be supposed to be ignorant of it themselves) nor even the Son
himself (who although he knows all things, Joh. 21. 17. yet can do nothing of
himself, but what he sees the Father do, Joh. 5. 19. And who speaks not of
himself, but the Father which sent him gave him Commandment what he should say,
Joh. 12. 49.) But the Father only shall in his own time, make it known by
bringing it to pass. And this Exposition of this Place of Scripture (which is
the only Text that seems to press very hard upon us in this Controversy) I am
sure, is much more easy and natural, than many of those Interpretations, which
the Socinians do advance, of the principal Passages which we urge against them.
But if any one shall tell me, that this whole Matter concerning the Trinity, is
very obscure and difficult to be apprehended; and therefore, that it is
unreasonable to require the explicit Belief of such Doctrine, as necessary,
either to Salvation or Churchcommunion: As to the Obscurity, it is not to be
expected that it should be otherwise, since, in this Life, we know but in part,
and prophecy in part, and see but through a Glass darkly, or in a Riddle, as
the Margin has it Word for Word from the Original, 1 Cor. 13. 9, 12. As to
Churchcommunion, I shall speak of it hereafter in its proper Place: And as
touching Salvation, I refer my Reader to what I have said,. 3. and Part 1.. 14.
and. 26.

24. Either the Matter of this visible World did from all Eternity coexist
together with God, or else it was produced from Nothing by him, there being no
Third Way to be assigned: Now both these Ways being above, tho neither of them
contrary to my Reason; my Reason alone can never solidly determine which of
them is the right. But the later of these making most, in my Opinion, for the
Honor of God (of whom, as being the most perfect Being, I think I ought to
entertain the most glorious Thoughts that possibly I can;) and the Holy
Scriptures so often ascribing Eternity without Beginning unto God, in an
emphatical manner, as his alone peculiar Attribute, I am thereby brought to
believe, that the Matter of this World is not eternal, but was at first created
by God from Nothing; and consequently, that God can again annihilate it, or any
Part of it, if it should so please him.

25. That God did contrive, frame and fashion this World, and every part of it,
and also that he still preserves and governs it by his Providence, I have
formerly concluded, Part 1. 7. and. 10. And tho every ignorant Person is not
able to dive into, and fathom the Counsels of a great and Sovereign Prince; yet
this is no Argument that he does not manage and rule his Dominions with due
Care and Wisdom: Nor could the making, nor can the Government of the World be
any manner of Trouble to God (as the Epicureans objected) since he is
absolutely Omnipotent, and needs no more but to speak the Word and the thing is
done.

26. It is very evident that the Heathen World its self was generally and
strongly addicted to the Belief of certain Beings (some good and some evil)
superior in Nature to Man, but subject to, and Ministers of the Will and
Pleasure of the supreme God. But the Holy Scriptures do give us a more full and
perfect Account of this Matter, viz. that God created certain Spiritual Beings,
called Angels; that is to say, Messengers, as being sent forth by him to
execute his Will upon all Occasions that he thinks fit; and particularly to
minister for them who shall be Heirs of Salvation (not that God has any need of
their Assistance or Ministry, any more than he has of the Worship and Service
of Man; but only thought fit to create them of his own good Will and Pleasure:
and probably that they, as well as Man, might be Objects for him to exercise
his Goodness and Beneficence upon.) But whether every particular Person, State
and Kingdom have their proper Guardian Angels, appointed them by God, is not,
as I can find, upon any sure Grounds to be determined. But we are farther
informed, that of these Angels some sinned, and therefore kept not their first
Estate, but were cast down into Hell, and delivered into Chains of Darkness, to
be reserved unto Judgment; the Chief, or Prince of whom is called the Devil,
the great Dragon, the old Serpent and Satan, and is, together with his Angels,
permitted by God to range to and fro in the Earth, to tempt even the Godly, but
to prevail and work in the Children of Disobedience.

27. That an eternal Succession of Men, or any other Beings, without a
Beginning, is absolutely impossible, I have, I think with Reason, already said,
Part 1.. 6. That Man at first was not fashioned by any blind and undesigned
Chance, is to me very evident, as well from the wonderful Frame of his Mind, as
from the great Variety, Regularity and Usefulness of all the Parts of his Body,
and particularly his Organs of Sensation: And that he did not at first spring
up out of the Earth by any Force of Nature, distinct from the Power of God, I
think needs no Proof, because the contrary Supposition is not only without any
Ground of Evidence, but also liable to so many monstrous Improbabilities as do
render it hightly extravagant to imagine. I therefore must conclude, That (at
the least) the first Male and Female of Mankind were immediately framed and
fashioned by God; and that all the rest of them were and are derived from those
two by the way of natural Generation (Christ Jesus excepted, who tho born of a
Woman, was not begotten of a Man) is the plain Voice of the Holy Scripture.

28. That Man, tho made a little lower than the Angls, is yet by Nature far
more excellent than any other living Creature, is sufficiently apparent. The
Holy Scripture tells us, that God made Man after his own Image: But this
Expression cannot be understood with respect to the Shape and Structure of the
Human Body (God being both incorporeal and invisible) but is, as I apprehend
it, to be inlation to those Faculties which are implanted in the Mind of Man,
and that internal Uprightness in which he was at first created; which do carry
in them an evident Similitude and Analogy unto some of those Attributes and
Perfections which are in God himself. That the Body of Man is made originally
of the Earth, by which it is nourished, and into which it is again resolved, is
obvious to be collected from Reason: And if I had never been told that God
breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of Life, whereby he became a Living Soul,
yet those Powers and Faculties which I find in my self, of Thinking, Judging,
Drawing Consequences (and those sometimes in a very long Train) reflecting back
upon my own Thoughts, and determining my own Actions as I please, together with
that inward Satisfaction which I reap from doing what is morally good, tho
naturally and to my Body painful and uneasy; and the Trouble which I find upon
the doing of any thing which is morally evil, tho otherwise never so pleasant
and delightful, would, I think, have sufficiently taught and assured me, that
there is a Principle within me, which, tho united to my Body (and thereby
affected with its Delights or Pains) yet is really distinct from it, and of a
different Nature and more noble Original, which I call my Soul.

29. That God, who has originally a Love for all Mankind,. 16. should have
created any Man with an Intent to make him eternally and unavoidably miserable,
is to me a Contradiction: And since, on the contrary, he has naturally
implanted in every Man a vehement and unextinguishable Desire of being Happy,
and of always remaining so, I cannot but conclude, that God intended Man at his
first Creation unto eternal Happiness. For that he should implant the Seed and
Principle of such a Desire in us all, which never fails to spring forth and
show its self in every Man who comes to Years of Knowledge; and this to be only
a Torment to us, without any Possibility either of suppressing or satisfying
it; is, I think, not to be conceived, except we should suppose that at the
first he made us to be Objects, not of his Love, but Hatred.

30. As even by the Ruins of a noble Structure we may be able to give a Guess
how goodly the Building was at its first Erection; so when I at present
consider how distorted the Nature of Man is (his Lusts and Passions always
struggling with, and often getting the Victory over his Reason, which evidently
was designed for the superior Faculty) own my Understanding alone methinks
suggests to me, that Man was at first created in a more perfect and upright
State and Condition than what he is in at present: But how our Nature was so
far perverted, as that all our Reason and Endeavors cannot again reduce it to
that firm and perfect Regularity, in which we are sensible it ought to be, and
therefore have cause to believe that it was at first framed by God, is what of
our selves we never could have collected from any Suggestions of our own
Understanding.

31. Whether the second and third Chapters of the Book of Genesis are all to be
understood literally, or whether an allegorical Interpretation is in some parts
to be admitted, I think my self not much concerned to debate. But, which way
soever we take, the plain Result will be, that whereas God placed our first
Parents, at their Creation, in a state both of Innocence and Happiness; they by
transgressing his Law, and thereby incurring his Displeasure, sell both from
the one and the other. Now that they, by their sin, might deprave their own
Natures, and vitiate their Constitutions, is no way irrational to suppose: And
that from the depraved Nature and vitiated Constitution of Parents diverse
inconveniences may be entailed upon their Posterity (who do derive not only
their bodily Temper and Complexion, but frequently also their Passions and
Inclinations from those of their Parents) is what common Experience does daily
testify. When therefore the Holy Scripture assigns the sin of our first
Parents, as the Cause of the Corruption of the Nature of Mankind, I see nothing
therein which is not very reasonably to be allowed.

32. He who grants a Favor to another, barely and only of his own free will
and pleasure, may without any violation of Justice, whenever he pleases,
withdraw that, which he is under no Obligation to continue any longer than he
thinks fit. Nor is it any way to be reckoned as unmerciful or cruel, to cease
the continuance of a purely voluntary kindness, if the stopping of it does not
render the Person actually miserable without any fault committed by him. If
therefore God had thought fit, even for no other reason but his own Pleasure,
to divert the stream of his kindness from Man; and that although he had continued
in a State of Innocence, provided he had not put him into a state of
unavoidable Misery; who could have any just reason to complain, or find fault
with him for doing what he should please with his own? Much more then will it
follow that, If upon the occason of our first Parents Transgression, and the
Corruption of our Nature which thereupon ensued, God had resolved to cut us all
forever off from the inheritance of those Blessings to which Man was designed
at his first creation, but now rendered naturally unfit for, by this original
pollution; even in this there had been nothing contrary to the strict Rules of
Justice or Mercy: Especially if we consider, that all the World have ever
thought it reasonable that, in some cases, Children should, on account of their
Parents Faults, lose some benefits and advantages which otherwise they would
have enjoyed. But actually to inflict a positive Punishment upon any one for a
Fault which he never committed, nor any way voluntarily concurred to, nor was
at all capable of hindering in him who committed it, being so directly
contrary, not only unto Mercy, but also to the common Rules of Justice; I can
not but conclude, that though the original Corruption of our Nature may be
reckoned as a just occasion why God might. if he had pleased, have excluded us
all for ever from the Joys of Heaven; Yet that alone is not to be assigned as a
Cause why he will doom any Man to the Torments of Hell, who does not otherwise
deserve it, by his own actual sins and Transgressions.

33. That by the Corruption of our Nature we are all of us mightily inclined to
things that are evil and immoral, is most evident from our constant Experience:
But that we have not thereby lost all knowledge and power of doing that which
is good, I think is no less apparent from the Writings and Examples of so many
brave Heathens; Who having no other Divine Law but that which was written in
their Hearts by the Suggestions of their natural Understanding, yet both taught
and did so many of the things contained in the written Law of God. But
curiously to distinguish and assign the Bounds between Nature and Grace (which
are both the Gifts of God; the one in an ordinary, the other in an
extraordinary way) and to pretend to show how far we may go by the bare
strength of Nature, and where it is that we just stand in need of supernatural
Assistance, I look upon to be a work of very little use or benefit; but of
extraordinary difficulty, and perhaps impossible for any, but God himself, to
perform. Moreover, how God will deal with those who have no other Guide to
follow but the Light of Nature; How far he will punish their Sins, be merciful
to their Ignorance or Infirmities, or reward their endeavors to do good, is a
Secret of which we are no way able to give any particular account. But it may
suffice us to know, that the Generation of Mankind by reason of the Corruption
of their Nature being apparently in a worse condition in respect of eternal
Salvation, than what they otherwise would have been; God was pleased to
determine that he would not deal with them according to that absolute
Sovereignty which he had over them, nor according to the strict and rigorous
Rules of Justice, which might have justified the greatest Severities; but
according to the inclinations of his Mercy and Loving kindness. Of which way of
Gods proceeding with us, I come now to give an account.

34. That God might, if he had pleased, without the violation of any of his
Attributes, have freely forgiven all the Sins of Mankind, and even restored our
Nature again to its primitive Integrity and Uprightness, seems naturally to
follow both from the Absoluteness of his Authority, and the Almightiness of his
Power: And even the strictest Justice, tho it fully allows, yet does not compel
any one to exact a Debt where he is the only Creditour, or a Punishment where
he is the only party injured or offended. But if God has thought fit to deal
after another manner with us; and rather offers to help our Infirmities, as
occasion requires, than wholly to repair our perverted Nature; and chooses to
have an Expiation made for our Sins, rather than to remit them without any such
consideration; Although his Will and Pleasure is enough to silence all our
Exceptions, and justify his proceedings; yet may there some probable
Considerations be urged in order to make us clearly apprehend the Wisdom of God
in the fitness and reasonableness of this his Dispensation: As namely, that
hereby we are, or ought to be made more continually sensible of our constant
Dependence upon him, of his great Mercy and Compassion for us, of his perfect
Hatred and Abhorrence of sin.

35. It cannot, I think, be doubted but that, at the very time of the Fall of
man, God, who is infinitely wise and knowing, and therefore stands in need of no
time to deliberate, had fully determined what he would do in order to the
Expiation of our Sins, and the helping of our corrupted Nature, so as that we
might be again in some capacity of recovering that Happiness to which we were
at first designed,. 29. And that this work of our Redemption was to be
performed by the Means and Mediation of an extraordinary Person, who was to be
sent into the World, under the Title of the Messiah, or the Christ, is
abundantly evident, both from the Old and New Testament; especially if we
compare them and expound them one by another. But it is certain, that Christ
did not immediately come into the World; nor was there any one for some
Thousands of Years after the Fall, who so much as pretended to that Title or
Office; Whether it were, that God thought it fit by some previous Dispensations
to prepare the Minds of Men for the reception of so extraordinary a Person, or
for what other reason, I pretend not to determine; but think my self obliged
entirely to submit to the Wisdom of God, who thought fit so to order it, that
the Messiah should not appear until that fullness of time which he had appointed
for it. In the mean while, although the great Light was not yet to come into the
World, yet God suffered it not to be wholly overspread with Darkness; But
besides the Light of the visible Creation, which declares the Glory and eternal
Power of God; and besides the natural Light which arises in every Man's
Understanding, whereby they who have no other Law, are a Law unto themselves,
unto which their own Conscience is a Witness beyond exception; God was pleased
in a supernatural way to reveal himself unto diverse persons (to the intent that
they might teach the Knowledge of him to others) as to Enoch, Noah,
Melchizedek, Job, and probably to many more than we read of (Amongst whom, why
Baalam should not be reckoned, I can see no reason; although Covetousness and the
hopes of worldly Advancement tempted him to make but an ill use of the good
Gifts of God) And also to choose out unto himself a peculiar People, namely that
of Israel, and to vouchsafe unto them a more than ordinary knowledge of Himself
and his Laws, by his Servants Moses and the Prophets: And lastly by his
Providence to order the matter so, that the Writings of Moses and the Prophets
should many years before Christ's coming, be translated into the Greek tongue
(which was then the most universal Language) that by them all Nations might
have the more Instruction, and so be the better prepared to receive the
Messiah, whenever he should be made known unto them. And for this reason also
it seems to be, that God so long before the Mosaic Law, ordained and appointed
the Sacrificing of Beasts; whereby it became the common practice of the
Gentiles, as well as Jews: Not that he had any esteem or value for the Blood of
Bulls or of Goats; but only that by this practice the Minds of Men might be the
more easily and readily disposed to own and rely upon that great Sacrifice,
which Christ was one day to make of Himself for them.

36. There are several Prophecies dispersed up and down through the Old
Testament, plainly designed to foretell the coming of the Christ or Messiah,
what sort of person he should be, and what he should do and suffer: As that he
should be the Seed of the Woman, of the Progeny of Abraham, of the Family and
Lineage of David, born in Bethlehem, and born of a Virgin: That he should come
into the World about the time that the Scepter and the Lawgiver, that is to
say, the force and power of civil Authority, should cease from the Tribe of
Judah, and should finish his Work in the compass of the last seven Years of
those Four hundred and ninety, which are pointed out by the Prophet Daniel;
That by many he should be despised and rejected, should be a Man of Sorrows,
and acquainted with Griefs, be oppressed and afflicted, yet bear it most
patiently, and at last be wounded and cut off, not for himself, but for our
Transgressions. And yet for all this he is foretold to be a person wonderful, a
Counselor, the mighty God, the Prince of Peace, of the increase of whose
Government there should be no end, and unto whom the gathering of the Nations
should be. Now although there may some Difficulties be started as to the
Interpretation of some of those and such like Prophecies, which do occurr in
the Old Testament (which is no great wonder, considering how the Jews, who are
enemies to Christianity, have endeavored to obscure and perplex them) yet if
we do consider that there is evidently a fair, consonant and reasonable
Application of all these Predictions to be made unto Jesus of Nazareth, and
that there is not, nor ever was any other person to whom they could be applied,
besides himself; and since it is not possible for any one, but God, to foretell
a thing with so many circumstances so long before it comes to pass, I think I
may very well from hence conclude, not only against the Jews, who acknowledge,
but also against all others, who may perhaps at first deny the Authority of the
Old Testament, that Jesus of Nazareth is the Christ or Messiah, whom God had
promised to send into the World: And if to this we add the greatness of his
Miracles, and the transcendent Goodness of his Doctrine (of which see Part 1..
19) I think the Argument will have the force of a Demonstration.

37. In the Holy Scriptures I find such things spoken of Christ as do plainly
show him to have been a true and real Man; in all things like unto us, sin only
excepted: Other Expressions also I find frequently applied to him, which cannot
possibly agree to any Man, or created Being whatsoever, but only unto God; as I
have already said. 22. And although there is a plain Distinction made between his
Divine and Humane Nature, yet is he always spoken of but as one person. Here
then I know not better how to express my Sentiments than by saying, that in the
one and single Person of Christ, there is a Conjunction of both the Divine and
Humane Nature, and consequently that Christ is really and truly both God and
Man. And if the same Objection be made against this Doctrine as is against that
of the Trinity, viz. that it is very obscure and difficult to be apprehended; I
shall also return the same Answer, as I have already done to that in the latter
end of. 23. to which I refer my Reader.

38. He who acknowledges Christ to be God, to be sure will allow of his eternal
Existence, as to his Divine Nature; And, as to what concerns his Humane Nature;
that he was Conceived by the Power of the Holy Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary;
and that, after some years spent in preaching and doing good, he was, through the
Malice of the Jews, and at their vehement desire, condemned by Pilate the Roman
Governor, to be crucified; which was accordingly done, and a Spear thrust into
his Side; That being dead he was buried, and lay in the Sepulcher unto the
third day; upon which he rose from the dead, and aster several times conversing
with his Disciples for the space of Forty days, that he was visibly taken up
from them, and received into Heaven unto infinite and eternal Glory, where he
is our perpetual Mediator and Intercessour at the Throne of God: All this, I
say, is so evidently and without Controversy testified by his Disciples (whose
Veracity I have asserted, Part 1.. 19) and recorded in the Scriptures of the
New Testament (whose Authority I have proved Part 1.. 23. etc,) that no
reasonable Man, I think, can now deny, or so much as doubt of any part of it:
And although there are one or two passages of Scripture, from whence it is
inferred, that Christ before his Resurrection did descend into Hell, yet will I
not venture, nor do I think it necessary, to determine whether by the word Hell
is meant the state of the dead only, or the place of the damned; or (if the
latter signification be to be chosen) for what end and purpose it was that he
descended thither. Only I conclude certainly, that it was not to suffer any
thing there; because I do not find the least intimation throughout the
Scripture of any suffering of Christ, which he did or was to endure, beyond the
shedding of his Blood and yielding up his life upon the Cross.

39. What God might have done (had he so pleased) without any other
consideration, but only by virture of his own absolute Authority; if he has
rather chosen to do it for the sake of Jesus Christ, and in consideration of
that Obedience which he performed, and those Sufferings which he underwent, who
shall dare to find fault with him, or pretend to be wiser than he? Now that it
is for the sake of Christ, and of his Obedience and Sufferings, that God
vouchsafes to us the Pardon of our Sins, and makes us the offer of everlasting
Happiness, is so plainly declared in many places of the Holy Scriptures, that
nothing can be more. And since I find God's sending of Christ to be set forth
as an instance of his Love, not to some few particular persons only, but even
to the whole World; and since Christ is said to have died for all, and to have
been a Propitiation for the sins of the World, without any exception; I cannot
but conclude, that all men who ever were, or are, or shall be, might have been,
or may be the better for Christ and his Sufferings, if through their own
default they have not, or shall not forfeit that Benefit which was designed
them. And as it is not disputed, but that the ancient Patriarchs, who by Faith
foresaw the coming of Christ, had a share in that Redemption which he wrought,
although they died before he came into the World; so to me it seems to stand with
a great deal of reason, that even those persons who never heard any thing of
Christ, may yet for his sake find Mercy from God; because God, who perfectly
knows the most secret Inclinations of all Hearts, may clearly foresee, that if
the knowledge of Christ had been proposed and offered unto them, they would
have owned him, and submitted unto his Gospel; which our Savior tells us, was
the very case of Tire and Sidon; and for which reason he declares that they
should receive a milder Doom than Chorazin and Bethsaida in the day of
Judgment, Mat. 11. 21, 22. And how far this may extend to all such as labor
under very strong Prejudices, although not strictly invincible, I think that God
is the only proper Judge.

40. But however God may think fit to deal with those, who are either ignorant
of, or strongly prejudiced against the Christian Religion; yet the manner of
his proceeding with true Believers is plainly enough declared. All those who
receive and own the Christian Faith are not to be looked upon as so many
separate persons; each of them believing such and such Doctrines; but are
always represented in Scripture as Joined together in one Society or Body,
which is called the Church, of which Christ Jesus is the chief or Head; and
under an obligation to live in communion and fellowship one with another, under
those Laws and Constitutions which Christ has given them; but not, that I can
find in Scripture, obliged to join with, or submit to, any one person, as the
Vicar of Christ and the visible Head of the Church upon Earth. For if Christ
had appointed any such person as his Deputy upon Earth, he must either have
declared a matter of such consequence with great plainness and evidence, or
else it would be very hard to find fault with any man for being mistaken in it:
Whereas the Arguments which those of the Church of Rome bring to prove, either
that such a Vicar there must be, or that St. Peter the Apostle was the Man, or
that the Pope or Bishop of Rome (and not the Bishop of Antioch) is the
Successor of St. Peter both in his Bishopric and Authority; are all so weak
and precarious, so forced and perplexed, and so fully confuted by the
Protestant Divines, that nothing in my Opinion but Blindness of Understanding,
or worldly Interest can prevail with the Members of that Church, still to
insist upon them Now that Christ instituted but one Church, in which all true
Believers and good livers, are for ever to be comprised, is very plain. And
although, through the Mistakes and Perverseness of Man, this Church is rent and
divided into opposite, and contending parts, and parties; yet this does not
hinder but that according to its true and primitive Constitution, it is, or
ought to be one (as a Kingdom or Commonwealth by its Laws and Constitutions is
but one Society, although there may arise Factions and different Interests in it)
nor shall any Man be esteemed as a Member of the Church before God, who is not
ready and willing, according to the best of his power and knowledge, to
maintain the Unity of it, and that upon those very Terms, and none other, which
Christ has appointed, as near as possibly he can find and apprehend them.
Moreover, that all the Laws and Constitutions on which Christ has founded the
Church, and by which he would have it regulated, are exactly agreeable unto the
Rules of sound Morality, and the Will of God, cannot be so much as doubted; and
therefore it is truly said, that the Church is Holy, although every particular
Member thereof has both his frailties and his sins; which yet he must repent
of, and so become holy as the Church is holy, or else he violates one of the
main and fundamental Laws, and so becomes as it were an Outlaw of the Church,
and forfeits his part in all the Privileges that belong unto that Society. And
whereas, before the coming of Christ, the People of Israel did enjoy more of
the Favor of God, and had greater privileges and advantages, on the score of
their being God's chosen and peculiar People, than any, or all other Nations of
the World; The Gospel of Christ, on the contrary, now looks upon all as equally
entitled unto God's Favor (and the advantages thereon depending) who take care
duly to qualify themselves for it. So that whereas formerly the Church (that
is, the chosen People of God) might have been said to be particular, as being
in a manner limited to one Nation or People; now on the contrary, it is
Catholic, that is to say, universal, as being no way confined to one place or
Nation; all People being equally chosen by God in Christ, who will receive and
love according to the Gospel.

41. In those several Revelations which God was pleased to make of himself
after the Fall of Man, unto Adam, to Abraham, and to the People of Israel,
there was still a plain intimation given them, that in the time to come there
should an extraordinary Person arise in the World, who should yet more clearly
make known the Will of God to Mankind. But when Christ, who was That Person,
did accordingly come, and send his Apostles to preach the Gospel over all the
Earth; he neither suggested to them, nor they unto the World, that any other
Revelation was ever after to be expected; But always gave them to understand,
that God had in the Gospel completed and finished all that declaration which
he intended to make of Himself, or his Will, unto Mankind, until the general
Judgment and Dissolution of the World. If therefore the Holy Scripture had
given me no manner of assurance of the perpetuity of the Church; my own Reason
would have been enough to make me conclude, that God in his Providence will so
order the matter, as that the Christian Religion, being the only known and
ordinary means of eternal Salvation, shall never be wholly extinguished while
the World lasts, so as to stand in need of any new Revelation to revive and
restore it. But that there shall always be a certain Company of Men, evidently
conspicuous to the World, teaching and professing the true Christian Religion,
without any Error or Corruption in Doctrine or Worship, is what I can no where
find promised or foretold, either by Christ or any of his Apostles. On the
contrary, there are several passages in the New Testament, which do plainly
seem to foretell that, in process of time, most pernicious Doctrines and
practices should prevail and take place, even amongst the generality of those
who should profess themselves to be Disciples of Christ. And whosoever shall
but lightly compare the state of Christianity for several Centuries before the
Reformation, with that Draught of it which is left us by Christ and his
Apostles in the Holy Scriptures, must, if he be impartial, I think be fully
convinced of the truth of those Predictions.

42. Whether or no God has, or does at any time communicate or bestow any
extraordinary Grace or Assistance upon those, who are no visible Members of the
Church, but altogether strangers unto that Revelation which he has made of
himself, is a question which the virtuous lives and heroic actions of some
brave Heathens make it hard positively to determine in the negative. But that
he will give so much Grace and strength to every one who shall become a Member
of Christ's Church, as that thereby they may (if the fault be not their own)
sufficiently qualify themselves for eternal Happiness, by the performance of
those things which he requires on their part to be done, is what I think no man
can doubt of, who does but in general consider the Mercy and Love which God
designed, even unto all men, but more especially unto the Church, in sending
our Savior Christ Jesus into the world; although there were not any particular
Promises of this nature in the Gospel: And that this Grace and ability to do
good is in Scripture ascribed unto the Ministry and Influence of the Holy Ghost
upon the hearts and minds of true Believers, is plain and generally owned by
all Christians. But that this influence of God's Spirit does not work so
uncontrollably, but that it may be resisted, and even wholly rejected and lost,
is I think sufficiently obvious, as well from Reason and Experience, as form
those passages of the Holy Scripture wherein we are exhorted not to quench the
Spirit, but to walk in, and be led by, the Spirit, and the like; which were
apparently needless and to no purpose, if the operations of the Holy Spirit
upon our Hearts were so strong as that we could not choose but comply with them.
Now the things which God requires to be performed on our part, in order to life
everlasting, are apparent, and can be no more but to believe those Truths which
he has made known, which is called Faith; and to observe those Precepts which
he has commanded, which is called Obedience. And as I have already shown that
these things are required from no man beyond the measures of possibility, Part
1.. 14. So does the Scripture most fully assure us, that God will in them make
a very sufficient allowance for the ignorance and frailty, and even for the
perverseness of our Nature; and will not only be merciful unto our Weaknesses
and ordinary Failings, but will pardon and forgive even our greatest and most
wilful Sins, upon our true and hearty Repentance, which is a part of our
Obedience: And as for the sin against the Holy Ghost, which is said to be
absolutely unpardonable, I do not think it needful to enquire here into the
Nature and Consequence of it, but shall refer my Reader to that excellent
Sermon of Dr. Tillotson, the late Archbishop of Canterbury, upon that subject.
But here it is highly necessary that we should all take that Caution, which
both Reason and the Holy Scripures do give us, viz. That we should not presume
so much upon God's Mercy and Lenity, as from hence to take occasion of going on
in our Wickedness: For Kindness thus abused will certainly turn into the
highest Wrath, and much increase the Damnation of a Sinner.

43. I am inclined to think, that those Arguments which are drawn from the
nature of the Humane Soul it self are not by themselves sufficient to prove
that it is immortal; but on the contrary, that the eternal duration of any
created Being depends not so much upon its own Nature, as upon the Will of God,
who created it. But as Reason alone suggests unto us, that there is a Life to
come after this, Part 1.. 13. And that Man was at first designed by God unto
life eternal, (Part 2.. 29.) so does the Holy Scripture most clearly assure us,
that they who perform what God requires, shall be happy to all Eternity; and
they who do not so, shall be miserable without end. The reconcilableness of
which with God's Justice and Mercy I have accounted for. 17. But wherein this
Happiness of the righteous shall consist, we can but very imperfectly tell; and
whether the Punishment of the wicked shall literally be in everlasting Fire, or
whether that expression be only made use of Metaphorically, to signify the
greatness of the Torment, I think it not necessary to determine. But both my
own Reason and some places of Scripture do seem strongly to suggest, that
neither the Reward of good men, nor the Punishment of the evil, shall be equal
unto all; but greater or less according as they have exceeded one another in
the Holiness or Wickedness of their Lives.

44. That all Men are mortal, is sufficiently testified by out daily
Experience: But that the Souls of Men immediately upon their separation from
their Bodies are not in a state of Insensibility; but are straitway conveyed
into a state, either of Joy or Misery, seems very apparent to me from St.
Paul's desire to be dissolved that he might be with Christ; from our Saviors
Promise unto the Thief upon the Cross; and from the Story or Parable of the
Rich man and Lazarus; as also from some other intimations which the Holy
Scripture gives us. But since there is, one day, to be a general Judgment of
all mankind before the Tribunal of Christ, where every man must receive his
Sentence for eternal, either Happiness or Misery (as the Holy Scripture does
assure us) It seems not irrational to judge, that neither the righteous nor the
wicked do receive their full and final portion until that Judgment be passed
upon them. I know not therefore how to condemn those, who anciently took up the
Custom of praying for their deceased Friends, who had lived holily and died
piously, that they might find favor and acceptance at the general Judgment,
and have their portion of Glory augmented; But I can by no means approve of
those, who upon such pitiful suggestions have presumed to determine that there
is such a place as Purgatory, where the Souls of men are to be purged and
suffer a temporary Punishment before their admission into Heaven. And although I
look upon their praying for the dead to be a mistake, rather than a sin, yet
their taking of Money for so doing, and raising such a Revenue upon that Fund, I
look upon to be a most ungodly Cheat and Imposition upon the People.

45. Although I do not apprehend that there is any natural decay in the general
frame and structure of this World, yet it is certain, that by the Power of God,
who made it, it may, whenever he pleases, be destroyed and dissolved; and the
Scripture assures us, that it shall be so at the time of the general Judgment;
at which time also there shall be an universal Resurrection of the Bodies of
all those who have died, and a change of those who shall be then alive. But
whether all the same individual Particles of each man's Body which have been
laid down in the earth, shall be raised and reunited again to their Souls, I
look upon to be a needless Enquiry. What St. Paul says upon this Argument, 1
Cor. 15. 35. does abundantly satisfy me; the purport of whose words I take to
be this, viz. That God, who being the Author of Nature, has given such a
vegetative power to a Grain of Corn, that when it is thrown into the Ground,
and there macerated and dissolved, it springs up again, and brings forth a Body
suitable and proper to its self; that that same God, I say, both can and will
at the last day, from the dead and dissolved Bodies of Men, raise up such
Bodies, as shall please himself. And as there is a continual and great change
of Particles in the Humane Body, between the Birth and the Grave; so I see not
what Absurdity would follow if we should allow also that there is a like change
between the Grave and the Resurrection.

46. And thus I have endeavored to give a brief and plain account of that part
of Christianity which is purely or chiefly doctrinal; which upon the most
strict search that I have been able to make, I think is exactly agreeable to
the tenor and main design of the Holy Scriptures, and no way contradictory to
the Principles of plain and sound Reason. And if in many other Points of
Speculation, which by some are adopted into Religion, I am either wholly
ignorant, or perhaps doubtful and undetermined, or, it may be, mistaken; Yet if
to the Belief which I have here professed, I do superadd a virtuous and
Christian course of life, I hope there is no moderate Christian, who does not
in effect make it a part of his Religion to be uncharitable, but will allow
that I may be saved. But wherein this virtuous and Christian life consists, and
what are the Duties which the Gospel obliges us all to perform (whether they
are the Duties of pure Morality, as to love God and our Neighbor; or those of
positive institution, as to be Baptized, to receive the Holy Communion etc.) is
to be the subject of the Third and last part of this small Work; to which
therefore, I now proceed.

A Gentleman's Religion.
PART III.
1. ALL the Commands of God, and consequently all the Duties of a Christian,
are reducible to these Two; viz. To abstain from that which is evil, and to do
that which is good, according to his ability. Those actions I call good, which
either are eternally agreeable unto the nature, circumstances and mutual
relations of Persons and Things, and therefore for ever to be approved of by
every impartial rational Being (as I have said Part 2.. 18.) for which we must
appeal to every man's Reason (as we do to his Eyes, without any other
Demonstration, to prove that the Sun shines) or else are expressly commanded by
God, of his own positive will and pleasure (to whom, as being his Creatures, we
all owe an entire Obedience) for which we must have our recourse to the Holy
Scriptures of the New Testament only; all the positive Institutions and
Ordinances of the Mosaic Law, which were given by God to the People of Israel,
being abrogated, and the Obligation of them annulled by our Savior Christ;
Although the moral part of it, which contains the Precepts and Rules of eternal
good and evil, and wherein the very life and soul of that Law consisted, be not
only abetted and confirmed, but also very much improved by him. And such
actions as are contrary to good, that is to say, either disagreeable to the
nature and circumstances of Things and Persons, or else positively forbidden by
God; I call evil. I am indeed of opinion, that in the Holy Scriptures we have
not only the positive Commands of God, whereby some things, which otherwise
would have been indifferent, are enjoined or forbidden; but also, either in
particular, or at least in general, a sufficient account of all those actions
which are eternally good or evil, and therefore to be done or avoided by us;
And this designed by Almighty God for the direction and instruction of those
Men, who have not ability to dive into, and discover those things by the
strength of their Reason. And therefore, in order to describe the whole Duty of
a Christian, it might be enough for me to collect the Precepts and Prohibitions
which God has given us in his Word, and to vouch no other Authority or reason,
but his Will for them. But because every man's Duty will probably make the
greater impression upon his mind, when he is satisfied, as to the
reasonableness of it, as well as convinced of its obligation; I shall
endeavor, as I proceed, first to infer as much of our Duty as I can, from the
nature and circumstances of Things and Persons; and then to superadd, where
there is occasion, what God has positively ordained and commanded as to any
point; And this with the same conciseness that I have observed in my Second
Part, neither enlarging upon those Arguments, nor reciting those Texts of
Scripture, which I suppose my Reader to be able to call to mind upon the least
hint of them,

2. To begin then: Since God is the most perfect and excellent Being in
Himself; and so loving and beneficent to Us, It follows, that we ought to love
him in the highest degree that possibly we can; And true and complete Love, as
it is an act of one person exerted toward another, as its object, consists in
an unseigned desire, First, of always doing what may be truly grateful and
acceptable to the person beloved; and Secondly, of enjoying and being with him
as much as may be. The more ardent and zealous we are in our love to God, the
better undoubtedly it is; And we should strive to engage our Affections, as
well as our Reason and our Will, unto him from whom we have received all
things: But yet this Love is not to be measured, or judged of, by the
earnestness of those sudden motions, which sometimes may arise within us, upon
the contemplation of God's Excellency and Goodness; because to be thus
Passionately affected is not wholly in our Power; and sometimes least so, when
we most earnestly desire it. But the true and certain way of judging whether we
love God, or not, is by examining whether we are steadfast in our Resolutions,
and accordingly diligent in our Endeavors, constantly to obey him, and keep
all his Commandments; which is the only way to please, and consequently to
enjoy and for ever be with him: And where the Love of God is thus firmly rooted
in the Will, and brings forth plenty of Fruit in the life and actions, it is
certainly nevertheless acceptable to him, although it does not so passionately
move our Affections as we could wish or desire: And as all the Duties which we
owe unto Almighty God, are derived from, and do depend upon that, of loving of
him; or rather indeed are contained in it, so is it very evident, that they are
all to be judged of by the same forementioned Rule; that is to say, not so much
by the strength of an inward Impulse upon the Mind (which is a thing not under
our Command) as by the steady agreeableness of our Will and Actions, unto all
such Principles, as are right and good.

3. Since God is the most excellent and perfect, and consequently the most
worthy, of all Beings, that are, or can be; from hence it will follow, that we
ought to honor him with the greatest Honor that may be. Now to honor any
person is, in other words, inwardly to esteem, and outwardly to show our
Respect to him. Our inward Esteem of God consists in a due Acknowledgment of
his Being and Attributes; and our outward Respect to him, is to be shown, as
well by abstaining from all actions which may savor of any Neglect or
Irreverence toward him, as by performing all such as may appear to be
suitable, both to his own Excellency and our Dependence upon him.

4. Since God is present in all places, and knows all, even the most secret
things; and therefore cannot possibly be deceived, or imposed on; We should, on
this consideration, be very watchful and careful, upon all occasions, how we
behave our selves in his Presence: And, methinks, it is a most shameful and
deplorable thing, that Men commonly scruple, not to do those things in the
sight of God, which they would be afraid, or ashamed it should be known, or
even suspected, of them, by Men like themselves.

5. Since God is most true; from hence it will follow, that we ought to believe
what soever he says or makes known, how improbable soever otherwise it might
seem to us. But the true estimate of such belief is not to be made by the
clearness and strength of our speculative Assent unto those Truths, which he
has proposed to our Understanding (for to receive a Truth without any Doubts or
Scruples, which sometimes do unaccountably force themselves upon us, even in
the clearest cases, is not always in our power) But rather by the constant
suitableness of ourlives unto the profession of such Doctrines as we receive
and own. And he who has but a weak Faith, and yet leads a good life, although he
is not qualified for doubtful Disputations, is nevertheless a true Believer;
because his Belief answers the main end and design of the Gospel; which I have
shown to be Virtue and Morality, Part 1.. 42. Nor can there (for example) be a
better Evidence, that a man does really and sufficiently Believe the Truth of a
life to come, than when he is industrious and diligent in preparing for it;
whatever Doubts or Scruples he may have, in point of Speculation, about it.

6. Since God's Power is infinite, and his Authority uncontrolable; it follows,
that we ought to fear him (and so much the more, because of our natural
propensity to sin) because he has it always in his Power to make us miserable
here, and eternally so hereafter. But he cannot be said to fear God most (that
is, most truly) who is possessed with the greatest dread and terror at the
thoughts of his Wrath or Judgments; for then the Devils, who tremble, or wicked
Wretches, who despair of God's Mercy, would be the best performers of this
Duty: But he is the truest Fearer of God, who always takes the greatest care
not to offend him; the Fear of him being never originally designed to torment
and disquiet our Minds, but only to be such a Check upon us, as to keep us in
due Awe and Obedience.

7. Since every sin is an Offense, both against a gracious and a powerful God,
and of every dangerous consequence to the person who commits it; And since
nothing can possibly be concealed from God, it follows, that we ought to be
deeply concerned, and truly sorrowful for every sin which we commit, and by no
means to palliate or frame Excuses for them, but freely to own and confess them
to him. But the truth of this Sorrow is not to be measured by the
Passionateness of it, or the Tears which it produces (which, tho sometimes good
signs, yet, too often produce but little effect) but by the hearty reformation
of life that follows: And he only can be said, to any purpose, either to be
sorry for his sins, or to confess them to God; who is careful for the time to
come to forsake them.

8. Since God is Almighty, he is certainly able; and since he loves us, he
cannot but be willing, to do every thing that is best and fittest for us, if
we, by our own faults, do not provoke him to the contrary: From whence it
follows, that, as long as we serve him faithfully, we ought, in all our wants
and exigencies, to trust and rely upon him. And if he does not relieve or help
us in such a manner as we desire; we ought to bear whatever Afflictions we lie
under, patiently and contentedly; as well knowing, that God takes no delight in
grieving us; but only corrects and keeps us under, in order to our eternal
good. And to demonstrate our Trust in God, and submission to his chastising
hand; we must never attempt, by any unlawful means, to supply any of our Wants,
or free our selves from any, even the most grievous pressures: Although, at the
same time, honest labor and industry (yet still with submission to God's Will)
for the compassing of any thing which is lawlful and good, is not only allowed,
but commended and required.

9. But since God is a free Agent, and since all the good which we have, or are
capable of, comes from him, and depends altogether on his Power and overruling
Providence; we ought to pray to him for whatsoever we stand in need of; and
that he would bless all our honest Labors with success. But because, often, if
we had the very things which we desire, they would, at the last, tend to our
hurt; and because he knows what is fit for us, much better than we our selves;
therefore we ought always to pray, that his Will should ever take place rather
than our own. And since we can have no reason to doubt of his Love, we ought to
assure our selves, that we shall receive either the very things we pray for, or
else that which is altogether as good for us, if our sins obstruct it not.

10. And the very same considerations, which prompt us to make our Prayers to
God in all our wants, do sufficiently demonstrate, that we ought to return
Thanks unto him for all the Blessings which we have received: Amongst which
those Afflictions which have at any time reclaimed us from sin, and brought us
to a sense of our Duty, ought, I think, to be placed in the chiefest rank: And
the only Demonstration of a truly thankful Heart to God, is the making a pious
and honest use, to his Glory, of all those Blessings which we daily receive
from him: Nor can there be any thing more absurd, than for a man to pretend to
give God Thanks with his Lips, who does not also do it, more to the purpose, in
his Life.

11. As God's Justice and Veracity are a reason beyond exception, why we should
without Anxiety depend on all his Promises; so the great Promise which he has
made us, being that of everlasting Happiness; for our more effectual attaining
unto which, he has sent his Son our Savior Christ Jesus to suffer for us; It
is therefore accordingly our Duty to hope for eternal Salvation; that is to
say, to expect the performance of what God has promised, and the enjoyment of
what Christ has purchased for us. But this hope is to be shown not by the
strength of our Confidence that we shall be saved (in which it is very possible
that a man may deceive himself) but by our constant care in duly performing
what God requires, on our parts, in order to Salvation: For he only who is
diligent in doing the work, does, with any reason, expect, or hope for the
promised Reward.

12. As we are obliged to pray unto God for all that we want, and to hope for
eternal Salvation from him; so the Holy Scripture directs us, to ground all our
hopes of Happiness upon the Sufferings of Jesus Christ, and to offer up all our
Prayers in his Name, as hoping only for his sake to be accepted, who is
represented as our only Mediator and Intercessour with God. Whosoever
therefore offers to join the Merits, Mediation or Intercession of any Saint,
together with Christ Jesus, either to strengthen his hopes of Salvation, or to
make his Devotions more surely to be accepted by God; as he seems to distrust
the Mediation of Christ, as if, alone, it were imperfect and insufficient; so
he acts not only without any Warrant from, but even contrary to the plain
tenor of the Holy Scriptures.

13. That it is absurd to attempt, and impossible to make, any bodily or
visible Picture or Image to represent God, who is both incorporeal and
invisible, is most evident beyond doubt or denial: And when any such
Representations are made with that design, and exposed to the view of the
People, the natural consequence of them, must needs be to beget wrong Notions
of God in the Minds at least of the more ignorant sort: For such as any thing
is represented to them, such they will be apt to conceive it in all points to
be. My Reason therefore alone would sufficiently conclude, that it is unlawful
to make any sort of Picture or Image to represent God, although he had not so
positively forbid it in the Holy Scripture; nor so expressly declared himself a
jealous God in that particular.

14. In all Cases where one man may deceive another to his great damage; it is
reasonable that he, who apprehends such danger, should not depend upon another
man, except he first has good security given him of his Truth and Fidelity. Now
many times the best, or indeed the only, security which can be given in such
cases, is a solemn Appeal to Almighty God (who is the Searcher of all Hearts,
and the Punisher of all Wickedness) as expecting and freely offering one's self
to his Wrath and Vengeance, in case he prevaricates in what he asserts or
promises: And this is what we call by the Name of an Oath. And since he who
takes an Oath (I mean with due seriousness and consideration) does therein make
an evident acknowledgment of some of the principal Attributes of God; viz. his
Omniscience, Justice, Truth, and Power; it follows that an Oath, duly taken, is
an act of Honor and Reverence toward God; and consequently, is not, in its
self, unlawful or evil: But if an Oath be taken rasbly, or unadvisedly, or
unnecessarily, or in trivial cases; it is a lessening and undervaluing of the
Divine Majesty (which ought always to be treated with the profoundest
Reverence) and, consequently, sinful and unlawful. And this is all that I can
conceive to be forbidden by our Blessed Savior, Mat. 5. 34. Nor can I
apprehend that, that place contains an universal prohibition of all swearing
whatsoever: For, besides that the very Context in the preceding Verse does most
evidently limit the discourse to such Oaths as are purely voluntary, and
therefore altogether unnecessary; There is neither Reason nor Precedent to
induce any one to believe that our Savior would universally forbid any thing
which has nothing of Evil or Malignity in its nature: And some even of the best
of Men, not only before, but since the coming of Christ, and even the Blessed
Angels themselves, we are assured in Scripture, have sworn upon some occasions
with great solemnity. Nor do the Holy Scriptures, in other places, where
mention is made of the taking of an Oath, speak of it as a thing unlawful, or
forbidden, or any way universally evil in its self, but altogether the
contrary: Nor did our Blessed Savior, that we can find, design to deprive
Princes or Magistrates of any part of that lawful Power which they had over
their Subjects before his coming; who, every where, were invested with a Right
of exacting an Oath from Them, when it should be necessary, either for the
peace and security of the Commonwealth, or for the ending of Differences
between private parties. And as for that passage of St. James 5. 12. which is
by some urged against swearing in any case whatsoever; It, being no more but a
recapitulation of our Saviors words which were just now mentioned, needs no
other Answer than what I have already given. But since the very nature and
design of an Oath is to invoke God, that thereby a Man may give assurance to
another of his truth and fidelity; it follows, that to affirm any thing upon
Oath, beyond what the Man, who swears, knows to be true; or not to perform what
he has upon his Oath promised, is a sin. And since he who imposes upon another
by doubtful and equivocal words, does as much deceive him, as he who speaks a
downright Falsity; from hence it will follow, that such a deceitful Oath is
altogether as contrary to the nature and design of an Oath, and consequently as
unlawful as a false one. But although an Oath lays an obligation upon a Man to do
whatever he has sworn, yet if a Man swears to do any thing which is a sin, and
contrary to some former Obligation, under which he indispensably lies to God or
Man, he can not in this case be obliged to keep his Oath, but is bound to
repent of it. For, besides that it is not reasonable, that any man's own act
should free him from any Obligation under which he lies to another; it is
plain, that an Oath can neither alter the nature of a sin, nor make it lawful
to commit it. And since the design of an Oath in its own nature is to oblige
him to performance that takes it; and since the Name of God ought never
unnecessarily to be invoked; it follows, that where a Man ought not to keep an
Oath, he ought, not on any account to take it.

15. According to the Customs of different places, there have diverse Ceremonies
and Forms of words been introduced in the taking of an Oath; some of them
grounded upon Reason, and others taken up through mistake in imitation. Thus,
probably, whereas it may have been a Custom in some places in an Oath to invoke
the Vengeance of God upon ones head; from hence, likely, might arise that Form
of swearing by the Head; and, in imitation thereof, by the Hand, or other parts
of the Body. And whereas it was usual to take solemn Oaths, in extraordinary
cases, in the Temple, or at the Altar, and, with us at this time, laying the
Hand upon the Holy Scriptures; from hence might arise the Forms of swearing by
the Temple, the Altar, the Bible, etc. But here it must be noted, that the
nature of an Oath being for assurance, and consisting therefore altogether in
the intention of the parties, viz. as well of him who requires it, as of him
who gives it; He may be said really and truly to snear, not only who makes use
of such a Form and Ceremony as is accustomed or prescribed in any certain
place, but he who any ways signifies to another an intention to oblige himself
under the penalty of God's Wrath and Vengeance: And for the same reason the
joint intention of both parties, as it appears fairly to be signified (without
any place for Fraud or Collusion) must needs be the true measure of the
obligation of every Oath.

16. When a Man promises a thing, and obliges himself thereto, not to any other
Man, but only to God alone; this is what is commonly called a Vow; and, comes
so exactly under the same Rules with a Promisory Oath (as will presently appear
to whosoever reads the two foregoing Sections) that I need not again
particularly repear them. But it is a very necessary caution to be observed in
all Oaths, and more especially to be taken care of in Vows; that a Man should
never voluntarily oblige himself to any thing but what he is well assured is
within his power to perform; I mean with the help of that common Asistance and
Grace which God has promised to all that seek it. For if a Man goes beyond
this, and ties such Burdens upon himself as he is not sufficiently sure of
strength to bear; besides the presumption of the thing, it must needs involve
his Conscience in many Difficulties and Perplexities.

17. Since there is no other Being whatsoever, which for Power, Goodness, or
excellency of Nature can any way be equalled to, or compared with, Almighty
God; from hence it will follow, that all these foregoing Duties, which we owe
unto God on the account and supposition of the Transcendency of his Nature and
Attributes, are not any of them to be paid unto any Thing or Person besides
himself. For that would be in effect to set up somewhat else as a God, or in
the place of God, unto our selves. Let them then who seem either to love, or
fear, or trust in, any Thing or Person as much or more than God; and who offer
up their Prayers and Devotions unto any Saints or Angels; which seems to
suppose their Omnisciences, and that they know the Secrets of Men's Hearts; and
to argue some distrust of God's Goodness and Readiness to hear us; Let them, I
say, and such like persons, consider well with themselves, how, they can answer
these things to God, who is a jealous God. But since every Man, who is sincere
in Religion, must necessarily suit his Worship and Duty to God according to the
apprehensions which he has of the Deity; He who is convinced of the distinction
of Persons in the Unity of the God head (of which I have endeavored to give my
Thoughts Part 2.. 22.) cannot, I think, but make the Father, the Son and the
Holy Ghost, the joint Objects of his Service and Devotion. And why it should
not be both lawful and proper to invoke the Son and Holy Ghost, together with
the Father, in our Prayers, as well as to be Baptized, and to Bless, in their
Names, together with him (which are both I think acts of Divine Worship) I
confess I can see no sound reason that can be given. But if any man shall tell
me, that, in the Worship of God, he dares proceed no farther than the Holy
Scriptures will expressly warrant, and therefore that he can not invoke the
Holy Ghost in his Prayers, because he there finds neither Precept for, nor
Example of it (Judging no Man, but leaving every Man to stand or fall to his
own Master) for my self I answer, that since God has made us reasonable
Creatures, I can not but think that a clear, and rational Consequence from
Scripture is as good a Warrant for any religious action, and lays as great an
Obligation upon him that is convinced of it, as the most express Text: And if
the Personality and Divinity of the Holy Ghost be admitted (as I here suppose)
to me, no Consequence seems to be clearer than that he is to be invoked and
worshipped, together with the Father and the Son.

18. Since the end to which God designs all Men, is eternal Happiness in
another life; Part 2.. 29. To a capacity for which we are again, after our
Fall, restored by Jesus Christ, Part 2.. 33, etc. It follows, that we ought not
to do any thing whereby we may miss of this end, or be diverted from the
prosecution of it; But on the contrary, that the whole course of our actions
and endeavors should ever be bent on the pursuit of it.

19. No Man will ever be diligent in the pursuit of any thing of which he
seldom thinks, and rarely considers the benefit of obtaining, and the evil of
missing it. If therefore we are obliged to be diligent in our endeavors after
eternal Happiness; we ought to make the Joys of Heaven and the Torments of Hell
the subject of our frequent Thoughts and Meditations.

20. He who places his Happiness, or any part of it, upon a wrong Object, will
never be so diligent as he ought in the pursuit of that true Happiness, to
which he is designed by God; because the stream of his Thoughts and Endeavors
must needs, in the whole, or in part, be diverted, according as he apprehends
his Happiness to lie another way. Now that there is nothing in this World
(except a good Conscience, and the hope of eternal Life, which, tho they may be
had in this World, yet are not of the World) that can any way make up a part of
our real Happiness, is abundantly demonstrable from the vanity, uncertainty and
shortness of all worldly Joys. He therefore who places any part of his
Happiness upon any thing belonging to this World, most certainly, places it
upon a wrong Object. But whatsoever a Man proposes to himself as the ultimate
End of any of his actions, it is certain that, therein he places some part, at
least, of his Happiness: For that which is the ultimate End of any action of a
Man, must be proposed as the final satisfaction of some of his Desires (for as
far as any one's Desire extends, so far off must be the End he aims at) and no
Desire of any Man can ever be finally satisfied, till it meets with that
wherein he supposes his Happiness (in whole or in part) to consist. From hence
then it will follow, that although there are some Pleasures and Satisfactions in
this World, which may innocently be enjoyed, yet No man ought to propose any
worldly enjoyment as the ultimate End and Design of any of his Actions. For
this would be a placing his Happiness, or some part of it, upon a wrong Object,
and thereby a hinderance of his pursuit of the true Happiness for which God
designs him. To illustrate this, which otherwise may seem obscure, by an
Example or two. A Man may lawfully, without doubt, relish the Meat he eats (for
to what other end did God give us the Sense of Tasting) but the reason of his
eating, at all times, ought to be to preserve his Life and Health, that he may
be the better able to do all those things which God requires from him in order
to his Salvation; this being the End for which God designs him, and which he
therefore ought always to pursue. But he who in eating designs no more than to
gratify his sensual Appetite, or to pamper his Body that he may have the
greater enjoyment of the rest of the Pleasures of this World; acts below, or
rather contrary to, the End he is designed for; and may justly be compared to
the Beasts that perish. Thus also a Man may innocently be pleased to have the
Garment he wears, decent and comely, because the Eye is naturally gratified
with the beauty of any Object: But if a Man wears Cloths which are more fine
and costly than some others, his reason ought to be that he may not (according
to the humor of the world) be contemned for the Meaness or Sordidness of his
Apparel; but endeavor, by all fair ways, to preserve such a Respect among Men
(who are very apt to judge by the outward appearance) as may enable him to do
the more good in the world: But he who cloths himself like the Lillies of the
Field, or Solomon in all his Glory, only that he may admire himself, or be
taken notice of by others, for his remarkable Finery, is a vain person, and
acts as foolishly as the Crow in the Fable, who clad himself in the Peacocks
Feathers. And what I have here said concerning Food and Raiment, may also be
applied to Riches and Honor, and to all Pleasures, which are not absolutely
unlawful; and to every thing which Men aim at, or value in this World; which
they may lawfully seek after and take delight in, as far as they may be
Instruments of doing Good, or are consistent with their Christian Duty; but
they must not place their Happiness, or any part of it, in them; for that would
make them forgetful of Heaven, and necessarily involve them in the sins of
Ambition, Covetousness, Voluptuousness, etc.

21. As we are obliged to do whatsoever God commands, and patiently to suffer
whatsoever he, in his Providence, shall think fit to lay or inflict upon us;
so, for the same reasons, are we certainly bound to continue in this both doing
and patiently suffering, until such time as he shall be pleased, of his own
Will, to free and dismiss us from it. From whence, it follows, that no man
ought, upon any account, to lay violent hands upon himself, or voluntarily
contribute to the shortning of his own Life, because he knows not but that God
might be willing to exercise him yet farther, with Sufferings or other trials,
to his Glory, and the good of his own Soul. Nor ought any Servant, without
leave or license, to withdraw himself from the Service of his Master. And the
same reason which forbids us to destroy our Lives, should also keep us from
putting them to any unreasonable or unnecessary hazard.

22. He who in Duty is obliged to any thing, lies also, of nedessity, under an
Obligation to qualify himself as well as he can, and to seek after, and make
use of all such Means and Instruments as are necessary for the better exceuting
and compassing that same thing to which he is so obliged. Since then Health of
Body, Knowledge and Understanding, and a competency of Riches, Power and
Authority, are necessary Qualifications and Instruments for the better
performance of many of those Duties, to which we stand obliged by God's Law; it
follows, that these are things which every man, according to his capacity,
ought to seek and endeavor after. But we must not strive nor seek for any of
these things by Ways or Means that are unlawful and wicked; for that would be,
beforehand, to destroy and frustrate the very End and Design, for which alone
they are to be sought and desired: namely Virtue, Piety and the Service of God.

23. On the other side; Whatsoever is an impediment or obstacle to the
performance of any necessary Duty, we are bound, as far as we are able, to
suppress or remove it out of the way. Now our Reason being that which first
leads us to the Knowledge of Religion, and always enables us rightly to
understand and judge of our Duty; And since all violent Passions, and overeager
Affections, do disturb our Reason, and very much hinder the free use and
exercise of it; It follows, that we ought always so to govern our Passions and
restrain all our Affections, as that they may be wholly subservient to, and
never overruled or mis-lead, our Reason.

24. Since God is the Creator, and therefore also the absolute Lord of all
things; every thing certainly ought by us to be always put and applied to that
very same end and use (and no other) for which it was intended by him, as far
as we have any intimation of his design, either from Reason or Revelation.
Hence then it will follow, that those Creatures which God has given us, to
feed, sustain and keep us in health, that we may be the better able to do our
Duty, and labor in our several Callings, ought not at any time (much less
ordinarily) to be used to Excess, so as to impair our Health, or discompose our
Reason, or any way hinder us in the performance of any Duty: And that Faculty
of Generation, which God has endowed us with, in order to the propagation of
Mankind, ought not to be abused for the sake of filthy sensual Pleasure. Nor
ought that plenty of Creatures, which God has bestowed upon us for the service
of all Men, without exception, to be engrossed into the hands of any certain
Men, so as that others should want the Necessaries of Life, whilst they abound
in Superfluity. By which it appears, that Gluttony and Drunkenness, Lust and
Covetousness are sins, and always to be avoided; and therefore, on the
contrary, that Temperance, Chastity, Charity, and Liberality are Duties, and
always to be practiced.

25. Experience assures us, that the Spirit of Man is of an active nature; and,
rather than be altogether idle, will be apt to employ its self in that which is
evil. Nor does a man ever lie more open to Temptation than when he has nothing
at all to do. He therefore that would keep himself innocent, must be careful
always to avoid Idleness. For besides that Idleness would prove a Snare to us;
It is a shame and a sin. When there is so much of God's work to be done in the
world (for the promoting of his Glory and the Public good of Mankind) that any
man, who pretends to be his Servant, should stand still, and not put his
helping hand to the carrying of it on. But as we cannot say that a Man is idle,
when he lies down to sleep; that, being thereby refreshed, he may be the better
able again to labor; so must we by no means pass that Censure on him, who now
and then spends some small portion of his Time in some pleasant and innocent
Recreation; that, having his Thoughts hereby a little relaxed and diverted, he
may be the fitter to return to Business of moment and consequence. But as for
those persons, whose whole life almost is nothing else but Diversion; and who
scarce ever set themselves to any employment, whereby either God is glorified,
or others benefited; what can they expect but the same Sentence which is
pronounced upon the idle and unprofitable Servant, Mat. 25. 26. And if, to be
altogether idle and unemployed is not to be excused or justified; how much more
are they to be condemned who are so frequently employed in such things as are
evil and scandalous?

26. Since the right knowledge of our Duty arises chiefly from a true judgment
concerning the circumstances and qualifications of Things and Persons, it
follows, that every Man should endeavor, as far as he is able, to inform
himself rightly, and to frame true Notions, in all points, of and concerning
God, Himself, and other Men; to whom there are Duties owing; and also of all
those things which are the subjects of any of those Duties, and in the true
management whereof, such Duties do consist. For if he be mistaken in his
Judgment concerning either of these, he must of necessity take wrong Measures
in his actions. Thus, for Example, if a Man should not believe God to be
eternal, most good, wise and powerful, etc. it would not be possible for him to
love, honor and fear him in that degree that he ought to do; And if we do not
always remember ourselves to be frail Creatures, subject to Passions and
Infirmities, of short continuance in this World, and that, whatever Excellency
we may seem to have, we derive it wholly from God and his Providence, and not
from our selves; we shall never be able so effectually as we ought, to govern
our Passions, and restrain our Affections from the things of this World, and
pursue that End for which God has designed us. And if we do not consider that
other Men (whatever accidental Differences there may be between us) are equal
to us in nature, that their Souls are as precious in God's sight as ours, that
Christ died for them, as much as for us, etc. We shall not be inclined to
behave our selves to them with that Justice, Charity and Humility which do
evidently appear to be our Duty. And, lastly, if we do not frame a true Notion
of the Vanity of the things of this World, and the Excellency of the Joys of
Heaven; we shall never be able to prefer the later before the former, in such a
measure as we ought to do.

27. Although the chief Happiness of Mankind is reserved by God to be enjoyed in
another life, by those who heartily strive for it whilst they are in this; yet
can I find no reason to think that he has decreed us all, or any of us, to be
absolutely miserable whilst we remain in this World. On the contrary, since God
has originally a love for all Mankind in general, Part 2.. 16. I cannot but
conclude, that he always (even in this life) designs at least some share or
beginning of Happiness for every Man; and never afflicts, or suffers any Man to
be afflicted, but only in order to his greater Happiness hereafter; until such
time as he thinks it proper to pour out his Vengeance and final Destruction
upon such as have by their Wickedness altogether forseited his Love and Favor.
Since then God originally designs some measure or commencement of Happiness to
all Men, even in this life, as well as eternal Happiness hereafter; it follows,
that we (who ought as much as we can to be subservient to all God's Designs)
should endeavor as much as in us lies, to promote the Happiness of every Man,
both in relation to this World, and of that which is to come. Or in other
terms, that every Man should endeavor to do as much good to all others as he
can, and to hurt no man whatsoever, if he can avoid it.

28. But if every Man always kept singly by himself, without any Society or
Intercourse with others; it would be impossible to do any good one to another:
And therefore I conclude, that it is the Will of God that Mankind should live
each with other in a state of Society. And to make us all the more sensible of
the necessity and obligation that lies upon us thus to live with, and do good
to others, God has so ordered the state and condition of all Mankind, that it
is not possible for any Man long to subsist, much less to enjoy any sort of
Comfort or satisfaction in this Life, without the good will and assistance of
others; which he has no reason to expect, except he be ready upon all occasions
to retaliate what he himself so continually stands in need of. And since God's
original Love to Mankind is not confined to some certain persons, but
universally extended to all; I must needs conclude, that he designs not only
the Comfort and Happiness of some particulars; but universally of all Men
whatsoever. And since the more universal the Society between Men is, the more
universal the Happiness which thence results will be; it will evidently follow,
that it is God's Will that every Man should behave himself after a sociable and
friendly manner, to every other Man, without exception. And since there is no
Man in the World, however weak and poor, or at never so great a distance from
me, but it is possible that things may fall out so as that, one time or other,
I may, in my Distress, stand in need of his Help and Friendship, my Reason
tells me, that it is my Interest, as well as Duty, as much as I am able,
beforehand to oblige every Man who comes in my way, by doing Offices of
Civility and Kindness to him, as occasion offers.

29. That God has given to Mankind in general the free Liberty to make use of
all other Creatures for their support and sustenance, my Reason, as well as the
Holy Scripture, does assure me; because without some of them we could not
preserve our selves in being; and if we had not liberty to destroy others of
them for our use, they would in time so overspread the Face of the Earth, as
that we could not have any safe or convenient Habitation upon it. But if all
these Creatures were always to remain in common, so that no Man should have a
Right to take possession of any part of them to his own prticular use and
disposal, and to exclude others therefrom; the Consequence must needs be
perpetual Discord and Confusion. For when I had prepared Food to sustain my
Hunger, or Raiment to defend me from the Cold; if every other Man should have
still as good a Right thereto as I, any one might lawfully take it away from
me; and if my Right were as good as any others, I might also lawfully Defend my
Possession; from which state of things Contention and Strife must eternally and
unavoidably arise. I therefore conclude, that there must be some Laws of
Property and Right; and that every man must yield to others that which is their
own, or else there can be no such thing as Society and Beneficence preserved
and kept up amongst Mankind. Now in order to discover these same Laws of Right
and Property, whereby every man is to know what is truly his own, I lay down
this general Rule, as a thing most reasonable, That, Whereas originally every
Man's Right and Title to every thing may be esteemed equal (God having given us
all the Creatures in common, and not, by any act of his, divided to each Man
his several Property) If there be any apparent, or but probable, ground why
such or such a particular thing should be the Property of one Man rather than
of another, that ought so to determine the matter as to oblige all other Men
quietly to yield and suffer him to enjoy and use that same thing, whatever it
be, as his own. For where the Balance stands exactly even, a small matter is
enough to turn the Scale to one side. Now in these following Cases there seems
to be great Reason for determining a Property in a thing to particular persons,
viz. 1. When a Man is the first that takes actual Possession of a thing, and
converts it to his own use. For such a Possession is an addition to his general
Right beyond what any other Man, who never was in Possession, can pretend. And
why should I part with my Possession to any other, or he demand it from me,
except he were able to make out a better Title than I to the thing in dispute?
2. When a Man takes Possession of a thing, which is actually rejected and
deserted by him, who last had the Right to, and Possession of it. For his Case
seems to be much the same with his who first takes Possession of a thing, 3.
When a thing is given, or in Exchange made over, to another by him who had
before a just Right thereto: for it is highly reasonable, that every Man should
have liberty to dispose of his own, 4. When a Company of People do by an
Agreement make a Partition of what was before in Common amongst them all, it is
reasonable that every Man should acquiesce in that share which upon such a
Division, shall fall to his Lot. 5. When a Man takes care and pains to produce
and rear any thing for his own use or profit, it is reasonable that he (and not
another Man against his Consent) should enjoy the benefit, of his own Labor.
And lastly, where a Society of People do submit their Properties unto a
legislative Power which is erected amongst them, it is reasonable that herein
they should always be concluded and determined by the Laws of that Community,
of which they are Members. And if there be any other Rules for determining the
Rights of Men to particular things, it is most evident, that due care must be
taken to keep and observe them, or else farewell all Order and Society.

30. Where Fidelity is wanting, Society cannot be truly kept and preserved. I
therefore conclude, that every man is obliged faithfully to perform whatever he
Promises; except the person to whom the Promise is made, do freely acquit and
discharge him from it. But if a Man promises to do a thing which is sinful, he
ought not to keep such a Promise as that; as I have already shown in the Case
of an Oath.

31. And the same Reasons which oblige us to hurt no Man, to yield to every Man
his Right, and to keep our Promises, do plainly show, that he who wrong fully
hurts another, or deprives him of his Right, or breaks his Promise made to him,
ought, as far as he is able, to make full Restitution and Satisfaction to the
person whom he has thus injured. For he that makes a Breach in humane Society,
is doubtless obliged, as far as he can, to repair it.

32. Where a Proposition is literally false, and yet spoken with no manner of
intention to deceive another, it is not to be called a Lie: But he who asserts
any thing for a Truth, with an intent to make another believe it, which is, or
for ought he knows may be, false, he only is to be esteemed a Liar. Now some
have doubted whether the sin of a Lie consists in the bare Untruth, or only in
the Injustice of it; and from thence have been inclined to believe, that such a
Lie as does no hurt to any one, not draws any manner of evil consequence after
it, is not to be looked on as a sin; and so much the less, if it be told with a
real design only to do Good, or prevent Mischief. The Niceties of this
Controversy I leave to be discussed by others. But since humane Society cannot
be upheld without, in many cases, a dependence upon one another Veracity, I
may surely venture thus far to conolude; viz. That, not only such a Lie as
tends to the damage of another; but also such a Lie, however otherwise
innocent, as gives occasion to render a Man's Truth suspected in other cases, is
to be reputed unlawful, if for no other Reason, yet at least fore this, because
it is injurious to humane Society. And the same Reason will hold as strongly
against all mental Reservations and equivocal Expressions: For what is humane
Society at any time the better for the literal Truth of what a Man says, if
others who are therein concerned, do not understand his true meaning by the
words which he speaks to them?

33. It is highly reasonable that every Man should have such an Esteem and
Respect showed him, as may be proportionable to his Virtues and good Qualities:
And as it is proper enough for a Man, by lawful ways, to assert his own
Reputation whenever it is unjustly aspersed; so he ought to take especial care
in the management of all his Words and Actions, that he may not seem to exalt
or magnify himself, or to despise or undervalue others beyond what is not only
just and true, but also necessary, either for the bringing about something that
is good, or the preventing something that is evil. For there is scarce any
thing that gives greater disgust, or helps to render a Man more odious to the
World, than an overforwardness to praise and magnify himself, and to
undervalue others, if he be not necessitated thereto by some very just Reason:
And on the contrary, there is scarce any thing which reconciles a Man more to
the Favor and Good Will of People, than when he is not over apt to ascribe
much to himself, but is ready to give the utmost Honor and Respect to all
others that in reason can be thought due. I conclude therefore, that Pride is a
Sin, and Humility a Duty, because the former tends to disturb, but the latter
strengthens and confirms humane Society.

34. What is incumbent upon him to do, who has done wrong to another, I have
just now shown: But if another Man wrongs, or any way endeavors to Injure me;
As it is lawful for me (so for every Man) to stand upon my defense, and use my
utmost endeavors to save my self from Wrong, or recover that which is my
Right; (for otherwise all the good and honest Men in the World would
continually lie exposed to the Wrongs and Insults of any evil Man, who might
have a mind to destroy them) so I, and every Man ought to be ready at any time
to be reconciled to an Adversary or Enemy; provided it may be upon such terms
as are consistent with our own Safety: Nor ought any Man upon any occasion to
do any greater harm to his keenest Enemy, than what he apprehends to be
absolutely necessary to his own preservation. For since Society and Peace among
Mankind is the Will and design of Almighty God; If a breach be made therein by
another, I ought for my part to do nothing which may make it wider; but ever to
be ready to give a helping hand to the closing and making up of it.

35. Hitherto I have endeavored to lay down the main and fundamental Rules of
that Duty, which every Man is obliged to pay and perform to God, to Himself,
and to all other Men. Now to deduce all the particular branches of Virtue and
Piety from these main Principles; and to show how Morality is improved and
refined by the Gospel to the highest degree of perfection, is a thing not
dificult to be done, but yet inconsistent with my designed Brevity: For which
therefore I must refer my Reader to some of those Books of Christian Piety,
wherein each Particular of our Duty is, at large, described and pressed. But in
the mean time if we would have a shorter Abstract of our Duty than what I have
now been giving; The Holy Scripture furnishes us with three Rules (two expressed,
and one implied) from which every thing that we can be obliged to do, is easily
dedueed; And they are, 1. That we should love God with all our Heart Soul and
Strength. 2. That we should truly love our Selves, that is to say, so as always
to aim at and pursue our true and chief Happiness: And 3. That we should love
others as we do our Selves: Not with the same degree of Love; for that is not
only unreasonable, but impossible; but with the same Reality and Sincerity; or,
in other terms, that we should ever do unto all other Men what we would think
reasonable that they should do unto us, if we were in their Circumstances and
they in ours. But besides these general Duties, which are indiscriminately
incumbent upon all Men; there are diverse particular ones, which do arise from
those several Relations which Men may contract and bear to others, of which it
is fit that I give some brief Account.

36. That God would have the Generation of Men continued and increased upon the
Earth, is very evident; as well from the natural inclination which he has
implanted in them (as in all other living Creatures) to propagate their Kind;
as from that Love and Affection which is common to them with other Creatures
toward those who spring from them. But if Mankind were propagated only by the
exercise of wild and wandering Lust, without confinement to any settled Rules or
Laws; this would bring in such a Deluge of Confusion and disturbance, as would
unavoidably deprive them of the greatest part of those satisfactions which at
the present they do, or may, enjoy. For if there were no such thing as settled
Marriages, we can hardly suppose that ever there would be any sort of settled
Families, which are the first beginnings of Society and regularity amongst Men;
Fathers would not know which were their own Children, and consequently would
take no care to bring them up, or provide for them; and not only the pain of
bearing, but the whole trouble of nourishing reating and providing for
Children, would lie, wholly upon the Female Sex, who by themselves could but
very imperfectly perform that work as it should be done. Since therefore God
intends the Comfort and satisfaction of Men, even whilst they are here upon
Earth, I conclude, that it is his Will, that Mankind should be propagated no
other way but by settled Marriages, that is, by a Compact and Agreement between
the Male and Female, and that under such Rules as are fit and proper to promote
the general Happiness of Mankind, which being his great design, ought ever also
to be ours.

37. That a Woman should have more than one Husband at a time, is notoriously
contrary to the design of Marriage, and therefore directly unlawful: And that a
Man should have more than one Wife, at a time, the experience of many, in
former Ages; and, at this time, in the Eastern Countries, does sufficiently
testify to be contrary to that peace and quietness which is necessary to the
Comfort and Happiness of every Family; and therefore not so agreeable to that
universal Friendship which ought ever to be preserved amongst Men; but
especially among those who are so nearly allied together. Moreover, if Men and
their, Wives should have liberty to part one from the other, whenever they
please (besides the Confusion and disturbance which this also must breed in
Families, especially where there are Children in the case) Marriage would
hardly differ from that wild and wandering Lust, against which I have spoken in
the preceding Paragraph. I conclude therefore, that although, before the coming of
Christ, if a Man took more Wives than one, not for Lust (which is unlawful.
24.) but merely for Propagation; it might in some cases be dispensed with; yet
it ever was most pleasing to God, that a Man should have but one Wife at a
time; and that nothing but Death should ever part a Man and his Wife; except
the evil Behavior of one party should make the continuance of the Marriage
Compact and Cohabitation, not only something uneasy (for that for peace and
quietness sake should be born patiently) but downright intolerable. But these
things which Reason may perhaps but imperfectly suggest, the Gospel has passed
and established into Laws; viz. that, as every Woman is to have but one
Husband, fo no Man must have more than one Wife at a time; nor must any thing
part Man and Wife but Death, except it be the case of Adultery: And better,
much it is, that particular persons should sometimes be forced to labor under
some Inconvenience, than that any such Liberty should be allowed as tends to
disturb and distract the World.

38. We generally find, that all Men, even Heathens as well as Jews and
Christians, have conceived a more than ordinary abhorrence against the Marriage
of such persons as were very nearly Allied together within some certain Degrees
of Relation. And since the World is wide enough for a Man to choose a Wife, or a
Woman a Husband; those general Rules which are given to us, in Scripture, of
providing for things honest, not only in the sight of God, but of Men also; and
of taking care, not only about such things as are just and honest, but also
about such as are lovely and of good report; should teach us that no person
should engage in such a Marriage as is by wise men commonly reputed to be
incestuous and unlawful.

39. Since the relation of Husband and Wife, is wholly owing to the mutual
Compact and Agreement which is made between them at their Marriage; the Duties
which result from that Relation can be no other but the faithful keeping and
observing of that same Compact and Agreement, the Conditions of which, may be
more or fewer according as the parties shall think convenient. But these are
always necessary, and must never be wanting; viz. that the Husband and Wife
must sincerely love each other; must be strictly faithful to each others Bed
(without which, mutual Love can never be preserved entire) and Christianity
expressly adds, what Reason perhaps does also obscurely suggest, that the Wife
must be subject and obedient to her Husband.

40. When Children are begotten and brought forth into the World, it is not
reasonable, nor agreeable to God's design, that they should perish and dye for
want of care to be taken of them. Nor are there any Persons upon whom a greater
obligation can lie to bring up Children, than upon those who begat them, and
were the cause of their being: And since God intends not the Misery and
Affliction; but generally the Comfort and satisfaction of Mankind upon Earth,
as well as their Happiness hereafter in Heaven; I conclude, that it is ever the
Duty of Parents to take the best care they can to bring up their Children, and
to promote their true Happiness, both in this World, and that which is to come.
For which reason we must needs suppose them to be vested with a lawful Power of
governing and chastising them, as far as is necessary to keep them in good and
regular order.

41. And on the other side, since Children are beholding to their Parents, even
for their very Being, whereby they are capacitated, not only for the enjoyment
of the Satisfactions of this Life, but also for eternal Happiness in the World
to come; it is highly reasonable, that they should love their Parents with a
very high degree of Affection; and should always be ready to make them the best
returns of Duty and Service that they can. And according as Parents have been
careful in bringing up and making Provision for their Children, so the
Childrens Love and Affection ought still more and more to be returned and
expressed toward them.

42. Where Parents, by Death or otherwise, are rendered incapable of nourishing
and breeding up a Child; or where they utterly forsake and expose him to the
wide World, before he is able to provide for, or take care of himself; If
another person takes him, and maintains and puts him in a way of living, such a
Child is in all reason obliged to pay a proportionable share of filial Love and
Duty to him who has performed the part of a Parent to him.

43. It is not pretended, that ever any Person or Family, by name, were ever,
by God's particular and revealed Appointment, invested with the Power of
governing over such or such a certain People; excepting only the case of the
People of Israel; I therefore conclude, that however the Magistracy which is
lawfully established throughout the World, is ordained of God; it is not by
immediate Revelation from Heaven.

44. Whether a Parent by the Law of Nature has the Power of a supreme
Magistrate over his own Children, is not necessary here to enquire. But I see
no ground in Reason or Nature, to judge that the eldest Son of any Kindered
successively should have the same Power over his Brothers and Sisters (who are
no way beholding to him for their Being, nor, it may be, for their well-being)
and much less over his Fathers Brothers and Sisters; as the common Parent of a
whole Family may have over all that spring from him. I conclude therefore, that
lawful Magistracy is not to be derived by the Law of Nature from the alone
right of Primogeniture; Nor do we ever meet with any Prince in History, who
derived his Authority from this only Fountain; and if this were the true Right
and Title of Magistracy, it would follow, that all the World ought to be but
one Monarchy; and Adam's Heir Male the Emperor thereof; and all the Kings and
Emperors that ever were, whose Titles were originally bottomed upon another
Foundation, were no better than mere Usurpers.

45. Where one Man conquers another; that is to say, by force of Arms, or by
Stratagem, gets him so into his Power, as that he can destroy or kill him at
his pleasure; the conquered person indeed, being obliged to do all that
honestly he can for the preservation of his own Life, ought, on that account,
to use his best endeavors by an obsequious Demeanor to assuage and pacify
the Fury of the Conqueror. But, farther than he finds necessary to his own
Preservation, he is not obliged to obey the Conqueror; except he binds himself
thereto by some act of his own; there being no Law of God or Nature which lays
any farther Obligation on him in that case but only to preserve himself,
without doing wrong to another. Since then all the World does allow that a
Subject is bound to obey the Magistrate, who is lawfully set over him, even in
those cases where no danger, in this world, would attend his Disobedience, or,
as the Apostle expresses it, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake.
It will follow, that Conquest alone, without any Compact or Agreement, does not
establish the Conqueror a lawful Magistrate over the conquered People. For if
it did, there could be no difference between a Liege Subject, and a Prisoner of
War.

46. If any man unjuslly invades the Property, or attempts the Life of another,
It is lawful for him, to whom the Wrong is offered, to defend himself the best
he can; And if he has no other way of securing himself, nor can prevail with
his Enemy to desist from his evil Design, the necessity of preserving himself
from Death, or (which may be as bad, or worse) from Ruin, will certainly
justify the Killing of him. For otherwise the Lives and Fortunes of all honest
Men must for ever be exposed to the arbitrary pleasure of every lawless and
wicked person, which is contrary to that comfort and satisfactory state, which
we suppose God generally to design for Men, even in this Life. And that which
is allowable for every single Man to do for himself, is surely no less lawful
for a Society of Men combining together, to do for their joint and mutual
Safety. Moreover, if in such a Society any person be taken in, or after, such
an unlawful Attempt, it is lawful for them to punish him in such a manner
(whether by death or otherwise) as may be necessary to terrify others from
doing the like for the time to come: For without this, there could be no
security against evil doers; who might contrive to act their Mischief so
secretly, as not to be killed, or even resisted in the very fact it self. But
if such a Society have not certain Laws and Rules to proceed by in all such
cases, and some certain persons to put those Laws in execution; every Man would
take upon him to be his own Judge; and what might feem fit and reasonable to
one, might appear otherwise to another of a contrary interest, from whence
perpetual Factions and Confusion must needs follow. But there is no reason that
any one, or more of such a Society, without the consent of the rest, should
take upon them to make Laws for, or exercise Authority over the whole
Community. For if it were in every Man's power to make himself a Magistrate, all
might set up to be Rulers, and few or none would be Subjects; which would bring
in Confusion, and destroy the Society. But when the whole Society do agree and
consent, that such certain persons shall have the exercising of such certain
Powers (which originally are in the Body of the Society it self) it is then
lawful for those persons to act accordingly; and they who have consented to
their Authority are, by virtue of that Consent, obliged to pay Obedience to
them. I conclude therefore, that the Original of Magistrates is from the
Consent of the People, since there is no other solid ground, that I can find,
upon which to establish them. And when once a legislative and executive Power
is thus settled and established by the consent of a People, who acquiesce in it,
and upon all occasions take shelter under its Protection; it is to be looked
upon as ratified and confirmed by God's own appointment; and Subjection and
Obedience is accordingly to be paid to it by every particular person who abides
within the precincts of its Juridiction. For this was the very case of the
Roman Government, which was in St. Paul's time; and there is exactly the same
reason for it in all other Kingdoms and Commonwealths whatsoever.

47. Since then Magistracy derives it self wholly from the Consent of the
People; from hence it will follow, that the Original Rule of the Magistrates
Power and the Subjects obedience, is that Consent which the People has given;
or, in other terms, those Laws and Constitutions of the place, in which the
Body of the Nation have acquiesced: Beyond which neither any Magistrate ought
to command, nor is any Subject bound to obey. For where there is no Law, there
can be no Transgression, nor any Obligation to Obedience; nor consequently any
Right to Command.

48. But if the legislative Power of any Nation do enact any thing which is
contrary to the express Law of God, or the eternal Laws of good and evil; No
particular Man can be bound to obey such a Constitution. For the Authority of
God ought to weigh more with us, than that of any Community whatsoever; And it
is expressly ruled in Scripture, that we ought to obey God rather than Man.

49. And the same Reason (viz. Self-preservation) which allows a Society, thus
settled into a Government, to punish Malefactors within themselves; must also
justify them, it by force of Arms they defend themselves against any foreign
Enemy, which would wrong or oppress them; or endeavor to recover their Right
from those who have taken it from them, and refuse to restore it. For otherwise
it were in vain for a Community to hope to subsist by maintaining good Order
and Discipline at home; if all the while they must, without remedy, lie
continually exposed to the Wrongs and Insults of every Enemy which may assault
them from abroad. I conclude therefore, that War, whether defensive or
offensive, may in many cases, be very just and lawful: Nor is there the least
word throughout the Holy Scriptures, which may represent the Profession of a
Soldier, who fights under a lawful Authority, as any way contrary to Religion
and a good Conscience: Tho such a Man certainly ought not only to exercise his
calling with as much Mildness and Humanity as can be consistent with the
service of his Country; but also ever to satisfy himself first of the
lawfulness of the Cause in which he engages, before he draws his Sword in the
Quarrel: For as we are obliged to do no hurt to any Man whatsoever, if we can
avoid it; so, for the very same reason, ought we not to become instrumental in
any Wrong or Injustice which another Man (let him be who he will) intends to do.

50. That an humble Demeanor, together with a reasonable Diligence, and an
honest Fidelity to his Master, is the Duty of every Servant, is most apparent;
because if a Servant be either haughty, negligent, or unfaithful, he ceases in
effect to be a Servant. And on the other side, that Justice and Humanity are no
less the Duty of a Master toward his Servant is altogether as clear, because
where these are not observed, the Condition of a Servant must be intolerable,
and contrary to that comfortable state which we suppose God to design for all
Men; and therefore for Servants, who are as much Men, and as much valued by
God, and for whom Christ died, as well as for their Masters.

51. That all Christians are, or (according to Christ's Institution) ought to
be, combined together into one Society, which is called the Church, I have
already said Part 2.. 40. Now in all such incorporated Societies these three
things are ever to be considered, 1. What is the Design of the person or
persons, who first gather and institute them? 2. What Advantage accrues to
those who become Members of them? And 3dly. what are the Laws and Rules to be
observed by the whole Body, and every Member of it? The Design of our Savior
Jesus Christ, who, at the Will of his heavenly Father, instituted and embodied
the Christian Church, was to purify unto himself a peculiar People zealous of
good works, or, in other terms, by this Incorporation so made, more effectually
to promote the practice of Virtue and Godliness in the World. The benefit and
advantage which every true Member of this Church may propose to himself, is the
participation of God's Grace and assistance here for the better performance of
his Duty, and the enjoyment of everlasting Happiness hereafter; both which are
promised to us by God in and through Christ Jesus our Savior. And lastly, the
Laws of the Christian Church are either, 1. The general Laws of Piety and
Morality, of which I have hitherto been giving an account; or, 2. Such
particular Constitutions as are proper to it, considered as a congregated and
incorporated Body of Men; which I have reserved to be treated of in the last
place of all.

52. The first thing which is incumbent on every Man, as (or rather, in order
to become) a Member of the Christian Church, is to be baptized in the Name of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: Which Ceremony is intended to put us
in mind of that Purity and Cleanness from sin to which we ought to bring our
Souls by a virtuous and holy life: And although to wet or wash the Body with
Water, may seem but a slight and inconsiderable thing; yet since our Savior
Christ has expressly appointed and commanded it, and since his Apostles were
always most careful to perform it; insomuch that even they who had received the
extraordinary Gift of the Holy Ghost from Heaven, were yet required to be
Baptized, in order to become visible Members of the Church; This Ceremony, I
think, ought not to be left off, or discontinued. Although whether it be performed
by dipping the Body under the Water, or by sprinkling the Water upon it, to me
seems to be altogether indifferent; and to be regulated only by Prudence, or
the Custom of particular places. For neither does the word Baptize signify any
more than to Wash; which may be done either way; nor does it appear that the
Apostles dipped all those whom they baptized Moreover, since sprinkling, as
well as dipping, may sufficiently denote the washing and cleansing of the Soul
from sin; and since Baptism is not expressly, in the Holy Scripture, determined
to either of these ways, to the exclusion of the other; I conclude, that God
has left the matter (so far) indifferent to us; and to be ordered according to
Prudence, as the Circumstances of things and persons shall at any time direct:
And as long as the Substance and Design of his Command is carefully retained, I
see no necessity of being so very solicitous about a Circumstance of it; except
it could evidently be made appear, that he had appointed and determined it.

53. Since then Baptism is as the Entrance or Door of Admittance into the
Church of Christ, it will follow, that all they, and they only who are duly
qualified to be Members of his Church, are fit to have Baptism administered to
them. If any person has been brought up out of the Chucrh, until he comes to
years of understanding and knowledge; he is then, and only then, qualified to
be a Member of the Church, when, having repented of all his former sins, he
believes and owns that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and consequently
receives and professes that Faith and Doctrine which he has taught and
authorized, and obliges himself to live according to all those Laws and Rules
which he has prescribed to us; this being the very Condition which our Savior
indespensably requires from his Church, and every Member of it, according as
they are capable of performing it. But if a Child be born of Christian Parents,
or is so in the hands of Christian Guardians, as that it is in their power to
bring him up in the true Religion; and they do promise and engage so to educate
him; such a Child as this, even before he comes to any knowledge of things, is
yet qualified to be a Member of the Church of Christ (upon the presumption that
he will perform what God requires from him when he comes to be capable of it)
and so to continue, if, by Apostasy or wickedness, he does not, in process of
time, separate himself again from it. For this, beyond dispute was the case of
In sants, before the coming of Christ, who at eight days old (if Males) were to
be Circumcised, and thereby admitted into the Church of God, and within his
Covenant, if they were either the Sons, or Servants born in the House, of
believing persons, and who, as well as their Parents, are expressly said to
enter into Covenant with God, which is but another expression for becoming of
his Church: And no one surely will offer to say, that the Case of Infants is
made worse than it was, by our Saviors coming into the World; especially,
since he has expressly commanded, that little Children should come unto him,
and not be forbidden; for that of such is the Kingdom, that is, the Church of
God. I conclude therefore, that not only adult persons, who make a due
profession of their Faith and Repentance; but also such Infants as are in a way
of being brought up in the Christian Religion, are, without any Obstacle, to be
admitted to Baptism.

54. There are some passages in the New Testament, which seem plainly to
suggest to us, that it was a constant Custom with the Apostles of Christ, to
lay their Hands upon all such as had been Baptized (which laying on of Hands
was undoubtedly accompanied with Prayer to God) in order to their receiving the
Gifts and Graces of the Holy Spirit of God: But that this was a thing
positively prescribed, and commanded, I do not find clearly proved: And
therefore, although I dare not hastily condemn those particular Churches, where
this same Custom is disused or intermitted; yet since the Grace and Assistance
of the Holy Ghost, in order to the leading of a good life, and obtaining
eternal Happiness, is for ever continued unto the Church, as I have said Part
2.. 42. and therefore ought ever to be sought for (although the working of
Miracles and speaking of all Languages, without learning them, be ceased from
amongst us) I cannot but conclude, that the laying on of Hands upon persons
that have been baptized, together with Prayer to God for their growth and
continuance in Grace, which is commonly called Confirmation, is a prudent and
godly Custom, and ever fit to be continued in the Church.

55. As every particular Man whatsoever is obliged, in his own private person,
to honor and worship God; so the Church, being a Society incorporated for the
better serving of God, is under an Obligation to do the same in her associated
capacity, that is to say, to assemble together for his worship. And because the
whole Number of Christians, which are dispersed over the Face of the Earth, are
not capable of meeting together in one place; the Universal Church therefore
lies under a necessity of subdividing it self into particular Churches; and
those again into particular Congregations, according as they find to be most
convenient for the pursuing that same end for which they are so incorporated.
Moreover, since all these particular Churches and Congregations are still, or
ought to be, but Parts and Members of that One Catholic Church which our
Savior Christ has appointed and founded, it follows, that none of them ought
to constitute or act any thing amongst themselves, which may give a just
occasiou for the breaking of that Union and Concord which he designed, and has
commanded always to be maintained amongst them. But on the contrary, Matters
ought every where so to be ordered, as that if a Member of any one particular
Church should travel into any other part of the World, he may meet with nothing
in any Christian Congregation, where he comes, which justly should be a
hinderance to him from assembling or communicating with it.

56. The particular acts to be performed in these Christian Assemblies, are all
such as tend to the Edification of the People in Virtue and Godliness (which is
the design of their Incorporation) and consequently, to the promoting of each
man's eternal Salvation (which is the end that every Christian is supposed to
pursue.) All which are reducible to these Two Heads, viz. Devotion toward God,
which includes Confession of sins, Prayer for all things necessary, both for
themselves and others, and Praising of God, as well for his own Excellency and
Perfection, as for his Love and Beneficence to all Mankind: And 2. the
Instruction of the People which are assembled; which is to be done by Reading
and Explaining the Holy Scriptures, Catechizing, Preaching, etc. But there is
one act of Devotion toward God to be performed in such public Assemblies,
which is commonly known by the name of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, or
the Holy Communion; of which it will be fit to say something more particularly,
because it is an Ordinance altogether of positive Institution, as well as
Baptism, of which I have already spoken.

57. As our Saviors Death and Passion, which he underwent for the sins of the
whole World, should ever out of Gratitude, be remembered by us in the most
emphatical and affecting manner; so except we have, every one of us, a share
and interest in that Atonement which he thereby made to God for us, we cannot,
by the Terms of the Gospel, hope for eternal Salvation. In order then to both
these Ends he himself before his Death appointed it, as a perpetual Ordinance,
for ever to be continued in his Church, that Bread should be blessed, broken,
and eaten; and a Cup also blessed, distributed and drank, in such assemblies as
should meet together in his Name, not only as a Remembrance of his Sufferings
for us, which are thereby shown forth and represented; but also as the
Communion, that is to say, the exhibition of his Body and Blood unto, and the
participation of them, by all faithful and good Christians. To say with the
Roman Church, that the Substance of Bread and Wine, being blessed or
consecrated in this Ordinance, are transubstantiated or turned into the very,
real Substance, of the Body and Blood of Christ, so as that that very same Body
of his which was crucified, and that Blood which was shed, are wholly and
entirely received into the bodily Mouth, and swallowed down by every
Communicant, does not only draw after it such monstrous Absurdities, as no Man,
I think, without renouncing his Reason, can digest, nor can be inferred from
any passage of Scripture interpreted according to the Rules which I have laid
down, Part 1.. 25. and 33. But is also directly contrary even to the Letter, as
well as Meaning of the New Testament; in which the Bread, in this Holy
Institution, is plainly called Bread (and by the same Rule the Wine must still
remain Wine, as to its natural substance) even after the Blessing or
Consecration of it. As therefore I must needs conclude, that the Body and Blood
of Christ are not received by the Members of his Church after that manner,
which they of Rome do define; so must it also follow, that their Worshipping of
the Host and pretended Sacrifice of Christ in the Mass, together with their
depriving the Laity of the Cup (which besides other Absurdities do wholly
depend upon the Doctrine of Transubstantiation) are none other than mere human
and unlawful Inventions and practices. But since a Man may then be said truly
to receive and partake of any thing, tho at never so great a distance from him,
when he has a real Interest in it, and enjoys the Benefit and Advantage of it
(as a Man may have an Estate, and reap the Profits of it, tho it lies in a far
distant Country) I do therefore conclude, that the way whereby we do receive,
or communicate in, the Body and Blood of Christ, by this Ordinance, is by being
made Partakers of those Benefits which by the Crucifying of his Body, and the
shedding of his Blood do accrue to us; and that whosoever eats of this Bread,
and drinks of this Cup in such a manner as Christ has appointed, has thereby
assuredly a share of those Benefits held forth and conveyed unto him.

58. How often this Ordinance is to be practiced and repeated in every
Congregation, is not expressly determined, either by Christ or his Apostles;
and therefore can only be regulated by the Prudence of the Church it self: But
common Reason will tell us, that it should be so often at least, as may be
sufficient to preserve a fresh and lively Remembrance of the Sufferings of our
Savior in the minds of the People; this being one main End of its first
Institution And so often therefore ought every Christian, who is arrived to
years of understanding (for such only are capable of doing any thing in
remembrance of another) to come and be partakers of it. For to contemn or
neglect this Ordinance, which Christ has appointed for such a peculiar End,
argues a great slight and disregard of his Death and Passion (besides the
Disobedience to his Command) and therefore is justly to be looked on as a very
great and heinous sin.

59. As it is a great Affront, and even a Mocking of God, for a Man to draw
near to him in any of his Ordinances, without a sincere and well-meaning heart
(for which Reason Hypocrisy in Scripture is represented as most odious, and the
Prayer and Sacrifice of a wicked Man, whilst he continues such, is said to be
an Abomination unto God) so does he seem to resent such a Practice in no
instance more than in this of the Holy Communion; of which he who eats and
drinks unworthily, is expessly said by the Apostle to be quilty of the Body and
Blood of Christ, and to eat and drink damnation to himself: Which Expressions
although they are differently interpreted by diverse persons, yet in whatever sense
we take them, they do abundantly show, that God is in a particular manner
offended with those, who any way profane this sacred Institution. It therefore
is the Duty, and ought very much to be the concern, of every Christian first,
to examine himself, and to make the best trial and enquiry that he can, whether
he be truly sincere in his resolutions of serving and obeying God faithfully
all his life-long (for any person who is thus disposed, and none other, is ever
acceptable to God) And then with Devotion and Reverence suitable unto such
Sincerity, to come and eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup: That as, on
the one side, he may not neglect what Christ has commanded and required; so, on
the other, he may not incur the Penalty which is threatened to an unworthy
Receiver.

60. He that worships or prays to God by himself alone, may do it as well by
offering up only the inward Thoughts and Desires of his Mind, which are clearly
seen and known unto God, as by expressing himself outwardly by Words; which tho
even in our private Devotions they may be very proper to keep our Minds intent
upon what we are about, yet are no way necessary to inform God of what we think
or wish for. But when a Society of Men do meet to join together in God's
worship, their Devotion must of necessity be outwardly expressed in Words;
because there is no other way of keeping their Thoughts (wherein their Worship
does consist) united and joined together. And since Words not understood are in
effect the same with no Words at all; I conclude, that the Language wherein the
Worship of any Church or Congregation is offered up to God, must always be such
as is well understood by the Assembly of the People who meet together. Nor does
even the Doctrine of Transubstantiation amaze me more than that the Church of
Rome should own the 14th. Chapter of St. Paul's first Epistle to the
Corinthians to be the Word of God, and yet have all their public Services
every where performed in the Latin Tongue only, which is not now understood by
the generality of any Nation in the World.

61. As Peace and Unity, mutual Love and good Agreement amongst the Members of
every Society, together with Order and Decency in all that is transacted
amongst them, absolutely necessary to the being and continuance, or at least to
the well-being of the Society it self; so are they carefully prescribed and
inculcated by Christ and his Apostles, as things to be always preserved and
maintained in the Christian Church. And as he, who first occasions the
violation of any of them, is plainly guilty of a very great sin; so in all
Matters that are not particularly and clearly determined by God's Law, we
cannot propose a better and safer Rule to our selves, than always to do that
which tends most to the advancement and preservation of them.

62. If some certain time be not determined for Christians to meet together for
God's Worship, which every Man may know of before it comes, and accordingly
prepare himself for it by laying aside, for that time, his worldly Business;
Disorder and Confusion (which is the natural Consequence of Uncertainty) must
needs follow. That one Day at least, in seven was expressly required by God,
under the Mosaic Law, to be sanctified and set a part for his Service, is
beyond dispute. That the Observation of the Jewish Sabbath, or the last Day of
the Week is not required from the Christian Church, to me seems very evident
from St. Paul's reckoning it amongst the transitory Shadows of the old Law,
Col. 2. 17. But that we Christians ought not to be behindhand with the Jews, in
setting apart a proportion of our time for God's Service, I think will follow
as well from the great Mercies which we have received from him; for which we,
no less than they, ought to show and express our Thankfulness; as also from
that general Rule which our Savior has given us, that our Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees. And that accordingly one Day in seven, namely the First
Day of the Week (which in Scripture is therefore called the Lord's Day, Rev. 1.
10.) has ever been so set apart for the Service of God in all Christian
Churches, I presume will be denied by none; As also, that the Reason of the
Apostles making choice of this particular Day, was in remembrance of our
Savior's glorious Resurrection, which on that Day was performed, and whereby
their Faith in him, which began to waver, was confirmed and raised above all
doubt or diffidence. Now since no Reason can be given, or so much as imagined
why this Day should be changed for any other Day of the Week; I do from what
has been said conclude, that the Lord's Day, or First Day of the Week, ought
for ever to be kept holy in the Christian Church; and particularly dedicated to
the Service of God. And where either the Church universal, or any particular
Church has set aside any other days to be kept holy, in remembrance either of
any of God's Mercies to us; or of the Martyrdom of any of his chosen Saints,
who sealed the Truth of the Gospel with their Lives, and transmitted it so
confirmed down unto us; or as Days of Fasting or Abstinence, in order to humble
our selves before God for our Sins; since in all this there is nothing contrary
to God's Law; nor any thing but what may be well consistent with, and
serviceable to, true Piety; It will follow from what I have said, 61. That
every Member of such a Church is obliged to keep and observe these same other
Holy Days, so far as no way to give Scandal, disturb the Order, or break the
Peace of the Church which has established them.

63. Order and Decency necessarily require that all the outward circumstances
of Worship, which God himself has not determined by his own Law, should be so
settled by the Church, as that all Confusion and Unseemliness therein may, as
much as is possible, be avoided. But care on the other side ought ever to be
taken, that Modes and Ceremonies be not so multiplied as to become uneasy and
burdensome, or distract the Devotion of the People. Now there being no such
fixed and demonstrable Rules of Decency and Order, but what will have a
different relish with different Men, according to their several Educations, and
Customs to which they may have been used; it will be very difficult, if not
impossible, for any Church so to regulate these external matters as to please
every Man's Fancy, and give disgust to none: For what some may think to be but
decent, others may take to be too formal or pompous; and what these may
apprehend to be suitable to the Simplicity of Christianity, another sort may
look on as mean and jejune. As therefore the Church in this case can do no
more, but act according to the best of her Prudence; so since every Man cannot
expect to have his particular Fancy in these things pleased and gratified; It
will evidently appear to be the Duty of each private Christian, so far to
comply with every such constitution of the Church where he dwells (provided
there be nothing in it which is sinful) as not to break the Peace and Unity, or
disturb the Order of the Church on that account. But if any Church shall offer
to impose any Ceremonies or practices whatsoever (which God has not prescribed,
and which therefore are in themselves indifferent) not for Decency and Order;
but as things in themselves Holy, or absolutely necessary to Salvation (as some
of old would have done by the Jewish Ceremonies) with such Impositions as these
no Christian ought at all to comply; nor suffer his Religion or Conscience to
be thus burdened: But every Man must stand fast in that Liberty wherewith
Christ has made us free; tho at the same time he must be very careful not to
pretend, or use this Liberty as a Cloak of Maliciousness.

64. Since different Opinions in matters of Religion are generally apt to beget
Dissensions and Animosities between those who entertain them, as our daily
Experience does abundantly testify; It ought to be the Church's, and every
private Christian's endeavor, that all Men may become of one and the same
Judgment, or at least, that there may be as few Differences amongst them as is
possible. When therefore any religious Dispute arises, whereby the Church's
Peace and Unity is like to be endangered, It is free and proper for (Nor is
there any thing which should hinder) either the Church universal, or any
particular Church, or even any prudent Men whatsoever, to declare and publish
their sense of the matter in debate. But as no Man can be obliged to believe
the Determination of any Church or party whatsoever, any farther than he is
convinced and satisfied of its agreement with Reason and the Holy Scriptures,
Part 2.. 1, and 2. so is not any Man bound to oppose or dispute even against an
Error it self; except there be something in it which is injurious to Christian
Faith or practice; and consequently which may prove pernicious to Men's
Salvation. And therefore if such a Mistake, which may have prevailed in any
Church, cannot well be rectified without endangering the breach of Peace and
Charity (because they who hold it, it may be, are obstinately wedded to it) I
think it is the Duty of us all to be very tender in such a case, and to permit
every Man freely to abound in his own Sense, until such time as God shall think
fit to bring them to a clearer sight of the Truth. And by no means to renounce
the Communion of any Church on the account of any Error that is not damnable;
and much less on account only of such Terms or Expressions as are but abstruse
or of doubtful signification. For otherwise since the Apprehensions of Men are
so very different (especially in such things as being remote from our Senses
are matter only of rational Speculation) if Difference of Opinion upon such
theological Questions, as do not immediately concern our Salvation, were a
sufficient ground for Separation in point of Communion, there would soon be
probably almost as many Churches as Men in the World. But if any Church shall
require from a Man, either to comply with, or practice, any thing, which is,
not only against his Fancy in point of Decency or Convenience, but also against
his Conscience in point of Lawfulness; or that he should not only be silent and
not oppose, but also explicitly profess the Belief of, any such Doctrines as he
judges to be false (however innocent the Belief of them may be to them who
think them true) and if such a Church shall refuse and deny her Communion to
all those who will not join with her upon these Terms; We must rather be
contented to be excluded from such a Church's Communion, than to purchase it by
solemnly telling a down right Lie before God and the World, or by the violation
of any other of God's Commands: For if we offer to do Evil that Good may come
of it, St. Paul has declared us to be in a state of Damnation.

65. For the due regulation of every Society, it is necessary that it have a
Power, somewhere or other vested in it, over its own Members, either to compel
them to live orderly, according to its Laws and Constitutions, or, if any of
them are disobedient and refractory, and will not, upon due admonition, be
reclaimed; wholly to exclude them from the Body of the Community. For,
otherwise, if the Members of any Society may at their pleasure break its
Constitutions, and violate its Laws without control, this would be wholly to
pull down the Enclosure, and lay all open and common, as before; and
consequently, in effect to dissolve the Society it self. And accordingly our
Savior has given the Church a Power to admonish and rebuke those who give any
scandal by their ungodly and unruly Behavior; and if upon this they do not
repent and reform, of rejecting and cutting them off from her Communion. Which
Authority must ever be exercised with due mildness and caution, for the
edification, and not with heat and fury, which in the end would more probably
tend to the destruction of the Church. But if any Church shall go beyond this
to punish or persecute Men, with Fire and Sword or with Fines and Imprisonment,
only for being of a different persuasion from, and refusing to communicate
with, her; In my Opinion she herein acts contrary to that Mildness and
Gentleness which the Gospel upon all occasions prescribes; and particularly in
the case of dealing with those who oppose themselves to it, 2 Timothy 2. 24. Although
at the same time it cannot be de^yed, but that if any Man, under the pretense
of Conscience, or Religion, shall advance such Doctrines or do such acts as are
destructive to the peace or safety of the civil State or Commonwealth; the
civil Magistrate may, and ought to punish such a person according to the Laws
of the Land, notwithstanding all his pretenses. For if the Plea of Conscience
(the truth of which can only be known to Almighty God) be sufficient to save
any Malefactor from Punishment, no civil Society can ever be safe, and all
humane Laws and Magistrates would be wholly useless. See Part 1.. 35.

66: And as Almighty God in his Mercy is pleased not to cut the greatest
sinners off from all hopes of pardon; but is ready at any time, upon their true
and sincere Repentance, to receive them again into his Favor, so has he
committed unto the Church the ministry of Reconciliation; which Church
therefore accordingly ought not only to endeavor to bring sinners to
Repentance by Preaching. Admonition and Exhortation; but also wherever she sees
evident Marks and Tokens of it in any person (of which yet there ought to be
good assurance) for his greater comfort and ease of Conscience, to remit or
absolve him from his sins, and restore him again to the benefit and privilege
of Christian Communion, of which I suppose that he has, or ought to have, been
deprived: And whatever Sentence of thus binding or loosing, remitting or
retaining of Men's sins is duly and regularly pronounced by the Church upon
Earth, our Savior assures us it shall be ratified and confirmed by God in
Heaven. But that a Man is obliged to make a particular Confession of all his
sins unto any other person, except God, in order to obtain the Pardon of, or
Absolution from them; as I no where find it asserted in the Holy Scripture; so
the reason which the Roman Divines do allege for it, is very weak and
unconcluding: For it is not the particular Confession of a Man's sins (which
may be performed by the most hardened impenitent) but his Contrition, and the
visible reformation of his life (which may sufficiently appear without a
particular Confession) that only can enable the Church or her Ministers to
judge whether he truly repents of his sins or not, and consequently whether he
be a proper Object of God's Mercy and the Church's Favor. Although I deny not but
that in some cases it may be very proper for a Man to make known the diseases
of his Soul to a prudent Spiritual Physician, that he may have his advice for
the cure of them. And his Duty also to make an open Confession of his sins
whenever it is necessary for God's Glory, or to repair any public scandal
which has been given by him.

67. That Almighty God, even where he has pardoned a Man's sins upon his true
Repentance, may yet, on the score of those very sins which he has so pardoned,
lay some sharp and severe temporal Afflictions upon the penitent, either to
keep him more effectually from sinning for the time to come, or that it may be
a Terror to others; or for many other reasons best known to himself, is a thing
that cannot be disputed. But from hence to infer, that these temporal
Afflictions, if not laid on us in this World, are to be undergone in Purgatory,
and that therefore, for the preventing them, it is fit and necessary that
Penance should be imposed by way of satisfaction, or Indulgences granted by way
of Remission; and all this without any Warrant from the Holy Scripture, save
only a faint and forced Consequence from some few perverted Texts; is a thing
so groundless and precarious, that it amazes me to think how Men can suffer
themselves to be so grossly imposed upon. And whosoever shall duly consider
upon what weak grounds the Pope and his Prelates do pretend to a Power of
dispensing and distributing the Merits of Christ unto the People by way of
Indulgence (as if they alone had the keeping of that Treasure under Lock and
Key; and to which, tho, infinite, they have yet added the Merits of the Saints
to make their Treasure more abundant) will, I think, very much wonder that
their People should be so free to part with their earthly Treasure in
purchasing these Indulgences upon no better security.

68. That the Apostles of Christ, when they were first sent abroad to preach
the glad Tidings of the Gospel, did anoint many sick persons with Oil, and
thereby miraculously heal them, we are plainly told by St. Mark, c. 6. v 13.
And that in this they did no more than what Christ himself had expressly
commanded them, is most reasonable and probable to suppose. Moreover, that the
anointing with Oil, which is mentioned by St. James, c. 5. v. 14. was intended
for the very same purpose; viz. the raising up the sick person and restoring
him to Health, is as apparent as any thing can be form the very Context. But as
we do not find that this anointing of the sick was appointed either by Christ
or his Apostles, as a standing and perpetual Ordinance for ever to be used in
the Church; so since Experience shows, that the miraculous effect of healing
thereby is now wholly ceased; I can see no reason why the practice it self
should be any longer continued. But what just ground the Church of Rome can
have from either of these, or any other place of Scripture for the divine
Institution of their Extreme Unction, which they make use of for a far
different end, namely the preparing thereby of persons who are past hopes of
recovery, for their passage into the next life, is more than I am able to find
out.

69. As the Body natural would be but a confused and useless Lump, if it were
not distinguished into the several Members, which are necessary for its own
Service and preservation: And as the Bodypolitick would be but a disorderly
Rabble, if there were not Magistrates settled to rule and govern, and
ministerial Officers appointed to perform all necessary Functions in and about
it; so the Holy Scripture, as well as Reason, assures us (and the practice of
the apostolical Church, which is there recorded, confirms it) that the like
Appointment and distinction of Offices are no less necessary in the Church; in
order to the regular and orderly government of it, and the due execution of all
its Laws and Constitutions. But how far these Offices are limited and appointed
by the Law of God, or how far left to be settled, and determined by the Prudence
of the Church, according as Circumstances may render it convenient, is what I
shall not take upon me to pronounce my Sentence in. But whatever Polity or
ecclesiastical Constitution is settled and acquiesced in, either by the whole
Church in general, or by that of any Nation or Country in particular, I think,
ought quietly to be submitted to by every one who would be a Member of such
respective Church, except there appears to him to be either something therein,
which is not only uncommanded, but even contrary to the Law of God; or else
something wanting, which God requires, and therefore is absolutely necessary to
be maintained and kept up in all Churches. Nor can I apprehend that any less
Warrant can be sufficient for breaking or endangering the Peace or Unity of the
Church (the preservation of which is so often and so earnestly recommended to
us in the Holy Scripture) besides the absolute necessity of obeying the
Positive Command of God himself. And therefore, since the Government of the
Church by Bishops, that is to say, by certain persons having in their several
Districts a Priority among, and in some respects a Superiority over, the
Presbyters; has for so many Ages been universally settled amongst, and
acquiesced in by, all Christians in all parts of the World; I cannot find how
they can be excused, who (without any necessity for so doing) have so earnestly
set themselves, not only to retrench the Exceffes, and rectify the Abuses of
the episcopal Power; but also to pull down, and wholly abolish, the very Order
it self; to the no small scandal of those who think that so universal a
Constitution, every where taking place, even in the primitive Church, could be
grounded on no less than an Apostolic Ordinance (of which there seems to be
some, not obscure, Footsteps in the Scriptures of the New Testament) and that
most probably in conformity to that Imparity which Christ himself established
between the Apostles and the seventy Disciples; who were yet both commissioned
by him to preach the Gospel.

70. How far a case of necessity may, upon some occasions, excuse or justify a
Man for taking on him an Office which regularly does not belong to him,
especially if his design therein be truly honest and sincere, I know not. But
no Man certainly ought to intrude into any ecclesi astical Function; or
exercise any such Office, who is not called and admitted thereunto by the
lawful Authority, and according to the established Constitutions of the
Society. For if this be not carefully observed, the distinction of Offices and
Functions in the Church is in effect wholly taken away; and a wide Door opened
for Confusion and Anarchy. But then on the other side, good care ought ever to
be taken by the Church, that no persons be entrusted with any sacred Office,
but such as are duly qualified for it; And that such a Maintenance be provided
and settled for every such person, as that he may not be necessitated to neglect
the public Service of God and the due exercise of his Function, by being
constrained to bestow and spend overmuch of his Time and Labor in getting a
Living for himself and his Family.

71. I have now gone through what I at first designed; and have not, that I
know of, omitted any one thing which I could judge to be a material or
necessary part of Religion; Although I have on purpose endeavored to avoid the
use of some Words, which do frequently occur in all or most Systems of Divinity
that I have met with; And the reason why I have so done, is not that I find
fault with the Words themselves; but because I would have my Reader take notice
that Religion does not consist in Terms of Art or forms of expression; but in
the belief and practice of such things as God has made known, and requires from
us; And it is too common among Men to wrangle about Words, before they have
clearly fixed and agreed upon the meaning of them. I have not, for example,
made use of this Term Justification; But yet I have endeavored to show upon
what conditions a sinner obtains the Pardon of his sins and Mercy at the hand
of God; which is the same thing: Nor have I said any thing of the nature or
number of Sacraments: But I have spoken what I thought might be necessary
concerning Baptism, the Holy Communion, and those other things which the Church
of Rome calls by that name. And if once I am satisfied touching any thing, how
far God requires it from us, and whether or no it be necessary to Salvation; I
cannot see why I should trouble my self much in enquiring, whether such a thing
may properly be called a Sacrament or not, which to me seems no more but a
dispute about the meaning of a Word. True indeed, it is, that in the Doctrine
of the Trinity, which I have delivered, Part 2.. 22. I have expressly made use
of the Terms person, substance, etc. because I could find none others so fit
and proper to express my Thoughts; Nor durst I venture in so sublime a matter
to apply new Words to those things of which I can have but very imperfect and
obscure Conceptions. And having thus said all that I intend upon this occasion,
I freely submit the Whole to the Judgment and Censure of every Reader; leaving
him to that liberty which I my self always desire to enjoy; and being ready to
retract any thing that I have said, whenever I am convinced that I have been
therein mistaken.

Books Printed for Richard Sare
THe Fables of Esop with Morals and Reflections, Folio.

Erasmus Colloquies in English, 8o. Quevedo's Visions, 8o.

These 3 by Sir Roger L'Estrange.

The Genuine Epistles of St. Barnabas, St. Ignatius, St. Clement, St. Polycarp,
the Shepherd of Hermas, etc. Translated and published in English, 8o.

A Practical Discourse concerning Swearing, 8o.

The Authority of Christian Princes, over Ecclesiastical Synods, in Answer to a
Letter to a Convocation Man, 8o.

Sermons on several Occasions, 4o.

These by Dr. Wake.

Epictetus's Morals with Simplicius's Coment, 8o.

A Sermon Preached upon the Death of the Queen.

Both by Mr. George Stanhope.

The Doctrine of a God and Providence vindicated and asserted, 8o.

Discourses on several Divine Subjects, 8o. These two by Thomas Gregory,
Lecturer of Fulham.

Dr. Gregory's Divine Antidote, in Answer to an Heretical Pamphlet, Entitled
an End to the Socinian Controversy, 8o.

Essays upon several Moral Subjcts, in two parts, by Jeremy Collier, M. A. 8o.

Complete Sets, consisting of 8 Volumes of Letters writ by a Turkish Spy who
lived 45 Years at Paris undiscovered, giving an account of the Principal
Affairs of Europe, 12o

Humane Prudence, or the Art by which a man may raise himself and Fortune to
Grandeur, 12o.

Moral Maxims and Reflections, written in French by the Duke of Rochfoucault,
now Englished, 12o.

Of the Art both of writing and judging of History, with Reflections upon
Ancient as well as Modern Historians. By Father Le Moyne. 12o.

An Essay upon Reason, by Sir George Mackenzie, 12o.

Death made comfortable, or the way to dye well. By John Kettlewel. 12o.

The Parson's Counselor, or the Law of Tyths. By Sir Simon Degg, 8o.

The Unlawfulness of Bonds of Resignation, 8o. Price 6 d.

An Answer to all the Excuses and Pretenses which Men ordinarily make for their
not coming to the Holy Sacrament, 8o. Price 3 d. by a Divine of the Church of
England.

Remarks on a Book Entitled, Prince Arthur an Heroic Poem, by Mr. Denis, 8o.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX TO A GENTLEMEN's RELIGION: In which it is Proved, That nothing
contrary to our Reason, can possibly be the Object of our Belief; But that it
is no just Exception against some of the Doctrines of Christianity, that they
are above our Reason.

LONDON: Printed for R. Sare, at Grays-Inn-Gate, in Holbourn, School.

AN APPENDIX TO A Gentleman's Religion.
1. HOW those Persons who take unto themselves the distinguishing Name of
Unitarians do dissent from the main Body of Christians, of whatsoever Church or
Persuasion, touching the Doctrines of the Trinity, and the Incarnation of our
Savior Christ, is so well known, that I need not here offer to open or explain
in the Terms of the Controversy which is managed between them. Now when in
this Dispute the Unitarians are pressed with some passages of Scripture, which
seem very evidently to make against them, besides other ways which they have to
avoid the force of them, they commonly have recourse to the nature of the thing
controverted; and press their Adversaries back again with this demand, How such
a thing can possibly be? And when to this it is replied, That there is
evidently no Contradiction to sound Reason in the Doctrines themselves, and
that the Truth of them ought ot be believed upon the Authority of God, who has
revealed them: But that the manner of them is utterly above, and altogether
incomprehensible to our finite and narrow Understandings, and therefore not to
be enquired after. In return to this, there are some who maintain, that if
these Doctrines were not contrary to Reason, yet this alone is a sufficient
cause to reject them, that they are confessedly above it. For of that which is
above our Reason (say they) we can form no true Conception, or Idea; and it is
absurd, or rather impossible for a Man to believe, that which he cannot clearly
and plainly so much as conceive or apprehend.

2. For the right stating and clearing of this whole Controversy, I have given
such hints in the Gentleman's Religion, Part 1. Sect. 33. Part 2. 22, 23, 37.
as I thought to be most fit for Men of ordinary Capacity, and most suitable to
that brevity which I all along defigned. But in this Appendix, I shall address
my self unto those, who are of a more refined Understanding, and accustomed to
a more exact way of thinking; and try if I can give them any satisfaction in a
Matter, which seems to be not a little perplexed, perhaps by the overmuch
Curiosity of some of both the contending Parties.

3. That our Knowledge of things is but short and imperfect, is confessed on
all sides. It is also very evident, that no Language whatsoever will afford us
variety of Words sufficient to express all the Diversities and Peculiarities of
our Thoughts, so as to secure them from the Mistakes of Ignorance, or
Misapprehension, and the Cavils of Perverseness; but that after all our Care,
our most cautious Expressions will sometimes be liable to be misinterpreted to
a contrary, or at least, wrested to a different meaning, from what we intended.
And therefore the most Acute and Judicious Writer will probably find himself
much mistaken, if he at any time hopes so to handle any Controversy as to
satisfy every Man. But since, upon the strictest Examination which I have been
able to make, I am my self fully convinced of the Truth of what I have
concluded in this Dispute, I will now (with God's Assistance) try, whether I
can express my Thoughts with so much clearness, and prove them with such
sufficient Arguments, and pertinent Instances, as may give some Satisfaction to
others also: And that I may the more effectually do this, I shall endeavor to
proceed as near as I can in such a Method, as is always used. in Mathematical
Demonstrations.

4. This word Doctrine is but another Term for a Propesition; and what a
Proposition is, or when it is said to be true or false, certain, probable, or
doubtful, I need not spend time to explain.

5. Reason is that faculty in Man (for I meddle not with the Knowledge of
Angels) whereby he apprehends, things, and their Attributes or Properties; and
frames a Judgment concerning what he apprehends. And also from those Judgments
which he makes, draws sometimes more immediate, or more remote and distant
Consequences.

6. The Truth of some Propositions is so very plain, that as no Man in his
Senses can deny them, so is it impossible to find out any thing which is more
plain whereby to prove them. And such Propositions as these I call selfevident:
Such for Example are, That all the parts of a thing taken together are equal to
the whole. That both parts of a Contradiction cannot be true at the same time;
and the like.

7. When the Truth of a Proposition does not immediately appear by its own
light, but yet the Proposition can, beyond question, be proved from other
Propositions which are self-evident; such a Proposition as this I term to be
built upon Reason alone. Such for instance are, That two Triangles, having
equal bases, and being contained between the same parallel Lines, are equal;
and all other Propositions which are capable of being demonstrated, or clearly
proved from the bare Principles of Reason.

8. Where the possibility of a Proposition (i. e. that it implies no
Contradiction) can be evidently proved from the Principles of Reason alone, but
yet the actual Truth and Reality of it cannot the same way be made appear, such
a Proposition as this I call reconcilable to Reason. Thus for Example; That an
Oak should grow up to its full and usual Stature, in an hour, is as possible
(that is to say, as free from Contradiction) as that it should do the same in
an hundred years; (for all growth is motion, and the swiftness of motion may be
for ever increased) but that ever this was actually so, cannot be proved by any
Arguments drawn from Reason.

9. Where any Proposition (either immediately in it self, or mediately in its
Consequences) does plainly contradict any other Proposition which is either
self-evident, or built upon Reason, such a Proposition as this I term to be
contrary to Reason; such for Example is this Proposition, That the three Angles
of a Triangle are equal to three right Angles, and such like.

10. Where a Proposition is in it self true, but we are unable clearly to
apprehend or frame a Notion or Conception of the things contained under the
terms of it, such a Proposition I term to be above Reason. And a Proposition
may be either wholly and altogether above our Reason, when we can frame no
manner of Conception of the things spoken of, or else but partly above it, when
some Notions of the things we have, but those very obscure and imperfect. Thus
the Doctrine of Light and Colors, is wholly above the Reason of a Man born
blind, who can frame no manner of Notion of these things from the Description
which others make of them, because he is altogether destitute of proper Organs
to receive any Impression from the things themselves. But the same Doctrine
would not be so much above the Reason of a Man, who had some faint and confused
glimmering of Sight; though still much more above his Reason than it would be if
he were endowed with the saculty of clear and distinct Sight, as other Men
commonly are.

11. To know, is to give assent to a Proposition when it evidently appears to
be built upon Reason. But when the Truth of a Proposition is assented to, not
upon Arguments drawn from the Reason, or the Nature of the thing, but upon
account of the Veracity, and Authority of the Person or Persons who affirm it;
such a Proposition as that is said to be believed. Furthermore, If a Man
understands not the meaning of a Proposition, and yet believes that it contains
a Truth in it, because of the deference he pays to the Person who speaks it;
this I call an implicit belief: And properly speaking, the Object of such a
belief is not the Truth of the Proposition it self, but only the Veracity of
the Speaker. But where a Man understands the meaning of the Proposition which
he believes, this I call an Explicit Belief.

12. No Man can possibly believe or give his Assent to any Doctrine or
Proposition which appears to him to be contrary to Reason, (see Sect. 9.) For
to own a Proposition to be self-evident, or built upon Reason, and yet at the
same time to believe another which mediately, or immediately, is contradictory
to it, is absolutely impossible.

13. If a Proposition be reconcilable to Reason, (Sect. 8.) and the Truth of it
also testified by such Persons whose Veracity is beyond all doubt, or
exception; such a Proposition cannot but be believed by any one unto whom it
comes so testified. For if it be reconcilable to Reason, then it may possibly
be true; (Sect. 8.) and if I am actually convinced of the Veracity of the
Person or Persons, who relate it, I cannot choose but believe that it is True.
From whence I think it evidently follows, that Revelation, or the Testimony of
another, may justly be looked upon, not only as a means of Information, but
also a motive of Persuasion, whatever a late Author says to the contrary.

14. But that which is most material in this present Controversy, is what I am
now going to make appear, viz. That a Man may have most sufficient, and cogent
Arguments, to give his Assent to such Propositions as are not only in part, but
wholly, and altogether above his Reason. (Sect. 10.) For the clear and plain
evincing of which, I shall crave leave to make a Relation of a Conference which
once I had with a blind Man; to whom, when I understood that he had been quite
blind from his Infancy, and never could remember to have seen the least
glimmering of Light, I had the Curiosity to put several questions. I asked him
first of all, Whether ever he had endeavored to frame any Notion or
Conception, of Light or Colors, of which I suppose he had often heard mention
to be made in common Discourse? To which he answered me, That he had often
endeavored it with the greatest Application of his Mind that possibly he
could. And to that end and purpose he had made it his Business to ask all the
questions he could think of, whereby to get Information, but all to no purpose;
for that he was still altogether as ignorant of the Nature of Light and
Colors, and as unable to frame any Conception of them, as if he had never
before heard the Names of them. He told me moreover, that he was a long time
before he would, or could believe, that other Men had any faculty at all which
he wanted. For, says he, I was sensible of no Defect or Imperfection in my
self, but believed my self to be altogether as perfect as all other Men with
whom I conversed; and therefore when they told me that I was blind, and talked
to me of Light and Colors, I apprehended for a great while, that they did it
only to impose upon me. But are you now convinced, said I, that you are blind;
and that other Men have the faculty of Sight, which you want? Yes, replied he,
I am fully satisfied and convinced of it. How can that be, said I. when you can
frame no manner of Notion of Light or Colors, which are the Objects of Sight?
Thus answered he, I was convinced of it: They would put me at a distance from
them, and yet would tell me every thing that I did; as whether I stood, or
sat, or held up my Hand, or let it down, or the like: Whereas I could not not
discover any thing which they did, except I were close to them, and felt them
carefully with my Hands. Now by this, continued he, I am fully convinced, that
other Men have a faculty which I want, whereby they can discover and
distinguish things at a distance, which they call Sight: And I am told by all
Men, that there is something called Light, which is diffused through the Air,
and is the Instrument whereby they are enabled to exercise this faculty; and
also that the Color and Shape of things are the Objects upon which the same is
employed. But although I can by my touch distinguish between the different
shapes of some things, and so can frame a Notion of Shape: Yet what Light is,
or what Colors are, I have not the least Conception; although I am, as I have
told you, sufficiently convinced, that some such things there are. Now this
Relation being (for the substance of it) true; to my own Knowledge, or at least
(as every Man will own it to be) possible and rational; it will evidently
follow, without any farther proof, that this Man had very good and
unquestionable grounds to believe some things that were altogether above his
Reason; for what Sight, Light, or Colors were, he was utterly incapable of
framing, or receiving, any Idea. But yet that there were such things, and that
all he heard Men discourse about them was not mere Fiction, (as he for some
time apprehended) was plainly proved to him by such Arguments as every
reasonable Man must allow to have been abundantly sufficient to move his
Assent. Nor was this Assent of his which he gave unto these things, a bare
implicit Belief; (Sect. 11.) as if he had been told that something did Exist,
which was called Blictri; but was altogether ignorant of what was signified by
that word, (as Mr. Toland speaks.) For aithough it was absolutely impossible
for him to frame any direct Notion, or Conception, of the things themselves,
yet by those analogous Representations which were made to him of them, he well
might be, and was accordingly, not only fully convinced, that what was spoken
concerning them, was not insignificant Nonsense; but also enabled to frame some
sort of representative Conception of them, which is more than a Man can do of
Blictri; of which he hears only the sound, but knows not the Signification.
For, supposing a Man at the very time of his Birth, to be utterly deprived of
his Organs of Sight; yet, by the use of his other four Senses, he may well
conceive what a faculty of Sensation is; and how a sensible quality, or the
small Particles of Matter flowing, or rebounding from a Body, and striking upon
the proper Organ of Sense, do make such a peculiar Impression upon it, as to
affect our Understanding with some particular Knowledge of the Body it self,
whereby we are enabled to distinguish it from other Bodies. And as he can
directly apply all this to the Senses of Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, and
Touching, of which he may be as good, or a better Master than other Men: So, by
way of Analogy from these Senses, he will be able to make some imperfect sort
of Representation to himself, what sort of thing Sight is; and what Light, and
Colors are; though directly, and particularly, he knows no more of them, than
if he had never heard of them. Sir Kenelm Digby, in his Treatise of Bodies,
Chap. 28. tells us of a Spanish Noble Man, who was born so absolutely deaf,
that if a Gun were shot off close by his Ear, he could not hear it; and yet was
taught to speak very distinctly; and, by the motion of any Man's Mouth, so
perfectly to understand what he said, as that he would not lose a word in a
whole days Conversation. Now the Doctrine of Sounds and Music must of
Necessity have been as much above this Man's Reason, as that of Light and
Colors, was above the blind Man's, of whom I but now spoke; and yet there might
very good Assurance have been given to the one, that there was such a Sense as
Hearing, and such a thing as a Sound, as well as there was unto the other, in
the case of Light and Colors.

15. And now to apply what has been said, to the Controversy concerning the
Trinity, and Incarnation of our Savior. And here the Issue which I am now
trying, presupposes these three things: First, That the Texts of Scripture,
which are brought to prove the Truth of these Doctrines, are sufficient for the
purpose for which they are alleged, if we interpret them according to the
natural Order, and usual signification of the Words and Expressions of them.
Secondly, That the Doctrines themselves are not contrary to Reason, as not
implying any Contradiction; see Part 2. Sect. 22. But Thirdly, That they are
altogether above our Reason, because we cannot frame any Notion or Idea of that
particular Union, and Distinction, which is between the Three Persons of the
Blessed Trinity, or between the two Natures which are in our Lord Jesus Christ:
Which three things being taken for granted, the question that is to be
determined, is, Whether or no it be a sufficient ground for a Man to deny his
Assent to the Doctrines of the Trinity, and Incarnation of Christ, because they
are above his Reason?

16. And here, in the first place, it is very plain, That although we cannot by
any means comprehend the things themselves, yet we do so far understand the
meaning of the Terms in which these Doctrines are expressed, as clearly to
perceive that they are not a company of insignificant Words put together, to
make a sound, and signify nothing. What a Person is, we know; though we cannot
tell what sort of Persons the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are; and how
their Personal Distinction between themselves, particularly and fully differs
from that of Men, one from another. What it is to be One, we well understand,
although we cannot frame an Idea of that special Union which is between those
Divine Persons. What it is for one being to generate another, and what to
proceed from another, we are not ignorant; although the peculiar manner of the
Generation of the Son of God, and the Procession of the Holy Ghost, be beyond
our Capacity to conceive. And Lastly, What it is for two Beings to be United
together, we can very well apprehend; although we pretend not to know the
manner of That Union which is between the two Natures in the Person of Jesus
Christ. From whence it plainly follows, That these Doctrines, though above our
Reason, do yet so far stand upon equal Terms with those Doctrines which I have
termed reconcilable to Reason, Sect. 8. That as our Reason may be plainly and
positive convinced from its own Principles alone, of the possibility of the
one; so is there no Principle of our Reason which can reach so far as to prove
or demonstrate any impossibility in the other. And where there is no
Contradiction, or Impossibility, in a Doctrine, it will undeniably follow, that
that same Doctrine may possibly be true. And where ever a Man is convinced of
the possibility of a Doctrine, if the Truth of that same Doctrine appears to
him to be restified by any Person, of whose Veracity he cannot entertain any
manner of doubt, he cannot refuse to give his Assent to it; as I have said,
Sect. 13. Since then the Veracity of God admits of no manner of doubt, and the
Holy Scriptures are by both Parties in this Dispute allowed of, as most
Authentic Records of the Doctrines of Faith, and Rules of Life, which God has
made known, and revealed to the World. And lastly, since we here suppose, that
the Doctrine of the Trinity, and that of the Incarnation of Christ, do neither
of them contain, or imply, any Impossibility or Contradiction, although they
are both of them above our Reason, it will follow, that if all, or any of the
Texts of Scripture, which are brought to prove these Doctrines, being expounded
according to the common way of interpreting all Books, (of which see Part 1.
Sect. 25.) do fairly (and without being wrested) contain (either in themselves,
or their evident Consequences) those same Doctrines which they are alleged to
establish, there can be no just Cause why any Man should deny his Assent to
them. But if, notwithstanding all this, it be still urged, that it is not
possible for a Man explicitly to believe a thing of which he can frame no
Conception or Idea; I must refer him to the Story of the blind Man, Sect. 14.
which seems to me abundantly to evince the contrary. And why we should not
believe the Doctrines of the Trinity, and Incarnation, upon the Testimony of
the Holy Scriptures, as well as the blind Man did the Existence of Light and
Colors, upon the Testimony of other Men; joined with that collateral
Experiment which I have mentioned, I profess I can see no manner of Reason.

17. And as in my Book, Part 3. Sect. 71. I have advertised my Reader, that I
have purposely avoided the use of certain Words and Terms, for the Reason there
given: So must I desire him to take notice, that for the like Reason, I have
both in my Book, and in this Appendix, omitted so much as to mention the word
Mystery, about which, so great a Noise has of late been made. Whether this same
Term Mystery, be always used in the New Testament, in the very same (and no
other) Signification as it is understood by Heathen Authors? Or, Whether other
sorts of things, by a very allowable Analogy, are not also there called
Mysteries, upon account of their Obscurity; because we know them but in part,
and see them but as in a Glass darkly. Or, Lastly, Whether there be any thing
in Christianity, which may properly be called a Mystery, according to the
genuine meaning of that Term; to me seems to be no more but a Contention about
a word, which the Apostle expressly forbids. 2 Timothy 2. 14. But whatever may be
determined concerning the propriety of the Word, the thing if self seems to me,
to be very evident, that there are some Doctrines in Christianity, which are
above our Reason, and yet that this is no sufficient ground for the denial of
our Assent to them.

18. And if I am told, that after all this, there is no greater obscurity in
any of the Doctrines of Christianity, than what there is in all natural Beings,
with which we most familiarly converse; whose real Essence we cannot penetrate,
but must content our selves with a sort of Superficial Knowledge of them, which
is caused by those Impressions which they make upon our outward Organs; which,
at most, can be termed but a nominal Essence; so that even a spire of Grass, a
Stick, a Stone, or any other natural Being, may upon this account, as truly be
termed Mystericus, as the most sublime Doctrines of Religion. I shall only
answer, that it mightily raises my wonder, to hear Men so freely acknowledge,
that in every other thing whatsoever, there is something which is above their
Reason, and to which their Understanding cannot reach; and yet, that they will
not allow the same in Religion.

19. But I know it will be objected, that the first of those three Suppositions
which I have laid down, Sect. 15. will by no means be granted by the
Unitarians; for they are so far from allowing the Texts of Scripture, which are
brought to prove the Doctrines of the Trinity, and Incarnation, to be any way
sufficient to that purpose; that on the contrary, they do, with the greatest
Assurance, undertake to bring other and contrary Interpetations of those very
Passages, which they pretend to be far more Rational and Natural. To which I
shall only Answer, that this is all that I aim at in this Appendix, that the
Issue of these Controversies may be placed upon that which is the only true
Foundation for it; I mean, the Authority of the Holy Scriptures; and that blind
Men would not take upon them, by the strength of their Reason, to discuss
Problems, and frame Conclusions concerning Light and Colors, of which they can
have no true or sufficient Idea. I am very sensible that learned Men, who have
their Minds strongly prepossessed with any Opinion, may, by their Criticisms,
and Paraphrases, and such like Engines, torture and screw almost any Text of
Scripture, till they make it look with another Aspect from what is truly its
own, and seem to confess what really it never thought or meant. But if we would
always take those Interpretations which flow of themselves, and not those which
are violently pressed from the Scripture, (which I think is the fairest way of
expounding all Speeches and Discourses whatsoever) I cannot, for my part, see
how we can otherwise conclude, concerning the Doctrines of the Trinity, and
Incarnation, than as I have done, Part 2. Sect. 22. 37.

FINIS.

