^EWS of a NEW WO^ FROM The WORD and WORKS of God Compared together.

Evidencing that the Times of the Man of Sin are Legally determin^ and by the
same Right the Days of the S^N of MAN are already Commenced.

Being some Account of Eight Sermons Delivered at a Lecture in London

Whereto for further Evidence are Added Two Small Tracts, The One touching the
Times of Gog and Magog, the other touching the 3 last Vials.

By J. S.

Psalm. 102.13. Thau shall rise and have mercy upon Sion, for (...) to favor
her, yea, the Set time is come.

LONDON, Printed, for Francis Smith at the Elephant and Ca^ near the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil. 1676.

If this be true as here our friend divines,
The promised morning star appears and shines,
Which will us guide into the Land of peace,
Where error, sin and death shall wholly cease.
Added by his Friend, Panagathophilus.
The PREFACE.
Candid Reader,
WAving all Apology for the neglected garb of the ensuing Discourses, which
being not penned before they were delivered, owe their preservation from
oblivion, and their seeing the light in this way only to the value that some of
the hearers put upon the subject and import of them, which moved them out of
their own notes to prepare this copy of them. Waving also a particular account
of the special arguments of the several sermons, which by a continued series of
evidence pursue that one scope of the nearness of the approach of the
Bridegroom, beginning first with the computation and calculation of the
prophetical periods both in Daniel and the Revelation, and thence discending to
the signs given by our savior, Mat. 24. and thence proceeding to the days of
the Son of man (spoken of Luke 17.) showing the complexion thereof, and that
probably these days are begun, offering evidence thereof from the ancient
Tipes, and thence taking into consideration the Vyals, and showing (contrary to
the sense of many) the probability, that six of them are poured forth, whereby
a great stumbling block is removed out of the way of our faith, and hope of the
Lords coming, being so near. I say waving all these, and referring the Reader
for satisfaction to the discourses themselves, I shall discharge the p^rt of
this preface in 5 short notes on that text, Is. 52.7. how beautiful upon the
Mountains are the feet of him that brings good tidings of good, that
publishes salvation, that says unto Sion, thy God reigns? where we see,

1. That the sum total of those good tidings or tidings of good things, that
the ears of the whole creation desire to be blessed withal, the substance, the
crown of that peace, that salvation, that every creature without stretched-neck
waits and looks for, is the reign of Syons God, the reign of the Lord Jesus:
this man shall be the peace when the Assyrian shall come into our land and when
he shall tread in our palaces, Mich 5.5 The Assyrian by a metonymy is the
head-enemy, comprehending under him every subordinate enemy or evil, that shall
be found at last, upon the place, afflicting the Israel of God at Christ's
coming, which must receive their Discharge by the exercise of his regal power:
the reign of Christ ( Syons God and king) is that visible and glorious state of
Christ's kingdom in the earth, with reference to a set appointed time for its
commencement and continuance, when he takes to himself his great power and
reign, Rev. 11.17. as the great and only potentate, king of kings and Lord of
Lords ( 1 Timothy 6.15.) which time is immediately (without any Interregnum) to
take place from the expiration of Antichrists times, measured in the Revelation
by 1260 prophetical days, which when they began and ended, and so by
consequence when the days of the son of man began, is calculated in the ensuing
discourses: these days of the Son of man not beginning with Christ's personal
appearance but with Daniels 45 prophetical days, at the end of his first number
of 1290 days, ch 12. which 45 days or years, as I humbly conceive, are that
generation spoken of by our Savior, wherein all these signs that are
immediately to precede his personal appearance, are to come up in view, and
receive their accomplishment, and in the rear of them the Lord himself will (as
I humbly expect and believe) appear in person. By this stating and bounding of
Christ's reign, those ^es and acts of his mistical and spiritual reign, all
along, (...) great and glorious soever in the overthrow of Judaism and
heathenism, and wasting the man of sin, are shut out (...) account, as
amounting to no more but the keeping up (...) in the world, during the militant
state of the (...) called the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, Rev. 1. but
not yet making these enemies as the chaff of the summer threshing-floor, to be
carried away with the wind, and no place found for them, as they must be, Dan.
2.35. which is the work of these days of the son of man. This is my sirst note
upon these words upon which I have been something long, I shall be briefer in
the rest.

My 2d is this, the peace, the good things, the salvation of Syon, and the
reign of Sions God, commence together; this arises also clearly from the text,
no other, no earlyer messengers bring good tidings, or publish peace to Sion,
then those that say unto her, thy God reigns: there is a twofold appearance
of Christ testified of in the Scriptures; the first as past, the second to
come, each of them have their proper and distinct work and efficacy assigned to
them; we are said to be reconciled by his death, saved by his life, To 4.10.
which life is his second appearance, Heb. 9. last. till his second appearance
we are saved only in hope, To. 8, 24. Gal. 5.5. The second appearance it self
is but in hope to this day, then must all the fruits and advantages of it be so
too: how does this endear Christ's second appearance it self to us? how should
it make us watch to it, long and cry for it, come Lord Jesus come quickly; our
actual and complete salvation depending in it, which till then is a mystery,
then and not till then will be the glorious manifestation of the sons of God;
then will a full and glorious account be given of every letter and title of the
glorious hopes and privileges of the state of believers in Christ; of those
glorious things that are spoken of the city of God, as their being not in the
flesh but in the spirit; their not sinning, nor being able to sin; their being
the righteousness of God, that those that live and believe in Christ shall
never die, with many more, which now are mysteries, but then the vision shall be
made so plain, that he that runs may read it, this is my 2d Observation.

3ly, The manifest glory of the Lord Jesus breaks forth out of the mystical
state of it, as out of a cloud, silently, secretly, and unawars, even to the
surprise of Sion her self, else what make these tidings, these publishings,
what need of them? if to tell no more then was obvious, and what Sion knew
before, it must be some unexpected news that makes these messengers so welcome,
their feet so beautiful: Babylon was taken at one end, three days before
Belshazar knew of it; the Jews were as men that dreamed when God brought back
their captivity thence, having either forgot, or not studied the promise. The
times of the man of sin may expire, and the days of the son of man may
commence, and yet both their parties may be ignorant both of the one and of the
other; in which sense that kingdom of God is said to come, not with
observation.

4ly, It is the gloriousest Testimony in the world to publish the reign of God
nothing makes the feet of any messenger so beautiful as the bringing of these
tidings, the making Evidence of the drawing near of this day. The very eye of
the prophets testimony in the Old testament was Christ's first appearance; the
glory of the prophets testimony under the New Testament is Christ's second
appearance.

Lastly, the first notice of these blessed and joyful tidings is given to those
that are upon the Mountains, and by them are divulged and published to their
fellows, that like, and with themselves have left the City Babylon, ye and
earthly Jerusalem too, Luke 21. that have forsaken the multitude that are on
the mountains as doves of the valleys, Ezekiel. 7.16. lamenting after the Lord, as
in Samuels days, looking for his appearance; such (whether in Churches or out
of Churches) as mourn for the absence of the Bridegroom, embracing mountains
and deserts in spirit, rather then sitting down in any buildings of men;
waiting for that building of God, that Heavenly Jerusalem, that has the glory
of God, that are uneasy, and cannot take up in any state of things, that can
corrupt: to the joy of these will the Lord appear; by these are these tidings
brought, to such as these they are sent, and to every one of these they will be
highly welcome. Wherefore now with the noble Bereans, search the Scriptures,
whether these things be so; you have the scales here put into your hands, the
Epocha's pitched, the Calculation made ready to your perusal, the signs of the
times opened, the dark Characters uncipherd, the types and ancient paralels
applied, the series of the Apocaliptick visions, and many of the Sinchronisms
set before you, what of them is fulfilled, and what yet to be fulfilled: In
reflection upon all which I may say with soberness, without vanity, and
arrogating any thing to my self (who for the light here offered, am the
greatest debtor of all) that many Prophets and righteous men have desired to
see these things, to see such evidence of our redemption drawing nigh, but have
not been favored with it. And if upon perusal of the evidence, you find it so,
as is reported, that we are come to the days of the son of man, and are so far
entered upon them; then for a farwell, be admonished of this one thing, that as
these days of the son of man are days of great expectation, wherein all things
that are to precede his glorious coming, are to be fulfilled, and that before
this generation pass away, so they are, and will be found, to be days of great
temptation and tribulation to the last, even till the Lord appears in person
from heaven; therefore as the expectation should make us lookup, and lift up
our heads, and concern our selves about these things, with a more then Ordinary
concern for that, as they are great, so they draw nigh (and according to our
concern will our fruit be in this day;) so the temptation calls us to more then
ordinary circumspection and watchfulness, therefore our Savior inculcates that
warning so often, in speaking of this day; and that to his disciples, laying
before them the danger if they do not, and the safety and advantages if they
do: Luke 21.34, 35, 36. chapter 12.35, 36.37, 38, Mark. 13.33. to the end of the
chapter. And where the Lord shows such a concern (as he does about this
watching) there to think, that watching and not watching will come to the same
reckoning, argues a great slieghtness, if not a profaneness of spirit. Though
ye be believers, as to the main, and your part in heaven cannot be taken from
you, yet ye may lose your part in these days, and may be removed in some
displeasure, and so lose the honor of serving in the works of these days, the
honor of being of the number of the watchers by whose decree (in association
with the Lord the great watcher of Israel): that great tree is to be grub'd up,
whose body is hewn down before. Never are men, yea good men in more danger of
sleeping, then when sleeping is most dangerous, as we may see by the disciples,
whose eyes were never so heavy as when their Lord was in that bitter agony.

Wherefore to conclude, if these be the days of the son of man, set these days
always before your selves, to comfort and support you in all shocks and
dangers: say as he said, Caesarem vehis and fortunas Caesaris, they are Christ's
days, and Christ will have the day of all his enemies. And bring these days,
and hold them up, before the son of man, call him to his own days, ye that are
the Lords Remembrancers (and such should all believers be;) keep not silence,
give him no rest, till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth; it is his work,
but it is our interest; say, if these be the days of the son of man, then let
the son of man appear in his day. The sword of the Lord and of Gideon, the
faithfulness of Christ, and the faith of the saints, must be in association,
and then the like wonders will be done as in the day of Midian, when the host
run, and cried, and fled.

The First Sermon.
Luke 12.35.40. Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning; and ye
your selves like unto men that look for their Lord, when he shall return from
the wedding, that when he comes, and knocks, they may open unto him
immediately, etc.


IN much of this Chapter, our Savior is discharging his disciples and
followets of worldly cares, which is a very merciful consideration of our Lord,
who as he knows that we have need of these things, so he also knows, how great
a burden and hinderance the care of these things are unto us, how they do let
and hinder our speedy following after him: Now in order to this, he administers
several considerations ot them, to discharge their cares by the ordinary
providence of God toward all his creatures, even toward the very plant which
he suffers not to want his moisture, and the poor sparrows, the providence of
God watches over them; but after all these considerations the Lord brings a
powerful one in consideration for good and all, and that you have in the 33.
verse, fear not little flock, it is your fathers good pleasure to give you the
kingdom; if a kingdom may be security to you (against fears of want against
earthly solicitudes.) Behold (says the Lord) the kingdom is given to you, and
it is given by the Lord with all his heart, for that is the meaning of the
phrase, It is the fathers good pleasure; it is as if the Lord would liken
himself unto an earthly father, that has an estate which he would settle, and
when he has settled it, O how is he satisfied, having settled it to his hearts
content, so does the Lord acquiesce in this settling of the kingdom upon this
little flock; he has no regret when he reflects upon it, but is perfectly well
pleased with his own act, this kingdom comprehends all in it, it is not said a
kingdom, but the kingdom.

God has many kingdoms (as I may say) or there are many considerations of this
kingdom, the kingdom of grace, the providential kingdom, etc. Take the kingdom
how you will in the whole extent and latitude of it, the father gives the
kingdom to the little flock: I know that many content themselves, and would
have the Lords people to look after no other kingdom, but that in heaven; and I
confess it is a very good portion, and when once we get thither, we shall never
desire to change that for any of another nature.

But I tell you, that all the Saints departed are to come again with Christ,
and enjoy his kingdom here upon earth, and therefore we must lose nothing of
our fathers gift; For the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven shall
be given to this Saints of the most high: so that I say, take this kingdom in
the utmost latitude of it (and in a kingdom you know thete is a fullness of all
good whatsoever); All is the Saints, but I shall not stand upon that, but upon
the settlement which the Lord here reveals unto them, and that account puts
them upon a most generous dispose of whatsoever they have in this world; sell
that you have, and give alms, provide your selves bags that wax not old, a
treasure in the heavens that fails not. It is as much, as if the Lord should
say, I would have you my disciples in the confidence of this kingdom (of this
great provision that I have made for you, and I would have you) as free as
Princes, as Emperors; it was so in the primitive times, and we are not right,
till we come into that spirit (when the Lord shall call for it) to put all into
a common stock; there is much to be said in this case, whether it be now
practicable, as the case stands, and we in such a confused slate as we are; If
such a thing should be, people (it may be) would be willing to have a community
with those of their own judgment and persuasion and ways, this is not right,
unless it be with all that believe, Act. 5.32.

But after this, he comes to the exhortation that I read to you, Let your loins
be girded about, here we have directions to the Lords disciples, how they are
to dispose themselves for this kingdom, and they are three.

The first is, let your loins be girded about,

2ly. Let your lights be burning.

3ly. Be ye your selves like unto servants that w^yt for their Lord when he
will return from the wedding.

First, let your loins be girded about, what is this? you know the loins are,
the strength of a man, the meaning of which (I conceive) is this, be settled in
the firm says, and expectation of this kingdom, this is, to have the loins
girded about, we do find this kingdom and the hopes of it to signify so little
to us, because we are scarce resolved, scarce thoroughly grounded and settled in
our minds touching the truth of such an expectation; therefore says he; let
your loins be girded about; and you know, that if a man have clothes upon him,
and they hang loose about him, this man is unapt for any action or business,
his long trail hangs about his heels, and flutters so about him, that he cannot
go about any work or business with any strength; and therefore the loins being
girded, do in the 2d. place signify a man's preparing himself, and addressing
himself strenuously to the work and business that the Lord does appoint unto
him, that is, this girding of the loins, which in this case is waiting for the
Lord, doing every thing as a wayter, having their eyes upon this coming: And
therefore to be girt, is to be well persuaded and resolved to gird the promises
about you, and to gird your hopes clofe unto your hearts, that so you may with
confidence wayt for your Lord; and expect his coming.

The second is our profession, our lights burning, our profession is our lights
and lamps by which we make forth our hope, and shine forth in it to others: Now
when the loins are girt, this is a good help to the burning of our lamps, our
profession will be vigorous and lively when our hope is firm, when the loins
are girt about with truth, that we do reckon upon it as a truth, that will not
fail us, as a hope that will not deceive us, then I say the lamps will burn
clearly: then we shall not only make a profession of this hope, but we shall
make our hope visible in all our walkings. The lamps of many Christians burn
very dimly, and the reason is, because they waver in their hope.

The third thing concerns our spirits, for the word here (your selves) imports
something more then our profession, or our faith, ye your selves, that is, your
spirits, and your inward frame, your hearts, and your inward man; your selves
in all your affections, your selves in all things; like unto men that wait for
their Lord when he shall return from the wedding; I would a little paraphrase
upon the words before I come to any observation, when he shall return from the
wedding, what is the meaning of this? does the Lord return from the wedding
when he comes? One would think it more proper to say, that he comes to the
wedding, then that he returns from the wedding; why, surely the Lord does come
to a wedding, he comes at last to the wedding-supper, when he comes to his
people; but he comes also from the wedding, for the wedding is in heaven, but
the wedding-supper shall be here on earth. Christ is married to his people in
his own city (as I may say) and in his fathers house; and indeed all our
flockings it is to heaven; by conversion we are brought thither by our father,
and thither do we repair for all things; there the Bridegroom is: If we will be
married to him, we must go thither to be married, the wedding is in heaven; now
whether you will take it so, or whether you will take it of the saints
departed, the spirits of just men made perfect, who are with the Lord, he comes
from thence, and brings these with him, to his poor Church here upon earth, who
are in the 37th verse, called servants, blessed are those servants. So that, in
that sense the Bride is the saints departed: and the Church on earth, they are
the bride also: yet they are in the form of servants, as the Apostle says:
Gal. 4. The heyr, while he is a child differs nothing from a servant, and
although Christ has revealed sonship unto us, yet still we are sons in the
form of servants; there is much of the form of servants that sticks upon us
still: but now those that are departed and dead in Christ, they are the Bride,
they have put off this habit and form of a servant, and so in that respect
Christ may be said to come from the wedding, the meaning is, his coming from
heaven, that contains his coming from heaven, that contains his coming from the
wedding That when he comes and knocks they may open to him immediately; this
does acquaint us with another manner of Christ's coming, then it may be many
Christians do dream of: They think of a glorious coming, a visible glorious
personal appearance, which shall strike the world (as many as are enemies) with
amazement and dread (I say, all that are enemies) and which shall bring a
glorious charge unto all surviving saints; this coming will not be a knocking
at our doors, for Christ will make his own way, and every eye shall see him:
but this coming here is a coming to our particulars; to every particular
believer, as well as to the public body: It is a coming in the night, a coming
privately, a knocking at our doors, and such a coming, as that those that do
not watch, will not be aware f, nor will not reap the benefit of it. And
therefore he says, that when he comes and knocks they may open unto him
immediately, this is a coming into us; not a coming to us only, but a coming
into us. Blessed are those servants whom the Lord when he comes shall find
watching. Here is the fruit, here is the glorious fruit and advantage of those
to whom the Lord shall thus come, and find them watching; he shall change
their condition from the condition of servants, and he shall make them to be
the Bride, and shall gird himself and make them to sit down, and come forth,
and serve them: This is not the manner of a Lord to his servants, but this is
the manner of our Bridegroom to his bride. And if he shall come in the second
watch, or come in the third watch, and find them so, blessed are those
servants, Mark, 13.35. You shall find there four watches mentioned, the
evening, the midnight, the cock-crowing, and the morning, now there is two of
these watches that are mentioned here; I might if I had time speak to these
four watches, and show you how they measure out all the time, from our saviors
departure to his coming again, for it is all of it a long night, while the sun
is out of the Hemisphere, while Christ is absent, it is all night, and the time
is measured by watches; I give you only the hint of what I understand by it:
the evening was from the time of our saviors ascension until the putting forth
of the man of sin, which took in the first three hundred years, in which time,
there was Judaism abolished, and removed off the stage, the seven Churches of
Asia were dismantled, and lastly, Heathenism was thrown down, and this evening
did reach unto the sixth seal, and then that watch went out; then came on the
midnight-watch the time of Antichrist, the man of sin, and this midnight watch
was the longest watch of all the rest; this watch lasted during all the time
that that man of sin, was rampant, (as I may say) for a thousand years, during
which time indeed those that were delivered were those that were sealed, the
sealed ones, which you read of, in Rev. 7. They had a Song as in the night,
they had a mystical reign with Christ, during that time, but the whole world
did wonder after the Beast, and this (I say) lasted for a thousand years, till
the cock-crowing, that is, till the dawning of reformation, which began about
the year 1300. And then began the cock-crowing watch, and this was the crowing
of the cock, Babylon is fallen as in Revel. 14. And from that time, has Babylon
been falling and the Lord has been consuming the man of sin, this is the
cock-crowing, and this cock-crowing lasted from the 5th. trumpet unto the 6th
Vyal, so long does this watch last. Then says the Lord, behold I come as a
thief, blessed is he that watches, and so from thence the 6th Vyal does begin
the morning, (that is) the morning watch. And this I am persuaded has run
forth several years amongst us, I have told you partly my apprehensions
formerly, that Daniels 1290. days brought us to the morning watch: and that
they came up (reckoning the times from Julian) about 2 or 23. years ago, since
abour 48. or 50. some difference there is about the time of Julian.

Now that which I would hint by the way, is this, that our Lord and Bridegroom
is not unmindful of his poor spouse here on earth, but has been making to her
ever since his going from her, he has been passing the time of his
night-watches, not without a tender regard to his dear spouse he has been
coming in several ways, and we are now come to the very last coming of all, the
last watch. For that which our savior says in May. 13. ye know not in what
hour the Lord comes, whether in the evening, the Cock crowing, or in the
morning, compared with this text here, that one of them holds forth the secresy
of his coming, and the other holds forth a gradual coming, that he comes
gradually in all these times, in all these seasons: and why should not the Lord
be gradually coming as the primitive glory gradually went off, as also the
typical glory went off from the sanctuary of old. It first went up to the doors
of the sanctuary, and then to the midst of the city, there was three removes
of that glory, and so answerably it was when Christ went to heaven, the
primitive glory did not flee away presently, all at once, but during the
Apostles time (while they lived) there was agood measure of it abiding, but
when they went off the stage, as John, who was the last of them, says, Little
children, it is the last hour.

That glory was then going, when they went, and yet it did not all of a sudden
go, when they went as the Records of the Ecclesiastical History show, there was
a great power of says, a power of miracles conttnued after the Apostles days,
but that glory was sinking, and it sunk first inwardly, before it went off, in
the visible sense of the Church, there was a decaying in their love first: so
(I say) as this glory went off, by degrees, so it will return by degrees; I now
come to propound one particular to you; ye your selves (I fasten upon that)
like unto men that wait for their Lord, when he will return from the wedding.

I have told you formerly it is part of my witness and testimony (which else is
a poor broken thing, but I say it is a part of my witness and testimony, that
the saints, are the inheritance of Christ, the riches of the glory of his
inheritance is to be seen (if you will take a survey and account of it) you
must behold it in the saints. I have also delivered in this place, that it is
Christ's spiritual and powerful coming and appearance in the saints, that is the
gteat object of our expectation, and that which must do our business for us. It
is not his appearing in the clouds, it is not his coming down upon the earth,
and manifesting his glorious visible person, that will do our work if his
spirit be not at work in our hearts, if he does not come in a glorious
manifestation of his spirit within us; it is that, that does, and will quicken
us now, and make us live the life of faith, and it is that that must quicken us
at the last day, and raise our bodies out of the dust, and make us live the
life of glory.

And that we may reconcile the personal appearance to and wlth his spiritual, I
told you that the personal appearance of Christ is the glorious ministry, that
shall call up the life of his spirit in his people that lies bound there as in
a sleep, this is by way of preface to that which I would observe at this time.

Ye your selves liko unto men, that wait for their Lord: now that which I would
observe, is this, that the great care and concern of the Saints that live in
those times, that are upon Christ's coming, should be, that themselves may be
prepared, that themselves may be in all things like unto men of such a hope and
expectation. Our work is to have it brought home, to our selves (mark ye) your
faith must be grounded upon this coming, which I understand by having your
loins girded about, and your profession must be shining, which (it may be) many
are apt to think is concerned chiefly in their Church-administrations; but this
is not all, but you are to look to your selves, to the frame of your hearts and
spirits; look to your selves, you your selves. If this had not been something
more then your loins girded about, and your lights burning, it had been a kind
of tantology and repetition; therefore there is an Emphasis to be put upon
this, your selves, not your loins only, not your expectations only, nor only
your profession: Christ holds your selves a distinct interest from other men;
well, but what are your selves, what are your spirits; you may cloth a man
with the habit of a prince, yet may he be far from the spirit of a Prince, and
from the true worth of a Prince; profession is but a habit, and many men wear
other men's clothes, and appear in a splendor and equipage that does not at
all belong to them; look and see what they are within, and alas! you will find
them full of rottenness and dead men's bones, and therefore you your selves look
to your selves; and why should men look to themselves, but because your selves
are the great interest of the Lord; It is not your way, nor your profession,
but it is your spirit that is the Lords bride, and that is his Bride chamber
into which he will enter, that when he knocks you may open to him, that is
the great business; your spirit is the Lords Bride, and the Lords Bride-chamber.

Now what are we to look to, in our selves: why, first, let us look that we be
in nothing unlike unto servants that look for their Lord: I tell you there were
no end, if we should begin to show the unlikeness; where do you find a likeness
to such servants? what unlikeliness is there even in the Churches? Our Savior
tells us what is unlike, viz. to be overcharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and the cares of this life, this is unlike such a day, such a
hope, such an expectation. Now what is the surfeiting and drunkeness there
spoken of? surely our Savior (I conceive) would not suppose that surfeiting
and drunkeness in the letter was chargable upon professors; and I wish that
many professors were not too much tainted with this, even with gusling and
drinking from one Tavern to another, and from one good meeting to another: but
there is another kind of surfeiting and drunkeness, you know what the Apostle
says, be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess, but be filled with the spirit:
this drunkenness is set in opposition to the spirit, wine to the spirit. From
whence I gather, that whatsoever has the form or appearance of spirit, and is
not spirit all that is cautioned in that place to be abstained from. I remember
the saying of a good man that came from a meeting (as we may be) his report was
this, that they were so drunk he meant, not that they were drunk with wine, but
Drink with their gifts, self-sufficiency; this is surfeting and drunkenness;
and I wish with all my soul, that they that do profess the Lord, and those that
think they are on the upper ground, and have the advantage of others, that they
would take heed of this surfeiting and Dr^nkenness of surfeiting of their forms
of their seize; thinking they are come to Sion, because it may be they
are come to the letter of a poor administration. Though alas! as it is managed
amongst many (if not most) at this very day, alas! it is a mere Babel, the one
says it is thus, and another says it is thus, whereas I tell you I am not
against any of them, I am not against the Baptist, nor against the
congregational way that do baptize their children, the Lord does bear them
both, and he is able to make them both to stand; but this crying out, Lo here
this is the way, and the others crying ont, Lo that is the way; whereas it is
the right spirit in each, that is that will justify each administration: and
except there be the unity of the spirit maintained in the bond of peace, I tell
you our Churches are a mere Babel, and yet there are among them that do
maintain this unity: God forbid I should think otherwise: There is a seed among
the Churches that are of the large spirit, and do not set up themselves over
Christ, but shine forth according to the light communicated to them, therefore
I lay no burden upon them.

But (I say) this surfeiting and drunkenness is opposite to the very
expectation of Christ's coming; alas! are we so full now, are you so well, are
you so happy? what do you think, that the New Jerusalem will be only snch a
kind of thing as your Church Fellowship is? that it will set the crown upon the
head of your form and your way? are you where you would be; so as that you are
at rest? you are drunk indeed if this be your spirit, what says our Savior; do
this till I come, as if he should say, have your eye upon my coming, let this
be your entertainment till my coming; but to think to do this is all, and leave
out till he come, is to pass by that which is indeed the glory of the sentence;
Do this till I come is as much as to say, you shall have better cheer then
this, better communion then this, when I come. Do this, but I will come and
then ye shall be planted in the likeness of my resurrection. This glorying
therefore, and taking up our rest in present seize is one sort of
surfeiting and drunkenness, and I wish the Churches did not so much glory in
their pastors, and these glory so much in their gifts, and in their policies
how they can manage affairs, this is not like men that look for their Lord,
when he will return from the wedding.

If our eyes, and our hearts were more upon Christ, we should see all other
glories fading, dim and perishing; and if pastors themselves were thus
spirited, they would be preaching this, we must decrease, and he must increase,
and so cherish that life and light of Jesus in their members, and not keep it
under; which I doubt is too much the guilt of too many pastors of
eongregations, and in the government of their Churches, the spirit of Christ is
in bonds with them.

Secondly, Another unlikeness to men waiting for their Lord is, that, beating
their fellow servants, this is somewhat worse then the other if he shall say,
the Lord delays his coming, and shall begin to be at his fellow servants, this
is a rude thing indeed, this is a thing that one would wonder to find in
Christ's family: what? beating their fellow servants? this is for the poor
blind sottish world to do. Where shall we fasten this beating? surely we
cannot fasten it upon the prelatical Church, they not acknowledge us to be
their fellow servants, therefore we will excuse them it is not they, It is
true, the Saints have had great persecution from them, and from those that have
taken their part, but this is not the beating of the fellow servants here
spoken of; we ought to bless God for this present freedom, by what means soever
we have it; if we have no law for it, it is to be the more admired, and we must
say of God, he does wonderfully, and it is mavelous indeed: but those that
beat their fellow servants they must be fellow servants themselves. And truly I
doubt this will come home to the Churches, they will be found the beaters of
their fellow servants: now by the way, take me right all aloug, when I speak of
the Churches I speak honorably of them as Churches; I speak of them, as the
Lord does in the 2d. and 3d. of the Revelations, where he acknowledges a found
part, and a sick part, and so I look upon the Churches at this day: there is a
sound part, and sick and declining part, now this is the corrupt and sick part,
that beats their fellow servants. Truly it is very visible, not only in word,
but print, and I could wish that it were not so minifest, I would then stifle
it, I would suppress it, but that it comes abroad so: And if some men can carry
it, there shall be no Church in the world but the baptized Congregations: some
of them say, that there is no way to entitle a man to the privileges of
Church Fellowship to Church Communion, except he comes in at that door of
baptism that is the initiating-ordinance, now I can heartily allow them in
their way and administration, and I think I can make it good, that the Church
of Christ does consist of such a variety of parts, and forms, and that the
beauty of the unity of the spirit does arise from the great variety that is in
the form, or administration; I can prove to you, if I had time I presume from
the Scripture, that there are in Christ's body-mistical living and dying
Christians: 14. Romans whether we live, we live unto the Lord, and whether we
dye, we dye unto the Lord, in which there is a great mystery: that the dying
should be the living man, the dying-Christian has the better of it, and the
living-Christian that is spoken of there, is the weaker man, though he be
saved: who is he that lives, why it is he that is still under the law in a
great measure. The law has dominion over a man so long as he lives, so that
he is the living man, that is not yet unhorsed, that is not yet brought down
into the grave of Christ (he is not yet brought down as the Lord will bring his
people) he lives to the letter, and to the form, and outward administration: I
say not, but that a man may converse in forms and administrations, so that his
life be about them till the times of reformation: God may train up his people
under those Pedagogies; but bear with me, that I call them weaklings: It is by
way of condescension that the Lord comes to us in a sign, were it not better
if we could act faith upon the Lord without these visible representations and
forms, in which many have acquired thrones to themselves, which the Lord never
intended: signs were to be subservient things, not to Lord it over his people,
as those do, that unchurch all other Churches, and throw them out of a part in
Christ that come not in at their door. This is a beating of their
fellow servants what greater beating can there be, then to say, they are not
the Churches of Christ, if they be not in such a form, in such a way, this is
to be unlike those that look for their Lord.

The Second Sermon.
Luke. 12.35.36. Let your Loins be girded about, and your lights burning.


I Have made an entrance already into these words, that which I pitch upon
last, was ye your selves like unto men that look for their Lord, It is the
crown of the preparation here commended to us, for the coming of our Lord (our
selves).

The framing of our selves, the disposing of our selves like unto men that wait
for their Lord, not only your Lamps, and your loins, but your selves; I shall
not repeat any thing I spoke the last time, I shall only remember you, that I
declared my sense, that it is the last watch that we are in: into those four
watches (you know) I cast the times from Christ unto his second coming. And the
last watch I told you (I did conceive) began immediately after Daniels first
number of 1290 days expyred, now after that I came to show what these words
did import, you your selves like unto men, etc. And I had only time then to
reflect upon the unlikeness, to caution, that though it is not enough that we
be not unlike (yet that is a great step if we avoid the unlikeness) I had not
time to come to the positive likeness you may expect I should now fall upon it,
but I have been persuaded in my own mind to cast my discourse at this time
into another mould, and to speak unto these two heads in this order.

First, to make some further evidence of the times that we are in, and that for
this reason, because it is the main argument and enforcement in the text here;
It is that that is to put us upon the disposing of our selves. The preparing
our selves, It is that that has a great influence upon this preparation that
is here required, and when I have spoke of that, then I shall come to the
preparation, which is the second thing; now in making evidence to you of this,
that this is the time when this exhortation is in season, wherein it does
especially lie upon us to prepare our selves for the return of our Lord.

I shall offer the evidence of this under two heads, First, to show you, that
the time is fulfilled that was to precede the coming of our Savior; and
secondly, to show you, that the signs of those times have come up and
presented themselves, and showed themselves before us, if we had eyes to see,
and hearts to take notice of it.

First, I say, I shall begin with that, that the time is fulfilled, you shall
see what my meaning is, if you look into Mark 1.15. After John was put in
prison, our Savior preaches, saying, the time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of
God is at hand; mark ye there, our Savior that had spiritual enforcements
enough to have driven home his doctrine, and instructions, into the minds of
the people, yet he maks use of this argument, this enforcement, the time is
fulfilled: the meaning of our Savior is clear to be this, the times that were
to precede my manifestation in the flesh, they are fulfilled, he says not to
them: Lo, I am here, the promised Messiah (though that was the thing they were
to know) but he bears in the acknowledgment of that to them (he makes way for
it) by this consideration, the time is fulfilled; it is as much as if he should
say; my father did set the time, when I should visit the world it my first
appearance, the time was set to a day, to an hour, that time is now fulfilled,
therefore under that consideration of the time being fulfilled; look about you,
repent and believe the Gospel, attend now, the time is come, says he, is not
this clear therefore, that there is a time for every purpose under heaven?
There was a time for his first appearance, and there is a time for his second
appearance. And when the time is come, men should be up with their
expectations, if our Savior, that spiritual Doctor, that was able to convince
the spirits of men by spiritual power and evidence, if he work by this medium,
and tell them of the time, we may be allowed to take the help of this
consideration; now the question will be, how we shall prove the assumption, for
the major is clear, if the time be fulfilled we are to look for his second
coming, that is clear, now, how shall we make that out? for this, the Lord help
us and be with us; I desire not to go forth in any confidence of the flesh, we
are all yet subject to mistakes; how many have been mistaken? if I should tell
you of an immediate revelation made to me, that is not made to other Saints,
you might demur upon it; I shall not go by that evidence, that the time is
fulfilled, but only by the Scriptures, and that is by a double computation, a
computation of Daniel, and the Revelations, compared together in Dan. 12.11.
you have two numbers, which were there revealed unto Daniel. Upon his great
solicitousness and earnest application to the Lord, after the Lord had thrust
him away (as I may say) and bid him be quiet, yet Daniel, humbly, putting
himself forward again, the Lord does so far yield unto him as to tell him the
time how long it should be, and from what date it should begin. From the time
that the daily sacrifice should be taken away, there should be 1290 days, this
is Daniels first number and computation. The computation of the Revelations,
you have in chap. 13. v. 5. And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great
things and blasphemies, and power given unto him to continue 42. months. These
42. months being resolved into days (as they are in Revel. 11.) contain 1260.
days which is the time of the witnesses prophesying in Sackcloth, and it is
the time allotted unto the beast and unto the Gentiles, to trample under foot
the holy City.

Now Daniels first number of 1290. days, is more then this, it is 30. days
more then this 1200, and therefore how shall we make these to square, why? I
shall briefly give you my sense of it.

I conceive they have one, and the same Period of expiration, though not one,
and the same rise, they begin not at the same time, but they end together. This
number of Daniels 1290. concerned the Jews, showing how long, they should be
trodden under foot by the successors of that Monarchy, under whom they were at
that present time, broken and humbled.

The number begins from the time of Julian the Apostate, and he says from that
time, that the sacrifice should be taken amay, and the abomination that was
desolate set up (which was the attempt that was made to restore Judaism, which
after it was abrogated, was a desolating abomination) from that time there
should be 1290. days.

Now the Apostle John shows the time of the beast, of the Roman beast (the
Roman Monarchy under the last head of it, the Papacy) and he says, there is
but 1260. days allotted to it, therefore if these two numbers do expire
together, we must begin the computation of the Revelations, 30 years after the
time of Julian.

But happily you may say this is by guess only, I answer, I have this ground
for the beginning the computation of the Revelations, 30. years later, then the
time of Julian. For Julians time was 360. and I begin this computation in 390.
or thereabouts; I say it began after, because that that was the time of the
expiring of the Dragons cause; you know there are 3 enemies, the Dragon, the
Beast, and the false Prophet, that do exercise the Church of Christ, till the
Dragons time was out, the Beast did not ascend the stage.

Now, though the Dragon was cast out of heaven about the time of Constantines
coming to the Empire, in the year 310. yet he was not totally and finally
vanquished, so as to give up his cause, till about the year 390. or 393. (there
is some difference in our Chronology, but it is not considerable) when
Theodosius obtained that signal victory against Engenius.

Now after that defeat, Heathenisme never displayed banner in the field more,
and then was that power removed out of the way, which did let the appearing of
Antichrist, 2 These. 2. He that lets must first be taken out of the way: now
then beginning at 390. both the computations will come up together, both
Daniel, and John, and so they did come up together; I am very well satisfied in
it (I speak it as to my self, but I impose it upon no other) I say they did (I
humbly conceive) come up in the year 1650. then was Daniels 1290. days
expired, and then was the 42 months ended.

Now for the 45. days that are afterward, they are (I believe) the time that
Daniel speaks of, here, in the beginning of this chapter: At that time, shall
Michael stand up, the great Prince, which stands for the children of thy
people. This may seem strange, that after Antichrist his 42. months are
expired, we should have such a time of trouble, as never was, but pray mark (I
believe) there is a great mistake in this: in the objecting of this trouble, or
in the applying of it: As if it were the time properly of the Churches trouble,
I grant that the Church shall have a great sense of the trouble in common among
others, nay I grant, that the enemies of Christ, and of his kingdom shall
chiefly direct their aim in all the time of that trouble against the Church;
even, if it were possible, to blot out the name of Israel from under heaven.
But the holy Ghost does not object this trouble directly upon the Church, nor
properly; for this being that time when Michael stands up, the trouble is only
accidental to the Church, for it is the time, that the Lord will deliver his
people, the trouble is but the charges of the suit: would you be delivered
without suit? It is, as if a woman should expect to be delivered without
travel; you should look upon the issue of the trouble: observe how it is
spirited, how it is intended, what is the design of the trouble, the Lord is
coming to judge, he is coming to take down this old state of things, that he
may bring in a new, this is the trouble of these times: It is not a trouble
that is under the management of the enemy, as if they did, what they would, no,
they are passive, they are driven by the judicial hand of God, they are
bringing down their own house: with their own hands, as Solomon says, it is
that trouble, under which the saints are called, to lift up their heads,
because their redemption draws nigh.

A little to gird this closer to us, of the times being fulfilled, wherein I do
expose my self, and my judgment. Let others think of it, and me, as they shall
see cause, but (I say) I do verily apprehend it so, I would not come to you
with vain visions, were it not sealed up to me, to my heart and soul, and it is
not a new thing, but I have been a long time leading into it, and am more and
more confirmed in it, that the time is fulfilled, and that this work, that is
now in hand, it is Christ's work, it is he, that gathers the nations, but (I
say) to gird this unto us, consider this one thing.

That Antichrist is the last enemy, that is to infect or annoy the Church, and
the only enemy that does let or hinder the revelation of the son of God, or
rather the son of man from heaven; and therefore, if we can show, as I think we
have showed, that his time is out, then the time of Christ is come, which I
shall desire no other evidence for, then what you find in the 2 These. 2. Where
the Apostle is settling the minds of believers, in those days, touching the
times of the man of sin, and of the day of Christ, when it should be, and he
issues his discourse into this, as you may see in that chapter: that there was
nothing that hindered, but the man of sin, who was not yet revealed, but this
mystery must have it is time, it must have its course, he must be revealed, and
then, when that man of sin is revealed, then shall he be consumed by the spirit
of Christ's mouth and destroyed by the brightness of his coming, and then comes
the day of Christ? for so you see in the text, let no man deceive you, for that
day shall not come, except there be a falling away first.

Now, when that falling away has had it is course, and that the man of sin has
been revealed, then there is nothing to let, but Christ will come, I could
please my self with this subject. In the next place I come to the signs, which
may be more suitable to you, then these calculations are.

For these signs are those, that our Savior, accomodates to all capacities,
he delivers them to his poor disciples, who were at that time, men of no
extraordinary reach, though, when the spirit came upon them, they were
wonderful men, otherwise they were no extraordinary men, and our Savior gave
them these signs of his coming.

And I tell you now before I point you to these signs, I shall not point you
to such, as it may be you might think, but the signs that shall come upon you,
you shall find in Mat. 24.29. The sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not
give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, etc. And then shall
appear the sign of the son of man in heaven, I confess I have read these
Scriptures many and many a time, and have perused them over with the sense of
an allegory in them, a general notion of the darkness of the times, and the
like.

And some look upon them, it may be, according to the letter, as if there
should be a wonderful consternation upon these heavenly bodies, that should
make them to withhold their light. But I shall acquaint you, with what has
been presented to me, and let them that are spiritual, judge of it.

First, where shall we begin these signs, for here our Savior does give them
a beginning, (immediately after the tribulation of those days) now the
question is, what those days are, that our Savior speaks of before, what the
tribulation was, as the end of which, those signs do commence? I know, that
you can hardly avoid fixing that tribulation upon the destruction of litteral
Jerusalem.

I confess, I would not undertake the task to carry the discourse that does
antecede this 29. v. out to any other subject, then the destruction of
Jerusalem, but yet, let me tell you, by comparing this with another Scripture,
you shall find a great help to discern what that tribulation was, viz. Luke
21.34. Jerusalem shall be trodden down etc. until the time of the Gentiles be
fulfilled. Our Savior speaks here, and Luke does record the very same
discourse of our Savior, as Matthew does, and it does appear by comparing
these, that our Savior intended that description, of those calamitous times
that was to come upon Jerusalem, to be a type, and a figure of that passing
away of carthly Jerusalem, among the Gentiles.

The one was a glass (as I may say) and a mirror, in which you might see the
other, it was a type and a figure, and so our Savior takes in both, he takes
in the holy city in the letter (which Jerusalem was before Christ's coming) and
he takes in the holy city in the mystery, earthly Jerusalem among the Gentiles,
which was to run the very same race and course, and to drink of the same cup
with litteral Jerusalem, and therefore you find in Revel. 11. that very
expression, the holy City shall be trodden under foot (the same that our
Savior says of Jerusalem in the letter) till the time of Papisme be fulfilled,
that is the 4th. Beast under the last head, so that from she expiring of those
times, commence these signs, and this is a good step that we have gained to
see, where to pitch the Epoch of those signs; now as to the true import of
these signs, there has been great darkning of the sun, and the moon and the
stars, and the powers of the heavens have been shaken, at the opening of the
6th. seal. But they have not been fulfilled, as they were here intended, those
signs were to commence from the end of the 42. months, or from Michaels
standing up, which is all one time (as I conceive) and brings us to the morning
watch, when those signs are to have their fulfilling under Daniels second
number, or under that space of 45. prophetical days, added to the 1290. days
in the first number.

Now then, let us consider what these signs do import, first let me show you
this place, whence our Savior takes these signs, which it may be you have not
considered, for I did not of a long time, till it was presented to me, and (I
think) it is that which will hold, and will obtain your assent likewise.

Our Savior, as he did answer the Devil by Scripture, and did delight to teach
by Scripture, so he shows the day of the Lord and the day of his coming by
Scripture, the place is Joel. 2.31. where you have these words, the sun shall
be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great, and the
terrible day of the Lord come, and so chap. 3.15.

Here is the very Mother text from whence our Savior takes these signs, he
speaks here according to Scripture, according to the prophets, for our Savior
in his ministry, spoke by Scripture, though he was Lord of the Scriptures, as
well as of the Sabbath, yet did he speak by the Prophets, and by the
Scriptures: to teach us to do so.

Now you know the sun, and the moon, and the stars (take them generally) they
are the greater, and lesser lights of the world, if you take them
distributively, some look upon the sun as the primitive light, the original
light, the moon as representing worldly things, and the light of humane
affairs, to be signified by that, and the light of men whereby they walk in
religion is expressed by the sun, the stars to be eminent lights, whether in
Church or state, this is the common understanding of these things, and we shall
not dissent from that.

Now that which I would hold forth to you, in these signs is this, there is a
3 fold fulfilling of them.

1. There is a sinful darkning of the Sun.

2. There is a penal darkning of the Sun.

3. And what shall I say? a gracious darkning of the Sun, or a dispensational
darkning of the Sun, and that which I would deliver to you, in the opening of
these, is this.

I have with me, the light of fulfiling going before me, for that I shall say
to you, So that I shall tell you matter of fact, matter of history, in these
things, these signs have had their eminent fulfilling amongst us, and in our
sight, and yet but little notice taken thereof.

First, let me premise these two things, time and place, the time I have spoke
of already, I shall add only, that it is not in every time that these signs
were capable of being fulfilled, but it must be in, and from a time of great
light, of great liberty, of great reformation, from the beginning of the
performance of promises, and of Christ's kingdom, that these signs must take
effect. For look you, it would not be otherwise said properly, the sun to be
darkened, that is dark before, that the sun from it is shining forth in it is
splendour and glory to be darkened, there is the sign; and the moon in its
brightness to be turned into blood, there is the sign; and the stars from
showing themselves, in the height of heaven to fall from heaven, there is the
sign.

Now next for the place, or subject, in which these are to show themselves,
that is another thing; it is not to be limited or confyned to Babylon or Rome,
strictly taken, for we shall find that these expressions are spoken of Babylon
and Idumea, Esa. 34. and in other places.

But I say, the subject that these signs do operate upon, and the heavens in
which they are to show themselves, they are more large, it is this old world,
this old state of things; take it in it is utmost latitude and extent, this old
state of things, let it be found amongst those that spit at Rome, and at
Popery, and think scorn that they should be in the least tax with it.

Having promised these 2 things, concerning time and place, that these signs
show themselves at such a time after a great light and reformation, and they
will spread themselves all over.

Now I come to those 3 things, the sinful, the paenal, and the dispensational
fulfilling of these signs, and all these you may consider them, in the 3 fold
orb and sphere, I shall only give you, a little short character of the
fulfilling of these in each.

When a people of high and raised principles and profession shall degenerate
and sit down in low, vile, and base practices; This is one fulfilling of this
sign of darkning the sun a spiritual Orb and sphere, in a sinful way, and let
me tell you these signs have been upon us, and had we been spiritual and
acquainted with the Scripture, we might have read the doom of the political and
the Ecclesiastical state of things therein. 2. The Second, the political
sphere, the darkning of the sun there: I would express thus: when those that
had the cause of God in their hands, the cause of religion, and the liberties
of men, when they did deflect and turn aside to a private interest, to seek
themselves, when they did (I say) sit down in self interest, self-seeking, and
ambition, and neglected that plough, that they had put their hands to, then was
the sun darkened in the political sphere, sinfully, this was a sinful darkning,
a sinful infirmity, or weakness in the political sphere.

3. Thirdly, the Ecclesiastical sphere, I will describe that, thus, when those
that have groaned under the yoke and bondage of Antichrist, and have found
mercy, and have been brought up from under deck, when they shall wantonise it,
and forget the goodness of God, and shall go about to build the things that
they had destroyed, and carry back the people, the flocks under their charge
into Egypt again, and bring them under bondage again, this is the darkning of
the sun in the Ecclesiastical orb and state, this is the sinful darkning of
the heavens.

And this brought on the penal darkness, which I think we are all sensible of,
when God did let those that had sinfully, or through sinful infirmity been
prevailed with by temptations, to darken themselves, and to draw sackoloth over
the sun, the light of the appearance of God, in which they come forth, then the
Lord suffered them by their own divisions, and by their weak, foolish and heady
mannagement of things to pull down their own walls, to break down their own
banks, and pull up their own hedges, and to make way for the old bondage, and
the old corruptions to break in upon them, this was the Lords penal darkning of
the sun. It may not be so expedient for me to be particular in these, neither
may it be needful, because the sense of every one of us can readily prompt us,
and supply us, with more particular enlargements, and sad experience can show
that the Lord did remove and take away, or suffered to be removed, and taken
all the light, that did remain, instead thereof most unsavory snuffs do fill
the candlesticks, and all places, from whence the people of God in their civil
and religious things should be fed, either with judgment or instruction.
Brutish pastors are come up, that feed not, that care not for the flock, a dark
sun in the firmament in the stead of the true sun, and of the chearing and
refreshing light of judgment and justice and righteousness: we might be large
in these things, but I shall rather leave this to your own enlargment, in your
own thoughts.

Now one word of the dispensational darkness of the sun, there is a
dispensation of God upon us, and his dispensation is holy, and it does aim at
the greatest advantages, the greatest good to his people, that ever any
dispensation did travel of, or bring forth. And that, the prophets are very
full of that tell us, the Sun shall be ashamed, and the moon confounded, when
the Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Sion, Esai. 24.

Do not think that the weakness of men, your friends. or the malice of men your
enemies, could whelm you under such providence, such disappointments as these
are, if the Lords hand had not been in it, if it were not for good, the Lord
would not take away the light of the sun, the light of our eyes from us, but
that he might give us a better light, a light that should be, as that of seven
days.

And therefore in this case, we may reflect upon the swanlike song of John, who
closes his eyes, and gave up to the Bridegroom with this consolatory
consideration: He must increase, but I must decrease; this, he spoke in the
name, and person of his administration, and of his work: And so says the
prophet, the day of the Lord (says Esaias) shall be upon every thing that is
high; because it is that, that will wonderfully exercise us, when it is,
therefore the holy ghost enlarges upon it, that so you may see it, to be no
other then what was in prospect, in foresight. And in that chapter there is a
particular instancing in all those glories, that shall be darkened and brought
down before the Lord.

If you ask upon what account I state it? I answer, It is upon this old aneient
constant account, all the comings forth of God, they have as well supplanted
and removed that which has been before, that is their first work, For flesh,
and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God. It must be removed, the old
bottles cannot bear the new wine, and therefore there must be new bottle, for
the new wine, and I pray you in the taking of this in, understand, that it is
no more, nor no less then a first creation-glory that is removed. Let it be
found where it will in Church, in ordinance, in duty, in gifts, in ministry,
first creation-glory must all go down, that is the reason that it has not held
it.

I believe, we have had in our days, as great a taste of first creation-glory,
and that in good men, in Saints, who (I believe) are in heaven; yet (I say)
their work was much in a first creation-spirit, and it was too weak, it could
not hold out, for the law makes nothing perfect, and I tell you there is much
of the law hangs still upon us in all our Church-work, yea in all our duties. I
need not tell you, your duties have been shaken, (I believe) you have felt it,
but the reason is, because you are not holy and unblamable in love, but in
fear, and in bondage; what is that, that puts you upon all you do, but times
and seasons? therefore (I say) so far there is a shaking, and there will be a
terrible shaking, I will end with that Scripture in Ezekiel. 38.19. v. Surely in
that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of Israel, in the land of
Israel, shall be a shaking as I told you before, even the land of Israel shall
not be exempted, though it is all for Israel, it is for the service of Israel,
that this shaking is, that so, that which cannot be shaken, may remain; I
cannot now show you what work this calls for from our hands, if we be drawn
from under these signs and recovered; but I tell you, there is no recovery,
till the Lord appear, you will find this darkning will spread over all the
christian, and Antichristian world, and it will not be long, for we are upon
the middle of the morning watch of Daniels last 45. days after the 1290. days.

The Third Sermon.
Luke 12.35.36. Let your loins be girded about, and your lamps burning, and ye
your selves like unto men, etc.


WHat the Apostle Peter says of the Gospel preached by the Prophets, that non
unto themselves, but unto us did they minister, may be said of the Evangelists
in the present subject, that we are more concerned therein, then those
primitive times, and that these times we are now in, border very nigh upon
Christ's coming, which gives great force to the exhortation; this I have
endeavored to evince two ways.

1st. That the time, that was to run out before Christ's second coming, is
fulfilled, namely Antichrists time or the days of the man of sin are expired,
the beloved disciple John in his Revelation, begins his account of the 42.
months, from the passing away of the heathen world (the heathen Empire) which,
though it began to be dissolved at Constantines coming to the throne (which was
about the year 310.) yet was it not wholly blown off the stage, until about the
year 390. when that famous defeat was given to Eugenius (the general of the
heathen forces) by Theodosius the Emperor, after which time Heathenisme never
displayed banner in the field more.

So that from that time, I begin the 42. months of the Beast, and so reckoning
from that time 1260. days you know, when they came up.

2. The next essay to evidence the time, that we are now in, to be so nearly
approaching to Christ's coming, was by the signs of the times, this being first
premised, that from the end of the 1290. days, there is but 45. more by Daniels
computation unto the resurrection of the dead, or Christ's coming, and as to the
signs of the times, I pitched upon Mat. 24. the turning of the sun into
darkness, the darkning of the sun, and this I opened to you in a threefold
sense.

The sun may be taken, for the political, or the Ecclesiastical sun, and both
these are darkened in a sinful way by men's own apostasy, and declyning, and in a
penal way by the Lords just judgments overturning of them.

And in a dispensational way as a witness and testimony to that better and
brighter sun, that is to shine forth, and so I did give you some little brief
description of all these things, whereby they that are wise may understand a
great deal more then was then expressed.

But I shall stand no longer upon the repetition of any thing I spoke the last
day, but let us look forwards, I propounded to you (you know) in the next
place, to come to the influence that these considerations should have upon us,
which I thought I should be ready for, upon what I had already discoursed,
touching the signs of the times. But find, I shall be a little longer in
making my way to it, and I hope not without profit, nor without some
satisfaction to you.

And I will tell you what it is that cast me upon a little longer and further
explication of the times, I was considering, that signs do import a futurity,
they import that the thing whereof they are signs is yet future, and to come,
signs go before the thing, whereof they are signs.

And truly, there may be a great deal of snare in this, and the flesh may take
occasion, it may take advantage by this, to put off the day of the Lord, saying
we are but under the signs of it, and who knows how long these signs may
last, the day may be a great way off.

Therefore, I now must bring you a little nearer unto the day of Christ,
whereas you find a passage in Daniel chap. 7. of their bringing the Son of man
near unto the ancient of days (they brought him near before him) so there may
be a bringing of us near before him, or near unto the days of the Son of man,
and it will be a very good service to us, if we can be so brought justly and
righteously.

Now that is it, which I shall at this time speak unto, and I have confidence
to tell you, and I think the Scripture will stand at my back in it, that the
times of these signs, that I have spoken of are called also. The days of the
son of man, so that there is a beginning of the coming of the son of man in
these signs.

And therefore, our Savior says in lukt 21. when you shall see these things
begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads for the day of your
redemption draws nigh. How nigh you will say? why? within a generation, and
what are these gnerations that our Savior points at, if you look into Math. 1.
And compare all those times, 14.14. and 14. generations, you shall find, that
the latter 14. generations were not much above 40. years, one with another. And
I have already pointed to you, the length of this generation, in which these
signs, are to give Christ to the world, that they are but 45. years at the
most, but I say, this time is called the days of the son of man, this you shall
find, Luke 17. in several verses from v. 21. to v. 27. The days will come
wherein ye shall desire to see one of the days of the son of man, etc.

So that there is more then one day, there are days, one of the days, of the
Son of man. so likewise in the 27. and 28. v. and so on, As it was in the days
of Noah, so it shall be also in the days of the son of man, now mark, what I
ground my self upon, it is this, that as in the old world there was a matter of
120. years, wherein God was giving warning to the world, and yet all that
while, the flood was coming (it was a coming all that 120. years) and so, as in
the days of Lot (for ought I know) from the time that the captivity of Sodom
was brought back by Abraham, when he prevailed against the 4. Kings, which was
a figure of the 4. Monarchies that the true Abraham will vanquish. For ought I
know, from that time Lot was a faithful warner and admonisher of the Sodomites,
for it is said, that his righteous soul was vexed day by day (he did vex
himself with reproving of them) and as Noah was a preacher of rigteousness, so
was Lot.

And there was such days of Lot, days of witnesing and days of warning) and all
that while fire was coming upon Sodom, so likewise now there are the days of
the son of man, that is, there is a certain lot of time wherein the son of man
is preparing for his coming, wherein his curriers are going forth, and are
giving warning of the Bridgroomes coming. The judge is coming, his harbingers,
his Heralds they are gone forth, these are called the days of the son of man;
It is true, it is not the days of the visible personal appearance, that comes
in the rear of all, but these are the days of the son of man that are to
dispose the world for his reception, some as forerunners draw others in a way
of mercy, that they may have a sweet, a comfortable closure with the Lord,
these I call the days of the son of man. They are days, wherein the son of man
stands up, and is preparing himself as you meet with such an expression in Dan.
12. At that time shall Michael stand up, the great Prince that stands for the
ceildren of thy people.

And therefore these days of the son of man, they are days in which all things
are working to his interest, and toward his coming, though they be trouble
some times, as Dan. says, yea such as never was, yet they are such times in
which Christ's interest is rising, though it rises by very strange methods and
ways (that seems even contrary) yet his interest is rising, and his enemies are
falling.

You may remember the two characters, that I gave you the last day of the
signs of the times, how they must be qualified, if so be, they be signs, if
the trumpet give a certain sound, there must be these two qualifications in the
signs. First they must be in a right place, they must give their witness in a
right place, and 2dly, in a right nicke of time, a right juncture; the place I
told you, where these signs are to be looked for (the darkning of the Sun, and
the like,) the place where these do give forth their voices, It must be in a
place, that is most noted, most eminent, that is the very eye of the world or
light, and purity, and reformation; there it is, that these signs must give
forth their voices. It is not in any part of the world, it is not in Egypt, it
is not in Babylon, but in Judea, in Jerusalem, I say it is, it must be in those
places, it must be that eminent sun that must be darkened, that is, (as I may
say) the sun of the world, the sun of the age, this is the sun, that must be
darkened.

Then 2ly, it must be in such a time too, in such a juncture, when the sun has
(as I may say) recovered his light, and is in the greatest freedom, has
dispelled and scattered the clouds, and mists, and shins forth more clearly, it
must be at such a time, that it must be darkened: and I suppose, I need not
apply these two qualifications, to show you, that they may be discerned, upon
the signs that we have had, that there has been such a place, and at such a
time too, there has been such a darkning of the sun.

Therefore now to proceed, if these, signs have given forth their voice among
us, why? then these are the days of the son of man, the days wherein he is
preparing, wherein he is making ready for his expedition, he is bowing the
heavens, as I may say, to come down amongst us, And the Lord grant that we may
have a sanctified use of these warnings of his, I must profess to you that I
bave believed, and therefore have I spoken, I cannot get over these things, in
my own spirit.

I see such Progidies, such prodigious times, and perils, such prodigious
wickednesses and violence I see such impieties of the whole world, the
filthyness of Sodom, the daring wickednesses of this age, even egging and
provoking the Lord down from heaven to judgment, as if he did not make have
enough.

I see (I say) me thinks the age putting forwards themselves, as if the stage
would not be cleared fast enough for the Lord to appear, they are driven upon
self-destroying ways and courses by a judicial hand, these things are very
notorious and visible, (I suppose) to your eyes and observations as well as
mine.

Nay to express it a little further, we see the powers of heaven shaken, we see
foundations pulled up, we see the very earth, and the inhabitants thereof
dissolved, Merchants, and others breaking nay what do we speak of them,
kingdoms breaking, Churches breaking, and are you asleep? are you not a ware
that these are the days of the son of man, and which is indeed no less a sign
then all the rest, we see such a sleep, such a lethargy upon most, even the
wise as well as foolish virgins, nay we see now that night is for a vision unto
the prophets, and the sun is gone down even at noonday, so that men do ask
Watchman what of the night? what hour of the day is it? or what of the night?
and few there are that do see, or take notice, that these are the days of the
son of man, and that the coming of our Lord is so near as indeed it is.

And this is as great a sign as any, for so we are told it should be, who is
blind as my servant, and who is deaf as the messenger I sent, seeing many
things, but thou observest them not, and hearing, but thou understandest them
not. Incase 40, or 50. years ago, a man should have laid forth that which we
have seen with our eyes, and heard with our ears (if a man (I say) should have
laid them forth in lively colors of their own acting) you would not have stuck
to have said and concluded immediately, that these led the way to Christ's coming.

But (I say) that fate that is upon us of hesitancy and darkness, and
blindness, that we do not understand the signs while we are under them, is of
it self one of the greatest signs, For when he comes, shall he find faith on
the earth?

And Daniel has told us, that the wise shall understand, but the wicked shall
not understand, well! let me come now to make some impro^ent of this, If these
be the days of the son of man, we may look for the fulfilling of all that is
promised, and I tell you, that if these be the days of the son of man, limited
for the performance of all, before his personal appearance, there is but a
little time, yet to come, and therefore I say we may look for these births to
come very thick one upon another, those great promises of the destruction of
all Christ's enemies, and the gathering of all his elect; b^th Jews and
Gentlles, from one end of the heaven unto the other.

But, that which I desire to speak to, at this time, is a word to our selves,
(or the Lords people) that we may be ready, if these be the days of the son of
man, and that there is determined such a darkning of all glory (all
first-creation glory) and that such a consumption is decreed upon all the
earth, then it concerns us to look to our standing. Those that have the name of
Christ, the affairs and interest of Christ in their hands (as the Churches
inspecial pretend to have) It Is said that the moon shall be confounded, and the
sun ashamtd, when the Lord of hosts raigns in Mount Sion, therefore I say it
concerns us.

If I were now to speak to the Churches, but it may be the Churches may hear
what I say, I desire to deliver my testimony without any just offense to the
Churches,

But I must speak, and I think the Lords interest does require it; it
concerns the Churches to look to themselves, and their work, and to consider
what it is they build! whether it be that which will stand in the day of the
Lord.

It is true, the Lord has owned the Churches against darker forms, and I have
been of the number of them that have blessed the Lord for his owning the
Churches. They have stood to their principles, they have kept up their
meetings, and God has been with them in this thing, but let them take heed,
least their table become a snare, and least this success, and owning that they
have had from God, turn not to their hurt, because they have born up, against
the day of man, let them not think they can bear up against the day of God,
there is a day that will search them, although they have stood the shock of
their enemies and persecutors.

The Machabees were owned by the Lord in their days, but the successors of
those Machabees (who were under the 2d temple) fell before Christ, though they
were owned against the heathen. These successors were the scribes and
Pharisees, men exceeding zealous of the law, I say they were the successors of
the Machabees.

That which I am jealous of, is, that there is an interest of man, a fleshly, a
formal interest, by which we are in danger; yea the best of men are in danger
of Savouring such an interest, of espousing it, of carrying it up against the
spirit. For my part, I do profess this, that let the Churches manage their
affairs in liberty, in love, and in humility, waiting for the further
appearance of Jesus Christ, the further breaking forth of the spirit, and let
them keep their form till Christ comes from heaven for me, I shall never have a
hand to strike at them, but that which is an evil sign upon the Churches, is.

First their divisions among themselves.

Secondly their exceeding rigid, and censorious carriage toward those that do
not jump with them.

Thirdly they are every one overweening and magnifying and crying up their own
form, against and in bar of all others.

Whereas the Scripture tells us, that where the spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty, the spirit holds forth in a great latitude, him that eats, and him
that eats not, him that observes a day, and him that observes it not, that
both may do it so to the Lord, and both may be accepted, the Lord can make both
to stand, and the spirit tells us, that love is the great law of Christ, and
that if a man have all gifts, and all knowledge, and all faith, and not charity,
and that charity what is it?

Why it is the holding tho unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, it is not
in breaking that unity for any different apprehensions about this, or that. I
tell you, that is Christ, that is the great tie, and obligation of Christians
one to the other, and the Church of Christ is built up only in him, and his
blood is the only cement that makes all these stones cleave together. His blood
and his spirit are the foundation of the Church of Christ

If you say, that all the Churches do not strike upon this rock, I answert I
hope so too, or at least that there are many among all the Churches that are
unconcerned herein, there is a found part that falls not foul upon Christ, and
the spirit, but why do they not purge themselves from those that do, if ye do,
then shall ye be vessels of honor. But where is there a testimony born to the
spirit? nay is there not a great jealously of the spirit, and of the prevailing
of the interest of the spirit? I tell you, those that look askew on the
increasing glory of the spirit and of Christ in the spirit, they stand very
dangerously, the day of the Lord will be heavy upon such, and let my brethren
of the Churches look for the conversion of the Jews, so do I, both of the ten
tribes, and the two tribes. But let me tell you this, that the Jews will not be
converted, till the veil be taken off your hearts, and you be turned to the
Lord, there is a mistical Jew, as well as a natural Jew. And what is the
mistical Jew? you may know them in allusion to the natural Jew, as, as to the
natural Jew, you know what the Apostle says, the Jew seeks after a sign, there
was such as sought after signs, and stuck in the letter, and gloryed in
outward privileges in their Temple, their services and sacrifices.

So I say, now there are such; nay, where shall we find among the generality
of Professors any other? the Lord help us, the vail is too much upon all our
hearts, and (I say) that enduring Christians are no friends, to the conversion
of the Jews.

We say also, that Antichrist must be destroyed, and that he is a great let and
hindrance to the conversion of the Jews; but (I say) that Antichrist will not
be wholly removed, until we be more spiritual then we are, in our converse in
ordinances, and in our manageing of spiritual affairs. There is a great deal of
Antichrist lies lurking here, there is an old Church-spirit, an old
testament-spirit, the spirit of the Jew much to be found among the Churches;
now therefore, it concerns us, if we would be found helpers forward of their
conversion, to be more spiritual, for, as Antichrist is to be destroyed by the
brightness of his coming (which some might take for his personal appearance, I
will not be positive in that).

But (I say) there must be such a brightness of his coming in his people (at
the last) to vacat Antichrist and discharge him, and (I say) likewise tha-
there is a text Romans 11.31. Which does import, as if there should be a signal
restitution or resurrection-spirit among the Gentile Christians, before the
calling of the Jews, that shall provoke them to jealousy, for so the Apostle
says, That through you mercy, they also might obtain mercy, now that which I
would argue from hence, is this, if the Apostle means only the Gentiles
receiving the Gospel, that has been these 1600. years, and yet the Jews are
not wrote upon, therefore I look upon this mercy here spoken of, to be some
eminent mercy, that the Gentiles shall be partakers of, toward the end: some
eminent mercy that shall be showed unto them, to make them shak themselves from
their dust, to arise, and shine, and this shall be a provocation unto the Jews,
when they shall see their Messiah in the arms of the Gentiles.

I tell you, my brethren, it may be, I speak it rudely, but yet I speak as if
I were to appear before the Lord immediately, that I fear the present posture of
the saints, and of the Churches, and the managing of their affairs, is not to
the service of Christ, nor the service of the Jews; nor the promoting of those
great designs of God, which he has revealed to us, in his word, but we tread
in the same steps of those that are gone before us, as it is said in Ephesians. 3.6.

I have cut off the nations, their towers are desolate, hearken ye my brethren,
has not God cut off the nations, the national Churches before the eyes of the
Churches, we have seen it, in our days, we have seen the sun turned into
darkness, and the moon into blood. National Churches cut off, the Towers fallen,
this should have been for instruction of those that came up in the room of them
(in the room of rhose national Churches) do you think (I pray do but consider)
they were cut off, because they were wicked, why? are you come past corruption,
was there not a beauty upon them in their day? what have some said to me lately
why? all the Martyrs were of our religion, say they, It is true there was a
virgin spirit in that degree of reformation, in it is first coming forth, and
there was a freshness upon it, but it quickly corrupted, now may not the same
corruption grow up in others, in other forms, and if it be so, is God any
respecter of persons

I wonder, that men should be offended at those that speak what they see, when
we see the signs upon us, must we not acknowledge it, those that are offended
with their brethren, because they cannot build them up, nor say a confederacy
with them, if they were humble Christians, they would consider and enquire, and
say, is there not a cause? Is there not a cause why some walk at a distance?
why they dare not touch with us? Why truly? if you ask what cause, I will tell
you what cause, you say, why will ye not come among into the Sion of God, I
tell you that is enough to turn ones stomach, you make as if you were come to
your rest, you are haughty because of Gods holy mountain, Zeph. 3.11. thou
shall no more be haughty, this intimates, they were haughty before, and I tell
you that is cause enough to set Christ and his spirit at a distance from men,
when they are haughty, haughty because of the Lords holy mountain, and alas!
what is the Lords mountain? if the Lord be not in the holy mountain.

It Is true Christ calls Jerusalem to the last the holy city, when it was a most
abominable place, and the temple his house, but Christ calls it in another
place your house, it was my house indeed, but now it is your house, you have
made it your own, you have filled it with your own spirit, and therefore it is
your own now I shall come off from this theme, and I shall conclude with a
little further evidence, that this is an extraordinary day that we are in, they
are the days of the son of man, wherein the son of man must have his time;
things must be managed to his interest, and according to his will, the man of
sin has had his day, and his time.

Now because I would relish your mouth with this, at the close, I will give you
my evidence to this, that the man of sin, has had his time, he has had his
day, then what should hinder but that the son of man should have his day, now
that the man of sin has had his day, I tell you, either he must have more
time, then God has allotted him, or else his time, is out for the Lord has
allotted him but 42 months. All the business is, where to begin these months,
now ( I say) either we must begin them, at the going off of the old dragon,
which was the enemy that did infest the Church before the rising of the beast,
or else we must leave so much time from the expyring of th Dragon to the rising
of the beast, without any assignation of it, whereby so much time must run out,
in waft, and for nothing.

Now that were to reflect on Christ, and upon the spirit, either that the Lord
should loose so much time and let it run out in waft, or that he should not
give us an account of that time, when he undertook that work, not to acquaint
us with all the times of the Church, and all the occurrences thereof: it were
to impute insincerity to Christ, which were blasphemy to think.

Whereas he tells his people, the man of sin has but 42. months, and then
shall he down, mean time I will come in with faith, and patience to you, that
so you shall weather the point: some would not begin the 42. months till
Boniface the 8th. when Phocus murdered his master, and was set up in his room;
but by that account, there should be 200. years, that would have no name,
whereas it is clear, that the beast was in being, and in working 200. years
before, and did give manifest proofs of his being up, that he might be known
what creature he was.

And therefore I know not what authority any have to contradict, when the
spirit says, it is but 42. months for them to say, they are not to begin, till
the Beast was in his full height, when the spirit has not said so.

Therefore (I say) the time of the Beast is expired, and all that we find of
the beast now (which is exceeding much of his rage) they are but the effects of
his wounds, he is dying, and would save himself, but (i say) this day is
Christ's day, Michaels day and the Lord is going on conquering and to conquer.
And therefore it concerns the Saints to reflect upon these things, for the
upholding of them, that so they may not faint, look for breakings, and
desolations more and more; but let your eyes be upon the design, that the Lord
has in all these, come and behold the desolations, that he has made in the
earth, it is all upon the account of his own interest and his dear spouse; and
therefore let us open our hearts to these days of the son of man. And say to
the Lord, whatever ts not consistant with thy interest, O take it from the
midst of my bowels, be can did, be sincere, have no interest in your eye but
Christ's, he must have his will now, oh! comply with him, and it will be your
own case, say as Mephibosheth said, let him take all, for as much as my Lord
the king is come again in peace; unto his own house? Sam. 19.20. Oh that the
Lord would bow the hearts of the Churches, of officers and members, that they
might carry on no interest but Christ's, I would you were all in fellowship, but
I would have it in the spirit, do not shut out the spirit, nor draw a veil, nor
a curtain before the spiritual glory of Christ.

These days of the son of man, as they import great things to the public. so
they import spiritual advantage to every particular saint, for in these days a
fuller discovery of Christ is to be expected, and some have experienced it,
Christ has been manifested much in my time, comparing the discoveries of
Christ with former times, with an age before, what a difference you will find,
and yet they were holy persons, and accepted then, but what high discoveries
are there now? this place was attended with one that had not only the tongue of
an Angel, but his discoveries was as sublime, as his language, his spirit was
in the carrying up of Christ's interest, that was the eye of his ministry I
would not glory in men, but it is meet to be acknowledged unto God, that it
has been an age of light, and reckon upon it, that whatsoever stands in the
way of the interest of the Lord Jesus, of his spiritual and powerful
discoveries and manifestations, it will down, let it be Church, or ordinances,
or what it will, down it must go, therefore let us take heed of setting our
shoulders, to uphold the interest of any thing that is obnoxious to that of our
Lord Jesus.

The Fourth Sermon.
Luke 17.26. And as it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be also in the days
of the son of man.


I Am very sensible, that I have not finished my former text, there is a great
deal yet to be spoken to, upon it; and therefore, I must make a little apology
for changing my text at this time.

But though I change my text and remove a little farther into this Gospel of
Luke, yet I do not change my subject, I shall speak to the same subject, that
I was upon before; but you may remember the last time, that I spoke here, it
was under great infirmity, for I confess, I have a very slippery memory.

And I did not deliever much of that, I thought to have spoken then, by way of
evidence of that truth, that I was desirous to carry upon my discourse at that
time: and therefore (I say) because I did engage on such an assertion, as might
seem somewhat strange, namely that these days which we are in, are the days of
the son of man; therefore I choose these words to make forth further evidence of
it to you, but those that were here may bear me record a little, what it was
that lead me to that confidence, to assert, that these are the days of the son
of man, you know, I was upon the signs of Christ's coming, which I had opened
to you the day before (those signs spoken of in Math. 24.) of the Suns being
turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, and applied them to these times,
now those signs you will see are so contiguous, that I may say, they are the
signs of the son of man there mentioned, and that there is but a very little
distance, between those signs appearing, and the son of man's coming and
indeed, it may be a question, whether that these signs are not the sign of
the son of man in heaven? for it is said in Math. 24.30. Then shall appear the
sign of the son of man, immediately after the tribulation of those days now
these words here must be understood, either that these signs are the sign of
the son of man in heaven, or else that the sign of the son of man in heaven,
is connected with these signs, and follows these signs: for (then) shall
appear the sign of the son of man in heaven, not after, but then, this was one
thing, that lead to it. And then another thing was, that the times of the man
of sin were out, I told you: and therefore the times of the son of man, must
needs be begun, of course, for there is no chasm between these scenes, but like
linkes of a chain, the one takes hold of the other, and before the other is
quite done, the following scene begins, as it is said of the four Monarchies
(and it is, and has been accordingly fulfilled) that the succeeding Monarchy
in all the four, did tread upon the heels of the former, so is it said of
Christ's kingdom, that in the days of these kingdoms shall the God of heaven set
up a kingdom.

Christ's interest does commence before the total, (before the very final and
consummate) abolition of the former interest,

Now (I say) notwithstanding this evidence that has been offered, feeling in
my self, as I do, I confess, that this is somewhat a strange, and a boly
assertion, to assert these, to be the days of the son of man, therefore, I
desire, as well for the acquitting of my self, as for the satisfaction of you,
to give you a further account of my grounds, why I call these the days of the
son of man; therefore have I those these words.

As it was in the days of Noah; so shall it be also in the days of the son of
man.

I shall first expound the words, and then apply them, for I desire you would
not expect from me, (...) should handle this text largly, but only so far as
(...) relation to my design, and as I may thence (...)dence of this truth to
you, that these are the days of the son of man. Now that which is to be
expounder is first, why our Savior is here called the (son of man), and 2ly,
why the time of his revelation is not called (a day but days) and then to show
you (what there is in these days) that makes them to be called the days of the
son of man.

First, you may think, that this is an improper appellation of Christ, to call
him, the son of man, when he is setting up his kingdom, but to tell you the
emphasis of the word, it is the son of Enosh; now this appellation is taken out
of Daniel, as all interpreters do agree, viz. Dan. 7. Where he has the vision
of the kingdom of Christ, succeeding in the rear of the four Monarchies, there,
Christ is exhibited to us under the appelation of the son of man, or the son of
Enosh, which is sorry man; now it may be thought that this notion is very
disagreeing to Christ's kingdom when he comes to be great to the ends of the
earth? but if you look into the 5. of the Revelations, you will see there, that
the elders do reflect upon Christ, in that honor, that was put upon him, to
open the book, as a lamb that had been slain Rev. 5.6. And you read there also,
the Angels joining with them in this quire, and in this very note, as you may
see in the 12th. verse, saying with a loud voice, worthy is the lamb, that was
slain to receive honour^ and glory, and blessing: So that here we see, that it
is not casual, that Christ is called the son of man, when he is to take his
kingdom, but it is upon design, it is to reflect honor upon him, upon that
very account, because he stooped and condescended so to be the son of man, and
humbled and abased himself, as you will find 2. Phil. 6.7. He makes the very
deduction of his glory and honor, to rise from his humiliation, wherefore God
has highly exalted him: and this consideration is that which does likewise
redound to the comfort of the mistical body and members of Christ, who how low
soever they are yet the kingdom is designed for them, as Christ said to to his
disciples Luke 12. fear not little flock, who are not only little in respect of
number, but little also in respect of stature (as I may say) little in the
account of the world, and in their own sense likewise, it is your fathers good
pleasure to give you the kingdom.

Secondly, the next thing is the days of the son of man, it is not the day of
the son of man but the days in the plural number, and this holds forth to us,
that there will be days, that is, there will be a tract of time, wherein the
interest of Christ, the interest of his kingdom shall be solicited and agitated
in order to his glorious and public coronation, and enthronement, the days of
the son of man, you meet with it twice here in this chap. v. 22. And he said
unto the disciples, the days will come, when you shall desire to see one of the
days of the son of man and ye shall not see it, that is, as it appears to me,
they shall be looking for these days in those fleshly, and carnal assumptions
(as I may call them) of several spirits that shall start up, crying lo here,
and lo there, but they shall see nothing of the son of man in all those voices.

You shall desire to see them, and go forth, as many shall do, but shall find
themselves mistaken, for the days of the son of man are of a more general
import and influence, and they are of a spiritual discerning, there is the
first time that you meet with days, And the 2d is in my text, you have 3 times
in this chapter the word day in the singular number spoken of.

So shall it be in that day, when the son of man is revealed, and so shall the
son of man be in his day, now if days, in the plural number, and day, in the
singular number be not the same, then they are thus to be distinguished. The
days are that tract of time, that lead to Christ's giorious and visible
appearance, I shall stand no longer upon this, because it will be more fully
made forth, when we come to show the import of these days, what these days do
import, what they contain in them, which I do therefore immediately address my
self unto.

I have already showed you, that they do import this, that the days of the man
of sin are ended, the days of Antithrist are over, that is, his 42 months
spoken of, in Revel. 13. I shall repeat nothing that I have said concerning
that, but only this, that the holy Ghost does not speak so improperly, as to
call those the days of the son of man, which are the days of the man of sin,
there is therefore a legal determining of the right of the man of sin, though
he may be actually troublesome for a while after, even till Christ's glorious
appearing, and so there is a legal commencement of Christ's time, though we see
not yet all things in his possession, yet he may have a legal right, and so he
has in these days, to which I add, that as Jacob took hold of the heel of
Esau, so does Christ's kingdom take hold (as I may say) of the times of
Antichrist, I shall not give more authority to the Apocripha then what may seem
fitting Let it stand or fall to that evidence of truth, that shines in it, but
in Esdras you have such a question as this propounded by him, who holds forth
himself to be Esra.

There is a question held forth, touching the parting of times, he desires to
know of the Angel, what is the parting of time between the two worlds, and he
receives this answer, that Esau is a figure of the old world, and Jacob of the
new, and says he, look as there is the hand of a man, between the hand and the
heel, so there is no more time, between the old and the new.

Now I can make no sense of that answer, but this that as there was no hand at
all between the hand and the heel, that is, the hand of Jacob, the power of the
new world, that took hold of the very heel of the old world and thrust it out;
so does the power of the son of man and his days (the very beginning and
commencement of his kingdom) thrust out the old world.

And let me observe this, by the way, that this kingdom, and these days of the
son of man, if they did take place in our spirits, and in our faith, we might
be so much the more serviceable in thrusting forth the old state of things:
Therefore, now I shall come to show what makes them to be called the days of
the son of man, for if you see Antichrist the man of sin still upon the stage,
you will say, upon what authority do you lay Christ's claim to these days? what
ground have you for it? how are these his days more then any other?

Let me tell you, my beloved friends, these days are not only the days of the
son of man, because they are not the days of the man of sin (as wafts and
straies belong to the Lord of the Manor, it is not only for that reason I call
them the days of the son of man), but Christ has a legal right unto them, and
his term begins in these days.

You may say, we have always been otherwise instructed, it is a common received
thing, that Christ's kingdom begins with his visible appearing, and that 2
Timo. 4.18. v. seems to countenance this, which runs thus, I charge thee before
God, and our Lord Jesus Christ who shall judge the quick and the dead, at his
appearing and his kingdom, where, his appearing may be conceived to commence
with his kingdom, and his kingdom not to commence or begin, till his glorious
and personal appearing.

To this I shall answer: it is true, that text does necessarily import, that
Christ must appear in his kingdom. And that I do verily believe, and do expect;
but that Christ's day, or Christ's kingdom has no beginning, till there be an
Adequate revelation of his person, until he appear as a man, in that kingdom,
as well as God, cannot, that I see, be thence inferred.

For we shall show you by and by, by the types that were held forth, and the
times of the old testament that there may be a beginning of Christ's kingdom
(and is so) before his glorious appearance, and manifestation, and there may be
many kingdom-Acts done before Christ in person do exhibit himself visible to
our eyes; that which I would begin with, you shall find in Dan. 12.1. At that
time shall Michael stand up. This is the first thing, in the days of the son of
man, Michaels standing up, for I look upon the action, which is showed unto
Daniel here (for the consuming and bringing to naught the four Monarchies: both
in the East, and in the West) to fall into these days of the son of man, and to
be performed by Christ, who is the Michael here that stands up.

Now I confess there may be some question whether this Michael be Christ, or
no? because we read of Michael (in this prophecy of Daniel) that is spoken of,
as one of the chief princes, one of the chief Angels, which is not proper to be
applied to Christ.

For he that is the supreme, is not in a rank with the Angels, nor consigned to
a particular charge or province, as he is called Michael your prince, in the 10
chap. and the last verse.

Now if it be but the standing up of Michael the Archangel, there is something
to be done, when Michael stands up (and it being a word which is both passive
and mean too.) It signifies to be raised, or roused up, as if before this time,
he did couch or lie down, therefore if we take it of Michael the Archangel, it
imports something, but I have two or three reasons why I take it for Christ.

First, because he is mentioned singly, then, at that time shall Michael stand
up.

For though a single Angel may be sent to carry tidings unto the Saints, yet a
single angel is not competent to have the whole affairs of Christ's interest,
and his kingdom committed to him, and to stand up singly for it, this is a work
rather for the Lord himself, this is one reason: Another reason, is this,
because it is said, at that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince, but
in the Septuagint, and so likewise in the Hebrew, there are two Articles; in
the Septuagint, it is Michael the prince, the great, now I say, these are not
proper for an angel, these are sovereign titles, and belong to the Lord
himself. As we use to say Constantine the great, and Theodosius the great, they
are all sovereign attributes, that is a second reason.

Thirdly, at that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince, we never read
of Gods sending any creature, either Angel, or man to be a single Champion and
deliverer of his people, but we read oftentimes, that God engages himself
singly to arise, Psalm. 12.5. for the oppression of the poor for the sighing of
the needy, will I arise, says the Lord, etc. And so in Esaias. 23.10. and in
Esaias. 42.19. and Esaias. 63.5. and several other places, where you may read of
Christ's engaging alone, and so I say, here it suits with Christ's standing up,
but it suits not with any creature: Now then what is there in this of Christ's
standing up, who is the Michael here (and if any shall yet be unsatisfied that
he is called Michael, we may as well ask, why he is called David, David your
prince.)

But (I say) standing up here, does import a change of posture, and an
addressing of himself to the Churches business, why sleep thou? it is that
which is intimated, that the Lord in some dispensations seems to be asleep, and
let things go as they will, but when the Lord stands up, and awakens, it makes
a great change, a great alteration, when Christ laid aside his garments it was
to do a singular thing, it was to do, or show a singular, a wonderful act of
condscention and grace.

And so when Christ rises up, it is the fall of his enemies, and for the
relieving of his spouse, it is a rising up with anger and indignation, with a
concern, as the Lord says, what have I here, that my people are sold for
naught? I cannot bear it longer, then up he gets, it is said, at Christ's first
coming, it is for the rising and fall of many.

What then will his second coming be? when he rises to judgment, when he rises
to plead the cause of his people, well; but in the next place Michaels
standing up, or Christ's standing up, is a standing up for himself, and for his
people to take his great power, as it is said in the Revelations, thou have
taken to thy self thy great power, now shall Christ stand alone? consider this,
if a king stands up, and has great occasion to stand up, either that he is
invaded or that his subject rebels against him, upon such occasion, his
confederates and allies, will pour in their forces upon his enemies.

Surely our Lord Jesus, has great Allies, and confederates, his father, and
all his holy Angels, you know, it is Gods covenant with him, that he will give
him the heathen for his inheritance, and he that will put all his enemies under
his feet, before ever he has his kingdom, we find the ancient of days upon his
throne, and it is a fiery throne too, as you have it, in Dan. 7. Now if Michael
stand up, all heaven, all the hosts of heaven will stand up with him, it will
be found so, and let the Saints reckon upon it, Christ will not want power,
this is from Michaels standing up, that is the first thing. But then 2ly. we
find in Dan. 7. another strange thing which we read, but pass over, not
knowing well what to make of it, we have done so many times; in the 13. v. I
saw in the night visions, and behold one like the son of man come to the
ancient of days, and they brought him near before him, not to exercise you with
the difficulty of the understanding of this, I shall immediately point you to
what I think was the type of this, and will give us a very good account of it.

Solomon, you know, was a type of Christ's kingdom in the tranquillity and
peaceable time of it, when it had wethered the point of all opposition, and had
now got the day of all its opposers, now you shall find such a thing as this in
that type, before David's days were out, Solomon was presented to him, for the
kingdom, and that by David's allowance, and David did as it were put his power
upon Solomon, and set him up, which gives us the clearest light into this
prophecy, that I know of.

When David was old, and cold, that they could not keep heat in him, but they
were sain to provide otherwise to refresh his blood, and to put spirit in him,
then was thought a time for Adonijah to set up for himself, and get the
kingdom, for David was like a candle in the socket, and so Adonijah might think
the action would not be misinterpreted by David, then they called all the kings
Sons to the feast, only they left out Solomon (the true interest, the heir
designed by God, and sworn by David, he is left out) and Zadoch, and Benajah,
these were not called, but all the rest: now when Adonijah was at his feast,
Nathan hears of it, and acquaints Bathsheba the mother of Solomon, who goes
forthwith to David about it.

Here is now in type, the bringing the son of man to the ancient of days, as
she brought Solomon she is a type of the Church presenting Christ unto God,
saying, have thou not sworn, that Solomon thy son shall reign after thee? This
is presenting the son of man to the ancient of days in the type, now so it is
in the Antitype, so it is in these days of the son of man, behold King Solomon
with the Crown, wherewith his mother crowned him. Can. 3. the Lords Prophets,
and such as are true to the Lords interest, bring the son of man to the Ancient
of days, the prayers of the Saints will run much in this strain, and they will
be speaking good of Christ, in the ears of God, and will be telling what their
expectations are, and how they tender the setting up of Christ, and how they
suffer, and must suffer till Christ reigns, and that they never expect to see
good days till he comes, this answers the type, the bringing of the son of man
to the ancient of days.

The ancient of days is commonly looked upon to be the father, now it is true,
the father has covenanted and engaged to set Christ upon his throne, and he
calls him his King, but you will find in Revel. 1. this very description, that
is in Daniel applied to Christ, The hair of his head is said to be as white as
snow, and therefore how shall we understand this? I will tell you how it may be
reconciled by David's Lord, David's son, that is, the head of Christ is God, this
is the head here spoken of, (the hair of his head was as white as wool:) and
therefore I say, this presenting the son of man to the ancient of days, is but
the bringing the right heir, Christ the son of man, to the head of Christ,
which is God.

In the next place, there is not only the presenting of Solomon (as a type)
unto David, but David does appoint Nathan to go and anoint Solomon and set the
crown upon his head, and sends Benajah, and Zadock with him.

So this is, in these days of the son of man, there is an anointing of Christ,
and an instructing of him (as I may say) as David did instruct Solomon his son,
and as in the Psalmist, it is said, give the king thy judgments O God, and thy
righteousness to the kings son.

David gave unto Solomon the charge for the building of the temple, and he gave
him the pattern of it, and he exhorted him, and encouraged him to be strong,
and know the God of his fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart, and by
computation, it took up, about six months before David's death, that he was
introducing Solomon in his room: so that I may say, here is a great deal of
Christ's kingdom demonstrated. For all this was before the old state was out,
Solomon was actually enthroned and stated in the kingdom in his fathers time,
and Solomon did exercise his kingly power as you know, 1 Kings chap. 1. v.
50.53. chap. 2.4.10.

Now, I shall not apply these things yet, because I am not come to my
assumption, I am but laying my groundwork, but before I come to that, I must
show you the complexion of these days, and although these days are the days of
the son of man, yet they are not such days, wherein the glory of Christ and his
kingdom do shine forth without a cloud, and therefore for that, we must, have
recourse again unto our text.

And you shall find there, that these days of the son of man are days of an
extraordinary nature, they are days, wherein the world shall be drowned in a
flood of prophanes, and sensuality, and security, and this is in order to a
making them fit for a flood of judgment, so it is said here, As it was in the
days of Noah, so shall it be in the days of the son of man.

Likewise, so also as it was in the days of Lot, not only does this scripture
witness this thing, that the days of the son of man will be of such a nature
and complexion, but likewise in Zach. 14. the Lord tells us, there, in several
expressions, that are very Emphatical, as to what the nature of this day will
be (one day) or a day by it self (we may understand that by it) an odd day,
such a day as has not been or shall be known by the Lord, as who should say,
none but the Lord shall know it. Neither day, nor night (that is a strange day)
neither clear nor dark, neither the one nor the other, but mixed of hoth.

But at the evening tide, it shall be light, then it will clear up like it
self: briefly the days of the son of man will be a time of as prodigious
wickednesses, of as great trial to the saints, of as great calamity to the
world, as ever days were, and beyond all president; so Daniel says, at that
time shall Michael stand up, and it shall be a time of trouble such as never
was the like. But what then makes the title of the son of man, if there shall
be such days of trouble, is that title worth nothing in these days? I answer,
there is a light side of these days, and that is to be seen by those that have
eyes, by those that are spiritually enlightened to see; there will be a dark
hope in all the people of God, and in all the whole creation in these days,
that surely, there is something in the womb of these dispensations that will
revive them at the last, and this the blind world can see and say. But the
saints (especially, if they watch, and if they obtain that favor from the
Lord, as Daniel did, that was a man of desire) they may see, and will see,
whither all things will tend, and where they will issue, and so they will be
comforted and they will sing for the majesty of the Lord, they will rejoice in
that which God will create. They will be engaged actually with the Lord in
creating a new heaven, and a new earth, this will be the mixed nature of these
days, they will be prodigiously wicked daringly wicked and yet they are the
days of the son of man, why so? because it suits his design upon all accounts,
that the Churches enemies might show themselves like themselves, that so his
judgments might be the more conspicuous; the more clear which he will bring
upon them, and also that his people might have the trial of their faith and
sense of their own weakness and failings, and so ( I say) it does suit Gods end,
who designs so to come, as that his day should fall as a snare upon all that
dwell on the earth, that there shall be no more likelihood of the day before
his coming, then of many ages before, that so the mockers might be confirmed
saying, where is the promise of his coming? as who should say, you talk of
Christ's approach being near, but there is no sign of it, not considering, that
he comes as a thief, you your selves know perfectly says the Apostle, that the
day of the Lord so comes, Christ comes before the 7th vyal (that is)
preparation is making for his coming, It it his legal time yea it is his actual
time before the the 7th. Phyal for says he, behold I come as a thief, should
now show you the Parallel, having spoken of the complexion, it is that which
conforms this time to Gods former proceedings, There were such days before God
destroyed the old world 120 years, Those were the days of Noah, and the world
was looked on as a drowned world from the beginning of those days, and so the
days of Lot from the time that Abraham, had rescued the king of Sodom, and the
other four kings from their enemies, which was a sign of the four Monarchies,
from whose hand, Abraham, the father of the faithful, delivered Lot, and for
his sake the rest were delivered.

Now it is probable, that from that time Lot used a greater freedom to admonish
them, to make a better use of their deliverance, then they did; those were the
days of Lot, there were days then, there was a time for the judgments coming,
but it was not fully come, so likewise does Gods day prepare his enemies
against such a time that they may be as fuel dried for the fire, that they may
flame like a torch or a sheaf, when fire is put to them.

So likewise, he prepares the vessels of mercy, I shall only tell you in our
saviors time, there was from the denunciation of the judgments against
Jerusalem 40 years, and so likewise from our Saviors rising, till his
ascension, there was 40. days wherein he was (as I may say) preparing himself
for his ascension to heaven.

I might give you twenty Parallels of it, but now I come to the application of
these things, to these days, and as for the standing up of Michael, that is the
first thing I would assume; that Michael is raised up, Michael has stood up
for several years, if others, in other parts of the world do question this, yet
we in those parts have no reason to doubt of it, it is much, if we are not
convinced of it, of the Lord Jesus his standing up, and addressing himself to
promote and serve, in his own and his Churches interest above all interest, and
all kingdoms of the world, that interest of the kingdom of God that has lain
hid in the faith of the Saints, and in the promises unto this time, if you say,
what evidence can be made of this, it is a question not becoming those that
have seen the great works of God, as we have done, have we not seen Michael
standing up: have we not seen him rousing himself, have we not seen three
nations bowing in his name, have we not seen an heaven, and an earth passing
away? have we not seen a dissolution of the Church, and state, have we seen all
this, and do we question whether Christ has set a foot his title, or no, you
know, that kings when they are proclaimed in this land, they begin in the
Palace yard, they are not all over proclaimed in one moment. (So I say) the
kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ is to be a rising, and a growing kingdom, of
the increase of his government and of peace there shall be no end; and why may
we not say, that this Island, or these three nations may resemble the palace
yard, where Christ is first proclaimed, he has been brought to the Ancient of
days by clouds of witnesses, who have pleaded his interest with God, you know
it has been the subject of the saints prayers these 30. years yea nothing has
relished upon the spirits of the saints, that has not related this way, if
Christ's kingdom has not been at one end of it, it has been no prayer, no
sermon, if it have not had that at one end of it, yea has not the Lord Jesus
exercised his kingly power? has he not made many overturnings, has he not
dealt with many Adonijahs, how many would have set themselves up in his room?
This is the account of all these quick revolutions, these overturnings, this is
exceeding declarative of his being near, whose right it is, I shall therefore
conclude with a word of use, or application, and it is this, Let us lift up our
heads for the day of our redemption draws nigh.

I have already formerly, once and again told you, that these 45 days from the
end of the 1290. days spoken of in Dan. 12. are that generation (as I conceive)
in which our Savior says, all things shall be fulfilled, for so were the
generations from David to Christ (those 14 generations) 43 years one with
another.

So in those 45. days in Daniel, wherein Michael shall stand up, Daniel is
told, that all should be fulfilled in that time, and I say these times began in
the year 1650. and we are now in the middle of them (we are very forward) and I
do more suspect my self for the setting my post too far off from Christ's
appearing, then of setting it too near; I say, I more suspect my self for that,
and the Lord knows, i.e. (if you subdivide this last watch or space of 45 years
into lesser watches,) in which of the watches, of this last watch, he may come,
in the second, or in the third watch, but we are near to it, let us look up,
and lift up our heads.

You see what evidences have been given of these days.

Obj. But if Christ's coming be so near, would the times be so evil may some
say? I answer was not Sodom at the worst, when Christ came with the other two
Angels to destroy them, and so the old world.

Yea, but you will say, the people of God would be better then they are, if
Christ's coming were so near.

Answ. They shall be made better by his coming, the summer spoken of, is the
very appearing of Christ, you know that when the trees puts forth summer is
night, but it is the appearing of Christ, is the summer, would you have fruit
before summer? your fruits are growing in the winter, and in the spring, they
are coming forwards, but you have not your fruit till the summer; Christ is
preparing his people by the present dispensations, and they shall shine, but
all that Christ does now is emptying work, cleansing work, as when a man pulls
down his old house, in order to building it anew, Christ is removing house and
he is taking away joy from the earth, (the old joy) trade is going, the joy of
the earth; and the very husbandman may loose the fruits of the earth this year.

And if you look within, O what desolations are there? alas! though the Lord
give us our wits and our senses, yet we hear of one, in one place, under a
spirit of dispondency, Gods fire is in Sion (in this day) and his furnace in
Jerusalem, and there is none of us, but have our back burdens, if it be but
being companions of suffering ones, it cannot but go to our hearts, this is the
sowing time, yea but you will say possibly.

Obj. There is a promise of the spirits pouring forth, and therefore these
cannot be the days of the son of man, I answer the spirit is not the first
grace, the leading grace, as in those promises made to Israel in the letter, of
bringing them back to their own. land, Ezekiel. 36.24.32. They must be in their
own land and settled there before the spirit is poured forth, lest they should
reflect too much upon their own qualifications, least thy may be ready to say,
it is for our reformation that God has visited us.

Therefore will the Lord at he t last (as at the first) take his people, in
their blood, and in their unworthiness.

Obj. But you may say, we see nothing of the Jews being called, and Antichrist
destroyed.

Answ. Antichrist has but a mystical destruction till Christ comes, and there
will be a Pope, for ought I know till Christ appears, but his time is legally
out and determined, and when a time is out, what is done afterward, is an
usurpation, and Antichrist shall pay dearly for all at the last.

But as for the Jews, it is a material objection, we cannot look for the
appearance of Christ, till they come in, though on this occasion; let us be
aware that there is a mistical Jew, that needs to be turned to the Lord, as
well as a litteral Jew, but as to the litteral Jew, though we see him not come
in, yet we know not how soon we may, for it shall be very suddenly, a nation
shall be born at once (mark the expression) though we do not see yet, have we
heard nothing of the rattling of these dry bones? let others take it for what
they please, for my part, I take it for a truth, and the rather the more,
because it is the time for them to appear and though they may be hid in the
deserts, for some time, it is not more then what their fathers were in their
day, who lay still by the space of 37 years, in the wilderness of Cadesh, and
the people of the nations little concerned themselves with them, nor they with
them.

Besides, what we heard in the year 1665. when there were reports of their
stirring, it is not impossible to show you earlier stirrings, as we have it
recorded of the year 1650. that there was a very great meeting of them in the
plains of Ageda, where they set up tents, and there was a confluence from all
parts, no less then 300 Rabbis, that were able to show their Genealogy, and
in a very large tent, there was an orderly dispute, where they did with great
ingenuity and candor put the question, whether the Messiah was come, or not?
Then came in the Priests, and Jesuits with their vicar, and their breaden God,
and made them break up in disorder: nay what if I should say unto you that
Christ has showed himself to that nation distinctly, it is crebly related that
he showed himself in the year 53. in Frankenland upon the cross, and that he
was there so seen by thousands of spectators with his Angels about him, as if
that very word of Daniel were in fulfilling, and that the Angels were
presenting him to the Ancient. of days, representing that in a visionary way
then, which is the work of the day still in the hearts of the saints, through
the intercession of the spirit. I speak it only for this (my beloved friends)
for that I know (I feel) that we need the quickening of this consideration, we
are amused with the times that we are in, and do not know what Israel is to do,
because we do not know, nor discern the times; look to it, and take heed of
security, take heed of an unwatchful frame of spirit, for these are the days of
the son of man.

The Fifth Sermon.
Luke 12.35.36. And ye your selves like unto men that look for their Lord, when
he will return from the wedding.


THe influence of Christ's coming deriving it self from the nearness of it,
things though great, that are remote, seem but small, and work but little upon
us, things that are not to be in our day, nor in the days of our children, we
are apt to put off, therefore I made it my business in two or three discourses
to show you the nearness of this coming of Christ; I showed it you, first, by
the expiration of the times of the man of sin, and Secondly, by the signs of
Christ's coming being fulfilled, pitching chiefly upon those signs in Math. 24.
And in two other of the Evangelists of the suns being darkened, and the moon
being turned into blood. The third time I showed you, that these are the days
of the son of man by several particulars, and (by something I had spoken)
devolving our discourse to that point; I pitched upon those words in the 17 of
this Gospel. Where our savior speaks of the days of the son of man, and
paralels them with the days of Noah and Lot, which I told you does intimate to
us, that there is a tract of time from the expiration of the 42 months (of the
man of sin) to the glorious revelation of the son of man in person from heaven,
and that this tract of time is called the days of the son of man, wherein, he
is preparing to set forward unto this glorious expedition.

Now in these days of the son of man, I did partly open to you what was to be
done, and showed you some figurative delineation of this work by former types,
and especially in the investing of Solomon into the kingdom; I showed you, that
before David's death Solomon was set upon the throne, and in opening of those
passages, we sound them to cast a great light upon some prophetical passages,
that we meet with in Daniel: As about the bringing of the son of man, to the
Ancient of days, which I told you does very aptly agree with that type of
Solomon to David (bringing him unto remembrance, as I may say) which was done
by Bathsheba, by the advice of Nathan the prophet, she goes to David, and puts
him in mind of his oath, and she is seconded by Nathan, and thereupon David
does send to anoint Solomon, and to set him upon the throne, and all this was
in David's life time: Now the observation I made from these things, was this,
David you know was a figure of the militant state of Christ's kingdom, his
setting Solomon upon his throne before his own death, does intimate to us,
that, before the militant state is swallowed up (as I may say) of victory, (or
of the triumphant state of the Church) Christ is to be set upon the throne; as
the succeeding links in a chain do enter into the former links, so does Christ's
time take hold of the former times, even as Jacob took hold of Esau his brother.

From thence I came, in the winding up, to show you that Christ was entered upon
his kingdom, and that there were many acts passed in order to Christ's glorious
reign, and that he had laid his claim in partionlar, to these three nations,
and had been proclaimed here, as in the palace yard (as I might say) of his
dominions.

I gave you also many concurrent passages, that have fallen in, to strengthen our
faith, and answered some objections touching the calling of the Jews, which
although we do not yet see, called to the knowledge of Christ, is not to
trouble us, forasmuch, as their calling is not to be expected, until they be
settled in their own land. For so the promise seems to cast things, in that
order, that God will as freely look upon them, even in their blood, as he did
at the first, when they were in Egypt, that so it may not be said, that their
turning to God did lead the Lords turning to them.

Yet I told you, that we have heard of the rattling of those dry bones, which
(because the time is come) should make us take heed of saying, there is nothing
in it, though we are not acquainted with the posture of their affairs, how they
stand since that, only I told you, that we may have this reserve of hope, that
as when they came out of Egypt, they lay 37 years in the wilderness of Cadesb,
and probably were as much out of the eye of the nations, for a great part of
that time, as they are out of our eye now.

So I say, God may be forming that people secretly in the dark, and may be
carrying on his intended goodness toward them, and we may see the sun of their
redemption, and restitution suddenly break forth of the clouds, although we do
not hear of them every day.

I should now come to show the nature of this coming of Christ, which is here
held forth to us in these words, When he will return from the wedding, but
before I come to them, I must make a little use of that word, I have already
hinted. Use, First, if it be so, that we are in the days of the son of man,
that is, in that generation which Christ's speaks of in Math. 24. and the other
Evangelists (when these signs of his coming are to have their course, and in
the rear of them all, Christ is to appear.)

I say, if we be in that generation which probably is that 45 years spoken of
by Daniel at the end of 1290. days (and which 45 years I have told you by
computation is one half of it run out, or very near, for there is but this
difference between chronologers of a matter of 3 years, from whence the 1290
commence, either in 360 or 363. from Christ). All agree, it was in Julians
time, and some say in 360, others say in 363. there is but that difference, and
so accordingly they came out in 1650 or 53. so that I say there must be half,
or very near of the 45 days following, expyred.

Use, Then in the first place, this shows us, that there has been nothing in
all that cry, that has been of the day of the Lord, which has been proclaimed
by several voices, and by several spirits, and indeed the disreputation that
has been brought upon it by some mouths and spirits that have been the
trumpeters of it: has made others ( I say it has made many sober and cautious
spirits) decline it, and to have no pleasure in it. But if that would be a good
argument against the truth, because the devil himself does acknowledge it,
surely then men should have disowned Christ, in this day.

For you know, that spirits of divination, and unclean spirits did confess him,
and acknowledge him, and such as were reputed devilish, but the truth was
nevertheless the truth, for being taken up, by unclean lips.

The intent of this Use is, that we may gather up, and not lose even that
testimony, which has been given of the day of the Lord, and that from good
evidence, from the sense of it, the experience of it, the feelings of the
workings of it, in the spirits and affairs of men.

Surely there can be no account given of these wonderful changes that we have
seen, not only in this outward world, but in the inward world too, unhinging,
and unhorsing and bringing down all the glory of man, I say, no other account
of it, can be given, but that the days of the son of man are come in; It Is
true, they are mixed days, and so I told you all along. Neither day nor night,
neither clear nor dark, as Zachariah says, in his 14. chap. They are days by
themselves, as I may say, days full of trouble, as Daniel says, it shall be a
time of trouble, such as never was, and yet days, that have in the womb of them
such a birth, such a glorious birth and blessing for the world (for the whole
creation as well as the people of God) as no former times have had.

They are days (as I may say) wherein Christ is in the mount with God,
ereating, and taking instructions (as I may speak with holy reverence) for the
administration of his kingly office in this world; as Moses the typical
mediator was in the mount 40. days, and 40 nights, receiving his instructions
for the people, let not the expression offend you it is said in the Psalms,
give thy jadgments O God to the king, and thy righteousness to the kings son.
Which need be no more strange to us (that Christ should receive his judgments
from the father) then that he should receive the revelations from the father,
which he owns (the revelation that God gave to him, to show unto his servants
things shortly to come to pass.)

Now, because I have mentioned that of Moses, do but consider what fell out in
the mean time, Moses was in the mount with God, and although the people had
seen the Lord, coming down upon the mount, after such a terrible manner, yet
while Moses. lingered and stayed in the mount, they fell to Idolatry, they made
the calf: is not this a wonderful thing; that they should go turn aside, I tell
you, there has been as great an apostasy from these days of Christ, from that
hope, and that witness that was given of the day of the Lord, but it is no
other, then what our savior himself had foretold us, Math. 25. there you
find, the virgins going forth to meet the Bridegroom; it is said, there was a
cry at midnight, saying, behold the bridegroom comes, and yet after all this,
while the Bridegroom tarryed, they all slumbered and slept, and so it is at
this day, these days of the son of man are not exclusive of trouble, and of
strange spirits; the devil, when he sees, that men are awakened, and he cannot
hinder it, but they have an expectation of the Bridegrooms coming, he will
mingle heaven and earth together, if it be possible.

He rushes in with all his delusions, he seeks to blast this hope, these
expectations of the saints, all manner of ways; and if we had been well advised
(as I may say) and had known the Scripture, we might have expected a storm, to
be poured out upon us, even a storm of inward exercises and trials, as well as
outward troubles.

These days of the son of man are days, which none of the wicked do understand,
as Daniel observes, but the wise shall understand; they are days, wherein
Christ comes privately (as it is here intimated, that when he comes, and
knocks, you may open unto him immediately; it is that which is not unusual
among men, for Ambassadors of Princes to come in, privately at first, and to be
advised with about their public reception, before they make their public
entry, Christ comes also privately to his own, and his glorious appearance in
his adequate person (man as well as God) comes in the rear of all.

So that (I say) let us not lose the things, that God has wrote, It is true,
there is danger on the other hand, (that is) of crying up, the present day, for
the time of Christ's appearance, and if it were worth the while, or that I were
competent for such a business, we might show you, that this notion of Christ's
being come; and of the day of the Lords being come, shutting up all the
expectations of the saints within the present performances, does offend several
ways, it offends against the order of the works and appearances of God, who
has set times and seasons for all his purposes.

If Christ's day be as much, as it ever shall be, it does mix and confound all
things together, it makes Antichrists day, yea you may as well confound his
first, and his second appearance together, it is said, he has appointed a day,
wherein he will judge the world, it is not now, but it is appointed, so the
Apostle directs the hope of believers to another day, and you will not say, but
that Christ was come to them in the spirit, yet they waited for a further day,
the Apostle himself says, he had not yet attained, nor was as yet perfect, so
that (I say) this does strike at the order of Gods working and appearances, and
as the Apostle says concerning the resurrection, those that say, the
resurrection is past, destroy the faith of some: It is a destroying of our
faith, and of our comfort, to hold forth this to be the day of Christ, to be
the time of Christ's appearance, the all that we were to expect.

I confess, it is not to be wondered at, in the Prelatical Church, that they
would have us to expect nothing but tribulation in this world and persecution,
the Church of Christ (say they) must travel under the cross, nntil the last
judgment until they come to heaven, though they mind not to do so themselves,
nay this they preach to others, that they themselves may ride upon the high
places of the earth, they would keep the people still in ignorance and
blindness of that day of Christ, which when it comes will abase all the pride
and loftynes of man, as you have it in Esaias 2.

It will abase things that are high, and exalt things that are low, the vallyes
shall be exalted, and the mountains and hills shall be brought low. But that
any that are spiritual, should go to destroy the faith, of themselves, and
their brethren, by taking the present dispensation for the full performance of
the promise, is that which may be justly wondered at, and it is not certainly
without a great design of Satan, thus to beguil them, and through them to
endeavor to beguil others of the comfort, and the hope of Christ's appearance,
and of the redemption of the body: It is true, there may be a revelation of the
day of Christ in the spirit, and this may be given forth at any time, Abraham
saw Christ's day though he lived many ages before Christ's time; and so John was
in the spirit on the Lords day, but yet notwithstanding, John tells us, that
this day of Christ, was to come on orderly, there is such a series of times and
providence, so many scenes that are to be presented before that concluding
scene, before Christ's sitting on the white throne: There were so many seals to
be opened, so many trumpets to be sounded, it is true, there was a glorious day
in the primitive times, but that was but the first fruits.

And it is called ( I conceive) the first fruits, because it was answering to
the first fruits under the law, for there were three seasts, three times in the
year, all the males in Israel were to appear before the Lord, there was the
feast of the passover, and the feast of the first fruits (which was at
Pentecost, the very time when the spirit came down upon the Apostles, as
fulfilling that feast) and there was the feast of ingathering, or the feast of
tabernacles, and it was in the feast that you find written in Joh. 7.37. In
the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus cried, and said, etc. This
feast of tabernacles held several days (there were 7 days that it was kept) and
so this feast that in the Antitype answers to the feast of tabernacles, may
take in all this generation that I speak of, (the 45 years of this last
generation) the days of the son of man.

But mark ye, in the close of this time (that is the great day) then will
Christ appear in his glorious equipage, with all his holy Angels, then will he
come both in his own glory, and in the glory of his father, and of all his holy
Angels, and till Christ has his full glory, we cannot expect the full effusion
of his spirit.

The spirit will not be poured upon all flesh, the earth will not be filled
with the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea, till that great
day of the feast, till that last, and great day of the feast.

So that (I say) take heed of taking part of payment for the whole, it is true,
these are the days of the son of man, and I do believe that from this time you
shall see the interest of the son of man, riseing and growing more and more,
all things shall work unto that glorious issue, those that are wise shall see
it every day, to them, day unto day will utter knowledge, I say the interest of
Christ is on the rising hand still, and all opposite interests are in the way
of declyning, and therefore let us prepare for him, we have seen something
already of the day of the Lord upon things that have been high and lifted up,
let us look to see it yet more, the Lord will abuse the loftyness of man both
of one sort and of another, I tell you, there is a great deal of haughtiness,
which the Lord will abuse even in his own people, and in their spiritual
affairs, it is said in Zeph. 3.11. In that day, shall thou not be ashamed for
all thy doings, whorein thou have transgressed against me? for then will I take
out of the midst of thee, them that rejoice in thy pride, and thou shall no
more be haughty, because of my holy mountain, this Scripture does hold forth
unto you, the process of the day of God (or of these days of the son of man)
they are humbling days to all.

God by these dispensations which have passed over us, has been bringing his
people to this pass, he has been working upon them, that necessary
qualification of making them an afflicted and poor people; I remember very
well, that the first time I spoke here (when your desires gave me a call to
make a little supply of that place, that was destitute by the removal of that
eminent help, that did appear usually, in this place before) I told you, then
that for my part, I was one that was spoiled by this day of the Lord, and I
must own and confess unto you, that there is nothing does relish, nor can
relish with me, of the old glory of the excellency of man, though I know that
all of us have a young tooth in our heads, as the proverb is, and we should
willingly be something among men, but the Lord has mercifully shut the door,
against any such hope, or expectation, and therefore let it not enter into our
hearts, for God has forbid the banes, we must never touch with any such things
more, for God is stayning the pride of all glory, though spiritual discoveries
have all along unhorsed, and I may say unmanned us (I mean the Lords people)
yet it is now the work of the day, more eminentlie. What was Paul in his time?
rude in speech, I come not to you in excellency of speech, or in man's wisdom,
he accounted all those things dung and dross.

And truly (I say) our ordinances, and administrations, our ministrings one to
another, the ministering of pastors to their congregations, and the mannaging,
of our affairs, and our fellowships; must become more and more in the spirit,
less in man, less in the wisdom of man, and more in the power of God, or else
this day, that is coming, will throw it all to the ground.

And therefore, happy will those be, that are as that carcass, that Christ
speaks of in the end of Luke 17. where the carcass is, thither will the Eagles
be gathered together; that man, that is made as a carcass (that is all his own
life, beauty, and activitie it is all gone) the Eagles of resurrection life
and glory will descend upon that carcass, and take it up into themselves, or
the Eagles are an Emblem of the resurrection, in casting their bill.

And these are they, that the day of the Lord comes to revive; It comes to save
the poor and needy, it is not so much the poor and needy in purse, for alas
many of the wicked are so (many of Christ's enemies are so) the Devil has not
power to make all his children rich, if he had, it would be a sad world and
intolerable, but the poor and needy, that shall be saved, and comforted in
this day, are the poor and needy in spirit; such as are indeed nothing in
their own eyes, and therefore the world despises them, they are such whose life
is hid with Christ in God, and God will rebuke us (as he has done,) he will
rebuke our life, whereby we are apt to court too much the glory of this first
creation; by which we are defiled (I say) the Lord is rebuking our life
inwards, and when this day of the Lord comes (his glorious appearance) it will
find his people in the most forelorn and desolate condition of any people; I
will leave in the midst of thee, an afflcted and poor people, that i^, ill. (I
say still remember this) that this day of the Lord has a quarrel only with the
undue exaltation of things, it has only a quarrel with the flesh, with the
glory of the flesh; I do not say, but that God will recompense, and does in his
people, recompense all that he takes from them in the flesh, with inward
minifestations, yea, let me tell you, yet more, the day of Christ (even these
days which are begun, these days of the son of man) as they do pull down with
one hand, so they will be building up with the other. And the new world, the
new state of things, shall grow up gradual he, even as this old world finkes
and declines: the Lord has (I say) this double work in hand, and though he
destroy the old foundations, that we are apt to build upon, yet he will
substitute, even under them, a new foundation, out of which all our comforts
shall spring and grow up; that so (as the Apostle says) being uncloathed, we
shall not be found naked. God will not pull down this old world about the ears
of his people, but he will have a new state of things, everlasting habitations
ready to receive them, and this new state of things shall grow up out of
Christ, and out of a root in the spirit, strangely, wonderful he, God shall do
a new thing in the earth, a woman shall compass a man, God will serve his
people by such hands, and such instruments, as they did little expect it from,
as we begin to see at this day, that so we may learn ever from hence, to take
heed of comparing the instrument with him, who is the workman, but that it is
God, whatever the instrument be: he will make the beasts of the field to honor
him, he will open rivers to (...) people in the wilderness and in the dry
places, even those things which we were ready to cast away, which we thought
were altogether unprofitable, God will make them fruitful in great advantages
unto his people, he will gird Cyrus, that does not know him.

And thus will he bring the blind by a way, that they know not, and will make
darkness light before them; so that God does not father pull down the old fram,
but he is as forward with his new frame, and though it be not all in our sight,
but like curious pieces, which are pulled in from the tumult of vulgar
observers, yet when the works is finished, the vail shall be drawn aside, and
we shall see it a very glorious piece. I have been longer then I thought for,
detained from the words which I should come to, of Christ's returning from the
wedding, I see, I shall but make an entrance into them now.

I shall give you a little general view of it, and the sense and meaning of the
words, as the Lord does open them to me.

Ye your selves like unto men, that wayt for their Lord, when he shall return
from the wedding, that when he comes and knocks, they may open unto him
immediately, This enters us upon the nature of Christ's coming, he comes as a
Bridegroom, indeed he is to be looked upon under several notions in his coming,
he comes as a judge, and an avenger, shall not God avenge his own elect, that
cry day and night unto him? but that that has the preceedency of all other
considerations, and is especially in the eye of his saints, is, his coming as a
Bridegroom, behold the Bridegroom comes.

But here is a great difficulty in the text, and that is, it is said here, he
comes from the wedding, it is not said when he co^es to the wedding, but from
the wedding, (when he shall return from the wedding;) and if you will render
the word gramatically, it is, when he shall return out of the wedding; now this
does not hinder, but that he comes to the wedding, as other Scriptures
intimate, but what is this wedding that he comes from, and why is he said to
come from the wedding? I answer, First the wedding that Christ comes from, is
(I conceive) the glorious investiture of his own person, as he is our head and
representative in the glory of the father, and in the glory of his kingdom,
that is the wedding he comes from.

And his coming is not only to publish, but to impart the glory and the
fellowship of this glorious marriage with his Church here on earth; there are
four weddings of Christ (as we may say)

There was his wedding in Eternity, of which Solomon speaks in Proverbs 8th.
Then was I by him, as one brought up with him.

Christ was the image of the invisible God, from eternity, and so he was his
spouse, and his temple.

The Second wedding was Christ's marrying our nature, in the low estate of it,
marrying our rags, and infirmities, the word made flesh.

The third wedding is Christ's returning unto the father, and being glorified
with the same glory, that he had with him before the world was, for which he
prays in John 17.

And then the fourth and last wedding is, that of Christ to his Church at his
Second coming, when he will come to receive them to himself, as he says, if I
go, I will come again, and receive you to my solf.

Now it is the 3d wedding, that Christ comes from, comes out of that to his
poor afflicted Church here upon earth, to take them into the fellowship of his
own glory, and this little preposition ((...)) does import unto us, that Christ
is influenced, he comes influenced from the glory that he has at the fathers
right hand to impart it, to leaven his body the Church with it, with that
kingdom, and that glory, and so I take that passage in Rev. 21. to import,
Behold he that sits upon the throne, says, behold I make all things now.

As much as if we should suppose Christ to be thus speaking and deliberating
with himself, saying, here I am in glory, here I am at the right hand of power,
all things are made subject to me, principallities, and powers, things in
heaven, and things in earth.

But my poor mistical body lies still in the earth, in the sudds, lies under
afflictions, temptations, and infirmity, why now (says Christ) I cannot longer
forbear, I have along time held my peace, but now (says he) I will cry like a
traveling woman, I must have my spouse with me, where I am: and thus he comes
influenced from his own glory, to impart this glory to them; and this now he is
doing all this 45 years. Let it not offend you, that I speak so much of the
time; if the Scripture did not speak of it, I should not be so bold, but both
the old, and new testament speak of it: Christ tells us of a generation that
shall not pass, till all be fulfilled, when these things begins to appear,
that generation will give you your desire ere it go out. Now I say, all this
time, Christ is taking private order with his Saints, and with his people, for
this public reception of his in the world, and that is the reason of what is
said here: That when he comes and knocks, ye may open to him, immediately;
though I grant you, there is more employed in this, then merely Christ's
spiritual visits unto his people, which has been in all times more or less;
but the meaning is, that in these times, more especially Christ is doing such
things in the world in order to his kingdom, as he would have his people,
understand them, as knocks of Christ, their beloved.

And I wish (with all my soul) that the Churches may hear Christ's knocks at
their door, he knocks and knocks, and knocks, he knocks by all the rents and
divisions, that are among them.

And this is a comfort to the saints (those whose joy is in him) not that the
truth of our communion with Christ shall be disowned by him, but there is a
covering upon us, that must be taken off, And as it was said of John the
Baptist, that Christ must ircrease, and he must decrease, (he speaks it not of
his own person only or chiefly, but of his administration) so I say there has
been such knocks by rents, and divisions, there are such rents at all our doors.

How has the Lord been knocking, to give us notice that the old world is
marching off, and a new world is a coming, now blessed are they that do watch
and understand the Lord, and are born up by that hope and expectation, and
though he comes to dissolve many marriages, that we have made, and to take us
out of the arms of those that are with us, yet he comes to solemnise the
blessed wedding between us and himself.

Now (I tell you) what that marriage will be even the taking of us into the
fellowship of his own glory, as he says of the body in Phil. 3. that he will
transform our vile bodies, and make them like his own glorious body, so I say,
as he will do this with our bodies which is the last thing, so he will do the
same with our spirits; and this is the work he is carrying on now, and we
should be opening unto him immediately, and we should be aware, that the Lord is
entered upon his refyning work, and he will sit as a refyner, it is not a
transient act, a business to be done at a sitting, but he will set to it, though
the completing of it will be in the twinkling of an eye, but Christ is at work.

Therefore if we do but know the gift of God, it may be a help to us to look
for this hope from Christ. He has begun to betake himself to his great reign,
the waters have forsaken their wonted channel, and they run backwards; God
turns the spirits of nations, the spirits of powers, and what great things we
may see in a little time, we know not; I tell you Gods last works are very
quick, as things that draw near to their center usually are.

The Sixth Sermon.
Luke 12.35.36. Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning. And
ye your selves like unto men that wait for their Lord, when he will return from
the wedding, that when he comes and knocks, they may open unto him
immediately.


THat which I had in my eye, when I first took this text, I have been kept off
from all this while, that I have been speaking upon these words, which was to
administer a word (as the Lord should give it into me) to assist that
preparation the Lord calls for, in these words; that we might not be found
unready, and in an immeet posture at Christ's appearance: Now, that which has
retarded these instructions, has been my desire to set before you; the
important call of the present times to concern your selves about these things;
for we are apt to put off that work which the present exigency of affairs does
not require at our hands; especially if it be unpleasant work, as this work is
unto the flesh; to break from this world, to pull up our stakes out of this
world; I say it is a work we are not forward to, until we needs must, till
there is an immediate call to it, and an indispensable necessity for it, men
are apt to put it off, and with the fluggard, to turn them selves in their
beds, concluding, as he; I may have qne nap longer. I may sleep a little
longer, therefore, I have desired to set before you the nearness of the coming
of Christ, though indeed I did not think to have taken that scope; when I first
took up these words, to let out my thoughts so freely, as I have done to you.
But beginning with the signs of the times in Math. 24. I know not how, the
discourse devolved it self upon the days of the son of man, and it was thus,
those signs in Math. 24. are by our Savior (as they seem at least to me and
many others) all of them bounded within a generation, and we find in Daniel,
that which does comport with this, Dan. 12.

We find there two numbers, the latter of which is 45 years, which I have told
you, is much after the proportion of the generations from David to Christ, and
it is said, those 45. years which follow the 1290, days shall bring us to that
glorious state, that top, that pitch, that perfection, that he is blessed that
waits, and comes to the end of those days, yea we find in the 17. of this
Gospel, the days of the son of man, not a day, but days, and parelling them
with the days of Noah, and the days of Lot, they must of necessity be
understood of a tract of time preceding his glorious visible appearance, in
which, his appearance shall be drawing on; so in these days of the son of man
that great Catastrophy is drawing on upon the world, and therefore by way of
correspondence, as answering those times, it is suggested to us that there are
such days of the son of man; and I likewise gave you, by calculation and
computation, that we are in the very midest of those days, those 45. years.

I am very sensible, that this computation, to dwell much upon it, may not be
so acceptable to serveral hearers, I shall only make this Apology for my self,
that it is an argument of great comfort and hope to my self, and it is that
which I have found a need of, even to understand the times, and for any that
are, it may be not so we pleased with such discourse, yet if it could be let
into them, and that an evidence could be made to them, that the coming of our
Lord were so nigh, I am persuaded, they would have as much comfort in it, as I
have; though I grant this, that this is such a knowledge, as is gained by the
comparing Scripture with Scripture, it is a light of prophecy, which I will
grant you is but an exterior means, and he that has the testimony of Jesus,
has the spirit of prophecy. And could you read the works of God, and his
goings in Christ, and in your own souls, in conformity unto Christ, you might
see the very original mould (as I may say) in which all times are cast, you
might see the pattern, according to which God does fashion, and frame all his
dispensations, both to the Church, and to the world.

But I shall no longer hold you on this, the last time I began to enter upon
the nature of Christ's coming, having spoken of the nearness, we come now to
the p^ture of it, which is held forth unto us under a several notion; Christ
comes as a Lord, to take account of his servants, and he comes as a Bridegroom
to take them into the fellowship of his own glory, he comes also as a Savior
to redeem Israel out of all his troubles, and he comes as a Judge, and a
revenger, to destroy his enemies, but that which has the precedence here in
the text, is his coming as a Bridegroom.

And I told you, the last day, that there are four weddings, there is,

First, the marriage of Christ in eternity to his head, spoken of in Prove. 8.

Secondly, there is Christ's coming down out of that glory to marry our
infirmities, the word was made flesh.

Thirdly, there is Christ's return with the spoils of this created image unto
heaven, and marrying that unto the glory of his heavenly man, and then,

Fourthly, there is the return of Christ again the Second time from heaven, to
fetch up, the individual persons, and members of his body mystical, into a
fellowship with himself, in the same glory.

Now our business (I told you) that we are immediately concerned about, is, the
third marriage, when he shall return from the wedding, you your selves like
unto men that looks for their Lord, when he comes from the wedding, what
wedding is this? It is from the wedding which he has solemnised in heaven of
our natures unto the son of man in heaven, this poor smitten nature Christ
takes at the utmost disadvantages of it, under all the sin and shame; and
meanness and poverty of it, he has married it to the son of man in heaven, to
the heavenly glory.

Mark ye, not our persons, but our nature, this is the wedding from which he
comes, and he comes now to take our persons to marry them, into the same glory.

Indeed these three latter weddings, they are all in pursuance of the first,
and they are all to end and terminate there, the first wedding which is the
marriage of Christ unto his head (which was in eternity) this is the glorious
exemplar, and this is the rest of the people of God by him, thus to be brought
to God.

And all that was after wards, it was but a glorious project, for the enriching
and embellishing of that marriage (as I may say).

As if the Lord could not show love enough in setting up such an object, as man
in the person of the Lord, Jesus from all eternity in his heavenly man, as if
he could not show love enough, in espousing in him all his heavenly race, that
should be produced out of him: suppose Christ, as he is described in Prove. 8.
where he is said to be by him and rejoicing always before him, suppose (I say)
that Christ had a race of men, and a seed that he had begotten, and brought
forth from that glory in which he was in eternity, this had been a great deal
of love in God thus to espouse man, and to beautify and glorify man; but ( I
say) for the glory of this love the Lord projects, that this man, who was the
object of this love, he shall come forth in a natural image, as it is said in
the 1 Cor. 15. First that which is natural, and afterward that that is
spiritual: and therefore, he makes first, Adam, an earthly man, he makes him
first a living soul, but yet here was not ground rich enough, that is, it was
not dark enough to set off the love, and glory of God.

And therefore, this man at his man at his best, being then but an earthly
piece though pure earth) here is a project for this love to go out further to
man, in his fall, and therefore the divine counsel permits all that, suffers
man to fall into the utmost extremities, into the worst of circumstances, that
could possibly be; and then, from thence does the Lord recover him, and brings
him up, to the first image, as a passage to the second and heavenly image; he
is restored in principle in Christ, but not so restored as to rest there, and
yet (I fear) there are thousands of professors that rest there, that are
restored to no more then Christ's active and legal obedience; and they account
this the new birth, but it is not so; for all that restoring, even in Christ
himself, it is but to declare him to be a fitting sacrifice, a Lamb without
spot, and to furnish the matter of that sacrifice, and every saint has
something of this spotless lamb (as I may say) though not in perfection, he is
not without spot as Christ, but he is without spot in Christ, not in himself,
for if you examine the actions of the best men, and take a trial of them, and
weigh them, they cannot hold weight before the Lord, though a saint in his
mind, has a more noble principle, being renewed after the image of him, that
created him. But if it were so in Christ, that he, at the very height of his
legal righteousness was only thereby qualifyed and furnished to be a sacrifice
to his father, it is that which instructs us, that in all our seize in
that first image, we should look upon it to be only given us, for a sacrifice.

There was you know several offerings under the law, some were but a pair of
young pigeons, yet it was accepted, so that (I say) whether we have more or
less of that active righteousness in the force of our first life, and
principle restored (this is a great shortness in our knowledge, not to know that
there is in Christ himself a first covenant-life, a first covenant-principle)
this must all be laid down and parted with, Christ did so himself, and so must
all his.

And this is that, that the Lord is carrying on, through this life. we are
dying daily, and offering up our bodies, and I pray, what is that body which is
dead because of sin, the Apostle speaks of men that were in the body of the
flesh, therefore this body is the body of the first creation light, it is that
image of God that was presented in it is perfection, by Christ, in as great and
absolute a perfection as in the first Adam.

And it is restored in principle, in all that believe in Christ, there is
something of that lise, whereby they tend to a greater exactness and
perfection, then they can attain unto, but this body is dead, and all must be
broken off from this husband, as in Romans 7. you have it there very plainly
declared, know ye not brethren for I speak to them that know the law (says he)
how that the law has dominion over a man as long as he lives, that is as long
as the man lives his own life (for a believer is crucified with Christ, but
Christ lives in him) what is the husband here? it is the law you will say, the
law is not capable to be a man's husband, as it is only a doctrine, or as it is
a form of words, what is that to be ones husband? Therefore you must consider,
herein, that it is Christ (mark ye) that is the husband even under the law, for
he has a first covenant wise, and first covenant children, he is a husband
under the law, is it not said, though I was a husband unto them, Ier. 31.32. I
beseech you accept of these hints, and weigh them.

I desire not to speak my own words, and if I did not think, that there was
that in these things which does mainly import our souls, I durst not speak
them; but if you consider, you will find that there is a world of professors,
that have only relation to Christ as a first covenant Lord, and husband, for it
is Christ that is the person in both, in law, and Gospel.

Moses was but a typical mediator, it was Christ that was the true Mediator.

There is an appearance in which Christ comes forth, which is not to abide, but
is to go away, as he acquaints his disciples with the expedience of it then,
yet he was a Bridegroom then, but he was a Bridegroom in the flesh, and that
covenant relation was to be exchanged for a better covenant relation, Romans 7.4.

Do you not see here, that Christ is the Bridegroom, his flesh was shadowed out
by the law, what do we mean by his flesh? my beloved brethren let us wait upon
the Lord for light in these things, there has been a great deal of pudder
about the flesh of Christ, as if Christ had no body now: because the Apostle to
the Hebrews reflects on the days of his flesh as past.

Alas! this is not the meaning of Christ flesh, for the flesh properly, and the
law and sin, and death, all these are relative one to the other, so that the
flesh, as it is considered in us, is the free hold of sin; now Christ, he comes
in the flesh, and he therein fulfils all rightousnesse, and so does (as I may
say) recover that ground which the first Adam had lo^t, sin was entered upon the
flesh, Christ he comes and plants righteousness in the flesh (mark ye) it is
but in the flesh, the flesh is that active sat of first-covenant life, and
righteousness in conformity to the law and letter, which was the state which
was restored in Christ though lost in Adam, and this is that which believers
themselves are brought forth into, in order to a passage through it into the
righteousness of God, the first stone of which building is laid, in the
dissolution and passing away of this first strength, this first activiry and
power, that the creature finds himself invested withal, and in which he thinks
himself a gallant piece.

I say the first stone of this new building, is laid by the pulling down of all
this, ye are dead to the law, that ye night be married to another, even to him
that is raised from the dead, there is our new husband, that is a believer has
now given up, as Christ did, when he gave up that first life and righteousness
to his father. When he had done all, and the law could require no more from
him, he had another piece of obedience which was a note above all the law, what
was that? why he must be obedient unto death, as much, as if God had said unto
him, can thou now my son forgo all this glory, can thou strip thy self,
can thou put it all off, can thou trust me to raise thee again, and bring
thee forth in another glory, in a heavenly image? I can, says he, there is none
but Christ could do it, were it not for our captain, we should never have gone
through, he was married (as I told you) unto the original glory of God, he was
married to his head, and he having the presence of eternal life with him, he is
able to charge through these legions of devils, this land of death and
darkness, though it was that made him sweat drops of blood, and cry out, my
soul is sorrowful unto death; yet he was so enabled, and supported, that
through he goes, and had that glorious issue, that the Gospel is the report of,
this is one husband; now mark ye, he being raised from the dead walked a while
with his disciples upon the earth, about 40. days, then he ascended, he was not
in that glory where he expected to be, while he was on the earth, for he would
not let Mary touch him, saying touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my
father, as who should say, I am not yet, where I would be, nor where I shall
be, I am not yet the object of that new converse, which thou shall have with me
or at least I am not yet manifest in it.

Therefore (I say) his ascending was, that he might marry our natures in his
own person, unto his glorious head, though he was married unto the father in
eternity, yet not as the son of man on earth, but this was the marriage of the
son of man on earth.

And so he carried up our nature, out of this state of poverty, beggary, in
sin, death, yea out of legalor first covenant-righteousnesse into the glory of
God, that is the third marriage, that I have been speaking of wherein, you see
how it differs from the first marriage.

The first was the marriage of the son of man, in heaven unto the godhead, but
this is the marriage of the son of man on earth unto the son of man in heaven,
that is clear by our Savior his own stating of it (let us not slight that) for
he says, before Abraham was. I am, this glory, is to be the covering, the
clothing to the son of man, on earth, this is the wedding from which he comes.

You possibly will say, why did not Christ come all this time, has this
wedding lasted this 16. 1700. years? my brethren, our Lord Jesus Christ is
presented as our head, so that Christ was married as a public person, and we
must all follow to this wedding, this has been the work ever since, through
all times and ages; from Christ's assention, it has been (I say) the
preparation of the Bride the lambs wife, for this fourth and last marriage
Christ's 3d marriage, the heavens must receive until the restitution of all
things, till his Bride be ready.

And all the saints have been hastening out of themselves, out of his fleshly
fallible state and image, into the resurrection life, they have been hastening
by a mistical death; this is the work of all ages since Christ, to prepare the
Bride (that is such a number of men and women as God has fore known, in his
eternal counsel, that are to come up successively upon the stage of this world,
in their generations and times, to be the witnesses of our Lord, and of his
death, his sufferings are to be fulfilled in them, and so is his life to be
manifested in them (as the dyings of Jesus, so his life) this has been his
work since his a scention, and when his number is eompleated, then will the
Lord reveal himself from heaven in our persons, in that glory, which our
natures have been invested with from his ascension; then will Christ and his
bride, the lamb and the lambs wise, plant, and model the world, and they will
have a new seed after that which shall be born, in Christ's own image (as Adam
is said to beget a son in his own image) which will be the new race of men and
women after this glorious marriage.

For Christ will have generations of saints, that shall be brought forth unto
him in his kingdom, in another glory, then we have known all this time; Thus I
have been carried, whether I would not, for what I designed to speak, I am not
come to, I should have showed you by the example and pattern of his wedding on
Christ's part, the glory of his marriage, and I should have come to the
application, but I must take another time for this.

The Seventh Sermon.
1. Ep. John 3.2. Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it does not yet
appear, what we shall be.


YOu see, though I am off from my former text, yet not from my subject, this
text benig of a kin to it, and bordering upon it, and having many things in my
mind upon it, though not digested into such a method, as more leisure and time
might have afforded: I shall abruptly present to you the 2. heads, upon which
we shall spend this opportunity, without more curious survey of the text, or
context, and briefly they are.

1. That blessed and glorious hope, which is laid up for the Saints, at Christ's
appearing, and 2d. the evidence of it.

These are the two things that I shall pick out of these words, the hope is,
that we shall be like Christ when he appears, the evidence of this hope, is,
that we shall see him, as he is, for the hope it self, you see, it concerns us,
our persons, and our spirits.

And that is the immediate and great concern and expectation of believers, in
Christ's glorious kingdom, and at his glorious appearing, the change that shall
be brought upon our selves, the glorious change that shall be brought upon all
things, ( for he that sits upon the throne (says) behold I make all things new)
is to begin first upon us, it is to begin upon the Saints and when they are
changed not only will all things be changed to them, but all things shall be
changed with them, though not presently, yet in due course and order, for the
Apostle says that the whole creation groans and travels in pain, expecting to
be delivered into the glorious liberty of the sons of God; they are to be
delivered into our liberty, and the Gospel throughout, in all the privileges
both of grace and glory (in both states of the kingdom, both that of grace, and
of glory (the militant, and the triumphant state) do hold forth first fruits,
that shall be first visited and first saved, and then the Lump and body, first
the root, and then the branches, and I do the rather put a note upon this,
because we are apt to be carried forth into other contemplations and
expectations of the change of times, the change of kingdoms, commonwealths,
Churches, and overlook the fundamental change, this head change, this right
change which begins in the persons of Saints, of believers themselves, which
may be called the beginning of changes, as we read of the beginning of
revenges, in Deuteronomy, or the head revenge of the enemy, so this is the head
of change, and in vain do we look for a happiness to come unto us, by the
change of our circumstances, and of our conditions, if there be not this
Radical, this fundamental change in our persons, and spirits. Now this change,
I shall first present it to you in the substance of it, and then shall consider
the arguments, the illustrating arguments, in the text, and in the context.
First the substance of this change, into a likeness of Christ, when he shall
appear, we shall be like him, the likeness unto Christ is that which cannot
but speak for it self, and commend it self sufficiently to our desires, can
there be any better thing then to be like Christ? can there be a greater thing
then to be like Christ? Let us but consider who, and what he is, he is the
likeness of God, the brightness of his glory, the character of his person, in
whom god has drawn forth himself, to the life, he is the image, he is the
glory of God, there is not any excellency in God but it is displayed in our
Lord Jesus, most beautifully; most divinely, most advantagiously; and therefore
it may well be a hope that may bow the vastest desires, and fill and satisfy
the most enlarged hearts and expectations, surely if there be so much beauty in
this first creation, in this natural image, which is but the first draught, but
the rude lineaments (as I may say) of that glorious image of God, then what
must there be in the very life-image it self: if the shadow be so beautiful, on
what is the person!

As it is said, he that made the eye, shall be not see, so (I may say) in this
case, he that has by a shadowy relation that he has given the creature, put
so much beauty upon it (as in the first creation before it was marred by sin,
which had a great deal of beauty in it) has he not a choicer beauty, has he
parted with any thing from himself, and has he not retained better things with
himself?

But I shall not go on to expatiate upon this, for it would quickly engulph us,
and take up all our time, but that which I would further say, is this, and it
will arise out of the arguments of the text, which will show us the greatness
of this glory, we wait (for the glory of this image which we shall be conformed
unto) there are several arguments in the text, and in the context v. 1. Behold
what manner of love, etc. And it does not yet appear, etc. The first argument
is the present nonappearance of this-life, of this glory, some philosophy
makes privation a principle, and so here in the text; This nonappearance,
which is in a sort a privation, is a principle, or a demonstration of the glory
of our future hope and expectation: It does not yet appear; now when the
Apostle says it does not et appear, you must not take him, as speaking of a
saint, when he is at the worst only (when he is at and under in his spirit) but
you must take him as speaking to (or taking in within the extent, or compass
of his affirmation) the best state that ever any saint did appear in, that it
was rather a non appearance then a proper appearance of this glory, it does not
yet appear, take it from Adam, and all the first creation-glory, take it from
Abraham, and all the new creation-glory that ever yet appeared, it is a
nonappearance, it is a hyding rather then a displaying of this glory, it does
not yet appear.

None of the saints in their seize in their most lively and raised
apprehentions, or actings ever did, or could give any tolerable account of
this glory; I shall make forth to you my meaning by a Scripture resemblance,
the present state of the saints is but as the state of most rich and beautiful
flowers in the seed, or of a most flourishing and fruitful tree in the kernel;
you know what the Apostle says in the 1 Cor. 15.36. and so on.

As much as this, that the natural body, take it in a saint himself that has
the highest communications of God, it is but the seed of the spiritual body,
and of the true appearance into which he shall break forth, and so our Savior
calls himself in that present state of his in the flesh, in Job. 12.24. a
single seed.

In all his ministries and miracles he calls himself but a single seed; now
what may we learn from this; why that the present state of a Christian bears no
greater proportion to the future, it bears no greater similitude, and
resemblance of the future, then a seed, or a single grain, or kernel does of
the flower, the plant, the tree, the fruit.

There are three things in a seed which do forbid it to glory, first, it is a
narrow, contracted thing, it is a dark thing, and confused; it is also a dead
thing, except it fall into the earth, it abides alone. I shall speak of these
three a little; that so we may from the disadvantages of the present state, be
a little enlightened into the glory of our future and enlarged hope.

1. A seed is a contracted thing, what is a kernel to a tree, a poor little
narrow thing, you know what our Savior says, of the mustard seed, that it is
the least of all seeds, but the true body of that seed (when it is grown up)
the birds may rest in the branches of it; so are we in the present state,
narrow, and contracted, Oh! we have neither room for God, nor room for one
another in our hearts, we are such pitiful poor narrow contracted things, as
single seeds abiding alone.

I have lately been thinking touching the resurrection, how we in the present
state do espouse (mark ye) but a few dusts of the earth, as our peculiar
bodies, and we are separated and divided from all others, as well as from the
globe, the Mass, and body of the earth; and this body, we not only live in,
but live to it, all our care and concerns is for it, and let all the earth be
miserable if we can be happy.

This is the pitiful narrowness and contractedness of man in the present
state, and although the seed of God, which is cast into us, is (as the Lord
says of his people) a noble vine, a noble seed, and is witnessing, and
testifying in us, of a greater largeness and breathing after it, yet we cannot
break from our prison, but here we are confyned and shut up in the narrow
bounds of self, yea shut up against God, and we would be content to be a vail
upon God, though he did loose his glory thereby.

Oh! there is this pitiful narrowness, in this present state, but when the body
is sown in the earth, then it mingles and incorporates with it is mother earth,
into the dust of the whole creation, then it marries them all, so will it be in
our risen state: oh! then there will no more be a particular concern, a
particular life, a particular glory, but we shall have the body in communion,
be in fellowship with all our fellow members; we shall stand in one body, in
one joy, with our head, and all our fellow members, as you see in a seed of
corn, when it has dyed in the earth, it comes up in an ear of corn, wherein
there are many seeds, 20.30. a hundred fold, living in fellowship together.

Secondly, a seed is a dark thing, dark, and confused, there is in a seed
radically, vertually the tree, the plant, the flower in that poor little seed,
but if you will go to find out the arms of this tree, it is not the most
skilful Anatomist that can find them out, but there they lie wrapped up together
in a dark state not explicate, not brought forth, so is it in the present state
of the saints.

There is heaven, yea what do we say heaven, there is God, and Christ, and the
spirit yea there are all the Angels of God, there is all the train, all the
Retinue, all the gory of heaven, in every saint, so as that they do dwell
mutually in one another, and every spirit is a house, and habitation for all
blessed spirits, and all graces, all virtues, all excellencies; they shall
display themselves gloriously even out of this seed, but at the present they
are only here in a confused mass, nay a mass I may not call it, they are but
in a principle not brought forth. We have sometimes hints, notions,
apprehensions of great glory, but where are the integral parts that should make
this an entire piece: here is a glimps, a glance, and eye, a little finger, as
it is said of one of the twinns that put forth his hand and drew it back (in
the case of Zarez, and Pharez.) So there is a putting forth of the hand, but
alas the body is yet in the dark, and keeps behind all those glorious parts,
they are but in seed, yea

3ly, As seed is not only dark and confused, but it is dead as our Savior
says, and we all know by experience. You may take that seed, which will sow a
whole field, and bring forth a plentiful harvest, you may lay it up in your
garners, years, and yet you have not one seed more at the years end, then when
you laid it up; for alas! the seed is a dead thing, unless it falls into the
earth, as our Savior says, so are we, we are dead, as the Apostle says, and
our life is hid with Christ in God. There is the earth, we must fall into,
there is our mother earth, our principle with which we must unite, must be in
union with it, by a mistical death; you know that this natural death is but an
ordinance to serve in the knowledge and doctrine of this mystical death unto
us, it was ordained for this end unto believers, it came in originally by sin,
yet being come in, God makes use of it for this service, to represent to our
eyes and senses, that we must thus dye out of our selves, as the body dies into
its original, that so it may be in union with the fullness of the whole earth:
So we must dye out of our particulars into our own source or principle: the new
Jerusalem that is from above, that spirit of which we are, from whence we were
taken: as Adams body was taken from the earth, so we are taken from a divine
ground, and into that must we dye and fall, that so (I say) we may be in union
and in fellowship with the fullness of that principle. I might observe other
things from the seed, as being course in it is appearance, a course covering.
all of you know that the husk of a seed is but a course thing, so is the
present form and appearance of the saints; I do not speak of the bodily
appearance only, though that is but a course thing in comparison of the
glorious body that we shall have, when Christ appears: But the body of our
works, and righteousness, and all our actings as we are professors or saints,
it is but a course thing in comparison, you know there is, if you take off the
husk of a kernel there is a fine white kernel within, so I say there is a pure
thing, lies under a dark, and course covering in us, it does not yet appear
that is the first argument.

The Second argument, of the glory of this state, that we look for, is from
these words, now are we the Sons of God, compared with the first words of the
1st verse. behold what manner of love has the father bestowed upon as, that we
should be called the sons of God; my argument from hence is this, if we are the
sons of God, that does import a greater glory, then we indeed can conceive, for
it does import a similitude unto God, and a bearing his image, as the son of a
man bears the image of his father, and is like unto his father; and the Apostle
in that Romans 8.17. builds very high upon this bottom, upon this foundation, If
children, then heirs heirs of God, and joint-heyres with Christ, that if we
suffer together, we should be also glorified too either; and so he goes on, he
builds all this upon this foundation that we are children, that we are sons:
you know that the father does communicate not only his worldly substance, not
only his goods, his riches, his inheritance, but his life, his spirit and his
nature, unto his children; now if you would but take in the strength of this
consideration, we must (I say) consider the 1st verse, behold what manner of
love, etc. Love, you know is the principle of propagation in the creature, and
so is love in God, and it is such a kind of love, this propagating love it
does intend the bestowing of the dearest life and joy to the begotten, we are
said to be born of the will of God. Now you know that every man's will is called
his pleasure, because indeed the will is the very subject and source of all
pleasure, and in all comparison between the understanding and the will; they
agree in this, that the understanding does form and draw (as I may say) the
lineaments of truth, But the will gives the life, touches the life of
intellectual creatures, is the pleasure of their will in the draught of their
understandings; so that the saints, as born of the will of God, are the very
pleasure of God, they are the very love of God, they are the breath of this
love, the product of his love, upon which he does design to display all the
lovelyness that is in himself; and therefore now, what think you? has the love
of god given that glorious account of it self in the present state of the
saints? is this all the love which God has to shed down upon us? this that we
experience in this present state? why! if God loves he will love like himself,
and the effects of this love shall resemble that great love, which is the
author of it, and the fountain of it, it must resemble it, it is said, that
they shall say, Behold how he has loved them, men and Angels shall say so,
behold how he has loved them, God will write forth his love in a greater
character, and in a fairer letter, then yet it has been read in, nay then yet
it has been conceived by any saint; the prophet tells us, no eye besides thee,
has seen, or conceived the things, that he has prepared for them, that love
God, Esaias. 64. I may from hence glide very aptly into the evidence of this
hope, though there are several other arguments of the greatness of it: I now
come to the evidence of it, the evidence lies partly in what God has done, and
partly in what he has declared himself, that he will do. First, in what God
has done, God has already (you see) loved us, and he tells us in the prophets
with an everlasting love, and that everlasting love is not only to everlasting,
but was from everlasting; now there is more in this, then you are aware of, God
has set up this glory with himself (this glory into which he will bring forth
the saints, he has set it up with himself) before the world was, he has set
it up in Christ let me tell you, there is nothing less then eternal life, that
God thinks worthy of his people, or that they are to account an interest:
Therefore now, if the things we hope for, be eternal things, then they were
before the world was: in hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie,
promised before the world began, yea he not only promised it, but he did
exhibit it in the person of our Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 5. We wait to be clothed
upon with our house from heaven the building of God, eternal in the heavens,
this eternal habitation is that that Job speaks of, he shall know his
habitation and not sin: This eternal fair record of our persons, and of our
life in Christ, is that which was by him, when he made the world, as in Prove,
8. Let me tell you, this state of ours, this contracted dead state, which we
are in at this present time (which is as the rude draught of that suture state
that we expect (why this state of ours and this seed) was comprehended in that
state, in glory above, and did flow, as it were from that state, grew from that
glorious plant and tree; it descended by creation into this state of nature
that here it might dye, and might rise again through a mistical death into it is
first state, for Christ that is our pattern has declared the divine process
of this mystery.

Christ tells us, that he was in the bosom of the father before he came into
the womb of the virgin, and while he was here on earth, he had his apartment in
glory: his rooms, his Lodgings, in heaven, nay the whole was his, he was the
son of man in heaven, though he did come forth from that state into this poor
narrow thing, the son of man on earth, yet he had his relation to that still,
therefore he says, glorify me with that glory that I had with thee before the
world began, this is the nobleness of a Christians relation, and that consists
in two thins especially.

The one is, that the whole work is transacted in the person of Christ, we are
saved in him, circumcised, raised in him, and the other is, that there is the
pattern in the mount of all that we shall be, that is eternally existent with
God, in which he does behold all his works, his very last and concluding scene,
and that is the righteousness that sustains him, under all the riskes and the
adventures that his works do run through, in this world, and it is a great
ground of hope to the saints, that they descend from such a state. if you could
suppose a spring in the city, that was as high as the highest tower, though it
might fall as low, as the lowest part of the ground of the whole city, yet it
would rise again as high as the place, from whence it comes, and so (I say)
this is a great confirmatiou unto us, that we shall arrive at such a pitch,
because we set forth from such a glory. Let others call this a notion, if they
will, I am sure. the Scripture gives ground for it, I will be bold to say, that
all that glory, as it is in heaven above, so it is likewise shut up in narrow
bounds in that principle of regeneration, that is in the heart of a saint;
these heavens, as they lie in the spirit, and person of our Lord Jesus, so do
they in the principle of regeneration, of says and love, as it is in Christ
Jesus: faith and love you must not understand to be only of Christ efficiently,
but to be in Christ subjectively, our graces would never endure, nor keep
sweet, if they were not kept in Christ, because we derive our selves from those
dear bowels of the father; when he brought forth Christ who is the eternal son
of god, he brought forth his whole body in him, all his members were with him,
and all the glory that ever they shall have, was put upon them there, in that
pattern in the mount.

The Second evidence of it, is, The interest of our Lord Jesus in this, whose
children, whose branches, whose seed we are, when he shall appear, we shall be
like him, if so be that such poor inconsiderable things, as we might always be
whelmed under a bushel; is Christ so inconsiderable think you, shall not he be
set on a Candlestick, shall he not have his time to appear

Till we appear with Christ, Christ will not be completely glorified, and when
Christ does appear, we cannot but appear with him, why so? because as we are
called in a body so is Christ called in a body too: Christ cannot avoid being
afflicted in our afflictions, I tell you there is no weather-glasse that shows
changes in the air, as Christ's glorified person shows all the changes that
befalls his members, and so they represent his glorified person, as in a glass,
and there ill be spots in this moon, till the saints are glorified with him;
therefore it is Christ's interest the glory of the saints, when he shall come to
be glorified in his saints, and admired in all that believe not, by them, but
in them, 2 These. 1.

Therefore let this be the comfort of poor saints that travel under a load of
corruption, a body of sin, and of death, of it shall not always be so with the
sons of God, they shall not always be so kept, it shall not always be so with
the son of God, with the son of righteousness, he shall not always be hid with
a cloud; no, no, he has his time to appear, the great and only Potentate, king
of kings, and Lord of Lords, he must show this great sight, and he will show it
in it is appointed time; 1 Timothy 6.15. and lastly, now to show you a little of
the power by which it shall be done, which possibly will not get an easy
entrance into our belief (what is the reason we stick at the believing of
things, but because we do not credit the power by which it shall be done) it
shall be by Christ's appearing. It is no more but for Christ to look forth and
to present himself, and to show himself, and the work is done, we may truly
say, let God arise, and his enemies shall be scattered; you see every day, how
that champion, the sun comes out of his quarters as a bridgroom out of his
chamber, and how he no sooner sets forth, but all darkness flies before him.
Oh! it is not the stoutest of enemies, that thou have, nor that the Church
has, can bear the presence, and the looking forth of the Lord Jesus, but they
will presently cry, hide us from the face of him, that sits upon the throne,
and from the presence of the lamb; my brethren, this glory in which Christ
shall appear, if you do but consider it, that the state in which he was upon
the earth was but as the seed, and in that first appearance bore no greater a
proportion to the glory of his person, and his spirit now in the 2d appearance
then a sed, a little dark sed, does unto it is plant or tree.

Do not think your Savior will be seen by you, as in the days of his flesh, no
he will come in the glory of his father, what do you think your Savior to be,
is he not God as well as man, he will come in the demonstration of his Godhead,
and what shall be hard or unpossible unto Almightiness it self, he spoke the
word, and they were created. Thus will God plant the heavens, and lay the
foundations of the new earth, even by the word that he has put into the mouths
of his poor witnesses in sackcloath, when he shall appear to back this
testimony, Oh! how will this living word back this testimony, and how will it
kindle and set on fire, the foundations of the mountains: and whatever does
cover this glory? when the Lord gave the word, great was the company that
published it, not only the Angels, but every creature shall take the word and
publish it, and transmit it to the very end of the world: I will give you but a
little demonstration of it, and that is from all your experience, look what
power the hitherto appearances of Christ have had in and upon the world, upon
the saints in the world, Christ dwelling in their hearts by faith, what great
things has it done, see what those worthies did by faith in Heb. 11. By faith
Enoch was translated, through faith they subdued kingdoms, wrought
righteousness, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of the fire,
women received their dead raised to life again, etc.

Now faith, you know is but seeing at a distance, but when Christ shall draw
near, when he shall hold forth himself immediately to the soul, oh! what a
glorious power shall we be sencible of from thence: so if we should reflect
upon revelations what great things have revelations done: ye know when Paul was
by the revelation of the Lord, as he says 1 Cor. 12.3. taken up I knew a man in
Christ (says he,) he was not sencible whether he was in the body or not, as
much as to say, I was not concerned about that, now, this is all, that I would
say unto you, I would have you to understand me aright, it is not only a bodily
sight of Christ that I drive at, though that shall also be, and the bodily eye
shall be able to take in the glory of his body and person.

But there is an intellectual sight of Christ, taking him in, by spiritual
senses, Christ is God, as well as man, and this is that I would only say, that
the sight of Christ is the power, whereby we are changed into the similitude of
Christ, by a true sight of him in the spirit, in the glory of his spiritual
person, this is that which will transform and change us: so that we are changed
after a divine manner, I say it is not by any methods, or ways of the creatures
acting, I cannot put you into a way, and tell you of such a process as your
Chemists do, that you must proceed thus and thus, no but I say it is his
exhibitting of himself, in a clear light; upon the soul, enables it to copy him
forth, as I may say; and to be brought forth into the same similitude.

Use, first, let us bear up under our present unlikeness unto Christ. truly the
present unlikeness is made many times more unlike by temptations, which God
sends upon his people, and by desertion, as if they were not low enough by the
general common and constant attendants of the fall, God so dispences his
people, many times, as to fall into deeps, and darkness, that they have no
sense of what they were, or of what they are, or of what they shall be, bear up
under these for there is a day of brightning promised.

And my second word is this, it is Christ's work and not yours, you are passive
in it, and under it, pray what do the heavens do to their own enlightening, but
lie under the beams of the sun, when the sun (which knows his time) arises,
and comes forth into the firmament. Let this comfort poor souls that are
concerned for holiness, that are concerned for the image of God, and likeness
unto Christ. Let it comfort us for the Church, and for the whole creation, all
which have promises: first, the first fruits the Church first, and then the
world, first the dead in Christ are to arise, every one in his order: now I
say, that is our hope, and our hope is laid upon our Lord Jesus, and upon his
appearing, and therefore do not dispond, do not say, how shall this be done?
consider but the word in Phil. 3. chap. According to the power whereby he is
able to subder all things to himself, I tell yon there is no such power in
matter, or in body as there is in spirit, the Lord Jesus Christ he changes us
after a spiritual manner, we are changed by the spirit of the Lord, that spirit
which works in an instant, therefore it is said in a moment, or in the
twinkling of an eye.

My second Use is this, Oh! travel, travel in the knowledge of Christ, and in
the discoveries of Christ, oh! wait to know Christ, and to have him opened and
revealed to you in the Scriptures, and by the spirit in all the means you are
under, I say wait for this, when we shall see him, as be is, we shall be like
him; Oh! it is nothing but the hiding of Christ's glory from us, that makes us
to partake so little of his glory, because I live, ye shall live also, the very
sight of his life will import life unto us, so the sight of his glory will put
glory upon us, for when he shall appear, we shall appear with him in glory.

The Eighth Sermon.
Luke 12.35.36. Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning. And
ye your selves like unto men that wait for their Lord, when he will return from
the wedding, that when he comes and knocks, they may open unto him
immediately.


I Have been long upon these words, but the subject is very copious, which will
excuse me, my aim in first pitching upon them, was, both to acquaint my self,
and you (I say that we might all of us be acquainted from the Lord, and from
his spirit amongst us) with that preparation that becomes us for the Lords
appearing: to this end, I have spent much of my time in holding forth to you,
the grounds of my expectation of the Lords coming to be near; very near;
beginning with the signs which our Savior himself gives us of his day: in
handling of which I was cast upon that phrase of the days of the son of man,
which I endeavored to clear up unto you, that they did hold forth a tract of
time, from the end of the beasts term which we meet with in Rev. 13. (where we
find it precisely, limited within the space of 42 months) unto the coming down
of the new Jerusalem, and Christ's glorious appearance; and having dispatched
that I came to the application, and the last time, I spent the whole in an use
of exhortation, to watching, to watch for the Lords coming, thinking to have
gone on, with other duties, that this season calls for.

But it has been cast into my thoughts since I was here, that there may remain
some doubts touching the times, and I may be thought too forward and early a
reckoner, and that chiefly upon the account of the Vyals, which many, very
serious and enquiring souls (many that are very much enlightened in the works of
God in this day, and have great hopes for the kingdom of Christ, and do wait
heartily for redemption in Jerusalem) yet cannot get over the stumbling block
of the Vyals, thinking they are not yet poured out: whereas I have intimated
often, that we are under the 6th Vyal, and have been so long; Therefore, though
it may seem to be a great undertaking to remove this obstrnction, and to give
satisfaction in this point, and I cannot say, that I have so prepared my self
for it, that I can promise this will be the fruit of it, yet I am willing to
appear, though in weakness, and hold forth that light which I have for this
thing, that the Vyals, most of them are poured forth; I shall first give you my
grounds for this and then I shall answer an objection or two, that are come to
my knowledge against it, and so we shall go on afterward with one application.

Now in discerning this point (as indeed in discerning all prophetical
mysteries) there are two rules, that do exceedingly avail to the guiding of us
in fynding out the mind of God in prophetical truths: and the first is this,
to look to the type, and compare the type, and the antitype together, and the
second is, to compare the works of God in the world with his word, for these
works of God are the comment upon his word, and the best comment that we can
have: Now for the first, I would premise this, that there is not any thing in
the new Testament, not any period of time, nor any scene that concerns us
Christian gentiles, but there is the prototype, the resemblance of it, in the
ancient Church of the Jews; these times of the new Testament, are called the
fullness of times, they are the times of the fulfilling of prophecies;
prophecy, though not as to fulfilling, yet as to delivery, was completed and
made up in the times of the old Testament, and therefore it is said the
prophets prophesied until John, and our Savior, when he began his ministry,
says the time is fulfilled, now then to the point in hand, what are the types
of the Vyals.

We do find that expositors have not amiss paralelled these Vyals with the
judgments that God did execute upon Egypt, when he brought forth Israel, for
they are a manifest allusion unto those judgments, as you may see, if you do
compare them, though they do not correspond in point of number, yet they are
called plagues, here is the scab as was in Egypt, as when Moses threw up the
dust into the air, so it is in the first Vyal, there is a scab, and a sore upon
those that worshipped the beast: then another plague was upon the rivers and
fountains, as here in the Vyals, the 3d Vyal turns the rivers into blood, and
there was darkness over the land of Egypt: so under the 5th Vyal the kingdom
of the beast is darkened, so that I say, there is a warrantable ground for an
allusion of the Vyals to the plagues in Egypt, but yet withal I say the
allusion is not only unto the plagues of Egypt.

For the Vyals are poured forth by the witnesses, and we shall find that there
is an allusion to 3 several pairs, all in that vision of the witnesses (or that
doctrine of the witnesses, as you may call it, if you will, Revel. 11. there is
(I say) an allusion to three pair of witnesses, the first pair is Moses and
Aaron, Elijah and Elisha the second, and Joshua and Zerubbabel the third pair,
and as they were called two witnesses so they did fulfill their testimony in 2
parts, there was 2 parts of their witness, and two seasons of the fulfilling
thereof, the first part was in a time of suffering before they were escaped
from under their suffering-state, that was their first part; but in the second
part, they were upon the upper ground, they were (as I may say) the heyrs
apparent of a kingdom, and an interest which was upon the rising hand; I shall
show this to you clearly in all the three.

First, you know that Moses and Aaron before they lest Egypt (while Israel was
under the yoke) they did pour out several plagues upon Egypt, but this was not
all the work they had to do, there was the greatest plague of all was powered
out afterward, when they were escaped ont of Egypt, at the red sea, there was
the destruction of Pharaoh and all his hosts.

And Joshua who was indeed for a supply unto Moses, when Moses was taken off,
to carry on and complete the work, he led Israel into Canaan, and gave them
that land: so that he did enter upon the labors of Moses, and he knew the
work, there is the first pair, and from the time of the red sea, Israel was a
prevailing in terest, until they were settled in Canaan: so likewise, you may
see in the second pair, Elijah was a man of contention all his days and fled
for his life, yet before his death, he had power to restrain the heavens, that
they should not rain, and he slayes the Prophets of Baal, I might show you how
that Ahab, and Jezabel and her prophets were exceeding apt types of the Beast,
the false Prophet, and the whore, under the times of the new testament, as
Elijah was a type of the witnesses.

Now Elisha comes with a double portion of Elijahs spirit, he anoints John, and
brings down the house of Ahab, and he perfects the work of Elijah in the spirit
of the kingdom, Elijah represents the time of the witnesses under their
persecution, and his ascension was a type of the ascension of the witnesses,
these are the second pair.

But the last pair is Joshua, and Zerubbabel, Joshua he was clothed with filthy
garments as were the witnesses that prophesied in sackcloth, Zach. 33. Joshua
was the priest, the high priest and Zerubbabel, he was the Prince, the civel
ruler. Now you know, that it is said in the Revelation that he has made us
kings and priests to God his father, and the witnesses come first as priests in
a suffering state, and thereia they do part of the work, they do execution
against Babylon by pouring out several of the Vyals, but from the time of their
slaughter, and their ascension, then Christ comes forth in his witnesses as
acting immediately toward his kingdom, and then he anoints them with the
spirit of the kingdom, that so they appear not now any longer as Joshua with
filthy garments but as the Lord says there, take away the filthy garments from
him, and set a fair mitre upon his head, and they did so.

Now by all this, it does appear, that there are two parts of the witnesses
work, there is one part under suffering, during the times of the beast, and
there is another part after the times of the beast are expired, this is the
first ground.

The second ground is this, from comparing the word of God, with the works of
God, and that which I have to say upon that account, is this; that we shall be
injurious to the works of God, if we do not acknowledge the Vyals to be powered
out, there have been such works done, as do justly challenge this glory unto
them, to be the fulfilling of this word of God, in execution of the Vyals.
Every degree of reformation has powered forth a Vyal upon the Anti christian
state, and has done considerable execution upon that state; as I might referr
you to the times from Wickliff down to Luther, John Huz, and Hierom of Prague,
and so down from those times, if we shall not acknowledge those works to be the
execution, and pouring out of the Vyals, upon what account shall we place them?
what word of God was fulfilled in them? for Antichrist did receive a
considerable detriment and imparing by them that is clear and manifest, whole
kingdoms rent from him, by that reformation. And the work has proceeded yet
further to the detecting of him (I mean of Antichrist) in his most specious
appearances, and to the darkning of his kingdom in our day; so that they did as
the Scripture says, gnaw their tongues with pain these two are general grounds.

Now more particularly, I would speak two or three words unto you, to clear up
this, that the Vyals are to be powered out by the witnesses, and not as some do
think by some extraordinary instruments that shall be raised up in the very end
of time, near Christ's coming, and that may appear from hence from the very name
that is given unto Christ, in whose power all his instruments do act and work,
this is the name that is given unto him, the faithful witness: in the beginning
of this book of the Revelations in the salutation, so that I say, Christ, and
all his, do their work by witnessing, and therefore, pray do but mark how the
holy Ghost does pursue the phrase in giving an account of all the successes of
Christ, he uses this word of testimony, I know not what the Vyals are to do,
but to overcome the beast, and the overcoming of the beast is by the word of
their testimony; I grant that term in Revel. 12. is spoken of the Dragon, and
of the primitive Churcn under the seals, when under the 6th. seal, they
obtained the day against the heathen dragon, whom they overcame by the blood of
the Lamb, and the word of their testimony, but so also they overcome all
Christ's enemies, they overcome the beast, and the false prophet as well as the
dragon by the same means; and therefore in Rev. 19. you will find there, that
the beast, and the false prophet (and the kings of the earth that did manage
their interest and assist them) they were slain and their party, by the sword
of him that sat upon the horse; which sword proceeded out of his mouth, and so
it is said in 2 These. 2.8. v. speaking of the wan of sin, whom (says the
Apostle) he shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, so that you see, it is
the witnesses that are to power forth the Vyals, and that it is the word of
their testimony that does the work, it is not kings nor parliaments, but as
they shall be raised and influenced to be helps in the work in that which is
proper for them to do.

But the chief, the influencing cause of all is Christ and his witnesses,
therefore says the Lord, I have put my words in thy mouth, the words of his
mouth shall bring down the old state of this world, and plant the new, and
therefore in conformity to this, we find four of the Vyals powered forth by the
witnesses, during their suffering-state, as in Revel. 11. turning the water
into blood, were two of the Vyals, and the plagues o^ the earth, and the fire
two more, so it is easy to show you, in Revel. 14.18. that there also is
mention made of 4. Vyals in the vintage, now this harvest, and the vintage are
(by the judgment of those that have waited upon God in these things)
apprehended to signify (though they do distinguish them indeed) to signify that
conversion and bringing in of nations in the beginning of the reformation,
where some of the Vyals are hinted, and then there followed another Angel
saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, which they do apply unto the ministry of
Luther, who preached, that all were in a state of damnation, that did abide in
the doctrine of the beast, and did not come out of it, that was the harvest,
and then the vintage follows, the gathering of the vine of the earth, and
casting it into the winepress of the wrath of God, which is that fourth Vyal
Angel does cry for, so that (I say) by these things, it is made probable, that
the Vyals are powered out most of them before this time.

There is an objection or two, which must be answered before we can carry this
away in peace. And that is,

Obj. That it is said, that the Vyal-angels come out of the temple, and this
temple was not opened until the 7th. trumpet sounds, as you may sinde in Rev.
11.15. where you read at the 15 verse. the seventh Angel sounded, now in the
15. chap. it is said, that the 7th Angel came out of the temple, now this is
that which many do ground upon, that therefore the Vyals are none of them
poured out, because we read not of the temple being opened until the 7th.
trumpet.

Answ. Though Mr. Brightman delivered his judgment that it sounded an 100.
years ago, yet it is not so apprehended by others after him; now that which I
shall say to you, is this, that the temple here spoken of, is not that temple
out of which the Angels came (the Vyal Angels) that is one thing, and then the
other is this, that that temple which is here feon to be opened, was not opened
at the coming out of the Vyals, but was opened afterward, first that it is not
the same temple, mistake me not, I mean not, that there are several temples,
for there is but one temple; But in the temple you know, there was the holy
place, or the temple of the priests, and the most holy place into which the
high priest alone entered; now the temple of the priests, that was open all
along, that I prove thus from Revel. 11.1. where you find, that the Angel
commands John to go and measure the temple of God, and them that worship
therein, this was the temple of priests, for there was the Altar in the holy
place, now the other temple which was the most holy, there was the Ark, and
that is the temple, which is opened after the 7th trumpet sounded. The holy of
holies, the temple of God was opened, and there was seen in his temple, the ark
of his testament Revel. 11. last.

The ark was not seen in the temple of the Priests, where the Altar was, but it
was seen in the most holy place, for thither was the ark carried, and so in
that chap. 15. Behold the temple of the tabernacle of testimony in heaven was
opened. This is not that state of the Church whiles they were under suffering
from Antichrist; but it is that state that the Church enters into after the
expiration of the term of Antichrist, when they are just going up into the
kingdom, that is the temple that is opened at the 7th trumpet, and there it is
called the temple of the tabernacle of testimony. Because the ark was called
the ark of the testimony and the tables that were in the ark are called the
tables of testimony; so that (I say) these temples were distinct, that is the
first thing. The Second thing, that I have to prove is, that this most holy
place is not opened for the Vyals to come out, but is opened after they are
come out, for when the Angels are said to come out of the temple, there is no
specification, that that temple was the temple of the tabernacle of the
testimony, but I heard a great voice out of the temple, chap. 6. v. 1. now to
prove this he says in the beginning of the 15th, chap. I saw a great sign in
heaven, and there is a summary account of the Vyals pouring out, and the
victory of the true Church of Christ over the Antichristian Sinagogue in the
four first verses, before you hear of the opening of the ten ple of the
tabernacle of testimony, for this is a character that is observed throughout
the Revelations, where you meet with that word after these things) as you do in
5th verse. there is always another vision of distinct new matter, and that which
follows in time after the former; as for instance, after the Lord had
dispatched his mind unto Johu in those Epistles, in the 2d and 3d chap. It is
said, chap. 4. After this I looked and behold a door was opened in heaven: so
likewise in the 7th chap. after the 6th seal had brought the heathen dragon
down, and cast him to the earth, it is said, after these things I saw 4 Angels
standing, etc. Now this is an evident token of things that do succeed and
follow, and are not contemporary, so here, chap. 15. v. 6. It is said, after
the Vyals, and not before the Vyals, of which he had given a summary account in
the former verses, and indeed, if we do but consider the nature and import of
Vyals, that will help us in the discerning of this point that is before us,
which will serve for an answer to another objection, and that is this;

You will say the Vyals are the judgments of God upon the beast, now this is
the order of divine justice, that sin when it is finished, brings forth death;
but the beast had not finished his sin, at the beginning of the times of
reformation, and therefore it is not to be expected that he should have his
reward, till he has done his work.

Answ. Yet he had done work enough to be rewarded for, before the Vyals began,
he was not idle, he fell to work immediately, when once he had power given to
him, he opened his mouth in blasphemies.

He had ravished the Christian world from Christ, before these Vyals began to
be poured forth: did he not deserve something for all this? was he not ripe for
judgments? all the work that he did afterward, was very much occasioned by the
Vyals, by the coming forth of the light, and the truth against him, which did
sorely vex him, so that he behaved himself like a beast indeed, with great
rage, more then before.

But consider in the 2d place (mark ye) the import of the Vyals, of which word
we read but once, as I know in the old Testament, viz. of a Vyal, and that was
Samuels taking a Vyal of oil; but the Vyals we read of in the Revelations, are
full of odours, or the prayers of the saints: now there are but 3 things that
can fill the Vyals, either the sin of the enemies, or the judgments of God for
those sins, or the prayers of the saints, and I think, they may be all in the
Vyals.

It is certain, the prayers of the saints are there, they cried from the
primitive times, and so down all along.

The sins of the enemy, they also fill up these Vyals, you know what God says
of the Amorite, The sins of the Amorites are not yet full, for so God tells
Abraham, as much as to say, the Vyals are not yet full, I shall give you one
place here, the Lord speaks much in this kind of phrase, Deuteronomy. 3.34. Is not
this laid up with me in store, or sealed up among my treasures? he says before,
Their wine is the poison of Dragons, is not this laid up in store with me? you
know there are seven seals, and six of them were opened before the heathen
Roman was destroyed.

So that all the whole time from Christ unto his second coming, is all under
the seals, we are under the seals to this day, the 7th seal is not sully
opened, till Jesus Christ in person be exhibited to the joyful view and
beholding of those that look for him. All this while God is registring and
recording all the sins of the enemy, all their bitterness, it is sealed up
amongst his treasures, that is the 2d. thing that fills the Vyals, the sins of
the enemy; Consider that antichrist had been at work about a 1000 years before
ever a Vyal did stir against him, before the beginning of the Reformation. And
as there was the sins of a thousand years treasured up against him, and the
prayers of a thousanp years for vengeance upon him, so there was the wrath of
God distilling into these Vyals, for every sin brought a drop of wrath into
these Vyals still, therefore you need not say, that antichrist had not done his
work, and so was not to have his wages, for you fee he had done a great deal of
his work, yea his sin was full, that is so much as was to precede the Vyals.

Now because the time is so far past, I shall spend the remainder of it, in a
word or two of application, it is a word of exhortation to us, To be waiting
for the return of our Lord from the wedding, and I would not have you think
this is th same word altogether with that I spoke the last day, thongh if it
were, yet it were worth the while, I exhorted you then to watch, and that was
against sleeping and security: I told you in all things, you must be as looking
for your Lord; you may do business, but with a wakeful ear and eye, to be in a
readiness, to knock off from all affairs, to enter with the Bridegroom, and
open unto him immediately, but now I say we are called to wait for this
Bridegroom; for I tell you, he may be nearer to us, then we are a ware off, and
though the present time is such a time, that puts the saints upon a great
disadvantage as to this waiting, and that in two respects.

First it is a dead time, a dull time, a silent time, it is a time that has
such a complextion as is most disadvantagious to the saints; it is like the
midst of summer, and the midst of winter, there is no fermentation in the blood
(as I may say) but all is quiet in the body, so it is with us, a still time,
our faith does not work, nor we are not exercised but are strangely becalmed,
like a vessel at sea, neither wind nor tide with it, no waves to waft it over,
but there it lies still, so is it with a saint at such a time.

Secondly, it is possible, it is a time of great confidence to the enemies of
the Church, who say we have them in a nooze, and they cannot escape us yet, and
therefore I think it most necessary thus to apply to the saints at this time,
and to encourage them, and call up their faith, for I tell you, this is the
very complexion of the time, wheerein Christ may be expected.

It is a time wherein the Church feels least working of any providence toward
these issues, but all things are still, and it is a time wherein her enemies
are most confident, but this is no other, then what the Lord acquaints us with
by the Apostle, in that 1 These. 3.5. When they shall saypeace and safety, that
is, when the enemy shall say so, etc. Now whether this be such a time, or no,
judge that your selves, wherein the Lords enemies do cry peace and safety to
themselves; I confess to you, I am continually alarumed in my own spirit, and I
cannot be out of the hearing of this voice in my ear continually, that the
Bridegroom is coming, and that the day of decision is nearer then most men do
expect.

I could tell you something touching the place, which I know is a great
objection against these things: the place where the Lord will begin the
glorious discoveries of himself, and the setting up of his kingdom; we do
expect that it should be in the great continent of the world, and that it
should be all over the world at once, but we may be very much mistasten in
that, the Lord does begin his judgments in a particular place. Revel. 16.16.
Armageddon is a particular place, what need they be gathered to Armageddon, if
Christ should take his enemies wheresoever they are all the world over? then it
were not proper to say they were gathered to a particular place; so Joel. 3.
There you have the valley of Jehoshaphat, that is the judgment of Christ, which
he will exercise before the final judgment of the dead, before the raising of
his dead enemies, that have dyed from the beginning of the world to that time.
We must first look for the judgment of the quick for they shall be judged
before the dead, and I tell you, that it may be made out, that the seat of this
judgment is not to be all the world over, but in this Roman monarchy, or the
seat of the 4th. Monarchy. And perhaps we may bring it into a narrower
scantling then so too, where the witnesses resurrection does first appear,
there is the lamb, that is the valley of Jehoshapbat, there will this decision
be, it is not only the Western Empire as you have it in Esaias. 59.

But it is, the Isles of the west, yea yet closer, it is the north west Isles,
chiefly as I might show you from Esaias. 24.15.

It is by the Jewish Rabbis themselves applied to the Isles of great Britain,
this being the only north west Isle of note in the world there is not any
people in the earth, that God has so owned and hononred and tried, and set up
such a cause and interest among them, as in these nations, where his son has
been owned as king of saints, his claym has been put in for these kingdoms,
these things might be made clear to you; so that I say there may be a beginning
of that work of God in these nations, which other nations are not ready for; I
might show you this, from the last of Esaias. where it is said, that they that
shall escape (in that day of decision) shall go, and be instrumental to bring
in other nations, and the nations of the Gentiles must be brought in before the
Jews come in; this seems to be the method of Gods work, and therefore how near
may the Lord be to the beginning of this work, when all this is to be done
before Christ's appearing, which is but a little time the 1335. days being
within a little of coming up.

I should now come to show you how we should wait for the appearance of the
Lord.

First, we must wait patiently.

Secondly me must wait with a concern, be so concerned for this, as to forget
all things else in comparison not to be satisfied with ought else, though God
throw in many things of another nature yet let this be the concern, else all is
nothing.

Thirdly, wait in poverty of spirit.

The Nineth Sermon.
James. 1st. 4 v. But let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be
perfect and entire, wanting nothing.


SInce the Lord persuaded me to answer the desires of some of his people to
come sometimes and appear amongst you; I have endeavored to acquaint you with
the grounds of my hopes and perswations, that the day of the Lord is near. I
have (I confess) through the need I have found of it in my self (as well as
from the survey that I have taken of the condition of my fellow members in the
body mistical, needing some relief, I have I say engaged my mind, and have
been waiting upon God for light in the point, that I might have some
satisfaction, what time of the day (or of the night) it is, that we are in, and
might have some discerning of the times, and what God does intend to do with
us: and you know, that I have imparted to you, (what satisfaction I received in
my self) that the times of the man of sin (that is the 42 months which were
alloted to him) are expired, and that they did end with Daniels first number of
1290. days mentioned in Dan. 12. And that we are now in the middle of those 45
years, that were to run out from that time until the time that he speaks of,
when he says, blessed is he that wayteth, sand so comes unto the 1335 days, or
years; that is the 45 prophetical days, from the expyring of the first number;
so that by my account and reckoning the time of the beast expired, about the
year 1650 or 1653. (for there is that difference between Gronologers from
whence to begin the account from Julians time, wherein (some say the one and
some say the other) If you take it from the earliest account, there are 24. of
the 45 years past, but if from the latter 21 past, and 24 to come. I confess,
I have found a great exercise in my self to digest so long a delay as 21 or 24
years, it is a great while, especially for men that are in years (and according
to the course of nature, may drop before that time) to wait, which has put me
upon, searching exceedingly, if I could find any thing that might relieve in
this case, if we might yet bring the day of Christ's glorious appearing nearer;
There being such a promise left us of shortening the days (the days of the last
calamity) but ( I say) it is not for us, upon our own desires (that would fain
do it,) to shorten the time, we may not presume to do it) and therefore for my
part I am fain to give that up, I cannot bring the post nearer, then the
Scripture sets it; there may be some relief, which I do not see in other places
of the Scripture: Therefore I have chosen this text at this time, here in
relief, if the Lord shall give us, the experience of it, that is, if he shall
be with us in the exercise of patience, patience will tide it out, patience
will secure a good issue unto us, and therefore the Lord be with us now, and
enable us to be exeroised upon these words profitably.

Let patience have her perfect work that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting
nothing; I shall not take the ordinary way of discoursing this point of
patience to you, to raise a doctrine and handle it by reason and use, but I
shall propound first to open to you what this patience is, and Secondly to show
you how it is required of us, and thirdly to speak something that may, if the
Lord be with it, and in it, call up this grace in us and help us in the
erercise of it.

First, what is patience, the word here translated patience is hupomene, and it
signifies a standing under, and abiding under the yoke, or the trial, with
continuance, and perseverance, and with hope, and expectation; there are 3
things in patience, there is tolerantia or bearing, and there is perseverance,
and there is expectation.

Patience is not proper, where there is not a burden, where there is not a
deferring of good or bearing of some evil, now there is both in this occasion,
that calls for the saints patience; here is evil present, and here is good
absent, here is hope deferred, and here is great trial and exercise present, I
need not speak of these particularly, you know that in the Revelations (in two
chapters, to speak of no more) the holy Ghost does reflect upon the great
exercise that must be expected would be given unto the patience of the saints,
by the course of the man of sin, that he runs, as 1st in Revel. 13. Where you
have the two beasts described, it is said, at the end of the description of the
former beast, here is the patience, and the faith of the saints, and 2ly in
Reve. 14.12. where he speaks of the fall of the beast, and of his worshipers,
he says, here is the patience of the saints, both these texts (and the latter
especially) imply both the exercise by a present evil, and the expectation of
deliverance, and of an absent good, to be given in due season.

Secondly, As there is bearing, so there must be a continuance a perseverance
in bearing of this trial, and in expecting of this good, there must be a
continuance in bearing, as the Apostle says in Heb. 10.36. Ye have need of
patience that after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise,
and so all the comfort is to them that endure to the end, they shall be saved,
there must be a perseverance; because thon have kept the word of my patience
(it is said to the Church of Philadelphia) I also will keep thee from the hour
of temptation Rev. 3.10. And unto another Church he speaks of keeping his works
unto the end, there must be perseverance in suffering and in doing, and in the
aforementioned place in the Hebrews, ye have need of patience, that aftor ye
have done the will of God etc.

Though, indeed, this doing of the will of God, is not only the active part of
a Saints life and obedience but his very suffering is a doing the will of God,
a Christian is active even in suffering, for yon may remember this expression
by our Savior is assumed unto himself, says he, Lo I come to do thy will, O
God; he also says sacrifices and offerings thou would not, but a body have
thou prepared me, that will that he came to do was to be a sacrifice, therefore
a Christian is active even in suffering, and indeed this is the glory of a
Christians patience; Christians do not bear evil as a stock, or a stone, or as
pillars that are made for porters to set down their burden, but a Christian is
said to be exercised by the things that he bears, and it is said, that they
bring forth the peaceable fruits of righteousness, to them that are exercised
thereby, a Christian is a lively stirring thing, he is exercised in suffering
the will of God.

Thirdly, the third thing is expectation, this is also in patience, as the
Critics upon the word say, it does import a tollerantia, and persever antia
cum expectatione, there is a trouble they are sensible of, in the deferring of
their hopes, and in the continuance of their trials, but this trouble is joined
with a comfortable expctation, they bear it with an expectation of an issue,
according indeed as God has provided for all his, in all their trials, whether
they be public or personal trials, God is faithful that bath promised, and
will not suffer you to be tempted above what ye are able, but with the
temptation, will make a way to escape; so that a Christian is subjected in
hope, as it is said the creation is, God forbid that a Christian should not
have his part in that privilege, that the whole creation shares in, they are
subjected in hope, how much more the Saints, they shall have the first mercy,
as they are the first fruits of his creatures, so they shall have the first
fruits of redemption, the rest of the creatures shall be delivered, but how and
when? why? iuto the glcrious liberty of the sons of God, even as Christ is the
first begotten from the dead, so the saints are the first fruits of the
creation. Christ entered into heaven, first, the foreruner entered for us, and we
follow him, we are called up by him, and received into the same glory with him,
so that (I say) there is an expectation in this patience, even as the hireling
waits for the end of the day, and the watchman watches for the morning, so do
the people of God wait for the promised redemption, we through the spirit do
wait for the hope of righteousness by faith, for we are saved by hope, as the
Apostle says in Romans 8.

But hope that is seen is not hope, so as that now from henec, we gather this,
that where there is not an expectation, there patience will be found very weak,
and impoteut, and indeed, that will be found to be the account of our
impatience, want of faith and hope, so is the strength and firmness of our
patience, Abraham saw the day of Christ, he waited with a great firmness of
patience, because he saw my day and rejoiced, and was glad, and therefore let
me tell you, friends, upon this account (before I pass from this particular) it
is your interest, as well as your duty (I say it is your interest) to study the
promises, to study the prophecies, and to study the times, these three things
are to be studied, it is your interest as well as your duty to do it. I know
that you will grant the first, that it is your interestto study the promises,
but alas! this is a lame business the studying of the promises, if you do not
study the prophecies, and study the times, for to have a promise that some
time, or other, there shall be a new state of things, and not have the time
discovered to you, this is but a languishing tomfort, alas! say many, it will
not be in our days, as that good man comforted himself, that the evil threatened
would not be in his days. So patience is very lame upon this account because
they know not whether it will be in their days or nor, that is the cause of so
great slightness, in this respect they leave these things to others, say they,
you have leizure you can study the times and the promises, and so they take it
upon the words of other men; but we may speak long enough, ere we can bear a
solid ground of comfort into your hearts, if you have it only from our words,
unless as the Samaritans said to the woman, ye have heard and seen it your
selves, and so know that the time does draw near.

And if you say, how should we (alas how should we) discern those difficult,
those obscure periods that are delivered so darkly in the Revelations, and
other places, let me tell you (I desire to be free with you) I know not whether
it will suit with me or no, to speak often among you; espetially this winter time
(though if I were among you, I should embrace the call to be often among you,
for it is my comfort) but let me tell you, I have in these my poor labors
among you, directed you to Dan. 12. that you might take it, and make something
of it, which you may if you wait upon God; the words are plain, that from that
time of taking away the daily sacrifice, and setting up, the abomination of
desolations it should be 1290 days.

If one should tell you, that at such a time, or at the end of such a period,
such an estate should fall to you, or such a kingdom beyond sea, would you not
study it, when this time would come up, though it were set a little darkly, it
is nothing, but that you have not a heart to it; I beseech you bear with me, it
lies upon my spirit as a grief, that people complain so of the times, are so
weary of the times, and would be at better things in that regard, and yet they
will take no pains to look into the times of the promises, if any should give
you bonds, will you lay them up in your desk, will you never look when these
bonds will be due.

I confess it is too plain, and I have no ground to recall my word, I stand to
the reckoning that I have made among you, that from the time of Julian the
Apostate who in opposition to Christianity was engaging to repair Judaism from
that time to 1650. or 1653. the 1290. days came up, and that from thence there
are but 45 years to come to the blessed period, would you have any thing
plaincr, and if the Lord has so considered us in such a Scripture as this, we
ought, in thinkfulness to him, to set our hearts to the understanding of it, if
all the interpreters be out, yet we may fetch the sense of it from heaven,
strive then with God, that he would give you some account of the prophecies, as
to the times, having brought this glorious hope so near, as I have done, or as
God ha^h done to me, and I to you, as within a little more then 20 years, now I
lay aside all my books, and all my reckonings, (though the evidence thereof
abids with me still, I cannot bring it nearer, nor can I fee how it is further
off) I am now studying the times, and there is a self evidencing light in the
times, in the dispensations of God, and in his dealings with his people, and
his manifesting himself in their spirits and forming them, it is a self
evidencing property, that is in the dispensations of God to acquaint us, what
they are, and what Gods connsel and purpose is in them. And I have sound great
comfort in this reflecting upon the times; our Savior says it is, that that
may afford us light, yea heathens can discern the face of the sky, and yet
cannot we discern the signs of the times, there is as much light to be
gathered from the times, if we wisely consider them, as our Astrologers gather
from the face of the sky, as our Savior instances of them, in some things, as
in a cloud arising out of the west, and the blowing of the Southwind etc. and
have we not now a notable cloud arising in this western part of the world (so
that I say, there is a light in the times, and truly to give you one iustance,
I do apprehend, that we may clearly see in the times, both dissolution and
restitution: though more of the former, then of the latter: you know it is
said, that there must be a dissolution before there be a restitution, the first
heaven and earth fled away from the face of him, that fate upon the throne, and
seeing all these things must be dissolved, what manner of persons ought we to
be.

Then I pray, answer me this in your own spirits, whether this generation or
age, that we have lived in from the times of our childhood (at least the most
of us that are here) whether it has not been a dissolving age. Remember the
first Scripture that I pitched upon to give evidence of the times from that
Mat. 24. There shall be signs in the sun and in the moon, and how I opened
them, this is that I say we have seen in this part of the world, a little model
of the great dissolution of Churches and states, oh how have we seen them
disordered, we have seen a first heaven, and a first earth pass away, though
you may say it is come again, yet there was a dissolution; no man can deny, but
that is not all, the dissolution continues, and it works still, the interest of
the kingdom of God, works in the bowels of all interests and of all affairs, as
it is manifest at this day; why, we see, there is no glory is able to hold it
long but it waxes dim, it passes away, it is but like the mushrom, that runs
up in a night, and but for a night, or like Jonahs gourd, as we are told, it
shall be before the day of the Lord.

What dissolutions have there been in Churches, how has one glory of things
risen up after another, and passed away every one of them, they have had their
day in Churches, in gifts, in administrations, in discoveries, I tell you, the
heavens and the earth are visibly passing away. If you should follow it to the
affairs of men in the world, why you will find it there; what breakings of
trade, what confusions are there; I tell you the very joy of the earth is gone,
and except it be in a sew that are resembled, by the gleaning after harvest, as
you have it in Esaias 24.13. Except it be in a remnant, that have hope in God,
there is no joy in the earth, when thus it shall be in the midst of the land
among the people, there shall be as the shaking of an Olive tree, and as the
gleaning grapes when the vintage is done, they shall lift up their voice, they
shall sing for the majesty of the Lord, etc. and as it is Esaias. 30.29. They
shall have a song as in the night, I grant there is such a song, as in the
night, in a dark season, when all things are dark round about us, there is a
song as in the night, which these gleanings have, I mean this poor remnant,
which God says in Zephany 3 12. he will leave (he will leave an afflicted and
poor people) they sing indeed in the spirit, but alas as to all outward things,
they mourn, as well as others, they see all things to be sinking, and
dissolving, so that all our rejoicing is in hope, is in spirit. I say moreover,
if you will consider, as indeed we ought to do, there is not any particular
providence toward any of the saints, but there may be an intimation in it of
Gods visiting the rest of their brethren, therefore I say, study the times, and
study the dispensations of God to your own particulars, and see what light you
can find, for this is that which will be exceeding helpful to you, in the work
of patience.

Now having thus opened patience what it is, I come now to the second
particular, And that is the requiring of it; how it is required of us, and with
this quality, Let patience have her perfect work, what is this work of patience
and the perfect work of patience, why you know that patience, is a work it
self, it is the work of faith, the trial of your faith works patience, says
the Apostle Jam. 13. and tribulation works patience, Romans 5.2. now patience
has a work too, a work of its own, and patience, experience, and so the one
works or begets another all along, and hope makes not ashamed: now mark
you here, all that follows from the first work, that tribulation, works
patience, all the rest is the work of patience, the perfect work of patience,
it works experience, patience is to make us experienced Christians: this you
know results naturally from patience, from the long enduring of trials, going
through many of them (many for kind; and many for number) we have great
experience there by, as a traveller that has gone through many countries, he
has gotten great experience thereby, having undergone many hardships, and
tried several tempers of people, he gets experience; now this is a great
accomplishment unto a man, and we commonly mention it as a very great honor to
a man, for a man to be greatly experienced, this is part of the riches of a
Christian, you will stand for a man of experience in point of Physic, the
practice is the thing that enables a man most to do good, and to answer your
end, so it is with a Christian, it is part of his riches and of his glory,
experience, David was such an experienced Christian, (for they are all
Christians that did believe in Christ to come, but I say, he was so experienced
a Saint) that you could not turn him to any thing; but he was able to answer
you, saying, God was with me in such and such circumstances, I was able to
encourage my self, in the Lord my God.

So I say we have not only all the experience of the Saints that are gone
before us, but God will have us have a treasure of our own experiences, this is
a great matter.

But then secondly, this perfect work of patience (let patience have her
perfect work) indeed I had rather sum it up in the general, and have you
particularise at your leizure, and as God shall bring them into your minds, in
your reading of the Scripture, and in your spiritual race, I say this same
perfect work of patience is the perfecting of a Saint, and making him an
absolute piece, in whom nothing can be desired more, this is imported, or
employed here, in those wor^s, let patience have her perfect work, nay further
it is expressed that ye way be perfect and entire, wanting nothing. So that it
should seem that patience does sustain, or supply the place, and do the part
(as I may say) of all manner of tools to the polishing and perfecting of a
faint; there is the rough plain, where with you plain at the first, and after
wards the smooth plain, when the roughness is taken away, all is in this work
of patience.

I tell you, there is a great deal to be done in a Christian, to fit him for
that glorious converse with Christ in the new Jerusalem, and therefore you
read in Revel. 19.7. the marriage of the lamb is come, that is good news you
will say; bnt mark what is joined with it, the Bride has made her self ready,
his wife has made her self ready, the Apostle tells us; that flesh and blood
cannot enter into the kingdom of God, alas! we have been looking for the
kingdom of God, but when it did draw a little near unto us, we were as fit for
it, as a child is to manage the affairs of men, and therefore the kingdom of
God withdrew from us, alas we were not fit for it, flesh and blood cannot enter
into the kingdous of God. What is the meaning of flesh and blood there? It is
not meant that men in the body shall not enter into the kingdom of God, for
they most certainly shall, we shall not all sleep, but be changed, it is not a
putting off the body, but flesh and blood in the fallen and corrupt state,
wherein there is both weakness and corruption, and both these must be removed,
or else we cannot enter into the kingdom of God, now the Lord give us a sense
of this, how unfit we are in our present fram and temper, for that which we are
so earnestly calling for, may it not be said unto us, as the prophet speaks, it
is not for you to desire the day of the Lord, the day of the Lord is darkness
and not light, what will you do in the day of the Lord?

I tell you my brethreu, the day of the Lord is a trying day, alas! when it
comes to demand of us the giving up of such and such interests, or lusts, we
cry, O let me fly unto this, it is a little one and my soul shall live O; let
not the Lord dsscompose this part of the old building, we are for keeping up of
one, or other shedd of the old building: I have been more, within these two
days, thinking upon those words, (the carnal mind is not subject to the law of
God, neither indeed can be) then I ever was in my life, that I know of, and it
is that I should be glad to hear others sensible of, even the enmity that is in
the carnal mind, it is enmity aga nst God, it is not subject, neither can it
be: I tell you, if yon do not know this by your selves, you know not your own
hearts and do we think, that we shall pass into that new state of things by
translation (we might iudeed have done so if Adam had not sinned) out of that
which is natural into that which is spiritual. But now believe it there must be
knocking work, there must be dissolving work, and you will feel this, it will
put you to pain, I would not discourage you, for the Lord will be ut the whole
charge of taking down the old state of things, as well as the setting up of the
new, and he does, and will make his people a willing sacrifice, as Isaac was, he
can make this cup to pass from you, or otherwise he can sweeten it to you,
though it be a cup that Chrish natutal flesh it self desired might pass, yet I
say the spirit is willing, and if the Lord please to call up his spirit in us,
it will make us a willing sacrifice, but then is a great change to be brought
upon us.

Now hen having spoken so much of the time, let me come a little to minister of
this strength and help unto you, we should look up, to God, that we might be
ministers of the spirit, when we converse in the things of God.

I shall propound two or there things unto you to help you in this tydeing it
out with patience. The first is this, to reconcile you, to all he hardships and
trials, all the bitter things that God sees good to exercise his people with
all, consider the harmony that there is in all the ways and works of God, how
all of them conspire, and work together, they clash not one with the other, but
they are all of them by his wise contrivance set in their places, as he says,
he has set prosperity over against adversity, he has set evil days over
against good days, and they all of them deliver us up, as from Constable, to
Constable, one dispensation hands us unto another, and that to a third, and so
they all bring us in our journey as the waves, and billows of the sea do, that
makes the passage rough but yet they carry on the vessel, so do all the waves
and works of God, and although you may think here comes a providence that will
set me quite back again, as Israel was set back in the wilderness, they were
within a little of Canaan at their coming out of Egypt, they were over against
the land of Canaan, where unto they did pass at the last, and then they were
brought back again) yet God calls this a strait way, yet if you had seen it
delineated, as I have done, and observed their wanderings in the wilderness,
you never saw such a crooked line in all your life, but the rubbs of a bow I
make it run so much the stronger.

And this I will propound to your further consideration, that all the whole
schem, and all the scenes of Gods providence and dispensations to his people,
when they are set before us in an entire view (as in some parts of the
Scripture they are) they are called a song, as in that Deuteronomy. 32.

Where Moses speaks of the several changes that should befall that people, he
calls it, a song so like wife the book of Canticles which does prophetically
hold forth the feveral changes of the state of things from Solomon's time to
Christ's coming, it is called a song, so if we could but look upon the whole
body of divine counsel, and of divine dispensations, as a piece of poesy or a
song, it would sweeten it unto us, you know this age is much given to plays (to
Comedies especially which begin tragically but end very satisfactorily) so do
the ways of God, but if you should in a song leave out some, or any of the feet
in any of the lines, the song will be lame, it will hobble (as I may say) so I
say, if any thing of Gods dispensations, if any of his purposes should fail,
and should not have their accomplishment, alas! ye whole would want something
of its beauty, so here in my text: Let patience have it is perfect work that you
may be perfect, and entire, lacking nothing, men would be contented, might they
come to the end of their journey though they lost a great deal of the glory
that God intends them by the way, though they lost the advantages that
afflictions would work out for them, as that text says, a far more exceeding
wait of glory.

Look upon the contrivance of God, the project of God, there is not any one
passage, in his whole contrivance that can be spared, not any one trouble
either to the Church, or to any particular member, but all conduces to the
beauty and the entrance of the whole.

Secondly, consider this (and it is a main thing, and I pray set your hearts to
it) withdraw your own concerns out of the work of God, and wholly look upon it,
as the Lords concern. Let God alone be concerned, do you engage him by your
faith, as the himself is engaged in his own glorious counsel and purpose.

That which makes things so troublesome, is, that we take Gods part upon our
selves, and that makes it so heavy, we set our selves like Atlas to bear up the
heavens, and the pillars of the earth, alas it is not our work to do it, it is
wholly Gods work, it is his project, and his undertaking, and it is that which
he would have us wholly to concern him in, it is his work, it is him glory; so
that he himself is concerned, and he would suffer, it any of his work should
fail, or miscarry, pray consider that, I desire to draw out my heart to you, it
is the greatest comfort I have, when I find weakness in my self. I have a
great desire to live to see the glorious time of the Church, and when at any
time (as the devil is wonderful busy to cast in his fiery darts and
discouragements into the soul, when I find I am either assaulted with a sudden
fear, or that I cannot see how that little vigor, and strength I have should
hold out, I find a great deal of comfort in reflections of this nature, that
the Lord is more concerned in and for me, then I am in, and for my self; and
whoever can do so shall find and feel the benefit of it, has not the Lord
given his son for me, and he that gives his own son, how shall be not with him
freely give us all things; are we not his peculiar treasure then? I say leave
your selves to God, and say look thou to it, we may with a holy freedom say to
the Lord, look thou to it, it is not for us, though we are to serve the
providence of God, and the public, yet it is Gods concern, he is to look to
it, cast it upon God, but

3ly, A third consideration is his, I have told you, once and again, and now
also that I cannot bring tho time nearer (the time of our hopes) then I have
done; but yet consider this, this time that is yet to run out before that very
period comes, wherein he is pronounced blessed that waits and comes to that
time, I say those times that are to run out will be filled with wonders, and
with glory that shall give strength unto us, from day to day, from year to
year, to await the end to the last issne; for although it is not said, that
Daniel shall stand in his lot, until the end of those days (and then it is
promised he shall) ye I say there may goundedly be an expectation of higher,
more transcendent and wonderful works of God that shall entertain his people
during their watching and waiting; for you know, who is there that needs
watchers at any time, but will provide them entertainment during their
watching, they shall have strong water, or something by them, and so shall the
Lords people, you will say what entertainment shall we have? I must tell you I
look upon the 45 years as well night half expyred, which is the time, in which
Christ employs instruments for the throwing down of the remainder of his
enemies, throughout this whole western world, and the Eastern too, the great
Turk, the whole seat of the 4th Monarchy, all the enemies in these two Empires
the Eastern, and the Western, Christ takes this time to bring them down, and
wonderfully brought down they must be, and come to their end, this abundance of
Scriptures tells us, he will shake heaven, and earth, and the desire of all
nations shall come; and so he says in Joel, he will gather the heathens to the
valley of Jehoshaphet, and so Zach. 14.3. But in Revel. 16. you read, that at
the pouring forth of the 6th Vyal the great river of Euphrates shall be dried
up, he is drying up Euphrates at this day, and this will be a glorious work to
see how Christ gets ground of his enemies, and how the house of Saul grows
weaker and weaker, indeed it would be very little comfort to see destruction
and desolation, if the new state did not put off the old state, as the old nail
gives way to the new, or as Jacobs supplanting Esan, though that new state is
not to be seen vulgarly, or visibly, yet the saints find it coming on in the
spirit (and this if you be reasonable men will satisfy you, God will satissy
his people ere he has done, and it is your mistake if you are not satisfied
with this way he takes, so did Israel dig up fouutains, and their rock followed
them.

The 4th consideration is this, that if we did understand things aright, we
should rejoice with all our souls, it would turn to us for a testimony, that
the Lord holds us in so long suspenee, being an argument of the greatness of
the transcendency of the things, that are promised, otherwise God would not
exercise his people so long in the waiting for them, think you that God will
exercise his people with waiting for a trifle Esa. 64.4. From the beginning of
the world men have not beard, nor perceived by the ear, neither has any eye
seen besides thee O God, what he has prepared for him that waits for him, if
you expect Christ's glorious kingdom any otherwise, you will be mistaken, there
is no common or ordinary thing; in that day expect nothing but wonders, things
that are to put your faith to it to acknowledge them when they come to pass,
that you will be ready to say, are we in a dream? as when the Lord brought back
the captivity of Sion, this is that which makes our patience so lame, we
represent the kingdom of God, in such a pitiful poor way, and manner, what is
the utmost glory that men present it in, why? that it will be a time of pure
ordinances, and the ministers shall recover themselves, with their people,
alas, alas, is this all? is this the kingdom of Christ? I saw no temple there,
God will bring his people to immediate converse with himself, they shall see
eye to eye, God intends to bring his people to a state without sin, past this
state of infirmity.

I confess men may give such an account of Christ's kingdom that may not
balance the charge or trouble of working it about.

Do you think that God would have suffered Paradise to fall, but that he had a
better state to bring forth? Do you think that the temple had been suffered to
miscarry, but that he had a better state to present?

Do you think that the primitive state had been suffered to decline, but that
he had a better state yea better then the Apostles, better then the Prophets?
We see (say they) through a glass datkly, but in that day, Christians shall be
known to whom they belong, you know a waterman by his badge, the name of God
shall be written in the foreheads of his people.

If you look for any thing but wonders in that day you will be mistaken, things
being working to that issue, I say you will see wonders.

One word more, till Christ comes in person, let us improve his spiritual
presence with us, which by promise, shall never be taken away.

And I tell you, as I have told you formerly, it is the spirit of Christ in the
Saints, that is the power by which they shall be changed, Christ's personal
appearance from heaven bears a part, it is the glorious example to which we
shall be conformed, and it has a ministry likewise of enouragement and
strengthening; it will call up our faith, and the life of the spirit into
exercise in us, but they must both meet, the shout of our faith with the shout
of the Angels, when Christ comes from heaven, the spirit is that power by which
it is done, and that being with us, what advantage might we make to this day of
God, through the affistance of the spirit! It is possible for men to have the
name of the new Jerusalem written upon them, before the new Jerusalem comes
down from God, out of heaven, else what means that promise Rev. 3.12 Him that
overcomes will I make a pillar in the house of my God, and the name of the
City of my God, even of the new Jerusalem, etc. The overcomer is the person to
whom this promise is made, we must fight the good fight of says, we must be
over coming all our spiritual enemies, and this is the work of this present
day, let the Dutch and others grapple with their enemies, we have other enemies
to deal with, though we desire that God would fight the battles of his people
every where, and give them the advantage in every battle, ye I say we have
other enemies that we are engaged with; I tell you this overcoming is only by
the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, he is the overcomer that has suffered in
the flesh.

To this overcomer is the promise made of writing on him the name of the city
of God, what is the meaning of that? why! he shall walk in the name, in the
power, in the spirit of that new state.

An APPENDIX to the Former Discourse.
Of the 5th Trumpet, with a general view of the four precedent trumpets.
THat the 5th trumpet is not to be ranged so high into the ages past (as most
interpreters do) applying it to the incursions of the Saracens, soon after the
600 year of Christ, and allowing the space of 700 years well night between
that, and the 6th trumpet, which they place upon the beginning of the 13th
century.

There are many reasons to dissuade, as,

First, from the general doctrine of the trumpets, it is agreed by all, that
the man of sin, or Antichrist has as well his growing, as his judgment and
fall under the trumpets; it must also be affented to, that his sin must be full
before his fall and judgment comes; accordingly, the four first trumpets are
the time of his fin and corruption, rising to the height and breaking forth,
and though those trumpets are applied by most expositors to the judgment of the
beast, gradually destroying him, and may with some fitness of allusion, find
ground and matter for such application, for God, though he gave up the
Antichristian world to that Apostasy, did not forbear to witness all along
against against their growing corruptions, in such manner as may answer the
language, and expressions of the 4 first trumpets) yet I humbly conceive they
properly set forth to us, the gradual growth of corruption, and degeneracy in
that sinagogue of Satan, and the occasion and means thereof, which was 4 fold.

1. The waxing cold of their love, and the breaking forth of contentions about
outward things, expressed by the hail and fire mingled with blood (and cast on
the earth, the generality of professors) under the first trumpet.

The 2d. degree, ambition and burning desire of rule and supremacy (in the
clergy as they will be called) expressed by the burning mountain, cast into the
sea under the 2d trumpet.

The 3d corruption in their administrations, by a malignant star falling on the
Rivers and fountains under the 3d trumpet.

4ly, A corruption of their light expressed by singling the 3d part of the sun,
the moon, the stars, under the 4th trumpet, and here, by this time, things are
come to that pass, that the Lord sees it time to give a stop, and to take in
hand to judge this abominable state, and therefore, sin being finished, so far
as was ordained to be before (for the rest of their sin breaks forth, under
their judgment and it is not the least of their sin) there is an Angel sent to
fly through the midst of heaven, to denounce woe, woe, woe, to the inhabitants of
the earth ( i.e. to the worshipers of the beast) by reason of the other voices
of the trumpets of the 3 Angels that are yet to sound now these three last
trumpets being of a classis, and ranged thus together, distinguished from the
4. preceding, it is a strong presumption that they are of a different nature
and import; and that as the former trumpets discover the growth of Antichrists
sin, so these acquaint us, with the steps of his judgment, under the 4 first,
he was climbing up higher, and higher in his state, and in his sin, under the 3
last, he is declining still more and more, and sinking into the wrath of God,
under judgment, till at last he is cast into the lake both head and tail, this
is my first Reason.

My 2d is from the non-quadrature of the application of the 5th trumpet to the
Saracens, in respect of time; the Saracens, I grant were a sore judgment, and
infested the Roman world exceedingly by courses, and by times, from the year 60
till the time of the Turks prevailing (which was for many hundreds of years)
and were that hand and judgment whereby God testified against those growing
corruptions of Rome all along, while they were springing up, but these Locusts,
under the 5th trumpet are bounded, and limited within their 5 months, which
take a day for a year, make but 150 years, how this time can give an account of
the incursions of the Saracens by the space of 6 or 700 years, I cannot see,
nor am I satisfied with Mr. Medes falve for it, having (I think) good reason to
dissent from him, and to understand these Locusts under the 5th trumpet of the
1st times, of the Turks, from the beginning of the 13th century, while by the
space of 150 years, they were very noisome and offensive, tormenting the men,
that had not the seal of God in their foreheads, but not killing them, as after
that time they did, for about the year 1450. or 53. as Mr. Mede has noted (out
of History) was Constantinople taken by the Turks, which was a killing, or an
extinguishing of the Roman name in the East, where you have the 5 months
exactly from the 1st. uniting of the 4 families of the Turks, under the Ottoman
family.

My third ground is from the mother text, as I may call it, from whence this
allusion of the Locusts is taken, which is from the prophecy of Joel, (as Mr.
Mede has observed to my hand) which prophecy throughout, is a celebrating of
the day of the Lord, or the day of his judgment in a prophetical strayn, as is
in so many words expressly owned more then once, or twice in that prophecy,
chap. 1.15. chap. 21.11.31. and chap. 3.12. And in this day of the Lord,
judgment begins at the house of God, and that takes up the one half of the
prophecy unto the 18th verse of the 2d chapter, and from thence to the end, is
the judgment of the enemy, and God brings this judgment on the enemy by driving
him by a judicial hand upon acting violence toward his people, which was the
violence of the enemy his own heart, only God makes way for it, takes off the
bridle, and gives them full scope, that he may take advantage against them for
it, and so he does 2 works at once, he purifies his people by these scullions,
and for their filthy doing of it, takes occasion to destroy them when they have
done, now therefore the allusion being taken from this place, it is an argument
that the work in both places, is the same, and that from the issuing froth of
these Locusts here under the 5th trumpet (the first two trumpets) that hour of
Gods judgment is to be reckoned to begin, whereof he speaks Revel. 14.7. which
hour takes in these 3 last trumpets, and they take in all the times from the
beginning of the beasts declyning (which was from the beginning of the
reformation, or the preaching of the everlasting Gospel at the entering of the
13th century) to the white throne, this is my third ground.

My 4th ground is from a knot of Arguments taken from this vision of the 5th
trumpet Rev. 9.

The 1st, whereof is from the accommodation which arises from thus stating this
vision to that schem of the 1000 years mystical reign, from the downfall of
heathenism.

2 Hereby the Locusts under the 5th trumpet, and the army of horsemen under the
4 Angels in the next trumpet are the same enemy split into 2 times and actions,
as by their characters in the prophecy, they seem to be, and not 2 several
enemies as former interpretations have made them: for they agree in their
numerousnesse.

Locusts are innnmerable as the army of horsemen are in the vision.

2. They are both like unto horses prepared unto battle.

3. They agree in their breastplates.

4. They agree in their Lion-like teeth and heads.

5. They agree in their serpentine tails and stings, so that whether you
understand these locusts, and these horsemen of the Turks, or whether you
understand them more largely of all the power of the Antichistian enemy and all
his instruments, to execute his wrath, they are the same enemy acting a 1st and
a 2d part; the first only preparatory to the 2d, tormenting but not killing; so
it is said under the 5th trumpet, they were like horses prepared to battle, v.
7. but v. 15, there they are loofed for execution, that were prepared before;
and we have seen how appositely, this may be applied to the Turk, who is the
glass, or mirror of all Christ's enemies under these 3 last trumpets, as the
beast is the image and representation of all the Babilonish enemies under that
first 1000 years of the four former trumpets.

For these reasons I cannot consent, that this 5th trumpet, or first two
trumpets should belong to so ancient times, as above a thousand years ago, but
that it belongs to the times of Satan loosed from the year 1300 and that both
these locusts, and Euphratian army, and Gog and Magog at last are no other then
the whole power of the Dragon, beast, and false prophet combined, that stand up
for that cause, which Satan has all along managed, by different parties and
methods, whether wars of persecutions, or inquisitions, and so takes in both
civil, Ecclesiastical and military forces, of Turk or Pope rising up against
Christ, and his interest, or beloved city, wheresoever; and the design of God
herein is first to purge-and chasten his Church, and so withal to spend and
dry up these waters, according to the import of the 6th Vyal, and in the end to
devour them with his fire from heaven, which, whatever it import more and more
literally, according to the judgment that befell Sodom we have reason (from
what is said of the 7th Vyal and many places in the old Testament) to include,
and take in the fire of their own divisions, to which God will give them up to
break and destroy one another, as the Midianites did, and Moab, Ammon, and
Mount Seir, to which way of working out the Churches quiet the prophets do
frequently allude, and we may see in part already, this way on foot, in the
divisions between France, and Spain, and in other parts between men of the same
profession, who, one would think should count it as they have done formerly,
their common interest to agree, and join together against the beloved city,
and would certainly continue so to do, but that by a judicial stroke from God
they are blinded, and so fall foul upon one another, therefore let the people
of God look up, and lift up their heads, for the day of their redemption
draws nigh, and those that understand the Lords design in these things will
do so; whence it is that in the prophets, when they speak of this terrible day
and these dismal dispensations, they by the spirit of prophecy see come, as the
shaking of an olive tree, and as the gleaning grapes, when the vintage is done,
that lift up their voice, and sing for the Majesty of the Lord, glorifying the
Lord in the fires, they hear some that have a song in this night, as when an
holy solemnity is kept and gladness of heart, as when one goes with a pipe, to
come into the mountain of the Lord, this to be, when the earth is made empty
and waste, is strange, but who are those but such as Daniel calls the wise that
shall understand, that know the design of God in these things, and where they
shall end, that have the mountain of the Lord in their eye, and see these
things working that way, that know the thoughts of the Lord, and understand his
counsel, which the blind enemy does not, Mich. 4. These sit with the Lord in
heaven and laugh, for they see him about to fulfill that word, that he has
spoken, Joel 2.18. The Lord will be jealous for his land, and pity his people,
and remove far from them the Northern army, as it follows there, in confidence
whereof they even dare their enemies, as it is in the 3 chap. v. 11. Assemble
your selves, and come all ye heathen, and gather your selves together round
about, for thither will God cause his mighty ones to come down; and so v. 12.
with a thousand more places to this purpose, which the occasions of Gods people
have called them to mind, and acquaint themselves with of late times, for
which cause I need not quote them.

A Sober Enquiry into the Nature and Times of God and Magog, and whether that
Scene be not now on the Stage.
GOg and Magog is that last dark black cloud which God in his wisdom sees good
to bring over his Churches affairs and hopes, when after a troublesome and
dangerous sea, they are ready to enter the port, or haven of their long wished
expectations, and is that in the body natural, the last enemy after which
follows an uninterrupted sevenity never to end, but in the joy of eternity.

The false images that men have formed to themselves of the great works of God
to come, have constantly led them out of the way, so that they have not known
those works when they have been before them, mistaking both the Quid, and the
Quando, both what, and when they were, which were the 2 grand enquiries of the
prophets, as might be instanced in all the great works of God recorded in
Scripture; would Israel in Egypt else have been so deaf to Moses message, when
he came to deliver them? would the Jews have been so surprised with their
return out of Babylon, that they were like them that dreamed? would they also
have overlook't the coming of Elias and Christ himself had not their minds been
prepossest with other figures and representations of these things? like as
Naaman the Sirian, that thought the prophet would have come forth unto him, and
have stroaked the Leper, and have called upon his God, when his way, was none
of all these.

The mysteries of Christ's kingdom are spiritual things, and must be compared
with spiritual, the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy, the way of
God toward particular believers is a little, but true model and abstract of
those greater ways of his providence and administration toward the Church, for
they are both cast into the same mould.

Taking my measure hence from the spiritual analogy, I define and determine the
general nature and import of this last enemy, Gog, and Magog, that as the new
birth of a soul is not without it is pangs and dangers, his course, and progress
through a wilderness of temptations, his issue and conquest ordinarily with a
sharp conflict either at, or before death, so the Church, in like manner, at
her first coming forth is watch't by the dragon, exercised all along in the
wilderness by the beast and false prophet, and at last when none of these
wiles can prevail, but that she gets ground every day, and is ready to be
crowned with an absolute victory and rest, then the devil being loosed, rages
and foams, as he did in the Gospel, when Christ came to eject him out of his
long usurped possession.

To discourse these things at large is what I have neither time nor patience
now to do, only as to the last 2 or 3 brief hints in evidence, that such a
dispensation is common and we are taught to expect it.

1st, From the great law and pattern, our Lord Jesus Christ, who as he was
sought to be destroyed as soon as born, and was all his life time a man of
sorrows and temptations, so last of all had the sharpest trial by an hour and
power of darkness, and the Apostle acquaints us, that whomsoever God foreknew,
be predestined to be conformed to the image of his son, and therefore,

2ly, The Author to the Hebrews, in strengthening believers to sufferings,
tells them, ye have not yet resisted unto blood, as much as to say, they must
look for that first or last, a fiery trial, as Peter calls it, conform and
agreeable whereunto

In the 3d place has been the experience of the Saints all along, as if they
were all ask't one by one, ho they get to heaven, or to assurance in this life,
they would all tell you with one mouth, that besides their ordinary and
familiar exercises, with which they lived and were brought up, they had at last
the greatest shock and most signal trial which was as the parting blow.

And as Gog and Magog, are the last, so that they are no new or strange enemy,
but an old enemy known to the Church too well; we have the Lord himself
asserting, Ezekiel 38.17. Thus says the Lord thou art he of whom I have spoken in
old time, by my servants, the prophets of Israel; this is plain also in the
book of the Revelations, the devil that was loosed is the same, that was bound,
viz. the Dragon with 7 heads, and ten horns, he changed his form, and carried
on his design, by other methods, during his bynding; but the same enemy, all
along, and when at last he resumes his 1st shape of a dragon, he carries on his
work by the same hands of the beasts worshipers, all that are lest him; for the
beast and his worshipers were these, he entered into at his bynding, these he is
in a confederacy with, from his loosing, as we have expressed at the 6th Vyal, by
attending this character, we shall find, it is the Roman Antichrist, from
first to last, for as the beast that makes war upon the witnesses, is said to
ascend out of the bottemlesse pit, Rev. 11. so also the Dragon after the
thousand years of his consynement, is said to ascend upon the surface, or
breadth of the earth, Rev. 20.9. For so the word translated, they went up, is in
the greek they ascended, correspondent whereunto is their judgment, fire
descended from God and fell on them, so that by this character, the beast that
slays the witnesses, and the Devil loosed, are the same enemy, though this of
Gog and Magog be not the same action, for this is after the slaying of the
witnesses.

Also by this character, the loosing of Satan should bear date from the 5th
trumpet, the first of the woe trumpets; during the first 4 trumpets, there was
no such woe pronounced, the Church had her thousand years of a mistical reign,
but under the 5th trumpet, we first read of the bottomless pit opened; and
although this be by inter preters applied to the issuing forth of the Saracens
about the year of Christ 600: yet I conceive it will be found otherwise, and
that this opening of the bottomless pit was not till about the year 1300, when
the devil was let loose after the 1000 years (from Constantine) of his binding;
of which more hereafter: if this hypothesis can be made out (as I trust it
shall) it will dissolve many knots in the Revelations. In order whereunto I
premise, and lay as a fonndation, that the man of sin is the last enemy, the
Church is to be exercised with until Christ's coming; and that is clearly
intimated by the Apostles, 2 These. 2. where speaking to this argument, the
times of the day of Christ, he shows, it is not to be, till Antichrist has run
his course.

That may be, you will say, yet it follows not, but another enemy may succeed,
but the Apostle cuts off all pretense to that by saying, that this man of sin
is to be destroyed by the brighnesse of Christ's coming, as much as to say, he
is to last unto Christ's coming, though he will be much wasted before by the
spirit of Christ's mouth, in the ministry of his servants, and witnesses, yet so
much of him will remain, as to give Christ the oppurtunity of the last, and
dispatching blow at him: whence I conclude, either this man of sin takes in
Gog, and Magog, or else Christ should concern himself with a lesser enemy, and
leave the greater untoucht, which were not for his honor. I know, what will be
said, that Gog and Magog come not up, till after the 1000 years are finished,
and those 1000 years, begin not till Christ's coming, and his destroying the man
of sin, but how that will be proved, that after Christ is revealed from heaven,
and the new Jerusalem planted in the earth, such an enemy shall arise, I cannot
see, for besides the improbability, it is flat contrary to the text, which
says, the first heaven and earth were put away before the descending of the
Jerusalem, and Gog and Magog are destroyed by fire from heaven, before the old
heaven and earth pass away Rev. 20.10, 11. therefore Gog, and Magog are not in
being after the new Jerusalem; this is my 1st ground.

Obj. But it is said, that the beast and the false prophet were cast into the
lake, before Gog and Magog come up upon the stage, therefore Gog and Magog
cannot be the same enemy with the beast, and false prophet.

Ans. They are not formally the same, but materially they are, as the old and
new commandment, are the same materially, though they differ fromally, or as
the Dragon. Rev. 12.3. and the beast, Rev. 3.2. to whom the Dragon gave up were
materially the same; for the Dragon was a Roman, and so was the beast,
therefore it was but the shifting of a form; in like manner inter preters hold
the first, and the 2d beast to be the same materially; only formally
distinguishing, this therefore I take to be the resolution of this doubt, that
during the 42 months, all things are managed in the name of the beast, though
as I have hinted from the year 1300. the devil was loosed in him, and acted as
a Dragon, but he puts not on the name of Gog and Magog, till those 42 mouths
are expired, which was in and about the year 1650. and from thence begins
Daniels last 45 years, which are the times of Gog, and Magog properly, which
Gog, and Magog are the remnant of the same Roman Antichrist that was before,
but acting now in another rage and spirit, and in the very name of the Dragon.

And to confirm this, let it be considered, that the casting of the beast and
the false prophet into the lake, was rather a damming of their places, their
politic and public capacity and interest, then a destroying of their persons
and power physical, or a judging of them under that form of Antichristian
abomination: leaving them enemies still in being, as men; that which makes for
this, is that they are said to be cast alive into the lake, and the remnant of
their party to be slain, not with the material sword, but with the sword of him
that fate on the white horse, which sword proceeds out of his mouth: to be
short then, the heathen Dragon, the Antichristian beast, and false prophet, and
the devil loosed with his Gog and Magog, are the same 4th beast described by
Daniel, the same Roman Monarchy putting on several forms for several scenes and
works to be done by them, for the trial of the Saints, and though the glory of
the Roman Antichrist be ecclipsed, and his name not used in this last scene of
Gog and Magog (which makes him fry in the lake as in his own grease for this
shameful foil) yet he shall be alive, till Christ's coming from heaven, who
will then make void his place literally, as it was spiritually, by the light
of truth and conviction in the hearts of men, made void before, during which
interim, from his dejection into this lake (of vexation and disappointment)
until Christ's glorious appearing, the Dragon who joined forces with him
against him that sat on the white horse, before his fatal discomfiture, shall
take up the bucklers, and by himself manage the war against Christ, till he
descends from heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, and consumes him,
and his forces, disables him as he did the beast before him, and cast him (even
the Dragon) also into the same lake of torment, wrath, vexation, enmity, and
disappointment: of these notions I say as of the former Hypothesis, if they can
be made good, they will do the business.

My second ground is this, Antichrist, the beast, the man of sin, the false
Church, the whore of Babylon receive only a mistical judgment and destruction
before Christ's appearing from heaven, then, and not till then, will be the
manifest abolition, and destruction of these enemies, they will live, and
breathe though under judgment, till that moment that Christ may have the glory
of destorying them, and that they may fell the terror of his hand in their
destruction, else what means that of the Apostle, that Christ shall destroy the
man of sin with the brightness of his coming, therefore it is, that at the last
Vyal of all, we read of great Babilons coming up in remembrance before God,
which shows that (whatever interpreters invent of another Babylon at
Constantinople to salve it) the 5th Vyal poured on the throne of the beast, did
not dispatch Babylon, and that the 18th chap. of the Rev. has only a mistical
fulfilling till Christ comes from heaven.

It will be objected that the papacy must be destroyed before the Jews be
converted, their Idolatries being a great let to the Jews receiving the Gospel.
I answer, that this is a conjecture no where that I know determined in
Scripture, I grant that the Idolatries of Rome, and the superstitions of those
that come too near the Papists may well be looked upon as a great hinderance to
the Jews embracing the Gospel, but that God cannot carry them over this block I
fear to affirm.

Nay 2ly, I do expect the Jews return into their own land, before they embrace
the Christian faith, and that their first stirring and restoring will be as
truly, while they are in their blood, as their first planting was: but after
that, when they are settled, the Lord promises to pour clean water upon them,
and for ought appears to me, God may make use of the Eastern Gog and Magog
(whom he will bring against them) for an awakning of them, to himself, and will
be sanctified in their eyes by his appearing for them, against that enemy,
which deliverance he will likewise sanctify unto them, for the turning their
hearts back again unto him, and the receiving of him, whom he sent unto their
fathers, and now sends again, to be their deliverers from this last enemy.

My third ground is the Analogy between the course of the ancient Church and
people of God, the Jews, and us gentiles, for they are our types, as the
Apostle says 1 Cor. 10.

Now there is not the least color, or footsteep for the expectation of any the
least disturbance of the new Jerusalem state by Gog or Magog, or any other
enemy, yet Ezekiel, and other of the prophets prophecy of this new Jerusalem,
and this is a certain truth, that the whole System and body of prophecy, was
made up in the times of the old testament, and therefore it is said, the
prophets prophesied until John; the new Testament being called the fullness of
times, for this cause, because it is the time not of giving forth new
prophecies, but of fulfilling the old.

And therefore the book of Revelations, is but a collection of the old
prophecies, as to the subject matter thereof, but (which was that which none of
the prophets could do) there is made an orderly digestion, distribution, and
applycation of them in the order of times to be fulfilled, and all the scenes
that concern us Gentiles, are with allusion to the like, that have been, or are
to be fulfilled among the Jews, and are delivered to us in the language of
those types, as might be instanced throughout the whole book of the Revela.
from one to the other; now we find in the prophets no Gog and Magog prophesied
of, to infest the new Jerusalem, but before it commences, we have a prophecy
thereof at large by Ezekiel, which is an argument I know not how any can get
over, therefore either the new Jerusalem is not the same state which the 1000
years, or Gog and Magog must precede the 1000. years reign, which is contrary
to the text, or else the Gentiles new Jerusalem state must be cast in another
mould quite, then the Jews is: I say one of these 3 must follow, if we have a
Gog, and Magog, to disturb us after it, when the Jews shall have none but only
before theirs, and so God must vary his rule and way, and his economy and
dispensation to one part of his own family, must be on this wise, and to
another on that wise, in this particular, which is alike in all others, which
without better grounds to suppose it, I cannot admit.

My 4th ground is, that by this Hypothesis there is a fairer account given of
the 2 beasts, Rev. 13. and of their distinction, then the ordinary exposition
does afford; if we take the time of the 2d beast, for the times of Satan
loosed, when the beast that was so plausible and taking before, changes his
shape and form, and puts on a dragon-like rage and cruelty; I know this will
seem very absurd, to suggest, because of the horns of the lamb, that are seen
on this 2d beast, what more unlike a dragon then a lamb? but let it be
considered withal that this 2d beast spoke like a Dragon, so that there is
something of a Dragon and a great matter too: the mouth of the Dragon is as bad
a part as any, for with that he s^s fire, as we commonly say, and poisons with
his breath.

But 2ly, Let us consider this 2d beast is not only 2d in way of numeration,
but in the order of his rising, springing up after the other, which though not
so plainly expressed by John in the Revel. but only couch't in those general
intimations of the other beast, and the first beast before him, yet is expressly
noted by Daniel; Dan. 7.24. Another shall rise after them, i.e. after the 10.
horns, and he shall be diverse from the first, and he shall subdue 3 kings, and
into the hands of this horn it is that times and laws shall be given, until a
time and times, and the dividing of time, which time, times and dividing of
time, cannot be the whole 42 months of the beast, or the 1260. days of the
witnesses fackcloth-prophecy, as they are commonly expounded, for that this
beast rises after the 10 horns not with them, nor presently after them, it is
to be supposed, for that would be as good as with them, but many hundreds of
years after them, and let it be observed that this phrase and reckoning, is but
once mentioned in the Revelation, and that is chap. 12. and then it is applied,
not to the beast, but to the serpent (or dragon which is all one) and that not
to his times before his casting down out of heaven, nor to his times, while he
was shut up in the pit, but as I suppose to his last times of loosing again,
Rev. 12.14. for I take this 12th chap. for a compendium or abstract of the
Dragons story, from his dethroning by Constantine to his last treading of Gog,
and Magog, where we find a 2 fold fight of the woman.

The first v. 6. making an opportunity for Antichrists rasing, or rather giving
way to him, at his coming forth.

The second v. 14. Upon the devils loosing, for this double slight is paralel'd
and answered with a double scene of trouble from the Dragon, the one presently
upon the birth of the manchild, who had got into the throne in heaven, being
caught up thither, the Dragon and his Angels sought to have destroyed this
interest, but prevailed not.

The 2d is after a 1000 years, when this manchild had so long carried heaven
away from the Dragon, and that the beast and his followers, to whom the Dragon
resigned, were discovered now by the dawning of reformation (which then began
about the year 1300) to be but an earthly crew, the Dragon bethinks himself,
what use to employ them to, and finds they were apt and sit to make instruments
of outward trouble and persecution against the heavenly ones, and so he employs
them that way, for the first war was in heaven, but this latter on the earth,
the first war was managed by the Dragon and his Angels, learned men, and
religious men; for it is said, that the Dragons tail drew the 3d part of the
starts from heaven, and did cast them to the earth (i.e.) he made them of his
party for an earthly interest, which yet they colored with the name of heaven,
and with pretended miracles and juggling tricks sought to cozen the world, and
to put the cheat of a false and adulterated Christianity upon them, wherein he
prevailed upon the inhabitants of the earth, all whose names were not written
in the lambs book of life, but the woman and her heavenly offspring, hold out
against the Dragon, Michael and his Angels got the day, and the Dragons place
was fonud no more in heaven: then comes on the 2d war after the 1000 years
wherein the dragon betakes himself to outward force, then the woman flees the
2d time into the wilderness, from this 2d state of the beast and his war, and
under this assault she is helped by the earth, which availed nothing to her
help in the former war, but here the earth opened her mouth and swallowed up
the flood, as we shall show hereafter: how kingdoms engaged, and stood up for
the witnesses, bearing off much of the shock of war, and persecution from
them, until at last the Dragon siugles out the remnant of the woman's seed, and
goes forth with great rage, to make war with them, and to swallow them up ( v.
last of the 12th) which I take to be his last attempt, and properly to referr
to Gog and Magog, wherein as in all his former, he shall fail, and shall make
least of all of it, as shall be showed in it is place; This is my Scheme of this
chapter, and to confirm this, observe, that in this last war, to give light to
us, that it is the loosing of Satan, which is to be, but for a short time, as
it is said Rev. 20.3. it is so noted in this, Chap. 12.12. upon the devils
coming down, failing of his enterprise (by the beast his Angels and juggling
tricks) to recover heaven, that he had great wrath, because he knew, that he
had but a short time, and then 2ly, in the last scene of this last war, for
there are several scenes in it, as we shall show (the battle of the white horse
being the former part of this war) he is said only to go forth to make war
with the remnant of the woman's seed, which shows this action to be removed far
in time from the primitive ages, and the persecution thereof, for the Church
then was the woman, but these are the progeny, the offspring, the successors of
the Church, many ages afier, not the woman clothed with the sun, not in the
glory of the primitive purity and perfection, but a poor weather-beaten
remnant, that had rid out the storm, and kept the word of Christ's patience, and
have the testimony of Jesus, but little applause in the world.

There lies one objection against this in the 12th chap. and that is v. 14.
where the 2 wings of a great Eagle, that were given the woman, are interpreted
of the Roman Empire into East, and West, which challenges this flight to those
earlier times even the first rising of the beast.

To which I answer, that it is but a presumption so to interpret the wings of
the Eagle from the congruity of the allusion to the Roman Ensigns, but we may
as well, and I think more groundedly derive this metaphor and allusion from
Moses song (when the Roman Eagle was not in being) Deuteronomy. 32.12. As an Eagle
stirs up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreads abroad her wings,
takes them, bears them on her wings, so the Lord alone did lead him; so also
Exodus 19.4. ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bear you on
Eagles wings, and brought you to my self. Lo, here the Lord is the Eagle, his
mercy and truth, his high and eminent ways of salvation are the 2 wings of the
great Eagle displayed for his people, and it is more probable and congruous to
understand the Lords speaking according to his ancient types in Scripture, then
according to modern conjectures of men while, I am pondering. There is another
objection to be removed, and that is, that that which I call the first war, or
the wart in heaven, cannot be that which the Dragon managed by the beast, for
that the beast is said in his war with the saints to over come them, Rev, 13.7.
But in this war in heaven. Rev. 12. The Dragon prevailed not, neither was his
place found any more in heaven.

I answer, both these may stand, the beast did overcome (i. e.) he maintained
his beast-like rule and kingdom in the subjects that were given him to rule
over, which were the dwellers on earth, whose names were not written in the
book of life, of the lamb slain from the foundation of the world, but the
Dragon who managed this war by the beast, with a desire, and design to hinder
Christianity from taking root, and to relieve the lost heaven to his own party,
he prevailed not in his design, for the woman in the wilderness carried heaven
in her banners, and Antichrist, and all his party were manifested to be but an
earthly finagoge, and especially as the Reformation grew on which occasioned
the 2d war: Thus we see the first war was waged in heaven, a spiritual orb
and sphere, and managed by the dragon and his Angels, the Pope and his
Cardinals, and Angelical Doctors, and this by the space of a 1000 years from
the downfall of heathenism; and if it be said the Pope usurped also a secular
power, and used the material sword deposing kings, and Emperors, I answer it
was chiefly for settling his own usurpation, and to fasten his horns on his own
head, where in also he prevailed more by his impostnres, then by his arms,
warring not as the Dragon, but as the beast: and now having made this way, let
us take a view of the Dragon and his army Gog and Magog, and their action, and
the time of it, and the design and counsel of God in it, and the issue he will
make, and that use he would have us to make of it in the interim.

The time we have already hinted to be from the 5th trumpet with some reasons
for it, which I shall now draw forth in order particularly, as,

First, the 3 woes that are denounced to usher in the three last trumpets, Rov.
8.13. answerably whereunto upon the commencement of the 2d war, Rev. 12.12. it
is said, woe to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea, for the Devil is
come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knows he has but ashort
time, this is the first Parallel and character of the time.

2. The Dragon or Devil, to this last enterprise of his, is said to be loosed
out of his prison, Rev. 20. which prison is expressed above, to be the
bottomless pit: accordingly at the 5th trumpet a star fell from heaven, and to
him was given-the key of the bottomless pit, and he opened the bottomless, pit,
and there arose a smoke out of the pit, etc. and out of the smoke came Locusts,
Rev. 9.1.4. again chap. 11. the beast that makes war upon the witnesses, which
is this time of Satan loosed, ascends out of the bottomless pit, this is that
little horn in Daniel, that rose after the ten, and was diverse from the rest,
and therefore Rev. 17. he is called the beast that was, and is not, and yet is,
for he shall ascend says the holy Ghost, v. 8. out of the bottomless pit,
therefore because of the different state of this war from the former, he is
said to be the eighth head though he be of the 7, v. 11. what further evidence
I have for taking the 5th trumpet within this time, I shall offer in the end of
this Discourse by it self, before I leave this circumstance of the time of this
enemies coming forth, I shall make this observatian, that as the 4. first seals
were different from the three last, for under the 4. first seals which were
more moderate, the living wights cry, come and see, but at the 5th seal there
is another cry of the souls under the Altar, for as the full of the
heathen-state drew near, the persecution was more fierce and general; so
likewise the 4. first trumpets were a calm time wherein the Saints had their
1000 years mistical and spiritual reign with Christ, comparatively to the 3
last trumpets, when the fall of Babylon drew near, then the beast bestirs
himself, and seeing his juglings and impostures would not suffice to keep off
the blow, Satan is let loose to help him by his Dragon-like-rage and venom: But
it will be said the 5th trumpet sounded many ages ago, this action of Gog, and
Mogog is not an action of so long time, and it is the last attempt, therefore why
do you pitch it so high as the year 1300?

A. I grant, the 5th trumpet sounded many ages ago, some, and that of great
note as Mr. Mode, and others pitch it in Anno Christi 600, but under favor,
do, I conceive miss it, for the harmony of this whole hypothesis, I pitch it in
1300. which, yet, I grant was too early, for this-single action of Gog, and
Magog; we say not therefore that Gog and Magog issued forth so soon, but then
the Devil was loosed, and he has employed his time since that in other
actions, viz. in making a continued successive war against the witnesses, or
him that sat on the white horse and his army, wherever he has appeared,
fighting him from field to field, from country to country, though he has come
off with loss in all, the serpent bruising Christ's heel, but receiving a broken
head in return thereof, under the 6th Vyal, we read of this gathering to
Armageddon by the instigation of the; unclean spirits, out of the mouth of the
Dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth, of the false
prophet, where you see the Dragon is engaged and joined in commission with the
beast and the false prophet, and here the spirits that gather the kings of the
earth to battle, are said to go out of the mouth of the Dragon, as well as out
of the mouth of the beast; the Phrase is suited to that in Rev. 12.15. where in
the latter war, the Dragon is said to cast out of his mouth water (as if there
were one action and time) that is, people or armies) as a flood after the
woman; by this you see that notion confirmed of the 2d beast, to be of this
time (as was before noted) by the particularity before hinted of, speaking as a
Dragon, you see what the Dragons mouth is, and what is his speaking, it is the
spouting forth his venomous flood after the woman; now this war lasts from the
beginning of the Reformation about the year 1300 till Daniels 1290 days come
up, that is till the years, which are the time, times, and a half, and then
begins Daniels last 45 years, or the times of God and Magog properly, which are
under the sole conduct and management of the dragon as Generalissimo; at last
the beast and false prophet lying down, and relying on his arm and help, which
time is said to be such a time of trouble, as has not been since there was a
nation, nor ever shall be; yet at this time is the Church of God both Jews and
Gentiles to be delivered.

2. This is the time allotted for the harvest and vintage Rev. 14.14. to the
end of the chapter, wherein God has been measuring the ground and parts of the
reformation, with war and desolation, for their slackness, negligence, and
growing cold therein, in bringing forth the fruits thereof, as we may see in
Germany, Bohemia, and the Palatinate, and other places beyond the seas, and
last of all, these Islands giving up the outward court in all these parts of
Europe to the Gentiles, to be trodden down and brought under, as he had given up
the Eastern Empire before to the Saracens, and then to the Turk, the witnesses
mean while pouring out the Vyals of Babilons mistical destruction, which
exasperates the Devil so much the more.

But it will be demanded, what ground I have to assign so long a time as 350
years to the loosing of Satan, when the holy Ghost says, he is to have but a
short time?

A 350 years is but a short time comparatively, not only with eternity to
follow, in which respect the Apostle says, our light afflictions which are but
for a moment, etc. but also in respect of the whole duration of the 4th beast,
the Roman Monarchy, whereof these are the last times, yea also in respect of
the 42 months or 1260 years of the last head of that beast, the Papacy.

2. That they are 350 years, besides the congruousness of so understanding the
phrase of time, times, and a half, we find Rev. 9.15. an army prepared there
(which I judge will prove to be of this time) prepared (I say) for an hour and a
day, and a month, and a year, which measure of time leaving out the hour and
the day, for a reason I shall show anon, and reckoning the month, and the year
by days, and taking a day for a year, they make up 395 years, which is 45 years
more then the 350, and are as I conceive the whole time from the Devils loosing
to the destruction of God and Magog, 350. of which years the Devil is trying
his fortune (with the beast and false prophet helping him) and all that time
they are preparing for this last scene of God and Magog, the scene of Daniels
extraordinary troublous time, before which comes, the beast and false prophet
are off their legs, as I noted before, and the dragon is left with the sole
command of the armies.

Now the reason why I leave out the hour, and the day, in that computation is,
for that I conceive, they are to be reckoned apart, and are as much as the
month and the year, and may be called Gods day and hour, as the other reckoning
is more prophetic; and if a prophets day be a year, Gods day is a year of
years that is 365 years; and if a prophets hour be the 12th part of a year
(which is a month) then Gods hour is a month of years (i. e.) 30 years which
being put to the 365, makes 395 years, and so the account is doubled to confirm
it, as Joseph said of the dream; and that they are to be looked on as 2
distinct computations, and not as one is probable, not only for their
quadrating with the time, times, and a half (with Daniels last 45. years added
to them) with the end of which, they exactly come up from the year 1300, when
the Turks brake forth, and when I held Satan was loosed: but also for that
there is no week in this scale, as for congruity there should have been, if the
design had been to set forth an entire time in a way of ascending: but it is
not said an hour, a day, a week, a month, and a day is one reckoning, and the
month and year another, yet both of the same quantity of time.

I have done with the time both beginning, and duration, I come now to the
subject it self, Gog, and Magog, the dragons army, and their action.

There is a 2 fold Gog and Magog, the first we read of in Ezekiel. which concerns
the Jews, the latter in the Revelations, which concerns us Gentiles, and this
latter is but briefly handled, referring us (as I suppose) to the larger
description of them in Ezekiel. By comparing both, we may draw out of them such
particulars wherein they agree and are parallel, we have already observed Gog
and Magog is an old well known enemy, the remainders of the 4th beast, the
Roman Monarchy, and as Dr. Holmes has ingeniously observed the description of
the latter horn, may very appositly be applied to the Turk as well as to the
papacy, who have ravished 3 horns from the Roman Empire; viz. Asia Graecia, and
Syria, as the Pope has impropriated and seized 3 to his Peter's patrimony to
maintain his tripple crown. We have also observed that this is the last enemy,
and the last trial that either Jews, or Gentiles shall have.

Now to proceed, the first character specifycating this enemy and action that I
shall insist on, is that quality of the juncture of time in which Gog and Magog
shall make this attempt, which is not only said shall be in the latter days,
Ezekiel. 38.8.16. But it is said, he shall come into the land that is brought back
from the sword, and is gathered out of many people against the mountains of
Israel, which have been always waste, but is brought forth out of the nations,
and are dwelling safely, having gotten cattle and goods, gold and silver, and
great ^ile, this is a main circumstance for the discovering of this enemy and
action; Gog and Magog appear not against the Jews till they be restored to
their own land and are settled there, and are in great security, and are
recruited and grown rich: In like manner when the people of God among the
Gentiles surrogated Israel, that have been trodden down by the Gentiles (the
papacy and those of that spirit are brought back from the sword and brought
forth of the nations (their corruptions and mixtures) and are arrived at a good
degree of Reformation and prosperity therewith, this is the time to look for
Gog and Magog, and if you see such a people after such a Lot as this, even when
they are ready to enter the port and haven of their desires to have such an
enemy let loose upon them, it is very suspicious to be this enemy, to be this
scene of Gog and Magog, I say if all other things suit, as if the beast has
had it is time of 42 months, and the other scenes that were to precede are over,
this is a greater character of Gog, and Magog.

2. He comes as a storm suddenly, violently, comes upon the interest of God in
their security, he comes as a cloud for number and multitude, not to be turned
back, v. 9. that is another character.

Both these particulars you have also Rev. 20. It is after the 1000 years of
the Churches peace, and rest from the Dragon, that Satan is let loose, and
after the Churches cause pleaded and decided against the beast and the false
prophet, and the kings of the earth, that helped him, after great suceess in
battle against the Antichristian party, after all the fowls were filled with
the flesh of kings, and captains, and mighty men (which I take to be the same
with that in Ezekiel, had gotten goods, and cattle and silver, and gold, and
great spoil) then Gog and Magog rallies the remnant of a dissolute party and
comes against this interest, and he comes as a cloud with numbers, and
multitude, as the sand of the sea.

That we may make clear work, as we go, I must give a little farther account of
the time when this enemy appears, which is the last scene of the Churches
troubles, and is to bring on the last destruction of these enemies, to think
therefore that the Churches enemies should be all destroyed before Gog and
Magog appears, is to leave no Gog and Magog to vex the Church, and to think
that by the decision of the battle of the white horse, all the Antichristian
party are destroyed, is all one as to leave no Gog and Magog in the earth to
act this last scene, for to imagine a fort of enemies to be raised from the
sides of the earth, that never yet appeared against Christ and his interest,
besides, that it is vain and groundless, is expressly contrary to the text in
Ezekiel, that says, it is a known enemy, and an enemy that watches the ways of
the Church, sees and observes how things go, and takes his advantages of their
security (and sinful divisions parhaps) Ezekiel, 38.17. compared with v. 14. and
v. 11. But though it should be granted, that this enemy is a stump of
Antichrist, yet it is certain, great execution must be done upon that interest,
and great deliverance thence wrought for the Church before this action of Gog
and Magog, therefore the question seems to be whether those scenes be over,
that are to precede this, and particularly whether the judgment of Babylon be
over.

To this I answer, that I conceive it may be made out, that the judgment of
Babylon that precedes, this attempt of Gog and Magog, is but a mistical
judgment, and that the judgment has been executed upon, Babylon by mistical
judgment, I mean such whether out ward or in ward, as which not withstanding
she continues and bears up in her pride and opposition until the last Vyal,
it is manifest she does, and yet (besides the former Vyals in elder times) I
conceive there would be no great difficulty to prove the the 5 Vyal, being a
mistical fulfilling of that 18th chap. that continues Babilons judgment to have
been poured forth upon her, and as little difficult to point out the time and
place, when, and, where it was fulfilled to the filling of the kingdom of the
beast full of darkness, making the Merchants of Babiton to mourn, and her
merchandise to become of no more esteem, which though it has not yet been done
in Rome, the Metropolis of the Antichristian Babylon, (who with all her
professed daughters, adorers, and worshipers awaits the last Vyal) yet has
been done in some kingdoms of the reformation, who, as at first they cast out
the beasts name, yet retained the tantamount or number of his name, so since,
even in this our age have experienced this 5th Vyal upon the throne or
government of the beast, wherein Rome it self was concerned, and had an earnest
of her own payment, which is not far off (for when God judges one, he
mistieally judges all that are in the same spirit, and if it be done thus to
the green tree, what shall be done to the dry?) and then when that time comes,
shall great Babylon, Rome her self come into remembrance before God, to give
unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath; to the fulfilling
of every Jota of her denounced judgment, in the very letter and rigor of it,
and then shall the cities of the nations that bear up with her, in her pride,
idolatries, and cruelties whether Popish or Mohammedan, fall with her.

And that there is not much time for these things to be brought to pass, Daniel
shows, casting up the times from Julian (when the last attempt was made for
restoring Judaisme, in opposition to christianity) of which time, to his last
period there temains not above 22 years, pitching the Epoch in 360. as Mr.
Brightman has demonstrated out of Onuphirius: For Constantin began his reign
Ann. 304. reigned 31 years, Constantius after him reigned 24 years, next
succeeded Julian, who reigned only a year, and some few months, which all put
together making but 56 years, from Constantines coming to the Empire, pitch our
Epoch just in 360. to which add Daniels first number of 1290 and it comes up
in 1650. and the second number, containing 45 prophetical days more comes up in
1695 which is 22 years to come: having cleard thi^ of the time when this enemy
is to appear, I come to a 3d character in Ezekiel, which is, that this enemy
and his action, is such as upon which the other bordering enemies of the Church
have their eye and great expectation, rejovcing much in it; so we read Ezekiel.
38.13. Sheba, and Dedan, and the Merchants of Tarshish, with all the young
Lions thereof, shall say unto thee (i. e.) to Gog, art thou come to take a
spoil, have thou gathered thy company to take a prey, to carry away silver and
gold, to take away catile, and goods, to take a great spoil, the phrase
imports a pleasure and secret tickling thy self to see this enemy up, they clap
him on the back, they set him on, and give him their cursed benediction in the
work, thus much for the characters.

I come next to the effect, and the design thereof, Gods design is one thing,
and the Dragons is another, the Dragons design is to retrive and bring back
the Church that is upon her escape, and well advanced, to bring her back into
his power, and clutches again, into a worse condition then before, and to keep
her for over there, and to prevent her new Jerusalem estate so near at hand,
which though impossible, yet this mad spirit not believing what he cannot but
believe, will be trying, though he be sure to pay dearly for it at last, but
Gods design is only a trial upon his people for most holy and glorious ends,
set before us; we may judge of the degree, to which God may suffer this trial
to proceed.

God has a 3 fold end in this scene.

1. To bring the last and utmost trial upon the faith of his people.

2. By this trial to make them conformable to Christ to rid them of themselves,
and those mixtures which made them miscarry in former works.

3. To take occasion by the discovery of the enmity of this last enemy to rid
the Church of this, and all her enemies forementioned.

The first of these particulars shows the trial is to be great and general, as
indeed all the rest import the same, but yet it is not to lay waste the Church,
but to purify her: in prosecuting this head I shall first show in what harmony
this counsel and dealing of God with his Church, and public interest is, with
h^s inward, and particular administration toward particular souls, and with
his out ward administration all along toward particular times and ages of the
Church that have gone before v. 1. there is not a saint that has a course of
any time in this world after his conversion, but has experience in a little
model of all these ways of God toward his Church in general, has the red
Dragon standing before him to devour him, as soon as borne into Christ, has
his wilderness state of temptation, by the beast, with all manner of baits and
snares to draw him off from his profession, and prevent his arrival at the
haven of a glorious assurance and rest in God, during which time he enjoys in
despite of all his enemies a reign with Christ, answering the 1000 years reign,
and after this when he is ready to enter the port of glory at death, or of
joyful assurance in this life (putting in a fort, a period to his militant
state, he is set upon by Satan, in an unusual manner as a Dragon with fiery
rage to destroy him and his hope.

I shall instance in some particulars, who yet were types and figures of the
public inter est, Jacob was loved with a peculiar choice-love, the blessing
was designed for him, he no sooner had it, but he is driven to fly with it to
Padan-aram, where he was a stranger to his fathers house for 20 years, but at
his return which is the thing that comes home to our purpose, Esau like the
Dragon comes against him with 400 men, then in what a conflict is he with God,
this is the Antimask before the blessing, which he then received from God. So
also Job who was set forth as a pattern of patience, you have heard (says the
Apostle) of the patience of Job, and the end that God made with him, typifying
and prefiguring the end God will make with all his, he was a man fearing God,
and eschewing evil all his days, but the state of prosperity was to be
dissolved; and a Phoenix must rise out of the ashes of it, and see how the
heavens are set about him with clouds, Satan let loose upon him, begirts him in
his substance, servants, children, wife, and his own body, and last of all in
his friends, who instead of comforters prove tormentors.

So also David he was from his first anointing for the kingdom, tried, and
exercised with the envy and jealousy of Saul, but at last so put to it, that he
said in his haste, all men were liars, even Samuel, and all, and concluded, he
should one day perish by the hand of Saul; he feigned himself mad, put himself
into the service of Achish king of Gath a Philistine, enemy to Israel, a sad
disguise, discovering at what an under David was in his spirit; these were
public types of the Church, their sufferings, of the sufferings of Christ,
their glory, of the glory that was to follow, and see in all these, how the
Devil plays the Dragon at last, take a more particular view of it in Job, from
his own mouth chap. 29. and chap. 30. where after a flourishing estate, largly
and elegantly set forth by himself chap. 29. (which was a little model of the
Saints 1000 years reign with Christ) see what a map of misery he is made chap.
30. the song, and by word of the rabble, but especially from v. 15. to v. 24.
wherein (as in the sufferings of our Lord Jesus.) God himself seems to take
part with his enemies.

And not to instance in any more, the Apostle Peter speaks of this last shock
as being common to all the Saints, both to the collective body, and the
particular members, and therefore advises us not to think it strange
concerning the fiery trial, as if he pointed to this red fiery dragon) as
though some strange thing happened unto us, 1 Pet. 4.12. for it is not to
destroy their faith, but only to try it, as he had acquainted them, Chap. 1.7.
and so our Savior secures Peter, and in him secures all that are built on that
rock, that Peter was Simon: Satan has desired to winnow thee, bnt I have
prayed that thy faith fail not, Luke 22.31. neither did Jacobs faith fail him
in that night of his conflict, Genesis 32.25. nor Jobs while he could make such a
glorious confession chap. 19.23.27. neither did David's faith fail him, though
it was shaken and seemed to fail when he said, I shall one day perish by the
hand of Saul, 1 Samuel 27.1. yet we read afterward, he encouraged himself in the
Lord his God. 1. Sam. 30.6. it is said the powers of heaven shall be shaken,
and so may faith be shaken but shall not fail: Gog and Magog shall compass the
camp of the Saints, on every side, so that which way soever they look, there is
nothing but danger and sear, this will make all things fail, but faith (as
David says) my heart and flesh fails, but God is the strength of my heart,
it will put even faith if self to it, and drive it into God, where properly it
is to dwell.

How great this trial is like to be may be guessed from these considerations.

1. That it is the last, and dying effect of the Dragons cause, therefore, his
rage is great, says the text, knowing he has but a short time, after which he
has no more that he can do.

2. He acts from desperation, and though he cannot hope to prevail, yet he will
set his life as dear as he can, and make it as costly and bloody a victory to
the Church, as God will suffer him, for no other bounds will be set to bloody
rage, then the restraint God lays upon him, who in his holy counsel, permits
him to go as far as may be with the safety of the cause, and interest, and the
faith of the Church, which is to be a full trial of it, and of their patience,
that it may have it is perfect work, and that the glory of that trial may be the
greater, as we may see in Job, the Devil had full scope to all manner trials,
his life only excepted, so the Church shall live, and that is all, till this
trial is over, therefore the Lord sets this bound, Esaias. 57.56. Lest the spirit
fail before me, and in another place, lest the righteous put forth their hand
to iniquity, Psa. 125.3. they shall almost come to it, but there it shall stop.

A second end of god in this trial is to bring upon the Church (Christ's
mistical body) that needful qualification and preparation for glory that God
wrote upon Christ the head: to make them conformable to him, according to the
law of his eternal counsel, Romans 8.29. for even Christ was made perfect by
sufferings, being crucified through weakness, or for the weakness of that state
he was in, in the flesh, which could not work out redemption for us, without
it is passing away, and the Apostle tells us all, after that law and example,
that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, this mistical death
therefore is to rid us of our selves, and those foul mixtures, which made our
former works miscarry, and prove abortive, as the snake pressing between sharp
(tones or rocks, puts off her old skin, and renews (as the Eagle by casting her
bill) so God uses the ministry of Satan himself in these sharp trials to help
us off with the old man, for it is a new race of Christians or Christians new
formed, regenerated, spirited, that are fit for the new Jerusalem, and all this
would not do to fit us for converse with Christ, and that heavenly company, if
the Lord did not put to his own hand at last, in that change, in a moment, in
the twinkling of an eye, but these tribulations help, that is the 2d end.

The third is, that the Lord may take occasion by this fresh and bleeding
discovery of the serpent and his parties enmity to destroy them, and deliver
the Church from them for ever, they have given occasion and provocation enough
all along, and God has rapt them for it, but deferred his anger till this
time, giving the Church support, mean while, as not having finished his work on
Mount Sion, and so former provocations slept, and were forgotten, but for the
glory of Gods righteousness, and to make his justice the more conspicuous, he
permits them this laft opportunity to show themselves, which they do to the
full, that God may take them in the fact while they are reaking hot in their
rage against the Church, that all the world may see for what it is he destroys
them, and how he favors the Church which the world could not well read in
former dispensations, they were so intermingled, but now the vision shall be so
plain that he may run that reads it, this is the account which the Lord himself
gives of this dispensation, Zeph. 3.8. therefore wait ye upon me faith the Lord
till I rise up to the prey, for my determination is to gather the nations that
I may assemble the kingdoms to pour upon them my indignation, even all my
fierce anger, and Ier. 51.39. In their beat I will make their feasts, and I
will make them drunken that they may rejoice, and sleep a perpetual sleep, and
not awake says the Lord; God will give them all the scope their hearts can
desire, power and multitudes to excecute their will, and no power with the
Church, and then will God triumph over them, as in the day of Iehosaphat, and
the day of Gideon called the day of Midian, and the day of battle, Zach. 14.3.
Esa. 10.26. Mich. 4.11.12.13. There are many other holy and gracious ends the
Lord has in this dispensation, might be instanced as to commend the following
rest and glory, therefore the Lord continues to take his people just off a
troublesome and tempest uous sea into it, that they may have the fuller, and
more perfect relish of it, which to intimate to us seems to be consulted in
that manner of phrase in Peter, where he speaks of the spirit, his testifying
in the prophets beforehand of the suffering of Christ, and the glory that
should follow, as much as to intimate, that the sufferings are ordained among
other and great ends, as a foil to the glory.

But I hasten to the conclusion of this discourse, there is one point I would
speak more fully to, and that is to give in fuller evidence and satisfaction,
that the times of the 5th trumpet are not to be ranged so high as interpreters
commonly carry them, but to belong to the times of Satan loosed, which having
slipped the proper place to bring it in, I shall therefore add it, at the close
of this discourse, and therewith shall also offer a paper which I drew some
months since, whereby the main subject of this discourse may receive some
further light, in the mean space I shall speak a word as to the aplication of
the precedent discourse to the times, and to the particular concern of the
people of God in these times.

1. As to the times, the design of this short discourse has been, to give or
get some light to discern the times, and to give some account why things go as
they do in the world; if the devil be let loose is it any wonder, if Gog and
Magog be upon the stage? may we not wonder rather if we escape thus? confider
the evidence that has been offered (and what more follows at the end of these
papers) from the calculation of the time, from the description of the enemy,
from the likeness of the action, from the opening of the design both of God and
Satan, and the parallel between the dispensation of God to particular
believers, and the whole collective body of the Church, which you have in the
foregoing discourse; to gird which a little closer to you, take these two notes.

1. That as it is but a mistical reign that the Church has, till Christ's
glorious appearing, so it is but a mistical judgment that is executed upon
Babylon, or any of the Churches enemies till then, else how should the day of
the Lord come as a thief, and fall as a snare on all that dwell on the earth,
as it is said it shall. The not considering this, makes us overlook the Vyals,
when they are before us; it is true it is said, at the pouring out of the
Vyals, his judgments are made manifest, but to whom are they made manifest?
will not the wicked do wickedly still to the last? must not the Lord, even
Christ at his appearing fetch the last blow himself at the wicked one?
therefore let us not think because a Pope lives still at Rome, and a grand
Signieur at Adrianople, that therefore we are not near the finishing of the
mystery of God.

By a mistical judgment I mean close and dark judgments, such as take them not
off their violence, but heighten and harden them the more, such the judgment
executed by the Vyals seems to be; and therefore by the 5th Vyal on the throne
of the beast, his kingdom is observed to be full of darkness, and so little did
the Antichristian party profit by that, or any of the precedent Vyals, that we
fiud them under the next Vyal, uniting and making head more strenously and
universally then ever before; like Pharaoh, that by every judgment was more and
more hardened, not but that God has all along given, many evident testimonies
of his displeasure against them, which those that have eyes, see, but they see
it not, or at least lay it not to heart to repent, but are unjust and filthy
still, or as that word (still) may import are more and more filthy and unjust,
there in discovering the judgment to be upon their heart, and thus it appears
to me, it will be till Christ fetches his last and dispatching blow at them,
and then they will see and be confounded.

My second note is this, that there may be a great mistake in expecting those
eminent scenes (in the last times of the beast) viz. the slaughter and rising
of the witnesses, the battle against him that sat on the white horse, or the
gathering to Armageddon, and the visible effects of the Vyals (especially the
six first Vyals, and so this attempt of Gog and Magog) should equally show
themselves in all the parts and places of the beasts dominion; it is sufficient
for this mistical way of judging, if the Lord single out some head-place, some
eminent part of his juridiction (that is or has been so) and there present
them at least more eminently, thus Ezekiel. 5.5.8. God did set Jerusalem in the
midst of the nations, and did execute judgment in her, in the sight of the
nations, and for their instructions, this suits the way and manner of God, who
is one, to judge, and save in one, as he did in Christ.

Therefore, though the witnesses have been spread all over the juridiction of
Babylon, and have prophesied, and have been slain by coast, as I may say, in
all her streets, yet the last and eminent settling of the cloud, seems to be in
one particular street or province, and there their visible resurrection also to
be, which is called the tenth part of the city, and so the battle of
Armageddon for the substance thereof (without that specialty) has been fought
by parties throughout the whole jurisdiction, but the last and great dash of
that shour, may be found to have lighted on some particular place more
eminently, and that is like to be, or to have been, on the head kingdom, or
kingdoms of the Reformation, and where that has been, there in probability, it
is, that the Dragon will second the worsted beast and his party, with his
succors of Gog and Magog. These are my 2 notes, which being premised I
conclude, that it is profitable; that this is the time of Gog and Magog, my
reason in brief is, for that there seems to me so little time yet to run out
before the white throne be erected, so little time that this old world has to
continue, my confidence arises from those numhers pitched by the Lord himself,
Dan. 12.11.12. the one of 1290 days, the other of 1335 days; the 45 years in
the last number exceeding the former I look upon to be the time allotted for
this expedition of Gog and Magog, the one half of which 45 years is expired:
now let us but consider how much work is left for the other half that is to
come, the Jews are to be called and brought to their own land, they are there
to be settled, and to get goods, and cattle, yea gold and silver in abundance,
and to live in great security, before the Eastern Gog is let loose upon them,
which for a people so spoiled, and that are to begin the world again, as the
greatest part of the twelve tribes are presumed to be, may well require half of
the time that is behind, and then after the destruction of Gog and Magog, they
are to be seven years burning the weapons of war, all this probably before the
coming down of the new Jerusalem: therefore, by this, judge whereabouts we are,
Daniel is promised to rise and stand up in the latter end of those days, those
days come up 22 years hence (there is not much difference among Chronologers)
all interpreters agree in the Epoch, and fix it in Julians time, all this work
is to be done among the Jews ere that time, is it not time therefore for us to
expect their call and return?

Our western Gog and Magog probably may not stay for them, but may lead the
way, and be a means of their awakning; for the Aposile intimates that through
our mercy they shall obtain mercy, which probably must be understood of some
eminent signal mercy, farther then has yet been seen upon us, by the reviving
the work, and cause of God among the Gentiles, and the deciding the controversy
that has been so long depending between Christ and Antichrist, wherein this
Gog and Magog is Antichrists last reserve. Now there being so little sand in
the glass, it is very pardonable to expect these actions and issues which must
show themselves before that little sand be run out, and as this late time has
been full of wonders, this might be reckoned among them as one, to be too early
with our expectations or observations, it having been the common fault of all
times hitherto to lagg and come behind, and it were very strange, if any of us
in this sleepy age should be up, and stirring before the Lord is stirring, for
my part, I cannot think it.

I shall shut up this point with this one note, referring the reader to what
farther he shall find in the end of this discourse, the 11th of the Rev. which
gives us a chronology of the whole time and trial of the Church, from the race
of Antichrist, to the 7th trumpet, gives us no expectation of any long time of
exercise after the resurrection and ascension of the witnesses, but only the
third woe which it is there said, comes quickly, and will likely as quickly pass
away, which third woe can be nothing but this Gog and Magog. Now that the
witnesses are risen and ascended, may I conceive be made out, both from the
time allotted for that scene, and from the evidence of the thing it self when
it appeared, for the time it must be at and with the expiring of the 41 months
of the beast, which 42 months good measure pressed down, and running over, and
above a hundred years to spare, may be put to the account of the beast, if we
should reckon from the downful of heathenisme, at Constantines coming to the
Empire, but I pitch the Epoch and commencement of his 42 months, Anno 390 (in
that last expiring of the Dragons cause by the discomfiture of Eugenius by
Theodosius) which came up in 1650. at or before which time I question not may
be proved the witnesses were risen and ascended to a heaven of rest and glory,
to which they were called by a great voice from heaven, as by a calm and
unprejudiced reflection on times, not out of our remembrance might be
instanced, when a scone of this nature (not in one or two particulars, but in
all circumstances throughout, so paraiel, that an exacter portracter of the
vision could not be drawn) did present it self, therefore that scene being
over, what can any woe since be other then that of Gog and Magog.

My 2d word thersore is to the people of God in respect of their spiritual and
inward affairs and concerns, it serves both to give them account of what has
befalne them, and to advise them both what to expect, and what to do.

1. By way of account, it has been such a time of trial and troubles upon the
saints, in respect of their own particulars, as well as the public, within as
well as without, as I think no former experience can paraiel, what with strange
spirits, false Christ's, and false prophets, and danger of seduction and
delusion thereby, what with horrible temptations carried on with such artifice
and cunning, such delusive power not to be resisted, wherein these spirits of
darkness have been so far successful, to make such impressions, as have
captivated multitudes, hurried more, and distracted somewhat with the shock of
terrible outward dispensations by persecutions, losses, trials of all sorts,
and that which has added to the horror of all, has been the darkness of the
dispensation, that they have not known what to call it, nor upon what account
to put these things which now begins, and I am persuaded will every day more
and more go on to clear up to be upon the account of the Devil let loose, and
to be their particular share with the public interest of Christ in this trial
by Gog and Magog.

2. By way of advice, it serves to teach us what to expect till this scone be
over, to direct us what to do, and to comfort us in what shall follow, first
expect all that an enraged enemy the Dragon with all his instruments can do, to
the utmost of their line, to make your lives uncomfortable, and to drive you to
utter despair; we read under the 5th trumpet when the Locusts first came forth
of the bottomless pit, that so great would be the trial and torment, that men
should seek death and desire to dye. Re. 9.6. if in those days under the first
woe, what in these days under the last woe? both Jeremy, Daniel, Joel, the
prophets, the Apostles, Christ himself, all acquaint us, it will be a day none
like it, of such tribulation, that men shall be dispiried, walk up and down
like Ghosts and shadows: yet be not dismayed, for as our Savior said in the
case of Lazarus, this sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, and
for your glory, when God has sinished his work upon Mount Sion, when patience
has had it is perfect work Therefore the direction is, act faith in God under
this dispensation, let your eye be on the design of God; which is your mercy,
your glory; see every trial, every thing ordained to serve and promote this
design, anoint the means by faith, that they may attain their end, or rather
Gods end upon them, offer up your selves to God under this death, this trial,
to be regenerated, to be made new, to be fitted for the kingdom, expect such a
gracious working of your trials, not from your selves, nor any grace in your
selves, but from the grace of God, his covenant of grace; our former works
miscarried because wrote much in our own spirit, therefore the Lord has taken
the work into his own hands, has laid by man and every creature that he may
work all himself, and have all the glory, and his work shall abide, this is the
direction, the comfort follows, first this is the last enemy, and this is the
last shock, by this enemy, the last enemy is death, if this enemy be not called
death, and signalised by that name, Esa. 25. as the type of him is, Esa. 28.15.
yet death and the Dragon, or the devil that has the power of death fall
together, Rev. 20. for no sooner is the devil cast into the lake, but the white
throne appears, and by the judgment of the white throne, death and hell are
cast into the lake, so that the saints after that, shall be troubled with death
and hell no more, neither death corporal nor death spiritual.

And what follows then but the new heaven, and the new earth, and the new
Jerusalem, a new world, and all things therein new.

But you will say, we must pass through a sore fiery trial first, but still
remember, it shall be but a trial, the devil shall compass the camp of the
Saints, but shall not carry his design, no more then the Sodomites did, that
compassed Lots house, fire shall come down from God out of heaven, and feed on
them; you read how by the 7th Vyal the great c^y is divided, who knows what
God may work by Gog and Magogs own divisions, this third woe is indeed the
greatest woe, but to whom? to the inhabitants of the earth, not to those that
dwell in heaven, though to them a trial, but with all a service fetching them
off more fully and more home to God their true rest. And for the outward part
of this woe, if this be the same time spoken of, Rev. 12.15.16. as I have
formerly hinted in this discourse it is, the earth shall help the woman, and
open her mouth to swallow up the flood, as we may observe it has done thus
far hitherto.

But yet there is more comfort behind, for as in this trial the devil comes
forth in person, (I may say) and it is the Dragons second appearance, so will
Michael standup, yea he does stand up, and Christ will appear in person the
second time to rescue his beloved city from this violence. So that here is all
the comfort can be desired, the very action is a service to us, to bring us to
God, and the issue will crown our joy in bringing down Christ unto us, look on
the deliverance of Let and Sodom, the very type of this, where you may find
all the parts, and the whole contexture of this scene, even to the fire that
came down from heaven, and the lake into which those filthy cities were cast,
but just Lot is delivered, and the Lord appears in person to his deliverance,
look on the old world another figure of this, all drowned, but upright Noah
saved in the Ark, so shall it be with the Lords Noah's and Lots in this day,
when the enemy shall come in like a flood, and when the Lord shall send his
flood of his wrath upon them, nay when he shall rain down fire from heaven upon
them, therefore his is the Lords call, this day to his Lots, to his Noah's, to
abandon Sodom, to flee out of Babylon, and to deliver every man his own sou;
let the Churches hear this, and all that walk with them to arise, and depart
out of every form and appearance of things, of holy things, Church or
ordinance, that is polluted, that is destitute of the spirit, where Christ, and
his spirit is not in rule, in power, is not predominant, striks not the great
stroke, bears not the great sway, that state of things is a Sodom, and Egypt, a
Babylon, it is not something of God, or something of the spirit being there,
makes it otherwise, if the spirit be not there in rule and dominion; God knows
how to save that something, and will do it, as he did Lot out of Sodom, but
that shall not save Sodom. It is true, the last Vyal is poured out upon the
air, the prince of the power of the air, and his whole party not Ecclesiastical
only, but corrupt civil forms, and constitutions also, but with ths civil (or
rather uncivil rule of corrupt men) the Lord will put down also very specious,
and glorious religious forms that are not in the spirit, for the shall put down
(says the Apostle) all rule and all authority and power, 1 Cor. 15.24. yea the
same Apostle tells us in the third chap. of the Epistle v. 11. and 16. that
though the foundations be right, yet they that build bay and stubble upon it,
shall suffer loss in their work, and though themselves shall be saved, yet so
as by fire: therefore we see we had need to take heed not to our foundation
only, but also to our building. The Apostle Peter tells us, that all these
things must be dissolved, he says not simply all things, but all these things,
not the works of God, for whatsoever God does is for ever; for as all Christ's
words, so all Gods works are spirit and life, therefore we read in Revelation
of the ark, and the tabernacle taken into the temple in heaven, (as typically
they were into Solomon's temple) and that at the founding of the 7th trumpet
they were seen there, the true spiritual substratum of every ordinance,
creation and institution of God, when a higher glory is revealed, is carried up
and taken into that glory, but the earthly part of it falls to the earth, how
much more all the works and buildings of man, and all his pleasant pictures,
Esa. 2.16. and as all civil foundations, policies, constitutions, built with
blood. and unrighteousness, shall dash and break one another in pieces, so
will these spiritual buildings, that are so in name only, be dashed in pieces
like potters vessels, and that in great part by their own divisions; Gog and
Magog also are used in this work, who as the Assirian of old, are sent against
an hipocritical nation, Esa. 10.6. to take the spoil, to take the prey, and to
tread them down as the mire in the streets, this is one way; that the earth
shall help the woman, and drink up the flood, the dragon designs the holy, the
beloved city, but that shall not be given into his hand, but there is an
hipocritical nation which yet all themselves of the holy city, and are so
esteemed by one another, being called by the name of Israel, and come forth of
the waters of Judah, these shall be given into his hand, and when these things
are judged and dissolved, the Churches enemies destroyed, and her self
purifyed, then shall appear the new heavens and the new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness. Even so come Lord Jesus come quickly.

Errata.
PAge 6. line 7. for charge read change. p. 12. l. 23. for the large r. a
large. p. 14. r. acknowledging. p. 15. l. 21 for about r. above. p. 18. l. 1.
for him r. them. p. 27. l. 13. for tax r. taxt. p. 30. l. 16. for bottle r.
bottles. p. 36. l. 9. for or r. for light. p. 41. l. 28. for inducing r.
Judaizing. p. 42. l. 13. for tha r. that. p. 45. l. 16. for Phocus r. Phocas.
p. 56. l. 21. r. subjects. p. 61. l. 30. r. I should p. 65. l. 1. for might r.
nigh. p. 65. l. 32. for be r. the. p. 72. l. 8. for creating r. treating. p.
72. l. 28. for go r. so. p. 76. l. 31. for abuse r. abase. p. 86. l. 6. for men
r. man p. 92. l. 17. r. lost. p. 114. l. 23. for one r. our. p. 117. l. 5 for
John r. Jehu.

FINIS.

