An Impartial Relation of All the Transactions BETWEEN THE Army of the
Confederates, And That of the French King, In their Last Summers Campaign in
Flanders With a more particular Respect to the Battle of Fleury.

The Character of the Generals, and the Reasons of that most unhappy
Miscarriage.

With a List of the Great Officers Slain.

Also, Observations on the grand Consultations at the Hague; and the New
Measures that are taking for the Opening the ensuing Campaign, compared with
Those of the Last.

To which are added, Brief Instructions and Encouragement to those English
Gentlemen, that are going over to Serve in the approaching Campaign: Also, A
short Description of the Spanish Netherlands.

By W. Sawle, Chaplain to One of Their Majesty's Regments in Flanders.

Licensed, JAMES FRASER. And Entered.

LONDON, Printed, And are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, at the Stationers-Arms.
1691.

The PREFACE.
I Never did design that these Papers of mine should be made Public, or be put
into the Press: They were only Written for the Private Satisfaction of a
particular Friend; but by his means, unknown to me, were almost all Printed
before I came to understand it: However, I assure the Reader, That this little
Pamphlet contains nothing but what was asserted to be True by the best Officers
of the Army; and what may conduce to encourage the Soldiers of my Country to be
Brave against the Common Enemy of the best part of Europe, (especially of our
Nation) who was never well Beaten but by the English; and which Honor is
still, I hope, reserved for Us, the next Campaign.

However, if the Men of War may not think it worth their while to read it over;
yet, it is very probable, it may afford some Diversion to those who love to be
at Quiet at Home, and settle Kingdoms over a Dish of Coffee, and Beat Armies
with a Whiff of Tobacco.

It Is not Here, in the least, my Design, nor yet my Capacity, to lay open the
Faults of the Dutch Cavalry: I am almost persuaded, those Troopers, Man for
Man, would be too hard for the French: And the Saying of a Great Man of War was
somewhat severe upon them, when he declared, That if he had a mind to take a
Lease of a Man's Life, it should be a Dutch Troopers: But I don't doubt, but
that the last Summers Error will give them more Courage and Skill in This which
follows; And their a little too hasty Retreat at Fleury, will be but as a
Recoyl to Rush on upon the French again with greater Violence this Campaign.

As for the French, notwithstanding their outward Boastings, and brave
Pretenses, I am sure they are almost at their last Prayers; and it is very hard
with them at Home, as well as it is in the Army: And notwithstanding their
Balls, their Masks, their Gayeties and Triumphs at Versaile; yet, Sir Charles
Sidley's Speech will reach them There too, and that with a Witness, viz. That
although they seem to look at Court so well in the Face, yet the Kingdom in
general is Sick at the Heart; and though the Courtiers charge those hard Times,
Armed Cap-a-pe; yet the poor Countrymen, who maintain those Habiliments, and
can have them, are Shot through and through.

And indeed, their Deserters and Refugees, which very often come to our
Garrisons, give a Melancholy Description of the Hardships which their Troops
often suffer; and would be very well contented to stay with us, and take part
in our Army, but that they can never fashion themselves to live well at ease
out of their own Country, unless it be at London: In a word, if there was ever
any probability of reducing the French Insolences, it must be now, when so
many Princes will push so vigorously against them, with all their Force, this
following Campaign. And without doubt, the Army of Britains, which this Year we
shall have against them, will give them the greatest concern they have met with
this long time; and I am confident, the other Confederate Princes will follow
them so close, as they will find them to be truly in earnest for the time to
come. In the mean while, let us take notice, that Arms and Armies, Stores and
Arsenals, fenced Cities, and great Fleets, can signify very little, unless
Providence shall Bless our Endeavors; and there is but one way of obtaining
the Aid of the Almighty Arm, and that is, by Believing in Him, with an
Obedience to his Will and Holy Laws.

'Twas an excellent and brave Description, which Ovid gives of the Great
Hector, when he supposes the whole Greek Army to be disordered at his Presence,
in this Verse, Hector adest secumque Deos in Pratia ducit; That when Hector
came to Battle, he had the Gods present with him: And truly, if so, and those
were True Gods, he had no need to doubt of a Victory; for he could not choose
but Conquer. So true is that which the Warlike David knew, by the best
Experience, and deeply to be considered by all Christian Soldiers, That Blessed
are the People, whose God is the Lord.

A True ACCOUNT of all the Transactions of the last Summers Campaign in the
Spanish-Netherlands, etc.
IT IS none of my business, at this time, to write the Reasons, why so many
Princes should be now Armed against the French King: Any one who has but little
Judgment in Human Affairs, or is any way concerned for the good of his Country,
must needs know: And indeed 'twas high time for us, of this Nation to take the
Alarm, and to look to our selves, seeing the great Storm, which so much
threatened others, if not timely provided against, would fall, at last, more
heavily on us, though we seem to be at a greater distance.

The Emperor, the Duke of Savoy, the Princes Electors, the Princes of Hannover
and Lunenburgh, the States General, the Spanish King; and, which is more
considerable than any one of the rest, the King of Great Britain: I say, all
the Forces of these Princes, by Land or Sea, have as yet bin so far from making
any great Impressions on that one Monarch, that he seems as yet to be greater
than at first; and his Arms thus far have had the Advantage; but the first
Winners are generally the last Losers: And I don't doubt, but that their late
Braveries, and little Successes, will be as so many Alarms to awake the Fury of
the Confederates, and prick them on to early, vigorous, and pressing
undertakings this next Campaign. The French indeed are at the beck of one, They
are very quick and alert for Execution, and the great Fortune of their Grand
Lewis, both open and fraudulent, for so long a Time, against so many Princes,
their making War in their Enemies Countries, the raising of vast Contributions,
their burning of Villages, and daily Plunders, have raised such a Vainglorious
Spirit in their Men of War, as to think that nothing can stand before them, and
that they are, as it were, born to be Lords of Europe; but I am very confident,
should their prosperous Sunshine look but once a little Cloudy, and they were
but well beaten in a Battle or two, their insolent Temper would soon shrink
into a slavish Fear; and the miserable consequences of Distrust, Mutiny, and
Cowardliness, would crowd thick upon them.

Now, I hope, this Honor is reserved for the Subjects of my Nation, who have
bin the only People in the World that have best talked with the French with
Sword in hand, and given the greatest Checks and Corrections to their daring
Confidence: And seeing then that the King of England, as he is Prince of
Orange, is Captain General of all the Forces of the United Provinces, and has
several English Regiments now actually in the Service of the States; seeing we,
of this Nation, are so much interested in the War, and because the business of
this last Campaign was of the greatest moment, little being done in the first,
against the French, but what was done by the English; seeing the Hollanders,
notwithstanding all their pretentions to Hardiness and Valor, have scarce bin
yet able to oppose the French, without most obliging helps from the
good-natured English; and because we British Regiments, last Summer, had not
the Honor to be at the Battle of Fleury, which was the great business of the
last Campaign, but was chiefly managed by the Dutch Army, I shall come to the
main thing which I here design, to wit, to give you a particular account of the
Transactions of the last Summer; for the better performance of which, I have
made my chief business to know the particulars, from the best, most able, and
most skilful Gentlemen, who had not little share in those Grand Affairs.

The Prince of Waldeck, who is a German, and Related to the King, supplies the
Place of His Majesty of England, and Commands the Forces of the States General,
is about the Age of Seventy, very little inclining to Fat, and of a handsome
Stature, but somewhat stooping under the great weight of Age and War: A Prince
second to none in Military Affairs, and is worthily esteemed one of the
greatest Captains of his Age: He has not had the Reputation of a very
Fortunate General; but this ought rather to be imputed to the Forces which he
Commanded, than to any deficiency in his Skill or Courage: His great Age does
not in the least hinder him from the most Toilful Cares: He very seldom goes to
Bed till Twelve at Night, and is commonly dressed and ready by Five in the
Morning, either to send forth Scouts and Spies, or to receive them; or to
examine Draughts and Maps, and Grounds and Passes; or for Council, or to give
necessary Orders to his Army: His Parts are as fresh and vigorous as ever; he
gives the best Reasons for what he does of any Man living: If he has any
Fault, it is for having somewhat in him of the old Roman Fabius; and sticks too
close to his Art and Rules.

Under him, in the last Spring, the Campaign began to be opened about the 14th
of May, toward the Country of Namur; and after three or four Marches, and
about the 12th of June, his Forces being about 25000 Fighting Men, he Encamped
his Army nigh a Village called Fleury, on a great and a plain Corn-Field, than
which, there is scarce a more Fertile spot of Ground in Europe, and now made
more Luxurious by the Blood of one of the greatest Battles, according to the
number of Men, that has bin Fought in these Parts this great while.

Not much above Four Miles from this Place, is the River Sambre, Fordable in
most Places in the Summer, but bounded very much on both sides with craggy
Banks, and thick Woods; on the other side of this River lay Encamped the French
Army, Commanded by the Famous Monsieur Duke d' Luxemburgh; the number of his
Army not much exceeding that of the States: He is of the Ancient and most noble
Family of Montmorancy, about the Age of Fifty, prodigiously ill-shaped and
deformed in his Person, but Skilful, Haughty, Politic and Brave. Now, besides
the main Bodies or standing Forces on each side, there are also Two
Camp-Volants, or Flying Armies, consisting of Eleven or Twelve Thousand Men
each; that of the French, Commanded by Marschal D' Humiers; ours of the
Confederates, sometimes by Prince Vaudemont, but commonly by the Marquis D'
Castanaga, Governor of the Spanish Netherlands, in his own Person. These Flying
Armies are for sudden Onsets, or for seizing of Passes or Towns, or else for
joining the main Army on all occasions: They consist generally of good Horse
and Dragoons, and are seldom Encamped above ten or twelve hours March from the
main Body: Now, D' Humiers being not above ten Leagues, or hardly so much, from
Monsieur Luxenburgh, Castanaga was to observe his Motion.

The Forces of England, in this Country, the first Campaign were considerable,
but the Horse, and five Regiments of Foot being called for Home, we had only
Six Battallions left, which, except one, which was at Mechlin, were all in
Garrison at Ghent; the Regiment of Schonberg, Commanded by Sir Robert Douglas;
Two Battallions of the English and Scotch Guards; The Regiment of Hodges, and
the Regiment of D' Offerel: Our Commander in chief was Major General Tolmach.
We had Orders to March and join Prince Waldeck, above a Fortnight before the
Battle, but our Money coming not timely enough from England, and we having
contracted some Debts in that City, could not conveniently be permitted to
March till our Money came. Indeed, if we had bin at the Battle, we could have
done no great good; it is very probable, in having our Post of Honor, we might
have bin all cut off in an Army which was left immediately without Horse.

The Army of the Duke of Brandenburgh down toward the Moselle, had the Year
before, taken the strong Garrison of Bonn, and was now Marching to Besiege
another Citadel, called Mont Royal, whom our Army was to cover: Affairs
standing in this Posture, and Monsieur Luxenburgh knowing, that without a
Battle their Towns would be picked away by degrees, one after another, was
resolved to Fight, or else the Brandenburgh Army could not be hindered; yet he
would be sure so to order his Business, that he would not Fight unless with an
advantageous Policy: He therefore sends a strict Express to Marschal D'
Humiers, to this Effect:

My Lord,
I Have no need to tell you my Design; I desire that immediately, on sight
hereof, you would send your Baggage, that you can conveniently spare, into our
Neighboring Garrisons; let your Camp stand in the same manner as it is, leave
only 3000 Foot to Guard it; and give Orders, that no Person whatsoever shall
pass in or out, upon pain of Death, till you have Horsed all the Men that
possibly you can, and have joined with my Army. I hope you will March without
any delay: Do this, and the rest you shall know when you come to my Camp.


According to these Orders Marschal D' Humiers Equips his Detachment on a
Wednesday Even, and a Thursday Afternoon joined Luxenburgh, just as his
advanced Horse began to pass the Sambre: In the mean time the Spies and Scouts
of Castanaga being careless, and not going farther than in sight of the other
Camp (having often seen it) and not dreaming of the Policy in hand, might see
their Tents pitched, and standing as before in the same order as when they
first Encamped; so that the Spies returned well satisfied, that all things were
at quiet, and that the Enemies posture was even as at the first: But on Friday
about Noon, when the dismal noise of Cannon, and the uncessant Vollies of a
mortal Engagement had Proclaimed the Design, Castanaga was too late Alarmed;
the rest of the French Camp removed in the Night, and the Battle was over and
lost before 'twas in his Power to Arrive half the way.

Indeed, in this Adventure, Monsieur Luxenburgh run'd a great Risque, and yet
such as 'twas necessary for him to do; for if Castanaga, as he had with him
excellent Regiments of Lunenburgh and Hannover Horse, with the young Prince of
Hannover himself; I say, if he had known the motion of D' Humiers, and Marched
after him, so as to come at that time when the Battle was begun, and have
fallen on the Rear; or else if he had come in to Prince Waldeck when the Dutch
Horse began to run, it would soon have Rallied the Loping Dutch Horse, unless
they were possessed with more than a pannick Fear, turned the day upon the
French, and must needs have given them a great Repulse. It is reported, That
none can have better Intelligence than the French Generals, because they give
more to Spies than usually others do; they Fee them after an extraordinary
liberal manner; which, as I have bin told, is somewhat neglected in the States
Army. Prince Waldeck had either very few Spies out, or else they who were sent,
were not skilful enough to give warning of the great increase of the French
Army: The Prince, indeed, was not surprised as to the main; he had sufficient
notice that the Duke D' Luxenburgh was passing the Sambre, and would not be
persuaded to oppose his Attempt: He thought his Army as good as that of the
French, and indeed to outward appearance they always were: Few Soldiers having
better Aspects than the Dutch Troopers, if their Hearts were but so good. The
Prince knew his Army to be well rested, free from fatiegue, in Health, and to
look well and promising: He had the advantage of Sun, Wind, and Ground; and if
his Army would but do as Soldiers ought, he could not well be beaten; but if
Soldiers will not Fight, it is no fault of the Generals if the Victory be lost. The
Troops that could best be spared were left with D' Humiers, in case of
necessity, to Guard the Passes, and make good the Retreat again over the River.

Their Army having all passed, very early in the Morning, put themselves in
Array, as the Ground would give leave to March to the Dutch. The States Army
was drawn skilfully up in two Lines: The Holland's Horse on the left, being
most in number, were Commanded by the Brave Prince of Frizland, the Grave Van
Nassau, Lieutenant General Aylna, and Count Fladorf, all said to be brave and
experienced Men of War: The Right was mostly Spanish or Flanders Horse,
Commanded by the Brave Count D' Tubee, than whom, it is said, there is scarce a
better Horseman living: The main Battle was guided by the Prince himself. The
Battle began first on the Right: The Spaniards had the Post of Honor, and did
what Men of Honor ought to do: They first of all received the French Fury, and
then Charged through them with such Courage and Bravery, three or four times,
that they soon brake them, though more in number by far, and made themselves
Masters of Eight Pieces of the French Cannon.

But here comes the misfortune of all; The French, who pretty well knew the
Dutch Horse, had placed against them their Gens d' Arms, the choice of the
Kings Household, and, as it is said, 2000 Gentlemen Volunteers, than which, they
say, unless among the Germans, there are scarce their Equals: They advanced
against the Hollanders with Sword in hand; at the sight of which, without so
much as Firing of Carabin or Pistol, maugre all the Threats and Persuasions of
their skilful Generals and great Officers, they turned tail, and ran all away;
which gave leisure enough to some of those Conquering Squadrons to go and help
their Brethren on the Right; so that Tubee, with his 2000 Horse, for he had no
more, was soon overpowered; so that soon the States Infantry were left all
naked, both on Right and Left, without any Horse to cover them: However, they
were resolved to do like Men of Honor, and to sell their Lives at the dearest
rate they could, and accordingly cast themselves into the most requisite
Postures; so that the Enemy, by their close and punctual Fire, were so often
Galled and Shattered they knew not what to do; the French Infantry could not so
much as dare look them in the face; could the Dutch be left alone to them, they
would esteem them as nothing: The Carnage, the mean while, was great on both
sides: The French Horse were forced to rally their Foot several times, and to
bring them up under their Covert; till at last being overpowered by too vast
Bodies, both of Horse and Foot, and some of their own Cannon being turned upon
them, they were at last Beaten, and forced to yield to unequal numbers: The
Regiments which defended the Cannon, were almost all cut off, and whole
Battallions, scorning to turn, were cut down almost Rank and File as they
stood; so that the Foot fighting so brave, though the French had almost two
Horse for one, if the Dutch Troops had but again Rallied, and but in a manner
only showed themselves about again in Order, the French had bin really
dismayed, and would have made their best shifts to have quitted the Field; but
they were gone and scattered, and rather than helping, fell to the Plundering
of the Vivandeers of their own Army. The Battle began on Friday the 13th of
June, as I take it, about One a Clock in the Afternoon, and the Evening drawing
on, the General, with his best Skill, endeavored to bring off what Battallions
he could, and Marching away by Night toward Nivelle, by hard Passes, he came
and Encamped on the other side of the Canall of Brussels, which looks toward
Machlin or Holland.

The French lost in the Battle, notwithstanding their Conquest, nigh 5000 Men;
a great many of their Officers being Buried in the Church at Fleury, as I was
informed by the Priest of the Parish; and the heaps of their Dead lay very
thick over all the Field. The Dutch had as many Killed, and a great many
Wounded, besides above 7000 taken Prisoners: They lost their Cannon and Copper
Boats, all their Artillery Wagons, and most of their Baggage; and left the
Spoil and Plunder of the Field to the Conquering French: And now a great
Consternation was presently spread over all the Netherlands, and People began
immediately to fear what great Progress the French might make in pursuit of
their Victory; some thought they would March and Besiege Charleroy, which was
reported, at that time, to be but ill Stored: Others thought they would press
on and follow the broken Army of the States General; and most, that they would
try to force Castanaga, but none of these surmises happened; the French Army
stayed nigh Three Weeks near the place where they won the Battle. They had
received a severe Blow in getting the Victory; their Army must be again
refreshed and recruited, which would take up some time; that the Camp-Volant of
Castanaga was strong and firm, consisting of 13000 strong, and could, in spite
of them, retire and join Waldeck.

Immediately, upon the Loss of the Battle, the States had sent a Passionate
Express to the Duke of Brandenburgh, who, with his Army, lay toward the
Moselle, That he would be pleased to March with all speed and join their Army,
or to lie nigh them, to be able to assist on all occasions; and those all
joined together would make a Formidable Body. The French indeed assayed, if
they could, to hinder their joining, but it came to nothing, the Elector
Marching another way than what they imagined.

In the mean while, we the British Brigade, were Shipped on Bilanders, at Ghent,
on the River Scheld, and in three or four days came to a place called Vilvord,
on the Canall of Brussels, about two Leagues from the City, and not above a
Mile and half from the Camp of Prince Waldeck: It was not thought convenient
for us to take our Posts, and to Incorporate in the Army in one Camp, but we
were allotted a Piece of Ground by our selves, at a Village called Park, toward
the said Castle of Vilvoord: This is an Ancient Palace or Citadel, now very
Ruinous, especially on the Inside; and by its Ruins, Height, Compass, and
Situation, shows it was the Place of great Personages; but in these latter
Times, it is very Famous for being the Noble Prison of the Spanish Netherlands:
If any great Courtier, or Lord, or any Governor of a Town, or considerable
Officer of an Army, shall be suspected of Falsehood, or Betraying his Trust, he,
without any noise, is presently seized, and sent to this Castle, where he must
undergo strict Imprisonment, and a stricter Trial. In former Times they had
there a strange Contrivance for a strange, sudden, and barbarous Execution,
having a great Wheel in the bottom of the Prison, so that the Prisoner being
brought into a Room just over it, not thinking what might happen, perhaps as he
sat at Dinner, and not at all knowing of his Condemnation, the Chamber, like a
Scene, would, on a sudden, be opened into Two Parts, and immediately the
Condemned would fall into the under Engine, and, in a short time, be torn to
pieces, and never be more heard of: But this way of Proceeding and Punishment
is now left off, though still this State Inquisition is very severe, and there
is but small hopes of any one that is cast into it.

Here it was that I first saw the Dutch Army this Campaign, about five or six
days after the Battle: The Battallions of Foot looked thin, and grievously
changed; and Brussels was crowed up with Wounded Men: The Horse indeed looked
as they were wont, and pretty well gathered together, as having a far better
way of Self-preservation: Here we Encamped above four Weeks, till Prince
Waldeck had sent off the shattered Regiments, and had received new from the
Frontier Garrisons, with Cannon, Boats, Artillery and Wagons, as was
necessary. The Country all about Brussels is exceeding Pleasant and Fruitful;
the City is large, very thick Peopled, and full of Coaches and all sorts of
Gallantry a la mode of France; and the French Language is spoken there by the
meanest Tradesmen: It Is very Hilly, which in these Countries is a great Rarity:
The Palace and the Park stand on the highest Ground, and seem to overlook the
rest; the Park is but little, but sweet and beautiful, besides Adorned with
some of the finest Waterworks in Europe: There is also the Royal Armory, which
most Travelers that come into those Parts desire to see; wherein are curious
rarities and devices in Armor, and Trophies, and Banners, and Standards of the
Ancient Earls and Governors of Flanders, and Kings of Spain.

When the Army was recruited, and all necessaries made up, and every thing put
in order, about the 23d of July we had orders to March, and Encamped that day
at a place called Overiisk, where we of the English joined the Dutch in order,
had our Post of Honor on the Right, and made a very pretty addition to their
Lines: Here it was, that one might well perceive a very good alteration in the
face of our General: He looked sad, discontented, and pensive after the Battle;
and was heard to say, That he wished he also had fallen among so many Brave Men
as he had lost at Fleury, but that he hoped GOD had spared him for a greater
Revenge; so that nothing could have pleased him more at that time, than to see
his Army again look Vigorous and Strong, and himself put into such a condition
as to be able once more, before the Summer was over, to return Monsieur
Luxenburgh his former kindness. We stayed in this Camp but one Night, we
Decamped the next Morning, and came to a Place, a pretty Village called Wauvre,
where, in a most delightful Valley, about Three in the Afternoon, we came to
the Camp of his Electoral Highness the Duke of Brandenburgh, and joined our
Armies: His Forces consisted of about 5000 Horse, and 13000 Foot, and Thirty
Pieces of Cannon, all looking Brave, well Clothed and Warlike; a finer Army
not to be seen, according to their number: The Duke, with his Duchess, and Two
Brothers, with the great Officers and Ladies of his Court were with the Army:
He is very short and crooked, as to his Person; he is about the Age of Thirty,
his Face indeed is fine and comely: His Brothers, Prince Charles and Prince
Philip, are both Tall and well Shaped Gentlemen; His Court was exceeding
Splendid: Besides his Guards, he has an hundred French Gentlemen Refugees, all
well Mounted and Clad in Scarlet, with a broad Gold Lace on the Seams, every
one looking like a Captain; They are called his Grand Musketeers, and always
attend his Person: He had also with him several Ministers of Foreign Princes;
amongst others, was the Honorable Mr. Johnson, Envoy from the Court of
England. Here it was that Prince Waldeck received a Letter from our King, that
he was Conqueror at the Boyne, and was immediately going to Besiege Lymerick;
and hoped to be with us at the head of our Army in Twenty days; upon which
news, the English Envoy made a most splendid Feast for the Duke and his
Duchess, Prince Waldeck, and all the Generals and great Officers of the whole
Army: Where the General made the news public, and was seconded with Drinking
of Healths, Huzza's, Drums, Trumpets, and Ho-boys.

Our Army now consisted of nigh 45000 Fighting Men: We had no Talk among us
now, but of Victory and Conquest; all Officers fitting and preparing for a
Battle, by sending all the Baggage they could conveniently spare into the
Neighboring Towns, that so we might speedily advance toward the Enemy, who
were not above Eight Leagues from us: And, 'twas said, the Brandenburghers had
received Orders, neither to give nor take Quarter: From hence we removed, and
Encamped at a place called Genap: In this place we staid about six days; and,
on the Sunday, which was the day before we Decamped, all the Chaplains of the
English and Hollanders received Orders to have particular Prayers and Sermons
on the occasion of the King's Victory in Ireland; and 'twas appointed a day of
Rejoicing throughout the whole Army. Here it was that I saw the Order of a
Triumph in a Field, much beyond any that is possible to be represented in the
most Pompous Cities. On the Sunday Evening, a little before Sunset, the whole
Army was completely drawn up in Battle-Array, in Two Lines, the Horse on the
Right and Left, in exact Order, with Trumpets sounding, Drums beating, and
Colors flying: The Prince, and the other Generals of the Army riding up and
down, and giving particular Orders of the Time and Signals punctually to be
observed; so that at the shutting up of the day, that the Action might look
more terrible Comely, after the Firing of Seventy Pieces of Cannon, there was a
running Fire, which looked but as one continued Volley, or rather a long
rolling Clap of Thunder, through both Lines, beginning on the Right of the
first Line, till it came there about again to the second. This was done three
times with Cannon and Volley, which seemed to rend the very Skies, and made the
Earth to tremble; insomuch as the Enemy might easily hear the sound, and judge
of the Triumph; after which we Camp'd our Arms, made the Night a Festival, by
plentiful Suppers, Drinking of the King and Queens Healths, and the Grandees of
the Army with Huzza's and Music.

Here it was that we first heard of another Victory gained by the French under
Monsieur Catinat, against the Duke of Savoy, and Papers Printed at Brussels
were Sold up and down the Army, of the manner and method of Monsieur
Luxenburgh's sending Expresses to the French King of his Fortune in Flanders:
He had with him in his Army, one of the Sons of the Famous Marquess d'
Boufflers, who was one of the Dauphin's Generals at that time on the Rhine; to
him he gave the second Honor, by sending of him first to Versaile; and he was
ordered to speak to the King no more than these words,

Sir, They who Fight in your Name cannot choose but Conquer: Your Victorious
Genius, Reigns throughout the World: Your Army, with Monsieur Luxenburgh, has
beaten the Dutch: The Grand Prior is at hand to relate the Particulars; and
among the rest, will forget to tell your Majesty, That he is an Honor to War,
and one of the Bravest Men in the World. From hence we advanced about Three
Leagues toward the Enemy, to a place called Segnioria de Bosch, or Our Lady of
the Woods; here we stayed about four or five days; and here was the first place
that our Talks of a speedy Battle began to abate, and the Grandees to disagree
in their former Resolutions. Not much above two Miles from this Place is a
pleasant little City called Nivelle: It Is walled round according to the Ancient
Fortification; but if 'twere Modern, it would signify nothing, for it lies in
a Bottom, and there are high Hills looking over it on every side: In this place
are the Church and Cloisters of the Famous Lady's Canonesses, of the Order of
St. Gertrude, who was a Daughter of the Ancient and Noble Family of Trisnie,
who first settled this Order, and Endowed it with large Revenues; and no Woman
can be Canoness here unless Nobly Born: They have no Confinement but to Sing
their Prayers four times a day; they may Walk or go Abroad, Converse with Men,
and Marry if they like, but when Married, like Fellows of our Colleges, they
lose their Collegiate Stipend: They are dressed, as to the fore Parts, all
Topping and Modish; their Habit is a white Veil hanging from the hinder part of
the Head down to the Middle, and a long Robe faced with rich Furrs, which they
may put off if they please when they come from Chapel: When in our Marches at
any time we come nigh this Place, multitudes of the Gentry of the Army flock
here, to hear them Sing at their Devotion, and to drink Wine in their Tavern,
which they have within the Gate of their Cloisters, where, by Servants
appointed, Wine, as Champaign and Rhenish, is sold by Retail, as part of their
Revenue.

From our Lody of the Woods we Marched next to a little Town called Nostre
Dame, or Our Lady of Hall; here was the Head Quarters of the Duke of
Brandenburgh, and Prince Waldeck had his at a place called Lambeck: This was a
strong Pass, and by our Encamping there, an hindrance of the Enemies making
Excursions into any of the adjacent parts of the Country: Here our Army was
increased to a vast bigness; for at this Camp we joined the Forces of
Castanaga; so that our Army reached almost five Miles in length, and was
soberly judged to amount to nigh Six and Fifty Thousand Men strong. In this
Camp we had very bad Weather, much Lightning and Thunder, and Rain for nigh six
or seven days together; so that we could hardly stir all that while out of our
Tents unless Booted.

The French lay Encamped at a place called Lessines, not far from Valenciennes,
with an Army very little in number inferior to ours; the great Plain of Cambron
lay between us, from whence Monsieur Luxenburgh sent word by a Trumpet, that he
there expected to meet us: And, I am fure, our General Prince Waldeck would
have accepted the opportunity with all his Heart, but the Frenchman was
Satirical, and meant no such thing; and had taken care enough to devour and
destroy all the Forage that lay in those Plains, and every where else before
our Army; and there was no coming to them, with such a Body as ours, unless we
could come to them without Horse or Wagon, or both Men and Horses could live
without Meat.

But however, this was not all which might hinder a second Battle, the
Confederates were at variance in their Counsels: The Elector, though he be a
great Prince, yet he is but a young Man, and not very much experienced in the
Art of War: Now, from the time that he joined us, all Orders were given out at
his Quarters; the Councils of War were held at his Court: And his Electoral
Highness, as it is reported, is too much inclined to hearken to his General, who
is said to be now nigh Ninety years old, and to be too much decayed in his
Abilities of Mind, which were never very Famous; therefore our General went but
seldom to Council, as loath to have a passionate positive Dotage to take place
of his Oracles: Besides, the Governor of the Spanish Netherlands was loath to
venture a second Battle, and it could hardly be agreed about our Posts of
Honor; so that after we had staid here about three Weeks, and had made the
Country look like a Desert, which we found almost like a Garden, we Marched and
came a little nigher the Enemy, at a place called Wanbeck; not far from hence,
is the most delightsome Palace and Garden of Enghien, belonging to the Duke of
Arescot; a Place which Art and Nature have both contrived in a most Luxurious
manner to make lovely, wonderful, and almost a Paradise; from hence, it is said,
the French King took his Pattern for his prodigious Contrivances at Versaile.
Here we staid a considerable time, (I think above three Weeks) and having Eaten
up all the Forage that we could possibly get, the Winter coming on, and the
Rains beginning to fall, which continues usually this time of the Year almost a
Month together. The French, as well as we, thought 'twas high time to break up,
which we did about the middle of October, within a little while one of the
other: Thus our mighty Army, which was enough to Fight almost all Europe for a
day, was broken up for this Season, without any other Engagement, than that of
Wind, Rain, and bad Weather, and we went to our Winter Quarters wet and weary:
And thus ended the Campaign.

And here now we may see the great difference that is betwixt an Army, the
Subjects of one King, and under the Command of one Captain General, and another
which is compounded of several National Interests, and under diverse Princes
which are not subordinate one to another; for the one is still ready to Moove,
to Stand, to Execute, even at the very Nod and Sign of their Commander, whilst
the others are disputing about their Posts, differing in their Councils, and
endeavoring to promote their own Interests and Affairs; so hard is it to Order
so many different Nations, to promote one common Good and public Design. This
is the only great advantage that the French have against us: That Force must
needs be very strong and vigorous which is so truly united. And I hope the
Confederate Princes, from the mistakes of the Last, will so order their
Councils against the Next Campaign, that with one Heart and firm Resolution we
may Early and Briskly push the War upon the French; or else, I fear, little
Progress will be made against so Skilful, Politic, and well compacted an Enemy.

Indeed, if the King of Great Britain had been able to come at that time that
he designed to be with us, when he Writ to his General out of Ireland, and had
Headed our Army, we might have made the Enemy look about them; for all Disputes
would soon be composed by a Crowned Head; and all the Generals would easily
submit to be Led on by a Great Monarch: And I doubt not but this will be our
Honor and Happiness this Summer; for we shall have an Army of Britains this
following Campaign in Flanders, to the number of Twenty Thousand Horse and
Foot, which, with the States Army, and the Reputation we have always wone
against the French, will make a Force Formidable and Glorious; and if we are
Conducted by our own Warlike King, we shall put Monsieur Luxenburgh to his last
Shifts, notwithstanding all his Skill in Magic or Conjuration: And indeed,
this is the thing which the French King this long while mistrusted: The Wisdom,
Skill, and Courage of our KING, when but Prince of Orange, always gave him a
secret Concern; and he has bin heard to say, as I have been credibly Informed,
That he more feared the Petit Baron of Breda, (as his Pride was pleased to
Style him) than the Emperor, or all the Confederate Princes besides. Indeed, to
our great Scandal and Misfortune, we have a sort of People here in England, who
are Mutinous and Abusive under any Government, who are Brave and Daring at
Play Houses and Taverns, but would rather see their Country turned into Ruins,
than honestly Fight for it against an Invading Enemy: That rejoice because
Turks and Infidels are helpers of the French: That value neither Liberty,
Religion, or Laws, nor Honor, so their Pockets might be filled to satisfy
their Lusts: These are the Enemies of our Brave King; and would pretend to
sully the Actions of the best of Princes, by their Impotent Railings: but let
them breath out their black Murmurings till Hemp will permit them to breath no
longer: It Is impossible they should hurt his most Glorious Name, which long ago
has bin Famous over many Nations; and Loved, Honored, and Esteemed by the
greatest Captains and Generals of the Age. He is every where known to have all
those Virtues which tend to make a most Renowned Hero: He is Just, Sober,
Temperate, Wise, and Valiant: He is such a Prince as a Philoscpher would
delight to represent to the World for a Pattern; and has not one Quality but
what tends to the Greatness, Prosperity, Honor and Reputation of a Christian
Nation: He never saw Fear but in the face of an Enemy: He has often stared
Death in the Face, even in its most terrible Postures; and has grasped at his
Laurels through streams of Blood. It is not to us alone, I mean to the English
Nation, to whom he has done the greatest Good; The States General, the Spanish
King, the Duke of Brandenburgh, with all the other German Princes; nay, the
Emperor himself are all preserved by him, and do declare it to the World, by
the most grateful Testimony, that they really are so: For if our late King had
kept his Post till this time, and carried on his Designs with the French King,
as he had contrived it; nay, though he had stood neuter, or only a Spectator,
whiles the other should pour his Legions into the Spanish Netherlands, we
should soon see how like a Deluge they would run into the Provinces, swallow up
all before them; and then what the Neighboring Princes might expect, is easy
to be imagined; our turn here in England would soon come after; our Religion
and Laws would first suffer a Convulsion, and what might become at last of our
Kingdoms in general, is easy to be guessed, when King James should have
trusted him so far. They are not only Protestants whom he has obliged, but
many other Princes of the Roman Catholic Religion: And His Excellency, the
Marquis d' Castanaga, Governor of the Low Countries, when he had received the
News of the King's Success in Ireland, was heard to speak these Words with the
greatest Affection, viz. That he was persuaded, King William was Born to be a
Scourge to the French: That by Him the Confederate Princes might expect Justice
against the Grand Tyrant, and by His means a Firm and Happy Peace would be
established over all Europe.

But among the other Blessings, which we His Subjects shall enjoy from Him,
this is not one of the least, That as He is a Valiant and Warlike Monarch, so
he will raise again, among us, the Ancient Genius of true British Valor,
which was so very much decayed to our great Dishonor, under the Luxury and
Easiness of the Two last Reigns: For the Plenty, Riches, and Fertility of a
Kingdom, conduce very little to its Security and Honor, unless it is also well
stocked with skilful Men of War, and a good Soldiery: And that Nation has the
best pretense to Riches, good Traffic, an easy and free Commerce, and the
most obliging Respects of Foreign States, who have the best Swords. Now, these
Two Years of War, which we have had in Ireland and Flanders, have considerably
stocked us with able Officers, and have so hardened and emboldned the ordinary
Soldiers, that they are now pretty well fitted for any difficult or brave
Undertaking; who, first when they were drawn into the Field, were fitter to
have Nurses to attend them, than Officers to Command them. And, notwithstanding
at present, the public Taxes of the Kingdom, and the Expenses for carrying on
the War by Sea and Land, are burdensome and heavy to the Subject, which indeed
are nothing to the Troubles of other Subjects beyond the Sea, yet I doubt not,
but in a short time, we shall confine the French King to his proper Bounds,
force him to seek Terms of Peace at our Will and Discretion, have our Religion
and Properties firmly and truly settled at Home, and a free Trade and Commerce
over all the World.

I come now to give a brief and cursory Description of the Lower Flanders, not
in a Geographical Sense, but as it is the Seat of War, and a Place convenient
for the good Living and Subsistence of Soldiers; so that those of my Nation,
who have not yet been Abroad, and by the KING are Commanded to serve there in
His Army, the Next Campaign, may not be disheartened or affrighted by the
impertinent Tales of unexperienced People, concerning the condition of a
Low Country Soldier, that so they may be encouraged cheerfully to go, and learn
to be Skilful, to be Brave, and to Conquer, in that Place which is the Nursery
of Men of War; and where Wealth, Honor, and Glory may be gotten by the Valiant
and Victorious. The Countries of Brabant, of Heynolt, of Namur, of Flanders,
are so Pleasant, so Fertile, so abounding in Corn, in Flax, in all sorts of
Provisions, as Beef, Mutton, Bacon, all sorts of Fowls, and plenty of Cheese,
Butter, and the like; all sorts of good Beer, and good cheap Wine, that a Man
cannot propose to live better, or at an easier Rate, in the cheapest or fattest
County in England, than he can in any of those Places; so that I may say of it,
what once the Famous Marschal d' Turene Merrily promised to a Brigade of
English, who had behaved themselves well in the Army which he Commanded, That
he would March them to their Winter Quarters, through such a Country, where
they should have fresh Cocks and Hens every day. Our Camp can scarce ever be
above seven or eight Mile from some fine City or great Town, where you may be
furnished with all Conveniences that you can honestly desire: Where the People
are thick, well Dressed, and well Bred, and look so unconcerned, as if the
noise of War had never come nigh them. The Air indeed in the Winter, though it
lies nigher to the Sun than England, is sharp, piercing and cold, though far
drier than ours; but this may be born with, whilst we have all Necessaries in
a good Garrison: But in the Spring and Summer, the Season is so Refreshing, the
Temperature of the Heavens so convenient and wholesome for lying in the Field,
that, bating the hazard and danger of Battle, it is more pleasant lying in the
Camp than in any City. Very few Places in those Parts are Rocky or Stony. The
Soil is of such a Fat and Fertile Nature, that it needs no Care or Pains of the
Boors to force, or to dress it. In that Place, which by a long Camp is made
Desert, you shall see the next Year all sorts of Grain in such a flourishing
condition, as if it had bin kept up by the greatest Art, Skill, and Industry of
the Husbandman: When the Season comes, they but just turn up the Earth with a
Plough, and cast in the Seed, and they don't doubt of a plentiful Harvest, if
we don't prevent them. And whoever sees this Country, and knows it well, must
needs confess, That Providence, in some measure, is Merciful to the
Inhabitants, in permiting it to be the Seat of War; for else they must needs
wallow in too great a Plenty, and become the most Wanton and Luxurious of any
People under Heaven. They confess themselves, that if they could have but Three
Years Peace out of Seven Years War, they should substantially Recruit, and be
well enough contented: And indeed wherever we March, or wherever we Encamp,
we have so great a Plenty of Flesh, Bread, Wine, Beer, and Fruits, or what is
desired by the nicest Palate, brought after us in such Method and Order, and at
such Reasonable Prizes, that I am sure there could be no such cheap living in
King James's Camp on Hounslow-Heath, nor Eating or Drinking more wholesome and
plentiful.

It Is true, in this Country, every where, are abundance of Apples, Cherries,
Green-Peas, and the like, which our unmanag'd and foolish Soldiers, the first
Campaign, eating greedily and unseasonably, were severely punished with Fluxes
and Calentures; by which a great many of them miserably Perished: But now all
Officers are obliged, by a strict Care, to forbid them the Eating of
Raw-Fruits, and to lay out their Money in good Flesh and Broaths, and to warn
them daily of the sad Consequences of Intemperate Living: So that last Summer
our Men held out Brisk, Healthy, and Vigorous to the last; and do live as well,
if they please, with as much Plenty of good Meat and Drink, as they can wish or
reasonably desire to have in their own Country.

Moreover, in these Countries, in Times of War, there are often opportunities
in which a Soldier may raise himself to a considerable Fortune: He that takes
care of his Health, that lives Neat and Clean, that studies his Employment, and
is diligent in his Duty, lives always easy under his Officers, and has their
Love and Commendation: And if he happens, in Service, to Survive a Battle, or a
Siege, besides part of the Spoils and Plunder of the Field, which may happen to
his share, he may often have his turn and tower of Spoiling and Moroding in the
Country of his Enemy, in exacting of Contributions and burning of Villages, by
which he may often get Purchases Rich and Valuable, as is allowed him by the
Rules of War: But to conclude,

Our KING now sits Arbiter in one of the most August, the most Princely
Assemblies that has bin known these many Ages; and if He shall be the
fortunate Instrument, as I hope He will, in making of a Peace, or at leastwise
a Truce, between the Ottomon and the Roman Emperors; if He shall lead his own
Army, next Summer, in the Neterlands, I don't doubt, but that the old hardy
German Army on the Rhine, and ours on the other side, on the Lower Flanders,
will make such forcible Impressions on the French Territories, (which is the
only thing they have still feared) as will soon alter the Title of Lewis le
Grand, and scatter the People that delight in War.

FINIS.
ADDENDA.
SInce my Writing these Relations, there has lately fallen into my hands, an
Account of the Battle of Fleury, Published at Paris, by the French King's
Order, which, among other things, gives the following particulars of the Slain
and Wounded on the French side, in the Army Commanded by the Duke of Luxemburgh.

General Officers Slain.
The Count de Gournay, Lieutenant General, and Governor of Maubeuge. The Sieur
de Metz, Lieutenant General of the Artillery. The Marquis de Villarceaux,
Marshall de Camp. The Sieur de Sallart, Brigadier-General. The Sieur le Roach,
Marshall de Camp. The Marquis de Soicourt, Brigadier, and Colonel of the
Regiment of Vermandois. The Sieur de Barillac, Marshall de Camp. The Sieur de
Fussac, Brigadier, and Colonel of the Regiment of Vermandois. The Sieurs de
Fanury and Tetu. The Chevalier de Soiecort, Colonel of the Dauphin's Gens d'
Arms. The Sieur de Bellefouriere, Colonel of Piedmont. The Marquis de
Verderonne, and The Sieur de Laubespins. With Nine Hundred and Forty
Subalterian Officers.
General Officers Wounded, the Four last of which are since Dead.
The Sieur de Vivan, and The Sieur de Zimenes, both Mareschals de Camp. The
Sieur de Greder, Brigadier General. The Count de Albert, Son to the Duke de
Luynes. The Marquis de Livarot. The Count de Marchin. The Marquis de Movy. The
Count de la Solre. The Sieur de la Riviere. The Count de Seaux, Colonel of the
Regiment of Campaign, with many others.
They own likewise, That diverse Regiments suffered extremely in this Fight, and
particularly the Royal Piedmont, those of Picardy, Normandy, Languedoo,
Champagne, Vermandois, the Royal German, the Dragoons of Furstemberg and
Salbourg, the Foot Guards, and the Gens d' Arms; there remaining of the latter
(who were 600 before the Battle) but 175, and of the Swis Regiment of Stoupa,
most of the Officers were Killed; they also own the losing of Thirty Standards.

Some further Observation on the Battle of Fleury.
We must acknowledge, That the design of the Confederates was well laid; so
that if Boufflers had been busied upon the Moselle, as it was contrived, either
the Duke of Luxemburgh would not have ventured a Battle, or else he would have
hazzarded the loss of it, since it was only by Number that he got the advantage
he had, and not by the Valor of his Soldiers. On the other side, it is to be
presumed, That Prince Waldeck would not have run the risk of an Engagement, had
he been truly informed of the Conjunction; so that the first and principal
cause of this Misfortune proceeded from this, That the Troops of Brandenburgh,
Munster, and Newburgh, were not joined at the Place appointed, to divert the
French Forces. There are some however, that will not stick to say, That if the
Cavalry had done their Duty, as well as the Foot, the Enemy had been certainly
Routed: But that was scarce possible, by reason of their over-powering number;
it being apparent, that they were very near Three to One: By which means, as
the Hollanders had no Relaxation, the French only Fought by turns, and never
Charged but once, whereas the others were constrained to Charge Three times.

Then again, Besides that the Number was so unequal, the place of Battle was no
way favorable, it being a Plain of a large extent, wherein the Dutch Army was
constrained to Fight altogether; whereas, had the Place been narrower, they
might have formed more than Two Lines, and have had a Reserve beside, which
would have, in some measure, supplied the inequality of Number. In short, not
to condemn the Cavalry altogether, whose Fault perhaps would not have seemed so
great, had not the Foot performed so well; certain it is, that they were far
more unequal in number to the Enemies Foot, than the Dutch Foot to the Enemies
Cavalry; so that it is not altogether to be wondered, that the one gave Ground
while the other stood firm; to which we may add, That they had to do with the
King's Horse; that is to say, with all the Bravest, most Undaunted, and best
Disciplined Men in France. Besides that, the French Cavalry had more Generals
than the Dutch Horse, which was a great benefit for the Rallying them, when
they were broken; and which, without question, was the cause, in part, that the
other could never Rally again.

After all, we have many Reasons to persuade us, That this Victory was not so
advantageous to the French as they at first gave out, and that it cost them
much more than they were then willing we should know. It Is certain, they
tarried a very little while upon the Field of Victory. And it is no less true,
that they were so far from pursuing Prince Waldeck after the Fight, as is
usual, that he had all the leisure he could desire to make a slow Retreat.

All the Advantages that the French reaped from this Victory, were only these,
That they put their Enemies to great Expenses to Recruit their Army; and that
they maintained themselves in the Spanish Dominions, and exacted from thence
most heavy Contributions; and which is more considerable, they gained time; so
that the Campaign was too far spent, before their Enemies were in a Condition
to attempt any thing considerable against them.

In the last place, some look upon the management of this Action, as a thing
that showed the fineness of French Counsel above all other. It Is true indeed,
that they made use of their Garrisons to gain a Battle, and that by that means
they supplied the smallness of their Number: But unless they were assured of
Victory, this was a very imprudent course; for what would have become of
France, had the Enemy proved Victorious? Her Garrisons would have been
unfurnished, without knowing where to get more Forces to supply the want of the
Slain. It was more likely that she might have lost the greatest part; and that
the Enemy might have broken into the Kingdom, putting all before him to Fire
and Sword: And therefore this Counsel of France will admit of no excuse, but by
saying, they were assured of Victory.

FINIS.

