AN ANSWER To an Anonimous PAMPHLETEER, Who Impugns the DOCTRINE Contained in
St. Athanasius his Creed. By I. Savage Gent.

Licensed March the 10th. 1689./90. Z. Isham.

LONDON, Printed for B. E. and are to be sold by R. Baldwin in the Old Bailey. M
DC XC.

AN ANSWER To an Anonimous Pamphleteer, etc.
A PAPER fell late into my hands, which upon perusual, I found to be an
Invective against the Person of St. Athanasius, and the Author of it a
professed Enemy to those Mysteries contained in his Creed, which he impugns;
and fearing lest this should prove a stumbling block to some of the Illiterate
Vulgar, to see the chief Mysteries of Christianity, to be so openly attacked by
one who denies the Trinity, the Incarnation of the Divine Word, and the
Divinity of Christ; and yet asserts the Scriptures, the Old and New Testament,
to be the Word of God: I resolved to answer the Arguments of this Deist, which
I here undertake.

And because this Author has involved himself in obscurity and confusion, I
shall endeavor by some previous Observations, to clear the way to this
Discourse in a Matter so difficult and nice, and so remote from Sense; by this
means not to confound the Reader, but to render the Discourse so clear and
conspicuous, as the Nature of these Sublime Mysteries are capable of; where I
shall wave those Indignities and Aspersions which this Author casts upon the
Person of St. Athanasius, leaving this to the Learned Historians, and confine
my self wholly to the Scope of such Dogmatical Principles as he endeavors to
subvert.

Observation.
My first Observation is the nature of the Mystery of the Sacred Trinity,
wherein all Orthodox Christians hold as an Article of Faith, one only God, and
Three Divine Persons, ( viz.) The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, by a real
identity between the Divine Nature, and the Personality of these Three Persons,
so that the Divinity or Godhead is singular, and indivisible; but the
Personalities are really distinct from each other, and yet really identified
with the Divine Essence, so that all together make unum-summum Ens, as the
Council of Lateran terms it.

Observation.
A second Observation is, That there are three manners of speaking in this
Sacred Mystery, which ought strictly to be observed.

I. Some expressions are absolute, as the Godhead, the Divine Essence, or
Divinity, with its concommitant Attributes, where no mention is made of the
Divine Relations, nor of number. II. There is another manner of speaking, by
notional terms, as the Divines call them; such are the Paternity, the
Filiation, the Passion, Spiration, all in abstracto, which are always to be
understood with relation to each other, and constitute number. III. A third way
of speaking is, when such words are used as signify the Divine Nature
contracted with the Personalities, or notional Predicates, as the Father, the
Son, the Holy Ghost, where Relations and Number are to be admitted.
Observation.
A third Observation is drawn from the two former, That all the absolute
Perfections which are in the Father, are also in the Son, and in the Holy
Ghost; not in equality, for where there is equality, there is also a relation
between the perfections that are equal, but the self same numerical and
individual perfections which are absolute Predicates of the Divinity, are in
all and every one of the Persons, per communicationem idiomatum. The reason is,
because all the three Personalities are identify'd with the Divine Nature,
which is the root of all the absolute Perfections of the Divinity; so these
absolute Perfections are also really identify'd with all and every one of the
Divine Persons, according to that received Axiom of the Divines; Omnia dedit
Pater Filio praeter esse Patrem, so that the Father gave the Son even the
fecundity of active Spiration, whatsoever the Geeeks in vain object against it,
as I shall make it more largely appear in a Treatise of the Trinity, which I
intend shortly to put forth. And so I proceed to answer the ill grounded
allegations of this Deist or Atheist, against the Orthodox Doctrine of the
Church.

His first attempt is against that saying of Athanasius, Neither confounding
the Persons, nor dividing the substance, for there is one Person of the Father,
another of the Son, another of the Holy Ghost; but the Godhead of the Father,
and of the Son and Holy Ghost is all one. On these words he thus passes his
Censure: Plainly as if a man should say, Peter, James, and John, being three
Persons, are one Man, and one Man is these three distinct Persons, Peter, James
and John. A very Learned Observation; he compares three distinct humane
Persons, having three distinct humane Natures, with the three Divine Persons of
the Sacred Trinity, where the same individual Divine Nature is in all three;
this is singular, that is, numerical; this is indivisible, that is divisible;
this can constitute no more Gods but one that must constitute three distinct
men. The Reason is obvious, because the denomination of God [being a term
absolute] is taken from the Divine Nature, so that if the Divine Nature be
singular, the Godhead must also be singular. As the denomination of Man is
taken from the Humane Nature, so because the Numane Hature is multiplied, the
denomination of Man must also be multiplied. How obvious is this to any vulgar
Capacity? How little Reason had this Author to call this Doctrine of
Athanasius, and of the Church of God, a ridiculous attempt, a barbarous
indignity, a monstrous proposition? He might more prudently have waved the
discovery of his illiterate Genius herein.

Yet he goes on in the same strain of confounding the absolute Perfections of
the Divine Essence, with the notional expressions of the Persons; for on these
Words of Athanasius, Neither confounding the Persons, nor dividing the
Substance, he adds, But how can we not confound the Persons that have but one
numerical Substance? And how can we not but divide the Substance, which we find
in three distinct divided Persons? There is one Person of the Father, another
of the Son, another of the Holy Ghost. To which he subjoyns, Then the Son is
not the Father, nor is the Father the Son, nor the Holy Ghost either of them.
It Is confessed. What then? Why says he, If the Father is not the Son, and yet is
the one true God, then the Son is not the one true God, because he is not the
Father. I deny this illation as false and nugatory on this present subject. Now
to the proof, for how can the Son be the one true God, if he is not he who is
the one true God? I answer, sub distinctione; if the Son be not he who has the
complete and adequate essential constitution of the one true God, then he
cannot be God, I grant it; if the Son be not another Person, namely the Father,
and yet has the complete and adequate essential constitution of the one true
God, he cannot be God. I deny it. The fallacy of the Author consists in this,
that he grossly confounds the notional and relative predicates with the absolute
and essential predicates; for consider the sublime Mystery that we are upon,
and what has been said above in the third Observation upon it, and you will
find the Error; for this Deist insists upon two Persons, the Father, and the
Son; and supposing the Father to be the one true God, he infers that therefore
the Son, which is a distinct Person, is not the one true God, and yet the same,
though a different Person, yet has all the absolute and essential perfections
with the Father; he has the same numerical Essence, Nature and Divinity with
the Father. Now I demand, whether it be possible that he should have the
complete and adequate essential Constitution of the Godhead, and yet not be the
one true God? For the Godhead is singular, wherein a number is Chymerical; you
had as good tell me that one may have the adequate constitution of a Man, which
is animal rationale, and yet not be a man, which is impossible, for where there
is the complete essence of a thing, there is the thing it self, which is
nothing else but its complete essence.

Then he proceeds: In the Creed the Godhead of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost, is all one, the Glory equal, the Majesty coeternal.
Therefore I ask, says this Author, whether the Glory and Majesty with which the
Son and Spirit are Glorious and Majestical, be the same in number with which
the Father is Glorious and Majestical? I answer Affirmatively. Then it follows,
says this Author, that the Glory and Majesty of these Persons is neither equal
nor coeternal, which he attempts to prove; because equality and co-eternity
import a distinction between the things equal and coeternal; therefore I
distinguish the sense of this illation, the Glory and Majesty of these Persons,
if taken absolutely and essentially, is neither equal nor coeternal, I grant
it; if taken notionally and personally, I deny it. The meaning of this
distinction is cleared by the former Observations; for if you take them
personally, they constitute number, and ground relations and correlations to
each other, but if understood essentially and absolutely, they do neither: in
plain terms, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, which are three distinct Persons,
are equally Glorious by the same numerical and individual Glory which is
singular and essential to the Divinity. But he replies, That in case the Glory
of the three Persons be numerically the same, then so are also all the other
Attributes; whence it ensues, that there is no real distinction between the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, but are only three Names of the same thing without
any distinction, as the Sabellians hold. I am sorry that I have to deal with a
Person so meanly versed in Divinity, as not to distinguish the Attributes of
the Divinity from the notional and relative predicates; the Attributes are
singular, and are all communicated to every one of the Persons, because they
are absolute, predicates, but the Relations are peculiar to each Person; so the
Father has communicated to the Son all the Divine Attributes, and what else is
peculair to the Divine Essence, but has not given him his Paternity, as is
noted above, for Paternity is a relative predicate, peculiar to one Person
alone, and not communicable; the same with proportion is to be said of the
Filiation, and passive Spiration.

In the next place, says this Profane Libeller, This Creed teaches that the
Father is Incomprehensible, Uncreated, Eternal, Almighty, the Son is Uncreate,
Eternal, Almighty, etc. Also that each of these Persons by himself is God, and
Lord, yet there are not three Gods, nor Lords, nor three Incomprehensibles, etc.

Now if in imitation of this, a Man should have a mind to say the Father is a
Person, the Son is a Person, the Holy Ghost is a Person, yet not three Persons,
but one Person; I would know why this were not as good Grammar and Arithmetic,
as when Athanasius says, the Father is God, the Son is God, the Holy Ghost is
God, yet not three Gods, but one God?

I answer, that what ever Grammar, or Arithmetic there is in it, I am sure
there is no true Divinity in it; for this Deistical Author insists here still
upon the same error, for the word Person is a relative and notional
expression, whereof there are three in God: but the word God is an absolute and
essential term, which is singular, and cannot be multiplied, as has been often
reiterated in this Discourse; but he demands, Does not a man contradict
himself, when the terms of his negation are the same with those in his
affirmation? Now for Logic. I answer, That two contradictory Propositions
ought to be ejusdem de eodem; that is, ejusdem praedicati de eodem subjecto,
as, Angelus est Spiritus, Angelus non est Spiritus. There are three Gods, there
are not three Gods; there are three Persons, there are not three Persons, etc.
But where is the least appearance of any Contradiction in all this?

Yet to make this the more conspicuous, I must take each Proposition in pieces,
and scan the several parts thereof according to the rates of Logic. For in
these three Propositions, the Father is God, the Son is God, the Holy Ghost is
God; the Subject of the first is the Father, the Subject of the second is the
Son, the Subject of the third is the Holy Ghost; these three Subjects are three
distinct Persons, Really different from each other. The Predicate of the first
is God, this is an absolute and Essential term, not capable of being
multiplied, for it is the Deity it self which is singular, and therefore the
Predicate of the second Proposition, which is also God, must be the same Deity
with the first, not another distinct Deity, for a second God would be a mere
Chimera: so likewise the Predicate of the third Proposition is also God, which
still imports the same Deity, this term God not being capable of any
multiplicity; so that the Subject of these three Propositions are three
different Persons Really distinct from each other; the Predicate of the same
three Propositions, which is God, has for its Object the singular Essence of
the Divine Nature, and the Propositions being all affirmative, do intentionally
identify the Deity with the subject of the same Propositions, which are the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as they are identify'd a part rei, wherein
consists the verity of the same Propositions.

As concerning the three last Propositions the Case is very different; for in
the first of them, which is this, the Father is a Person, though the Subject be
the same as in the three former Propositions, yet the Predicate is very
different; for in the first of these last Propositions the Predicate is a
Person, a generical term, common to all persons; the Predicate of the second is
also a Person, but distinct from the former in application, as the Mystery
teaches; so likewise the Predicate of the third is a Person; but these
Propositions being all affirmative, cannot be verified, but by applying that
generical term a Person to different and distinct individuums; for an
affirmative Proposition cannot be true, except there be an Identity between the
Subject and the Predicate ex part objecti; now the Filiation is a singular
individuation, which cannot be identify'd with any other Personality, therefore
the Propositions import a multiplicity of Persons, as the three former do
import a singularity of the Deity. Hence it is apparent, that we cannot say,
yet not three Persons but one Person, as we say, yet not three Gods, but one
God.

What follows in the Author, is mere stuff, and deserves no further answer, for
he goes upon a false supposition, which no Orthodox Christian will admit;
namely, that there are two sorts of true Gods, three personal Gods, and besides
one Essential God; whereas the Christian Faith never admitted but one true God,
who by his Omnipotence Created this inferior and Superior World, and by his
infinite Prudence and Providence preserves and Governs all things; wherefore
we deny the supposition as false and Heretical, as will be obvious to any who
considers what has been already said in this Treatise* especially in the first
and third Observation.

But this great Oracle of the Deists goes on upon the subsequent passages of
this Creed, and particularly upon these words: The Son is of the Father alone,
not Made, nor Created, but Begotten; to which he answers, That if the
Creed-maker had spoke here of the Creation of the Son by Divine Power on the
Virgin Mary, it would have been true, that the Son is neither Made, nor
Created, but Begotten; but then the first part of the Article would be false,
that the Son is of the Father alone; for he that has a Father and a Mother, is
of Both. But since he speaks of the (pretended) Eternal Generation, the latter
part of the Article is false, and inconsistent with the first part of it.

The mere explanation of the terms Made, Created, and Begotten, will evacuate
this difficulty. That which is Made or Created proceeds from the Maker or
Creator, as an Effect from its Cause, by the mediation of a real action, or
casualty between the cause and the effect; that which is begotten is produced
by Generation; but how shall we distinguish Generation from the production of
the Effect from its Cause? I answer, that according to the known definition,
admitted and approved of in the Schools of Philosophers and Divines: Generation
is Origo viventis a vivente, a principio conjuncto, in Similitudinem naturae.
Now to admit a real Action or Causality between the Father and the Son in the
Eternal Generation of the Divine Word, were to make a change in the Divine
Essence, ad intra, of that immutable God that can admit of no change. Whence it
unavoidably follows, that the Eternal Son of God is neither Made, nor Created;
but how then can we make it appear that he is Begotten? I answer, because he is
produced by Generation, according to the definition given; for he is produced
by the Divine Understanding, as related to all Creatures possible, by a clear
and Conspicuous representation, but especially a lively Image of all the
Perfections of the Divinity, which makes him to be in similitudinem naturae, as
I shall more largely explicate and prove in the Treatise of the Trinity, which
I intend shortly to bring to light. But to talk of a Mother (as this Author
does) is an impertinent indignity offered to the Divine Word, and savours too
much of the mean thoughts of the ignorant Vulgar.

Next in the Athanasian Creed follows, that the Holy Ghost is of the Father,
and of the Son, neither Made, nor Created, nor Begotten, but Proceeding. Here
this Deist Cavils first with the Holy Ghost's proceeding from the Son, contrary
to the Tenet of the Greek Church, for which he cites that Text of Scripture,
John 15.26. When the Comforter is come, which I will send unto you from the
Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedth from the Father, he shall
testify of me. Does this Text prove that the Holy Ghost does not proceed from
the Son * it only asserts that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father, which
we all grant, but whether or no it proceeds also from the Son, it does not
determine; but I shall prove this at large in my Treatise of the Trinity.

Secondly, he says (subjoyns this Author) that the Holy Ghost is not begotten,
but proceeding; yet he alleges that it is confessed by the most Learned
Trinitarians, that Begotten and Proceeding differ nothing at all: But I would
fain know who those Learned Trinitarians are; for it is well known that the
second Person of the Trinity, therefore is Begotten, because he is produced by
the Understanding, which represents the Deity, and the Creatures possible, so
that by the internal virtue of his production, he is intended to be in
similitudinem [whence he is called the Divine Word] naturae, whereas the Holy
Ghost proceeds by the Will, which is no representative power, but he proceeds
by an act of Love of the same Divinity; who does not see that these two are far
different from each other? and this clearly solves that frivolous Discourse
which follows; that in counting right we should say two Fathers, two Sons, and
three Holy Ghosts, or Spirits; for which saying there is no ground at all, as
appears by the difference given between Begotten, and Proceeding.

Next in the Creed follows, None is before, or after other; none greater, or
less than another.

Yet the Son himself says, John 14.28. the Father is greater than I. I answer,
That the Son says not this of his Divinity, but being Hypostically united to
flesh, he spoke it when he was in flesh of his Humanity; none is before or after
other. I ask, says this Deist, whether the Son does not, as he is a Son, derive
both life and Godhead from the Father? I answer affirmatively. But, says he; if
the Father gave to the Son Life and Godhead, he must have both before he could
communicate or give either of them to the Son. I answer, All this argues only
prioritatem originis, for as much as the Father was the Origin of all that is
in the Son, but all was done from Eternity; so there could be no prioritas
temporis, for before Eternity there was no time; neither could there be any
prioritas naturae, such as there is in a Cause in respect of his Effect, since
the Father was not the Cause, and the Son the Effect, for all Causes produce
their Effects by the Mediation of an Action, whereof the Cause is the Origin,
and the Effect is the term, which receives the action, and subjects it in it
self, as the Philosophers teach. Now the Eternal Son of God was produced by an
act of the Divine Understanding, which does not operate by acts distinct from
it self, as Men and Angels do, but all acts of the Divine Intellect and Will
have a real identity with the Divine Nature and Essence of God, as the Divines
teach; for else if God should understand by distinct acts, those acts must
inform the Divine Understanding, which would make a Change in God, and so
destroy his Immutability, as is apparent. The same with proportion is to be
said of the Holy Ghost, who proceeds by an act of Love from the Divine Will, no
less than that act of the Divine Intellect produces the Divine Word, or its
Hypostasis.

With what reason, now, can this Author still go on in his wilful ignorance? He
often says that this Creed contains many Contradictions, and as many
Impossibilities as Transubstantiation, and yet in all his Discourse, he has
not alleged two Propositions with a contradictory opposition which follows out
of the Doctrine of this Creed; nay, I confidently assert, that neither he, nor
any of his Sect, can allege any one contradiction issuing from the same
Doctrine. Let the pretended contradiction be assigned, and we are ready to
answer it, and to discover its fallacy, but to blunder and vaper as this Author
does, that there are Two Fathers, Two Sons, and Three Holy Ghosts, and yet
prove nothing of all this, is not to proceed like a Scholar, much less like a
Divine, but is wholly loss of time.

How often must I inculcate this Orthodox Truth? That in the ineffable Mystery
of the Divine Trinity, the characteristical notion of the Father is his
innascibility, together with his paternity and fecundity of active spiration;
of the Son is his filiation and fecundity of active spiration; of the Holy
Ghost, is his passive Spiration alone; These Three Persons, as they mutually
are correlatives to each other, so they are really distinct from each other,
they are capable of Multiplication, and constitute a number. The Father has in
himself (besides the relative predicates) all the absolute Predicates and
Perfections that are contained in the Divine Nature and Essence, all the
Attributes of the Divinity. The Father has Communicated to the Son all the
absolute Perfections of the Divine Nature, and the notional Predicate of active
Spiration. To the Holy Ghost, the Father and the Son have communicated all the
Divinity, with all the absolute Attributes and Perfections thereunto belonging.

So that although these three Persons are three in number, yet the Divinity of
them all is the self-same individual and singular Deity; for the same Divine
Nature that is in the Father, is also in the Son, and Holy Ghost. Now this
Author would have us to multiply the Divinity as the Persons are multiplied,
thereby to lead his Reader into a Labyrnth of Errors, by acknowledging more
Gods than one; which in effect is no better than rank Paganism. Must we follow
the conduct of his wild Genius, because he pretends to Demonstrations, which in
effect are mere Improbabilities; or adhere to those Sacred Truths which are
delivered to us by holy Writ, and are backed by Divine Authority? But let us
proceed with him to the Incarnation of the Divine Word.

The Athanasian Creed from lience proceeds to the Incarnation of the Divine
Word; thus, The right Faith is, that we believe and confess, that our Lord
Jesus Christ the Son of God is both God and Man. To which words this Author
replies, That then the Lord Christ is two Persons, for as he is God, he is the
second Person of the Trinity; and as he is man (a perfect man) he is also a
Person, for a Rational Soul vitally united to a Humane Body, is a Person. I
answer, that a Rational Soul vitally united to a Humane Body is the complete
Nature of a Man, complete I say, in ratione naturae, but to be complete also in
ratione Personae, you must add to this complete Nature a subsistentia, which
makes up the complete Suppositum, or Hypostasis of a man in ratione personae.
But in Christ there was no need of this Humane subsistentia, for the Divine
Word assumed the complete Humane Nature, not the Humane Person, as Nestorius
said, for the Humanity of Christ subsists by the Personality of the Divine
Word, which supplies abundantly all defects, and functions which the Humane
Personality would exercise, were it present; so that the Humane Personality
would be superfluous in Christ, and of no use at all.

To what he adds, [ viz.] Let the Athanasians then Confess that Christ was not
God, which is the truth. Here he plainly professes his Error, and flatly
denis the Divinity of Christ. It is not my design to prove at large in this
short Treatise, the Divinity of Christ, which the Divines have effectually
proved in the matter of Incarnation. I shall therefore only hint at some
Particulars: as the fulfilling of the Prophecies of the Old Prophets, the
Testimony of the Eternal Father in a Voice from Heaven: This is my Beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased; the often asseveration of Christ himself, confirmed
by many strange and prodigious Miracles, and sealed by his Death, the
Reluctance of Nature at his Crucifixion, his Resurrection after Death, which
none could effect but by the mighty hand of the Omnipotent, the Universal at
attestation of all the Apostles, in Confirmation whereof they all sacrificed
their Lives, with other pregnant motives contained in the Sacred Word of God,
which are too prolix for this short Treatise; all which being duly pondered and
considered, are able to convince, not only an indifferent judgment, but also
the most obstinate and perversest judgment that can be, if it be swayed by
Reason, and work them into a steadfast belief of the Divinity of Christ;
wherefore I shall wave (in this place)* any further dilatation of my Discourse
upon this Subject.

Now we proceed to examine the Hypostatical Union between the Divinity and
Humanity of Christ, how we can make it out, that any Union can be of that
Nature as to unite two Natures, whereof the one is Infinite, and the other
Finite; for the Athanasian Creed asserts, that though Christ be God and Man,
yet he is not two but one Christ; one, not by Conversion of the Godhead into
flesh, but by taking the Manhood into God: one, not by confusion of substance,
but by Unity of Person: for as the reasonable Soul and flesh is one Man, so God
and Man is one Christ. Against this the Deist argues, that in the Personal
Union of God to Man, and Man to God, the Union is between Finite and Infinite,
which is impossible. For we must either suppose that Finite and Infinite are
commensurate, that is equal, which every one knows is false; or that the Finite
is United but to some part of the Infinite, and is disjoined from the rest. A
very Learned Reflection! for who is ignorant of Gods Eternity, and Immensity,
or Ubiquity? which are two of the Divine Attributes. All Created Durations flow
successively by parts, whereof none are at any time in being, but only those
that are present; for to day, yesterday is past, its duration is destroyed, and
to morrow is not yet come, its duration is not yet produced; and so of all
Created Durations; whether this be done only by indivisible instances, as Zeno
Taught, or by indivisible instances, and divisible parts, which was Aristotle's
Opinion in his Treatise De continuo Successivo.

But God's Eternity is far different; for this admits of no parts, but is one
indivisible duration, essentially determined to co exist to all Created
duration, and Eternity; there are no parts destroyed, and others to come, not
yet in being; for by the same indivisible duration whereby the Divinity existed
from Eternity, he exists now, and existed yesterday, and shall exist to morrow,
and ever, and yet loses no parts of its duration, because it has none. Hence
Boethius, and with him the current of Divines, gives this definition of it,
Aeternitas Dei est interminabilis vitae, tota simul and perfecta possessio; a
perfect possession of an endless life, altogether, tota simul, not by parts, as
it is in all Created durations.

The Immensity of God Consists in this, that he is essentially determined to
all Created space, whenever or wheresoever it exists; so that God by his
Immensity, without any parts, is actually present to all Created space or
place, how distant soever the parts of space are from one another; to which God
corresponds not by several parts, but by an increate definitive ubication,
whereby he is totus in toto, and totus in qualibet part; all the Deity is in
all the space, and all the Deity is in every part and particle of space,
wheresoever, or whenever existent: as an Angel, which is indivisible, is in
the place which he Occupies by a definitive ubication; for the whole Angel is
at the same time in all the space, and the whole Angel at the same time is in
every part and particle of the same space; so is the Soul of Man, which is
likewise indivisible, in a humane Body; for the whole Soul is in all the Body,
and the whole Soul is in every part and particle of the Body; so that the Soul
exists in the Body by a definitive ubication, whereas the Body at the same time
exists in space by a circumscriptive ubication, whereby its parts are
collocated so, as that one part of the Body corresponds to one part of the
space, and another part of the Body to another part of the space. Now to the
Objection.

The Humanity of Christ is constituted in place by a circumscriptive ubication,
where the Divinity, the whole Divine Word is intimately present to him; what
commensuration more than this is necessary for a conjunction between the
Humanity, and the Divine Word? for that the Divine Word is in all places else,
by his immensity, is impertinent to this case, as long as the Divine Word is
entirely and intimately present to the whole Humanity, where the Hypostatical
Union may exercise its functions of connecting the Humanity to the Divinity;
for it is too gross an imagination of the Divinity, that part of it should
correspond to the Humanity, and part not; for in the Divine Nature there are no
parts, but all is indivisible.

Now for the Hypostatical Union, it is subjected in the Humanity, and
terminated to the Divinity, or Divine Word; for the Essence of God is incapable
of receiving any thing distinct from it self. And it is in vain to tell me that
this includes as many Contradictions as Mr. Iohnson's Treatise against
Transubstantiation does; produce those Contradictions that this Mystery does
include, and we shall use our endeavor to solve them.

The second Objection is grounded upon an Error, that the Union between the
Divine Word, and the Humanity of Christ connects two Persons, as Nestorius
would have it; but this error is already exploded. But it is in vain to sift
all the extent of Nature, for a parity to the Hypostatical Union of the Divine
Word to the Humanity of Christ, which is transcendent above all the power of
Nature, where the two distinct Lives, Memories, Reasons and free Wills are no
obstacle at all to it; for these two Natures do not hinder the Operations and
Functions of each other.

Thus I have run through all the Arguments, pretended Contradictions, and
Impossibilities, which this Author alleges against those Sacred Mysteries of
Christianity; wherein I have endeavored to give a satisfactory solution to
them all. Though he has insisted upon such Mysteries as are easiest to be
impugned, and hardest to be defended. For they are such as are delivered to us
by the Sacred Scripture, as backed by Divine Authority, and are not within the
reach of Natural Reason to demonstrate. For it were no less than a temerarious
presumption in any man that should attempt to prove any one of these Mysteries
by Natural Reason, Mysteries that are so sublime, and elevated above the reach
of Natural Reason, that they are not pervious to the Wit or Capacity either of
Man or Angel; which if Faith did not teach, Reason could not explicate; so that
we receive them from Holy Writ (as attested by Divine Authority) with great
submission and veneration, and are ready to vindicate them from all pretended
Impossibilities, Contradictions, and other Difficulties which the Mahometans,
Jews, Deists, Atheists, or other Infidels can muster up against them. And I
hope in this short Treatise I have not swerved from the received and approved
Doctrine of the Reformed Protestant Church of England, to whose Authority and
Correction I submit.

FINIS.

