THE NECESSITY Of Adhering To the Church of ENGLAND As by Law established: OR
The Duty of a Good Christian, And particularly of PARENTS and MASTERS OF
FAMILIES UNDER The Present Toleration.

By William Saywell, D. D. Archdeacon of Ely.

These are they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit,

Jude 19. CAMBRIDGE, Printed by J. Hayes Printer to the University; for Edw.
Hall Bookseller there. 1692.

December. 23. 1691.
Imprimatur,

Gabr. Quadring, Procan. Jo. Beaumont. Humf. Gower. Joh. Covel.


THE PREFACE TO All in any Authority, ESPECIALLY To Parents and Masters of
Families, IN THE ARCH-DEACONRY Of ELY.
I Have in the following Discourse showed you the true way to Peace and
Happiness upon Earth, and the certain means of Salvation in the World to come,
if you will keep your selves and Families in the Communion of the Church of
England, and practice those Rules and Orders which She has required for your
Public Devotion and duties of Religion. And also made it evident what danger
your Children and Servants are in of being ruined, if you do not make use of
that Power and Authority which God has given you over them, to see them duly
Instructed in their Catechism, and brought up in a Religious conversation, and
constant attendance at the Prayers and Sacraments of the Church. This I have
often urged with great earnestness to your Ministers and Churchwardens, as
they can very well testify; and this if I had opportunity, I should deliver to
your consideration in your several Parishes, and I doubt not, but your
Ministers often put you in mind of the same; but my strength and other
occasions not affording me leisure to do that, I do send these Books, which you
may Read and meditate upon at your spare times: And for your farther direction,
besides your Bible and Common Prayer, I recommend to Your and Their serious
perusal, a Book called The whole Duty of Man, where you have Sober and Pious
discourses about your particular Duties, and also useful directions about
Prayer and other parts of Private Devotion. It Is not only Meat and Drink you
are to take care of for your Families, as the Beasts do for their young; but
you are also to provide for their Souls which are the better part, and
therefore see them educated in the true Faith, and Obedience to God, and made
useful Instruments to promote the Peace and welfare of their Country. Schism
and Heresy will make them enemies to both, and to you to: It will teach them
to be stubborn and self-willed, Proud and Morose, Peevish and ill Natured,
False and Treacherous, and common disturbers of the Church and State; all which
inconveniences you will avoid if you bring them up in the constant Communion of
the Church of England; for She only here teaches them the true old Way, and the
plain Doctrines of the Catholic Church, and She is the only particular Church
to whom by the Laws of God and Man you are bound to yield submission; and this
has been fully made out not only against Papists, but all other Schismatics
and Dissenters.

This all Godfathers and Godmothers ought to take into their serious
Consideration, and where Parents are careless or erroneous, they should use
their endeavor to see their God-sons and God-daughters brought up in the
Profession of that Faith into which they were Baptized: the neglect whereof,
has made the command of the Church herein so much complained off and condemned
by the Dissenters, for else no Man in his wits can find fault with the Churches
care in this matter. Since beside the Parents, (who have a natural Obligation
to breed up their Children in the fear of God) others are engaged to take care
to see that done in Case the Parents dye or neglect it. Indeed it is every
Christians care in some measure, but that it might be more Orderly managed,
it is laid upon some few to take it into their more especial Charge, and usually
left amongst Friends and Relations, which in Reason and Nature will be most
careful to see it done. To say it is much neglected, is no more then may be
said of too many Parents also: but the custom is very good, and Sureties ought
to be more careful to perform the Trust that the Church and Friends lay upon
them, and to do what they can by themselves or others, is all that is expected.

But it is not only teaching them their Catechism is sufficient, but you ought
to see that they lead their Lives according to those Pious Rules and Directions
that the Church has taught them, and also carefully to restrain them, and to
correct them for their Vices and Debauchery, such as Swearing, Lying,
Drunkenness, absenting from the Church, and all other kind of Wickedness: and
the better to prevent all these mischiefs, carry them with you at all times to
the Church, and take account of them what they have Learned and Observed from
the Ministers Sermons and Catechizing, and be oftentimes on Sundays, etc. and
other Leisure times putting them in mind of their Duty. See Deuteronomy. 6.7.


This the State as well as the Church does now more particularly require of
you, Deuteronomy. 11.18.19.
during the Toleration; which is not meant to justify Heresy or Schism, or to
warrant that they are in a safe condition that separate from the Church, no
more then Jews or Heretics who have the like benefit: much less to encourage
Ignorance and Profaness, but only to take off the Temporal Punishment which the
Civil State did inflict. Now God does often defer his Judgments, to wait for
our amendment, and Parents and Masters do sometimes think it convenient to wink
at Offenses in their Children and Servants; and so tho the State does not at
present punish Dissenters, yet it does so far disapprove of their Ways, that
all the Obligations in Conscience to Conform to the Church still remain, both
by the Laws of the Church and State also. Neither is any Man thought fit to be
admitted to any Office or Place of Trust that does not join in Communion with
the Church of England. Besides you must consider, tho Punishments may be an
outward means, yet it is voluntary Obedience makes good Christians. If therefore
you will discharge your Duty to God, to the Church and State, and the
Obligation you owe to your Families, you must diligently observe these
Directions, and take more particular Care at this time in the educating of your
Children and Servants in the Communion of the Church, nay if you expect they
should receive any Benefit from any Public employment in Church or State. And
I pray God direct you and make you careful herein; and I as I have opportunity
shall sometimes come and see, and enquire how well your Parish-Churches and
Sacraments are frequented by those who would be accounted hearty Friends and
true Sons of the Church of England. For if they are careless herein, how can we
expect it from others who would rejoice at our Destruction; and the Papists in
the end will reap the greatest advantage by our Disorders. As you therefore
love God, love your Country, love your Childrens Souls, keep them from
Conventicles, and be careful in training them up in the constant Communion of
the Church of England. God does particularly commend Abraham because he did
command his Children after him that they should keep the way of the Lord. Genesis
18 19.
And Joshua does not only take care for himself, but says, As for Me and my
House we will serve the Lord. Josh. 24.15.
And it is the Command of God in the New Testament, Ephesians. 6.4. That you should
bring up your Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord: And what that
is I have here set before you, to prevent your falling into the Errors and
Confusions of the times. And how can you better spend your Days then in
promoting the Glory of God, and Peace and Love round about you, and obtaining
happiness for your Selves and Families to all Eternity? God be thanked the
Pious Zeal of the Sons of the Church has had so good effect in the City of
London, that daily Morning and Evening Prayers, Weekly and Monthly Communions,
are Reverently and Devoutly celebrated and frequented in many Churches and
Chapels. I hope their good example will stir up People in the Country to
change their careless behavior, to be reverent and constant in doing their
Duty, and attending the Prayers and Sacraments of the Church.

Calvin. de necess. Reform. Eccles. LET them give us such an Hierarchy, in
which Bishops have such a preheminency, that they do not refuse to be subject
to Christ, wherein they depend upon him as their only Head, and are referred
unto him; in which let them maintain Brotherly Charity one with another, and be
united together with no other Bond than of his Truth: Then I will confess there
is no Anathema that they are not guilty of, if there be any such, that do not
observe it Reverently and with the highest Obedience.

Calv. de vera Reformand. Ration. That no Man may raise a Calumny against us,
that we are too morose and froward concerning external things, and do so
precisely take away all Liberty; I do here testify that I do not contend about
Ceremonies, which serve for Order and Decency, or else are Simbols and
Incitements of that Reverence which we pay to God.

Calv. Ep. 87. Protect. Angl. I do highly approve that there should be a
certain Form of Prayer and Ecclesiastical Rites, from which it should not be
Lawful for Pastors themselves to discede or vary. 1. That provision may be
made for some Peoples ignorance and unskilfullness. 2. That the consent of all
Churches amongst themselves may more plainly appear. 3. That Order may be taken
against the desultory lightness of such who delight in innovations. Thus there
ought to be an established Catechism, an established Administration of
Sacraments, and also a Public Form of Prayer.

THE Necessity of adhering TO The Church of ENGLAND as by Law established, etc.
I Hope I have made it evident to you that I have a tender regard for the glory
of God and the good of your Souls, by the great pains and the charge I was at
to send you Books to stir you up, and direct you to the serious practice of the
duty of Godliness; for it is not hearing all the Sermons and melting discourses
in the world can bring you to Heaven, unless you do truly Love God, with all
your heart, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Matt. 22.37.
with all your soul, with all your mind, and with all your strength; which is
not done by running now and then into a Conventicle, and sighing and groaning
at a passionate expression of the Preacher, but by a constant and steady doing
of your Duty. There are in the world many errors in opinion destructive of
salvation, and there are more in practice. But of late years, since my coming
to this Office, our Churches have been much more filled, and the Holy Sacrament
of the Lords Supper better frequented, and the generality of the People seemed
to be very well satisfied with the Doctrine and discipline of the Church of
England as by Law established, and there need nothing but a hearty conformity
to the rules and order of it, to make us all instruments of Gods glory here on
earth, and happy to all eternity in the kingdom of Heaven. And that I might
more effectually persuade you to live in all Christian obedience to the will of
God, I thought some motives to the duty of Godliness, with short directions and
prayers, would be a means to make you more ready and willing to lead a holy and
Religious life This was my real design and intention in sending that little
Book amongst you, which if you would often and carefully read over, and observe
the directions contained in it, you would and more solid comsort and
satisfaction upon your death bed, or when you come to examine into the hopes
you have of Salvation, then in all the passionate Sermons that ever you heard
in a Conventicle, for then you would do your duty as God has commanded you;
whereas now most men content themselves with hearing only, and that not as they
ought to do neither, and so deceive their own selves, Jam. 1.22.

Since the coming abroad of that little Book, when I thought I had little else
to do but to call upon you to do your duty which you did already own and
profess, I am how put upon another care by the change of affairs in the State,
in order to the faithful discharge of my Office, that is to endeavor to recall
some, and secure others in the unity and communion of the Church; now when you
are ready to hear every new Man that sets up in a Conventicle, and read
erroneous books to lead you to destruction, I hope you will read and consider
what your Spiritual Governors (who have as great a concern for your good as
They have a blind Zeal for your hurt) have to say for the truth, and your
obedience to the Laws of the Gospel. And it is from the earnest desire I have of
your peace and welfare, and the salvation of your Souls, that I do now again
apply my self to you, and require you as you will answer it at the Day of
judgment, when I must give an account how I have done my duty to was do you,
seriously to consider how you that run into schism will answer this Charge
which I now draw up against you, when the scoffs and jears of your Leaders, the
all I urements and threatenings of your companions, and of your friends in
error will stand you in no stead, but you must each stand by your selves to be
Judged at the day of your death according to the word of God, which I now offer
to your consideration.

The pretense of Conscience and being satisfied in their way without assurance
from the Scriptures is an unsafe foundation.
I Know it is the temper of many of you to say we are satisfied, and you feel a
great deal of comfort in the way you take to worship God, and have the
testimony of your Conscience that you do act sincerely, and as you think, for
the glory or God. But how easily may Men flatter and deceive themselves with
such pretenses? Do not Jews and Mahometans, all Heretics and Schismatics
pretend the same? And are not many of them fully as Zealous and consident in
their way, and do they not as much condemn you in their thoughts as you can
them? Nay those that killed the Apostles thought they did God service? So that
to rely upon an inward satisfaction, Joh. 16.2.
the pretense of Conscience, without solid reason and foundation in Gods word,
is the common mistake that deludes the greatest part of Mankind. If ever then
you hope to appear with comfort before God, you must lay aside fancy and
persuasion, and examine both your Faith, and your Lives according to the holy
Scriptures. If we or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel in part or in
whole, or neglect any part of This, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8. When our
Savior began to preach, this was the Sum of his Doctrine, Repent and relieve
the Gospel, Mar. 1.15. When he sent his Apostles into the world, it was with
this large Commission, Preach the Gospel to every Creature, he that believes
and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned, Mark
16.15, 16. St Paul afterward speaking of the Day of Judgment, Says, God shall
Judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my Gospel, Romans 2.16.
Again, Christ Jesus shall he revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in
flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his power. The
Gospel does not only contain promises but precepts, duties, as well as rewards.
And therefore our Savior when he is asked what a man should do to be saved,
gives this answer, If thou will enter into life keep the Commandments. Again,
if ye love me keep my Commandments. St James says, whosoever shall keep the
whole Law, and yet offend in one point he is guilty of all, Jam. 2.10. This
contains all articles of our Creed, and all other Christian duties, we must not
think then our Zeal for one duty, will excuse our neglect of another, we must
not so much regard what we have done, but supply that we have not done. If
through error or mistake, any have lived in Schism, Heresy, Disobedience, or
breach of any other command, he must repent and amend, for no confidence and
self conceit can justify us before God, while we live in neglect of our Duty.

Obedience to Governors and love and unity with our fellow Christians,
necessary Duties of the Gospel.
AS our Savior came into the World to reform the errors and vices of corrupt
Nature, and teach Men the principles of Peace and Virtue, so in his Gospel he
has given most severe commands of mutual love and obedience to his Bishops and
Governors, because without it there would be nothing but ignorance and error,
quarrels and confusion, and as it was in the Jewish Nation when there was no
King in Israel, every one did what was right in his own eyes, so it will be in
the Church where there are no Governors, or none that are hearkened to or
regarded, every man will follow the devices of his own heart. Therefore when he
founded his Church, the first thing he does is to appoint Governors with power
not only to shut out of his Church, but out of Heaven, all those that contemn
their authority and will not be governed by them. Matt. 16.18, 19. Upon this
rock will I build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
it, and I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, whatsoever
thou shall bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall
loose on Earth shall be loosed in Heaven. And though in this place it be
promised to St Peter, to show that each single Bishop had that power in his
respective charge whilst he lives in communion with and conformity to the
Church, yet Matt. 18. it is said, whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth shall be
bound in Heaven; and when our Savior actually bestows this power, John 20.23.
he gives it equally to all the Apostles, whose soever sins ye remit, they are
remitted, and whose soever sins ye retain they are retained. Again he says, he
that receives you receives me, he that rejects you rejects me, and he
that rejects me, rejects him that sent me. And when he was going into
Heaven, that he might fully provide for the order and government of his Church,
he gives his Apostles authority over the whole World, to rule and to punish
them, as well as to teach and comfort them; and this power is to last to the
end of the World. All power is given unto me in Heaven and Earth, go ye
therefore into all the World, make Disciples all Nations, and lo I am with you
always unto the end of the World, Matt. 28. The Apostle Hebr. 13. bids
Christians remember them that have the Rule over you, who have spoken to you
the word of God, whose faith follow, v. 7. again, Obey them that have the Rule
over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your Souls, v. 17. And
it is our Saviors express command, if he refuse to hear the Church, let him be
unto thee as a Heathen and a Publican, and then he adds, to show whom he means
by the Church, that it is the Bishops and Governors of his Church, whatsoever
ye shall bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven, Matt. 18.17, 18. So that it is
beyond all possible doubt that there are Bishops and Governors sent by Christ
to continue to the end of the World, and there is a Church that must be
hearkened unto, under peril of being shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven.

There must be a method and order observed in appointing the Bishops and
Governors of the Church, that Men may know whom they ought to obey, and whose
punishments they ought to avoid.
ALL Men confess in general, that Christ has left Bishops and Governors in his
Church, but they are not all agreed who are those who have this Authority
committed to them: Now there must be some orderly method for our direction in
this as well as other matters, or else the Authority will signify nothing, and
not attain that end for which it was appointed. For if every body be left to
follow whom he please, then all censures and excommunications will come to
nothing, as soon as Men are shut out from one Pastor, they will run to another;
if one will not comply with their humor, they will go to another that will,
and so the Christian society, which ought to be the Pattern of order and unity,
will be the most confused body in the World; every body will become his own
Lord and Master, and will live and do as he lift, but how opposite is this to
that command of our Savior? If he refuse to hear the Church, let him be unto
thee as an Heathen man and a Publican, and to that of the Apostle, obey them
that have the Rule over you: when at this rate no Man has any other Ruler but
his own peevish will.

Our Savior therefore to prevent this confusion, as he had Authority
immediately from God, so he gave his Apostles full Commission to send others
with the like power of appointing new Bishops to the end of the World, as fast
as any should dye or the places become void. And to this purpose he says, as my
Father sent me, Joh. 20.
that is with power of sending you, so send I you, with power of sending
others. And lo, I am with you always unto the end of the World; accordingly we
find Paul and Barnabas ordained by the appointment of the Holy Ghost, Act.
13.2, 3. and they again when they had received this power go about ordaining
Bishops in every Church where they were wanting, Acts 14.23. and then Acts 20.
the Apostle exhorts the Bishops to feed the Flock of Christ over whom the Holy
Ghost had made them Bishops. Thus Timothy was ordained by St Paul, and he had
power to ordain others, but he is charged to lay hands suddenly on no Man, 1 Timothy 5.22. Titas also was left in Crete to ordain Elders and set in order the
things that were wanting. So that Christ he first sent forth his Apostles, the
Apostles they ordained and sent forth Bishops, they were to judge of their
abilities, and so to give them charge of Souls, and the People were to hearken
to them and obey them as appointed by the Holy Ghost, Act. 20. and so other
Priests and Officers that follow their orders and directions, 2 Cor. 7.15.

What method was observed in appointing Bishops and Governors of the Church
after the Apostles days.
IT IS not to be expected that the Names of all the Persons that were called to
be Governors in the Church, and the places and bounds within which every Man
was to exercise his Authority, should be set down in Scripture, no more then
the Names and Places of Kings and Printes and Civil Governors are. The common
rules of prudence and order are enough to direct in this as well as the other
matters, so that all things be done decently and in order, and to the
edification of the Church. Now the Rules of decency and order do require that
Persons should be appointed peaceably, and therefore no Man must thrust himself
into any Government till he be duly called and set apart for that Office,
neither must any one usurp another place and disturb him in the quiet
discharge of his duty. And then that all may be done to edification, it is fit
the Persons should be able and well qualified to do their Office; so there must
be Persons who have power to appoint, and judgment to examine and discern the
fitness of the Men who are to be called to so high a dignity as to be Teachers
and Governors of the Church; how they are for life and conversation; that
Magistrates and People can bear witness to, and are allowed to except against
ill Men. But whether they are sound in Faith, and endued with knowledge and
understanding rightly to divide the word of God, and discharge their duty, that
was ever the Office of the Bishops to enquire, as also to ordain and appoint
them, for they must lay hands suddenly on no Man, 1 Timothy 5.22. but are to
commit this Authority to faithful Men who are able to teach others also, 2 Timothy 2.2. again, how shall they Preach except they be sent, Romans 10.15. no Man
takes this honor unto himself but he that is called of God as was Aaron, Heb.
5.4. Now that was after a solemn and orderly manner, by Gods appointment he was
legally consecrated and set apart for that Office, Exodus 28. so were the
Apostles, so were those sent abroad by the Apostles, and so Persons were
appointed in all ages of the Church, being first examined and tried, and then
Ordained and sent forth by the Bishops according to certain Canons, and the
same order is observed at this day in all Churches that stand established in
any settled Government. And tho there be a dispute in some places whether
Bishops and Priests be of the same order, and upon that supposition that every
Priest is a Bishop, and has Originally in him fullness of all Authority and
Power, some do take it upon them to ordain tho mere Presbyters, yet it is upon
that principle and supposition that a Presbyter is equal to a Bishop, and has
Authority from Christ to ordain others by virtue of his Office, and so still
they maintain that Men must be examined and appointed by Bishops in a Regular
manner, before they ought to be allowed to take upon them any Office of
Preaching and Governing in the Church. And suppose a Bishop and Presbyter were
one Order, and a Presbyter had equal Authority originally to Ordain as well as
Bishops, which in the judgment of most Churches they have not; yet what an
unreasonable thing is it, to make use of a power of Ordination which was never
owned and allowed for 1500 years in the Church, and which does create many
doubts and disputes and great confusion in the Church, when they may have
Ordination from the Bishops, which all confess is sound and valid, and thereby
Men may avoid giving scandal to many Churches, and raising Scruples in the
minds of People at home, which all charity does require good Christians to
prevent. Now this Succession of Bishops down from the Apostles time to our
days, Luther T. 4. p. 6, 7, 8. Twenty years after his first appearing against
the errors of the Church of Rome. The Apostles were called by Christ himself,
the Apostles afterward called their Disciples, as Paul called Timothy and
Titus. Who afterward called the Bishops, the Bishops called their Successors,
and that Call continued to our times, and shall continue to the end of the
World, and it is a mediate call, because it is by Men, yet it is Divine; and
this is the general call all over the World after the Apostles, neither is it
to be changed, but highly esteemed, by reason of some fanaticall Men which
despise it, and boast of another better call, whereby they say they are moved
by the Spirit to teach. But such impostors lie, they are moved by a Spirit
indeed, but not by a good but a wicked Spirit -- Wherefore we must not run into
another Man's charge, as the Devil does stir up his Ministers to run where they
are not called.
has run as clearly and as evidently as the Succession of our Kings in England
since William the Conqueror, still one succeeding another, as any died or were
removed, by Ordination and orderly appointment to his Charge. But yet farther,
to keep peace and prevent confusion, there must be some Canons or Rules, to
retain every Man within the bounds of his duty, that one might not disturb
another, or undo what another had done. Now about choosing of Bishops and about
excommunicating Offenders; Bishops may vary in their opinion, as it is known
they often have done, one may be for this Man, and another for that, and unless
there be some Rule to proceed by, there will be endless Cuarrels and Disputes;
therefore the general Rule of Decency and Order must come in here, and we must
consider what direction the Scripture has given in this Case also. Now besides
the Rule of common Prudence, that amongst Governors of all Societies, if they
cannot otherwise compose any difference, they must sit down by the Authority of
the major part: the Apostle tells us. The Spirits of the Prophets are subject
to the Prophets, for God is not the Author of Confusion but of Peace, as in all
the Churches of the Saints, 1. Cor. 14. much more then particular Bishops and
Ministers ought to be subject to the rest of the Bishops. Then the general Rule
of our Savior is, If he refuse to hear the Church let him be unto Thee as an
Heathen man and a Publican; not only no longer an Officer, but not so much as a
member of the Church.

Now all Bishops being Governors of the Church, and Successors of the
Apostles, one as well as another has right to judge in Cases that concern the
peace and welfare thereof, but it is impossible they can all meet or be
consulted in ordinary Cases, and therefore as in the Civil state, for better
Order and convenience in administration of Justice or preserving Peace, the
World is divided into Kingdoms, Provinces, Counties, Cities, etc. And the
respective Governors have the certain bounds and limits of their jurisdiction,
and every one is to take care of all things within his own charge, and not to
intermeddle or thrust himself into another Country or Province. So by
direction from the Apostles, the Bishops did by mutual consent set out the
bounds of every Man's jurisdiction, according to Cities and Provinces; and
Civil States have confirmed the same in after Ages. Thus St James was Bishop of
Jerusalem, St Peter at Antioch, St Mark at Alexandria, St Andrew at Byzantium
now Constantinople, St Timothy at Ephesus, and Titus at Crete, etc. And after
them other single Persons did succeed in their places, as we see it is at this
Day, as one Bishop dies another is chosen and Ordained to succeed in his
Office. And as a City with the neighboring Countries round it did make one
Bishops Diocese, so several Cities and their adjoining Villages, did make one
Province under one Archbishop. And all matters that did concern the Church
were to be determined by the mutual consent of the Archbishop, and of all or
the major part of the Bishops of each Province, and this was the Order derived
from the Apostles, confirmed by the general Councils, S. Cypr. Ep. 68. can. A
post. council. Nice.
and generally observed through all Ages of the Church. As for the Authority of
Patriarchs, and of late years the usurpation of the Pope, these are all
encroachments upon the Church, and so are the Assemblies of Presbyters without
or in opposition to their Bishops, much more (the root of all confusion) an
independencie of every Preacher in each single Congregation, and deviations
from the Ancient and Apostolical Order. S. Cyprian Ep. 55. council. African.
can. 28.
The standing and general Law and Tradition was that which best suits with the
rules of Decency and Order, that Christians should not be drawn from their own
Country, should not be put to long and tedious journies, but have all Matters
ended at home by the Archbishop and Bishops of each Province amongst
themselves, who best know the state and condition of the People committed to
their charge, and are bound by interest as well as duty, to consult the peace
and welfare of their Dioceses. It Is needless to cite the Canons, See the 6 genesis
Councils, and particular Councils confirmed by them.
the case is known to all Scholars that look into the ancient Councils and
Histories of the Church. And according to this universal Order of the Church,
it is as easy for every one to know his own Spiritual Governors, as it is his
Civil. Every Ones charge is allotted, and all within such bounds and limits
belong to the Spiritual Government of the Bishop of the Diocese and his
Assistants, and Minister of the Parish where he lives; and thus it is in all
Kingdoms and Countries where the Christian Religion is professed, and this
Order and Authority all sober Divines do own and acknowledge. But still it is
with this limitation, provided they hold the Faith and Unity of the Catholic
Church, and keep within the Rules of the Gospel. For all Bishops and others are
members of Provincial Churches, and must be subject to the Rules and Order of
the Province; and all Provinces are members of the Catholic Church, and must
keep the unity of Faith of Christ's mystreal body. In rites and ceremonies, and
private opinions in lesser matters, particular Churches may differ one from
another, and each Province or Nation may consult and provide that which is best
for themselves, but then as to Faith and other necessary duties, that must be
the same all over the World, and nothing must be done contrary to the Laws of
Christian Charity, and that mutual Love that we ought to have for all our
Brethren in Christ; much less ought we to do any thing contrary to that duty we
owe to our Spiritual Fathers that are set over us by the Holy Ghost, Acts 20.
and to the peace and settlement of the Catholic and our own particular Church
or Parish. Now I cannot see what temptation any rational Man that wishes well
to the promoting of the glory of God and advancement of true Religion, can have
to change this ancient Apostolical Order of a Synod of Bishops governing
according to the Rules of the Ancient Church, and with the assistance of their
Presbyters, for a Synod of Presbyters only, according to the late Model of Mr
Calvin invented at Geneva. Or what benefit the People would have by it who must
still be left to the Minister of their own Parish; neither would they find
themselves in a better but worse condition. Much less should make a Schism to
enforce and bring in such a novelty and invasion upon their Spiritual Fathers
and Brethren in Christ: or else to destroy all Church Govenment, as the
Independants, Anabaptists and Quakers do, who set up Plow men and Thatchers
instead of Bishops and Priests.

All Persons in this Nation are bound to join in Communion with their Bishop of
the Diocese and Minister of the Parish where they live, and the great sin of
those that neglect this Duty.
I Have made it evident beyond all doubt that there are Spiritual Governors
appointed by Christ to continue to the end of the World, and all Christian
People must be under the Authority and Jurisdiction of some or other of those
Ministers; and that by direction of the Apostles, and constant Law of the
general Councils and tradition of all Christian Churches, and the Rules of
Decency and Order, all Countries that own the Christian Religion, are generally
divided into Provinces and Dioceses, etc. for the more peaceable management of
all affairs. Things being thus settled, all those commands in Scripture that
People ought to bearken to the Church; obey them that have the Rule over them;
besides all those general precepts, Honor thy Father and Mother, To know them
that are over you in the Lord and admonish you, to esteem them highly for their
works sake, etc. do oblige all People here in England to obey their several
Bishops, and join in Communion with their respective Parishes, and those that
do obstinately withdraw themselves from their obedience, do live in open
contempt of Christ, and manifest violation of his Holy Gospel, which does
require all Men to maintain Love and Charity especially with their Fathers and
Governors, and to keep the peace and unity of the Church. All such Men that
wilfully and obstinately continue in their Schism and disobedience, are not
only shut out from the privileges and benefits of the Gospel, but bring upon
themselves all the curses and punishments denounced against such grievous
Sinners, for those that are disobedient to parents are reckoned up amongst the
most heinous Offenders, Romans 1.30. 2 Timothy 3.2. Consider therefore how you will
answer it to God in the dreadful day, that do merely neglect to join in the
public Service and Sacraments, and thereby disobey your Spiritual Fathers, and
affront that Government which Christ has set in his Church for your good, and
as the means to promore his Glory and your Salvation: It Is not Man but God that
you reject, who gave us this Charge over your Souls, and you do despite to the
Holy Spirit of grace, from whom we receive our Commission.

Besies the guilt of disobedience and contempl of Christ's Ministers, you that
assemble in Conventicles are guilty of Schism; which is a damning Sin, and a
root of all confusion.
AS nothing is more agreeable to the Nature of God then Love and Unity, so
nothing is more odious to his most Holy being, then Schism and Division: for
the nature of Love is to unite all things in Peace and Order, but the nature of
Schism is to bring all things to misery and confusion. Whatsoever therefore
Schismatics may pretend of Zeal for the glory of God, their advancing Piety,
and setting up Religion in greater purity, the Scripture calls such courses the
works of the flesh and pronounces the Persons that follow them Men of carnal
affections. Romans 16. Gal. 5.
Those therefore that do not only withdraw from the obedience of their Lawful
Governors, but set up separate Assemblies under color of purer worship, do
plainly make a Schism in the Church and rend the Body of Christ in pieces, and
are marked out by the Holy Scrip, tures for the grootest enemies of God and
true Religion Our Savior fays he that shall be angry with his brother without
a cause shall be in danger of the Judgment, and he that says unto him Rache,
that is empty, vain Fellow, and so lighting and bringing his Person into
contempt, shall be in danger of the Gounoil; but whosoever shall say thou fools
shall be in danger of Hell fire. Now if it be so heinous a crime in the sight
of God, to undervalue our Brother, what is it to despise our Spiritual Fathers,
and contemn their godly commands and admonitions, moreover to tear and divide
the Church of Christ; and instead of Love stir up animosities and contentions,
strife and hatred, as is too to evident, and from thence do genenally follow
Massacres, Rebellions long and bloody Wars Murder subversion of Kingdoms and
States, destruction of Countries, and all the cruelties and miseries that
Mankind are liable unto. As these things are manifest by experience, so
Scripture tells us, Jude 18, 19. they spring from Schism; There shall be
mockers in the last times, who shall walk after their own ungodly lusts, these
be they that soparate themselves, sensual having not the Spirit; whereas none
glory more of the Spirit then these Separatists, whom the Apostle charges with
carnal and ungodly Lusts. Again, Romans 16.17. Mark those that cause Divisions
and Offenses contrary to the Doctrine which ye have Learned, and avoid them;
for they that are such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ but their own helly, and
by good words and fair Speeches deceive the heart of the simple. The Apostle
pursues the same matter, 1. Cor. 3.3. Lor ye are yet Carnal, for whereas there
is among you Envying and Strife, and Divisions, are ye not Carnal and walk as
Men? For while one says I am Paul, and another I am Apollos, are ye not
Carnal? Again, Galatians 5.20. reckoning up the works of the Elesh that shut
Men out of Heaven, he says, the work of the Flesh are manifest, which are
these, he puts down Strife, Seaitions, or Schism and Divisions, Heresies, and
then adds, v. 21. They that do such things shall not in herit the Kingdom of
God. So that as Schism is an heinous Sin of its own nature, so it proceeds from
a carnal mind, and that is the root of all other Evils and Disorders, James
4.1. From whence come Wars and Fightings among you? Come they not hence even of
your Lusts, that war in your members? Lust breeds Division, and Division breeds
War. and War brings all other evils with it, especially civil and homebred
Wars, which spring from this root of Schism.

If none of these temporal evils follow upon Schism (which God grant they may
not) yet Schism brings in Heresy, Ignorance and Profaneness.
DID Men keep to the Rule of Gods word, and follow the interpretation of the
Catholic Church, they would be secure from all danger of Heresy, ignorance
and profaness, and would have a sure direction to lead them into the way of
Salvation. For all the Schisms, Heresies and mistakes that Men sall into, come
by forsaking the guidance of the Church, and wresting the Scripture to their
own destruction, which St Peter says many of the unlearned and unstable do. 2
Pet. 3.16.
So that in this case; the Scripture may be compared to an Apothecaries shop
full of all fort of wholesome Medicines, if rightly applied with judgment and
discretion, but such as will prove deadly poison, if taken at adventure and
misimployed. Now our Savior has given us the Scriptures for our direction,
which with much study and pains, we may understand our selves for our own
benefit and instruction: yet because few Men who are engaged in worldly
pleasures and business, etc. do give themselves so much leisure as to read
through and consider the meaning of the Scriptures, so as to be able to
satisfy themselves in all doubts and scruples that cunning Heretics raise to
pervert them from the Truth. Therefore Christ Jesus left Pastors and Teachers,
and founded a Church, to continue a constant Pillar and Monument, to expound to
us all difficult and hard places, and to condemn and censure false
interpretations, and stop the mouths of Seducers, from spreading abroad
damnable Heresies to the ruin of your Souls, and then that her Authority might
not be despised, Matt. 18.
The Scripture says, if any one refuse to hear the Church, let him be unto Thee
as an Heathen man and a Publican. And for our better encouragement to hearken
to her instruction, our Lord has promised that the gates of Hell shall never
prevail against it, Matt. 16. And then to direct the unlearned and unstable, he
has set Pastors and Teachers for the perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.11, 12,
13, 14.
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ; till we
all come in the unity of Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect Man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; that we
may henceforth be no more Children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with
every wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of Men, and cunning craftiness, whereby
they lie in wait to deceive, etc. So that we do not take off from the fullness
and sufficiency of the Scriptures if rightly expounded and understood, but for
the satisfaction of the unlearned and unstable, which are the greatest part of
Mankind, we must remember, that God has kept up a Church and constant
succession of Bishops and Ministers in an Orderly way, to teach us the true
meaning of his Word, and to keep up Discipline and Order, and so to preserve us
from the Heresies and false Interpretations of Schismatics that lead Men unto
error and destruction. While Men therefore keep within the City, they are in
no danger of being a prey to the wild Beasts, but if they run into a
Wilderness, they may easily be destroyed by them. While they keep within the
Ship they are secure from drowning, but if they forsake that, and commit
themselves to the unconstant Waves, it is Ten Thousand to One if they do not
miscarry. So while Men keep within the Communion of the Church, and follow the
guidance of those Pastors which God has appointed to keep them steady, there is
no danger of their Salvation; but if they forsake the Church, and run into
Conventicles, Psalm. 91.11.
they go out of Gods way, and so out of his protection, and are exposed to all
Heresy and Confusion.

If their Teachers do not Sin wilfully and lead them into Heresy, yet they may
mislead them through ignorance and unskilfullness.
WHO can tell how often he offends, nay the Heart above all things is
deceitful; therefore it is an easy matter for Men that follow the guidance of
their own understanding, and neglect the command of the Church, to be deluded
by the Devil, who often appears as an Angel of Light, and yet is still busy to
seek whom he may devour. Neither can they hope for the blessing of God, and
depend upon the promise of his direction, when they go into by Paths and
pursue their own devices. How many plain things may such presumptuous Men
overlook? how often may they misunderstand some parts of Gods word which want
more care and attention? Besides. who can be sure that they come with all
Languages and other helps to reading them, or take such pains to read and
compare all Texts, as not to be ignorant in many duties of great necessity to
be observed? And if the blind lead the blind, they both fall into the ditch:
And no wonder if People perish for want of vision, when they wilfully run away
from the instruction of the Church, and follow such ignorant guides who had
need to be taught the first Principles of humility and understanding. Tho
therefore by good Words and fair Speeches they may deceive the hearts of the
Simple, and may gather many excellent expressions out of the Holy Scriptures,
yet it is a great rashness and want of Judgment, for Men to trust their Souls
upon the skill and understanding of such private Seducers; who by their
ignorance may leave them without that sufficient instruction which is necessary
to Salvation.

Objections and Questions against Conformity answered.
BUT some will Object, that their setting up Conventicles in opposition to the
Bishops and Ministers, is no more then what the Bishops did in opposition to
the Church of Rome, and therefore if they are Schismatics now, the Bishops
were also, by Reforming the Church without the Authority of the Pope and Church
of Rome.

I answer, By the Council of Nice, and all other general Councils, and the
constant Order of the Catholic Church, all Provincial and National Churches
have power to Govern themselves, and reform any abuses or errors that have
crept into their Communion. And our Bishops and Clergy did in an Orderly way
lay aside several errors that are maintained by the Church of Rome, but still
retain the Faith and unity of the Catholic Church, and we do also particularly
blame the Roman Church for breaking the Order and rejecting the Traditions of
the Primitive Fathers and general Councils, but do not at all break the Rule of
Christian Charity to the Church of Rome, or any other Church in the World; we
leave them to Reform and Govern their own Churches, and do but use the same
Liberty over our own Members, which Christ has given, and the Church has ever
maintained, which we allow them to use over those of their own Communion, for
they ought to Reform those abuses as we have done.

Obj. But is there not a plain rent and division made in the Church by this
Reformation, and those that were united before in One Communion, are broken
into several parties.

Answ. That there are and must be Heresies and Schisms in the Church, we are
taught by the Holy Scriptures, 1 Cor. 11.19.
That they which are approved may be made manifest. But we cannot answer for
other Men, it is sufficient we break Charity with no body; we pay all Love and
friendship, and all that communion that one particular Church ought to pay to
another, but we do not intermeddle with their private affairs, or disturb and
embroyl their Communion; and if the Church of Rome, and other Churches that
hold with her, would keep the same temper that we have and still do, we should
quickly see an end of all our Divisions, Can. 30.
for we differ from none but where they differ from themselves, and depart from
the Primitive purity of those Ancient and Apostolical Churches from whence they
had their beginning. And as for that Obedience and Conformity which we require
of our own Members, it is no other and upon far easier Terms, then all Churches
do require of those that are under their respective Jurisdictions. So that we
are neither the cause nor party in any Division. Other Churches that break
communion with us, deny that Christian Charity that One Member of Christ's Body
ought to pay to another; and those of our own Members that run into
Conventicles, set up Altar against Altar, and divide themselves from our
Communion, go against the plain word of God, which requires them to obey them
that have the Rule over them, See my Evangel. and Cath. unity, etc.
against the constant Order of the Catholic Church and general Councils, and
contrary to the Doctrine and Command of all other Churches in the World.

Obj. But are there no Reasons then for Men to refuse the Communion of their
particular Church and Bishop, and must every private Christian always comply
with their Governors, whatsoever they say or do.

Answ. They must obey their particular Church, in all things Lawful, which are
in all things not contrary to the word of God and the Catholic Church.

Obj. But who shall be Judge in this Case.

Answ. The sense of the Catholic Church in Cases of doubt is to be consulted.

Obj. But is it not hard to know where she may be consulted, and how to
understand her Sense in any matter?

Answ. God has promised that the way shall be so plain, that a wayfaring Man
though a Fool shall not err therein; Isa. 35.8. 1 Timothy 3.15.
and for our direction tells us, the Church is the Pillar and Ground of Truth.
And thereupon he has commanded us to hear and obey the Church, and there is no
doubt it will be an easy matter to understand what her Sense is, in all Cases
needful for us to know.

Obj. But have not Bishops and Scholars themselves many disputes about the
Church, and about her Sense in several points, and how then can People know the
Sense of the Church?

Answ. Men of some Judgment and little Reading, are willing to despise that
Authority which is above their capacity, and Men of great Reading and little
Judgment, do not know how to reconcile the seeming differences in the Church,
but if you consult your Bishops and Ministers, they will satisfy you
concerning the Sense of the Catholic Church in all parts of your duty. For
since God has made it our duty to hear and obey the Churches, he will order
matters so that all People that are willing to follow her direction, may be
guided by it: for God does not reveal any thing to us that we cannot believe,
nor command any thing which we cannot perform in the manner it is proposed to
us.

Quest. What plain Rule will you give us to go by in this matter, for we would
willingly know the Truth and hearken to the Church.

Answ. First in all Lawful, and in most doubtful matters, it is your duty to
follow the command of your particular Church.

Quest. But what must I do in things that seem to me contrary to the Word of
God, when such are commanded by my particular Church.

Answ. The second Rule then I would give you is, that if you think or are
credibly told, you ought not to join with your particular Church in this or
that Doctrine or practice, before you make a Schism, enquire of learned Men
what was the Sense of the Primitive Fathers and general Councils, and what is
the general opinion of other Churches, and most learned Divines about it, and
be sure you have good Reason and Authority before you depart from your own
Church in which you live and were Baptized.

Obj. This is the way to put me upon a tedious endless work, more then either
I, or the Persons I consult will be ever able to go through.

Answ. No, no such matter, the Sense and Consent of the Scripture and of the
Church is so clear in all points of duty that People are concerned to know and
practice, and the Controversies are so few when rightly stated and understood,
that want to be decided in Order to your doing your duty, that it will be no
hard matter to receive full satisfaction; for they are either such that have
been long ago decided, or the Church is wholly silent about them, and there is
no evidence of Scripture to oblige you to depart from your particular Church
upon that account.

Now consider in how many matters all Churches are agreed, and the
Controversies long ago settled.

First, against the Arrians and Socinians, Consess. August.
which are long ago condemned for Heretics, and the Three Creeds that expound
the Catholic Faith, See my enquiry into the means of a happy union.
contrary to their perverse interpretations, are generally received by all
Churches. So likewise the Anabaptists and Quakers, who deny Infant Baprism, are
likewise condemned by all Churches, and it is the constant Doctrine of the
Catholic Church and all Reformed Churches, that to separate from their Lawful
Bishops upon the account of their requiring of them to join in stated Forms of
Prayer, and for enjoining decent Ceremonies not contrary to the Word of God,
and thereupon to set up Altar against Altar, and run into private meetings, is
that Schism condemned in the Holy Scriptures. So that not only from the Holy
Scriptures, but from the interpretation of the Church, it is most evident that
they hold pernicious if not Damnable errors, and in these points it will be an
easy matter for every body to find satisfaction, and to know the Churches
Sense concerning them. So that to join with such Dissenters, and to profess
their Doctrines, is manifestly to oppose the Catholic Church, as well as the
Word of God.

Obj. But if you put us to enquire into the Ancient ways, and consult the Sense
of other Churches, and give us that Rule for our direction in matters of
Controversy; we fear you have a design to lead us back to the Church of Rome,
for they talk much of the Church, and the old Religion, and tell us all the
World is on their side.

Answ. That is the great weakness of some to imagine so, and by their speaking
meanly of harkening to the Authority of the Catholic Church, make many Suspect
indeed that the Church of God has been altogether corrupted, and lost; or else
no where to be found for many Ages but in the Church of Rome. Whereas if you
will inquire of your Bishops, and Divines of the Church of England, they will
tell you that the pretended Authority of the Pope and Church of Rome, is
contrary to the general Councils, rejected by the whole Church for the first
Six Hundred Years and upwards, and condemned by the major part of the Bishops
and Christian Churches, from the Apostles times, to this very day; nay the
Church of Rome is the only Church by Name warned to take heed least she be Cut
off from the Body of Christ, as the Jews were, Romans 11. So that the Church of
Rome is so far from being the Catholic Church, that she is a very corrupt part
of it; and those of that Communion that amongst us set up separate Assemblies,
do oppose the constant tradition of the Catholic Church, the Canons of the
general Councils, and follow a private Spirit, and are as proper Schismatics
as any of our Fanatics and Dissenters.

Obj. But those of the Church of Rome do not only charge us with Disobedience
to the Pope, but with Heresy and false Doctrine, in rejecting many Articles of
Faith and other Ancient practices of the Church.

Answ. But if you will consult your Bishops and Ministers, they will make it
appear, that the Points we reject are so far from being Articles of Faith, and
ancient practices, that they are Moddern errors and corruptions, not known to,
or else condemned by the Primitive Church, and this we may see evidently made
out by several late Writings and Disputes.

Obj. I am glad to hear you say the Catholic Church does plainly condemn the
Usurpations and Errors of the Church of Rome, as well as the Scriptures, which
seem plainly against them, and we think against many Orders of the Church of
England also that are mere Humane inventions, if not old Popish Superstitions,
which we cannot Lawfully join withal, and therefore are forced to serve God in
such a Manner as we can, and which we think is better pleasing to Him, tho in
separate Congregations.

Answ. Humane Inventions, and Popish Superstitions, are frightfull words
indeed; but so you must remember, are Slanderers, Schismatics, Heretics, and
disobedient to Parents, etc. as all those are that accuse the Church, and
cannot prove what they say.

Obj. But our Preachers have told us that these Orders of the Church are
Popish, Antichristian, etc. and therefore our Consciences would condemn us, if
we should comply with them.

Answ. But will you run into so great Sins against the plain Word of God,
because your Preachers tell you so. I thought the Word of God had been your
Rule, but now I perceive you follow your Preachers against the Word of God, and
will not obey your Governors according to it.

Obj. We think our Preachers are Good and Holy Men, and Teach us the Truth.

Answ. Why should you not have as good an opinion of your Bishops and
Ministers? But when the Preachers take upon them thus to draw you into Schism,
Disobedience, and teach you to have uncharitable thoughts of your Governors,
and to condemn the Church and fellow Christians; you ought to suspect if not
their honesty, yet their Judgment and Discretion, for they are Men, and may be
transported by Passion and Interest, or else through error and mistake, and
lead you into heinous Sins. For why should you think them wiser and better then
all other Divines.

Obj. But I hope still they teach us right.

Answ. But it is not enough to say you hope, you must be sure the Governors of
the Church are in the wrong, or else you are in a most miserable condition to
run your selves into so many Sins and dangers by separating from them.

Obj. But my Conscience tells me I am in the right.

Answ. But it is not your Conscience will excuse you, unless you have some
Command of God to build upon. Now turn your Bible over and over, you will not
find any thing in the Scripture against any duty required by the Church.

Obj. But pray where have you any Command of God for your Common Prayer and
Ceremonies.

Answ. We are commanded in Scripture to make Prayers and Supplications for all
Men, 1 Timothy 2.1.
and to see that all things be done Decently and in Order, and since the Words
and Ceremonies are not determined in Scripture, it is better the Governors
should consider and make Rules and Orders, then to leave it to every bodies
Fancy, so that we have command in Scripture for what we do. But, pray, where
have you any command of God for your irreverent Prayers and disorder in Gods
service?

Obj. Why do you call our Prayers and Service irreverent and disorderly?

Answ. Because they are so, and cannot be generally otherwise; for when every
Preacher is to follow his own heated and Rambling fancy, and every Hearer is
lest to Sit, or Kneel, or Stand, or Lie along; to put on his Hat, or put it
off: what can commonly be expected, but irreverence and disorder.

Obj. As for these Modes, Gestures and Postures, which you call Irreverent, we
matter not them.

Answ. But tho you matter them not, yet the Scripture does require all things
should be done Decently and in Order, 1 Cor. 14.40.
and we find that our Savior and his Apostles did kneel down and show all
outward Reverence, and therefore we think the Church of England has good reason
to require People to imitate their examples in behaving themselves Reverently
and Orderly when they are in the House of God, and not let their Service be
more rude there, then when they are at their houses at home: so that nothing is
commanded in this kind, but what civility and good breeding would teach Men to
observe, and for which we have the command of God, and the example of Christ
and his Apostles and other Holy Men.

Obj. Perhaps it would be better if People were more Reverent at their Meetings.

Answ. But how can that be expected, when all your Prayers and the whole
Performance is left to the Arbitrary pleasure and discretion of every Preacher
amongst you, who are Men, and those none of the ablest neither, and may err and
be ignorant.

Obj. But we think they Pray by the Spirit.

Answ. What do you mean by Praying by the Spirit do you mean that the Holy
Ghost does put all those words immediately into their Mouths, and so they use
no other Prayers, but what are dictated by the Holy Ghost.

Obj. We do think so, and our Preachers keep us up in that belief.

Answ. But how do they prove this? For if that be true, all their Prayers are
as Divine and Infallible as the Word of God it self. For the Holy Ghost is as
Infallible now, as when he did guide the Apostles to write the Holy Scriptures.
But it is evident to all the World, that these Prayers are often so far from
being Divine, that they sometimes are such as scarce become a sober Man.
Therefore you may see what Men your Preachers are that abuse you in this
manner, and cheat you with false stories, if your Preachers are dictated by any
Spirit, it is generally by the Spirit of delusion; for it is not to be thought,
that the Holy Ghost will work a Miracle at every Conventicle, to inspire every
dissenting Preacher, when ordinary gifts are sufficient not only for such, but
much more excellent Prayers: And any One that will but attend those Meetings,
and weigh their Prayers with Judgment, will find more of the error and
weakness of the Man, then of the least evidence of the Holy Spirit.

Obj. But we have heard other Men Pray and Preach, but could never find so much
satisfaction and comfort as we do from these Men.

Answ. Perhaps their passionate way of speaking, their Noise, with now and then
an affected Sigh and Groan, may stir up a present passion in you, as a good
Actor at a Play does, who can make the People cry and laugh when he will; I
hope therefore you will not say, that the Actor is moved by the Spirit, and
those are all made Godly People, that are thus moved and affected as to burst
into Tears; so that if you Judge of the soundness of your Religion by such
outward Passions, I fear the Player when he sets about it, will make you
believe he is the most Sanctified Preacher. Setting then aside this which is no
argument of the working of the Holy Spirit, but an act of the Man, and all the
efficacy is lost in an hour or Two, as soon as you come into Company, or are
taken up with business and other affairs: You must not therefore Judge of your
Religion by a sudden passion, but by your sound understanding, and steady
performing all parts of your Duty.

Obj. But this cannot be a sudden Passion only in me, but must be a real work
of the Holy Spirit, because I find a great change in my Life, I am grown more
sober, read and meditate upon Gods Word, and mind Religion more then I did
before.

Answ. But that is no Argament that you are in a safe way, so long as you
continue in Schism; for when the Devil did find he could no longer ruin your
Soul by open profaneness, he now may tempt you to more secret Sins, to more
Spiritual wickedness, which are as heinous in the sight of God, and as
dangerous to your Salvation.

Obj. We have satisfied our selves all along upon these accounts.

Answ. But you see they are weak grounds to rely upon, for all this while tho
you are Zealous for some, you may be wanting in many other necessary duties,
and you are guilty of Schism, disobedience to Parents, destroy all Discipline
and Order in the Church, encourage Atheism and Profaneness, and endanger the
safety both of Church and State, merely upon fancies and humors, for I can
call it no other, because there is not One good thing that you can learn and
observe there, that you cannot as well have and practice in the communion of
the Church. Besides you act against the Sense of the Primitive Church, and all
other Churches in the World.

Obj. If it be so, we are much mistaken, and greatly abused by our Ministers.

Answ. It is certainly so, and while you follow such blind and erring guides,
no wonder if you fall into destruction.

Obj. We have been told by our Preachers, and therefore did verily believe that
the Ancient Church were Papists, and when the Divines of the Church of England
did talk to us of following the Doctrine and Government of the Ancient Church,
we thought it was only with a design to prepare the way to bring us to Popery.

Answ. Now I hope you are satisfied that the Church of England is no ways
inclining to Popery, but does endeavor to teach you your Duty according to the
Holy Scriptures, and further to confirm the Truth and soundness of their
interpretation of Gods Word, by the Doctrine of the Primitive Church, and the
general Councils, and tradition of the Catholic Church. And this you may see
if you read their late Writings, they do as heartily maintain against the
Church of Rome, as they did before against the other Dissenters and Fanatics.

Obj. I am very well satisfied now that the Men of the Church of England are
far from being Papists, but you tell me that all other Reformed Churches do
approve of the Church of England, and are ready to join with her in communion,
and condemn those for Schismatics that set up separate Congregations.

Answ. Yes I do so, and if you will but advise with your Bishops and Ministers,
they will easily be able to prove it to your satisfaction. You may read much to
this purpose in my Evangelical and Catholic unity, where you have the opinions
of Luther, Melancthon, Bucer and Calvin, in their own words to this purpose.

Obj. Then therein I perceive our Teachers have greatly abused us also. Indeed
I find many rational and sober Men of the Church of England, and I believe
there may be a great deal of Truth in what you say, but yet they are of such a
persecuting spirit, that they will let no body live quietly by them that are
not of their persuasion, which we think to be a very ill temper, not becoming
the moderation of the Gospel.

Answ. It is a sad thing that the Church of England, which is the most gentle
and moderate, and does disclaim all cruelty and hard usage upon the account of
Religion, should now be accounted the greatest Persecutor, as I perceive she is
at this time. People strangely forget themselves, and the opinions and
practices of their own Party, when they lay such an accusation upon the Church
of England, which does disown any power of temporal punishment.

Obj. But there were many Statutes that did inflict severe penalties upon
Dissenters.

Answ. These are made by the State for the security of the Government; for they
finding Dissenters generally enemies to the public Peace, and endeavoring
changes and alterations by Mutiny and Sedition, saw it necessary by Penal Laws
to restrain them from growing too numerous, and to keep them within the bounds
of their duty.

Obj. But does not the Church of England then allow of Penal Statutes.

Answ. In a moderate way she does, to make Men hear and consider, but not to
undo them.

Obj. But surely Men need not to be used like Children, they have discretion to
mind their duty, without being stirred up by punishments.

Answ. They should have so, but it is plain that they have not, Romans 13.
and therefore God Almighty has placed Governors and Officers to be a terror
to evil doers, and a praise and an honor to them that do well and mind their
duty.

Obj. Yes, if punishments were inflicted on evil doers, we should like that
well; but they punish Godly People because they will not go against their
Conscience.

Answ. Do you account then all the Idle, Lazy people that lie at home and
sleep, or else sit drinking at Alehouses in time of Divine Service, and will
never so much as take pains to understand their Catechism, and bring their
Children to be instructed in the Grounds of the Christian Religion, Godly
People. Now it is evident these idle and ignorant People, unless they be stirred
up by punishment, will never give themselves the trouble to understand and do
their duty, and so will ruin their own and their Childrens Souls.

Obj. If you did punish only such idle and lazy. People that did live like
Heathens, and require them and their Children to hear and do their duty, no
sober Man but must approve of such Discipline, and will say such People deserve
to be punished. But you punish Godly People that do read and meditate upon the
holy Scriptures, and take pains to know and do their duty, tho they do not
conform to the Church of England.

Answ. The Laws are made in general for all that absent themselves from the
public Service, for else all idle People would excuse themselves under that
pretense of being Dissenters. Besides many are Dissenters not out of
Conscience, but out of Pride, Humor, and for temporal advantage; and so run
into Heresy, Schism, and Destruction. It is all the reason in the World that
such carnal affections should be restrained, and Men obliged to hear and
consider the sober Instruction of the Church; and the design of all punishments
is to that purpose, that men might not neglect their duty out of humor and
laziness, etc.

Obj. You will not allow then, that the Church of England is a persecuting
Church.

Answ. No, by no means, no body can with any color say that of Her; she does
advise all Magistrates to use that wholesome Discipline which God has
appointed, and which all Holy and Religious Magistrates have executed, to
oblige People to hear and consider. For as all Parents are bound to teach and
correct their Children if they be disorderly, so all Christian Magistrates, as
they are common Fathers of their Country, ought to see their Children
instructed in the principles of true Religion, and have a right to punish their
unruly and disorderly Children: accordingly there are Laws for that purpose,
which when executed as they ought to be, bring Peace and Holiness to a Nation;
tho in the executing them there is great prudence and moderation to be used,
which the Governors are to take into their Consideration.

Obj. But why do you say the Church of England is the most moderate Church in
the World.

Answ. Because she like the true Mother, is for correcting and not destroying
her disorderly Children.

Obj. Surely those that now cry up Toleration, and talk of liberty of
Conscience, when and where they had power, were not for putting to death and
exterminating those that did differ from them.

Answ. Yes, you may read lamentable Stories of the cruelty of the Anabaptists
in Germany, and I need not tell of the cruelties and Murders committed by
others, who would be representing the Church of England for a persecuting
Church. I shall not name particulars, inquire and you will easily satisfy your
selves that the Church of England does but advise such moderate discipline, as
Fathers ought to exercise over their Children, when the Dissenters are
generally not satisfied but with blood and destruction.

Obj. I cannot say, but you speak a great deal of reason in the defense of the
Church of England, and I perceive many good Men think it no harm to join with
her upon occasion, but they think they may also go and hear a good Sermon in a
Meeting.

Answ. But is not that to set up a Schism, and plainly to make a fraction in
the Church, and it is encouraging Children to think meanly of, and to despise
their own Ministers, Parents, and Masters, for what is it but the very case
that, St. Paul. blames in the Corinthians, that one was for Paul, another for
Apollos, another for Cephas; for tho a Dissenter may Preach well, yet when he
does it in opposition to the Church, without any call, and does draw People
into parties, it is that Schism which is condemned by the Scripture, and will
bring all those mischiefs that I have already spoken of; and does plainly teach
People to despise their Governors, Ministers and fellow Christians.

Obj. But why do you say those Preachers have no call?

Answ. Because most of them have no Ordination, and if they had, they have no
License and Authority from the Bishops and Governors; and so by the Law of
Christ, and the constant Rule of the Church, they have no power to Preach, for
how shall they Preach except they be sent? If they were Ordained, they ought
not to thrust themselves into another Man's charge.

Obj. Tho they have no outward Call from the Church, yet they are sent by Jesus
Christ.

Answ. How do you prove that.

Obj. Because we find them endned with excellent gifts, and Christ did not
bestow such Talents to be hid in a napkin.

Answ. Gifts are no Argument that a Man has a Lawful call, for a Heretic or a
Schismatic may have Gifts, and use them to divide and destroy the Church.
Therefore as none must Preach without a call, so if any that are called turn
Heretic or Schismatic, he may be silenced again, Titus 1.10. for besides
gifts, there must be a sober and orderly Conversation, sound profession,
Obedience to the Orders of the Church; and if this Method were not observed,
and Men tied to be Peaceable and Cuiet, and subject to their respective
Governors, the Church would be the most confused Society in the World.

Obj. I confess Ministers ought to be quiet and peaceable Men, and they ought
to promote Love and Unity.

Answ. But after this way of running into Conventicles, there can be neither
Love nor Unity, nor holiness in the Church, for one Preacher will be setting up
in opposition to another, and Sects and Divisions will daily increase: And you
see by experience Schismatics differ one from another, as they do from the
Church, and then fall a censuring and condemning one another, as much as they
did the Church; and thence proceed Hatred, Strife, endless Quarrels and
Contentions, and Heresies; Ignorance and Profaness overspread the Nation, and
all these mischiefs come upon us, because Men will not submit to that Order and
Government that Christ has set in his Church, but after their own lusts heap to
themselves Teachers having isching Ears. 2 Timothy 4.3.
Now the Scripture says, Men that thus oppose the Peace and Order of the Church
must have their mouths stopped, Tit. 1.10, 11. But if they are not stopped, all
good Christians ought to avoid having any thing to do with them, Romans 16.

Obj. Then I perceive you would take away the liberty of Conscience granted by
the Act of Parliament.

Answ. The Act of Parliament is only to free you from the punishment that might
be inflicted upon you by Law on your Body or Estate, and is equally extended to
Anabaptists, Quakers, and other Heretics, and almost Persons of all
Persuasions whatsoever, and to keep them quiet as to the State under their
perverse humors; and therefore was never meant to lead you to the way of
Salvation, or to warrant them to be good Christians; and my design is rightly
to inform your Conscience, and persuade you not to use this liberty for a Cloak
of maliciousness: and to take this opportunity to run from the truth, is the
way to bring upon your selves everlasting destruction, as many do, that forsake
the Church of England.

Obj. Do you think then we are in such a dangerous condition?

Answ. It is not for me to pronounce Sentence upon any One as to the other
World; but according to the Rules of Gods Word, and the constant Sense of the
Catholic Church in all Ages, and of all particular Churches at this day, for
Men to set up Altar against Altar, and separate from their lawful Governors
without just reason, is that Schism condemned by the Gospel; and that there is
no reason to separate from the Church of England, I have sufficiently showed by
taking off all the Objections against her Communion. Mr Baxter's Apology page
8. I know how unable the Separatists were to answer the many Arguments of the
Famous Arth. Hildersham, J. Paget, W. Bradshaw, Brightman John Ball, and other
old Nonconformists, for the lawfulness of Communicating with our
Parish-Churches, in the Sacraments and the Liturgy. I was exceedingly moved
against Separation (truly so called) by considering. 1. How contrary it is to
the Principle of Christian-love. 2. And how directly and certainly pernicious
to the interest of the cause of Christ, and his Church, and of the Souls of
Men, and how powerful a means it is to kill that little Love that is left in
the World -- 4. I was greatly moved in thinking of the State of most Churches
in the World; if I traveled into Ahassia. Armenia, Russia, or among the Greek
Churches, I durst not deny to hold communion with them. When I go to God in
Prayer, I dare not go in a separate capacity, but as a Member of the Universal
Church, nor would I part with my share in the Common-Poayers of all the
Churches, for all the World -- And having perused all the Foreign and Ancient
Liturgies extant in Bibliotheca Patrum. I doubt not but our own is incomparably
better then any that is there.
And consider what Mr Calvin says in this Case, who does also own Bishops,
Liturgies and Symbolical Ceremonies, as ours are, no just Cause of separating
from the Church, viz. Institut. l. 4. c. 1. n. 10.

I have set down the Preaching of the Word and Administration of the
Sacraments, for the signs whereby to know the Church -- For where the Preaching
of the Gospel is reverently heard, and the Sacraments are not neglected, there
for that time is a certain face of a true Church, and it is lawful for no Man,
without punishment, to despise her Authority, reject her Admonitions, be
refractory against her Counsels, or mock at her Corrections, much less may he
separate from her and break her unity. For our Lord does so highly esteem the
Communion of his Church, that he does reckon him for a Renegado and desertor of
Religion, that does obstinately separate from any Christian Society, that does
hold the true Ministry of the Word and Sacraments; from whence it does follow,
that to depare from the Church, is to deny God and Christ: but how much the
more ought we to take heed of such a wicked Schism; for while we go about as
much as in us lies to destroy the Truth of God, we deserve that God should
thunder against us with the greatest force of his Wrath, to break as in pieces.

If some Men of better understanding by their diligence get to a knowledge of
the principal parts of their Duty, yet the generality of People, Children and
Servants, will be exposed to all Ignorance, Error and Profaness.
IN the constitution of the Church, the very Order of the Service, and the
solemn times set apart to bless God for the particular dispensations of the
Gospel, such as the Incarnation of our Lord, at the Feast of Annunciation,
commonly called our Lady Day, his Birth at Christinas, and so his Passion,
Resurrection, Asconsion, sending down the Holy Ghost, the Feast of the Holy
Trinity, with other particular Seasons, are a standing Catechism, and with a
little help will easily bring even Children to understand and remember all
parts of their Duty, and for their fuller instruction and admonition, the
Minister is to Catechize in the Afternoons, and to teach those that are
ignorant of these things, and to put all others in mind to think upon and
observe what they do already understand. So that Persons that live in the
Obedience of the Church, must be stupidly careless of themselves, if they want
any thing necessary for their edification in Faith and Love, and finally to
attain Salvation; and if any generally are ignorant of these things, they are
such who run away from their Governors, and either through sloth or faction,
would not give themselves the trouble to hear and receive the sober advice of
their Ministers, and commands of the Church: Then under the Churches
discipline, the admonition of the Bishops, the reproof of their Minister, good
Neighbors and fellow Christians, did reform many of these abuses, and stir up
others to a diligent attendance upon the public Service. But now all sorts of
temporal punishments are in a manner Suspended, if you by running into
Conventicles, teach your Children and Servants, your Neighbors and
Acquaintance, to despise the Authority of their Bishops and Ministers, and all
the Spiritual discipline of the Church, you will be a means to encourage
Ignorance and Profaness, and in a short time our People will fall into Atheism
and Infidelity. For many from your example, taught to contemn the reproofs and
censures of their Governors, will not only neglect the Communion of the
Church, but all sort of exercise of Religion, and so turn Pagans, if not live
altogether like brute Beasts. Others that have as yet some sparks of the Sense
of Religion in general left in them, yet running up and down from Place to
Place, from one Sect to another, will be far from receiving that firm and
settled understanding of the Grounds and Principles of Religion, which is
necessary to keep them steady in their Duty, and to bulld them up to an Holy
and Heavenly conversation. So that you that withdraw your selves from the
Communion of your Bishops and Ministers of the Church of England, besides the
great Sins of Disobedience, Schism, and contempt of the Church, and the danger
you run of Heresy and damnable error; you do by your pernicious example
expose your Children and Servants, and multitudes of your fellow Subjects to
Ignorance, Profaness, Infidelity, Atheism; and so instead of advancing purer
Religion, you will bring the greatest part to no Religion at all; and these
things we could in a great measure prevent, if you by running into
Conventicles, and despising the directions of your Governors, did not give
them occasion, and encourage them to run away from the sober instruction of the
Church.

Let me therefore in the Name of God, (and as I have the general care and
charge of your Souls, and shall be ready to give any assistance and direction
you stand in need of in your passage to Heaven) prevail upon you to take these
things into your serious consideration. Religion is not a politic Engine to be
used at pleasure, only to serve Men's turns upon occasion, and gratine their
humor, and keep up the interest of a party, but it is the revealed and
unchangeable Will of God concerning our Salvation, and therefore must in all
things be carefully performed according to the Rules of his Holy Word; neither
must we have an eye only to this or that particular Duty, but have regard to
all his Commandments: Now Satan does often appear with strong delusions like an
Angel of light, and his instruments do with good words and fair Speeches
deceive the hearts of the Simple, and put many cheats and fallacies upon
unwarie Souls, to bring them into destruction. But there are scarce any more
weak and manifest, then those that you have been hitherto abused withal, and
many of them now evidently false by your own confession, as that we were all
Papists, we did worship Stocks and Stones, were only moral Men, without any
dependence upon the Grace of God, and the direction of his Holy Spirit. And now
these slanders are fully confuted, they turn to other devices, altogether as
groundless and unreasonable* as that it is indifferent what manner of Governors
Men live under in matters of Religion, so they live Holy lives, and that they
in separating from the Church of England, do no more then she did in Reforming
from the Church of Rome; as if it were the same to have a public Service that
they do understand, with having a public Service they do not, to have the use
of their Bibles or not to have them, to worship Images, pray to Saints and
Angels, be content with half the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, or not, when
our Lord requires the whole. To omit many other errors. And not only our
Bishops and Clergy, but Princes and Parliaments did all agree to Reform these
abuses, and settle our Church upon the sure foundations of Truth and Holiness,
according to the Word of God, and constant Law and Order of the Catholic
Church; and there is not one duty of Piety to God, Charity to your Neighbor,
and Obedience to the Catholic Church, but you may better practice in the
Church of England, then in any other Society or Communion. Deal seriously with
your own Souls and Consciences, What can you learn and practice in any Meeting,
that you cannot as well observe and be taught in the Church? Will you then
merely for Fancies and Humors expose your own Souls, your Wifes and Children,
and the whole Nation to the danger of all Heresies and Schisms, and bring so
great a guilt and distraction upon your selves and Country? If you are offended
at the evil Lives of some of our Members, do you come in and join with us, and
give them better example, and by your Holy and Orderly conversation so
strengthen our hands to their shame and amendment, that we may all follow Peace
and Holiness in this World, and Reign with Joy and Glory in the World to come;
but if you still continue obstinate in your Separation, consider how you will
acquit your selves at the great Day, of the guilt of Schism, Contempt of Christ
and his Ministers, Disobedience to Parents, and from being the sad occasion of
those Heresies, Profaness and Confusion that have been brought into the Church
of God: and that I do not say this as my own opinion only, but that which was
the fear and apprehension of Queen Elizabeth, and the Parliament in the
beginning of our Reformation, we may learn from their Words, wherein they did
as it were by Prophecy, foretell the miseries which since fell upon our
Nation, and were chiefly brought upon us by this Sin of Schism, and neglect of
resorting to the Church.

All and every Person and Persons inhabiting within this Realm or any other of
the Queens Majesty's Dominions, 1 Eliz. 1.
shall diligently and faithfully, having no lawful or reasonable excuse to be
absent, endeavor themselves to resort to their Parish Church or Chapel
accustomed, or upon reasonable let thereof, to some usual place, where
Common Prayer and such Service of God shall be used in such time of let, upon
every Sunday or other days Ordained and used to be kept as Holy Days, and then
and there to abide Orderly and Soberly during the time of the Common Prayer,
Preachings or other Service of God there to be used and ministered, upon pain of
punishment by the censures of the Church --

And for the due execution hereof, The Queens most excellent Majesty, the Lords
Temporal, and all the Commons in this Parliament now assembled, do in Gods Name
earnestly require, and charge all the Archbishops, Bishops and other
Ordinaries, that they shall endeavor themselves to the uttermost of their
knowledges that the due and true execution hereof may be had throughout their
Dioceses and Charges, as they will answer before God for such evils and
plagues, wherewith Almighty God may justly punish his People for neglecting
this good and wholesome Law.

Tho the mit ward Penalty be suspended, in some Cases, yet the Duty still
remains, and the reason is the same, and we may mind Men of it. But what
miseries and calamities our Nation has suffered by the neglect hereof since
that time, need not be told the Men of this generation, wish the hinderers of
the due execution of this Law formerly, that are left alive, would in time
consider and repent.

A Postscript to the CLERGY.
Reverend Brethren in Christ,
THE great business of our Lives, as Clergy Men, is so to instract and Rule our
several Charges, that we may be able to say with the great Apostle, I am pure
from the Blood of all Men, Acts 20.26, 27.
for I have not shunned to declare to you all the whole Council of God; that
will require a great deal of Care and Diligence, but it is a Duty ought to be
performed with our utmost endeavor, and saw will it be if any should perish
through the Ministers neglect: It Is true the Spiritual power Christ has given
his Church is little understood, and all her Authority is much slighted by too
many in this Age, and the many Divisions and Schisms will the rease this
disesteem; therefore it is more necessary it should be vigoroussy asserted and
maintained, and the dangers and mischiess that are like to follow upon it
should be discovered and laid open, while in some measure they may be
prevented. For tho it may seem plausible to some, and that there can be no harm
now and then to hear a good Sermon at a Conventicle, as well as in the Church;
yet in the end it will prove fatal to Religion, to say no more, what other
evils will follow from such a practice, if once espoused by Men of Interest and
Quality, as God be thanked commonly as yet it is not. These things I have
represented to you my Brethren at our Visitation, and I doubt not but you have
often urged the same to your several Charges; but because things Read may be
better weighed and considered, and I can with the same pains inform all as a
few; I have sent these Papers, the good effect whereof will in a great measure
depend upon your further Discourses and Management, in more fully enlarging
upon and explaining the several particulars in your Catechizing and private
discourses, and if you can thoroughly convince your Parishioners, that they
ought to forsake all other Meetings, and join in the Communion of the Church of
England, and that they are bound to reverence you as Christ's Officers
established by the Catholic Church, as really you are, while you are regularly
Constituted, and faithfully discharge your Places, they will easily hearken to
you in all other Duties. Many perhaps will read these Papers, that will not
look into a Church. But the design of this Discourse is not only to show them
the necessity of adhering to the outward, Communion of the Church, but to let
them see how much Religion in general, and the public Peace and quiet of
Conference is concerned in it, if they will go upon good grounds; also that
either through Ignorance or Error they are like to loose the main Principles
of the Gospel. My first desire therefore is, that you would take care in
Expounding to your Flook those Articles, Rubricks, and Canons which concern
Faith, Hope and Charity, and the essential Duties of the Gospel, and then upon
occasion, not always dwelling upon Matters of Discipline, let them know, how
useful and necessary these things are so preserve the unity of the Spirit in
the Bond of Peace, and in righteousness of Life, and be sure not to neglect
those Laws that (...) Catechizing and Expounding the same, for the instruction
of Old and Young according to their several Capacities; and I desire you to
consider what weight this Church has laid upon Catechizing, as well before as
since the Reformation, and see the fundamental Principles seriously imprinted
upon the Peoples minds, which you find Quilibet sacerdos plebi praesidens
quater in anno vel per sevel per alium exponat populo vulgariter absque
cujuslibet subtilitatistextura Phantastica, quatuordecem fidei articulos, december
mandata decalogi, duo precepta evangelii, viz. geminae charitatis, septem opera
misericordiae, septem peccata mortalla cum sua progeny, septem virtutes
principales ac -- gratiae Sacramenta. Idem. de officio Archidiacon. cap. Vt
Archid. Vt Archidiaconi -- quotiens Presbyteros invenerint -- statutis
temporibus populo minime [haec omnia] praedicasse sen publicasse, totiens eos
arguant: and poena canonica castigando supplere compellant quae temere
omiserunt.
Linwood Provincial. lib. 1. de officio Archipresbyteri, c. (...). And then
stir them up to show their Faith by their good works, in frequenting the
Public Prayers and Sacraments, and leading Holy Lives answerable to their
Profession. For if they really are, or desire to be good Christians, and
Members of the Church of England, they must not only rely upon talking, and
outward Profession, but sincerely observe the Rules and Orders of the Church,
both by themselves and Families.

There has been a great outcry made against many Pious and Learned Divines,
under the Name of High Churchmen, etc. and others have been magnified as more
rational and moderate Men, but all that I could see the Churchmen aimed at
was, Jud. 3.
earnestly to contend for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, in opposition
to Insidels and Heretics, and so to preserve the Purity of the Gospel, and to
keep a Decency and Reverence in the worship of God: and I appeal to the
experience of the Nation, where the Public Prayers and Sacraments are more
devoutly offered up and frequented, and what Congregations show the most
Religious behavior in the Church? And since it is the Gospel by which we must
be Judged at the last day, there is no other way, Philip. 1.27.
to appear with hope before God, then having your Conversation as becomes the
Gospel of Christ. Now all these Orders of the Church which are contended for,
are only applying the Rules of Gods Word, as may most tend to edification, and
to direct Men in the particular circumstances of each Ones Duty, and without
some such Orders and observance of them, I do not see how Men can keep up a
public Worship of God, without being a Scandal to Infidels and Sober
Christians, and why the Ancient Rules and Customs of the Church should be
thought an offense, I cannot understand, nor how the taking them away can
advance Piety in the Nation.

These Books I commit to your Hands, and desire you to lend them about in your
several Parishes, and make the best use of them you can, for the benefit of
those that you have any hopes will be the better by them. And put them in mind
to read and observe the Directions in the former Book.

FINIS.

