The Sacred Rite OF Confirmation.

Discoursed of in a SERMON Preached at Okeham in the County of Rutland, At a
Confirmation there Administered, by the Right Reverend Father in God WILLIAM
Lord Bishop of PETERBOROW.

On May 17. 1683.

By John Savage, Rector of Morcot in Rutland.

ACTS 15.41. He went through Syria and Cilicia confirming the Churches

D. Hieron. Dial. advers. Luciferianos. Si Scripture authoritas non subesset,
totius Orbis in hanc partem consensus instar praecepti obtineret

Hookers Eccles. Polit. lib. 5. p. 355. There is no cause we should doubt of
the benefit of Confirmation, but surely great cause to make complaint of the
deep neglect of this Christian Duty. Let Them not take it in evil part, the
thing is true, their small regard hereunto has done harm to the Church of God.

LONDON: Printed by J.C. and F.C. for William Hensenian, at the King's Head in
Westminster Hall. 1683

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM Lord Bishop of Peterborow.
May it please your Lordship,
IN Obedience to your Lordships commands, I first Preached, and now Publish this
ensuing Discourse. Whether I have offered any thing herein that may probably
win any to a love of and veneration for this great Office, I shall not presume
to judge, none being more conscious of its defects than my self. But since it
has past your Lordships approbation, and was favorably received by the
Reverend my Brethren of the Clergy, I do the less value the censures of others.

I am not ignorant that this Age, in the Universities and Cities especially,
abounds with great Scholars and eminent Preachers, the glory of our Church, as
well as the envy of our Adversaries; and I hope those great men will not
disdain to have a Mite thrown in now and then (though by the meanest Rural
Divine) to make some little addition to their Treasury.

When your Lordship first limited me to this subject, I thought it a barren
soil, because not commonly managed, but after a few thoughts spent upon i^, and
turning up some of the surface, I promised my self it would prove (to speak
like a Countrey-Parson) of the same nature with new broken up ground, which
usually yields a double Crop. I found the matter so copious, and the Office,
which St. Paul reckons amongst his six Fundamentals, so easily defendable, that
it has run this Discourse into a more than usual length; for which I hope the
great usefulness of the Subject, though not the way of handling it, will
apologize, if not make sufficient amends.

That your Lordship has highly advanced the honor and interest of this Church
in general, and particularly retrieved the almost lost Reputation of this
Sacred Office, stopping for ever the mouths of our Adversaries (who are apt to
bellow against unpreaching Bishops, and the neglect of those Offices that bring
no secular advantage) by your frequent Preachings, public Exhortations, and
constant Ministration of this holy Office; That by your candor and
condescension, you oblige your Clergy to a regular Conformity, and a love to
your Lordships injunctions as well as person; That by force of Argument,
managed with a winning mildness and sweetness of disposition, you have worn off
the natural ruggedness of many of the Dissenters, and prevailed upon them to
promise a submission: These things are not unknown to us who have the happiness
to live within your Jurisdiction, nor will it be deemed a piece of Sycophantry
by any who have the least knowledge of your Lordships Person or Actions.

And amongst the many demonstrations of your Lordships known candor, these are
not the least, That you command me to Print this ensuing Discourse, thereby
showing your readiness to encourage the industry of the meanest; That you
please to undertake the protection of it from the proud and censorious; And
that you give me leave in so public a manner to subscribe my self

Your Lordships most humble and Obedient Son and Servant, J. S.

The TEXT.
Acts 8. Chap. 17. v. Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the
holy Ghost.


SAint Luke having in his Gospel given an account of the Actions and Sayings of
our blessed Savior, from the time of his Birth, till his Ascension into
Heaven, (which glorious Ascension of his we do this day commemorate, and whose
gifts soon after bestowed are on this day to be distributed) does in this
Sacred History inform us of some of the most remarkable passages in the Lives
of the Holy Apostles. Whereof some are common unto all, others peculiar to a
few: those that are peculiar, he restrains especially to St. Peter and St.
Paul, the one of the Circumcision, the other the Apostle of the Uncircumcision;
and by restraining his History to these two, he does tacitly insinuate, that
the rest of the Apostles were no less industrious in their several Provinces to
propagate the Gospel of Christ. Amongst those actions that are common unto them
all, none more properly relates to the occasion of this present Solemnity, than
that remarkable Office of Confirmation, here recorded in the Text, which the
Apostles by St. Peter and St. John, their lawful Delegates, did administer to a
numerous company of the baptized ^^^aritans.

For St. Stephen being Crowned with Martyrdom, Chap. 7. and a violent
persecution being raised against the Church, in the beginning of the 8th, the
six surviving Deacons, with many other Christian Professors, were scattered
abroad throughout the Regions of Judea and Samaria, preaching the Gospel of
Christ. But the Apostles having not as yet composed the common Symbol of Faith,
or having not by lot or suffrage assigned to themselves their several
Provinces, continued still at Jerusalem, where they soon received the joyful
news of that wonderful success the Gospel of Christ had obtained by the
preaching of St. Philip the Deacon, who by Apostolical assignment, as some, or
by Divine impulse, as others, going to Sebaste, a Town founded by Herod the
great to the honor of Augustus, and the Metropolitan City of Samaria, verse
the fifth, rescued that whole City from the enchantments of Simon the Sorcerer,
and converted them to Christianity: for though all from the least to the
greatest had given heed unto Simon, saying, This man is the great power of God,
v. 10. yet when they believed Philip preaching the things concerning the
Kingdom of God, and the Name of Jesus Christ, they were Baptized both men and
women, v. 12. and those were the people with one accord, v. 6. The news whereof
coming to the College of the Apostles, then residing at Jerusalem, they
unanimously sent Peter and John to complete and perfect by their Apostolical
Authority what was so happily begun by Philip the Deacon, v. 14. who being come
to Samaria, and praying for them that they might receive the holy Ghost, (and
that in a more eminent and abundant measure than they had at their Baptism) v.
15. their holy and servent prayers met with a suitable return, this Sacred
Historian assuring us in the words of the Text, That having then laid their
hands on them, they received the holy Ghost.

And what was then done by the Apostles in their own persons, we are now met
together by the good providence of God, to see in some measure performed by one
of the Apostles Successors, who though he pretends not by virtue of his
Succession to the same power the Apostles were endowed with, viz. Of conveying
the gift of working Miracles, and speaking with unknown Tongues, those gifts,
together with their necessity in the infancy of the Church, having long since
ceased; yet may justly challenge from those his Predecessors, all that power
that is now necessary and essential to the edifying and governing of a
well-constituted Church, part of which does consist in this holy Rite of
Confirmation, which he is now about to administer to all that are duly
qualified; and I hope All are so, (through the care and industry of their
several Pastors) that are here met this day with an intention to receive this
holy Mystery. And the greater grounds we have to hope it, when we consider how
many thousands in this little County, beyond the usual number, were prevailed
upon and prepared for receiving the holy Eucharist at Easter last; in which,
blessed be God, we had almost as wonderful a success as St. Philip had in that
City of Samaria, whole shoals and multitudes of people, (the most inveterate of
Rebels and Dissenters not excepted) throwing off those Sorceries and
Enchantments wherewith they had lately been deluded, and coming with at least
an outward Reverence and Devotion to that holy Sacrament.

It Is true, we the Officers of our Lord, in pursuance of our original
Commission, and the late Orders to us directed, were forced to go into the
highways and hedges, to compel some straglers to come in, that these his
Consecrated Houses might be filled; but when we came unto them, we found it was
their disuse and ignorance of the thing that created a prejudice; for when they
submitted to the Summons, and observed the decorum and gravity used in the
celebrating of those holy mysteries, their fear of the Laws was presently
changed into a love for their duty; and their seeming alacrity and reverence,
makes us almost to think that Proctors and Appariters will be altogether as
useless now, as they were in the Church at Jerusalem, where the Disciples
continued with one accord in the Temple. Guardians of Churches, without the
guilt of Perjury, may shortly make their presentiments Omnia been; Canons and
Constitutions may hereafter be made without the necessity of affixing
Anathema's; and we shall again recover the golden age, where be that runs will
read his duty, and every one will be Religious without the force of Coercive
Laws.

These good Successes and happy Omens we must acknowledge due (under God) to
the care and vigilance of our right Reverend Diocesan, by which in some
competent measure, as far as his Sphere reaches, he has secured unto us the
happiness of this present Age. But his care for us is not here terminated; that
he might derive the like Piety and Devotion to Posterity, and the succeeding
Ages might share with us in the happy influences of his wise government, he did
by the like Orders lately enjoin his Clergy to prepare the younger sort by
Catechizing and wholesome Instructions for the worthy partaking of this holy
Ordinance. And thanks be to God, we do this day see the joyful fruits of our
labors: we have indeed heretofore toiled day and night, and have caught little
or nothing; but when by the assistance of our Savior, and the direction of so
wise a Pilot, we threw out our net, behold what a vast multitude is here
encompassed, both small and great! and though the draught be so large, we need
no Trimmers to secore our vessel; it will neither sink with its own weight, nor
will the waves of this world prevail against it, if to a lively faith in Christ
we add a reciprocal love amongst our selves, and unanimously resolve to carry
on what is thus so happily begun.

And that I according to my model may make one step toward the carrying on of
this great work, and the meanest in the Auditory may understand the nature of
this great Office that is now about to be celebrated, let me humbly crave your
attention whilst I insist on this remarkable instance, which the Apostles have
here given us, a summary account whereof we have in the words of the Text:

Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the holy Ghost.

Which words afford us these two Generals.

1. The celebration of a holy Rite or Ceremony: Then laid they their hands on
them. 2. The wonderful effects or consequents of it: And they received the holy
Ghost.
In treating of the first General, I shall briefly discourse of these following
things.

1. Of this Ceremony in general, showing you the lawfulness of it. 2. Of the
nature of this particular Ceremony, what it is significative of, the great ends
and purposes for which it was originally used, and afterward instituted and
practiced in the Christian Church; together with the material duty that this
Ceremony did heretofore wait upon and accompany; and from thence the expediency
of it will be discemed. 3. I shall discover to you that peculiar Order of
persons to whom the administration of this holy Office is restrained, with some
probable Reasons of such restriction; and from thence we shall see the honor
and veneration we ought to have for it; not so much in it self considered, but
as it is annexed to the highest Order in the Church, the Apostles and the
succeeding Bishops. 4. I shall lay down the qualifications of those to whom
this Office is to be administered; and from thence the holiness of it will
appear, it being not promiscuously to be administered to all that shall rudely
and unpreparedly offer themselves, but set apart for, and appropriated to sober
and competently intelligent Christians.
In treating of the second General, I shall endeavor to show, 1. What were the
great and stupendous effects of it upon its first institution and practice. 2.
That the consequents of it now upon its present administration by Episcopal,
are altogether as valuable as those were that ensued upon the imposition of
Apostolical hands. 3. That the seeming disproportion betwixt the outward means
and the inward effects, ought not to prejudice any considerative person against
the power and efficacy thereof. 4. We shall from the premised Positions easily
infer the excellency and usefulness of this holy Office, if not the necessity
of its continuance in the Christian Church: And so briefly conclude our
discourse with humble and modest Persuasives to all persons concerned.


I begin with the first General, 1 Genesis
and under that with the first thing that offers it self to our consideration.

I. And that is to treat of this Ceremony in general. That imposition of hands
is a mere Ceremony, having nothing of intrinsic goodness to recommend its use
u^^ us, is acknowledged by all; and yet this Ceremony (which abstractedly
considered was neither good nor evil, which might have been done or left undone
pro libitu, according to the pleasure or discretion of its Authors, without any
prejudice to the Church, or violation of any Christian Law) was used by our
Savior upon several occasions, and practiced by the Apostles in this and many
other instances. Now is it not much that our Savior and his Apostles should be
so ceremonious, that they should offer to practice that at which the
Consciences of tender Christians might probably be offended? what! had they no
regard to the scruples that might possibly arise in the new converted
Samaritans, or could they not foresee what offenses more enlightened Christians
in afterages would take at such legal worship, such matters of indifferency in
Gods service? Neither of these can be imputable to our Savior, and no doubt
the Apostles had a just regard to the one, and by inspiration or rational
conjecture did foresee the other; but they well understood that not such
indifferent things by them practiced, but the indiscretion of some and the
malice of others would create those prejudices; they might pity such persons as
weak and wicked, but this was not reason sufficient to deny the Service or
Discipline of the Church its innocent and significant Ceremonies, because there
are sools or mad men that will either laugh or rayl at them.

That God did actually restrain the natural liberty of man before the Law was
delivered, nay before Circumcision was enjoined, is plain from many instances,
particularly from some of those seven precepts delivered by God to the Sons of
Noah, Genesis 9.4.
which in themselves considered, are of an indifferent nature, and could not be
esteemed by the Heathen Proselytes of Antioch to be what the Apostles called
them, necessary things, Acts 15.28
had they not been made necessary to them by a former positive inhibition, or
at least at that time become necessary in respect of the end they aimed at; the
restraining our liberty in things indifferent being sometimes absolutely
necessary, in order to the peace and unity of the Church.

And as God before the Law did restrain man's liberty from several things
indifferent; so when the Law was to be abrogated, our Savior does however by a
positive injunction tie us up to the observance of some indifferent things.
Nay, he was so far from scrupling the use of lawful and innocent Rites, that he
adopted two Jewish Ceremonies into the Christian Doctrine; the one from
Baptizing of Proselytes, and the other from the Postroenium of the Paschal
Lamb; neither of which was enjoined by the Levitical Law, St. Mat. 28.19. St.
Mat. 26.26.
and yet both of them appointed by him as the lasting and perpetual Sacraments
of his Church. By his indispensable enjoining only these two, he did signify
his dislike of that burdensome variety which the Law and the traditions of the
Elders required; but by appointing these two, he did also show that it is not
unlawful under the Gospel to appoint Rites and Ceremonies, so they be for order
and edification. And this our Savior in many other instances did intimate unto
us. By a word from his mouth he might have infused his holy Spirit into the
hearts of his Apostles, but his infinite wisdom rather made choice to join with
it that significant ceremony of breathing on them, thereby signifying, St. John
20.22.
that he did at that instant immediately from himself convey the holy Ghost
unto them. And to come closer to our present purpose; Had our Savior been nice
and scrupulous in such matters of indifferency, the pronouncing his benediction
on the children that were brought unto him had been sufficient; St. Mark 10.16.
he had never taken them up into his arms and laid his hands upon them, using
Ceremonis burdensome to himself, as well as offensive to others.

I need not instance in that famous Council celebrated at Jerusalem by the
Apostles; Acts 15.28.
nor need I recount the Apostles Canons collected by Clemens Romanus, even
those that are accounted genuine; wherein their Christian as well as natural
liberty was restrained, and by which they consulted not the cavils and petulant
humors of Gainsayers, but the peace and safety of the Church. Let it suffice
that holy Scriptures do abundantly testify this to be the constant practice of
the Apostles, when they thought it a good expedient for Peace or Decency: Thus
we find St. Paul to make an order, not only in the Churches of Galatia, but in
Corinth too, 1 Cor. 16.1.
that on the first day of the week collections should be made for the
necessitous Saints at Jerusalem. Now the Corinthians were generally rich, and
(not unlikely) saucy and conceited, as appears from the Epistles of St. Paul,
and those two genuine ones of the aforesaid Clemens; and suppose any of them
had objected against this order, that Christ had freed them from the Law of
ordinances, that Months, and Years, and Days, were not now to be observed, that
this substantial duty of charity might as well be performed on any other day as
well as the first, and therefore their Christian liberty ought not to be
invaded; what think ye would St. Paul have done in this case? would he have
receded from his Apostolical power, and gratified the malepert humors of a few
of those rich, but scrupulous Corinthians? undoubtedly he would not; for an
Order being once made upon mature deliberation by lawful authority, if
rescinded upon no other consideration, but because every man's judgment cannot
approve of, or every ones humor will not comply with it, opens a door for all
Faction and Schism, and quite unhinges the whole frame of Government; St. Paul
surely would have visited such persons with the rod, and not in the spirit of
meekness; and have delivered them up unto Satan, 1 Timothy 1.20. 2 Timothy 4.15.
as he did Hymeneus and Alexander, for withstanding his word.

That common saying in the mouth of every late Dissenter, viz. That God
requires the Heart of man, and not his Hat, St. Paul clearly proves to be a
vulgar error: for he tells us, 1 Cor. 11.4.
That every man praying or prophesying (which belongs to the people as well as
the Priest) having his head covered, dishonors his head; i. e. by such an
irreverent posture, (during the Office either of Praying or Preaching)
dishonors Christ; 1 Cor. 11.3
for Christ is the Head of man.

When the Apostles had Manacles on their hands, Acts 16.25.
and Fetters on their legs, it is likely they consulted their own ease, in
finding out fit postures for offering up their Prayers; but when those
impediments were removed, and the shackles thrown off, they bended their knees
and lifted up their hands in their constant Devotions; this being agreeable to
the pattern our Savior had given them, St. Luke 22.41. Acts 21.5. Ephesians. 3.14.
who in the garden kneeled down and prayed. Thus St. Paul entering into the
Oratory on the seashore, kneeled down and prayed. And for this cause how I my
knees unto the God and Father, etc. And he requires the Christians to lift up
holy hands without wrath or doubting. 1 Timothy 2.8.
So ceremonious were Christ and his Apostles, that they would not sit when they
could kneel; they would not irreverently lean upon their elbows, when they
could lift up holy hands.

Sitting or leaning (if that can be proved to have been the posture) was well
enough becoming the Apostles at the first institution of the Lords Supper;
Christ being then in the flesh, in his state of humiliation, and not requiring
from them then, those outward tokens of Divine Worship or Adoration: But now,
being glorified as God, and challenging obeisance from Men and Angels, Holy
Church for good reason has changed that posture of Leaning for this of
Kneeling: For although we have known Christ after the flesh, and leaning in his
bosom might be the effect of his great condescension, yet seeing we know him so
no more, seeing he has declared himself to be Alpha and Omega, the first and
the last, Rev. 1.8, 11.
God blessed for ever; it is fit we should change that familiar way of
communicating with him; and lest we should be accounted Socinians (who use a
Table Gesture, as not owning the Divinity of our Savior) with all humility
upon our knees revere and adore, not the Consecrated Elements, but the
glorified Person of the Blessed Jesus.

But that we may speak particularly to the instance that is here before us, the
Apostles were not scrupulous to use this ceremony in the Text, although joined
with Prayer; a substantial part of Divine Worship; nay, although it was amongst
the Samaritans, who from a Doctrine that our Savior had taught them, might be
as much prejudiced against such practices, as our lately nice and scrupulous
Dissenters. They might have objected after this manner; Did not your Master, in
whose name ye teach, tell a woman of our City that God is a Spirit, St. John
4.24, 25.
and he that will worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth? and do
you his pretended Disciples come into our City and act contrary to your Masters
Doctrine? either renounce your pretended Discipleship, or lay aside these
childish and Superstitious Ceremonies, which are so inconsistent with the
worshipping of God in Spirit and in Truth. It Is true, the Samaritans might have
objected this, but we find they were wiser than to do so; they well understood
that our Savior in that saying of his, alluded to the Religion to which they
had hitherto been addicted, 2 Kings 17.24, 26, 29.
a Religion of a mixed nature, consisting of Jewish Sacrifices, offered up not
only to the God of Israel, but to Heathen Idols; and therefore she hour would
come when those Jewish Sacrifices would be laid aside, and God would be
worshipped with the spirits of men, and not with the bodies of Bulls and of
Goats; and those Heathen Idols which are vanity or a lie, must be dashed to
pieces, and God who is the eternal truth must be worshipped by them. This they
knew to be our Saviors meaning, and that such innocent ceremonies were no way
inconsistens with that Spiritual worship he required.

So that you see though these were babes in Christ, and as tenderly to be dealt
with as newborn Infants, yet this ceremony joined with Prayer, as the Apostles
would not wave it, so the Samaritans were wiser than to be scandalized at it.

This then being a plain and undeniable truth, that innocent and significant
Ceremonies may lawfully be used in the Church of Christ, Proceed we to the
second thing.

II. To inquire into the nature of this particular Ceremony, what it is
significative of, etc.

I need not tell you that the hand is the member or instrument by which we
bestow our largesses, or convey our gifts and kindnesses to others; nor that
even Nature carries the Fathers hand toward the Child's head, although at that
instant he knows not how or why he does it, when he outwardly prays for, or
inwardly wishes him a blessing.

The Eastern Heathens were not strangers to this custom; Naaman the Syrian
being offended at the Prophet for directing him to so unlikely a cure, as
washing seven times in the River Jordan, 2 Kings 5.9.
huffingly replied, I thought he would surely come out to me and stand and call
on the Name of the Lord his God, and strike or lay his hands over the place,
and recover the leper.

And that this Ceremony long before the giving of the Law was usually joined
with paternal benedictions, is plain from the Father of the Patriarchs, Genesis
48.14.
who by prayer and imposition of hands blessed the Sons of Joseph.

Under the Law the consecration of things or persons to the service of God,
Number. 8.10.12.
was by Divine appointment to be performed by laying on of hands. So when Moses
made Joshua partner with him in his Government, and conveyed to him the right
of succession, Number. 27.18.
by Gods commandment he laid his hands upon him; by which he did not only
impart the honor, but the more necessary qualifications of Majesty; for by
this he became full of the spirit of wisdom, Moses having laid his hands upon
him, Deuteronomy. 34.9.

And as Blessings spiritual and temporal were conveyed by imposition of hands
under the Law; so our Savior and his Apostles under the Gospel thought good to
retain that Ceremony, when they recovered the Sick, when they absolved the
Penitents, when they blessed Infants, when they Confirmed the Baptized, and
when they ordained Priests and Deacons. To instance in each of these, would
require more time than is here allotted; its own evidence makes it sufficient
that I hint unto you, that in all these several Offices, together with the
substantial duty of Prayer, they made use of this very ancient Ceremony; and
that probably for these two Reasons.

1. To lignifie that at that time there were true and real (not airy or
imaginary) Blessings conveyed to the partakers; for what can be more real than
the Spirit of Wisdom and godly Fear? what can be more real than Courage and
Magnaniimty sufficient to conquer the World, and baffle the strongest Enemies
of mankind, as I shall have occasion presently to show? and what could better
signify the real exhibition of these, than laying their Hands on them?

2. To signify that the Bishops and Pastors of the Church were the ordinary
Means and Instruments, the Hands which God makes use of to convey his Gifts and
communicate his Blessings unto men. Such public and solemn Offices as these,
wherein extraordinary Blessings were invocated, as they were not rudely and
nakedly to be administered without the decent attendance of some significant
Ceremonies, so neither were they to be performed nor the Blessings to be
expected, without the ministration of consecrated persons. It Is their Office to
attend us from our Birth to our Grave; by their hands we are regenerated in the
laver of Baptism; by their hands we are abundantly strengthened against all
spiritual Enemies in Confirmation; from their hands we receive the holy
Eucharist, the benefits of our Saviors Death, and the I ledge of his eternal
Love; from their hands, if we fall under the censures of the Church, we receive
Absolution; and from the laying on of their hands, together with the holy
Chrism (a custom far different from what is now used in the Church of Rome) the
Primitive Christians were freed from their several bodily Distempers; or at
least from their hands they then received the symbol of Christ's Body and Blood,
as the last and eternal Viaticum of their Souls. I should be infinite in
recounting unto you all the Blessings which God by these his Servants was and
is pleased to communicate unto men, and that under this holy and significant
Rite of Imposition of Hands.

Here then, in this solemn Office of Confirmation, great and unspeakable
Blessings being to be conveyed, and those by his superior Servants the
principal Stewards of his Household, what fitter and more significant Rite could
possibly be devised, whereby to secure a Blessing to the one, and Honor to the
other, than that which the Light of Nature has affixt to Paternal
Benedictions, than what the holy Patriarchs before the Law did practice, than
what under the Law in several the like cases was enjoined, than what our
Savior did frequently use, and to conclude, than what humane Reason could not
possibly invent any thing more plain and significant?

But, will some say, Was this all that the Apostles used, and did the Blessings
of God follow the Imposition of Hands only? No surely, there was something
else belonged to this great Office, and that of a higher and more valuable
nature in it self, than what is here mentioned. We are told, verse. 15. that the
Apostles, when they were come to Samaria, prayed for them that they might
receive the Holy Ghost. Prayer is an essential part of the Divine Worship, but
Imposition of Hands is only a decent and significant Ceremony proper and
adapted to the present occasion. Their servent and devout Prayers were the holy
charms that invited the Spirit of God to descend from Heaven, but Imposition of
Hands must be acknowledged only as a decent Rite, made use of mainly to
signify that this Spirit would ordinarily come to none but by the mediation
and ministry of those whom he had appointed.

It Is very evident that Prayer was the main Duty; and Imposition of Hands the
principal Ceremony; and this is All that we find here recorded concerning the
nature of this holy Office: Where then shall we find the holy Chrisin
consecrated by the Bishop, which the Church of Rome calls the Matter? where
stands recorded that jingling Sentence, Signo te signo crucis, and confirmo te
Chrismate solutis, in nomine Patris, etc. which they say is the Form of their
pretended Sacrament? If you will find them, you must search Pope Eugenius's
Decretals to the Armenians, with the approbation of the Council of Florence; or
if that will not satisfy, you may consult the Council of Trent, and the Roman
Catechism, which give a large and more plenary account of it: but let me advize
you not to search the Scriptures for it, for there you shall not find the least
tittle concerning it.

And yet it is somewhat strange the Scriptures should be silent in a business of
such importance; to record nothing but Prayer and Imposition of Hands, and to
pass by the Matter and Form, the two essential parts of a Sacrament, seems to
be an unpardonable omission in those holy Penmen. But you will find the
mistake was not theirs; this Sacrilege or holy Cheat must be imputed to the
Church of Rome, who ingenuously acknowledges that, Loco illius manus
impositionis, datur in Ecclesia confirmatio; i. e. if we may be so bold as to
render it into its true English, Prayer and Imposition of Hands is justled out,
and the holy Cross, with sanctified Balsam, and a kind of Charm at the end of
it, is got into the Chair, and commenced a Sacrament. Had the Romanists
retained Prayer and Imposition of Hands, not advancing it to the honor of a
Sacrament, but honoring it as a Sacramental completion (which is as much as it
will amount to) and added the Cross and Oil only as decent and significant
Ceremonies to attend upon it, they had kept themselves within the bounds of
modesty: for the truth is, Chrism was of very ancient use even in this holy
Office, together with the honorable badge of our Savior's Cross, as
Tertullian, who lived in the latter end of the second Century, testifies in his
Tractate De resurrectione carnis. Caro abluitur, ut anima emaculetur: Caro
ungitur, ut anima consecretur: Caro signatur, ut and anima muniatur: Caro manus
impositione adumbratur, ut and anima spiritis illuminetur: Caro corpore and
sanguine Christi vescitur, ut and anima de Deo saginetur. Where you see,
betwixt the two Sacraments he gives us an account of Confirmation, and the
three Ceremonies that did then attend upon it, viz. The sign of the Cross,
Unction, and Imposition of Hands. And St. Cyprian about the middle of the third
Century mentions the sign of the Cross in this holy Office, in his Epistle to
Jubaianus; Vt per nostram orationem ac manus impositionem spiritum sanctum
consequantur, and signaculo Dominico consummentur. So that it must be confessed
that these Ceremonies were of ancient use in the Church; and had they been
retained only as such, the more sober sort of Christians it is likely would not
have been offen^^^: But for the Church of Rome to lay aside the Apostolical
institution, and to advance these extrinsick Ceremonies to the same honor with
the holy Eucharist, is a far greater crime than she committed in the Council of
Constance, where she only denies the Cup to the Laity, as resolving to keep
them sober; but retains the use of both kinds to her proper Representatives,
their Priests standing on tiptoe rather than leave the least drop behind them.

Here then you may plainly see the ignorance of some, and the impudence of
others, who are Adversaries to our Church. The ignorance (I will not say the
malice) of our late Dissenters, who alleged that this Office of Confirmation,
as it is used in our Church, is a superstitious practice, and no better than a
Transcript of the Popes Decretals; whereas if they are compared together, they
are as opposite as light and darkness; their old Master Cartwright, who first
broacht this Scandal, openly retracting it upon better information. Here you
may likewise behold the forehead of those who pretend to pay a great reverence
to Antiquity, who yet curtail one of the Sacraments with a Non obstante, and to
make amends for it, add five more as of equal dignity. 'Twould be matter of
wonder that these things should gain so great a repute even amongst the vulgar,
were it not that we see intelligent Kings and Princes to be every day imposed
upon with the supposed holiness of Toys and Trifles; for surely this newcoin'd
Sacrament must be presumed to do as much good to the partakers of it (if there
be no real Obstacle to hinder its efficacy) as the Consecrated Clouts (and
Rattles) lately sent from Rome to the Infant-Duke of Burgundy.

But to wave the levity of their Pretenses, more fit for a Stage than a Pulpit,
We of the Church of England retaining the Primitive Institution and practice,
may comfortably expect a Blessing upon this holy Office; here being no
traditions of men imposed upon us as the Commandments of Christ, no Prayers
offered up upon this occasion but what the Church upon mature deliberation has
composed; no Ceremonies, as essential to the Office being here used, but what
the Apostles practiced; and all this as heretofore administered by the Apostles,
so now by the Bishops their lawful Successors. And this brings me to the third,
viz.

III. The peculiar Order of persons to whom the ministration of this holy
Office is restrained. We find by the Context, that although St. Philip
converted them to Christianity, and discipled them by the Sacrament of Baptism,
yet this holy Office was performed by St. Peter and St. John, v. 14. Now when
the Apostles which were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the Word
of God, they sent Peter and John. How! what is this that we hear? Was Peter
sent? were the Subjects so saucy and presumptuous as to send their Prince on
their Errand? Is not this He from whom his present Holiness derives his
Supremacy over all Dominions spiritual and temporal? Did not St. Peter
understand his power, or was he so weak as sneakingly to betray the Prerogative
of his Chair? Or if he did for that time suffer himself, like the titular Duke
of Venice, to be concluded in the general Vote, yet could not his Infallibility
guide him in executing the Commission? Must he have a Colleague appointed him to
seture his Superiouts that all things shall be rightly performed? Behold then
the sandy Foundation upon which the Romanists erect a supreme and infallible
Chair to his Holiness. O the miserable shifts that they make to avoid the force
of this unhappy instance! And yet amongst them all, that which is the most
plausible brings him to an equality with the rest of the Christian Bishops; for
A Lapide tells us, that as the Father sent the Son, In Loc.
and the Father and Son together sent the Holy Ghost, and yet all three equal
in Glory and Authority; so St. Peter may be said to be sent by the rest of the
Apostles, non imperio, as he quotes Cajetan for it, sed fraterua charitate and
impulsione.

Well, be it so, nay we may go far higher, and grant him to be what they say
the sixth general Council owned him, Conc. Constantin. 3.
viz. Primus Episcoporum, upon condition they will grant on the other side what
the same Council plainly determines, viz. Vt thronus Constantinopolitanus
aequalia privilegia cum antiquae Romae throno obtineat. Let him have the honor
of precedence, let him upon all occasions be the Mouth of his Colleagues, let
him open and conclude general Councils, let him be what they pretend St.
Cyprian owns, viz. the Origo, the Principium, the Exordium unitatis, provided
they will grant him to be what the same holy Father says St. Peter was, in his
golden Tractate De Vnitato Ecclesiae, where after he has told us that Christ
has given Apostolis omnibus parem potestatem, he presently tells us, Hoe erant
utique and caeteri Apostoli quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti and
bonoris and potestatis; which Rigaltias miserably endeavors to evade, by
granting an equality of Apostleship as to their persons, but denying it to
their Successors; an Hypothesis altogether as absurd and groundless, as their
pretended Donation from Constantine the Great. But though we may be so civil as
to grant him to be major singulis, yet his being sent by the rest of the
Apostles, clearly evinces him to be Minor Vniversis; which though it be a great
Soloecism in the Civil, yet is not so in the Ecclesiastical Politics. St.
Peter you see was concluded by the general suffrage, and so his Successors
ought to be, as the Councils of Constance and Basil have strenuously asserted.

Sent it seems these Apostles were, but what was the purport of their
Commission? It was this, that by their Prayer and Imposition of Hands the Holy
Ghost might descend upon the baptized Samaritans.

But what was the reason that St. Philip, a Minister of Gods Word, did not
perform this Duty? He was their Father in Christ, and had begotten them to a
lively Faith; he had renewed their Spirits in the Laver of Baptism, and
instructed them in the necessary Rudiments of Christianity; it is much that he
did not solemnize this Office amongst them: Besides, Regeneration is of a
higher nature than Confirmation, and he that gave the greater, why did he not
give the less?

The reason is plain and evident, Because St. Philip was a person modest and
faithful, and would not presume to act beyond his Commission; he knew that the
Apostles had reserved this holy Office to their own ministration; and for him
to attempt it, would have been a sin equal to that of the Sons of Korah, who
invaded the Priesthood of Aaron.

But the Church of Rome says that his Holiness by the plenitude of his
Apostolical Authority may make an inferior Priest the Minister of this
Sacrament. If so, it is much that St. Peter would give himself such an
unnecessary trouble, that he would not take his ease at Jerusalem, and appoint
St. Philip his lawful Substitute, giving him a Legantine power, as they say
Deacons are capable of: Why, it seems St. Philip was more modest than to ask
it; or if he had, St. Peter was more prudent than to grant it. Some things the
Apostles did absolutely reserve to themselves and their Successors, which we
the inferior Officers of the Church may not, must not pretend to; and amongst
them, this of Confirmation was one; and this St. Cyprian fully testifies in his
forecited Epistle to Jubaianus, speaking of these Samaritans, Quod deerat, says
he, id a Petro and Johanne factum est, ut oratione pro eis habita, and manu
imposita invoedretur, and infunderetur spiritus sanctus. And that this was
reserved to the Bishops the Sons of the Apostles in his age, himself being a
Metrapolitan Bishop, can best inform us: Quod nunc quoque apud nos geritur, ut
qui in Ecclesia baptizantur, Praepositis Ecclesiae offerantur, ut per nostram
orationem ac manus impositionem spiritum sanctum consequantur, etc. And this
the incomparable Hooker out of St. Jerome. adversus Luciser, proves to have been
the practice of the fourth Century; who though no great friend to the Episcopal
Order, yet tells us, that the custom of the Churches is, Non abnuo hanc esse
Ecclesiarum consuetudinem, etc. Dial. Orth. and Lucis.
that the Bishop should go abroad, and imposing his hands, pray for the gift of
the Holy Ghost on them whom Presbyters and Deacons, far off in lesser Cities,
had already baptized.

And for good reason did the Apostles restrain this to themselves and their
Successors, when we consider these following things:

1. That this did secure unto them the honor of their Apostolical Chairs; for
the safety of the Church depends much upon the dignity of its Superiors, the
respect that is given to their persons, the reverence that is paid to their
functions. Whereas if the chief Governors of the Church shall communicate to
inferior Orders their whole power, reserving nothing by way of pre-eminence to
themselves to distinguish them from others; their power being thus made cheap,
will become vile and despicable; the Hierarchy that Christ has established in
his Church will soon be destroyed, their Offices confounded, and that question
of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 12.29. Are all Apostles, are all Prophets, are all
teachers? would be answered in the affirmative: and to be short, such a
levelling of all Sacred Orders, would be the undoubted parent of multiplied
Factions and Schisms. And though it may be objected that Confirmation is not of
equal value with either of the Sacraments, both which inferior Priests are
capable of administering; yet it is by its restraint alone, sufficient to secure
the honor of the Function: for though a Velvet coat be of far greater worth
than a plain linen coif, Hook. Ec. Pol. lib. 5. p. 355.
and the first may be worn by every common Lawyer, yet the second being
appropriated to Sergeants and Judges, procures them a respect due to their
place and dignity.

2. From hence the Apostles to whom the chief care of the Church was committed,
were fully satisfied as to the diligence and industry of the inferior Officers
whom they had deputed. When they should see 'em bring in full shoals and
multitudes of Baptized Converts, offering up solemnly to God such fruits of
their labors, and presenting them to the Apostles for their Fatherly Prayers
and Benedictions, this could not but be a sufficient testimonial of their pains
and faithfulness; and by this the Apostles visited the Clergy, exacting an
account of their labors, as well as confirmed the Laity. And indeed no Society
can be of long continuance, where there is not such a due subordination; an
Independency in the Church looses the bands, and weakens the sinews of
Government. That Congregation wherein every Priest is a Bishop, and every
Bishop a King, cannot be long without Tyranny: and that Assembly whose Members
are superior to the Pastor, and uncontrolable, cannot be long without Schism
and Anarchy. But blessed be God, it was far otherwise in the Apostles times,
and once again we see it otherwise in this our established Church; where the
members of it in matters of Religion and Conscience are to be directed by their
several Pastors; the Presbyters and Deacons owning themselves accountable for
it to the Bishop, the Bishop to his Metropolitan, the Metropolitans to the
King, and the King unto God. And when all these in their several spheres shall
do nothing that they are afraid or ashamed should come to their Superiors
cognizance, but rather be forward to give an account of their stewardships when
required; this is the way to preserve the Church in its honor and unity: We of
the inferior Clergy giving demonstrations of our pains and industry, and our
Superiors the Prelates and Fathers of the Church, reaping the comfort of
seeing their Orders obeyed by a regular and industrious Clergy.

3. What a great comfort and satisfaction must needs arise to the Apostles,
when they saw by the industry of others whom they had deputed, so great a part
of their own burden discharged, the seed of the Gospel growing up and
flourishing in such tender plants; the great mysteries of Religion imbibed by
all sorts of people, young and old, and particularly so great a number of
Samaritan-converts, owning them not only as Ministers of Christ, but as the
principal Stewards of the Mysteries of God! What an opportunity was here
offered them of glorifying of God, whose praise they found in the mouths of
such Infant-Converts The unspeakable comfort which they foresaw would arise
from so grateful an object; might probably induce them to reserve this Office
of Confirmation to themselves and their Successors; which though of an
inferior nature to Baptism, yet well becomes the highest Order in the Church;
for hereby they do not only own and ratify the proceedings of those whom they
have deputed, setting their hands to the legality of it, which you know is the
proper act of a Superior; but they also confirm the Proselytes in their lately
received Faith, provided themselves set no bar to hinder it. And this brings me
to the fourth thing, viz.

IV. The qualifications of those to whom this Office is to be administered,
which are these that follow.

1. It must be supposed that they are already made Disciples by Baptism, and
that by persons lawfully ordained and appointed thereunto by the Apostles or
their Successors, as we find the Samaritans here were by St. Philip the Deacon;
and therefore (according to my present apprehension) those who have received
their Baptism from Lay-hands, who cannot pretend to such a derived power, are
not qualified for this holy Rite, unless performed in a time of absolute
Necessity: And as for those who have received their Baptism from persons
lawfully ordained, but such as by Schism or Heresy are professed enemies to
our Church; I will not say that Rebaptization is necessary, lest I should seem
to fall into the error of St. Cyprian and his Carthaginian Council; but that
it is highly necessary for such to address themselves to this holy mystery,
that by imposition of hands they may be incorporated into the Church; and
desiring the Bishops paternal benediction, acknowledge his superiority over
them. That this is highly reasonable in it self, and agreeable to the practice
of the Primitive Church, I need not prove to any one that has a competent share
of Reason, or the least acquaintance with Antiquity.

2. It must be presumed that either before or after Baptism they are endowed
with actual Faith in Christ: before Baptism, if they were adult persons; or
after Baptism, if they were Infants at the ministering of it. A general faith
before Baptism was sufficient at the first planting of the Gospel; the belief
that Jesus Christ was the Son of God was enough to entitle them to Baptism: but
when Churches were well constituted, great care was taken to instruct the adult
Proselytes in all the Christian Fundamentals; such were the Catechumens of old;
and both them and the Baptized Christians were fully instructed in all
necessaries of Faith, before they were presented to the Bishop for
Confirmation; as appears from the forecited Dialogue of St. Jerome, Dial.
Orthod. and Lucifer.
and from the exposition Irenaeus gives of the 1 Cor. 3.2. where he interprets
the Milk with which he had fed some of the Baptized Corinthians, to be the
first principles of Christianity; Iren. lib. 5. cap. 75.
and the holy spirit obtained by prayer and imposition of hands, to be the Esca
vitae, the stronger food or meat of life; of which as yet they were incapable,
Quoniam infirmum adhuc and inexercitabilem sensum erga Deum conversationis
habebant.

3. It must be presumed that they do not only competently understand the
Fundamentals of Faith, the rule of their Manners, and the nature of their
Baptismal vow, with all other things of absolute necessity, but that they here
make an open profession of them, publicly owning their Faith to be Catholic,
and their renunciation of all Spiritual Enemies sincere, their Vows and
Resolutions fixed and permanent; solemnly renewing that promise that was made in
their name at their Baptism, Rubric of Confirmation.
ratifying and confirming the same in their own persons, discharging their
Sponsors, their Godfathers and Godmothers, from their former obligations, and
acknowledging themselves bound to believe and to do all those things which they
undertook for them. And all this is supposed to be done in the presence of God
and his holy Angels; the Bishop being here as our Saviors Representative, Ep.
ad Saym (...). Ep. ad Teall. (...).
(for so Ignatius often styles him) and taking from each of them their several
fealties and acknowledgments. So that if they shall prove Rebels or Apostates
after such solemn Dedications of themselves unto God, after so deliberate a
choice of their Religion, and renewing their Baptismal Covenant; the Font in
which they were once regenerated will call them perjured, the very Rayles at
which they are to kneel, will bring in evidence against them, and their own
Consciences without the necessity of another Judge will at last condemn them.
But if to all the presupposed qualifications they shall add a good assurance,
and humbly address themselves to the chief Pastors of the Church, that by their
Prayers and impositions of hands, they may be confirmed in their Faith,
directed in their Manners, and enabled to perform such worthy resolutions, they
need not question but according to their faith so it shall be unto them. And
this brings me to the second General of the Text, viz.

The wonderful Effects or Consequents of this duty. 2 Genesis
And they received the holy Ghost.

But before I treat of this, I think it not altogether unseasonable to obviate
an Objection, viz.

What need is there of all this ado? Does not the Church of England teach that
we receive the holy Ghost at our Baptism, that we are then made members of
Christ, Children of God, and inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven? It Is true, we
were at that time partakers of the holy Ghost, and entitled to all those
privileges; but the gifts of the Spirit at that time imparted, were suitable
to the state and capacity wherein we then stood; remission of sins, and the
promise of the further graces of Gods Spirit; an actual incorporation into
Christ's Church, and a title to the Kingdom of Heaven, was as much as at that
time was necessary, especially to Baptized Infants. The Samaritans here in the
Text had undoubtedly the holy Ghost communicated unto them, and yet though they
were adult persons, it was thought necessary for them to receive from the
Apostles Imposition of hands, and by that a more abundant measure of the holy
Ghost. Their former sins, whether original or actual, were then remitted, and
an assurance given them if they died in that state, that eternal happiness
should be their portion; but here strength is given them against future
temptations, and their former title upon perseverance fully ratifyed and
confirmed. And this is agreeable to what Melciades an excellent Bishop (though
of Rome) in the beginning of the fourth Century has taught us, Ep. decret. ad
Ep. Hisp
who in his Decretal Epistle to the Bishops of Spain, (the former part whereof
does indeed savor of arrogance, and being no way suitable to the modesty of
that Age, may be supposed spurious; but the latter part of it being agreeable
to Primitive Doctrine, may be owned as genuine, and that) tells us; Spiritus
sanctus qui super aquas baptismi salutifero descendit illapsu, in font
plenitudinem tribuit ad innocentiam, in confirmatione augmentum praestat ad
gratiam; and quia in hoc mundo tota atate victuris inter invisibiles hosts and
pericula gradiendum est, in baptisinate regeneramur ad vitam, post baptismum
confirmamur ad pugnam. For, says he, As he that is by his General admitted a
Soldier, is not only signed with a Military mark or badge, but is furnished
with all necessary armor, so this benediction is an arming of the Baptized.
Dedisti militem, says he, da ei adjumenta militiae. To what purpose, says that
good Bishop, does a Father bequeath a great estate to his Son, nisi providere
studeat and Tutorem, unless he likewise provides a Tutor or Guardian for him?

I will not say, with some, that at this time a Guardian-Angel is allotted to
each person here confirmed; I heartily wish it were so, but I have no
convincing reason to conclude it: for should we positively assert what ever we
think expedient, we should soon erect an infallible Person or Society to secure
our selves from all material errors. However, this I may safely assert, with
that holy Bishop and Martyr afore-cited, Paracletus regeneratis in Christo
Custos and Consolator and Tutor est, The Holy Spirit is appointed to such
persons a Keeper, a Comforter, and a Guardian.

Let us then, in pursuance of the second General, inquire into the great and
stupendous effects of this holy Office.

I. And what they were upon the first ministration of it particularly here in
the Text. Some are of opinion that the holy Ghost upon the Apostles Prayers and
laying on of hands, did visibly descend upon the confirmed Christians, as he
did on our Savior after his Baptism, and upon the Apostles on the day of
Pentecost: others think it sufficient, that upon the Apostles ministration of
this Office, the gifts of the holy Spirit were conveyed unto them. Thus St.
Stephen was said to be full of the holy Ghost.

The gifts that were conveyed were of two sorts; ordinary, and extraordinary.
The extraordinary were such as the infancy of the Church did then necessarily
require, such were working of Miracles, speaking strange Languages, prophesying
of future events, and the like; which gifts as many of the present Samaritans
were endowed with, as the Apostles thought good to set apart and consecrate to
the holy Ministry. These were the gratiae gratis datae, which at that time
qualified them for the better discharge of their duty; very proper to create
Faith in the hearts of men, and to gain the Gospel a ready entertainment.

Some that would vilify this holy Office as it is now administered, pretend
that none but such extraordinary gifts were at this time conferred, and that
for the constituting of a Church, and enabling them to propagate the Faith. But
how weak and frivolous this assertion is, appears from the number of these
confirmed Samaritans, who in all probability were all that believed and were
baptized, and those, v. 6. were the people with one accord; from the least to
the greatest, v. 10. both men and women, v. 12. Now is it likely that a whole
City, which according to its name, was not only for stateliness of Palaces,
but multitude of inhabitants august and venerable, should be destined and set
apart by the Apostles to the holy Ministry? What kind of Church were they
likely to found at Samaria, where like a Dover-court all should be speakers and
no hearers, especially where so many women were permitted to tattle? what a
uniform body was this likely to be, which should be made up of Eyes, and
Tongues, and Hands, and no other Members to secure it from being monstrous?
whereas St. Paul tells us, The body is not one member, but many; and the
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. The holy
ointment that was poured on Aarons head, ran down his beard, even to the skirts
of his clothing; and these great effusions of the Spirit were extended, though
not in the same, yet in a sufficient measure, to the meanest of Christ's
members. In Acts 2.41. we read of three thousand souls converted in one day;
and in Chap. 4.31. we find that the place was shaken where they were assembled
together, and they were all filled with the holy Ghost. Here was an
extraordinary confirmation, and yet no extraordinary gists (as we read of)
bestowed: all that is recorded of the effects of this holy Spirits descent is
this, that they spoke the word of God with boldness; that they were endowed
with a true Christian courage and magnanimity to profess the Gospel,
nowithstanding the greatest discouragements they met with. It Is not unlikely
but that in answer to their Prayers, v. 30. God stretched forth his hand to
heal, and signs and wonders were done by the Name of his holy child Jesus: but
that any such new gifts were then bestowed, we have no ground from Scripture to
affirm; and that so many thousands should be miraculously empowered to preach
the Gospel in our modern sense, we have no reason to believe.

Besides those extraordinary Gifts bestowed upon particular persons for special
ends and purposes, there were the ordinary and internal Gifts of the Holy
Spirit, the Gratiae gratos facientes, that were common unto them all, and did
render them acceptable unto God. Such were the inlightning of their minds, the
inflaming of their affections, the endowing them with meekness and patience,
with courage and comfort; the inward assistances of this Spirit, by which their
Faith was strengthened, their Hope confirmed, their Charity enlarged, and all
their good desires became virtuous habits, and all their holy resolutions armed
with strength for their performance.

The former sort of Gifts were of a temporary nature, to continue no longer
than the infancy of the Church then required; they were signa tempori
opportuna, adapted to its present necessities; but the second sort of Gifts are
proper to all Ages, and therefore to continue till the dissolution of the
World; according to that of St. Chrysostom. in his 13th Hom. on St. Mat. thus
englished by a Reverend and Learned Prelate of our Church: Bish. Sparrow's
Ration. p. 311
In the beginning of spiritual and mavelous Dispensations, outward signs
appeared to confirm the new-preached Faith; but now that the Faith is
sufficiently confirmed, although such Miracles be not wrought, yet we receive
those inward Graces and Virtues which were signified and demonstrated by those
signs.

Now those Signs were the Gifts by which Simon Magus was at first detected at
Samaria, and at last baffled at Rome; by these the Wise men and the Scribes
were silenced, the Athenian Philosophers confounded, and the honest-hearted
both Jews and Heathens converted. This was the demonstration of Spirit and of
Power, which the Apostles and their immediate Successors did exercise; and yet
they did not make the comers thereunto perfect. They were Gifts highly
admirable and stupendous in themselves, and as desirable for their effects;
and yet, as desirable as they were, I can show you, out of St. Paul, a more
excellent way, and that is the second thing proposed, viz.

II. That the consequents of it now upon its present administration by
Episcopal, are altogether as valuable as those were that heretofore proceeded
from Apostolical hands. The speaking strange Languages was a gift highly
advantageous to the Church in general, but did not sanctify the heart, or
create any inward Grace in him that had it: Though I speak with the tongues of
men and angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding Brass, or as a
tinkling Cymbal. The working of Miracles was proper to produce Reverence in the
Beholders, and to command their assent to what should be delivered; but though
I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have no charity, 1 Con.
13.1, 2.
says St. Paul, I am nothing. Charity is the Bond of Perfectness, the height
and eminency of all Christian Virtues; it is that which actuates and invigorates
all other Graces, without which Faith would be dead, and Hope would be
presumptuous. This entirely unites us unto God, and makes us love our Neighbor
as our selves. This fixes our resolutions, and arms us against all manner of
Temptations. This keeps us low and Infantlike under the most prosperous
successes, and buoys up our souls from under the hardest pressures. This makes
us humble and condescending to our Inferiors, courteous and affable to our
Equals, lowly and submissive (notwithstanding the greatest disappointments we
meet with) to our Superiors. Finally to conclude, this is the Holy Ghost in
the Text, I mean the complement and perfection of all his Graces that the
persons now to be confirmed are to be filled with.

The promise of the Holy Ghost, Acts 2.39.
as St. Peter told the Jews, was unto them and to their children, and to all
that are afar off, afar off not only in distance of place, but in distance of
time and relation; and this promise, though not of miraculous Gifts, yet of
what infinitely outweighs them, the internal sanctifying Graces of his Spirit,
the fruits whereof are Love, Joy, Gal. 5.22.
Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance: that
very Promise will on this day be performed, and these Graces will now be
communicated, if they themselves do not put a bar, and hinder the efficacy of
this holy Office. And that you may be confirmed in the belief of this great
truth, let me request you to consider well the third thing proposed, viz.

III. That the seeming disproportion betwixt the outward means and the inward
effects, ought not to prejudice any considerative person against the power and
efficacy of this Office.

Will some say, How is it possible that upon so slight an action as laying on
of hands, and the Bishops Prayers, so much strength against all Temptations, so
much ability to perform all acceptable Duties, should be conveyed unto us? It Is
true, the meanness and simplicity of the Ceremony is apt to scandalize him who
understands not the invincible power of God, which oftentimes effects great and
stupendous Works by light and improbable means; here is nothing (as in the
Church of Rome) of pomp and solemnity to attract your eyes and raise your
admiration, nothing but what the holy Apostles did practice, and that in a very
plain yet comely dress.

My Father, said the Servant of Naaman, if the Prophet had bid thee do some
great thing, would thou not have done it? how much rather when he says unto
thee, Wash and be clean?

Dispute not then the possibility or manner of its conveyance, but since thou
have as much need of the Holy Spirit in thy capacity as the primitive
Christians had in theirs, fully persuade thy self that he will not be wanting
to thy devout desires, but as readily assist thee as he did them; and will no
more scorn to be invited down now, than heretofore he has been by Prayer and
Imposition of Hands: For if this Objection be of any force, we may upon equal
grounds be scandalized at the two great Sacraments; the visible signs whereof
are altogether as mean, and in themselves improbable. Nihil adeo est, says
Tertullian, quod tam obduret mentes hominum, De Baptis.
quam simplicitas divinorum operum quae in actu videtur, and magnificentia quae
in effectu repromittitur.

Others may again object, that if Miracles did now as heretofore attend this
Office, they should then have reason to believe that great and valuable are the
inward effects of it; but since those are ceased, they see not why this Office
should not cease with them.

But in answer to this, we must know that Miracles were not of the essence of
this holy Office; for if they had, they would have been essential to other
Offices which they did sometimes attend upon. The Holy Ghost we find in a
visible manner descended upon our Savior at his baptism; S. Mat. 3.16
and yet the Holy Ghosts visible descent never was looked upon as essential to
that Sacrament. When St. Peter preached the Gospel to Cornelius and his
Companions, we are told that while Peter yet spoke those words, Acts 10.44, 46.
the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the Word; for they heard them
speak with tongues, and magnify God; and yet the Gift of Languages never was
imagined to be of the essence of Preaching. So that we may with equal reason be
scandalized at those two great Offices, and pretend that the internal Gifts of
Gods Spirit do not follow the performance of those Duties, because the external
ones are wholly ceased.

Neither ought this to scandalize any, That they do not meet with sensible
alterations, violent motions, strong convulsions and tremblings: for though
sometimes the Spirit upon strong convictions may produce such effects, yet here
where a due preparation is supposed, and not a dispossessing of Satan, but
strength against him is wrought, such a violent commotion of the Spirits cannot
be expected. But the Holy Ghost comes here in a soft voice, works gently and
mildly upon the rational and intellectual parts of man, and by degrees moulds
and fashions him into the perfect stature of the Sons of God. As we are not
sensible of our natural growth, how every day new accessions are made to the
several parts of our body, and yet that we do grow, our senses do sufficiently
evince: so neither can it reasonably be expected that we should understand the
mode of the divine operations, and the way how such vital strength and
nourishment is conveyed to our Souls; although after a competent progress in
the ways of Virtue, we may safely conclude that we are grown in Grace; The
Spirit of God bearing witness with our spirit, that we are the Sons of God.

IV. Behold then the excellency, the usefulness, the necessity of this great
Office, an Office whose antiquity bears date with the holy Scriptures; whose
lawfulness the great Examples of our Savior and his Apostles (not to say any
thing of the constant and uninterrupted usage of it in the Church for many
Ages) do vindicate; an Office whose expedience and necessity of continuance,
the great ends and purposes for which it was instituted, viz. the conveying the
manifold Gifts of Gods Spirit, do sufficiently evince; an Office always
accounted so sacred, that our late Usurping Presbyters never durst pretend to
the actual exercise of it; an Office from which baptized persons may expect
such great and admirable advantages as far surpass whatever the Gift of Tongues
could express, or Miracles declare; an Office whose good influences nothing can
hinder, but the bars and obstructions that our selves do set: finally, an
Office which in no part of it lies open to any solid Objections even from the
worst of Adversaries.

To conclude then this our long and (as I am afraid) tiresom Discourse, let all
be persuaded in their several Spheres to promote the honor of this excellent
Work. Old men and maidens, young men and children, of what state or quality
soever, let 'em be ready to entertain this blessed Spirit, who is now (as it
were) hovering over your heads, and willing to come down into all prepared
hearts.

And you that intend this day to be partakers of this great Mystery, that
desire this holy Comforter to descend from Heaven and take possession of your
hearts; you that earnestly long for the refreshing and strengthening Graces of
Gods Spirit; you who are now to engage with Principalities and Powers, with the
deceitful World and your own Lusts, and come hither to be enabled to fight that
good fight, and to come off Conquerours: Let me request you deeply to imprint
upon your thoughts, not only the excellency of this Duty, with the gracious
effects thereof; but especially that solemn profession that you are here to
make, the Covenant with God and his Church that you are about to renew, the
strict Obligations that lie upon you from thence of being pious and devout,
just and charitable, meek and temperate.

For if you come prepared with such generous Christian resolutions as these,
you need not question but the Graces of Gods Spirit will by the mediation of
this his principal Steward, be conveyed unto you; for which you have the same
warrant, as the judicious Hooker observes, which the Patriarchs, Hook. Eccles.
Pol. lib. 5.
Prophets, Priests, Apostles, Fathers, and men of God in all Ages have had for
such their particular Invocations and Benedictions.

Address your selves then to the holy Altar with decency, receive the Blessing
with Faith and Humility, turn not the Grace you are this day to receive into
wantonness; but treasure it up in an honest heart, and let the fruits thereof
be discernable in your lives: then will you secure to your selves that
sevenfold Gift of the Spirit which the Bishop with the Congregation will
presently pray for; The Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of
Counsel and Ghostly strength, the the Spirit of Knowledge and true Godliness,
and the Spirit of his boly Fear.

And for us of the Clergy, as we have reason to glory in the number of our
Catechumens, and to magnify the God of Heaven for this joyful fruit of our
labors: So let us be persuaded to continue this good Work that is so happily
begun, and by catechizing and wholesome instructions, prepare the younger sort
successively for the like Blessings. This will engage his Lordship to continue
his intended kindness, in coming as it were to our doors, though to his great
charge, to administer this Office; and we shall all reap this comfort by it,
that the Children that are yet unborn will stand up and call us blessed.

And that this holy Office may have its desired effect, that when the Bishop
lays his hands upon them, they may be filled with the Holy Ghost, Let us All
here assembled, at the pronouncing of each Benediction, unanimously say, AMEN.

FINIS.

