A short Relation of some words and expressions that were spoken by Barbara
Scaife in time of her Sickness, a little before she departed this life: She was
betwixt fifteen and sixteen years of age, Daughter to William and Issabel
Scaife of the Blacksike near Appleby, in the County of Westmerland: In
profession of the Principles of Light and Life in Christ Jesus. Which those
People commonly called Quakers do bear Testimony to, and had fellowship with,
from their Childhood, and had a Care upon them to bring up their Children in
the fear of the Lord, and in the knowledge of that Truth which they had
believed in: and which their Children were in their tender age truly acquainted
with.

THe following expressiions were delivered from the said Barbara in the
presence of diverse persons her Parents also being with her for the most part,
during the time they were spoken by her.

And are given forth in honor to that Truth whereof none need be ashamed, but
for the Blessing sake that accompanies the same, may be encouraged to take
their part therein, (whereunto also the aforesaid Damsel upon her dying bed
has testified) and may be of service to all young people to love and fear the
Lord, in the days of their oyuth, that their lives may be comfortable to them,
and their latter end peace, and their Memorial blessed for ever.

The thirtith day of the first Month, 1686 was the said Barbara taken with
sickness, and her Sister Mary also, both of them beginning therewith in one and
the same hour. The distemper proved to be the small Pox, Barbara the first week
of her distemper was sorely laden therewith, but bore her exercise very
quietly.

The first of her words as relating to her inward state betwixt the Lord and
her own soul that were taken notice of. She delivered on this wise: Mother
(said she) suffer but few of those People that come to see us to stay in the
Parlour, but when they have seen us: desire them to go into the house, for we
have no need of such empty talk, as is used amongst too many we would be quiet
that we may pray to the Lord to forgive us the faults we have committed, and if
he spare us our life at this time I hope and do believe we shall amend and have
a care of displeasing the Lord while we live: After which words she spoke very
little for four days time.

^^d about the seventh day of her sickness and the sixth of the second Month:
She asked where her father was, her Mother told her he was at the Plough, she
said Let some call him in: for I believe I must leave this world shortly: And
after a little time, she begun to pray to the Lord with a very clear voice in a
Miraculous Manner, saying. O Almighty God I cry unto tbee, and beseech thee
blot out all my Transgressions. O Lord and all my sins. O let them come no more
into thy remembrance. I beg it of thee in the name of Christ Jesus with all my
Soul, and with all my strength: and let thy fafourable countenance be upon me:
Thus she prayed in a wonderful heavenly frame, desiring the Lord also to make
her passage sweet unto her by his consolating spirit, and that he would
satisfy and enable her Parents so to bear it: as that they might not offend
the Lord, and that he he would confirm and strengthen her weak Sister to give
up her self freely, as she blessed God she her self had done. She prayed to the
Lord to give her a Mansion place in his favorable presence: and that no more
might be laid upon her Parents then what with Patience they might be enabled to
bear.

She continued her supplications to the Lord for about three quarters of an
hour, to the admiration of those that were present with her: and several being
there that did not profess the Light and Truth: which she testified to, and
dyed in, were broken into tenderness to the shedding of many tears, and said
how can any dye better then she is like to do. The said Barbara called her
Brother to her bedside, and she fastening her eyes upon him said, Brother John,
be faithful to the Lord and thy Religion: and it may fall out that when thou
art a Man, the wicked Persecutors may hurry thee into Prison for the Testimony
sake thou have to bear, be sure thou do not regard that, but keep faithful to
the Lord and he will deliver and be thy Reward.

She exhorted her Parents not to trouble themselves with too much of the worlds
concerns. But (said she) Let that to some which you have here (it beng a Remote
place) and go to live near some good Meeting: Sedbergh Meeting if you can: if
my Sister and I be both taken frm you: and take my Brother* John with you and
bring him well up I desire you, and be all of you content: And one that was not
of the same profession which her Parents and she were of, being then present,
asked her if she could freely part with Father and Mother, Brother and other
Relations. She answered saying, I can freely part with and leave them all, for
the enjoyment of that comfort and happiness which my soul is made sensible of:

She prayed again unto the Lord with praises also in her mouth unto him
magnifying also the riches of his grace and goodness, for the comfort she had
received from him, to her Immortal Soul: at another time, her Mother
endeavoring to get her to take some meat. I desire thee (said she) do not
trouble me with meat, for if you think thereby to keep me, it is all in vain,
for I must die and leave you: Neither would I desire to live for all the world:
For to be with the Lord is better then ten thousand worlds, with whom I shall
rest for evermore, even with God and his Saints, his faithful People and
Servants, the Sons and Daughters of the upright, glory to his Name for evermore.

At many times duriug her sickness she manifested unspeakable love to her
Father and Mother, and to her weak Sister, touching whom she said to her
Mother, do not stay with me what ever may befall me, but go to her and abide
with her, for I do desire that too sharp sickness may not fall on her, until
she know her peace with God: She said again: Dear Mother do not sorrow for me,
and persuade my ^^ther not to weep for fear of offending the Lord: and least
(...) ^e longer kept from that Heavenly rest which the Lord has prepareed for
me, with the redeemed of our God for ever: Then her Brother coming to the Bed
side, she said to him, John be true to the Lord and love him with all thy heart
and with all thy Soul, all thy life time: And love not the World nor the
pleasures thereof, for the enjoyments of this World are in comparison nothing:
they are scarce seen till they are gone: but that which is enjoyed with the
Lord is for evermore, praises, praises, to his name saitb my soul for ever.

At another time she told them, she had only the River of her dissolution to
pass through her mother asked her if she saw over it, she said she did see over
it, and that she should joyfully pass it into the rest, where all sorrow and
tears should be wiped from her eyes for evermore glory and honor to our God
for ever:

These with many more living and comfortable expressions came from her. After
which for some days her exerc(...) becoming more weighty upon her, and her
weakness encre(...)ing, her voice became very low and weak, several times (...)
was heard to pray to the Lord, but none could take (...) words to make them
intelligable. In the time of all her Si(...)ness she was very tender in her
spirit and circumspect, n(...) any uncomly frame of spirit appearing in her or
unbecomi(...) word proceeding from her that we saw or heard, but ve(...) kind
and pittyful she was toward those that were with h(...) in her Sickness, she
seemed not much concerned for her ow extremity and pain, but rather concerned
for them that attended her, for the trouble they were put to in helping her*

The twenty seventh day of the second Month being com(...) she being much like
as she had been for three weeks, but tha(...) her weakness had increased upon
her, and being very cheerful and able to express her self: she said to her
Mother* What think thou of this forenoon: her Mother asked her what she
meant: she answered and said it will (...)ar (...) my time in this World: for
the Lord will ease me ere long take away all my pain, and wipe away all tears
from min(...) eyes. Call in my Father said she, that he may see my departure:
Her Father being come in, said Barbara how do thou (taking her by the hand)
said she I am ready to leave this World, and therefore Father and Mother be
content and bear me company a little while: And about the first hour in the
afternoon she departed this life, like as if she had fallen asleep, about a
Month after her Sickness begun with her.

In the time of her health she was of a very bold and cheerful spirit: Yet
tender kind and pittyful toward all that any way stood in need: And what help
she could reasonably make them of her own accord she was ready to do it: She
was very tender and kind to her Parents on all accounts, always careful not to
give them any occasion to be displeased with her that she could avoid: her life
was lovely her latter end peace: and her Memorial lasts and lives with us
everlasting praises to the Lord who worthy thereof for ever.

William Scaife. and Issabel Scaife.


MAry Scaife elder Sister to Barbara of whom in the forgoing Relation mention
is Made to have been taken with Sickness the very same hour that her Sister was:
And concerning whom Her Sister Barbara had been very tenderly concerned and
exercised in her Spirit for her in Supplications to God to give her the
knowledge of her peace that has no end* and who lived but about two weeks
after her Sister, ^er distemper also of the small Pox, was accompanied with a
Fever; so as that she got very little sleep for several days Which made her
extremity the greater. But in the Lords time who keeps Covenant and shows
mercy, and gives the Spirit of Supplication and prayer to them that believe:
opened her Mouth in a clear understanding: And (said she) O great God Jehovah
of Heaven and earth whose splendor fills Heaven and thy Wonders fills the
earth: have mercy upon me thine handmaid. Who am as a Worm before thee, yet
part of thy creation, Lord help my weak soul, revive my drooping Spirit, by thy
consolating presence, strengthen my faith I beseech thee, and help me through
this exercise, I pray tbee O Lord. That thy Will may be done in earth as it is
in Heaven: After this manner with many other tender expressions she continued
in Prayer for about half an hour, but her Sister Barbara being very weak at
that time, more of her words could not be so taken as to insert them here in
writing, But often she prayed to the Lord to make her willing to give up her
self freely, if the Lord required it of her, She desired the Lord that if there
was any thing in her that did offend him, he would manifest it to her before
her weakness became greater: Her Sister Barbara who in Supplications to God had
waited for the consolation of her weak Sister, was abundantly comforted,
because of the tender and comfortable frame her Sister Mary was brought into,
and praised God on her behalf with much refreshing satisfaction upon her
Spirit, as she manifested amongst such as were present with her.

After that Mary often prayed to the Lord in a tender sense upon her Spirit and
in much fervency of Soul, as the living exercise she she was under did
demonstate. She had been much inclined from her youth to read the Scriptures.
Being then about 18 years of age. And in her sickness after the Lord opened her
heart and mouth to show forth his praife, she often spoke of Job and David, and
of Gods Love and goodness to them, and other of his servants in Ages past. And
now said she, I do know Gods Love to be the same to me as it was to them: So
that said she, I am neither afraid nor unwilling to die, for God blotteth out
my transgressions, and lays nothing to my charge, and I do believe there is a
place prepared for me in Heaven:

And Dear Mother said she, do what thou can not to sorrow, my Love is great
to thee, and my advice is, that you go to live near some good Meeting and bring
up my Brother amongst Friends.

And her Sister being dead she spoke of her own death also, and said she was
well satisfied that her soul should ascend up to God in Heaven, Where said she,
I do believe my Sister Barbara's soul is ascended to rest with the Lord for
ever.

Then afterward her Sickness increased and weakness grew upon her, being
attended with many violent Convulsion Fits, so that she could not speak to be
understood, but sometimes to say John to her Bother: but very low and weakly
for about two days hefore her departure: Her Sickness continued upon her six
weeks and three days and she departed this life, the 13th. of the 3d. Month,
1686.

In her Life time she was very obedient and respective to her Parents from whom
she said she was not inclined to go for preferment, but would be content with
the like condition as was allotted them. She was also very careful of her
Brothers good, of a sober behavior from her Childhood, all her days loved the
Truth and such as feared the Lord her latter end was comfortable and
satisfactory to her; of great refreshment to her Parents, for which an
engagement lives with them ever to submit to God, and Praise his Name who is
Worthy for ever.

William Scaife. and Issabel Scaife.



