THE BOOK of ARCHITECTURE by VINCENT SCAMOZZI Mr. Builder of Venice

LONDON Printed for Wm. Fisher



THE Mirror of Architecture: OR THE GROUND-RULES OF THE Art of Building,
Exactly laid down by VINCENT SCAMOZZI Master Builder of VENICE.

Reviewed and enlarged with the Addition of a Diagonal Scale being very useful
for dividing the Author his given Parts into Minutes, whereby the principal
Points of Architecture are easily and plainly demonstrated for the Benefit of
all Lovers and Ingenious Practitioners in the said Art.

By Ioachim Schuym of Amsterdam.

Translated out of Dutch by W. F.

Hereunto is added the Description and Use of an Ordinary Joynt-Rule fitted
with Lines for the ready finding the Lengths and Angles of Rafters, and Hips
and Collar-Beams in any Square or Bevelling Roof at any Pitch, and the ready
drawing the Architrave, Frize, and Cornice in any Order. With other useful
Conclusions by the said Rule.

By John Brown.

The third Edition, with Addition of Stair-Cases and Chimney-Pieces.

London: Printed for W. Fisher, and R. Mount, at the Postern-Gate on
Tower Hill, T. Passenger at the Three Bibles on London Bridge, and E. Smith at
the Bible in the South Portico of the Royal Exchange. 1687.

TO THE LOVERS OF ARCHITECTURE.
Reader,
AS in all things Order is to be observed that we may avoid Confusion, or else
they will be a Chaos, as the Poets fancy; So especially in this excellent Art
of Architecture it is requisite that every part and member have its right Order
and due Proportion: And there having been many Masters who have with great Care
and Industry brought this Art to a great Perfection, among whom this famous
Master Vincent Scamozzi, Chief Builder of the Magnificent City of Venice,
deserves to be placed in the first and chiefest rank by the consent of all
Judicious Artists. Therefore for the benefit of our own Nation, and that it may
be made most useful for all Artificers in Building, and Lovers and
Practitioners in this most useful Art; who are or may be employed in Royal and
Magnificent Structures. The larger Book is here reduced into a smaller Volume,
and the Author his given Parts divided into Minutes; whereby the Principal
Rules of Architecture are made plain to ordinary Capacities by Ioachym Schuym
an Ingenious Artist. And for your better understanding, take notice, that by
Model is signified the Measure of the whole Diameter of the Column: as for
example: Let the Diameter be 18, 16, or 12 Inches, which shall be the Model
divided into 60 Equal Parts or Minutes, (as you may see in the Diagonal Scale
ensuing) by using which Measure all the Parts of the said Column shall be
Proportionable: And this dividing of the Column into 60 Equal Parts or Minutes
shall be used to all the Columns. Also here is added the Description and Use of
an Ordinary Joynt-Rule fitted with Lines for the ready finding the Lengths and
Angles of Rafters and Hips and Collar-Beams in any Square or Bevelling Roofs at
any Pitch, and the ready drawing the Architrave, Frieze and Cornice in any
Order, with other useful Conclusions by the said Rule.

In this Edition, that the Book may be the more complete, you have a Treatise
containing the Ground-Rules of Architecture, being the Substance of what was
writ of it by the Learned and Judicious Sir Henry Wotton in his Elements of
Architecture, with the Figures of the Roman and Corinthian Stately Capitals,
with Stair-Cases and Chimney-Pieces.

Accept favorably, and judge impartially.

Farewell.
The Description of the Scale, and its Use in dividing of the Parts in the
Column easily found out, agreeing with the Measure of the Author.
No. I.
THE height of the uppermost Line AB is taken from the Tuscan Cornice (in the
sixth Plate) and is divided into 4 parts: draw a Line straight up so long as
you will, as CA, and divide into 5 equal parts, then divide the uppermost fifth
part into 8 parts, and take 7 of them, and setting one foot of the Compasses in
the Point C, and the other foot to the uppermost seventh part, draw an Arch of
a Circle from that seventh part so far as the Line AB may be set on it from A
to B, and draw a Line sloping from B to C, and draw every fifth part with the
Compasses between the two Lines AC and BC; the undermost drawn Line GL is 1
part, HM 2 parts, IN 3 parts, KO 4 parts of the Line AB divided into 4 parts:
then to divide the parts so, you must see what use you have thereof in your
Cornice, and divide the Line AB into so many parts as there is occasion, as in
3 parts: so draw a Line from the point C, and into 4 parts, and draw a Line
from the point C, and then into 5, and draw a Line from the point C. Then to
strike out the small members of the Cornice, set the Compasses from H to the
Line, the which will give parts of the Line AB, then follows: therefore set
your Compasses on F and the Line, then have you the part, next follows the part
1: therefore set your Compasses from G to L, the which is 1 part: then set the
Compasses on G and the Line, the which is then parts, then set your Compasses
on F and, and add that to GL, and it makes together 1 parts, then follow two
parts, then set the Compasses from I to the Line, the which is parts, then on F
and, which is parts, then on H and 1/^, which is 2/32, and on G and the Line,
which is, and do the like with every member of the Cornice and the Base, as you
may see plainly in the sixth Figure.

No. II.
The Slope Line PQR is upon the Cornice of Composita, where is to be divided
into 7 and 11/12 parts, and one half twelfth part 7 11/12: and may be drawn
after the same manner, as with the Dorick, Ionick and Corinthian, as you see
plainly in the 24th Figure.

No. III.
The Author gives well the dividing the members in general of the Ornament,
Impost and Arch with the Base and Cimacia, but not so plain in particular how
much every member must be. There have been several Lovers of the Art have
endeavored to find out the dividing of the minutes. So I thought necessary to
put the minutes to it, and of the same to make a Scale. And for to make the
Scale right, divide your Model into 6 parts on one side, and divide the other
side into 10 parts, and so draw your Lines Diagonal ways, after the manner of
the draught of the Diagonal Scale in the next leaf ensuing. So is your Scale
made by which all the members are easily and rightly divided.

THE GROUND-RULES OF Architecture, Collected from the best Authors and
Examples, BY That Learned and Ingenious Gentleman Sir HENRY WOTTON, IN HIS
Elements of ARCHITECTURE. Now contracted for Public Benefit.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCLXXXVI.

THE GROUND-RULES OF ARCHITECTURE.
THere are several Rules or Precepts laid down by Architects concerning the Art
of well Building, some respecting the situation or total posture of the
Building; as that it be in a good and healthy air, not subject to foggy
noisomeness or mineral exhalations, or malign influence; that it be not far
from some navigable River or arm of the Sea; that it have a pleasant prospect,
and the first salutation of the Spring: But I pass over these, accounting them
rather wishes than precepts.

Other Rules there are touching the placing of the several parts of the
Building: As that all the principal Chambers of delight, all Studies and
Libraries be toward the East, the morning being a friend to the Muses; all
Offices that require heat, as Kitchins, Stillatories, Stoves, Rooms for Baking,
Brewing, Washing or the like, toward the South. All that need a cool and fresh
temper, as Cellars, Pantries, Butteries, Granaries, to the North: As also
Repositories for works of Rarities in Pictures, or other Arts that require a
steady light. But in this, regard is to be had to the nature of the Region,
every Nation being tied above all Rules to a discretion of providing against
their own inconveniences.

The Rules concerning the work it self, some respect the materials, and some
the form; as concerning the material part it will not disgrace an Architect,
which does so well become a Philosopher, to look into the properties of Stone
and Wood, as that Firr-Trees, Cypress, Cedars, and such other aspiring Plants
(which being naturally inflexible downwards) are fittest for Posts and Pillars,
or such upright use; on the other side Oak and the like true hearty Timber
being strong in all positions, may be better trusted in cross and traverse work
for Summers, or girding and binding beams, as they are termed And so likewise
to observe of stone, that some are better within than other to bear weather;
nay to descend lower, to examine Sand, Lime and Clay, of all which things
Vitruvius and other new Writers have discoursed without any daintiness. And in
this the Italians are very careful, burning their firmest Stone, and even
fragments of Marble, where it is plenty, which in time become almost marble
again, or at least of indissoluble durity, as appears in their standing
Theaters: whereas to make Lime of any refuse stuff, as we too commonly do in
England, is an error of no small moment in our Buildings. I shall close with
this principal caution, That sufficient stuff and money be ready before we begin
to Build; for when we build now a piece and then another by fits, the work
dries and sinks unequally, whereby the Walls grow full of chinks and crevices;
this pawsing humor is condemned by all Authors. In the form is to be
considered the general figuration, and then the several members. Figures are
either simple or mixed, the simple figures are either Circular or Angular, and
of Circular either complete or deficient as Oval: Now the exact Circle is in
truth a very unprofitable Figure in private Buildings, being the most
chargeable, and much room being lost in the bending of the Walls, besides an
ill distribution of the light except from the Center of the Roof, so as it is
not usual, save in some Temples and Amphitheatres; the Oval and other imperfect
Circular Forms have the same exceptions and less benefit of capacity.

Touching the Angular it is a true observation, that this Art does neither love
many Angles nor few, for first the Triangle which has of all others the fewest
sides and corners, is of all other the most condemned, being indeed both
incapable and infirm, and likewise more soluble into any other Form than it
self in the inward Partitions: As for Figures of five, six, seven or more
Angles, they are fitter for Military Architecture, where the Bulwarks may be
laid out at the Corners, and the sides serve for the Curtains then for civil
use, though there is a famous piece at Caparola belonging to the House of
Farnese, cast by Baraccio into the form of a Pentagone with a Circle inscribed;
where the Architect did ingeniously wrestle with diverse inconveniences in
disposing of the Lights and in saving the vacuities: but such designs as these
do aim more at Rarity than Commodity, and are rather to be admired than
commended. Therefore by the precepts and practice of the best Builders we
resolve upon Rectangular squares, as a mean between too few and too many
Angles, and are through the equal inclination of the sides (which make the
right Angle) stronger than the Rhomb or any other irregular square; but whether
the exact Quadrat or the long square be the better, is not well determined,
though I prefer the latter, provided the length do not exceed the Latitude
above one third part, which would much diminish the Aspect; as shall appear
when I come to speak of Symmetry and Proportion of mixed Figures, partly
Circular and partly Angular. There is a proper Objection, that they offend
uniformity, yet these seeming opposites, Uniformity and Variety, may be
reconciled; as we see in our Bodies, the great pattern of Nature, which are
most uniform in the whole figuration, each side agreeing with the other in the
number, the quality and measure of the parts, and yet some are round as the
Arms, some flat as the Hands, some prominent, and some more retired, so the
limbs of a noble Fabrique may be correspondent enough they be various, provided
always we do not run into certain extravagant inventions, whereof I shall speak
more largely when I come to the parting and casting of the whole work. We ought
likewise to avoid enormous heights of six or seven stories, as well as
irregular Forms, and the contrary fault of low distended Fronts is as unseemly,
or again when the face of the Building is narrow and the flank deep. Thus much
for the general Figuration or Aspect of the work.

Now concerning the parts in several, all the parts of every Fabric may be
according to Baptista Alberti comprised under five Heads, and they be these.

The Foundation. The Walls. The Appertions or Overtures. The Compartition. And
the Cover.
About all which I purpose to gather the principal Rules, and as I pass along
touch, the natural Reasons of Art.

First concerning the Foundation, which requires the exactest care; for if
that happen to dance, it will mar all the mirth in the House. Therefore that we
may found our Flabitation firmly, we must first examine the bed of Earth upon
which we will build, and then the underfillings or subastraction, as the
Ancients did call it, advising us not to rest upon any appearing solidity,
unless the whole mould through which we cut have likewise been solid. But how
deep we should go in this search, is not certainly determined, depending more
upon discretion than regularity, according to the weight of the work; yet
Andrea Palladio allows a sixth part of the height of the whole Fabric,
unless the Cellars be under ground; in which case he would have us found
somewhat lower.

Some Italians do prescribe, that when they have chosen the floor or plot, and
laid out the limits of the work, we should first of all dig Wells and Cisterns
and other underconducts and conveyances for the suillage of the House, whence
may arise a double benefit; for both the nature of the mould or soil would be
safely searched, and moreover those open vents will serve to discharge such
vapors as having otherways no issue might peradventure shake the building;
This is enough for the natural grounding, which though it be not a part of the
solid Fabric, yet it is here fittest to be handled.

Now follows the substruction or groundwork of the whole Edifice, which must
sustain the Walls, about which are these Rules, first that the bottom be
precisely level, where the Italians therefore commonly lay a platform of good
board, then that the lowest ledg or row be merely of stone, and the broader the
better, closely laid without mortar, which is a general caution for all parts
in building that are contiguous to board or timber, because lime and wood are
insociable, and if any where unfit confiners, than most especially in the
Foundation; thirdly, that the breadth of the substruction be at least double to
the insistent Wall, and more or less as the weight of the Fabric shall
require; for Discretion may be freer than Art.

Now the Foundation being searched; and the substruction laid, we must next
speak of the Walls.

Walls are either entire and continual, or intermitted, and the intermissions
be either Pillars or Pilasters; concerning the entry Walls there are these
considerations. That the Walls be most exactly perpendicular to the
groundwork; for the right Angle (thereon depending) is the true cause of
stability both in artificial and natural positions, a man likewise standing
firmest when he stands uprightest. That the massiest and heaviest materials be
the lowest, as fitter to bear than to be born. That the work as it rises,
diminishes in thickness proportionally for ease both of weight and expense.
That certain ledges of more strength than the rest be interlayed like bones to
sustain the Fabric from total ruin, if the under parts should decay. Lastly,
that the Angles be firmly bound, which are the Nerves of the whole Edifice, and
therefore are commonly fortified by the Italians even in their brick buildings,
on each side of the corners with well squared stone, yielding both strength and
grace. And so much touching the entire or solid Wall.

The intermissions (as has been said) are either Pillars or Pilasters.

Pillars, which are commonly called Columns, of them there are five Orders.

The Tuscan. The Dorique. The Ionique. The Corinthian.
And the Compound Order, or as some call it, the Roman, others more generally
the Italian.

In which five Orders I will first consider their Communities, and then their
Proprieties.

Their Communities (as far as I observe) are principally three: First, they are
all round; for though some conceive Columna Atticurges mentioned by Vitruvius
to have been a squared Pillar, yet we must pass it over as irregular, never
received among these Orders, no more than certain other licentious inventions
of wreathed and vined and Figured Columns.

Secondly, they are all diminished or contracted insensibly more or less,
according to the proportion of their heights from one third part of their Shaft
upwards, which Philander does prescribe by his own precise measuring of the
ancient remainders as the most graceful Diminution. And here I must blame a
practice familiar in some places, of making Columns swell in the middle as if
they were sick of some Timpany, unseemly to the very judgment of sight, and
contrary to the Original and Natural Type in Trees, which at first was imitated
in Pillars, as Vitruvius himself observes.

Thirdly, they have all their Undersettings or Pedestals in height a third part
of the whole Column comprehending the Base and Capital, and their upper
Adjuncts, as Architrave, Frize, and Cornice, a fourth part of the said Pillar.
Which rule of singular use and facility I find settled by Iacobo Baraccio a very
good Author. These are their most considerable Communities and agreements.

Their Proprieties or Distinctions will best appear by some reasonable and
plain description of them all with their Architraves, Frizes and Cornices.

First therefore the Tuscan is a plain massy rural Pillar, resembling some
sturdy well-limbed Labourer homely clad, as Vitruvius makes the Comparison: The
length thereof shall be six Diameters, or as Scamozzi makes it, six and a half
of the grossest of the Pillar, being a very natural proportion. The distance or
Intercolumniation may be near four of his own Diameters, because the materials
commonly laid over this Pillar were rather of Wood than stone, through the
lightness whereof the Architrave could not suffer though thinly supported, nor
the Column it self being so substantial. The Contraction aloft shall be
(according to the most received practice) one fourth part of his thickness
below. To conclude, the Tuscan is of all the rudest Pillar, and his principal
Character simplicity.

The Dorick Order is the gravest that has been received into civil use,
preserving in comparison of those that follow a more Masculine Aspect, and
little trimmer than the Tuscan that went before, save a sober garnishment now
and then of Lions heads in the Cornice, and of Trigliphs and Metopes always in
the Frize, sometimes likewise, but rarely, channeled, and a little slight
sculpture about the Hypotrachelion or neck under the Capital: the length seven
Diameters, and according to Scamozzi seven and a half, his rank or degree is
the lowest by all congruity, as being more massy than the three, and so better
able to support. The Intercolumniation thrice as much as his thickness below;
the contraction aloft one fifth of the same measure, he is best known by his
place when he is in Company, and by the peculiar Ornament of his Frize before
mentioned when he is alone.

The Ionick Order does represent a kind of Feminine slenderness, not like a
light Housewife, but in a decent Matron-like dressing. The length eight
Diameters in degree as in substantialness next above the Dorick, sustaining the
third, and adorning the second story, the Intercolumniation two of his own
Diameters, the contraction above one sixth part. And is best known by his
trimmings, for the body of this Column is perpetually channeled like a thick
plaited Gown; the Capital dressed on each side, not much unlike women's Wires in
a spirial wreathing, which they call the Ionian Voluta; the Corniee indented;
the Frize swelling like a Pillow, these are his best Characters.

The Corinthian is a Column lasciviously decked like a Curtizan, and therein
participating (as all Inventions do) of the place where they were first born,
Corinth having been without controversy one of the wantonest Towns in the
World. This Order is of nine Diameters, his degree one stage above the Ionick,
and always the highest of the simplest Orders. The Intercolumniation two of his
Diameters, and a fourth part more, which is of all other the comliest distance.
The contraction one seventh part. In the Cornice both Dentils and Modiglions.
The Frize adorned with all kinds of Figures and various Compartments. The
Capital cut into one of the beautifullest leafs that Nature does yield, which
is the Acanthas of Branca Vrsina, Bears Foot. In short, a Plainness did
characterize the Tuscan, so must Delicacy and variety the Corinthian Pillar,
besides the height of his Rank.

The last is the Compounded or Roman Order, his name being a brief of his
nature; for this Pillar is nothing in effect but a medly of all the precedent
Ornaments, and though, the most richly trimmed, yet the poorest in this that he
is a borrower of all his beauty. His length a mean between the Ionick and
Corinthian according to Scamozzi: though some will have him the highest, as of
ten Diameters, the contraction one eighth part less above than below, his
degree should be the highest, but few Palaces ancient or modern exceed the
third of the Civil Orders; you may easily know him by the mixture of his
Ornaments. And so much touching the five Orders of Columns, which I shall
conclude with two or three not impertinent Cautions.

First, that where more of these Orders than one shall be set in several
Stories or Contignations, there must be an exquisite care to place the Columns
precisely one over another, that so the solid may answer to the solid, and the
vacuities to the vacuities; as well for beauty as strength of the Fabric; and
by this Caution the consequence is plain, that when we speak of the
intercolumination or distance which is due to each Order, we mean in a Dorick,
Ionical, Corinthian Porch, or Cloister, or the like of one Contignation, and
not in storied buildings.

Secondly, Let the Columns above be a fourth part less than below, says
Vitruvius; which does appear a strange Precept, and would seem reasonable
rather to make them a fourth part bigger, because according to the Optic Rule
that the higher they are the less the diminution aloft should be, because the
Eye does naturally contract all objects more or less according to their
distance; but Vitruvius acquits himself like a wise Mechanic, the Natural
reason before the Mathematical.

That therefore they above should be a fourth part less, that those beneath may
better sustain them.

A third Caution shall be, That all the projected or Jutting parts (as they are
termed) be very moderate, especially the Cornices of the lower Orders; for
while some think to give them a beautiful and royal Aspect, by their largeness
they sometimes hinder both the light within, and likewise detract much from the
view of the Front without. I need say no more concerning Columns and their
Adjuncts, only answer one familiar Objection: It will perchance be said, that
this Doctrine touching the five Orders were fitter for the Quarries of Asia
which yielded one hundred and twenty seven Columns of sixty foot high to the
Ephesian Temple, or for Numidia where Marbles abound, then for the Spirits of
England, who must be contented with more ignoble materials. To which I answer,
that this need not discourage us. For I have often at Venice viewed with much
pleasure an Antiporch after the Greek manner raised by Andrea Palladio upon
eight Columns of the Compounded Order, the Basis of stone without Pedestals,
the shafts or bodies of mere brick three foot and a half thick in the Diameter
below, and consequently thirty five foot high, than which mine eye has never
yet beheld any Columns more stately of stone or marbles; for the Bricks having
been first formed in a Circular mould, and then cut before their burning into
four quarters or more, the sides afterward join so closely, and the points
concentre so exactly, that the Pillars appear one entire piece; which short
description I could not omit, that thereby may appear how in truth we want
rather Art than Stuff to satisfy our greatest fancies.

After Pillars the next in order are Pilasters, touching which I will briefly
collect these Notes. Pilasters must not be too tall and slender, lest they
resemble Pillars; nor too dwarfish and gross, lest they imitate the Piles or
Peers of Bridges; smoothness does not so naturally become them as a rustic
superficies, for they aim more at State and Strength than Elegancy. In private
Buildings they ought not to be narrower than one third, nor broader than two
parts of the whole vacuity between Pilaster and Pilaster; but to those that
stand at the corners may be allowed a little more Latitude by discretion for
strength of the Angles: In Theaters and Amphitheaters, and such weighty works,
Palladio observes them to have been as broad as the half, and now and then as
the whole Vacuity; he notes otherways, and others consent with him, that their
true proportion should be an exact square; but for lessening expense and
enlarging of room, they are commonly narrower in flank than in front. Their
principal grace does consist in half or whole Pillars applied unto them; in
which case it is well noted by Authors, that the Columns may be allowed
somewhat more than their ordinary length, because they lean unto so good
supporters. And thus much shall suffice touching Pilasters, which is a Cheap,
and a Strong, and a Noble kind of Structure.

Now because they are oftener both for Beauty and Majesty found Arched than
otherwise: I am here orderly led to speak of Arches, and under the same head of
Vaults, for an Arch is nothing indeed but a contracted Vault, and a Vault is
but a dilated Arch.

Therefore to handle this business both compendiously and fundamentally, I will
resolve the whole business into a few Theorems.

Theorem 1.
All solid Materials free from impediment do descend perpendicularly downwards,
because ponderosity is a natural inclination to the Center of the world, and
Nature performs her motions by the shortest lines.

Theorem 2.
Bricks molded in their ordinary Rectangular form, if they shall be laid one
by another in a level row between any supporters, sustaining the two ends, then
all the pieces between will necessarily sink even by their own natural gravity,
and much more if they suffer any depression by other weight above them, because
their sides being parallel they have room to descend perpendicularly without
impeachment, according to the former Theorem: Therefore to make them stand, we
must either change their posture, or their figure, or both.

Theorem 3.
If Bricks molded or Stones squared cuneatim (that is wedg-wise broader above
than below) shall be laid in a row level with their ends supported as in the
precedent Theorem, pointing all to one Center, then none of the pieces between
can sink till the Supporters give way: because they want room in that
figuration to descend perpendicularly: But this is yet a weak piece of
structure, because the supporters are subject to much impulsion, especially if
the line be long; for which reason this Form is seldom used but over Windows or
narrow Doors; therefore to fortify the work, as in this third Theorem we have
supposed the Figure of all the Materials different from those in the second, so
likewise we must now change the posture, as will appear in the Theorem
following.

Theorem 4.
If the materials figured as before wedg-wise shall not be disposed levelly but
in form of some Arch or proportion of a Circle pointing all to the same Center:
In this case neither the pieces of the said Arch can sink downwards through
want of room to descend perpendicularly, nor the supporters or butments (as
they are termed) of the said Arch can suffer so much violence as in the
precedent flat posture, for the roundness will always make the incumbent weight
rather to rest upon the supporters than to shove them; whence may be drawn an
evident Corollary, that the safest of all Arches is the Semicircular, and of
all Vaults the Hemisphere, though not absolutely exempted from some natural
weakness, as Barn. Baldi Abbot of Guastalla in his Comment upon Aristotle's
Mechanics does very well prove; whence I note, That when any thing is
Mathematically demonstrated weak, it is much more Mechanically weak; errors
ever more occurring more easily in the management of gross materials than
lineal designs.

Theorem 5.
As Semicircular Arches or Hemispherical Vaults being raised upon the Total
Diameter be of all other the roundest, and consequently the surest by the
precedent Theorem; so those are the gracefullest, which keeping precisely the
same height shall yet be distended one fourteenth part longer than the said
entire Diameter, which addition of distent will confer much to their Beauty,
and detract but little from their strength. This observation I find in Leon.
Baptista Alberti; but the practice how to preserve the same height, and yet
distend the ends of the Arch, is in Albert Durers Geometry, who taught the
Italians many an excellent Line of great use in this Art.

Upon these five Theorems all the skill of Arching and Vaulting is grounded: As
for those Arches which our Artizans call of the third and fourth point, and the
Tuscan Writers di terzo, and di quarto acuto, because they always concur in an
acute Angle, and do spring from the division of the Diameter into three, four
or more parts at pleasure; I say, ^hese both for the natural imbecility of the
sharp Angle it self, and likewise for their very uncomliness ought to be exiled
from judicious eyes, and left to their first Inventers the Goths or Lombards,
amongst other Relics of that barbarous Age.

Thus of my first Partition of the parts of every Fabric into five heads;
having gone through the two former and been incidently carried into this last
Doctrine touching Arches and Vaults, the next now in order are the Apertions,
under which term I do comprehend doors, windows, staircases, chimnies, or other
conducts; in short, all Inlets or Outlets, to which belong two general cautions.

First, That they be as few in number and as moderate in dimension as possibly
may consist with other due respects; for in a word, all openings are weaknings.

Secondly, That they do not approach too near the Angles of the Walls, for it
were indeed a most essential Solecism to weaken that part which must strengthen
all the rest: A precept well recorded but ill practiced by the Italians
themselves, particularly at Venice, where I have observed diverse Pergoli or
Meniana (as Vitruvius seems to call them) which are certain ballised
outstandings to satisfy curiosity of sight) very dangerously set forth upon
the very point it self of the Mura^ Angle.

Before I come to the casting and comparting of the whole work (being indeed
the very definitive sum of this Art, to distribute usefully and gracefully a
well chosen plot) I shall collect some Notes belonging to these particular
Overtures.

Of Doors and Windows.
These Inlets of men and light I couple together, because I find their due
dimensions brought under one Rule, by Leon. Alberti (a learned searcher) who
from the School of Pythagoras (where it was a fundamental Maxim, that the
Images of all things are latent in numbers) does determine the comliest
proportions between breadths and heights, namely the Symmetry of two to three
in their breadth and length, in others the double, as two to four, there will
indubitably result from either a graceful and harmonious contentment to the
Eye. Our Master Vitruvius seems to have been an extreme lover of luminous
Rooms, and indeed I confess that a frank light can misbecome no Edifice, yet on
the other side we must take heed to make a House all Eyes like Argus, which in
Northern Climates would be too cold, in Southern too hot. Besides there is no
part of Building more expenceful than Windows, or more ruinous, not only for
that vulgar reason as being exposed to all wind and weather, but because
consisting of so different and unsociable pieces, as Wood, Iron, Lead and
Glass, and those small and weak, and easily shaken.

Of Doors there is this distinction; some were called Fores, some Valvae;
Those, as the word may seem to import, did open outward, these inwards, and
were commonly of two leaves or panes (as we call them) thereby requiring indeed
a lesser Circle in their unfolding, and therefore much in use among the
Italians at this day. But I charge them with an Imperfection, for though they
let in as well, yet they keep out worse.

Of Stair-Cases.
To make a complete staircase is a curious piece of Architecture; the vulgar
cautions are these.

That it have a liberal light against all Casualties of slips and falls.

That the space above the head be large and airy, because a man does spend much
breadth in breathing.

That the half paces be well distributed at competent distances for reposing on
the way.

That to avoid Encounters, and besides to gratify the beholder, the whole
staircase have no niggard Latitude, that is, for the principal Ascent in Royal
Buildings at the least ten foot.

That the breadth of every single step or stair be never less than one foot,
nor more than eighteen inches.

That they exceed by no means half a foot in their height or thickness, for our
legs do labor more in elevation than in distention.

That the steps be laid where they join somewhat sloping, that the foot may in
a sort ascend and descend together; which though observed by few, is a secret
and delicate deception of the pains in mounting.

Lastly, to reduce this doctrine to some Natural or at least Mathematical
ground, Vitruvius borrows these proportions that make the sides of a
Rectangular Triangle; that is, three for the Perpendicular from the stair-head
to the ground, four for the-ground-line it self or recession from the Wall, and
five for the whole Inclination or slopeness in the Ascent. There are likewise
Spiral or Cocklestairs, and sometimes running about a Pillar, sometimes vacant,
wherein Palladio (a man very expert in this point) was wont to divide the
Diameter of the first fort into three parts, yielding one to the Pillar and two
to the Steps of the second, into four whereof he gave two to the Stairs, and
two to the Vacuity, which had all their light from above, and this in exact
Oval is as a Masterpiece. You have here inserted the Types of several
Stair-Cases with their Ichnography; one whereof is a piece of Rarity, being a
pair of double Stairs, whereon two persons, the one ascending, the other
descending, shall not come at one another, made by Peidro del Bergo and Iehan
Cousin at Sciamburg in France in the Kings Palace.

Describe a Semicircle for the Ichnography, which divide in 12 equal parts, and
in it describe a smaller Cicle as at C. For the bigness of the Newel draw lines
from those Divisions in the great Semicircle into the Semicircle made for the
bigness of the Newel, so will that Semicircle also be divided into 12 equal
parts; then on every of the points in the great Semicircle erect
Perpendiculars, and those Perpendiculars shall show the ends of each respective
step; as the Perpendicular at 11 bounds the outward end of the first step, the
Perpendicular at 22 bounds the second step, etc. to 24, which makes good a
whole Circle in the Ichnography, and Perpendiculars erected from the inner
Semicircle mark on the Newels the ends of the same steps: work the same way
with the steps on your right hand. The Newel is pierced through in diverse
places to let in light.

Of Chimnies.
The Italians, who make frugal fires, are not in this case the best
Counselors, therefore from them we may better learn how to raise fair Mantles
within, and how to disguise gracefully the shafts of Chimnies abroad; therefore
shall lay down the Observations of Phil. de l' Orme, a man diligent in this
part of work.

First he observes, that who in the disposition of the Building will consider
the Region and the Winds that ordinarily blow from this or that Quarter, might
so cast the Rooms, which need most fire, that he should little fear the
incommodity of Smoke. But if the Error lies in the Structure it self, then he
makes a Logical Enquiry, That either the Wind is too much let in above at the
mouth of the Shaft, or the Smoke stifled below. If none of these, then there is
a repulsion of the Fume by some higher Hill or Fabric that overtops the
Chimny; if likewise not this, then he concludes that the Room is little and
close, so as the Smoke cannot issue wanting a supply of Air; and so having a
Natural Reason of the Cause, we apply suitable Remedies.

Touching Conducts for the Suillage and other Necessities of the House, (which
how base soever in use, yet for the Health of the Inhabitants are as
considerable as the rest) I find in Authors this Counsel, that Art should
imitate Nature in those ignoble Conveyances, and separate them from sight
(where there wants a running Water) into the most remote, and lowest, and
thickest part of the Foundation, with secret vents posting up through the
Walls, like a Tunnel to the wi^d Air aloft.

Thus, having considered the Apertions and Overtures according to their
particular Requisites, I come to the Contexture of the whole work under the
term of Compartition, into which (being the mainest piece) I cannot enter
without a few general Precautions.

First, Let no man that intends to build, settle his fancy upon a Draught of
the Work in Paper, how exactly soever measured or neatly set off in
perspective, without a Model or Type of the whole Structure, and of every
parcel or partition in Board or Wood.

Next, That the said Model be as plain as may be without Colors or other
beautifying, lest the Pleasure of the Eye preoccupate the Judgment.

Lastly, The bigger this Type is, the better; not that I would persuade a man
to such an Enormity, as that Model made by Ant. Labaco of St. Peter's Church in
Rome, containing 22 foot in length, 16 in breadth, and 13 in height, and
costing 4184 Crowns, the price of a reasonable Chapel. Yet in a Fabric of 30
or 40 Thousand pounds, 30 pounds may be expended in an exact Model; for a
little Penury in the Premises may easily breed some Absurdity of a far greater
Charge in the Conclusion.

Now after these Premonishments, I come to the Compartition it self, by which
is understood a graceful and useful Distribution of the whole Ground-plot, both
for Rooms of Office and of Reception or Entertainment, as far as the Capacity
thereof and the nature of the Country will comport.

The Gracefulness will consist in a double Analogy or Correspondency, First,
between the Parts and the Whole, whereby a great Fabric should have great
Partitions, great Lights, great Entrances, great Pillars or Pilasters; in sum,
all the Parts great. The next between the Parts themselves, not only
considering the breadth and length, as before when we spoke of Doors and
Windows, but likewise their height, a point hardly reducible to any general
Precept.

True it is, the Ancients did determine the Longitude of all Rooms which were
longer than broad, by the double of their Latitude; and the Height half as much
more as the Latitude, which Dimensions modern Architects vary upon discretion:
sometimes squaring the Latitude, and then making the Diagonal or overthwart
Line from Angle to Angle of the said square; the measure of the Height
sometimes more, but seldom lower, than the breadth it self.

The usefulness consists in a sufficient Number of Rooms of all sorts, and
their apt Coherence without Distraction, without Confusion, that it may be well
united, and may appear airy and spiritous, fit for the welcome of cheerful
Guests; about which the greatest difficulty will be in contriving the Lights
and Stair-cases; in which respect the ancient Architects were at much ease; for
both the Greeks and Romans (of whose private Dwellings Vitruvius has left some
Description) had commonly two Cloistered open Courts, one serving for the
Women's side, and the other for the Men, who now adays would perchance take so
much separation unkindly. Howsoever by this means the reception of Light into
the body of the Building was very prompt both from without and from within,
which we must now supply by some open form of the Fabric, or among graceful
refuges by Tarrasing any story which is in danger of Darkness, or lastly, by
perpendicular Lights from the Roof, of all others the most natural: For the
second difficulty, which is casting the Staircase, which is no hard point of
it self, but as they are encumbrances of room for other use, I have marked a
willingness in the Italian Artizans to distribute the Kitchen, Pantry,
Bake-house, washing Rooms, and even the Buttry likewise under ground next above
the Foundation, and sometimes level with the Floor of the Cellar, raising the
first Ascent into the House fifteen foot or more for that end, which besides
removing Annoys out of sight and gaining much room above, does also by the
Elevation of the Front add Majesty to the whole Aspect; and with such a
disposition of the principal Staircase which commonly does deliver us into the
plain of the second Story, there may be wonders done with a little room. But
though petty Offices may be well enough so remote, yet by the natural
Hospitality of England the Buttry must be more visible, and we need perchance
for our Raunges a more spacious and luminous Kitchen than the aforesaid
Compartition will bear, with a more competent nearness to the Dining Room. It
is likewise necessary to contrive a Room for a Conservatory of the Meat that is
taken from the Table till the Waiters eat, which with us by an old fashion is
more unseemly set by in the mean time.

Now touching the distribution of Lodging Chambers, I must here reprove a
Fashion, which has prevailed through. Italy, without ancient Examples: Namely,
that they so cast their Partitions, as when all Doors are open, a man may see
through the whole House; which does necessarily put an intolerable servitude
upon all the Chambers, save the inmost, whence none can arrive but through the
rest, or else the Walls must be extreme thick for secret Passages. And yet this
will not serve the turn, without at least three Doors to every Room, a thing
most insufferable in cold and windy Regions, and every where no small weakening
to the whole Work; being only grounded upon the fond Ambition of displaying to
a Stranger all our Furniture at one sight: there being another defect, which
necessarily follows such a servile disposing of inward Chambers, that they must
be forced to make as many common great Rooms, as there shall be several
Stories; which (besides that they are usually dark, a point hardly to be
avoided, running as they do through the middle of the whole House) do likewise
devour so much Place, that thereby they want other Galleries and Rooms of
Retreat. Thus having given you general Lights and Directions, and discovered
some Faults, the rest must be committed to the Sagacity of the Architect, who
will be often put to diverse ingenious shifts, when he is to wrestle with
Scarcity of Ground: as sometimes to damm one Room (though of good use) for the
benefit and beauty of all the rest; another while to make those fairest which
are most in sight, and to leave the other (like a cunning Painter) in shadow. I
will close this Part, touching Compartition, as cheerfully as I can, with a
short Description of a feasting or entertaining Room after the Egyptian
manner, who seem (at least till the time of Vitruvius) from the ancient Hebrews
and Phoenicians (whence all Knowledge did flow) to have retained with other
Sciences in a high degree, also the Principles and Practice of this magnificent
Art; there being no Form for such a Royal use comparable imagined like that of
the aforesaid Nation.

Let us conceive a Floor or Area of goodly length (for example at least of 120
Foot) with the breadth somewhat more than half of the longitude: About the two
longest sides and head of the said Room shall run an Order of Pillars, which
Palladio does suppose Corinthian, supplying that point out of Greece, because
we know no Order proper to Egypt; the fourth side I will leave free for
Entrance: On the foresaid Pillars was laid an Architrave, which Vitruvius
mentions alone, Palladio adds thereunto (and with reason) both Frize and
Cornice, over which went up a continued Wall, and therein half or three-quarter
Pillars, answering directly to the Order below, but a fourth part less; and
between these half Columns above, the whole Room was windowed round about.

Now from the lowest Pillars there was laid over a Contignation or Floor born
upon the outward Wall and the head of the Columns with Tarrace and Pavement sub
dio, says our Master, and so indeed he might safely determine the matter in
Egypt, where they fear no Clouds; therefore Palladio (who leaves this Tarrace
uncovered in the middle and ballised about) did perchance construe him rightly,
though therein discording from others. Always we must understand a sufficient
breadth of Pavement left between the open Part and the Windows, for some
delight of Spectators that might look down into the Room. The Latitude I have
supposed contrary to some former Positions a little more than half the Length;
because the Pillars standing at a competent distance from the outmost Wall,
will by interception of the sight, somewhat in appearance diminish the breadth:
In which cases (as I have said before) Discretion may be more licentious than
Art. This is the Description of an Egyptian Room for Feasts and other
Jollities; about the Walls whereof we must imagine entire Statues placed below,
and illuminated by the descending Light from the Tarrace, as likewise from the
Windows between the half Pillars above. So as this Room had abundant and
advantageous Light; and besides other garnishing must needs receive much State
by the Height of the Roof, that lay over two Orders of Columns.

And so having run through the four Parts of my first general Division, namely,
Foundation, Walls, Apertions, and Compartition: The House may now have leave to
put on his Hat, having hitherto been uncovered it self, and consequently unfit
to cover others; which point, though it be the last of this Art in Execution,
yet it is always in Intention the first; for who would build but for shelter? I
shall now only deliver a few of the properest, and (as I may say) naturallest
Considerations that belong to this remaining Piece.

There are two Extremities to be avoided in the Cover or Roof, that it be not
too heavy nor too light, the first will suffer a vulgar Objection of pressing
too much the Under-work. The other contains a more secret Inconvenience, for
the Cover is not only a bare Defense, but likewise a kind of Band or Ligature
to the whole Fabric, and therefore would require some reasonable Weight; but
of the two a House top-heavy is the worst, next, there must be a care of
Equality, that the Edifice be not pressed on the one side more than on the
other. And here Palladio does wisely advise that the inward Walls might bear
some good share in the Burden, and the outward be the less charged. Thirdly,
the Italians are very careful in giving the Cover a graceful Pendence or
Slopeness, dividing the whole breadth into nine parts, whereof two shall serve
for the Elevation of the highest Top or Ridg from the lowest. But in this
point, the quality of the Region is considerable; for as our Vitruvius
insinuates, those Climes that fear the falling and lying of much Snow, ought
to provide more inclining Pent-houses, and Comeliness must yield to Necessity.

Thus have you briefly laid down, from the best Authors, the Ground-Rules of
the Art of Building; which being well considered, may be of great use to the
ingenious Architect in the managing of any Royal or Noble Design.

FINIS.
THE DESCRIPTION Of the five Orders of Architecture, And first Of the TUSCAN
Order.
Note, that the Number in the several Divisions with the following
Explanations, refer to the Figures in the Book as they are marked from 1 to 40.

I.
IN the first Figure here is shown the several Orders of Columns how they
differ from each other, and how high every one must be.

The Tufcan must be 11 Models high; whereof the Pedestal must be 1 Model, or 1
Model 52 minutes: the Column must be 7 Models, the Ornament must be 1 Model,
and so the Ornament is one fourth of the height of the Column, and the Pedestal
also is one fourth of the height of the Column.

The Dorick must be 12 Models 53 minutes high; whereof the Pedestal must have 2
Models and 16 minutes; the Column must be 8 Models; the Ornament must be 2
Models: so the Ornament is one fourth of the height of the Column, and the
Pedestal is 3 of the height of the Column.

The Ionick must be 13 Models high; whereof the Pedestal must have 2 Models;
the Column must have eight Models and three fourths; the Ornament must have 1
Model: and so the Ornament comes to be one fifth part of the height of the
Column, and the Pedestal 3 of the height of the Column.

The Roman or the Composita must be 14 7/10 Models high, or 14 Models 42
minutes; whereof the Pedestal must be 3 Models; the Column 9 Models; and the
Ornament must have 1 19/20 Model, or 1 Model and 57 minutes: so the Ornament
comes to he one fifth part of the height of the Column, and the Pedestal 3 3/4
of the height of the Column.

The Corinthian must be 15 Models high; whereof the Pedestal must be 3 Models,
the Column must be 10 Models; the Ornament must have 2 Models: and so the
Ornament comes to be one fifth part of the height of the Column, and the
Pedestal one third of the height of the Column.

II.
If you would make Galleries without the Pedestal, you must take the height of
9 Models to make the work the more stately; so you may make one gross Base
under of Model: the breadth must be 11 Models; the middle inter-Column must be
3 Models; the inter-Column of either side must be 2 Models. But if you will
make them of six Columns, they must be 18 Models, and of eight Columns, they
must be 25 Models: the height for the lights of the Gate must be 4/7 of the
height of the Column, with his Architrave and Friese, and comes to 4 Models and
59 minutes; and the breadth is 2/7, the height is 2 models and 29 minutes: The
Ornament must be one fourth of the height of the lights, the door is 1 Model.

III.
The Tuscan Arch must be 3 Models and 52 minutes wide; the Pilasters under to
the foot of the Column must be 34 minutes; the height to the top of the Impost
is 5 models and 16 minutes; the Impost is 27 minutes high, divided into 84* the
small Arch or Bow is 26 minutes divided into 8 parts: the Arch must make an
half Circle, and somewhat more than of the Model; and for the projecture of the
Impost to diminish the sight. Upon the right and left side you must make
Windows; of the middle Gate the Key-piece is 40 minutes high.

IV.
If you will make the Tuscan Gallery with the Pedestal, the whole height must
be 11 Models, and the breadth 13 models of both the outermost Columns distance,
whereof the middle inter-Column must be 3 models 40 minutes; the inter-Columns
on the right and the left side must be 3 models: But if you make the Gallery of
6 Columns, they must be 21 models; and if they be of eight Columns, they must
be 29 models: The height for the lights of the Gate must be 4/7 parts of the
under-edge of the Pedestal, to the upper edge of the Friese, and 6 models and 3
minutes; and the breadth is 2/7 parts, and is 3 Models and 1 minute: the
Ornament must be one fourth of the height of the lights of the Door, and is 1
model and 31 minutes, whereof the Architrave must be 30 minutes; the Friese 24
minutes; the Cornice 36 minutes.

V.
The Tuscan Arch is in distance from one Pedestal to the other 4 models ^0
minutes; the Pilaster on the foot of the Column is 40 minutes; the height from
under the Pedestal, to the upper edg of the Impost, is 6 models, 12 minutes;
the height of the Impost is 41 minutes; the Arch or Bow is 29 minutes; the
Key-piece in the Arch is 50 minutes high; the Arch is higher a Circle and 10
minutes for the projecture of the Impost: there the Arch beings, divided into 5
parts, 4 of the same are for the lights of the Door of the principal Gate, and
is 5 models and 5 minutes; the breadth of the lights is 2 models 32 minutes;
the Ornament is 1 model 16 minutes high, whereof the Architrave muh have 25
minutes; the Friese 20 5/12 minutes; the Cornice 30 7/12 minutes: or divide the
Ornament 1 model 16 minutes in fifteen parts, and give five to the Architrave,
four the Friese, six the Cornice.

VI.
The sixth shows the particular members of the Tuscan Column: On the right side
have we the Pedestal and the Base: the Pedestal is of the height of the Column,
and comes to 1 model, which must be divided into 5 parts; whereof give the
under- Cimacium and the Plinth 1 of the Troco, make 2 the upper Cimacium 1
part, the upper Cimacium is 22 minutes: divided into 5 7/24 parts, the Base is
a model, and is to be divided into 5 parts. Under the body of the Column is one
small list of part, making 3 minutes: of the left side is the Ornament and the
Capital; the Capital is model high, and is to be divided in 10 parts; the like
part has also the Astragal; the Ornament is off; the Column high take 1 model:
this divided in 17 parts, whereof give the Architrave 5 prrts, the Friese 6
parts; the Cornish 6 parts; the Architrave 5 parts, is 32 minutes, divided in 8
parts; the Friese is 41 minutes, with his uppermost list, which is placed right
over the middle of the Column, so high as the Friese is, and the breadth 30
minutes: after this breadth the Friese jets out 7 minutes. Here is also after
the Friese the List of 2 minutes; the Ornament is 39 minutes high, divided in 4
parts, so you may this Column, and all its members, with the Impost; and also
all the other four Columns must be divided after the same manner with minutes;
whereof the Column must be divided into sixty minutes, and made after this
manner: The Scale is made in the first Figure, and the Rule wherewith you
divide your parts shall be set P, and for minutes an M. it may be easily
understood.

VII.
Here follows the great and small Impost with his Arch and Ornament of the
Principal Gates; upon the right side is the Impost and Arch; the Impost and
Arch of the small Arch stands beneath, marked with the Letter K; the Impost is
27 minutes high, divided in 8 parts; the like part has Astragal of the Impost:
the small Arch or Bow is 26 minutes, divided in 8 parts; the height of the
great Impost is 41 minutes divided in 6 parts; the great Arch or Bow is 29
minutes high, divided in 8 parts. Of the left side is the Ornament of the
principal Gate, and is 1 model 16 minutes high, whereof comes 25 minutes: the
Architrave divided into 8 parts; the Friese is 20 5/12 minutes high; the
Cornish is 30 7/72 minutes high, divided in 4 7/12 parts.

VIII. Of the DORICK Order.
IF you will make the DORICK Gallery without the Pedestal, then must you divide
the whole height into 10 models 37 minutes; and to make the Work appear the
statelier, you may make one gross Base under of half a model high, and of 4
Columns breadth must be 9 models 45 minutes; whereof the middle inter-Column
must be 2 models; the inter-Columns of either side must be 1 model; of 4
Columns breadth in the Friese must be 8 Triglyphs, and 7 Metops: but you will
make them of 6 Columns, you must divide the breadth into 14 models; and there
must be in the Friese of the 6 Columns 12 Triglyphs and 11 Metops: Also if you
will make the Gallery of eight Columns, then must the breadth be 19 models; the
height of the lights of the door is 4/7 of the height of the column with his
Architrave and Friese, and comes to 5 models and the breadth of the light of
the door must be 2 models 40 minutes: the Ornament must be of the height of the
lights of the door; and is 1 model 20 minutes divided in 15 parts; give 5 to
the Architrave, 4 the Friese, 6 the cornish; and so the Architrave is 26
minutes, the Friese 21 minutes, the Cornish 32 minutes.

IX.
The Dorick Arch must be 6 models 15 minutes wide from the middle of one
Column, to the middle of the other; and must stand a little more than half out
of the Pilaster: the Pilaster is 32 minutes broad under on the Foot of the
Column; the Impost is 27 minutes high, divided in 8 2/6 parts: the like part
also has the Astragal: underneath the height of the Arch or Bow is 27 minutes
divided into 6 parts; the Key-piece in the Arch is high 40 minutes; the Arch is
higher than half a Circle 10 minutes for the Projecture of the Impost; the
height to the top of the Impost from the Base is 6 models 4 minutes.

X.
The Dorick Gallery with the Pedestal, the whole height of the Column must be
12 models and 53 minutes; and four Columns must be 13 models broad, whereof the
middle inter-Column must be 4 models; the inter-Column of the side 2 models:
Upon the four Columns must be 11 Triglyphs and 10 Metops; but 6 Columns must be
21 models broad, and 17 Triglyphs, and 16 Metops; but 8 Columns must be the
breadth of 28 models, 23 Triglyphs and 22 Metops: the light of the door is 4/7
of the under edge of the pedestal, to the uppermost edge of the Friese, and is
6 models 57 minutes; the breadth is 3 models 24 minutes; the Ornament is high
one fourth of the height of the lights, and which is 1 model 38 1/6 minutes,
whereof the Architrave must have 32 minutes, the Friese 26 1/6 minutes, the
Cornish 39 minutes.

XI.
If you would make the Dorick Gallery with the Pedestal, then must the distance
from one Pilaster to the other be 5 models; the height from the under-edge of
the Pedestal to the upper-edge of the Impost, is 7 models 6 minutes; the Impost
is 50 minutes high; the Arch or Bow 34 minutes; the Corner-piece is 50 minutes;
the Arch is higher than a half-Circle 12 minutes for the projecture of the
Impost; the height of the lights for the Doors is 5 models and 52 minutes: the
breadth of the Lights is two models and 52 minutes: the Ornament is 1 model 23
minutes high, of which the Architrave has 27 minutes; the Friese is 22
minutes; the Cornish is 33 5/12 minutes: or divide the Ornament in 15 parts, 5
the Architrave, 4 the Friese, 6 the List.

XII.
Here is shown the particular members of the Dorick Column: On the right side
we have the Pedestal and the Base; the Pedestal is 3 of the height of the
Column, and comes to 2 models and 16 minutes, divided into 6 parts; whereof
give the under- Cimacium 2 parts, the body of the Column makes 3 parts; the
upper Cimacium 1 part, the under- Cimacium is 45 minutes: There has the Plinth
30 minutes; the other members in 15 minutes, divided into 3 parts; the upper
Cimacium is 22 minutes divided in 5 3/2 9/4 parts; the Base is one half model,
divided in 5 parts; the List upon the Base is, or 2 minutes, and stands off
from the Column: on the left side is the Ornament and Capital; the Capital is
one half model high, divided in 11 7/12 parts; and the like part has the
Astragal: the Ornament is of the height of the Column, and is 2 models 7 1/2
minutes divided in 18 1/6 thereof give the Architrave 5 parts, is 35 minutes
divided in 7 parts; the Friese 6 parts, is 45 minutes; the List above the
Friese is 5 minutes; the Cornish 6 parts 42 minutes, divided in 6 7/24 parts
(the Author gives 6 parts) that it may come forth more in the Cornish must come
in 10 Dentils, besides the Grape that hangs on each side.

XIII.
Here is shown the great and small Impost with his Arch and Ornament of the
Principal Gate of the Dorick, Order: On the right side is the Impost and Arch,
the Impost and the Arch of the smaller Bow, standing below, marked with the
Letter K: the Impost is 27 minutes high, divided in 8 a like part has also the
Astragal of the Impost; the small Arch or Bow is 27 minutes, divided in 6
parts; the height of the Impost Major or greater Impost, is 50 minutes, divided
into 9 parts; the great Arch or Bow is 34 minutes high, divided in 6 parts: On
the left side is the Ornament of the principal Gate; and is high 1 model 23
minutes, whereof the Architrave has 27 minutes, divided in fix parts; the
Friese is 22 minutes; the Cornish is ^3 5/12 minutes, divided in 4 parts.

XIV. Of the IONICK Order.
IF you would make the IONICK Gallery without the Pedestal, then must you
divide the whole height in 10 models, to make the Work show the more stately;
and under it make one gross Base of half a model high, and of four Columns
breadth must be 10 models and 21 minutes; whereof the middle inter-Column must
have 2 models; the inter-Columns that stand on the right and left side must be
1 model 55 minutes; on the middle of each Column and the Pilaster must be one
modilion; in the outermost inter-Columns shall be 5 spaces, in the middlemost 6
spaces; the four Columns have from the middle of the first to the middle of the
last Column 16 spaces and modillions: but if men will make them of 6 Columns,
then must they divide the breadth in 16 1/6 models, and there comes on the 6
Columns between the modillions 26 spaces; and of eight Columns must the breadth
be 22 models, and there comes on the 8 Columns 36 spaces between the
modillions: the height of the lights of the Doors is 4/7 of the height of the
Column, with his Architrave and Friese above the modillions, and the light
comes to 5 models and the breadth of the lights of the doors comes to 2 models
48 minutes; the Ornament must be and and of the height of the lights of the
doors, and is 1 model and 18 minutes, divided in 15 parts; give 5 to the
Architrave, 4 the Friese, 6 the Cornish; and the Architrave is 26 minutes, the
Friese 20 minutes, the Cornish 31 minutes.

XV.
The minor or smaller Ionick Arch must be wide from one Pilaster to the other 3
models 50 minutes, and must stand more than one half out of the Pilaster; the
Pilaster is 30 minutes under on the breadth of the Column; the Impost is high
28 minutes, divided in 9 parts; such like parts has also the Astragal there
under the height of the Arch or Bow 24 minutes, divided in 7 1/24 parts; the
Key-piece in the Arch is 50 minutes high; the Arch is higher than one half
Circle 12 minutes; the height from above the Impost to the under-edge of the
Base, is 6 models and 18 minutes.

XVI.
The Ionick Gallery with the Pedestal, the whole height of the Column must be
13 models, and the 4 Columns breadth must be 12 models, whereof the middle
inter-Column must be 3 models; the inter-Column on the side must be 2 models;
on the four Columns, from the middle of the first, to the middle of the last
Column, comes 20 spaces and modillions, of 6 Columns breadth is 19 models, and
has 32 spaces between the modillions; and of 8 Columns breadth is 26 models,
and has 44 spaces between the modillions: the light of the door is 4/7 from
the under-edge of the Pedestal of the Column, Architrave and Friese, to the
upper-edge of the modillions, and is 7 models 17 minutes; the breadth of the
door of the lights is 3 models 30 minutes; the Ornament must be and of the
height of the lights of the doors, and is 1 model divided in 15 parts; give 5
to the Architrave, 4 the Friese, 6 the Cornish; the Architrave is 32 minutes,
the Friese 26 minutes, the Cornish 39 minutes.

XVII.
If you would make the Ionick Arch with the Pedestal, then must the distance
from one Pilaster to the other be 4 models and 50 minutes; the height from the
under-edge of the Pedestal, to the upper-edge of the Impost, is 7 models and 35
minutes the Impost is 50 minutes high; the Arch or Bow 30 minutes; the
corner-piece 1 model; the Arch is higher than one half Circle 15 minutes; the
height of the lights of the door is 6 models 16 minutes; the breadth of the
lights is 3 models and 2 minutes; the Ornament is high 1 model 25 minutes; the
Architrave has 28 minutes; the Friese has 22 minutes; the Cornish 34 1/5
minutes; the Pilaster is 35 minutes broad under on the Column.

XVIII.
Here is shown the particular members of the Ionick Column: On the right side
you have the Pedestal and Base; the Pedestal is 3 of the height of the Column,
and comes to 2 models, which divided into 6, thereof give the under- Cimacium 2
parts, the Trunk or the Neck 3; the upper- Cimacium is 1 part, the under-
Cimacium 45 minutes; thereof give the Plinth 30 minutes, the other 15 minutes,
divided in 4 parts; the upper- Cimacium is 22 minutes divided in 6 parts; the
Base is half a model, divided in 5 7/12 parts; on the Column be two members,
divided out with the aforesaid parts, is 3 minutes: On the left side is the
Capital and Ornament; the Capital is 31 minutes high of the under-edge of the
Scroll, or more; the Astragal on the upper-edge of the Abacus is 18 minutes,
divided in 7 1/40 parts: The Ornament is 1 model high, and is of the height of
the Column, divided in 15 parts, give the Architrave 5, the Friese 4, the
Cornish 6, the Architrave 5 parts and 35 minutes, divided in 8 parts; the
Friese is 28 minutes, and must have one List on of part, such like part as the
Cornish has of 1 minute; the Cornish is 42 minutes, divided in 7 5/12 parts,
and twelfth part, or in 7 parts; but if you are to make great or Royal Work,
then commonly is the Friese carved: So must the Ornament be between and part of
the height of the Column, and divided in 16 parts; give the Architrave 5 parts,
the Friese 5 the Cornish 6 parts.

XIX.
Here is shown the great and small Impost with his Arch and Ornament of the
principal Gate of the Ionick Order: On the right side is the Impost and Arch,
the Impost and the Arch of the small Bow, standing beneath the Impost, is 28
minutes high, divided in 9 parts; such like parts has also the Astragal: The
Arch or Bow is 24 minutes, divided in 7 1/24 parts; the great Impost, is high
50 minutes, divided in 8 11/24 parts; the great Arch or Bow is high 30 minutes,
divided in 7 parts: On the left side is the Ornament of the Principal Gate, and
is high 1 model 25 minutes; the Architrave is high 28 minutes, divided in 7
parts; the Friese is high 22 minutes; the Cornish is high 34 minutes, divided
in 5 17/24 parts; under and above the Friese is one fillet of part of the
aforesaid parts.

XX. Of the ROMAN Order.
IF you would make the ROMAN Gallery without the Pedestal, then must you take
the height of 11 7/10 models, and make one gross Base under of model high; and
of 4 Columns breadth must be 9 models 40 minutes, whereof the middle
inter-Column must have 2 models; the inter-Column standing on the right and
left side, must be 1 model 42 minutes: On the middle of each Column must come
one Modillion; and in the outer inter-Column must come 5 spaces; in the middle
inter-Column 6 spaces: the 4 Columns have from the middle of the first to the
middle of the last Column 16 spaces and Modillions; but if you make them 6
Columns, then must the breadth be 15 1/12 models, and there comes on the 6
Columns between the Modillions 26 spaces; and of 8 Columns the breadth must be
20 models, and there comes on the 8 Columns 36 spaces between the Modillions:
the height of the lights of the doors is 4/7 of the height of the Column with
his Architrave and Friese: from the upper edge of the Modillions, and the
lights, is of 6 models 30 minutes; and the breadth of the lights of the doors,
of 3 models 25 minutes: The Ornament must be 3 parts of 15 parts of the height
of the lights, and is 1 model 24 minutes divided in 15 parts; 5 for the
Architrave, 4 the Friese, 6 the Cornish; and the Architrave is 27, the Friese
22, the Cornish 33, without the Gola and Orle, the which next belongs to the
Cornish of the Frontispiece.

XXI.
The small Roman Arch must be from one Pilaster to the other 4 models and 34
minutes, and must stand somewhat more than half out of the Pilaster: the
Pilaster is 28 minutes; under on the breadth of the Column, the Impost is high
31 1/9; minutes, divided in 11 1/12 parts: such like parts has also the
Astragal: there under the height of the Arch or Bow is 28 minutes, divided in 7
parts; the Key-piece in the Arch is high 50 minutes; the Arch is higher than
one half-Circle 14 minutes; the height from above the Impost, from the
under-edge off from the Base, is 6 models 54 minutes.

XXII.
The Roman Gallery with the Pedestal, the Column must be 14 models 42 minutes
high; and the breadth of 4 Columns must be 11 models and 50 minutes; whereof
the middle inter-Column must be 3 models: the inter-Column on the side 2 models
15 minutes: On the 4 Column from the middle of the first, to the middle of the
last Column comes 20 spaces and Modillions; of 6 Columns breadth is 18 models
and 20 minutes, and has 32 spaces between the Modillions; and of 8 Columns
breadth is 24 models and 50 minutes, and has 44 spaces between the Modillions:
the lights of the doors is high 4/7 from the under edge of the Pedestal with
his Column; the Architrave and Friese to the upper edge of the Modillions,
comes to 8 models 12 minutes; the breadth of the lights of the doors is 3
models 53 minutes; the Ornament must be 3/14 and; for the Architrave, Friese,
and Cornish of the height of the lights of the doors, and comes to 1 model and
53 minutes, divided in 15 parts; give 5 to the Architrave, 4 the Friese, 6 the
Cornish; and the Architrave is 37 minutes, the Friese 30 minutes, the Cornish
is 45 1/^ minutes.

XXIII.
If you make the Roman Arch with the Pedestal, then must the distance from one
Pilaster to the other be 5 models; the height from the under-edge of the
Pedestal to the upper-edge of the Impost, is 8 models 42 minutes; the Impost is
high 55 minutes; the Arch or Bow is 33 minutes; the Corner-piece is 1 model
high; the Arch is higher than a half-Circle 17 minutes; the lights of the Doors
is 7 models 18 minutes high: the breadth of the Lights is 3 models 26 minutes:
the Ornament is high 1 model 24 minutes; thereof the Architrave has 31
minutes; the Friese is 25 1/12 minutes; the Cornish is 37 7/12 minutes: the
Pilaster under on the Column is 32 minutes broad; the Architrave 31 minutes,
divided in 7 parts; the Cornish is 37 1/12 minutes, divided in 5 23/24 parts;
about the Friese is one List of part that goes off from the Friese.

XXIV.
Here is shown the particular members of the Roman Column: On the right side
you have the Pedestal and Base: the Pedestal is 3 of the Column's height, and
comes to 3 model, which divided in 8 parts, give thereof the under- Cimacium 2
parts, the neck 5 parts, the upper Cimacium 1 part, the under Cimacium 45
minutes: thereof give the Plinth 30 minutes, the other 15 minutes, divided in 4
parts; the neck of the Pedestal is high 1 model, and the breadth is 1 model 24
minutes; the upper Cimacium is 22 minutes, divided in 6 parts; the Base is
model, divided in 6 parts: On the Column be two members, and are to be divided
out with the aforesaid parts 3 minutes. On the left side is the Capital and
Ornament; the Capital is high 1 model and, or 70 minutes, which divided in 23
parts, to make the ground of the Capital, take 1 Square of 1 model, each side
of the Square draw one round Circle of 6/7 of a model, or 51 minutes, or so
thick as the Column is above, and all the other jettings over the like, as be
made in Corinthi; but the Scrolls are made after the Ionick manner: The
Ornament is 1 model 57 minutes and is of the height of the Column, divided in
15 parts; thereof give the Architrave 5 parts, the Friese 4 parts; the Cornish
6 parts; the Architrave 5 parts is 39 minutes, divided into 9 parts; the Friese
31 minutes; the Cornish 46 minutes, divided in 7 11/12 and a half part, or in 7
23/24.

XXV.
Here follows the great and small Impost with his Arch and Ornament of the
principal Gate of the Roman Order: On the right side is the Impost and Arch;
the Impost and Arch of the small Bow standing beneath, the Impost is high 31
minutes, divided in 11 1/12 parts; such like part has also the Astragal; the
Arch or Bow is high 28 minutes, divided in 7 parts; the great Impost is high 55
minutes, divided in 8 11/15 parts; the great Arch or Bow is high 33 minutes,
divided in 7 parts. On the left side is the Ornament of the principal Gate, and
is high 1 model 24 minutes; the Architrave is high 31 minutes, divided in 7
parts; the Friese is high 25 1/12 minutes; the Cornish is high 37 minutes and
7/12, divided in 5 13/24 parts; under on the Friese is one list of part and
minute.

XXVI. Of the CORINTHIAN Order.
IF you will make the CORINTHIAN Gallery without a Pedestal, then must you
divide the whole height in 12 models, and you shall place under it one gross
Base of one half model high, and of the 4 Columns breadth must be 9 models;
whereof the middle inter-Column must have 2 models: they that stand on the
right and left side must have the inter-Column of 1 model; on the middle of
each Column and Pilaster must be one modillion; in the outermost inter-Column
shall be 5 spaces, and in the middle 6; the 4 Columns have from the middle of
the first to the middle of the last Column 16 spaces and modillions: but if you
make them of the breadth of 6 Columns, then must you divide the breadth into 14
models; and there comes on the 6 Columns between the modillions 26 spaces; and
of the 8 Columns the breadth must be 19 models, and there comes on the 8
Columns 36 spaces between the modillions: the height of the Lights of the Doors
is 4/7; of the flat of the Column that come under the spaces of the modillions,
or in 6 parts under to the Architrave; and the Light is of 6 models; the
breadth of the Lights is 3 models and 5 minutes; the Ornament must be of the
height of the Light, and divided likewise in 15 of the like parts; give 5 to
the Architrave, 4 the Friese, and 6 the Cornish; and the Architrave is 26
minutes, the Friese 21 minutes, the Cornish 32 minutes: So the whole Ornament
is 1 model 20 minutes.

XXVII.
The small Corinthian Arch must be 4 models 8 minutes wide from one Pilaster to
the other, the Pilaster is 26 minutes broad under on the Column, the Impost is
33 minutes high, divided in 7 19/24 parts: the height of the Arch or Bow is 25
minutes, divided in 9 11/12 parts; the Key-piece in the Arch is 50 minutes
high; the Arch is higher than one half-Circle 16 minutes; the height from above
the Impost to the under-edge off of the Base, 7 models and 20 minutes.

XXVIII.
The Corinthian Gallery with the Pedestal, the Column must be 15 models high;
and the breadth of 4 Columns II models; whereof the middle inter-Column must be
3 models; the inter-Column on the side must be 2 models: On the 4 Columns from
the middle of the first, to the middle of the last comes 20 spaces and
Modillions, of 6 Columns breadth is 17 models, and has 32 spaces between the
Modillions; and of the breadth of 8 Columns is 23 models, and has 44 spaces
between the Modillions: the Light of the door is 4/7 of the under-edge of the
Pedestal with his Column to the upper-edge of the Modillion, and is 8 models 32
minutes high; the breadth of the Lights of the door is 3 models 59 minutes; the
Ornament must be of the height of the Lights of the doors, and is 1 model 42
minutes, divided into 15 parts; thereof the Architrave has 5 parts, and the
Friese 4, and the Cornish 6; and the Architrave is 34 minutes, the Friese 27
minutes, the Cornish is 41 minutes.

XXIX.
If you will make the Corinthian Arch with the Pedestal, then must the distance
from one Pilaster to the other be 5 models; the height from the under-edge of
the Pedestal, to the upper-edge of the Impost, is 9 models; the Impost is high
55 1/12 minutes; the bigness of the Arch must be 1/10 of the breadth, like the
foregoing Arch, and is 30 minutes; the Corner-piece 1 model; the Arch is higher
than one half Circle 20 minutes; the height of the Lights of the door is 8
models, and the breadth of the Lights of the door is 3 models 45 minutes, the
Ornament is high 1 model 36 minutes; the Architrave has 32 minutes, divided in
9 parts; the Friese is 25 minutes, and has one list of part under the Cornish;
the Cornish is 38 minutes, divided in 5 parts; the Pilaster under on the Column
is 30 minutes broad.

XXX.
Here follows the particular members of the Corinthian Column: On the right
side you have the Pedestal and Base; the Pedestal is of the height of the
Column, and is 3 models, which divided in 8 parts, thereof give the under-
Cimacium 2 parts, the Neck of the Pedestal 5 parts; the upper- Cimacium 1 part,
the under- Cimacium is 45 minutes; thereof give the Plinth 30 minutes, the
other member is 15 minutes, divided in 4 parts; on the Cimacium is also two
members, one Torus of and one list of: of the aforesaid parts, the upper-
Cimacium is 22 minutes, divided in 7 parts, there under is one list of parts
goes off from the neck; the Base is one half model, divided in 6 parts, and
must go off the shaft of the Column 1/^ part and a part: On the left side is
the Ornament and the Capital; the Capital is high 1 model or 70 minutes, which
divided in 23 parts; the Astragal is 1 of the parts of the Capital: The
Ornament is part of the Columns height, and is 2 models; this divided in 15
parts, give 5 the Architrave, 4 the Friese, 6 the Cornish; the Architrave is 40
minutes divided in 12 1/12 parts; the Friese is 32 minutes, the Cornish is 48
minutes, divided in 7 3/120. So much it projects, and is just 7 1/^ parts.

XXXI.
Here follows the great and small Impost with his Arch and Ornament of the
principal Gate of the Corinthian Order: On the right side is the Impost and
Arch, the Impost and Arch of the small Bow stands marked with the Letter K; the
Impost is high 33 minutes, divided in 7 19/24 parts; The small Arch or Bow is
high 25 minutes, divided in 9 11/12 parts; the height of the great Impost is 55
7/12 minutes, divided in 7 13/120; the great Arch or Bow is 30 minutes, divided
in 9 11/12 parts: On the left side is the Ornament of the principal Gate, and
is high 1 model 36 minutes; thereof the Architrave has 32 minutes, divided in
9 5/6 parts; the Friese is 25 minutes; the Cornish 38 minutes, divided in 5
parts.

XXXII.
Here is shown how you shall lessen the Columns; the Tuscan Column is smaller
above than beneath; the Dorick the Ionick 1/^; the Roman or Composita is 1/7;
the Corinthian is: which are to be divided in 12 equal parts, 3 of which must
go up in a straight line in the Tuscan Column; of the Ionick 3 goes up in a
straight line, and the Corinthian 4 parts goes straight up; of the Dorick, and
Roman or Composita, is a measure between the Tuscan and Ionick, and between the
Ionick and Corinthian; the other lessenings men may easily see how they shall
make them in the Figure here set down.

XXXIII.
Shows how you may make the Corinthian Base, and the upper and under- Cimacium,
with his Diagonal lines for enlarging the Projecture.

XXXIV.
Shows how the Corinthian Ornament is to be made, as the Architrave, Friese
and Cornice with his Diagonal lines for enlarging the Projecture, easy to be
understood; so draw one Diagonal line after a perfect quadrate of the whole
Projecture of the Cornice; and in these Diagonal lines must all the
Perpendicular lines come for the members that are in the Projecture; and this
outermost end must we then after this measure draw with the said Diagonal, so
that in the crossing, you make right Angels, that the height of the drawing
members be parralel near to the Diagonal.

XXXV.
This is the Ornament of the Corinthian Order of the principal Gate, and is 1
model 36 minutes high, (as before is declared) thereof the Architrave has 32
minutes; the Friese 25 minutes; the Cornish 38 minutes; the Architrave 32
minutes, divided into 9 parts; thereof sticks farther out as the outer-edge of
the Door-stile 7 parts, or 8 minutes farther for Cornishing; and let the ears
of the Architrave be 17 parts long; of the fore-given parts, or 55 minutes to
underneath, besides all other the Cornishing of the Architraves, as you may see
in the Figure; the Friese is 25 minutes, divided in 7 parts for making the
Voluta or Scroll, and draw one line up: the fourth part, or 14 minutes from
above off right Parallels; so there remains 3 parts or 11 minutes for the
standing out beneath, and the eye of the Scroll is 1/7 part, or 3 minutes and
2/14 of the height of the Friese; and draw a Line perpendicular from above to
the under-edge of the ear of the Architrave, and where the lines cut cross each
other, here is the middle of your eye: strike out the cross 4 parts 16 minutes
near to the outside, and 3 parts, or 12 minutes to the inside, and draw your
Scroll then after this manner here drawn: the Scroll or Voluta beneath is part
5 minutes smaller, as the upper-Scrol is, and is high 20 minutes, and the
breadth 12 minutes: divide the height in 8 parts, and draw a Parallel-line of 4
parts, or 11 minutes from beneath to above, and there the Parallel-line cut
cross the Perpendicular is the middle of the eye, strikes out cross 3 parts, or
8 minutes to above, and 4 parts or 10 minutes to the outside; and there remains
over 5 parts, or 12 minutes to the inside; farther all that belongs to it may
you in the Figure here plainly see; as for the breadth of the Scroll is 2 parts
of the Cornices given parts, or 19 minutes; the other members before may be
seen in the Figure.

XXXVI.
Here is shown two Chimney-mantils, with their Prosile.

XXXVII.
Here is shown the ground of the Building of the Lord Strozzi standing at
Florence, the like is described in the Authors third Book in the seventh
Chapter.

XXXVIII.
The half of the Building on the ground to be seen inwards of the Building of
the Lord Strozzi.

XXXIX.
The other half with the up-rising to be seen with the foreside of the foresaid
Building.

XL.
Here we have the under-side of the Cornice of all the five Columns; A of the
Tuscan, B of the Dorick, C the Ionick, D the Roman or Composita, E the
Corinthian.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THe Description and Use of the Carpenters Rule, together with the Use of the
Line of Numbers, and its application in measuring all Superficies and Solids;
Gauging with the use of a sliding Rule, and the Joint* Rule, by John Brown,
and sold by William Fisher.

THE Description and Use Of an Ordinary JOINT-RULE Fitted with LINES For the
ready finding The Lengths and Angles of Rafters and Hips, and Collar-Beams in
any Square or Bevelling Roofs at any Pitch, and the Ready Drawing the
Architrave, Friese and Cornice in any Order.

WITH Other Useful Conclusions by the said Rule.

BY JOHN BROWN.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCLXXXVI.









The Description and Use of a Joint-Rule fitted with Lines for the ready
finding the Lengths and Angles of Rafters, Hips and Collar-Beams in any Square
or Bevelling Roofs at any Pitch.
FIrst, The Rule is an ordinary Jointed Rule of a Foot long when shut together,
or two Foot being opened to a straight Line. And the Lines delineated thereon
for this purpose, are 1. First, a Line of Lines, drawn Sector-wise from a
Center on both Legs of the Rule, but continued to 30 at the end in stead of 10
the old usual manner, and every single Integer of the 30 is divided into 12
parts, to represent every particular Inch of the 30 Foot according to the
common reckoning by Feet and Inches. 2. There is another Scale of Equal parts
also, of the same length lying as near to the other of 30 as may be, on one Leg
only, which is divided into 40 parts, to represent 40 Feet: and each of those
40 Feet, parted into 6 parts to represent every two Inches only, because the
room for one Foot, will not admit of more parts. 3. In the same place on the
other Leg is divided a Line of natural Sines and Tangents to 45, but numbered as
a Line of Chords to 180 Degrees, to set the Rule to, or to find the quantity of
any Angle, in the proper terms of expression (all the world over) degrees and
minutes. 4. On the innermost Line of the 30 Scale that runs to the Center is
set 20 pricks, beginning at 2 at the Center-pin at 30, and so proceeding with
3, 4, 5, and 6 at the Center-pin at 15, and then 7, 8, 9, 10, and so forwards
to 20, toward the Center; which serves to divide a Circle into any number of
parts, very useful and ready in the practice of Drawing or Architecture.


Thus much for Description; the Uses follow.

The Uses of this Line of Lines; or Scale of equal parts to 30, drawn from the
Center, is of a general and manifold use: as Mr. Gunter in his Book of the
Sector has showed.

A brief touch whereof take in the first place, as by the way, and then the use
of the Rule to the business intended.

And for the better doing hereof, it is needful to explain three or four terms,
for the avoiding of many words, and needless repetitions in this brief, yet
plain Discourse.

1. First, by the word Lateral is meant any distance taken, either in Feet and
Inches, on the 30 Scales or degrees and minutes on the Chords, taken and
counted from the Center, in the midst of the head of the Joint-Rule along any
one Leg: as thus; Suppose I would take out 15 Foot Laterally, set one point of
the Compasses in the Center at the head, and open the other to 15 on any one
Leg on the 30 Scale; this extent I call a Lateral Extent of 15 Foot. Also if
you take the Lateral Chord of 60 Degrees, you shall find the extent of the
Compasses from the Center to 60 to be the same as from the Center to 15 Foot,
on the 30 Scale of Feet and Inches. 2. By the word Parallel, I mean any
distance taken, by setting one point of the Compasses in any number of Feet and
Inches on one Leg, and the other point in the same, or any other number on the
other Leg, across from one Leg to the other; as thus the Rule being opened,
then the extent of the Compasses from 20 on one Leg, to 20 on the other Leg, is
a Parallel extent. 3. In all Parallel Extents, you must set one point of the
Compasses in the Common Line on one Leg, to the Common Line on the other Leg,
which Common Line is that only of the 30 Scale which runs to the Center, in
which the Center-pins at 15 and 30 are. 4. The nearest distance from a point to
a Line is only thus; Set one point of the Compasses in the point given, and
open or shut the other being turned about, till the other will but just touch
or cleave the Line, that I call the nearest distance.
Use I. To lay down a Line, that shall represent any Number of Feet and Inches
given or required.
Take the Number given laterally from the 30, or 40 Scale from the Center, and
that is the Line required.

But if these Scales are too great, or too small, then take your Number of
parts, and the length thereof Laterally.

As for Example; suppose I would have 3 Inches to represent 30 Foot, take out 3
Inches between your Compasses, and make it a parallel in 30 and 30, and the 30
Scale is set to your desire.

Use II. To increase or diminish a Line to any Proportion.
Take the given Line between your Compasses, and make it a parallel in the
parts thereof; then the parallel extent of the parts you would have it
increased, or diminished to, is the Augmentation, or Diminution, which was
required.

Example, Let 3 Inches represent 8 Foot, and to the same proportion I would
have 10 Foot, or 5 Foot, viz. more or less.

Take 3 Inches between your Compasses, and make it a parallel in 8, and 8 on
the 30 Scale; then the parallel distance between 5 and 5, does diminish the
Line, and the parallel between 10 and 10 does Increase the Line to the
proportion required.

Use III. To divide a Line into any Number of parts or models under 30.
Take the given Line, and make it a parallel in the parts on the 30 Scale into
which you would have it divided, then the parallel extent between 1 and 1 shall
divide the Line accordingly.

Example, Let 4 Inches be a Line to be divided into 9 parts, take 4 Inches, (or
any distance whatsoever) and make it a parallel in 9 and 9 on the 30 Scale;
then the parallel distance between 1 and 1 shall divide 4 Inches into 9 parts
required: Note, that for more exactness and convenience, you may Double 9, or
Triple 9, viz. 18, or 27, and then if you make the Line to be divided, a
parallel in Triple the Number you must take out 3 in stead of one, and that
shall divide the Line into the parts required.

Example, I would have 5 Inches put into 10 parts, take 5 Inches between your
Compasses, and make it a parrallel in 30, and 30 the Triple of 10, then take
out parallel 3, and 3 the Triple of one: and that shall divide the Line given
being 5 Inches into 10 parts or models exactly: the like for any other. And
note, as the Rule stands you may take out any number of parts or models
whatsoever, to that Scale.

Use IV. Any two Lines given, to find their Proportion one to another according
to any other Number.
Take the Lines severally, and lay them Laterally from the Center, on the 30 or
the 40 Scale, which you please; and the Numbers of Feet and Inches, to which
they reach, shall show their proportion one to another of the parts of the Line
on which they are measured.

Example, I have 2 Lines, suppose one is 2 Inches long, and the other 5, or any
other unknown part.

Take 2 Inches the measure of one Line, and measure it Laterally on the 30
Scale, and it gives 5 Foot an Inch, then take out 5 Inches the supposed length
of the other Line, and it gives Laterally 12 Foot 8 Inches; then I say one Line
is 5 Foot and half an Inch, and the other is 12 Foot 8 Inches of a Scale of 30
Foot in 11 Inches 3 quarters length.

Or if you conclude on the Term or number of one Line, then make that Line a
parallel in the parts thereof, then take the other Line, and carry it
parallelly till it stay in like parts, on both Legs in the common Line, and
that shall be the Denomination of the other Line.

Use V. Two Lines being given, to find a Third in continual Proportion to them.
Take both the Lines, and lay them laterally on both Legs, and note the Feet
and Inches to which they do extend as in the last.

Then take out the lateral extent of the second Line, and make a parallel in
the terms of the first Line, keeping the common Line at that opening, then the
parallel extent from the terms of the second Line, shall be the lateral 3d Term
or Line in Proportion.

Example, Suppose I have one Line 3 Foot long, and another 5 Foot, and I would
have another to bear proportion to 5, as 3 does to 5 increasing, being in
numbers thus; as 3 is to 5, so is 5 to what? Here note that 3 is the first
number, and 5 the second.

The first Line laid from the Center, on the 30 Scale, extends to 7 Foot 7
Inches, and 5 Inches; the second Line gives 12 Foot 8 Inches.

Now the lateral second Line, viz. 5, or 12 Foot 8 Inches, made a parallel 7 in
Foot 7 Inches, the terms of the first Line, then take out the parallel extent
from 12 Foot 8 Inches (the measure of 5) and it shall give 21 Foot 1 Inch laid
laterally from the Center, for a third Proportional required; which, measured
on the Inches, is 8 Inches and a third, the answer required; for as 3 is in
proportion to 5, so is 5 to 8, and a third part.

But by the Line of Numbers, having the quantity of the Lines given in Numbers,
do thus:

The extent of the Compasses from the first Number 3, to the second Number 5,
shall reach the same way from the second Number 5, to 8.33 the third
proportional Number required.

Use VI. To divide a Line in such sort as another Line is divided.
Take the whole Line that is divided, and lay it laterally on both Legs, and
fit the Line that is to be divided parallelly in the ends thereof, then lay
every part of the divided Line laterally in like manner, as the whole Line was
laid, and the parallel extent between those parts shall divide the Line
accordingly: as for Example;

Suppose I would divide a Line of 8 Inches long in such sort as the Line of
Circles on the inside of the 30 Scale is divided.

Take out 8 Inches, and make it a parallel in 2 and 2, the divided Line, then
take out the parallel distance from 3 and 3, and that shall give the point 3
from the end of the Line you would divide, and so consequently all the rest in
order, as far as you please.

Use VII. To find a mean Proportional between two Lines or Numbers.
Open the 30 Scale to a right Angle, by making lateral 21 Foot 2 Inches a
parallel in 15 Foot.

Then find the Sum and half Sum, the Difference and half Difference, between
your two Numbers; and having the half Sum between your Compasses, set one Point
to the half Difference counted laterally on one Leg; and wheresoever the other
Point shall touch the common Line on the other Leg, is the mean Proportional
required.

Example, Suppose a piece of Timber be 10 Inches one way, and 18 inches
another, what is the Square equal, which is the mean Proportional between them?
the sum of 10 and 18 is 28, the half sum is 14; the difference between 10 and
18 is 8, the half Difference is 4* Now the 30 Scale standing Square, taking 14
the half Sum between your Compasses, and then set one Point in 4 on one Leg,
and turn the other Point of the Compasses toward the common Line, and there it
shall show 13 ^/12 near the Square equal required.

Use VIII. To work the Rule of Three by the Line of Lines to 30 or to 3 Numbers
given to find a fourth, in Geometrical Proportion Direct.
Make the lateral second a parallel in the first, then the parallel third shall
give the lateral fourth number required.

Example, If one Foot of Timber cost 10 d. what shall 6 Foot cost? facit 60 d.

Make Lateral 10 a Parallel in 10 counted as 1, then the Parallel extent
between 6 and 6 shall reach to Lateral 60, the Answer required (in pence.)

Again, another Example:

If 50 Foot, or a Load of Timber cost 44 s. what shall one Foot cost?

Take the Lateral Extent from 22 the half of 44 s. and make it a Parallel in 25
the half of 50, then the Parallel distance between 2 and 2 counted as 4 Foot
shall give the Lateral Number of 3 s. 6 d. the price of 4 Foot, whose fourth
part is 10 d. the price of one Foot. Note this help is used, to avoid the
nearness to the Center where the work is inconvenient.

Use IX. To measure flat Measure by the Scale of 30.
At any Inches broad to find how much in length makes a Foot.

Take Lateral 12, make it a Parallel in the breadth given, then take out
Parallel 12 again, and it shall give the length of a Foot required.

Example, At 9 Inches broad, as Lateral 12, to Parallel 9, so is Parallel 12,
to Lateral 16, the length required.

Use X. The breadth of a Board given in Inches, and the length in Feet, to find
the Content in Feet and Inches required.
Take the Lateral Length in Feet, and make it a Parallel in 12, then the
Lateral distance, between the Inches broad, shall give the Parallel Content.

Example, Of 15 Foot 3 Inches long, and 9 Inches broad.

Take Lateral 15 Foot 3 Inches, and make it a Parallel in 12, then take out
Parallel 9 and 9, and it shall give Lateral 11 Foot and a half the Content.

Use XI. To measure Timber by the Line of Lines to 30.
At any Inches Square to find how much makes a Foot of Timber.

If the Piece be not Square, then by the eighth Use make it Square: Then thus;

Take the Lateral Side of the Square in Inches, make it a Parallel in 12, then
take out the Parallel Side of the Square, and it shall give a Lateral 4th
Number.

Then take out Lateral 12, and make it a Parallel in the 4th Number, and then
take out Parallel 12 again, and it shall show the answer in Inches laid
Laterally from the Center.

Example* At 9 Inches Square what makes a Foot?

As lat. 9. to par. 12, so is par. 9. to lat. 6.: Again,

As lat. 12 to par. 4th, viz. 6, so is par. 12, to 21 Inches 1/^ the length to
make one Foot required.

Use XII. The Inches, Square, and Length given in Feet, to find the Content in
Feet and Inches.
As the Lat. Side of the Square to Parallel 12, so is the par. lenth to lat.
4th: Again,

As the Lat. 4th to parallel 12, so is the par. side of the Square to Lateral
Content.

Example, at 9 Inches Square and 20 Foot long.

As lat. 9 to par. 12, so is par. 20 to lat. 15, a 4th number: Again,

As lat. 15 the 4th to par. 12; so is parallel 9 to lat. 11, the Content
required.

Thus much for the General Use, being too long a Disgression from the matter
mainly intended.

Use XIII. The Breadth of any Frame being given, to find the Length of the
Rafter and Perpendicular by Inspection only.
In being a General received Rule, that the Length of the Rafters should be
three-quarters the breadth of the House, (or Frame) for true pitch, and 40 the
Feet in one Scale, being equal in length to 30 the Number of Feet in another
Scale, and 30 being 3 quarters of 40. Therefore,

If you seek for the breadth of the House on the 40 Scale, then right against
it, on the 30 Scale, is the length of the Rafter required. Also if you seek the
length of the Rafter on the 40 Scale, on the 30 Scale, right against it, is the
height of the Perpendicular required, viz. from the Raising-piece to the top of
the Gable end or Rafter required.

Example, If a House be 30 Foot broad, the Rafter ought to be 22 Foot 6 Inches,
and the Perpendicular 16 Foot 9 Inches and a; for right against 30, counted on
the 40 Scale, on the 30 Scale is 22 -- 6 the Rafter, and right against 22 -- 6
on the 40 Scale on the 30 is 16 -- 9 the Perpendicular.

1. Also by the Line of Numbers, the Extent of the Compasses, from 20 to 15,
will reach the same way from the Breadth of any House to his proprotionable
Rafter at true pitch.

2. And the Extent from 20 to 18, turned the same way from any Breadth of a
House to his proportionable Hip-Rafter, in square Frames.

3. Also the Extent from 20 to 11 18/100 will reach the same way from the width
of any House to his proportionable Perpendicular, at square and true pitch.

4. And the Extent from 20 to 28 -- 28, will reach from any other House Breadth
to his proportional whole Diagonal Line required, at square and true pitch.

5. And the Extent from 20 the breadth to 26 -- 63 the nearest distance at that
breadth, shall reach from any other breadth to his proportional nearest
distance required, if it were needful. But the Angles in all Roofs great or
small, if true pitch and square, are the same in all Frames.

Use XIV. The Breadth of the House and the Height of the Perpendicular being
given to find the Rafters Length, the Hips Length, the Diagonal Line, from
Corner to the King-post, and any Angle required, in square Frames. What the
Perpendicular Height of the Gable end ought to be at true pitch by the last
Rule you may readily see, and the better make estimate of the quantity of
alteration. Which being once resolved on, then thus proceed.
First open the two 30 Scales to a Right Angle by making Lateral 21 Foot 2
Inches a parallel in 15, and 15 in the brass Center-pins.

1. Then count half the Breadth of the House on one Leg, and the Length of the
Perpendicular resolved on, on the other Leg, then the parallel distance between
them, measured Laterally from the Center, Rafter.
shall give the true Length of the Rafter required.

Hips.
2. For the Hips Length count the Length of the Rafter last found on one Leg,
and the half Breadth of the House on the other Leg, and take the parallel
distance between, and measure it from the Center Laterally, and it shall be the
true Length of the Hips required.

Diagonal.
3. For the Diagonal Line, count the half Breadth of the House on both Legs, and
take the parallel distance between, and measure it from the Center, and it
shall be the Length of the Diagonal Line, from the Corner to the King-post.

Hips Length.
4. Again for the Hips count the Diagonal Line last found on one Leg, and the
Perpendicular height on the other Leg, and the parallel distance between shall
be the Hips true Length measured as before from the Center.

Example. In a House of 20 Foot wide at true pitch. See Fig. 1. let ABCD
represent a Frame of a House 20 Foot wide, BY the half width, BA and CD equal
to BC the whole width being 2 points to draw the Diagonal Lines by. IE being
equal to IB, and the half EI laid from E to G gives IG the true Length of the
Rafters, and GB or GC the Length of the Hips.

Or thus, Three quarters of CB, viz. CH gives CF and BF the Rafters Length; the
same extent also laid upon the middle Line from I to G, gives CG and BG the
Hips Length, IF is the Perpendicular Height, E is the Point of the Diagonal
Line or King-post, perpendicularly opposite to or right under the meeting point
of the 2 Hips, and the 2 Rafters when raised and set in their places.

Thus much for Illustration what to do, now for Application how to do.

The Width of the House is always given, the Length of the Rafter, or the
Height of the Perpendicular is next resolved on, which in our Example being
true pitch is also resolved on, either by Inspection as before, or else by
operation in this manner.

1. The Breadth of the House being 20 Foot, and the Perpendicular resolved on
to be 11 Foot 2 Inches. To find the Rafters Length, work thus,

Open the 30 Scale to a Right Angle (by Use the seventh) count 10 the half
Breadth of the House on one Leg, For the Rafters Length.
and the Perpendicular Height 11 2 on the other Leg, ( viz. both on the 30
Scale from the Center) and take the parallel distance between them, (on the
common Line) and measure it from the Center, and it shall give just 15 Foot the
Length of the Rafter required CF.

2. But if according to the Width of any Frame, you resolve on the Rafters
Length, and would have the Perpendicular Height of the Gable end, then thus:

Count the Length of the Rafter from the Center, and take the Lateral Extent
thereof (being 15) between your Compasses, the Compasses being so set, For the
Perpendicular.
set one point in 10 the half Width of the Frame, and turn the other point
parallelly to the common Line, and there it shall show 11 Foot 2 1/7 Inches,
the true Height of the Perpendicular at true pitch required. IF 11 Foot 2
Inches 1/7.

3. For the Length of the Hips, Count the half Breadth of the House on one Leg,
and the Rafters Length on the other Leg, and take the parallel distance
between, and it shall give the true Length of the Hips required. For the Hips
Length.
As here, the parallel distance between 15 and 10, shall be Lateral 8, the true
Length of the Hips required in a Square Frame 20 Foot wide true pitch. CG.

4. For the Diagonal Line from the Corner to the King-post. Count the half
Width of the House, Half the Diagonal Line.
viz. 10 Foot on both Legs, and take the Parallel extent between, and it shall
reach from the Center to 14 Foot 1 Inch being the Line CE in the Figure.

5. Otherwise for the Hips Length, Count the half Diagonal on one Leg 24 1 and
the Perpendicular 11 Foot 2 In. Inches 2 2/7 on the other Leg, Hip.
and the Parallel distance between, measured from the Center, will give the
true Hips Length 18, viz. the Line CG.

Thus much for the Rafters and Hips in Square Frames at true pitch, the measure
of whose Angles and Lengths are as follows, F. Inc. 180 parts F. 100 parts.
degrees. min. The breadth of the house being 20 f. and the two ends square, and the
Rafters it true pitch, the Lengths and Angles of the Frames, are CF Rafter 15
00 00 15 000 Rafter Top Foot 41 50 CG Hip 18 00 00 18 000 48 10 IF
Perpendicular 11 02 17 11 180 Hips Top Foot 51 38 BE Diagonal 14 01 68 14 140
38 22 BY Half Breadth 10 00 00 10 000 BC Whole breadth 20 00 00 20 000
Difference 13 16 KG Nearest Did. 16 07 50 16 624 BD Whole Diag. 28 03 36 28
281 Outsid. ang. 116 12

The Rule to find the Angles of the Rafters and Hips.
1. For the Angles that the Rafters make at Foot and Head, with the
Raising-piece, and King-post, do thus,

When the Rule stands square in the 30 Scale, then lay any straight piece to
the Compass points, when one stands in the half breadth, and the other point in
the Perpendicular; then if you apply a Bevel severally, to that straight edge,
and the 30 Scale at each end, the one is the Angle at Foot 48 -- 10, and the
other the Angle at Head, viz. 41 -- 50.

2. For the Angle at Head or King-post, and Foot of the Hips, do thus; the 30
Scale being set square, set one point of the Compasses in the half
Diagonal-line; on one 30 Scale, and the other point in the Perpendicular on the
other 30 Scale, and to those points lay any straight piece, then set a Bevel to
that Straight piece, and each 30 Scale, and the one shall be the Angle at Foot
38 -- 22, and the other the Angle at the Head, viz. 51 -- 38, then this last
Angle doubled, and the difference between the Angle at head and foot, viz. 13
-- 16 added, makes 1^6 -- 12 the Angle of the outside of the Hip-Rafter, in a
square frame at true pitch required.

3. A General way to find this outward Angle of the Hip or Mould is thus, in
any pitch.

First, you must find the nearest distance from one Corner to the opposite Hip
set up, or from a point in the raising piece, as far from one Corner as the
House-end is broad, as the point K or L in the Figure may be done thus.

Count the length of the Hip on one Leg, (and also take it between your
Compasses) and count the breadth of the House on the other Leg, and set one
point of the Compasses in the Hips length on one Leg, and the other point in
the breadth of the House on the other Leg, altering the 30 Scales, but not your
Compasses; then when the 30 Scales are so set, one represents the
Raising-piece, and the other the Hip set up.

Then the nearest distance from the breadth of the House on one 30 Scale, to
the Common-line on the other 30 Scale, is the nearest distance required, being
measured from the Center, 16-7-.

Then take the whole Diagonal Line, viz. CL, or BK from the Center Laterally,
and make it a Parallel, in the nearest distance last found; and that shall set
the 30 Scales to the Angle of the outside of the Hip required, which you may
measure in degrees thus: take Parallel 15 as the Rule stands, and lay it from
the Center, and it shall reach to 116 Degrees on the Chords, next one 30 Scale,
the Angle of the outside of the Hips required.

Example, and more briefly in a House 20 Foot broad.
The House-end is 20 Foot broad, the whole Diagonal Line is 28 Foot 3 Inches,
the Hip-Rafter 18 Foot.

Take 18 Foot between your Compasses, and set one point in 20, and open or shut
the Rule till the other fits 18, then the nearest distance from 20 to the
Common-Line will be 16 Foot 7 Inches 4/8.

Then take 28 Foot 3 Inches, the whole Diagonal Line, and make it a parallel in
16 Foot 7 Inches the nearest distance, and the 30 Scales are set to the Angles
required: For,

If you take out Parallel 15 the Chord of 60, and measure it Latterally from
the Center, it shall reach to 116, the Angle in Degrees and Minutes required.

Note. If the whole breadth and whole Diagonal Line is too large for your
Compasses, then the half breadth and half Diagonal will do as well, (taking the
half length of the Hip also between your Compasses, and on the Scale also) and
that shall set the Scales to the same Angle as before.

Use XV. To find the Lengths and Angles of the Rafters and Hips, or Sleepers,
in Bevelling Frames at any Piton.
1. For the length of the Rafter, set the 30 Scales square, then count the half
length of the Bevel-end on one Leg, Rafter.
(being always more there than the half breadth) and the Perpendicular resolved
on, on the other Leg: Then the Parallel distance between, measured laterally,
shall be the length of the Rafter required, and a Ruler laid to the two Points
of the Compasses to set on the 30 Scales, and a Bevel set, as before in Square
Frames is showed, shall give the Angles at head and foot required.

2. For the Hips length, count the Rafters length on one Leg and the half
breadth of the Bevel-end of the House, more by half the number of Inches
bevelling on the other Leg, and take the Parallel distance between, Hips.
and measure it laterally from the Center, and it shall be the length of the
longest Hip-Rafter. And for the shortest Hip count less than the Bevel-end, by
half the number of Inches bevelling, and that shall be the short Hip required.

3. The Inches, or Feet and Inches of Bevelling being given, to and how much
one corner is under, and the other over 90 Degrees (or just Square) open the 30
Scales, Angle of the Frame.
and take the breadth of the House over at the nearest distance, between your
Compasses, from the 30 Scale from the Center laterally, and make it a Parallel
in 15 and 15 for 60 of the Chords.

Then take the Feet and Inches Bevelling from the same 30 Scale laterally, and
carry it Parallelly till it stay in like parts; then just against it on the
Degrees or Tangents are the Degrees and Minutes required, that one corner is
more, and the other less than 90 Degrees.

4. To find the Diagonal Line.
Take the distance in the Chords to the Degrees above, or under 90 last sound,
from the Center laterally, and make it a Parallel in 15 and 15, and then the 30
Scales are set to the Angle; the end is over, Diagonal-lines.
or under 90 Degrees: Then count the whole or half Bevel-end on both Legs, and
the Parallel distance between shall show the length of the whole, or half
Diagonal Line measured from the Center.

Note, That when the Rule stands at the Blunt Angle, it gives the longest
Diagonal Line; and when it stands at the Sharp Angle, it gives the shortest
Diagonal Line.

5. By the Diagonal Line and Perpendicular to find the Hips Length, and the
Angles at Head and Foot of the Hip or Sleeper.
Count the half Diagonal on one Leg, Hips.
and the Perpendicular height on the other Leg, (the 30 Scales being Square)
then the Parallel distance between, shall be the length of the Hip required,
being longer or shorter, as the Diagonal Line is.

Also a Rule laid to the two points of the Compasses measuring the Parallel
Extent, Angles of the Hips.
and a Bevel laid to the Rule, and the two 30 Scales, at each end, gives the
Angles at head and foot of Hips required.

To find the nearest Distance from the Corner of the Rombus to the opposite Hip
set up in his true place.
6. Count the length of the Hip on one 30 Scale, and take that distance also
between your Compasses laterally, count also on the other 30 Scale the length
of the Bevel-end, and there set one point of the Compasses, and open or shut
the Rule, till the other point falls in the length of the Hip-Rafter first
counted (then one 30 Scale represents the Raising-piece, Nearest Distance.
and the other the Hip set up) then the nearest distance from the breadth of
the Frame over, at the Bevel-end and more, or less, by half the Feet and Inches
Bevelling, to the Common Line of the other 30 Scale, being measured from the
Center shall be the nearest distance required.

To find the Angle on the outside of the Hip.
7. To find the Outside Angle of the Longest Hip, Take the shortest Diagonal
Line between your Compasses, and make it a Parallel in the nearest distance
belonging to that Hip, and the 30 Scales will be set to the Angle required, and
to measure it take Parallel 15 and 15, and measure it laterally from the Center
in the Chords; Outside Angle.
and you shall have the measure of the Angle required.

Example; In a House of 20 Foot over at nearest distance, and 4 Foot or 48
Inches Bevelling out of Square. See Fig. II.

Let ABCD represent a Frame 20 Foot over, and 4 Foot Bevelling, the Bevel end B
C is longer than right over by 5 Inches; for if you set the Rule square, and
take the Parallel extent from 20 the measure over, to 4 Foot the measure of
Bevelling, and measure it Laterally, you shall find it reach Laterally to 20
Foot and 5 Inches, the true length of the Bevel-end.

The Bevel-end being 20, 5 Inches the Perpendicular resolved on, which at true
Pitch ought to be about 11 Foot 5 Inches fere. Then first for the Rafters
Length.

1. Set the 30 Scales square, and set one point in 11, 5 the Perpendicular, and
the other point in 10 Foot 2 the half Bevel-end; (and to the Compass-points,
lay a Rule, and to the Rule and the 30 Scales at both ends set a Bevel,
Rafters. Length and Angles.
and one shall be the Angle at foot, and the other at the Angle at the top of
the Rafter: And the one Angle will be 42 Degrees for the Foot, and the other 48
for the top of the Rafters) and the measure between the Compasses measured from
the Center shall be 15 Foot 4 Inches, the Rafters Length required.

As by Inspection on the 40 and 30 Scales you may see.

2. For the longest Hip set one point in 12 Foot 2 Inches and more by two Foot,
than 10 Foot 2 Inch: the half Bevel-end, and the other point in 15, 4 the
Rafters length, and measure it from the Center, it gives 19 Foot 6 Inches the
longest Hip.

Again, Hips Length.
Set one point in 8 Foot 2 Inches 2 Foot shorter than the half Bevel-end, by 2
Foot the half of 4 Foot the Bevelling, and the other point in 15 Foot the
Rafters length, and measure it from the Center, it gives 17 Foot 4 Inches the
length of the shortest Hip.

3. For the length of both Diagonal Lines, set the Scales of 30 to the Angle of
the Frame at each corner, and the measure from the half, or the whole Bevel-end
taken Parallelly, shall be the length required of the half or whole Diagonal
Line, according as you take the whole or half Bevel-end.

As here in our Example the Blunt-end is 101 gr. 30 min. or 11 30 more than 90
gr. therefore take the distance from the Center to 101, Diagonal-lines.
30 on the Chords, and make it a Parallel in (15 and 15) the Chord of 60, then
is the 30 Scales set to the Angle of the Blunt-end of the Frame, and the
Parallel distance between 20-5 the whole Bevel-end gives 31 Foot 6 Inches, the
whole Diagonal Line, B L, or the Parallel between 10 2 give 15-09 Inches B E
the half.

Again, The sharp end is 78, 30 11 degr. 30 less than 90, then the lateral
Chord of 78, 30 made a Parallel Chord of 60 (at 15) then is the Rule set to the
sharp end of the Frame, for the shorter Diagonal Line. And the Parallel
distance between 10-2 gives 12. Foot 11. the half, or 25 Foot 10 Inches the
whole Diagonal Line C F, whose half is C E the shortest whole and half Diagonal
Lines.

4. For the Hips Length, and Angles at Foot and Head.

Set the 30 Scales square, and count the shortest half Diagonal 12 Foot 11 on
one Leg, and the Perpendicular 11 Foot 5 on the other Leg, Hips Length.
then the Compass points so set, lay a Rul^ and take the Bevel at both ends,
and it shall give the two Angles at head and foot of the shortest Hip, and the
same distance of the Compass points shall be 17 Foot 4 Inches fere, Hips Length
and Angles.
the Hip-lenght, as before, and the Angle at the top 48 30, and at Foot 41 30
his Complement.

Again, Set one point in 15 Foot 10 the longest half Diagonal, and the other
point in 11 Foot 5 Inches the perpendicular, and lay a Rule to them, and set
the Bevel to both ends, and you shall find 54 gr. the Angle at the top, and 36
the Angle at foot, and the distance between the Compasses laid from the Center,
gives 19 Foot 6 Inches the longest Hip.

5. For the Outside Angles of both Hips, the longest first.

Take 19 6 between your Compasses the Hips length from the 30 Scale: Set one
point in 20 Foot 5 the Bevel-end, and close the Rule till the other point
touches 19, 6 the Hips length.

Outside Angle of long Hip.
Then take the nearest distance from 18 Foot 5 [2 Foot less than 20 Foot 5 the
breadth of the Bevel-end of the Frame] to the other 30 Scale, and it is the
nearest distance from the point of the Rombus A to the Hip BG set up, 15 Foot 9
Inches.

Then t^ke out 25 Foot 10 the shortest Diagonal. and make it a Parallel in 15,
9 the nearest distance, and then the 30 Scales are set to the Angle required,
for the Outside of the Long Hip being 110 degrees for parallel 15 measured
laterally on the Chord, gives 1100.

6. For the Outside Angle of the shortest Hip.

Take 17 Foot 4 Inches between your Compasses, and set one point in 20 Foot 5
the Bevel-end, and open or shut the Rule till the other point reaches 17 4 on
the other 30 Scale. Outside Angle of short Hips.
Then the nearest distance from 22 Foot, 2 Foot more than the breadth of the
Bevel-end of the Frame to the Common Line on the other 30 Scale, and that shall
be the nearest distance from L to CG the shortest Hip set up, which is 18 Foot
9 Inches.

Then take out 15 Foot 10 Inches the half greater Diagonal Line, (because 31
Foot 8 Inches is more than the Scale of 30) and make it a Parallel in 9 00 the
half of 18 Foot, and the 30 Scales are set to the Angle required, viz. 122
degrees; for if you take out Parallel 15, and measure it in the Chords
laterally, it shall be 122 the Angle required.

Note here by the way, the length of the Bevel-end, and the two Diagonal Lines,
and the halfs of them, and the blunt and sharp Angles of the Frame, are given
by the draught of the Frame, and they being first known, the work is half done;
but if not given, then use these Directions, which will help you to see the
reason of plain Triangles, and the use of the Scales.

Use XVI. To find the Rafters, Hips and Angles in Bevel and Taper Frames, being
broader at one end than the other. See Fig. III.
First, when the Frame is broader at one end than the other, then the middle
breadth is to be the guide for the Rafters Length, and the Perpendicular to be
equal to the middle Rafters perpendicular on both ends; though one pair of
Rafters is longer than another, and the Roof in winding thereby: Which winding
may many times be remedied by some convenient artifice or other, as the
ingenious Workman will soon perceive. As thus in brief:

Let ABCD represent the Frame of a House Bevelling at both ends, and broader by
2 Foot at one end than the other; as here in the Bevelling figure, being 20
Foot on one side, and 24 Foot on the other side at one Bevel-end 10 Foot 4
Inches, and at the other end 8 Foot 1 Inch, but at the nearest distance over,
only 10 Foot and 8 Foot.

First, for your more apparent satisfaction, draw the true form of the Frame by
as large a Scale as you conveniently can, with the Sides and Angles as exact as
you can, as ABCD; then draw the middle Line OF quite through the length, and GH
through the breadth of the Frame Perpendicular one to the other; then measure
GH as suppose 9 Foot, then lay off the half of GH from H to I and K, then take
out of GH, and lay it from K and I to L 6 Foot 9 Inches for a pair of middling
Rafters for this Taper-House, LG being the common Perpendicular at the middle
and both ends of the Roof, 5 Foot 0 Inch of an Inch.

And for the principal Rafters, To find the Length of the very principal (or
single) Rafter in a Taper Frame.
or other Rafters, open the 30 Scale square, and then count the Perpendicular
50 on one Leg, and half the distance between the Rafter-feet or half breadth of
the Frame at that place on the other Leg; and the Parallel distance between
shall be the true Length of the Rafter required.

Then for the Hips Length, first make AM and BM equal to AE or BE at one end,
and make CN and DN equal to DF or CF, and draw the Lines MM and NN at both
ends, also make Ab and Bb equal to AB, and Ca and Da equal to CD, and draw the
Diagonal Lines AS and BS, and CO and DO at each end extended, and set down the
measures of them.

These Lines being drawn, you have the half Diagonal Lines AS and BS, and CO
and DO, and may measure them by your Scale, to find their Lengths, or set the
Rule to the Angles AES and BES, find them by the 30 Scale; also you have the
Bevel-ends of the Frame, and the nearest distance over from side to side of the
Frame.

Then for the Hips Length and Angles thus,
Set the 30 Scales square, and count the Perpendicular Height LG on one Leg 50
and each half Diagonal Line, etc. one after another on the other Leg, and the
Parallel distance between shall be the true Length of the several Hips
required: Example.

The Parallel distance between 5 Foot-o-Inches the common Perpendicular counted
on one 30 Scale, and 8 Foot 1 Inch, the longest Diagonal Line AS counted on the
other 30 Scale shall give 9 Foot 6 Inches for the Length of one Hip AP
laterally.

And the Parallel distance between 5 0- the common perpendicular, and 6 Foot 6
Inches the other Diagonal Line BS shall give the lateral measure of 8 Foot 3
Inches, the length of BP, the other Hip-Rafter for the broadest end of the
Frame AB.

Again, the Parallel distance between 5 0- the common Perpendicular, and 6 Foot
4 Inches the great Diagonal Line, CO at the narrowest end shall give 8 Foot 1
Inch for the Hip-Rafter CP. And the Parallel distance between 5 0- the
Perpendicular, and 5 Foot-0-Inch-0-the lesser Diagonal Line DO shall give 7
Foot 2 Inches for the Hips length DP to stand over the Diagonal Line DO.

Note also, that if to the Compass points standing parallelly you lay a Rule,
and to the Rule (so laid) and the 30 Scales at each end a Bevel, and set it
according to the Rule and 30 Scales, it shall give the true Angle of the Hips
at the Raising-piece and King-post, which 8 Angles in these 4 Hips are expressed
by the Lines and Letters in the Scheme thus: PAS and PBS, PDO and PCO the 4
Angles at the Raising-piece. And SPA and SPB, OPC and OPD the 4 Angles at the
King-post.

Whose length you may prove by Mr. Pope's excellent way, making SP and OP equal
to LG on the extended Diagonal Line, and drawing the Lines AP, BP, CP, DP, for
the 4 Hip-Rafters length required.

Or for more proof thus also by the Rule, as before in Square Roofs.

Set the 30 Scales Square, and take the Parallel Extent, from 7 Foot 2 -- the
Rafters length at the broader end, on one 30 Scale, to 6 Foot 2 Inches more,
then the Bevel-end by 1 Foot the half quantity of Bevelling, and it shall give
9 Foot 6 Inches for the Hip AP, and from 7-2 -- to 4-2, one Foot less than the
half Bevel-end, to 8 Foot the Hip BP. Also the Par. extent from 6 Foot 5- the
Rafters Length at the lesser end, to 5 Foot 0- one Foot more than 4-0- the half
little Bevel-end, shall give 8 1- for the Hip PC. And the Extent, from 6-5-4/8
the Rafters length, to 3-0- 1 Foot less than the half Bevel-end, gives 7-1- the
Hip DP, as before.

Note, That by the working these 3 ways, you may be sure to prevent any
mistakes that may happen in working one way only.

Lastly, For the Angles on the outside or backs of the Hips.

Take every several Hips Length laterally between your Compasses, and set one
Point in the Length of the Bevel-end, (or rather in a mean between AB the
Bevel-end, and MM at the greater end, or CD and NN at the lesser end) and open
or shut the 30 Scales till the other Point falls on the Hips Length that you
work for, then for the longer Hip count more, and for the shorter Hip less, by
half the Inches Bevelling, then the whole breadth over, at the end, and take
the Parallel nearest distance from thence to the 30 Scale for a nearest
distance, which nearest distance you must keep.

Then take the whole Diagonal Line Perpendicular to the Hip, wrought for ( viz.
the shortest Diagonal Line for the longest Hip at each end) between your
Compasses, and make it a Parallel in the nearest distance last found, and then
the 30 Scales are set to the Angle of the back of the Hip required.

Example in this Figure for the longest Hip.
Take 9 Foot 6 Inches, the Hips Length AP between your Compasses, and set one
point in 10 Foot one Inch (a mean between AB 10 Foot 4, and MM 9-10) and open
or shut the Rule, till the other point stands in 9 Foot 6, the Hips length
first taken. Then the nearest distance from 9 Foot 4 Inches, one Foot less than
10 f. 4 Inch. the Bevel-end distance over, to the other 30 Scale shall give 7
10 a nearest distance from the point b to AP the Hip raised over AS the
Diagonal.

Then the Lateral Extent Bb of the whole Diagonal Line 12 f. 7 Inch. being made
a parallel in 7 10 the nearest distance last found, shall set the 30 Scales to
the Angle at R the back of the Hip required measured by taking Parallel 30, and
measuring at laterally on the Chords it is about 108 Degrees.

Secondly, Take 8 f. 4 Inches, the other Hips Length between your Compasses,
and setting 1 point in 10 f. 1 Inch as before, open or shut the Rule till the
other point falls in 8, 4 the Hips Length.

Then the nearest distance from 11 Foot 4 Inches, 1 Foot more than 10 Foot 4
Inches the distance of the Bevel-end to the Common Line of the other 30 Scale
shall be when measured Laterally from the Center 9 Foot fere, for a nearest
distance.

Then 15 Foot 8 Inches the longer Diagonal Line being made a Parallel in 9 Foot
fere, the nearest distance last found, sets the 30 Scales to 121 Degrees the
Angle required, the back of the shorter Hip required.

The same work serves for the other end, being near the same Angles: Which you
may prove by M. Will. Pope's excellent way, thus: find the middle between S and
A, or S and B at Q, then the nearest distance from Q to BP or AP near lay to R,
and draw the Lines RE, RM for the Angles at R the back of the Hips required.

Moreover, if you raise 4 Perpendiculars cutting the Points O and S, the two
places of the King-posts being perpendicular to the Raising-pieces AC end BD,
as the 4 Pricklines S, S, O, and O do show, and lay the length of each Hip from
his proper corner ABCD as AP from A to and. BP from B to and, DP from D to and,
CP from C to and, then draw lines from point to point, as in the Figure.

Then and are the two Ridges when turned right over OS, and C D is the least
Hip, and A B is the greater Hip, as Mr. Pope has well showed. Thus much for
Hipt Roofs.

Use XVII. To find the Length and Angles of every Principal particular Rafter
in Frames broader at one end than the other.
The Perpendicular, as before was hinted, is to be the same all over the Roof.
Therefore open the Rule Square, and take from the Perpendicular on one Leg, to
the half breadth of the Frame on the other Leg, measure it from the Center, and
that is the Length required. For the Angles lay a Rule to the Compass-points,
and set a Bevel, as before is showed, and you have the Angles at the
Raising-piece, (and Ridge of the House) to cut the Rafters feet by.

The same Rule serves to draw out a pair of Well-Stairs, to give Hypothenusaes,
or strings, at any particular height and breadth; for the 30 Scales set Square,
and the Perpendicular height counted on one Leg, and the breadth on the other
Leg, the measure between is always the Hypothenusa, or string in flying Stairs,
as may plainly appear.

Use XVIII. To find the Length and Angles of Collar-Beams in any Roof.
Take the whole breadth of the Frame between your Compasses, and set one point
in the Length of the Rafter on one Leg, and the other point in the same place
on the either Leg: then the two Legs represent the two Principal Rafters, and a
Rule laid to the Compass-points represents the Raising-piece; then at any
height that you please above the Raising-piece, apply a Rule parallel to it,
and the measure between laid from the Center, gives the length, (remembering to
add wood for the Tenons) and a Bevel laid to the 30 Scale, and Rule, gives the
true Angle to cut it by, (where the Timbers be square.)

Use XIX. To find the Lengths and Angles of Rafters, and Purloyns in Bevel
Frames.
The Length of the Rafters is showed before, to find it by the half breadth of
the Square or Bevel-end, and the Perpendicular answerable to that Roof, (as
afterward in the Example.) And the Angle of the Foot, and outsides or backs of
the Bevel-end Rafters, and the upright of the Gable end, must be to an Angle
less and more than 90 degrees by the Angle at the corner of the Frame where
that Rafter is to stand, being more at the sharp Angle, and less at the blunt
Angle, as in Figure IV you may see; the true quantity of which Angle is thus
found by the Rule.

Take the Length of the Rafter for the Bevel-end in Feet and Inches, and make
it a Parallel in 15, then half the quantity of Feet and Inches Bevelling, taken
from the same Scale, and carried parallelly till it stay in like parts, shall
show right against it in the Tangents the Degrees and Minutes required.

And this is the Angle that the blunt corner is to be laid in Legement more
than a square, and the sharp Angle less than a Square or 90 Degrees, both out
of Level, and out of square also, when you tumble or stripe in, the Tenons of
the Purloins, the thing desired.

Example, Let AB represent the Bevel-end of a Frame, being out of Square from
the Line AC 6 foot, as the Line CB shows; then if AC be 20 foot, AB will be
20 Foot 10 Inches. Then draw EL the middle Line of the Frame, and GM and HK,
the Lines at three quarter of the breadth of the Frame, then take ED the half
Bevel, and lay it from G to F, and from H to I, and draw the Lines AF and BY,
for the outside Lines of the two Bevel-end Rafters: end the two other Lines
parallel to them, according to the Breadth or Scantling of your Bevel-end
Rafters, as here in the figure 8 Inches broad. Thus the Lines AF and BY
represent the two end Rafters, laid in Legement to fit in the Purloins, as for
their lying out of Square from the Raising-pieces. And to the same Angle they
are to be laid out at Level, that the cutting of the Purloin ends may fit the
Rafter sides, when erected in their places, according as the ends F and I of
the Bevel-end Rafters are, according to the Angl^s AFG and AFM, the one being
11 degrees and 20 minutes under, and the other 11, 20 above 90 degrees.

Also, Note that if PK and OM do represent a pair of square Rafters, at any
intended distance from A, then TS and RQ will give the true Length of the
Purloins fit for those places, RQ being the shortest Purloin, and TS the
longest Purloin.

To find by the Rule only how long the Purloin must be on the outside more or
less than the distance on the Raising-pieces, where you intend the two Square
Rafter feet shall stand, do thus: set the 30 Scales to the same Angle that the
Bevel-end Rafters lie out of Square, when they lie in Legement, to frame which
here is to 11 degrees and 20 minutes.

Then count from the Center the quantity of Feet and Inches you intend to make
the Mortise-holes from the Rafter Foot, in the Rafters, for the Tenons of your
Purloins; and take from thence to the nearest distance to the other Line, and
that shall show the quantity that the one Purloin is to be longer, and the
other shorter, than the distance between the Rafter-feet on the Raising pieces.
Example thus:

Set the 30 Scales to the Angle GAF, then count AS the place for the
Mortise-hole from A on the Rafter, and take the nearest distance from thence to
the other 30 Scale that shall give SV, the quantity how much TS is shorter than
AO, and how much RQ is longer than PB.

Note, that if you count 3 quarters of 20 Foot 10 Inches, being the Length of
the Bevel-end, that then you will make the Rafters too long by 4 Inches and a
half, as in the Figure you may see: therefore the surest way to find the
Rafters Length is to set the Scales to a Square, and then to take the Parallel
Extent from the Common Perpendicular, to the breadth between the place for the
Rafter-feet on the Raising-piece: So that the Length of the Rafters for the
Bevel-end at true pitch, is AF 15 Foot 3 Inches, and not AW 15-7-, which is
just 3 quarters of AB the Bevel-end over which the two Rafters are to stand.
For then the top of the Bevel-end Rafters would be too high for the top of the
Square Rafters being cut just 15 Foot, three quarters of 20 Foot the breadth of
the Frame.

Use XX. The Use of the Scales to lay down or measure out on Paper, or Board,
the Members and Parts of the fine Columns, and their Ornaments, with their
names and measures, digested into a Table, for the more ease and use of Workmen.
For the drawing of the fine Columns and their Ornaments is largely before
treated of in the former part, by models, minutes and quarters, and considering
the harmony between it and our Scales to 30, that are parted into 12 parts, so
that when every Figure or Foot, on the Scales to 39 represent a model, then
every Inch is 5 minutes; and for small Paper-draughts, that way of counting is
near enough; but when you use it for a bigger draught, that the whole Scale of
30 may represent 3 models only: then every Figure will represent 6 minutes, and
the 12 Inches between are half minutes: but in very great Work, as in Temples,
or Castles, then the whole Foot or Scale to 30 may represent half of one Model
only, and then every Figure or Foot is a Minute, and every Inch or small
division is the 12th part of a Minute; for I count it to be a large Column,
whose Diameter at the Base (which is a Model) is above 3 Foot, and by this
manner of computation, which is natural to most Scales, the Scales to 30 may be
rendered convenient for small, or moderate, or large uses, as in the following
Examples may somewhat appear.

In reading of which you must have recourse to the former Figures, whose
Members are marked with 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10, and which Figures direct you to
the names in every of the Columns which I found to be wanting in the former
part, so that the method here used is thus: 1. The first Column in the Table is
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12, etc. answerable to the Figures on the 6th Figure,
in our present Example, which will streightway guide you to the meaning of the
names or terms in the Table by comparing it and the figure together, whereby
you may readily find every part or member, and its proper name. 2. The second
Column is the names of the Part or Member in the gross and particular also, as
the Pedistal, the Base, the Shaft, the Capital, the Architrave, Frieze, and the
Cornice, are the names in gross; the other are the names of the members in
particular. 3. The third Column in the Table is the several measures of the
particular members, in Models, Minutes, and Quarters, as in the Figures, though
more easily to be seen than in the Figures, because of the straightness of the
room there. 4. The fourth Column in the Table is the measure of every
particular part and member from the Pedistal, Base or bottom, to the top of the
Cornice, being useful in small draughts where the whole Pillar is expressed. 5.
The fifth Column in the Table is the several measures of every particular
member of each gross part, being useful when you draw large draughts of any
Work, or part thereof. 6. The sixth Column in the Table is the measure of the
Projecture of every particular part from the middle Line of the Column (or from
the smallest or most inward part of the Pillar, the rest being subtracted) but
I judge the middle Line to be the best Epoch to begin the account of
projecture for the convenience of the Compasses: and this Table of Projectures
as all the rest, is to Models, Minutes, and Quarters; as by trial you may see
at one view what each gross part and every particular part is.


The Description and Use
The Names and Number of the Members of the Tuscan Column in Height and
Projecture.
A Table for the Tuscan Order. Each part from the Base Each gross part alone
The proj. or middle* Number. Names of the parts and members. mod. min. q. M. m. q.
M. m. q. M. m. q. 1 Pedistal.
The lower Faceo, or Plint, of the Pedistal The Pedistal Body, or Stilobatum
Abacus, the Casement, or hollow Tinea, the List, or Square, or Rabit The
Architrave or Faceo The upper List of the Pedistal
0 30 0 0 30 0 0 30 0 0 42 0 2 1 0 0 1 30 0 1 30 0 0 40 0 3 0 5 2 1 35 2 1 35 2
0 41 0 4 0 1 2 1 37 0 1 37 0 0 46 0 5 0 12 0 1 49 0 1 49 0 0 47 0 6 0 3 2 1 52
2 1 52 0 0 46 1 7 Base.
The Plint, of the Base of the Column The Thorus, or Rondel, or Breast The List,
or Fillet, or Spira
0 18 0 2 10 2 0 18 0 0 42 8 0 12 0 2 22 2 0 30 0 0 42 9 0 03 0 2 25 2 0 33 0 0
36 10 Shaft.
The Shaft or Body of a Col. at the Base at the Capit.

0 30 0 6 22 0 8 47 2 6 22 0 0 22 2 11 Capital.
The List The Rondel or Astraga^ The Neck or Freize The List The Rondel, or
Bead-molding The Echinus, or Half-round The Plint of the Capital
0 1 2 8 49 0 1 2 0 24 12 0 3 2 8 52 0 5 0 0 26 13 0 8 2 9 01 0 0 13 2 0 22 2
14 0 1 2 9 2 2 0 15 0 0 24 15 0 2 2 9 5 0 0 17 2 0 26 16 0 7 2 9 12 2 0 25 0 0
30 17 0 10 0 9 ^2 2 0 35 0 0 31 2 18 Architrave, Frize and Cornish.
The first Faceo The second Faceo The List or Supercilium The Plint The
Zoporus, Epistylum or Frize The List or Supercilium The Scimatium or little O G
The Supercilium or List The Scima or greater O G The List The Corona or Crown
The List The upper Scima or O G The Supercilium, List, Tinea, or Eybrow The
upper List or Plint of the Cornish for the Tuscan Column or Order
0 10 0 9 32 2 0 10 0 22 2 19 0 15 2 9 48 0 0 25 2 24 2 2^ 0 1 2 9 49 2 0 27 0
26 2 21 0 3 2 9 53 0 30 2 27 2 22 0 40 0 10 33 0 1 10 2 22 2 23 0 2 0 10 35 0 1
12 2 23 2 24 0 5 0 10 40 0 1 17 2 26 2 25 0 1 1 10 41 1 1 18 3 30 0 26 0 8 2 10
49 3 1 27 1 35 27 0 1 2 10 51 1 1 28 3 49 0 28 0 9 3 11 01 0 1 38 2 50 29 0 1 2
11 2 2 1 40 0 52 30 0 8 0 11 10 2 1 48 0 56 31 0 1 0 11 12 0 1 49 2 1 00 0 32 0
3 0 11 11 0 1 52 0 1 02 0

Thus I have given you an Example of the Tuscan Order of the measure of every
Part and Member: the like may you make, from the Figures in the Book, of all
the other Orders, for your particular use and occasion.

FINIS.
The said Rule with all other Mathematical Instruments are made and sold by
John Brown, living in the Minories at the Sign of the Sun-Dial, and by Walter
Henshaw in East-Smith-field near the Hermitage.

There is also to be sold by William Fisher at the Postern at Tower Hill, a
very useful Book, Entitled, The Description and Use of the Carpenters Rule,
together with the Use of the Line of Numbers, commonly called Mr. Gunter's
Line. Also the Book of The Five Columns of Architecture, by Hanc Bloome.

THE ORDER OF THE FIVE COLLOMNES


The TUSCAN Colomne


The TUSCAN Artch


The TUSCAN Colomne with ye Pedestall


The TUSCAN Artch with: ye Pedestall


The Pedestall Base and Ornament of the TUSCAN


Imposts and Ornament of ye TUSCAN


The DORICK Colomne


The DORICK Arch


The DORICK Colomne with the Pedestall


The DORICK Arch with: ye Pedestall


Pedestall. Base and Ornament of the DORICK


Imposts and Ornament of ye DORICK order


The IONICK. Colomne


The IONICK Arch


The IONICK Colomne with: the Pedestall.


The IONICK Artch with: ye Pedestall


Pedestall Base and Ornament of the IONICK


Imposts and Ornament of ye IONICK order


The ROMAN Colomne


ye: ROMAN Colomne with: ye: Pedestall


The ROMAN Arch


The ROMAN Artch with ye Pedestall


Pedestall Base and Ornament of ye ROMAN


Imposts and Ornament of ye: ROMAN


The CORINTHIAN Colomne


The CORINTHIAN Arch


The CORINTHIAN Colomne with: the Pedestall


The CORINTHIAN Areh with: ye: Pedestall


Pedestall Base and Ornament of ye: CORINTHIAN


Imposts and Ornament of ye CORINTHIAN


The Corinthian Capital.


The Base of the CORINTHIAN order


The CORINTHIAN Ornament


The Ornament of A CORINTHIAN Doare or window


Two Mantle trees for a Chimney:


ye Ground platt of my Lord Strozzi house Standing at Florence


The Inside of my Lord Strozzi house standing at Florence


The front of my Lord Strozzi house standing at Florence


The Vnderside of ye: Cornish


The Roman Capital:


The Diminishing of the Colomne



















