NEW MEMOIRS AND CHARACTERS Of the Two Great Brothers, THE DUKE of Bouillon,
AND Marshall TURENNE.

Written in French by James de Langlade, BARON of Saumieres.

Made English.

LONDON, Printed by T. W. for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1693.

TO MY Honored Friend Sir Edmund Warcupp, of Oxfordshire, Knight.
SIR,
I shall make you but a bad Return for Lending me these Memoirs, by sending
them back in my English. However I did not think I could be too intent upon
them, when the longer I read, and considered this Book, the Characters of two
such Brothers as the Duke of Bouillon, and Marshall Turenne; raised in me a
True and more Lively Idea of your Sons, the Colonel, and the Captain. It is
true, that the former being born Princes, became Great Generals, but then they
lived long in the World to obtain it: whereas the other Two Brothers, though
cut off in their Bloom, had done more than any of such an Age could do, toward
Equalling their Great Examples.

The Battle of Sedan, in which the Duke of Bouillon got his greatest Glory, has
nothing more Considerable in it than the Action, by which he gained the Enemies
Cannon: and, upon Reading this, who could not but have an Image of Colonel
Warcupp's Bravery in the Battle of Steynkirk, where he drove the French from
their Cannon, and laid his own Half-Pike upon them. In the same Battle when the
Count de Soissons should have received the Advantage of the Victory, It is with
Surprise that we find him dead. This naturally brings Captain Warcupp to our
Remembrance, who, when He should have received the New Commands, which, for his
Valor, the King designed Him, was (instead of enjoying the Reward) found
mortally wounded in His Majesty's Service.

This, to a common Reader, may seem a melancholy and an improper Address to a
Father, but then they must be Ignorant of the Greatness of Sir Edmund Warcupp's
Mind, and his true Notions of Honor. Lacedaemon heretofore gloried in so great
a Man as Thrasibulus, who, receiving his Son Pitanas dead upon a Shield in his
Countrey's Service, Interred him with these Expressions: Let other Fathers shed
Tears; I Will not: This Youth died, like mine: Like a Spartan.

England has Reason to boast of a Double Honor in Sir Edmund Warcupp, who with
such an Evenness of Temper, and Heroic Patience, could bear the Loss of Two
Sons, so Young, so Brave, so very much his own, and so true English Men.

As for my own part, were I to be a Father, I should wish for such Sons; and
must they die! I would lose them after the same manner. And, I am sure, that in
bearing of my Misfortune, I could have no better Pattern than your self. But,
in the Circumstances I am in, at present, there is nothing I am more Ambitious
of, than to be Admitted amongst the Number of,

SIR, Your most Faithful Friends, and Humble Servants,

THE PREFACE.
THE Memoirs, here Published, were Collected by the late James de Langlade,
Baron of Saumieres, Secretary to the Council. They were found amongst his
Papers after his Death; and there being some Imperfect Copies in the Hands of
several Persons, who might have Printed them; his Widow, Madam de Langlade,
thought it better to oblige the World with the Original; which has given
Occasion to the present Edition.

MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE OF FREDERICK MAURICE De la Tour d' Auvergne, DUKE de
BOUILLON.
THere is no need of any Motive but Vanity alone to make the generality of Men
commit to Writing such remarkable Passages as come to their Knowledge: For
their aim is not only at present Glory, but the recommending of their Memory to
future Ages. But as for my Self, I can protest, that these are not the Motives
that induce me to the undertaking of these Memoirs. And that which makes me
believe, that I give a sound judgment of my self, upon this occasion, is, that
I had never began 'em, if I had not put an extreme violence upon my own Nature,
and looked upon the finishing of 'em as a duty indispensable. Let a Man take
all the caution he can, there will happen out a thousand inconveniences from
such sort of undertakings. One of the wisest Men of our Age, and of the first
Quality in the Kingdom, endangered his Family by the unfaithfulness of a
Transcriber, and the malice of a Person that had corrupted him. Besides, let a
Man have whatever design he please of writing only for himself, and letting
nothing appear in public till after his Decease, yet I see plainly, that ones
Opinion often alters; and that either under the pretense of placing a great
confidence in some Persons, or taking their advice, one willingly searches
after Confidents, to the end that one may find Admirers; so that among the
great number of Friends, whom our own self-Love or presumption makes choice of
in these Encounters, one always finds some indiscreet and unfaithful Person or
other, who reveals such disagreeable truths as will never admit of Pardon: and
it is impossible, without speaking of several Persons, to write the Memoirs of
a Man's Life who bore the principal part in so many great Transactions.
Besides, to speak conformably to my own inclinations, I should choose any other
employment rather than this, to fill up that idle time which my misfortunes for
some years last past have thrown upon my hands. But the Memory of the Duke de
Bouillon is so dear to me, and I have so great a veneration for it, that I
daily reproach my self for having so long deferred the publishing of what I know
concerning so great a Person.

I have endeavored, but without Effect, to learn something of his Infancy; for
I should have been willing to have spoken of it; being persuaded, by several
Observations I have made, That generally even in that tender Age of Mankind,
there are some lights given toward the discovery of what may afterward be
expected from them. And whenever those to whom the care of their Education is
committed, are deficient in the Knowledge of their Capacity, the Qualifications
of their Mind, their Genius; and, in short, their peculiar Inclinations, and
their Nature in general; it must be either for want of Light or Application.
Nor do I doubt but that we are often led, either to good or evil, and indeed to
any sort of business, according to the first Impressions and Examples that are
given us. Upon this very account, I cannot sufficiently wonder at the little
Care that is taken in the Education of Children. For whether we regard
Religion, as becomes every true Christian, or consult humane Prudence only; I
think there is nothing in the World, that is of equal Consequence. I know some
Tempers appear so manifest, and their Inclination to evil is so violent, that
it is almost impossible to alter them; but there are very few, that by great
Care and due Management may not be retrieved, if we begin to set about it
betimes. You see how Seneca and Pyrrhus were for some time able to prevail over
the cruel Inclinations of Nero. They might, perhaps, have made an honest Man of
him, if, as a private Person, he had been subject to the Laws, and obliged to
raise a Fortune by his Virtuous Actions: But the Greatness of his Birth,
placing him above any thing that he might be afraid of, and beyond any thing he
could farther desire, he followed the whole Current of his wicked Inclinations.
But, I perceive, That my Discourse has already ran too far upon a Subject,
which has no very great Relation to the Matter which I propose to Treat of.

THE First BOOK.
Frederick Maurice de la Tour d' Auvergne, was Son of Henry de la Tour d'
Auvergne, Duke of Bouillon, Sovereign of Sedan, by Isabella of Nassau.

IT would be unnecessary for me to speak of the House of the Duke of Bouillon:
All France knows, That both for its Antiquity, and the Grandeur of its
Original, it is one of the most Illustrious among the Chief Families in the
Kingdom: And Strangers are well enough informed of it by their frequent
Alliances with the Principal Families of Europe, and by the Sovereignties of
Bouillon and Sedan, which fell into it in the last Age.

I shall say but very little likewise of the Duke de Bouillon, during his
Minority, because I have not so exact Memoirs, as I could have desired, and I
will advance nothing, which I have not seen, or am very well assured of.

He completed his Studies at Sedan, where Mr. du Moulin, the Minister, was his
Tutour; a Man very much esteemed for his Learning. He bred him up in the
Reformed Religion, the Duke, his Father, and his Mother, being both
Protestants. His first Journey from thence, was into Holland, when he was about
sixteen Years old. This Country was then the Seat of War, and in the Opinion
of all the World, the best School to learn that Art in.

His Uncle, the Prince of Orange, who was esteemed one of the greatest Generals
of his Time, made him begin with a Colors in the Regiment of Maison-Neuve.

I have heard say, That, at first, there appeared little extraordinary in him,
and that indeed he was something slow in displaying himself. He spoke little,
kept himself reserved, and among his own Domestics. But at last he made
himself sufficiently known, and gained a great Reputation, as soon as he began
to have some Understanding in the Affairs of War, and the Country. This
showed, That his Silence, and Inclination to so peculiar a Reservedness,
proceeded only from his extraordinary Natural Parts, which would not suffer him
to speak of things without understanding them.

He then became Curious to that degree, that he was inquisitive about every
thing, and searched into the Niceties of the smallest Matters, that he might
know 'em thoroughly. But in satisfying his Curiosity, he never applied himself,
but to such Persons with whom he was most familiar. He then permitted himself
to make a small sally toward the Pleasures of Youth; and, amongst the rest,
that of frequent Entertainments, in which, though He was always magnificent,
yet it was without Excess.

In a short time he became active and vigilant, and familiar even to
Popularity, when it suited with his Designs: a Talent, which I have seen him
make an admirable Use of, in the following Course of his Life, upon very
important Occasions.

The Prince of Orange, seeing him thus altered, and finding, that he had a
strong Propensity to War; began to take a little more Care, in informing him.
He commanded him out, upon all Occasions, where any thing might be learned, or
any Honor gained. The Duke de Bouillon answered his Designs and Hopes with
that Advantage; that I have heard him then commend him to diverse Persons, for
having signalized his Courage and Conduct in several Encounters.

One of the most Considerable was at Boisleduc. The Prince of Orange having
besieged it, the long Resistance, which the Garrison made, had so weakened and
dispirited his Army, that, not thinking himself able to hinder a Convoy, which
the Enemy were sending, from entering the Town; there was a Resolution taken
secretly in the Council to raise the Siege. The Duke of Bouillon having Notice
of it, earnestly requested, That he might be permitted to go and encounter this
Convoy. He laid before the Prince of Orange the Methods, by which he would be
guided in this Design. The Prince finding they had been extremely well
contrived, proposed 'em to the Council, where it was resolved, That the Event
of 'em should be tried. In Pursuance of this, the Duke took such Troops as he
had demanded; He led them, by an extraordinary March, to find the Enemy in a
place where he had projected before to fight 'em, because it was very
advantageous to himself. There he attacked 'em, defeated 'em, took their
Commander Prisoner, and brought the Convoy, which was designed for the Relief
of the Place, into the Prince of Orange's Camp.

This Action raised the Duke to a great Reputation, and began to make him
looked upon as an Extraordinary Man. He gained the Hearts of the Soldiery, by
the Opinion they conceived of his Courage, and his great Genius for Warlike
Affairs; but more especially by that Natural Goodness which appeared in all his
Actions, by his Modesty, in speaking of himself, and his Familiarity, when he
did not command them. He had a good Mien, but could not be said to be handsome.
He was proper, had a high Forehead, his Eyes full and sparkling; Eyebrows
large and thick, but at a convenient distance. There was nothing rough either
in his Mind or Humor; yet something great and fierce both in his Air and
Tread. He knew even the smallest Officers, and, that they might not be ignorant
of it, he affected to call 'em by their Names: a way of treating Inferiors,
very politic and becoming a great Lord.

The States General, and those of the Province, could not long continue silent
in his Praises, which we may look upon as the more sincere, because they
grounded them upon their own glory and advantage; for this incident caused
Boisleduc to be Surrendered, which was a place very important to them, and added
much to the reputation of their Arms. They began to reward the Services of the
Duke of Bouillon with the Government of Mastricht, which they gave him. The
Prince of Orange showed great satisfaction in all these Proceedings, though
perhaps he would not have beheld 'em without uneasiness and jealousy, if they
had not raised thoughts in him suitable to his own Interests. He was now very
old, and had but one Son, and he in the Cradle, so that not hoping to be able
to live long enough to see him of a sufficient Age to fill his Place, and
finding all People well affected to the Duke of Bouillon, he looked upon him as
a Man in whose hands he might deposite the Government of the States upon his
own Decease; and to link him still more closely to him than he was already by
his Relation, as a Nephew, he resolved to make him his Son-in-Law, but he
thought it Prudence to wait another opportunity to declare this to him.

Things stood in this condition, when in Carnival time, the Troops being in
Winter Quarters, the Duke of Bouillon would go incognito to see Brussells. This
Journey which he undertook at first as a thing indifferent, only for diversion,
and to satisfy his Curiosity, did afterward change the whole Scheme of his
Fortune, and by a train of accidents became the source of all the happiness and
misfortunes of his Life. So that it is every day apparent, that the Fate of the
greatest Men and most flourishing States, turns upon things which at first view
seem of no consequence, and we often find, that if that which we ardently
desire had happened, we should be miserable; whereas all our happiness often
proceeds from this, That the things we are afraid of come to pass in spite of
us. Notwithstanding all this, we never leave projecting, and attributing the
good success to our selves, though we are often ignorant of the Causes, and can
never foresee the effects. If to such evident demonstrations of our Vanity, and
the weakness of our Understandings, we do but add those thoughts which we ought
to have as good Christians, we should undoubtedly show more Courage when we ly
under unhappy Circumstances, because we should see the hand of God in them: and
we should have less uneasiness while our designs are depending, because we
should never frame any but with an entire submission to the Disposal of
Providence.

One of the most splendid Courts in Europe, was at Brussels, when the Duke of
Bouillon came thither. The Duke of Orleans had retreated thither, and had been
followed by some Persons of the first Quality in the Kingdom, and a great
Number of the Nobility. The Infanta Isabella likewise had drawn thither the
Principal Families of the Low Countries, of which she was Governess. Here it
was, That the Duke of Bouillon saw Mademoiselle de Bergh, at a Ball. She was a
Person of great Birth, of a surprising Beauty, had the Reputation of much Wit
and Prudence, but a Catholic, and without any Fortune. The Duke of Bouillon
having learned her Name, found that she was his Relation; but there was a
Motive, stronger than that of Blood, which made him ambitious of being known to
her before his Departure. The Visits which he made her, engaged him still
farther. However he departed, without speaking of the Impression she had made
upon his Soul, though she easily perceived it. The Report of this Passion, was
soon spread in Holland, by those who had born him Company to Brussels: and
because no one could imagine that it would come to a Marriage, for abundance of
Reasons, which destroyed the very Thoughts of such a thing; People spoke of it
only as the Adventure of a Traveller, and that before his Face. But soon after
he returned to Brussels, in very great danger, and upon a slight Pretense. This
second Journey, made it apparent, That the Duke was more in Love, than he was
thought to be. At his Arrival he found a Discourse of a Match between
Mademoiselle de Bergh, and the Count de Bossu. Honor and Jealousy joined
themselves with Love, and forced the Duke to declare his Designs of Marriage.
He returned by the way of Sedan, to propose it to the Duchess his Mother. But
she was the more averse to it, because she knew her Brother, the Prince of
Orange, had designed him for one of his Daughters, who was afterward married
to the Elector of Brandenburgh: Besides his Mother had always resolved he
should marry one of her own Religion, and indeed he might have had his Choice
of any Protestant Lady in France, nor had he been a Match below any Foreigner.

Upon his Return to Holland, the Prince of Orange, and his real Friends, used
all their Endeavors to persuade him from this Marriage, and he, having Spirit
and Ambition enough, often attacked himself with very potent Arguments. But
these contributed only to his Uneasiness: For when Absence and Difficulties
cannot efface the first Impressions of Love, they render the Passion so strong,
That nothing can be able to change it.

When the Duke of Bouillon had continued about a Year in this Condition; his
Mind in suspense, and his Soul divided, by the Opposition which his Love made
to his Fortune; he at last fixed his Resolution, and the Duchess his Mother,
and the Prince of Orange, having not been able to hinder the Marriage, were
forced to approve it, when it was consummated. Love has often made the greatest
Men neglect the Advantages which Fortune has offered them, and that in a much
riper Age than the Duke of Bouillon was yet arrived to. I shall speak but one
Word in his Favor, and to the Honor of his Duchess, That I verily believe he
never repented his having married her. The Duke having tarried some time at
Sedan, whither he immediately carried his Lady, went with her into Holland, and
there Beauty and Merit gained so far the Ascendant, That every one approved the
Choice, which they had before so much condemned.

From the Hague the Duke de Bouillon went to Mastricht, to give his Orders, as
Governor, and afterward returned to Sedan, with a Design to tarry there some
time. His first business was, to gain an exact Insight into his own Concerns,
which he effected with the greater Ease, because never Man did things in better
Order. This appeared even in the smallest Matters: It was not in his Power to
look over 'em superficially, as Persons of Quality generally do, who think it a
Virtue, to place a blind Confidence in their Servants, and never perceive their
own Ruin, till it is past Remedy: As for him, he saw and examined all, yet
without that Spirit of Meanness, by some called good Husbandry, into which Men
often fall by too great Exactness: so near to one another are Virtues and their
opposite Vices.

But as for these lesser Affairs, they were instantly laid aside, when more
Important Business required his Attendance. He was very industrious, but the
pains he took were never uneasy to him. He never retreated at the Prospect of
any Labor, how great soever it might be, either of Body or Mind; but indeed he
was the same in every thing; he would be so intent upon his very Diversions,
that one would think he had been made to pursue them only. In private Company
he had so complaisant an Air, and would relax his Mind so far, that it would
then be hard to perceive his more Noble Qualities: and yet to have seen him
upon some great and public Action, one would have thought it impossible for
him to reduce himself to a private Station, though this was easy to him
whenever he thought it necessary.

His Affairs at Sedan, were not so many as to take up all his time, so he
applied himself to reading, and having fallen upon Calvin's Works, his Mother
was extremely pleased with it, being confident, That they would be a means to
confirm him in his Religion. But when she faw, that from reading he passed to
doubting, and from Doubts to a Desire of having them cleared, she began to take
the Alarm, especially when she was told by du Moulin, That the Duke had
proposed to him the holding a Conference in his Presence, with a certain
Religious Person, who was thought to be very well versed in the Controversy:
then she begged of him to relinquish that Design, and demonstrated to him both
her Grief and Fears.

The Duke of Bouillon had always had a great Tenderness and Respect for his
Mother, and his Fear of disobliging her, was the greater and more just, because
he had so much displeased her with his Marriage.

These Considerations delayed the Conference for some time, though the Duke did
ardently desire it, because du Moulin had urged several things against the
Catholic Religion, which the Duke of Bouillon was not able to answer. He spent
some Months in these Circumstances, but being no longer able to lie under such
Uncertainties, in an Affair of so great Consequence, he Resolved, to be plain
with du Moulin, and to speak to him as his Prince. He told him then, That he
would propound his Doubts in the Presence of the Father he had proposed before,
and another understanding Person, that he had sent for to Sedan: but he charged
him, Not to let his Mother have any intimation of it. There were several secret
Conferences held, after which the Duke was perfectly convinced of the Errors
of his Persuasion. He made his Abjuration of it, but it was in private, that he
might not offend his Mother; hoping, by this Management, to endeavor, in time,
to bring her over to the Knowledge of the Truth. He set himself to this, with
all the Application imaginable; and we may imagine he would leave nothing
undone, in so important an Affair, whose Success would spare him so much
Trouble.

It would be too tedious for me to relate here, what passed after this, during
the space of two Years, in which he continued to gain farther Light and more
ample Instructions. I shall only say this, That I believe, No Man of his
Quality was ever better instructed, or more persuaded of his Religion.

In the mean time, he received Advice, That the Spaniards were marching to
Mastricht, with a Design to besiege it. He was to lose no time, but immediately
to throw himself into the Town. He departed the same moment, but found it
invested. How-ever, by good Fortune, he got in, though not without Danger. He
defended it with a great deal of Bravery, and signalized himself by frequent
Sallies: so that the Prince of Orange having gained time to join his Troops;
and to march; the Enemy, upon his Approach, immediately raised the Siege.

In this Place the Duke of Bouillon met with Beringuan, for whom he had a great
Esteem and Friendship. He was a Man of Worth: Cardinal Richlieu had banished
him, because he was in favor with Lewis the XIII th. and because He had not
only a great deal of Loyalty, but as much Bravery and Conduct.

The Duke of Bouillon made him the Confident of his Abjuration; and withal,
told him, That to the present minute he had kept it as a great Secret, because
of the Duchess his Mother; but that, seeing (though not without extreme
Concern) neither Time, nor any thing else that he could do, would retrieve her
from her Errors, he was upon the point of declaring himself to her, and
professing publicly the Catholic Religion, when he received the News, That
the Enemy was marching to Mastricht. He added, That there was but one only
Reason, which could possibly induce him to delay it longer, which was his
Suspicion, lest in the present Conjuncture, the News of his Abjuration might
raise some Jealousies in the States and Prince of Orange; but that, as soon as
he should come to Sedan, he would declare, and send them a Resignation of their
Government, and the Command he had in their Cavalry: which he did the first
moment after his Return.

The great Affliction of his Mother, the Duchess, cannot be expressed. Nor was
the Grief and Indignation of the whole Family any less. The City of Sedan,
inhabited by Protestants, changed the Love they bore him into a secret Hatred.
He lost all his Posts in Holland, and renounced his greatest Expectations. In
short, upon the sole Respect he had to his future Salvation, he resisted all
humane Considerations, and passed by all the Advantages of his Fortune. So many
great Difficulties, which he foresaw well enough, and knew they must be
surmounted, might easily let us see the Vigor of his Mind, and the Grandeur of
his Courage; unless the Conversion of Men's Hearts is to be attributed to God
alone.

Some time after the Duke of Bouillon had declared his Abjuration, he came to
Court. He knew it not, nor was he known there, but by his Reputation. His
Design was to follow the Interest of France, where he had large Demesnes, and
his chief Inclination being to War, that against Spain, which had continued
some Years, seemed to open a way both to his Glory, and his Fortunes.

The Cardinal Richlieu was then at the highest Pitch of his Grandeur. He was a
great Minister, who, as all others do, owed the beginning of his Fortune to a
favorable Conjuncture, but the Settlement and Consequences of it were the Work
of his own Wit and Conduct. He had always great Designs: and never troubled
himself with any, but the most important Affairs of State; that he might have
more time for his Diversions and Repose. He governed the State with an Absolute
Power, but yet without governing the King, who, on the contrary, hated him at
the bottom. But the good success of his Administration, and the sure
Establishments he had made himself; set him beyond the Effects of Hatred.
However, there was always some Favorite, who, not being sufficiently devoted
to him, still gave occasion to Cabals in the Court, and the Intriegues of the
Closet: and these, joined with the fresh Example of the Death of Marshall d'
Ancre, caused great Disquietness to him. He spared nothing to gain Persons of
Merit over to him, or to ruin 'em, when he could not gain them. And no
Minister was ever better informed of what passed both within and without the
Kingdom. Should one judge of him by his Countenance, and outward Appearance,
nothing could be expected but an extraordinary Sweetness. Whereas he was
violent in all his Desires; and Love and Hatred never had a fuller power over a
great Man, to make him act as they pleased. Many of the most considerable
Incidents of his Life, had one or other of these two Passions for their
Foundation. He was very sensible of Friendship, but never pardoned a declared
Enmity. So his Ministry was terrible to Persons that were not in his Interests.
For as those he confided in might aspire to any thing, so there was nothing but
what his Enemies had Reason to be afraid of. All the great Lords that would not
submit to him were in Prison, banished, or out of favor. In short, either
forced by the necessity of the times, or his own Nature, he always chose rather
to establish the Security of his Person and Fortune by Rigor and Blood, than
to run the hazard of good Nature and Clemency.

The Duke of Bouillon made no long stay at Paris. He was well received by the
King, and all the Court. The Count de Soissons visited him often, and upon all
occasions treated him with a distinction, which showed his peculiar Esteem, and
a Desire of having him for his Friend. But they parted without entering upon any
matter that was considerable. The Cardinal and the Duke saw one another often,
but there were such Oppositions between 'em, that it was not easy to link 'em
in any strait Union.

The Cardinal was for none but such as were wholly devoted to him: and the Duke
of Bouillon was not made for Servitude; he was born a Sovereign, and had passed
his Life in a free Country. Besides, the Commands in the Army were full, which
were the only Things that could oblige him. So he returned, having only a
general Knowledge of the Court, and without any reason to praise or find fault
with the Cardinal: but with a Mind not much disposed to comply with his way of
Governing.

Some time after, the Count of Soissons retired to Sedan, to withdraw himself
from the Effects of the Cardinal's Hatred.

Common Fame has published several things as the Causes of their Disagreement;
but all the World agree, That if the Prince would have married Madam de
Combalet, Niece to the Cardinal, he had designed things so great for him, That
a Man would scarce venture to speak, and which would very hardly be believed.

The Duke of Bouillon dispatched a Gentleman to Court, to give the Cardinal
advice of the Arrival of Monsieur the Count; and to entreat the King, not to
take it ill, that he had afforded a Retreat to a Prince, who, he thought, had
committed nothing which might displease him, and in whom he could find none but
honorable Intentions of serving him.

The King approved the Duke of Bouillon's Conduct, and the Cardinal wrote him
word, That his Majesty thought fit, that Monsieur the Count should continue at
Sedan. But some time after, the Negotiations not having produced the Effects
which the Cardinal expected from them, he would have the Duke de Bouillon
abandon the Prince, and make him depart from Sedan. The Duke of Bouillon
excused himself, and answered, That the King having once approved of the
Prince's Stay there, he thought he might give his Word to him, for his
undoubted Security without limitation of Time: That such an Engagement to a
Prince of the Blood, did not leave him at the Liberty of proposing such a thing
to the Count, as his Retirement: That he prayed him to consider these Reasons,
and be pleased to apply himself to his Majesty, to gain his Approbation
likewise: That he hoped the rather for this Favor from him, because he could
assure him, That Monsieur the Count preserved inviolably all that Fidelity and
Respect which was due from him to his Majesty: And that he saw him very much
disposed to come sincerely to an Accommodation. In short, he was there at that
time. But Monsieur the Count being weak and self-conceited, when he did not
make himself stubborn by Distrust or Fear, he became so by his Vanity, and
Hopes for which he could have no foundation: besides he had no Person near him
that was fit for Business, which was the greater Misfortune to him; because,
for the generality, even the greatest Men don't maintain their Grandeur so much
by their own, as the prudent use they make of other Men's Counsels. So this
Prince being thus reduced to the Guidance of his own Inclinations, was so
uncertain in his Resolutions, that he never was of the same mind for two whole
days together.

In the mean time, the Duke of Bouillon was not ignorant of the Consequences
which might attend this refusal he had made, of ordering the Count to retire
from Sedan. He knew also the Irresolution of the Prince: he thought that he had
Honor and Justice on his side; and, at least, the concern he had for his own
Reputation, was sufficient to hinder him from doing any thing that might
blemish it. However it was, finding himself engaged, and seeing his own Ruin
at hand, he resolved to close with the Prince, to endeavor to fix him to some
one design. He told him then that in the condition things were, whatever side
he would take, there was no time to be lost in it; that if he would fall in
with the Cardinal, he should not stay till the beginning of the Campagn, when
the accommodation would become more difficult, and not so advantageous, or
honorable, because it would seem to have been forced. That on the contrary, if
things were past reconciliation between 'em, he must resolve upon an open War,
and take measures proper to maintain it. That for himself he would not counsel
him on either side, not desiring in so important an Affair to be Guarantee for
its Event: That he had no reason to be discontented with the Court: that at
present he had no manner of pretensions there: but that being resolved to
hazard all things for his Interests, it was necessary to consider what might
happen in case they should take Arms: That he had not altered his resolutions,
but on the contrary, would confirm whatever Promises he had made him; and that
he beseeched him to believe that nothing was able to stir him: But that he had
no mind to let himself be Besieged in Sedan; that he knew a great many Troops
were drawn out upon the Frontiers, and that if he would not come to Agreement
with the Cardinal, he should put himself into a condition of being in the
Campagn as soon as ever the Season would permit.

Whether Monsieur the Count found himself this day more disposed to determine
for War, than he was the day before; or whether he were pusht forward by the
Duke's Reasons, and the renewing of his Promises, He at last assured him, that
he would come to no Terms with the Cardinal; and to show him, that for his part
he would hearken to nothing, he proposed to him a Treaty with the Emperor and
the Spaniards.

The Duke de Bouillon saw plainly, that by their Succors it was impossible to
set an Army on Foot that should be able to resist the Kings, and to hinder the
Siege of Sedan, or the ravaging of the Country. Nevertheless one day, that He
might let the Prince recollect, that it was not he had lead him a march of so
great consequence, he took occasion to lay before him all the mischiefs that
were to be expected. It is not to be doubted, said he, but that the Emperor
and the Spaniard will agree to all the Proposals, that shall be made them on
our side. It Is their common Policy to agree to every thing till You are Imbarkt
in their Affairs, and afterward to stand to nothing but what is advantageous
to themselves: they will easily give some Money to begin the War, and send
Troops to maintain it for the present; but afterward they will take care their
Words and their Engagements shall be no burden to them; they will support us
only to make Diversions, and facilitate their other designs: but their interest
and ours will always be opposite at the bottom: It is ours to endeavor to
enter France, to ruin the Fortunes of the Cardinal: we must look for our
Security and advantage in a Peace, and the Establishment of a new Ministry;
They on the contrary, would have our condition beyond retrieving, and this
Ministry to subsist to be a perpetual Cause of division and trouble, which they
may work their ends by. But if we should be so unhappy, as to be forced to give
our selves entirely up to them, as it must happen, if we be not succored from
within the Kingdom, or upheld by some great Success; the War, which we have
undertaken, beginning to be reduced to a common War, You will become a Charge
to 'em, by reason of Your Quality; and when they have no Consideration for You,
you may quickly judge whether they will have any for me.

Monsieur the Count was not shocked by all these Reasons; the fear of the
Cardinal made him dread nothing else but the falling into his hands. They
concerted therefore what were their present Interests, and all that they had to
do: They made a double Instrument, which both of them signed; in which, among
other things, they promised never to treat separately. Afterward they sent to
the Emperor, and the Cardinal Infant who commanded in Flanders for the
Spaniard. The Duke of Bouillon, for his part, sent the Baron de Beauveau, a Man
of great Quality, and of a Conduct and Courage which made him always contemn
Fortune, and dangers. At the same time the Duke of Guise flying likewise from
the Cardinal's Persecution, came to Sedan, and finding things in this posture,
desired, That he might enter into the same Alliances, with the Emperor and
Spaniards, as the Prince, and the Duke de Bouillon. He gave Beauveau powers to
treat for him: but afterward, impatient to wait for his return, or rather
pushed on by the Antipathy, which Monsieur the Count had to him, he went to
Brussels, under pretense of laboring to further the Treaty by his presence.

He was a Prince well-shap'd, liberal and magnificent. He had a great deal of
Courage, and seemed to have as much Wit. He was then very young, and so they
attributed to his Age his great Inconstancy, and several other things, which
were blameable in his Conduct. But the Actions of his whole Life having been
always Youthful, there is reason to believe, That at the bottom these Faults
proceeded from his Nature, and not from his Age.

Whilst Monsieur the Count attended the Success of this Negotiation, he sent
secretly into France, to endeavor to raise Money from his Estate, and to
establish a Correspondence with the Cardinal's Enemies. They were strong, and
in great number, but they were dejected, not only by reason of his Power, and
the frequent Examples of his Revenge and Punishments: But rather, because
Treachery being sure to meet with a Reward, all Confidence seemed to be
banished from among Men: and so were absolutely persuaded, That there could be
no Security in the most secret Transactions. As for the People, they were
universally disposed to a Revolt: for in all times, a long Ministry, let it be
good or bad, will procure their Hatred, and whether it proceed from their
natural Inconstancy, or their real Misery, they always place their Hopes in a
Change.

In the mean time, the Cardinal ordered great Magazines to be made upon the
Frontiers, for the Subsistence of the Army, that it might be sooner than
ordinary in the Field.

The Duke of Bouillon, for his part, began to prepare for the War, and all the
Consequences of it, that he could foresee. He made 'em work upon the
Fortifications of Sedan, and furnished the Town and Castle with all things
requisite for a long Siege. He engaged several Officers, both Horse and Foot,
whom he had seen serve in Holland, and made Levies in the Country of Liege,
with which he reinforced the Garrison.

Things were in this Posture about the End of May, when the Baron of Beauveau
came to Sedan, with as ample a Treaty as they could desire, signed by the
Cardinal Infant for the Emperor and the King of Spain.

The Emperor promised Seven thousand Men, and the Archduke as many for the
Spaniard; and these two Bodies joined together, were to rendezvouze near Sedan
in the Month of June.

The Spaniards likewise engaged to send Two hundred thousand Crowns, to make
new Levies, or to be employed as Monsieur the Count, and the Duke de Bouillon
should judge most proper for their Designs. But the Spaniards gave but one half
of the Money which they had promised. Nor did they send that in the time they
were obliged to, and they failed entirely as to the Troops. The Emperor
performed his part; he sent General Lamboy with Seven thousand Men which he was
to furnish. During this, the Marshall de Chatillon came into the Field toward
the end of May, and advanced toward Sedan, as if he would invest it, but he
returned by the way of Monzon, without attempting any thing.

The Duke de Bouillon seeing him so near, and judging, that nothing was to be
expected from the Spaniards; proposed to the Prince the sending to Lamboy, to
make him draw nearer. Lamboy answered, That he had no Orders to pass further
without the Spanish Troops. Monsieur the Count and the Duke sent back to him,
to propose a Place for a Conference with him. He accepted it; and the Duke of
Bouillon went to meet him. He endeavored to make him understand, of what
Importance it would be, to let France see, That they had an Army near enough to
Marshall de Chatillon, to be able to oppose his Designs. But seeing he could
not move him, by Reasons drawn from the common Interest, and that he had
detached the Troops of his Army to send toward Air; he declared to him, at
last, That Monsieur the Count and he would go, and make what Terms they could,
unless he drew nearer to Sedan, and engaged to enter France with them, after
they had joined all their Forces.

Lamboy, seeing things in this Extremity, changed his Resolution; promised to
march, and to be in the Neighborhood of Sedan, within three days, with his
Troops.

The Duke de Bouillon sent a Gentleman immediately to Monsieur the Count, to
acquaint him with the Success of his Negotiation, and staid himself behind,
that he might send down the Boats he found upon the Meuse, to make a Bridge
there, to avoid the letting Lamboy's Army pass through Sedan. When he had set
them at work about it, Monsieur the Count came to him, under pretense of seeing
what they did. The Duke of Bouillon having entertained him some time, with the
Discourse of their Affairs, had no great difficulty to discover, that some
other Motive brought him thither. He found his Mind so possessed with the
Thoughts of an Accommodation, That though he was satisfied before of his
proneness to change, yet he was surpised at it, and could not forbear telling
him so, Monsieur the Count told him, That since he parted to go to the
Rendezvouze of Lamboy's Army, he had received a Letter from the Duke of
Longueville, his Brother-in-Law, which seemed to open a Passage to a
Negotiation between the Cardinal and him, and judging, that in this Conjuncture
they had all the Reason in the World to fear the Difficulties which Lamboy's
Approach might put them to; he thought it was Prudence to let himself appear
more irreconcilable than ordinary: that he had sent a Gentleman, that he could
conside in, to the Duke of Longueville, and that, till he was returned, he
would endeavor to keep Lamboy on the other side the Meuse. The Duke of
Bouillon answered him, That the making such a Proposal to Lamboy must be the
Ruin of all their Affairs: for having pressed him to the degree we have done,
What Reason have we, says he, to put the Change upon him, so soon and so
grossly: it must be easy for him, to see there can be no other cause, but a
Treaty with the Court, and then it cannot be doubted, but he will retire and
leave us exposed to unavoidable Dangers: That it was the Count's business, to
show himself at the Head of an Army on the other side of the Meuse: That then
would be a proper Time and Place to consider what Proposals to make 'em: And
that this March alone would add a great Reputation to their Arms.

Though these Reasons seemed to the Duke of Bouillon, to have made a deep
Impression upon the Mind of the Prince; yet to prevent any thing that might be
apprehended from the wavering Condition that he saw him in; Lamboy was no
sooner arrived, but he made him pass the Meuse with his Army.

In the interim, it being the Nature of Irresolution, which proceeds from
Weakness, to increase in proportion to the Instances that are made for a speedy
Resolve: Monsieur the Count was no sooner returned to Sedan, but he was more
unresolved than ever. In this Case he thought the Duchess of Bouillon the most
proper Person in the World to second his Intentions. He went to find her; and
having reasoned with her, upon the State of Affairs, he obliged her to write to
her Husband, all that Prudence or Tenderness could possibly inspire her with;
and to send Chadirac, one of his Secretaries, in whom he had a great
Confidence, to endeavor, at least, to persuade him to let Lamboy's Army lie
encamped under Sedan.

The Duke de Bouillon, after having received the Letter, and heard all that
Chadirac had to lay before him, answered him, that he knew very well the danger
they were in, which in reality was augmented, rather by the weakness of
Monsieur the Count, than the Power of the Cardinal: That as to what related to
his own particular, he saw reason to be afraid of any accommodation that should
be made without a Sword in their hands: that it could not lay open to him the
prospect of any Hopes, nor leave him so much as any reasonable pretense of
making any Demand: that on the other hand, it was not to be doubted, but the
Cardinal, either sooner or later, would be revenged of him for those Advantages
which he must be forced to let Monsieur the Count have over Him. But that if
they could push things forward, one lucky Event in the beginning of the
Campagn, would make all France take Arms, and overturn the Cardinal's whole
Fortune.

That he had advice there were great Commotions in Guyenne, and that the Favor
that Cinqmars, Master of the Horse, was in at Court, had already made Parties
there; that in short he should find greater Security and Advantages in pursuing
the War, than in any Peace could be made, as things stood at present. That
besides, as he had before told the Prince, Lamboy would assuredly Retreat, the
very first moment that he saw him change his design, not being able to
attribute the Cause of it to any thing but an Accommodation with the Cardinal.
That this was an Argument beyond reply, and sufficient to show, that they must
have nothing to do with new Projects.

Our Forces, continued he, when together, are above ten thousand Men, and the
Marshal de Chatillon has not more. There is nothing further then to be weighed,
either we must fight him, or force him to retire. Lamboy agreed with me in
this, when I made him resolve to advance toward his Entrance into France. If
we gain the Battle we have all before us. And after having hazarded so much as
I have done, to serve the Interest of Monsieur the Count, Victory may then give
me leave to put forward my own Pretensions. But if Fortune prove adverse to us,
we may at least gather this Advantage from our ill Success, that our Retreat to
Sedan, and so great a Resistance as ours will be, will show how far we are
Embarked in these Affairs, and then our Friends, both in the Kingdom and
without, will think themselves obliged to hinder us from falling.

When the Duke de Bouillon had spoke thus to Chadirac, he sent him back, and
ordered him to tell the Count, that Lamboy's Troops had passed the Meuse before
break of day, and that as soon as he had joined them, and they were Encamped
together, he would come to him to concert their final Resolution. In the mean
time, a Party, the Duke had sent out, brought him word that Marshal Chatillon
had Decamped, and some of the Prisoners that were taken affirmed, that his
Design was to Post himself upon the Meuse, near Sedan, to hinder Lamboy's
Passage.

After the Duke of Bouillon had received this Advice, and had made Lamboy pass
the River, he went to find Monsieur the Count, to acquaint him how things went,
and to let him understand, that now, without any further delay, it was
necessary to march up to Marshal Chatillon. Monsieur the Count agreed with him,
and the Duke finding him so well disposed, used all his endeavors to oblige
him to tarry in Sedan. He offered to leave him absolute Master there; and told
him, that in the Progress of the War, he would find other occasions enough to
signalize his Courage, but that at the beginning he ought above all things to
preserve his own Person. That as for himself, supposing he should fall in the
Fight, it would be a great Consolation to him to know, that He was in Safety,
and in a Condition to preserve his Wife and Children from being exposed to the
Vengeance of their common Enemies.

Monsieur the Count not only refused to tarry in Sedan, but proposed it to the
Duke to tarry there himself; and to let him alone run the hazard of a War, in
which the Duke was engaged only upon his Consideration.

This generous contest was concluded by their Resolution, that both should
march. The same day the Duke of Bouillon having heard Mass, and taken the
Sacrament at the Capuchins Church, and afterward left Orders in Sedan, and
signed some Papers that he judged necessary for his Household; returned to the
Army, and Monsieur the Count came thither likewise some hours afterward.

In the mean time Marshal de Chatillon, who was an undaunted General, but
incredibly negligent, being persuaded that Lamboy's Forces were still on the
other side the Meuse, marched to oppose his Passage. But he found the Duke of
Bouillon at the head of them, who having advice of his march was advanced with
a great Body of Horse, and being drawn up on a rising ground, had placed his
Squadrons so thick, that they could not see there were any Foot to support him.
Then he immediately secured all the places thereabouts, that might incommode
the Enemy. In the mean time Lamboy came up with the Infantry, and Cannon, and
Monsieur the Count with his Troops.

The two Armies being thus drawn out, and ready to join Battle, the Duke of
Bouillon rode up to the reserved Body, where Monsieur the Count was. He found
him at Confession, behind a Bush, which was his third time that same day.
Having tarried a little time to speak with him, he heard the Cannon: so being
in have to return, He charged the Captain of the Count's Guards, to tell him,
That, as things stood, it was of the utmost importance not to delay Fighting
one moment, and that he was going to give the Onset.

I shall not relate the particulars of this Fight, there are several Printed
Accounts of it: and if I should repeat the Praises which are there given to the
Duke of Bouillon, I should seem, instead of the Memoirs of his Life, to have
undertaken his Panegyric.

The Duke of Bouillon, with his Horse, charged those of the Enemy, and broke
'em; so that falling back upon their own Infantry, they created so great a
Disorder, that in a little time the whole Army was Routed.

All things went likewise well on Lamboy's side, who fought like a Captain, and
a Man of Courage. There was no brave resistance made but by the Cannon, which
the Duke of Bouillon attacked with great hazard of his own Person: But after he
had taken and routed the Troops that he found there, there appeared no Body of
Men that could rally again sufficient to make a Stand. Then the Duke of
Bouillon seeing himself near the place where Monsieur the Count was, went
himself to acquaint him with the Defeat of his Enemies; but found him dead.

The Fate of this Prince is the more strange and unfortunate, because he lost
his Life without having fought, and lost it even after the Victory, encompassed
with his Guards and several Gentlemen, and no one yet could ever truly know, by
whom, nor how he was slain. As for my own part, having laid together all the
Circumstances, that those who were then about him have related, I am persuaded,
that he killed himself. This was likewise the Opinion of the Duke of Bouillon.
For it is certain, that he twice lifted up the Visor of his Helmet with the
Barrel of one of his Pistols; and that Riquemont, his Gentleman of the Horse,
fore-warned him of the danger that might happen by it. It is certain, that the
Blow was in the middle of his Forehead, and that the Shot was so near, that the
Paper went into his Head. Nevertheless, because that the very moment he gave
himself this Blow, it chanced, that no one's Eyes were upon him: the Shame and
Despair of those that were about him; and, above all, the great Prejudice they
had to the Cardinal, made 'em say, That it was he that had caused him to be
assassinated, by a Traitor, who had mixed himself with his Guards.

If we consider thoroughly, how much the Duke of Bouillon had hazarded for
Monsieur the Count, we cannot doubt the Interest he had in the Preservation of
his Person. And then, if we judge into what a Condition the gaining of this
Battle would have put the Fortune of the Prince; it will be no hard thing to
comprehend how great a loss his Death must be every way to the Duke of
Bouillon, and consequently how great his Sorrow for him. In the mean time,
knowing of what Importance it is, to hinder the Disorder, which generally
happens in an Army, through the Desire of Spoil, and Heat of Victory; he
returned immediately, and omitted nothing that might secure it to him. It was
so entire, that the Marshall de Chatillon lost all his Infantry, and almost
all the principal Officers were slain or taken Prisoners.

The same day the Duke of Bouillon sent Salaignac to the Cardinal Infant to
carry him the News of the Victory, and Death of the Count; and to assure him,
at the same time, that the Treaty between the Prince and him being mutual, he
was ready to maintain it in every part, provided he would oblige the Spaniards
to perform their parts for the future, and prepare what they had been wanting
in heretofore.

Whilst the Return of Salaignac was expected, the Duke of Bouillon, with
General Lamboy, went to besiege Doncheri, a Place upon the Meuse, two Leagues
from Sedan. He carried it in four days: after this, he was for marching into
France, being persuaded, that if the Fame of his Victory had already raised the
Hopes of the Cardinal's Enemies; yet the Death of the Count, which they must,
no doubt, have had notice of, at the same time, would put them into a
Consternation: so that it was of very great Consequence, to let 'em see, by the
continuation of their Progress, That the Party did still subsist. But Lamboy,
without contradicting the Duke's Reasons, proposed only the deferring it for
some days, till he had refreshed his Troops. During all this Interval,
whatever Instances the Duke could make, it was impossible to oblige him to
march further; on the contrary, he sent Three of his best Regiments to Air:
and, after that, repassed the Meuse, to follow the Cardinal Infant, who marched
to the Succor of Air, and who had sent him Orders to join him.

The Duke of Guise, in a little time after, returning from Brussels, retired
with Lamboy, being offended, that the Duke of Bouillon did not stay for his
Arrival before he fought.

The Duke of Bouillon made a Gentleman go after him, to tell him, That to
follow the Spaniards when they had abandoned him, did not look like a
Performance of the Treaty which they two had signed. If he had any Designs,
that respected their common Interests, it was necessary they should concert
them; and that, if he would give him a Meeting, he would be sure not to fail
him. The Duke of Guise returned Answer, That he would be at Sedan in three
days, and there they would take their Measures. However, he did not come back,
nor was there one word heard of him.

Lamboy, to whom the Duke of Bouillon made a Compliment, by the same Gentleman,
wrote him a Letter, the Original of which is in my keeping, and which shows the
very great Esteem he had of him. After, having spoke to him of his private
Concerns, touching the Prisoners he had left at Sedan, and the Cannon taken in
the Fight, He added these very Words: As for what remains, my Lord, I see your
Highness is about making your Peace with France; upon which Subject I have
nothing to say. But it is with great Regret, that I see my self removed from
serving any longer under the Command of so great a Captain; to whom I shall
always continue, and with Respect, etc.

The Duke of Bouillon seeing himself in this manner abandoned, sent back
Salaignac with speed, to the Cardinal Infant, with an Instruction signed by
himself. He first complained, That since the Death of Monsieur the Count, he
had never vouchsafed to send any Person to signify the part he took in so
considerable a Loss, both for the Quality of the Person, and the Interest of
the Party: That in the very Letter that he had received from his Royal
Highness, by the Hands of Salaignac, he was so far from speaking of the Count,
in terms due to a Prince of the Blood Royal of France, That he had mixed him,
without distinction, with Persons that were not of equal Birth, when he spoke
of the Duke of Guise and himself: He assured him further, That he was ready to
execute the Treaty: But he declared, he would not stand to it, unless the
Spaniards would perform what was behind, and both the Emperor and they
immediately send the Troops and Money, which they had promised, for the
carrying on the War. He spoke also of Money advanced, and Losses both by the
King's Army, and Lamboy's. He represented the Freedom with which he had acted
during the War: He left it to others, to tell him how much he had contributed
to the gaining of the Day; and desired his Royal Highness to be pleased to
consider, That the Posture their Affairs were in, appeared so advantageous,
that there was nothing they might not hope for, if he would but put him into a
Condition of pursuing the Victory. He further added; That he should take the
delays made in answering him and not satisfying his Demands, for a manifest
Rupture: That in this case he must be off of the word he had given, and charged
Salaignac to demand the Papers he had signed; protesting, before all the
Princes of Europe, That having been abandoned, without Regard had to the Faith
of a solemn Treaty, nor to the Advantages of a Battle gained, and a Town taken;
he was reduced to seek his Safety in an Accommodation.

The Answer of the Cardinal Infant, was filled with nothing but the Praises of
the Duke of Bouillon, and the Examples of those who had been ruined by
confiding in Cardinal Richlieu, after having once declared against him: but he
avoided any positive Answer to his Demands and Remonstrances, and concluded in
these Words: If the Spaniards (says he) have failed in their part of the
Treaty, the Emperor having executed his, it is just, that his Highness should
address himself to him, for an account of their Failings, and that he cannot
acquit himself without knowing what he will answer: But Lamboy being retired,
no Answer that was to come so far, could be expected, without exposing him to a
manifest Danger.

The Marshall de Breze at the Head of an Army, had joined the Marshall
Chatillon, since the Battle. The King was likewise advanced toward the
Frontiers, and come as far as Rethel: so that all the Forces together were Five
and twenty thousand Men.

The Duke of Bouillon seeing himself in this Extremity, forced to retire into
Sedan, and to rely upon his own Forces, doubted not but he should be besieged.
He therefore applied all his Thoughts, to put himself into a Condition to make
a glorious Resistance. In short, it was no hard matter to imagine, that the
Cardinal incensed against him to that degree that he was, would not have an
extreme Desire to ruin him entirely. But considering the ill Dispositions that
the Court and the rest of the Kingdom had toward the Cardinal, and the
uncertain Condition of the Siege of Air; it was of dangerous Consequence to
undertake that of Sedan. Besides all the considerable Persons about the King,
both the Cardinal's Friends as well as Enemies, spoke in favor of the Duke of
Bouillon. The latter desirous to hinder a Prince that had been so declared an
Enemy of the Cardinal's, from sinking: The others, out of Generosity, seeing
him after so great an Action, exposed without any Hope of Succor.

In short, the King being arrived at Meziers, the Cardinal offered his
Mediation to the Duke of Bouillon. He accepted it with a Confidence equal to
the Sincerity with which it was offered him.

From the moment that the Negotiation was begun, and the Truce agreed on,
Cinqmars, Master of the Horse to the King, who had been so far declared a
Favorite, that he was already very much suspected by the Cardinal, sought the
Duke of Bouillon's Friendship by the Mediation of de Thou, who made several
Journies to Sedan, under pretense of the Obligations and Friendship that he had
for the Duke, but indeed to offer all things he could hope for, from Cinqmars.
He assured him, That Cinqmars had already labored very much to mollify the
King, and to make him recede from that Bitterness and Anger, which the Cardinal
had infused into him.

The Duke of Bouillon answered these Offers, and Advances, with such Decency
and good Breeding, as the State of his present Fortune required. He was
convinced, in the Sequel, that in reality these good Offices had not been
unserviceable to him.

In the mean time, the Peace was concluded in the most glorious manner that the
Duke of Bouillon could desire. The Cardinal would appear in the Treaty as
Caution for the Duke of Bouillon, and as Guarantee to Him, that his Majesty
should execute it sincerely, even to the Articles of the smallest Consequence.

The Duke of Bouillon went to Meziers, to see the King. He was received there
with all possible Demonstrations of a great Esteem, and entire Oblivion of what
had passed. The Cardinal omitted nothing to persuade the Duke, that he heartily
desired his Friendship. He told the King in public, that he ought to give him
the Command of an Army: and that since, even with the Spaniards, he had been
able to beat the French Forces, there would be nothing that might not be
expected from his Experience and Courage, when he should be at the Head of
them. Nevertheless, after all, upon Consideration of what had happened before,
and the general Notion that the World had of the Cardinal's Reconciliations,
the more Earnestness he expressed to the Duke of Bouillon, the less Opinion the
Duke had of his Sincerity.

The King went not into Sedan, nor did the Cardinal; Cinqmars went to Dinner
there with several of his Friends. The Duke of Bouillon generally was visited
by all the Court, and they could not refrain speaking of the extraordinary
Esteem they had of him: for as what he had done in the Day of Battle, and
throughout the whole War, had increased his Reputation in Arms; so his Praises
were no less, for having dared to declare himself against so great a King, and
so powerful a Minister; and to put his whole Family and Fortune to the Hazard
of a Battle, rather than dismiss an unfortunate Prince that had come to him for
Refuge.

The Peace being thus concluded, the King returned to Paris, and the Duke of
Bouillon continued at Sedan.

As he was very well instructed in his Religion, and had constantly such
Thoughts as became a sound Christian; so he always attributed the Success of
his Affairs to God: and by the public Prayers that he caused to be made, he
returned him Thanks for the Dangers from which he had been delivered. It might
seem probable, that after having come off with so much Glory and Success, he
should have applied himself to a more quiet way of Life; but he was not born
for Repose: and after what had passed, the uncertainty how he should manage
himself in Peace, did, for some days, distract his Mind with no fewer
Perplexities, than he had struggled with during the War. What Insight soever he
might have into things, and though his natural Temper might be never so far
from Irresolution, yet it was not easy to determine in his Circumstances. Each
side that he could take had great Inconveniences. To make a long stay at
Sedan, and to frame Pretexts for not going thence, was to make France suspect
him, to expose himself to new Dangers, and to bar up the only way he had left
to Glory and Fortune. Should he take up a Resolution of still pushing on the
War, what Succors could he expect from the Emperor and King of Spain, who had
so cruelly abandoned him, and in a Conjuncture where their own Interests should
have obliged 'em to uphold him, though they had not been bound to it by their
Engagements. To go to Court; what Security for him there? He that had been the
Soul of the only Party that had ever durst directly form it self against the
Cardinal. He that had Printed a Manifesto at Sedan that reflected so much upon
his Ministry. He that had gained a Battle, and made too Honorable a Peace to
have it ever effaced out of the Cardinal's Memory. And the Cardinal was too
well known to imagine, that he could ever dis-unite the Remembrance of an
Injury, and the Desire of revenging it.

The Duke of Bouillon reckoned, that the greatest Vexations of his Life, were
those he suffered under these Uncertainties. They must, in effect, have been to
him so much the greater, because I have often heard him say, That between two
sides, he had much rather take the worst, than not take any; because all would
fall to Ruin, by doing nothing, whereas, by Time and Action, one might expect
a happy Event of those Affairs, which appeared most desperate in their
beginning. At last, having weighed all things, he resolved to go to Court, and
carry his Wife and Children thither; and to show that he acted with an open
Confidence, he resolved to go and make some stay at Turenne, and some other
Seats that he had in Guyenne.

THE Second BOOK.
THE Battle of Sedan was fought on the sixth of July. The Treaty of Peace was
Signed at Meziers the eight of August, and about the fifteenth of September,
the Duke of Bouillon parted from Sedan, in his way to Court. He found it at
Nesle in Picardy. De Thou went before him, and Cinqmars came to visit him as
soon as he was arrived.

By the King's Reception, and the Cardinal's acting with him, he had just
reason to believe, that things were in the same posture he had left them. In
the mean time De Thou omitted nothing which he thought proper to fasten those
ties which he had begun between the Duke of Bouillon and Cinqmars; and he
thought he could not give the Duke more substantial Proofs of his steadiness
and Friendship.

De Thou had Wit, Honesty, Courage, and very noble Intentions: but his too
great activity made him enter upon several Projects which would undoubtedly
have been rejected by one who had been more capable of making deeper
reflections. He began with the Long Robe, some time after he was for the Sword.
So at last he had no profession at all: which must be looked upon as one of the
most disagreeable Conditions that a Man of Merit can find himself reduced to.
Amidst those different states which showed some uneasiness in him, he still
preserved the Reputation of great Honesty. He was then discontented at the
Cardinal about some Employment in the Army, that had been refused him, and this
discontent, without doubt, did in some measure animate him against this
Minister. In short, De Thou was resolved to ruin him. He believed, that as for
this World, he could undertake nothing that would be more Glorious, and that
before God he could do nothing more just. The Cardinal's Power seemed to him to
decrease every day; and Cinqmars on the contrary, to advance in favor,
insomuch, that he was now entire Master of the King's Affections. Amidst so
many prejudices, it is scarce credible, but that when De Thou laid down his
Platform of the Court to the Duke of Bouillon, he allowed some thing to his own
Passions. There is a great deal of probability likewise, that it was he who
made Cinqmars desire of the Duke of Bouillon, that he might have an opportunity
of discoursing with him freely, to tell him how he stood with the King, and
asked what his advice might be, in relation to the Cardinal: But when De Thou
made this Proposal to the Duke of Bouillon, he answered, that nothing could be
more dangerous to him, and even to Cinqmars, than to let the least suspicion
arise of their holding secret correspondence. That the Cardinal having
information of the minutest particulars, it was impossible for them to have any
private Conversation, especially in such a place as Nesle, that should not come
to his knowledge. The Duke of Bouillon therefore desired De Thou to divert
Cinqmars from this thought; and to let him understand, that it was the
Consideration of their common Interest which hindered him from complying with
it. He told De Thou farther, as a Friend, that he was desirous to live fairly
with Cinqmars, and to return the advances he had made him, and the good Offices
he had received; but that these good Offices were not of so high a nature as to
oblige him to be drawn blindly into his Interests: That in short he had no mind
to Re-imbark himself in new troubles, but that as things stood then, the
infallible way of doing it would be to intermeddle with Cinqmars his Conduct.
That if the Cardinal and Cinqmars were private Persons, then he should make no
scruple of declaring for Cinqmars, but that he could look upon neither of them
in such a respect; not the Cardinal, by reason of his quality as first
Minister, nor Cinqmars, as being the King's professed Favorite. De Thou promised
the Duke of Bouillon to manage things so, that Cinqmars his good inclinations
toward him should not be in the least altered. And indeed the Duke of Bouillon
meeting him next day in the King's Apartment, he found an opportunity to tell
him, that there was nothing he designed more passionately than his Friendship;
but that he had prayed Monsieur de Thou to tell him, that he would never ask it
till he had merited it by some considerable Service. The Duke of Bouillon
answered him with a general Complement, and for the rest referred him to what
Monsieur de Thou would say in his behalf.

When the Duke of Bouillon went to Nesle, he sent the Duchess his Lady, and
his Children, to Paris, to tarry for him there, with a design not to go thither
till the King went. But seeing that he would remain some time in Picardy, the
Duke of Bouillon staid but ten or twelve Days, hastened by the Season to make
his Journey into Guyenne, and indeed hastened more by his desire to quit the
Court, judging that as he saw things stand, it was prudence in him to make no
long stay there.

After taking leave of the King and Cardinal, he went to bid Cinqmars adieu,
who renewed to him all the Protestations he had already made, and told him,
that when any thing, which he ought to be informed of, should come to his
Knowledge, he would apply himself to De Thou, to acquaint him with it. The Duke
told him, that if he would take this pains, he could not Communicate to any Man
better, nor in whom he placed a more entire Confidence than in Monsieur de
Thou. They parted in this manner, that is, very kindly, but without entering
upon any thing particular.

Cinqmars was very well Shaped, and very Amiable. He had Courage, a Sprightly
Wit, Bold, Capable of great Undertakings, and patient in his pursuing them,
with great Art and much Application. But being no more than one and twenty, he
wanted Experience; besides he was Untractable, and Presumptuous, which are
generally the inseparable faults of Fortune and Youth: And these faults are so
much the more dangerous, because presumption engages them in rash Actions; and
refusing to be advised, hinders their abandonning 'em. So Cinqmars, what
Remonstrances soever his Friends could make, he could never overcome the Hatred
he had conceived for the Cardinal. If he had only been capable of moderating
it, could he but have subdued it before the King, there had been no Greatness
to which in time he might not have pretended, considering the violent
Inclinations of his Master toward him, and the Age and Indisposition of the
Cardinal. But, in short, it was impossible for him to manage these two Points,
with a Conduct that should be lasting; whether 'twas by the Fatality of his
Destiny, or because Men are not yet arrived to that Pitch of Wisdom, to know
when to stop the Career of their Fortune, so as to be able to fix it. But
whatever Impatience Cinqmars might have for advancing his Fortune, yet he could
not relinquish the Pursuit of his own Pleasures, and that inconquerable
Aversion he had for those of the King: for this Prince being inclined to Piety,
he used to seek his Recreations in some innocent Amuzements; so that what
pleased and diverted him, overwhelmed his Favorite with Melancholy and
Uneasiness.

The Abbot de Beaumont then in the Cardinal's Service, since Praeceptor to the
King and Archbishop of Paris, has told me, That one day his Master having sent
him to Cinqmars, to acquaint him that the King was very much incensed against
him; he found him in his Chamber, with Tears in his Eyes, bewailing his
Destiny. He said, several times, he had rather renounce all, than endure that
Life any longer, which the King made him lead. In short, he was in such violent
Passions, that Beaumont was scarce able to let him understand, that the King's
whole Discontent proceeded from this, That upon his Return from the Chase of
Blereau he seemed so weary, that he could not stay a moment in the King's
Apartment, who was retired into his Closet on purpose to call him only to him.
The Cardinal, in the beginning took care of Cinqmars's Conduct; He had, in some
measure, promoted his Fortune, for the Friendship he had with Marshall de
Fiat, his Father, who owed his Fortune to him: but perhaps it might he, because
he knew the Place of Favorite could not be void; and seeing the great
Inclination the King had to Cinqmars, he might think it better to follow than
oppose it.

At the Return of the Court from Picardy, Cinqmars desired of the King to make
him of the Council. He thought the Cardinal could have no Pretense to oppose
him in this, since he could not be ignorant that the King gave him an account
of every thing that passed there, though the most secret and most important.
When the King first made the Proposal, the Cardinal was so far transported as
to say, That it was enough to make his Affairs despicable in foreign Countries,
to let it be seen, that so small a Headpiece, as Cinqmars, should have any
part in them. Afterward he sent for him, and told him himself, what he had
said to the King; to which he added some things so offensive, that Cinqmars,
raging with Grief, flew from him like one distracted.

Some few days after, upon the Cardinal's being informed that Cinqmars was in
Love with the Princess Mary, and that he had Thoughts of marrying Her; he
raillied upon it very smartly, and said, He could not believe this Princess
would so far forget her Birth, as to debase her self to so mean a Companion.
These Discourses being told Cinqmars, raised his Hatred of Cardinal to the
highest Pitch. But these Encounters made no Noise then, because the Cardinal
believed it his Interest, not to let these aspiring Thoughts of Cinqmars be
seen, and the Troubles he created him: and Cinqmars did not think it proper for
him to reveal to any Person, the Discourse which he had with the Cardinal, and
the Treatments which he had received from him.

Whilst these things passed between the Cardinal and Cinqmars, the Duke of
Bouillon took his Journey into Guyenne. Passing by Orleans, Chance would have
it, that he should meet the Duke of Orleans. The Duke of Bouillon would have
avoided him, knowing that he had often expressed the Hatred he had for him. It
was grounded upon this; That at the time this Prince was retired to Brussels,
he had often endeavored to bring the Duke of Bouillon to his Party, without
having ever been able to engage him in it. However he received him very
obligingly, and would make him keep St. Hubert's Feast with him at Chaubort.

After he was arrived at Turenne; and had spent some days in looking after the
Affairs of so considerable an Estate, where he had never been before, he went
to that which he had in Perigord. Being at Limeuil, and coming from Hunting, an
unknown Person gave him a Letter, which de Thou had writ to him. He was
extremely surpised, when he saw it dated half a League off from Limeuil, and
that de Thou desired him to appoint a Place where he might see him without
being known. He did as de Thou requested: and when they were together de Thou
told him, that he was come to desire him earnestly in Cinqmars behalf, to
return to Court again, and that his Return thither would be of very great
Importance. The Duke of Bouillon asked him the Reasons, that might oblige
Cinqmars to propose to him the taking of so extraordinary a Journey; but he was
yet more surpised when de Thou answered him, that Cinqmars had not entrusted
him with them. This Proceeding appeared very disobliging, in relation to
himself, and almost incredible, in respect of de Thou. He told him, That, being
but just come thither, it was impossible for him to return without any
Pretense, or apparent Reason. He desired, he would let Cinqmars understand as
much: and yet that he would not relate to him all his Dissatisfaction: That
something was allowable to his Youth: That the Favor he was in had likewise
its Privilege: That he held himself obliged to think the best of Cinqmars's
Proceedings, in consideration of the kind Offices he had received from him, and
the Confidence he showed he had of him in Picardy.

About three Weeks after de Thou was returned from thence, The Duke of Bouillon
being at Turenne, received a Letter from the King, which ordered him to come to
Court with all speed. He departed immediately; and as soon as ever he was in
Paris, de Thou came to him, to request him, from Cinqmars, to let him speak
with him before he saw either the King or Cardinal. The Duke of Bouillon had a
great deal of difficulty to resolve what to do in so dangerous a Conjuncture:
nevertheless de Thou obliged him to consent to it, after he had told him, what
Measures he had taken, that he might do it without any manner of Fear.

The Duke of Bouillon then asked de Thou, if Cinqmars had never told him the
Reasons of the Journey, which he had made him take into Perigord? De Thou told
him, That he knew no more, at present, than when he parted with him; But that
Cinqmars had positively assured him, That, by the Sequel, they should see, that
neither of them should have reason to complain of the Management he had used
upon this Occasion.

The King was then at St. Germains. De Thou carried the Duke of Bouillon
thither in his Coach, and by the favor of the Night, and the Praecautions they
had taken, He and Cinqmars saw one another without any one's Knowledge.
Fontrailles was in Cinqmars's Chamber. Cinqmars presented him, as his intimate
Friend, to the Duke of Bouillon, who had never seen him; and added this at his
presenting him, That though he had an entire Confidence in Fontrailles, yet he
should not have took the Liberty of letting him be at this Interview, without
the Consent of the Duke of Bouillon; if he had not thought there was always
more Trust to be given to Persons of Quality, than to Servants; and that indeed
he had sent away all his People, under pretense of being alone with
Fontrailles, which often used to happen.

After their first Compliments, Fontrailles and de Thou retired into a Closet:
and then Cinqmars began to tell the Duke of Bouillon, That the King had not
been well since his Return from Picardy; That the Cardinal however had not
desisted from making him resolve upon going into Catalonia. That it was
resolved much about the same time, to fetch him from Turenne, to give him the
Command of the Army in Italy; and that he judged it very necessary for him,
before he saw any Body, to have some Intimation of it: the rather because he
could not persuade himself that this proceeded from the Cardinal out of any
good Intent, because he lost no occasion of making ill Impressions of him in
the King's Mind. That he had told him, a little while ago, That his Duchess
had too much Power over him; and that she, in her Heart, was entirely devoted
to Spain. That he had heard, that Monsieur des Noyers told the King, That it
was no difficult thing to take Sedan from him; because, being obliged by the
Treaty of Protection, to receive the King's Troops into it; He would have Right
to seize on It, in case he refused as many as should be sent thither. That, in
short, the Distrust they had of him was so great, that the Cardinal thought
nothing of more Importance, than the hindering him from returning to Sedan.
That they would not permit him even to tarry in Guyenne, and that the manner,
in which he had been visited, had caused Suspicions, That, without doubt, they
would send him to Italy, only that they might be able to secure his Person, in
case the King should die. That it would not be difficult to arrest him in an
Army where he should have no Troops of his own; not one Friend; and where he
was not so much as known, but by his Reputation. That, let him be never so
great a Captain, he would find himself much exposed, by the extraordinary
things that the Count de Harcourt had done there. That to come up to 'em, he
must be assured of as great Fortune as he had, and have the Ministry as much on
his side. That besides, the main Action would be either in Flanders or Germany.

Cinqmars added; That he now stood fairer with the King than ever, and that he
was not less secure of Monsieur's Favor to him, whom he had a little while
since acquainted, by the Count d' Aubijoux, of the Resolution that had been
taken, of making him go into Catalonia; but he had advised him not to do it,
being certain, that the Cardinal's Design was to Arrest him, if the King should
chance to dye there. That in this case the Cardinal had no small Designs,
seeing he had proposed to the King, under several weak Pretenses, to leave the
Queen and her two Children, at the Castle of Vincennes, where Chavigni, one of
his own Creatures, was Governor. That they were persuaded the King could not
live long. That it was upon this Consideration, that the Cardinal was so much
for his Journey into Catalonia, under pretense that his Affairs there required
it. That he doubted not, but that if the King should die so remote from his
Queen and Children, he being Master of his Confessor, and all other Affairs,
but that he would be so likewise of his Thoughts when he lay a dying; and then,
having both the Court and Army at his Command, his Ambition would have no other
Bounds, but what he himself should prescribe it. I ordered him further to
acquaint Monsieur, continued Cinqmars, that in this Extremity I would advise
him to secure the Spaniard, that, in case the King should die, the Party he
would find in France, might have some Assistance from abroad, by a Treaty,
which should be founded upon a general Peace; and by this means they might
secure themselves from the Designs of their common Enemy, the Cardinal. I am
persuaded likewise, added he, that the most infallible means of ruining him, if
the King does not die, is to dispose Monsieur to take Arms: For I having a
Correspondence with him, which I will continue, and seeing the King so often
tired with this Ministry, that he would willingly be delivered from it, I will
order it so, that his Royal Highness shall not declare, till there is so
favorable a Conjuncture, that I can infallibly make the King take a final
Resolution against the Cardinal; and I have made a Project for a Treaty with
Spain, which I will show you.

Here the Duke of Bouillon interrupted him; and told him he was desirous to
explain himself to him, in relation to the Spaniards. That he was just come
from under their Hands, and that he was resolved not to get into them again.
That he had too many Proofs of their Breach of Trust, and their Weakness, that
besides, their Divisions among themselves were so great, that it was impossible
for 'em to carry on any considerable Design, or that in the progress they
should not ruin themselves by their Misunderstandings.

Cinqmars though surpised to the utmost degree at finding the Duke of Bouillon
so averse to a Treaty with Spain, and seeing, that in an affair of this
consequence, he had advanced too far, toward one that would not enter into the
same designs, yet resumed the Discourse, without seeming at all concerned.

He told the Duke of Bouillon, that notwithstanding all these considerations,
it would still be much to their advantage, that Monsieur should make a Treaty
with the Spaniards, because it would make him more considerable, and that He,
having so much Power over him as he had, would hinder him from making any use
of it, unless they should afterward find it absolutely necessary. After this
re-entring upon what concerned the Duke of Bouillon, he assured him he had made
his Peace with his Royal Highness, and that he had so disposed him as to clear
up those matters that he said he had reason to complain of. That the first time
his Highness should see him, perhaps he would tell him the same.

Cinqmars concluded with remarking to the Duke of Bouillon, how much he ought
to rely on him, since he had given him such Proofs of an entire Confidence.
That it was as much as his Life and Fortune was worth, that this should be kept
secret.

The Duke of Bouillon answered, That he should have no occasion to repent; that
he would mention it to no Person breathing. He requested the same Secrecy from
him, as to what related to the Treaty with Spain. He asked if De Thou had any
knowledge of these matters, and Cinqmars telling him, that he had never spoke
to him about 'em, the Duke of Bouillon promised him, that he would never
mention 'em to him; and added farther, that as for the Command in Italy, he
would think of it, and having weighed the Advantages and Inconveniences, he
would take his final Resolution, and for the rest they might discourse at
leisure.

We may judge, by this whole Discourse of Cinqmars, that the Duke of Bouillon
retired with matter large enough to employ his Reason and his Fear. He saw very
well, that the Ambition of Cinqmars, and his hatred to the Cardinal, might make
him aggravate several things: but then, at the same time, to pass a true
judgment of his own Condition, and the present State of the Court, he would
find very great probabilities for all that had been told him. That which pressed
him most, was what to determine about the employ in Italy: the King having sent
for him, upon this account, it was not likely, he would be long without
speaking to him of it: should he accept it, he had great reason to fear the
Consequence: but in the present Conjuncture of their Affairs, there was more
danger yet in refusing it: and to prevent what might be feared upon his
refusal, if he should incline to that side, he must secretly, and with speed,
retire to Sedan, as the only means to prevent his being Arrested.

This was all that Cinqmars and the Cardinals Enemies could desire, to have him
retire to Sedan: and indeed to view only the first prospect of the thing, the
Duke of Bouillon might see in it both their common Advantages, and his own
Security: but to search into the Effects of it, he there must find his
undoubted ruin. Besides the Duchess of Bouillon, and his Children being at
Turenne, were sufficient Hostages for his Conduct. In short, having weighed all
these things, he went the next Morning to pay his Duty to the King, and to see
the Cardinal, being resolved to receive the Proposal, that should be made him,
as one surpised, but yet as if he were very well pleased at it. The truth is,
and I have heard him say so several times, that he was touched extremely with
the Glory, to see himself sought to, to Command a Royal Army, six Months after
the Battle of Sedan. This thought alone was sufficient to determine him; and
without doubt, it contributed much to his persuasion, that Fortune and his good
Conduct, should supply all the rest.

However eight or ten Days passed without the breaking this Design to him:
whether the thing was not yet fully resolved on, or because at this time the
King was more indisposed than ordinary. This Prince had naturally his health
but ill. He was then so weak, that his Physicians began to fear his Life, and
to tell this secretly to their Friends. But as secrets of such consequence soon
become public Discourse, the Rumor was spread every where that the King could
not last much longer.

During the Expectation of so great a Turn, every one made his own Reflections
upon Public Affairs, and according to them regulated the Projects of their own
particular Fortunes. But this Conjuncture being the most nice and perilous that
ever was known, Fear and Distrust were increased by the Danger; so that the
most daring Courtiers were afraid to consult together.

The Queen, who had been persecuted by the Cardinal so many several ways, was
in very great Frights. She doubted not but if the King should die, this
Minister would take her Children from her, to get the Regency into his own
hands; and though these Thoughts were as so many mortal Blows to her, yet they
were not the ut most of her Fears.

Monsieur the Duke of Orleans, who in several important Occasions of his Life,
had likewise felt the bloody Effects of the Cardinal's Hatred, could not doubt
but He would look on him as the most formidable Enemy; both for the Memory he
would retain of what had passed, and for the Authority, which his Quality, as
only Brother to the King, might seem to promise him, during the time of a
Regency.

Things being in this Condition, we may guess in what straits the Duke of
Bouillon found himself. Having passed his Life in the Wars and out of France,
He had scarce any more knowledge of the Court, than what he had gained by the
little stay he had made there; and Natural Parts, how great soever they be, are
not sufficient, without being succored by some Experience, or the Counsels of
a sincere Friend, who is harder to be found in that place, than in any other in
the World.

In the mean time they began to open the Thoughts they had of sending the Duke
of Bouillon into Italy, and though he had not discovered the Resolution he had
taken in this Affair, to any Person: Yet the Courtiers who are always ready to
determine what is to come to pass, being desirous of Novelties, and upon this
Occasion impatient to have some new Troubles, began already to say, That he
would refuse this Employment, and retire to Sedan.

The Queen, relying upon this Rumor, or pressed by her Fears, made de Thou
search after him with Secrecy and great Earnestness. She ordered, that he
should first be desired to close with her Interest, and to give her two
Instances of it, which she thoug^^ very essential: The first was, to accept the
Command in Italy; that there might be such a Person at the Head of an Army, of
whose Merit she was so well assured: The other was; That, if the King should
die, he would promise to receive her into Sedan, with her two Children, not
thinking (so well was she assured of the Cardinal's ill Intentions, and his
Power), there was any Place of Safety for them in all France.

De Thou likewise told the Duke, that since the King had been sick, the Queen
and the Duke of Orleans had entered into a very strict Union, and that Cinqmars
was the Person that had effected it; but that he was the only Man, to whom this
Secret had been entrusted, and he desired him not to disclose it to any Body
breathing.

The Duke of Bouillon gave him his Promise; and, resuming the Discourse, told
him, It was not possible things should ever come to that Extremity, that the
Children of France should have occasion for such a Retreat: that however they
should always be Masters of Sedan, when the Queen should be pleased to send
them thither; and he should look upon it as a very great Honor to receive 'em
there: That as for the Employment in Italy; It had not yet been mentioned to
him; but in case it was offered him, he would act conformably to the Queen's
Desire. Two days after, de Thou, out of a motion of his own, desired the Queen
to signify to the Duke of Bouillon, the satisfaction she took at the manner in
which he answered what had been proposed to him on her part; which she could do
but in very few words, and that as she was going to Mass; leaving the rest to
de Thou, as the Person in whom she had placed an entire Confidence.

In the mean time, the King grew better; and the Cardinal declared to the Duke
of Bouillon, that he was designed to Command the Army in Italy. He spoke to him
concerning this Employment in very obliging Terms, but used not any single
Expression that might show his Desire of securing him to his Interests or
Fortunes: Whether he was withheld by the Consideration of his own Glory, as
thinking it below him to Court any Body: or else, having resolved to Ruin him,
he would avoid the Shame of having used the Appearances of a real Friendship,
in order to his more certain Destruction. The Duke, at his Acceptance of the
Employment, made his Reply in general Terms, and with such a Grace, as might
become a Man of his Quality.

The same day the Duke of Bouillon being returned to Paris, Cinqmars came to
him two hours before Night, to carry him to visit Monsieur, who lay at
Venice-House, where his Stables were then.

After the Duke of Bouillon had given him Satisfaction, by clearing some
Passages that had happened heretofore; Monsieur told him all the obliging
things imaginable, earnestly desired his Friendship, and promised to serve him
upon all Occasions. Cinqmars added farther, addressing himself to Monsieur,
that he thought he had done him a signal Piece of Service, in bringing over to
his Party, a Person of the Duke of Bouillon's Quality; who, besides his
Personal Merit, was Master of a Place that was so very important. Afterward he
spoke of the Cardinal without any manner of Reserve; he discoursed at large of
what all of them had reason to fear, if the King should die; and Fontrailles
and d' Aubijoux being present, he said, 'Twas necessary to treat with the
Spaniards. Then Monsieur, taking up the Discourse, assured 'em he was going to
send Fontrailles to Madrid, and that he would recommend the Duke of Bouillon's
Concerns to him, if he was willing to come into the Treaty. The Duke of
Bouillon answered, That he had already spoke clearly to that Point with
Cinqmars, and that his Opinion was not altered. Afterward he represented the
Condition of the Spaniards, and their Failures in all their Treaties, more at
large than he had done to Cinqmars, adding, That he doubted not but their
Consideration for Monsieur's Person would cause 'em to make larger Efforts than
they had done for Monsieur the Count of Soissons and himself: but that no
Praecaution was too great be taken against their Infidelity and Weakness.

The Duke of Bouillon, as may easily be judged, was not prepared for this
Conversation. In effect he was very uneasy to find himself exposed to it. But
in the mean time, reflecting upon the Power, which Monsieur would have, if the
King should die, and the Union there was between him and the Queen, which
Secret de Thou had entrusted him withal; he thought, that though he had not
given the Satisfaction to Monsieur which he might expect, in relation to Spain,
yet at least he must not leave him without entering further into the
Consideration of what might happen upon the Revolution they foresaw: It was his
Opinion, That if he should not deliver his Mind freely as to that Affair, it
would bring a new Negotiation upon him, which, being managed by Cinqmars, would
make him lose the Merit of his Resolution, though he should take one agreeable
both to Monsieur and the Queen; because it would seem as if Cinqmars had
persuaded him to it. Besides, though the Duke of Bouillon had no Presumption of
himself, which is common even to the greatest Men; yet he could not but
apprehend, what Weight he might be in a Regency, when at the Head of an Army,
that might maintain the Interests of the Royal Family against the Cardinal.

These Considerations obliged him to reassume his Conversation with Monsieur;
besides he was willing to prevent the Thoughts they might have of retiring to
Sedan, after the Treaty with Spain, having gathered from Cinqmars his
Discourse, that they had agreed to propose it to him.

He told Monsieur therefore, That he did not know what his Designs were, if the
King should die; but considering the Confidence which his Highness had done him
the Honor to place in him, he could not but represent to his Highness, That
such a Person, as he, ought always to lay the Foundations of his Interest and
Forces within the Kingdom, rather than rely upon Strangers. That he might have
remarked, That when the Cardinal looked upon him as his Enemy, he omitted
nothing that might force him to go out of France: so that there was no doubt
but in a Regency he would be much more desirous that he should take that
Resolution. That being among the Enemies of the Kingdom, it would always give a
plausible Color for suspecting his Intentions, and making the Parliaments and
People abandon his Interests. That he was not of Cinqmars his Opinion, who
thought they could arrest him if the King should die; That it was a thing
without Example; and though the Cardinal were never so powerful yet he could
not find any Body that would venture to execute so rash a Design. That there
was none but the Queen that could contest any thing with him during the
Regency; and that if he could join Interest with Her Majesty, he saw no
Probability that the Cardinal could so much as put himself into any condition
of resisting 'em. However, if upon the King's Death he should believe it
necessary for him to go out of France, Sedan should be an assured Retreat for
him, the Queen, and Children of France, and that he would pass his word to
espouse no other Interest but theirs.

Then Monsieur took the Duke of Bouillon, and Cinqmars, and carrying them apart
from Fontrailles, and D' Aubijoux, he acquainted the Duke of Bouillon with the
Intelligence that was between the Queen and him, and concluded with the
testifying his great satisfaction in what he had told him; either because he
really was pleased, or did not think it proper to advance any farther Proposals
concerning Sedan, after such a Discourse as the Duke of Bouillon had made him.

When the Duke of Bouillon found himself alone with Cinqmars, he told him, that
though the Conversation they came from had the success he desired, yet he could
not hide from him the dissatisfaction he took at the manner with which the
thing was done. For what reason, says he, was there to insinuate to Monsieur
such a thing as a Retreat to Sedan? And what necessity of my speaking before
him of a Treaty with Spain? Cinqmars having declared to him his own* concern
for the trouble he saw him in: All this, continued he, engages you no farther:
And I dare tell you, that considering the state of the King's Health, I think I
have done you a considerable piece of Service; not only in reconcileing you to
Monsieur* and in having obliged him to speak to you with so much Freedom: but
likewise in that I have so disposed him, as to deliver himself entirely up to
you, as he will do, if he follows the design of retiring to Sedan: However I
promise you to divert it, if you judge it inconvenient.

The Duke of Bouillon saw very well that Cinqmars reasons were pure inventions,
and that in effect his design was to engage him to Monsieur, gave him only this
Answer; Remember, at least, that I never made any Promise of a Retreat to
Sedan, but in case the King should die. For whilst the King is alive, it would
be a very odd sort of Conduct in me to be my Self at the Head of one of his
Armies, whilst Monsieur and the Spaniards should make Sedan the Stage of a
Civil War.

The next day the Duke of Bouillon related to de Thou the whole Conversation
that he had with Monsieur, excepting the particular concerning the Spaniards.
He told him likewise what had passed between him and Cinqmars, after their
parting with Monsieur: adding, that how great a Favorite soever he might be,
yet if in any other Encounter he should happen to act with him as he had done
upon this occasion, they must assuredly break, and that he saw very well, that
all the pains which he had taken so officiously, had no other ground for 'em
but a desire to Embarque him so far, as that he might be a support to him
against the Cardinal.

De Thou did not excuse Cinqmars. He confessed, that Youth made him often drive
on faster than was to be wished for: and he repeated it several times to the
Duke of Bouillon, that he would have him take care not to bring himself into
trouble. These words made him understand, that de Thou knew Cinqmars design in
relation to the Treaty with Spain, as in effect the thing proved afterward to
be true. For Cinqmars had all along entrusted it with de Thou, who had used all
his endeavors to dissuade him: But not being able to accomplish it, he had
made Cinqmars pass his word to him, that no Person should know that he had any
Cognizance of such a Treaty, no not so much as the Duke of Bouillon. In short,
we have seen before, how that de Thou rather than open himself to him
concerning that matter in their Conversation at Limeuil, suffered the Duke to
judge very hardly, both of his own Conduct and Cinqmar's Proceedings.

At the same time the Duke of Bouillon asked de Thou if he had not heard that
the King's Favor to Cinqmars was decreasing. De Thou answered, that he had
heard such a thing, and had told Cinqmars of it, who assured him it was
absolutely false.

However, continued de Thou, that which makes me suspect that there may be some
ground for these reports is, that Cinqmars asked me with some concern, if they
had not spread themselves as far as the Duke of Bouillon. You may easily see
then by this Curiosity, said the Duke of Bouillon pleasantly, that I am a
Person whom Cinqmars would willingly entrust with the news of the advancement
of his Fortune; but I am not one to whom he would discover the secret of its
diminution.

The truth is, as the sequel demonstrated, that about this time the King began
to give Cinqmars great Mortifications, but in private, being unwilling that the
Courtiers should take any notice of it; either out of good Nature, or the
Uncertainty he might be in of continuing his Anger against a Favorite who had
so natural and so great an Ascendant over him.

Cinqmars used to go every morning into the King's Chamber, the very moment he
waked, and to be two hours with him there alone: But when the King was
displeased with him, this Privilege was denied him: and Cinqmars, lest any one
should perceive the Alteration, came every day to the Louvre at the same time
that he used to do, and entered at the Door of the Wardrobe, but instead of
going directly into the King's Chamber, he remained concealed in a little
Passage that was hard by, where he diverted himself with reading Romances, till
the King called for those Officers whose Place it was to enter. Then the first
Groom of the Chamber, who was Cinqmars his Confident, and in his Interests, let
him in by a back Door, which was near that Passage; so that they who came in at
the other Door finding him in the King's Chamber, and seeing the same
Appearances of Privacy, thought his Favor likewise continued the same.

Whilst things were in this Posture, the Duke of Bouillon had several
Conferences with the Cardinal, concerning the Affairs of Italy, and finding
himself sufficiently instructed, he thought, things standing thus at Court, the
best way he could take, was to go to Turenne, under pretense of preparing his
Equipage.

He went then to St. Germains, to consult with the Cardinal about his
departure, but he found that he was at Ruel, and that he would not be back till
Night: He resolved to tarry for him, and Cinqmars having desired his Company at
Dinner, he went thither, and carried de Thou with him.

Persons of the greatest Quality often eat with Cinqmars, even they who were
most devoted to the Cardinal, and his Relations: For Cinqmars all along kept
the Measures of Decency with this Minister; and had several times been
reconciled to him as sincerely as Reconciliations generally are made at Court;
where after having been very highly offended, there are Treaties still to be
made for returning into Favor.

At dinnertime Cinqmars began several pleasant Discourses, in which there
appeared an extraordinary Gaiety. This only increased the Duke and de Thou's
Suspicion, concerning his Favor: for they thought they saw Affectation in all
he said, and much more Trouble than Freedom of Thought: whether they were
prejudiced, or else, in truth, it is never so hard to speak without Concern, as
when one talks for fear one's Silence should be taken notice of.

After Dinner, the Duke of Bouillon being alone with Cinqmars and Fontrailles,
Cinqmars could not forbear speaking of his Hatred to the Cardinal, and passing
thence to the Treaty with Spain.

The Duke of Bouillon was not at all displeased at it, because he might show
Fontrailles that he had not changed his Opinion; but Fontrailles, upon the
fresh Difficulties which the Duke suggested, took occasion to tell him, that
there were, indeed, shorter and more secure Methods against the Cardinal, if
they would make use of them. Then Cinqmars looked upon the Duke, who had
changed the Discourse, as if he had not understood what Fontrailles said.
Cinqmars minded it, and told him readily, that the other Methods, that
Fontrailles would mention, were undoubtedly, That the Duke of Bouillon, instead
of going into Italy, would let Monsieur retreat into Sedan, and go himself
thither with him to declare War against the Cardinal. The Duke of Bouillon
answered, That he would keep to what he had concluded on, and advance no
farther: Besides, he told 'em That Sedan was indeed a very good Place, but, he
was confident, that it could not hold out long against a great Army; because
there were two Posts near it, which they could not maintain; and they being
taken, the Town must undoubtedly follow them. That whenever they made any
account of Sedan, they must, at the same time, consider how to gather thither
an Army, that should be able to enter France, and to hazard a Battle there
immediately. Thus the Conversation ended; and at Night, the Cardinal being come
from Ruel, the Duke of Bouillon went to find him, and was told, that when he
pleased he might be going to Turenne.

The Duke of Bouillon now seeing his Departure to be at his own Disposal; the
first Thought that came into his Mind, was to return to Paris, to take his
leave of Monsieur, before Cinqmars should have time to prepare him to make
fresh Instances, concerning Sedan, and the Treaty with Spain.

The Duke of Bouillon was scarce come to Luxemburgh-House, where Monsieur
lodged then, but de Thou came to tell him, that an Account was just come to the
King, That Marshall de Guebriant had defeated Lamboy, the General of the
Imperial Army. This gave the Duke of Bouillon occasion to tell Monsieur in
private, that the News could not but make him consider, that after this Blow,
which the Spaniards had received, it was easy to judge, that nothing could be
expected from them; and that Marshall Guebriant being posted so advantageously
as he was, their Affairs would be entirely ruined in Flanders, should the
Hollanders never so little favor France. To which Monsieur answered never a
Word.

The same day de Thou received a Billet from Cinqmars, which desired him to
endeavor that the Duke of Bouillon might come and lie at St. Germains. He
showed it to the Duke, who told him he had heard that Monsieur was gone
thither, and it was easy to guess, that this was the Reason why Cinqmars was
so pressing for his coming; but that he could not go to take his leave of the
King, till Monsieur was returned to Paris; as indeed he was at that time.

When the Duke of Bouillon came to bid the Cardinal adieu, that which passed
between 'em, was, in Reality, nothing but a Repetition of what was said the
same day that the Cardinal had proposed to him this Employment in Italy: but he
added this Excess of Civility, That he himself would carry him to the King to
take his leave.

The Duke of Bouillon and Cinqmars parted likewise, without having any thing
that was new pass between 'em. The Duke staying two or three days in Paris,
upon his own private Concerns, Cinqmars came to bid him once more adieu, and
renewed to him all the Protestations of Friendship that he had already made him.

The Duke of Bouillon passing through Limoges, Fontrailles came thither almost
as soon as he, and making him a Visit at the Bishop of Limoges his Palace,
where he lodged, told him that he was going to Madrid upon Monsieur's Account,
to Treat with the Spaniards; and that looking upon him as the Person on whom
the Weight of all their Affairs must lie, he desired him, above all things, to
take care of the Preservation of his Person. To this the Duke answered, That he
could not comprehend but that Monsieur had entirely abandoned the Design of
this Treaty, after what he had represented to him concerning the State of the
Spanish Affairs in Flanders, since the Defeat of Lamboy: That, for his own
part, he might easily perceive that this ill Success had not changed his former
Dispositions; and so he desired him not to mention his Name upon any Account,
throughout the whole Negotiation; because he was now more resolved than ever,
not to enter into any Treaty with the Spaniards during his whole Life.

Fontrailles used all his Endeavors to draw some word from him, that might not
be so peremptory; but his Reasons could not prevail, the Duke still repeating
the same thing.

Toward the end of March, Monmort going to Toulouse, rode Post through
Turenne. He was a Gentleman of Quality and Merit, devoted to Cinqmars, and more
his Confident than Fontrailles himself; Cinqmars had charged him to tell the
Duke, That it was a thing of the greatest Importance to them, that he should
speak with him once more, he desired him instantly to take his Measures so,
that in going into Italy, he might meet him at Lions, when the King should pass
that way in his Journey to Catalonia. But on the contrary, the Duke of Bouillon
delayed his Departure, on purpose that he might not meet him there; not only
that he might avoid the trouble of new Proposals, but because Cinqmars had
appointed a great number of Gentlemen of Auvergne, his Friends, to meet him
there, which caused the Duke to make his Reflections upon what Fontrailles had
said; That there were more secure and expeditious Methods for the ruining the
Cardinal, than an open War.

The Duke of Bouillon therefore did not part from Turenne, before he judged by
the News he received from Court, that it was already removed from Lions, and so
he could not meet it in his way. The Duchess of Bouillon bore him Company for
some days, and afterward returned to Sedan, with her Children.

When the Duke of Bouillon lay at Tarare near Lions, Monmort came thither Post
the same Night. Cinqmars had sent him after the Duke of Bouillon, to tell him,
that the Cardinal lay a dying: That, for himself, he had never been so much in
the King's Favor as he was at present; and so he hoped, in a little time, the
Duke of Bouillon would have no cause to repent his having admitted him to such
a share in his Friendship.

Monmort added farther, That Fontrailles was come back from Madrid with a
Treaty Signed in as ample manner as Monsieur had desired, but in the condition
that the Cardinal was then, there would be no need of it.

The Duke of Bouillon, after having answered Cinqmars his Complements, desired
Monmort to tell him, that Monsieur was very happy that he should be in no want
of Spanish Succors, because by a Letter that he had received from Liege, he was
better assured than ever, that they were not able to spare him any that would
be considerable.

The Cardinal was really very sick some few days after his departure from
Lions, and continued so upon the Rode, and was carried to Tarascon, whilst the
King went to the Siege of Perpignan: but it was not his Illness only that
obliged him to stay there. The Power which Cinqmars had over the King, was so
far increased, during this Journey, that the Cardinal thought he had reason to
be much afraid of it; and if the public saw plainly this advance in the King's
Favor, by the exterior marks of it: the Cardinal saw still better by what
passed in the management of Affairs, and the manner that the King often used to
speak to him concerning this Favorite: Cinqmars himself was so far from
concealing this Happiness, that he lost no opportunity of having it took notice
of.

It seemed to the Cardinal, that the King was wholly altered as to him, and
that the Face of the Court changed likewise in favor of Cinqmars. In short,
this Minister, and his Creatures, lay under such great uncertainties, that he
had it in deliberation, whether instead of going to the King when his health
would permit, he should not wholly retreat and write him word, that the
occasion of his removal was, because he could no longer have any security for
himself near his Person; Cinqmars being his declared Enemy, and having engaged
almost the whole Court in his Cabal.

In the mean time the King fell sick before Perpignan, and was carried to
Narbonne, where it was infallibly believed he would have died.

Cinqmars sent a Courier to Monsieur to acquaint him with it. He was advanced
as far as Bourbon, under pretense of drinking the Waters, and he had no sooner
received the news of the King's Condition; but that he sent the Count D'
Aubijeux Post away to find the Duke of Bouillon with all Diligence.

D' Aubijoux carried only a single Credential, and was to demand of the Duke of
Bouillon the necessary Orders for the receiving of Monsieur, the Queen, and her
two Children into Sedan.

D' Aubijoux had contracted a very strict Friendship with the Duke of Bouillon.
He was a Man of great Quality, of the Family of D' Amboise, and had the
reputation of much Honor and Courage. The Duke of Bouillon kept him three days
concealed in the Camp, not being able to determine what to do, and in the
Conversation they had together, the Duke of Bouillon oftentimes repeated to him
the same things he had already told to Monsieur, when he saw him at Venice
House, and they spoke about Sedan, the Treaty with Spain, and what was to be
done if the King should chance to die. For indeed the more the Duke thought of
it, he was the less able to comprehend, that the Queen and Monsieur should ever
imagine, that upon the King's Death they should be obliged to leave the
Kingdom: so that when he joined these Arguments which possessed his Mind, to the
memory of what had passed between Mounsieur, Cinqmars, and himself, he could
scarce doubt but this last instance about Sedan was a pure Artifice of
Cinqmars. The Pretext of providing a Retreat for the Queen, her Children, and
Monsieur, was very plausible and glorious for the Duke of Bouillon: But he had
all the reason in the World to fear, lest by this Engagement he should find
himself Embarked with the Spaniards, to maintain a Civil War against his own
Inclinations.

In the mean time, D' Aubijoux, who knew with what impatience his return was
expected, omitted nothing that might remove the Duke's Suspicions, and the Duke
of Bouillon did not doubt but that if they had a design of deceiving him, they
would not have begun it with deceiving D' Aubijoux: Besides, he had been
several times assured by D' Aubijoux, that he was too much his Servant not to
admonish him: That if he should send him back, without agreeing to any thing,
he might be certain, Monsieur would resent it mortally; and if the King, as it
was probable, should dye at Narbonne, it was easy to apprehend, that in the
posture things would be then, it would be of no small consequence, to have the
Cardinal for his concealed Enemy, and Monsieur for his professed one.

The Duke of Bouillon had resisted all these Considerations: but at last there
arrived an express from Court, with Letters for him and several Officers in the
Army, which all imported, That the King's Life was despaired of.

Then the Duke of Bouillon fixed his resolution, and gave D' Aubijoux the
Letters he demanded; but with this precaution, that he made him swear, they
should not go out of his hands till after the King's Death; and that if the
King should recover, he would keep 'em to give him again, or else burn 'em, if
he found any danger like to be in preserving them.

Whatever have D' Aubijoux could make, he found things strangely altered at his
return. The King was out of Danger, and the Cardinal, amidst his Fears and
Uncertainties, had advice of the Journey which Fontrailles had made to Madrid;
and waiting till he could learn more, he in the mean time sent Chavigni,
Secretary of State, to acquaint the King with it, but gave him express Order to
engage his Majesty, upon his Conscience, to keep the Secret. However Cinqmars
perceived some alteration in the King. He spoke of it to Fontrailles, who
advised him to retire to Monsieur. Fontrailles seeing he could not persuade him
to take this Resolution, gave the Duke of Espernon a Challenge, that he might
have a pretense to go from Court, without increasing the suspicions that might
arise against Cinqmars, by his absence: after this he disguised himself, and
got safe into England.

Cinqmars sent Monsieur advice how things stood. Monsieur desired him to come
to Moulin's at a day appointed, and that he was resolved to get out of the
Kingdom by the way of Franche-Comte.

In the mean time, the Cardinal who set every thing at Work, to discover the
cause of Fontrailles's Journey, by some means got a Copy of the Treaty with
Spain; though no one could ever yet learn, how he came by it, nor from whom.
The same moment he sent Chavigni to show it to the King, with Orders to assure
his Majesty, that this Copy was taken from the Original, and that, upon his
Life, he should have Proofs of it. Cinqmars and de Thou were immediately
Arrested, and necessary Orders were dispatched with speed for the Observation
of Monsieur. But when he saw that he had lost the Opportunity of saving himself
by the Franche-Comte, he be thought himself of sending the Abbot de la Riviere,
who was his Favorite to the Court. He gave him a Letter to the Cardinal, which
expressed his hearty Repentance in very passionate Terms, and his Desire that
his Pardon might be owing to him. The King, at the Cardinal's Intercession,
promised to forgive him all, upon Condition, That Monsieur should declare the
Truth. In short, the Abbot de la Riviere managed the business so well, that his
Master, moved with the Cardinal's Proceedings, and the King's Goodness,
confessed, in general, what had passed, excused himself for having burnt the
Original of the Spanish Treaty: gave a Copy of it, which he signed to certify
it, and made it be counter-sign'd by the Secretary of his Dispatches.

When the Cardinal had got so important a Piece in his hands, he sent a
Dispatch to Paris, to order the Chancellor to come with all speed, that He
with the Commissaries might frame a Process against Cinqmars and de Thou: In
the mean time they were sent to Lions: and because Fontrailles, to give the
Spaniards a greater Idea of the Party, had not omitted the Duke of Bouillon's
Name in the Treaty, notwithstanding all his Praecautions; and had assured them
that he would ratify it, and deliver Sedan for a Place of Retreat, a Messenger
was dispatched with great Speed into Italy, to have him Arrested.

The Orders were directed to the General Officers that commanded under him, the
Count du Plessis-Praslin, Couvonges, and Castelan: When they had all three
consulted together, about the Manner how they should put them in Execution,
they agreed, that they ought to defer it till the next day, when the Duke of
Bouillon would go to visit the Citadel of Casal, judging they could not,
without danger, attempt to Arrest him at the Head of the Army; so great was the
Veneration they had for him, and the Esteem that he had gained among them. He
had found so extravagant a Licentiousness in the Army, that nothing was wanting
to a Revolt, but a Man to Head 'em; and yet by his great Cares, and the perfect
Knowledge he had in the Orders of War, he had reduced it, in six Weeks time, to
a most exemplary Discipline, without the Execution of more than two Soldiers:
so that perhaps never any General, in so little time, gained the Reputation of
a Great Commander, without besieging any Place, or fighting any Battle, or
having any considerable Enemy to make Head against him.

The Army was then near Casal, Couvonges who was Governor of it went thither
betimes, to set all things in order. The Duke of Bouillon carried Castelan
along with him, and left the Count du Plessis to command in the Camp.

After the Duke of Bouillon had supped in the Citadel, he went down into the
Town, where his Lodgings were prepared, and by the way meeting with an Officer,
that was just come from the Army; he asked him what News from thence? the
Officer told him, he knew of none, but that if there were any he might be
informed of it by the Count du Plessis, who had arrived there long before him.
The Duke of Bouillon turning himself to Couvonges, told him, that he did not
understand what the Count du Plessis meant, by leaving the Army without his
Order. Couvonges answered him with much Concern, that he had been at Casal but
one Moment: and drawing nearer, gave him in his Ear so mean an Excuse for his
coming, that the Duke of Bouillon began to have some Suspicions, and
immediately after retired to his Chamber, saying he would write his Dispatches.

Couvonges, who had taken notice of the Duke of Bouillon's Surprise, as the
Duke had likewise done of his, went immediately to the Count du Plessis to tell
him what had happened. He had concealed him in a Lodging near the Duke of
Bouillon, for they had resolved among themselves, not to Arrest him till he
should be in Bed. The Chance fell to Couvonges to carry him word of it; but he
had already conceived so much Esteem and Respect for the Duke of Bouillon, that
he could never bring himself to the Resolution of Arresting him in the
Citadel, and it seemed to him, that by Arresting him in the Town, he should
only break the Laws of Hospitality in a less Degree, and have fewer
Difficulties in effecting a Design that could never be defended. Couvonges
having related to the Count du Plessis and Castelan what had passed between the
Duke of Bouillon and himself, they both judged that there would be danger in
deferring the Execution one Moment. Couvonges returned directly to the Duke of
Bouillon's Chamber, and finding him walking there desired a word with him in
private, pretending that a Spy had brought him considerable News from the
Enemy. When the Duke of Bouillon had ordered those about him to retire;
Couvonges began with the Compliments that are usual upon such Occasions, that
he was extremely concerned at the Orders he had received from the King to
Arrest him as his Prisoner. The Duke of Bouillon told him, that if he had an
Order it was Counterfeited, and desired to see it. Couvonges told him, that he
had left it with the Count du Plessis, who was not far off. Then the Duke of
Bouillon bad him go fetch it; and, laying his hand upon his Sword, told him, He
knew nothing that might hinder him from running it through his Body, for having
understood his Duty so little, as to dare to Arrest such a Person as he was,
without the Order for it in his Hand. Couvonges having been concerned before at
his undertaking this thing, and more troubled now at this Accident, returned to
Praslin who was then in the Court.

The Duke of Bouillon, without losing time, or making any noise, put out the
Lights in his Chamber, and got into the street by a Backdoor, there he met St.
Aubin who was his Harbinger. After having entrusted him with the Condition he
was in, he bid him follow him, took his Cloak the better to disguise himself,
and went directly to the Rampires, to try if they could find a place by which
they might escape: but he judged it impossible, after having thrown down stones
in several places, to learn the height of the Walls. St. Aubin offered to cast
himself down to make a more certain Proof of the Danger. But the Duke of
Bouillon thought it plain enough already, and would not consent to it.

At this time, seeing they were going the Round, the Duke of Bouillon retired
back; he stayed among some Ruins, and sent St. Aubin to the Town, to see what
had passed there, and to buy some Ropes, not despairing still, but by the
favor of the Night, he should make his Escape over the Wall. But St. Aubin
came back the moment after, and told him there were Guards at all the Avenues,
which hindered Folks from passing, and that a Soldier had told him, that all
the People were in Arms, upon a Report which was spread, That the Duke of
Bouillon would deliver Casal to the Spaniards. The Duke of Bouillon imagining,
that perhaps St. Aubin might be in greater Apprehensions than he had grounds
for, went to the Place that he saw him come from, and found there that not only
what St. Aubin had told him was true, but heard himself likewise proscribed:
for 'twas proclaimed by the Sound of Trumpet, That he who took him alive or
dead should receive a Thousand Pistols.

In this Extremity the Duke finding himself near a Court through which there
was no Passage, and seeing a Victualling-House thereabouts, he went into it
under pretense of Drinking. He found no Body in the House but one Woman. But
the Husband, who had run out upon the Noise in the Town, came back soon after,
and told him all he had heard concerning this Disorder. The Duke of Bouillon,
seeing he had nothing else to trust to, thought of engaging this Fellow; and
because he imagined he should work better upon him in his Wife's Absence, he
gave her Money to go fetch some Wine. Then he discovered himself to the
Husband, gave him his Purse, in which were about Twenty or Thirty Pieces of
Gold, with a Promise to make his Fortune. In short, the Duke had gained so far
upon him, that before his Wife was returned, St. Aubin was gone back with
Orders concerning what was to be done, and the Man had hid the Duke in a
Hay-loft, after he had promised to effect his Escape the Night following, and
that he would say nothing of it to his Wife. But he could not forbear imparting
this Secret to her, nor his Wife delay going to reveal it to Couvonges betimes
the next Morning. Couvonges went immediately to see if the Advice were true,
and made some Soldiers get up into the Hay-loft. The Duke of Bouillon finding
himself discovered, drew his Sword, and threatened to kill the first Man that
came near him. There was one that fired a Pistol at him, but it did not go off.
Then Couvonges, hearing the Bustle, got up presently by a Rope-Ladder, and told
the Soldiers he would hang up the first Man that should touch the Duke of
Bouillon.

The Commotion was so great and so general throughout Casal, by reason of the
Hatred, which they bore the Spaniards, and the Report, which had been spread,
That the Duke would make 'em Masters of the Place; that, whatever Care they
could take, yet, it was a great deal of Trouble to secure him from the Fury of
the People, when he passed through the Town. But because the Orders were to
carry the Duke immediately to the Castle of Pierre-Encise, they put him bound
into a Coach, with such a Guard, as might show of what Importance they judged
his Escape might be to them.

Cinqmars and de Thou were already in the Castle, when the Duke of Bouillon
came thither. The same day they found an Opportunity of conveighing a Billet to
him, which gave him a perfect Insight into the Posture of Affairs. For the
generality it is a great Comfort and Advantage to a Prisoner to receive News,
but the Duke of Bouillon at present paid very dear for both of them.

It is impossible to express his Indignation, when he found that Fontrailles
had not only as from Monsieur promised the King of Spain, that the Duke of
Bouillon would enter into the Treaty, and deliver up Sedan as a Place of
Retreat; but that in the same Treaty he had requested, and obtained a Pension
for him. We may guess likewise what Addition it was to his Trouble, to find
that Monsieur having given a Copy of the Treaty in Form, had not mentioned in
the Declaration he had joined to it, what the Conditions were, upon which, and
no other, the Duke of Bouillon had promised to receive him into Sedan; for this
Point was not cleared, either because Monsieur durst not disavow what
Fontrailles had done in his Name, in a Treaty now made public; or that it was
too great a Mortification to show the King what Projects he had laid upon his
Death, and to let the Cardinal see, how much he was afraid of him.

In the mean time, the Chancellor, with great diligence, had given
Instructions for the Process against Cinqmars and de Thou, who were both
condemned to be beheaded; one, as the Author of a Treaty with Spain, the
other, for knowing and yet not revealing it.

It is not possible for a Man to go to his Death, with more Courage, or greater
marks of a Christian Piety, than both of them demonstrated. Cinqmars, being
ready to mount the Scaffold, wrote to his Mother, to desire her, to pay some of
his Creditours; and showed in the Letter both the Tranquillity of his Mind, and
the Care he had of his Conscience.

De Thou, being better read in Divinity, made admirable Discourses upon the
Psalms and New Testament. There appeared in all his Expressions a lively Faith,
and an entire Resignation as to things of this World: yet, in short, though in
this last Action of their Lives, they both of 'em gave equal Demonstrations of
their Constancy, yet it is hard, considering the Disproportion of their Age and
Fortune, not to be so favorable to Cinqmars, as to allow him some larger
Proportion of the Glory.

The Duke of Bouillon having but a small Knowledge in the Laws of the Kingdom,
was persuaded, that he had acted only like a Man of Honor, in not revealing
his Friends Secret, and it was sufficient to excuse him from any Guilt of
Treason, That he had never given any Powers, nor signed any Treaty that was
made with Spain. But when he heard of de Thou's Condemnation, he doubted not of
his own Ruin, and for three days, that he continued without receiving any
News, he did nothing but prepare himself for Death. However no Sentence was
pronounced against him, either for want of Proofs, or through the Instances
made by the Viscount Turenne his Brother, who was very Considerable, and grew
daily more so, by his extraordinary Actions and signal Services.

But that which contributed more effectually than any thing to the Duke of
Bouillon's Safety, was, That as soon as ever his Duchess had the News of his
Seizure, she dispatched her Sister-in-Law, Mademoiselle de Bouillon, who was a
Princess of great Parts, and capable of Business, immediately away to Court.
She ordered her to tell the Cardinal from Her, That, if he put her Husband to
death, she would deliver Sedan to the Spaniards; and that he need not doubt it,
since she had already sent to 'em to come thither. But when Mademoiselle de
Bouillon saw de Thou executed, she went back to the Cardinal, to tell him, she
had full Power to negotiate with him, and to engage in any thing for the Duke
of Bouillon's Life and Liberty.

At last the Treaty was concluded on. It was Agreed, That the King should have
Sedan, and that he should give the Duke an Aequivalent in Lands within the
Kingdom; That, whilst these Articles were in Execution, the Duke of Bouillon
should come out of Prison, and the King's Troops enter into Sedan.

Mazarine, one of Cardinal Richlieu's Creatures, was sent thither to take
Possession for the King, and to give all necessary Securities: The Duchess of
Bouillon being likewise persuaded, That both her Husband's Life and Liberty
depended upon the rendering up of Sedan, parted with it as willingly as she
would have received a considerable Favor, and went to Turenne, to meet the
Duke of Bouillon, who was retired thither.

THE Third BOOK.
THE Year before, The Duke of Bouillon arrived at Turenne, after having gained
a Victory, and making so advantageous a Peace, that his Glory had spread it
self throughout all Europe: but now he came just out of a Prison, where he had
been in great danger of his Life, deprived likewise of the Sovereignty of one
of the best places in the World. This unhappy State which rendered him no
farther now considerable than his own Personal Merit could make him, yet did
not hinder the Nobility of the Neighboring Provinces from coming in large
Companies to visit him: and since they expected to find his thoughts in a
posture conformable to his Affairs, they could not but admire to see no manner
of alteration in so different a Fortune.

He conversed with every one as he used to do before, agreeably to their
humor, and the quality of their Persons: But he never entered upon any Apology
for what had passed, nor any insinuation of the hopes he might conceive for the
future. As for the rest of his time he took exact Cognizance of his Revenue,
and the condition of his Estate; he inquired into the management of his
Servants. In several places he set up Fathers to preach against the Reformed
Religion, which most of the Inhabitants thereabouts professed: and he himself
entered so far into the Controversy, as to dispute with diverse Gentlemen, some
of which recanted afterward: and in their private Affairs, he decided several
Cases, and reconciled as many differences. He spent everyday a set number of
hours in reading, and particularly in the perusal of the ancient Fathers. He
often hunted as well for Exercise as Diversion. He made very few Visits,
because though Cardinal Richlieu looked upon him as a Prince that was fallen
beyond retrieve; yet he could not but have regard to him as an Enemy that would
be ready for any undertaking, when a favorable opportunity should present it
self, either for his Revenge, or the Reestablishment of his Affairs. Besides,
he had notice that the Intendants and Governors of the Neighboring Provinces
had Orders to observe him. So he looked upon Turenne, and his other Seats, as
the places of his Exile. But by comporting himself after the manner I have
spoke of, it is easy to judge that he was not dejected at it, and that it only
increased the esteem they had already conceived of him. So true a thing it is,
That when Fortune has reduced Great Men to a private Life, they are able to
employ themselves so well as to maintain their Bravery and their Glory.

Five or six Months after his continuance at Turenne, Cardinal Richlieu died at
Paris. The very moment that the Duke of Bouillon received the News, he ordered
Prayers to be said for him in the Places that belonged to him; either out of
the pure Motive of Christian Charity; or else because a Personal Hatred makes
so little Impression upon Men of great Souls, that they cannot carry it to the
Graves of their most mortal Enemies.

The Duke of Bouillon did not change his Conduct upon the Death of Cardinal
Richlieu, but the Death of the King, which happened four or five Months after,
made him take up new Resolutions. Seeing the Queen was declared Regent, and
Monsieur the Duke of Orleans President of the Council; the Duke of Bouillon had
Reason to believe, and all France thought the same, That he could never expect
a more favorable Conjuncture. He therefore went for Paris. He was very kindly
received by the Queen and Monsieur the Duke of Orleans, and the whole Court
looked upon him as a Person that could not fail of re-entring Sedan, and
becoming more considerable now than ever. In the mean time, he perceived, by
degrees, that their way of Treating him began to be much cooler than at first;
and the Silence, as to his Affairs, which accompanied this Change, began to let
him apprehend, that if they had not entirely forgot the Losses he had
sustained, and the Dangers he had run through, yet at least that Remembrance of
them which remained, served rather to make his Presence seem importunate, than
to inspire any Sentiments that might be to his Advantage. There could be no
Addition to the Grief he conceived at seeiug himself in so different a
Condition from what he might reasonably have expected: but he thought it
Prudence to dissemble the Knowledge he had of this Misfortune, and, in the mean
time, that he might be certain what to rely upon, he judged it convenient to
demand an Audience of the Queen and Monsieur. They both promised him one. But
after having waited several days, to have a time assigned him, they remitted
him, at last, to the Abbot de la Riviere, whom they ordered to go and conferr
with him, concerning his Pretensions.

The Duke of Bouillon declared to him, That he was willing to execute the
Treaty, as to the Exchange of Sedan. But it being impossible that the
Valuations that were to be made, the Confirmations, and several other
Formalities, that were absolutely necessary, should be finished under several
Years, he desired, that, in the mean time, they would put him in Possession of
the Place. Not that he had any design of keeping it; but, on the contrary,
would, without any trouble, restore it into the King's hands the very moment
that his Aequivalent was ready. That if it were so at present, he would make no
Scruple in receiving it: But he foresaw Delays and infinite Disputes would
arise if they should proceed in this Affair, without having first delivered him
Sedan; because then they would treat of it as a Business that regarded him
only: whereas if they saw him reestablished, they would look upon it as the
King's Concern, for the extending of his Frontiers by the Acquisition of a
Sovereignty, and a Place so very strong, and so very important. That if none of
those Reasons would move the Queen and Monsieur, he thought it his Duty to take
the Liberty of representing to them, That both of them might die before things
might be in a Condition of being settled; that then the Loss to his Family
would be inevitable; and that after all that had happened heretofore, they were
bound both in Honor and Conscience, not to let him be exposed to this utmost
Misfortune. He added farther; That her Majesty and his Royal Highness were the
two People in the World that had least Reason to distrust him; nevertheless, to
show the Sincerity with which he would proceed, he offered to give them
whatever Praecautions they desired, even to the Delivery of his Children for
Hostages.

The Abbot de la Riviere answered the Duke of Bouillon with abundance of
Compliments. But he told him, that having no farther Orders than to hear him,
all that he could do was only to assure him, that he would report faithfully
whatever had been spoken, and it should not be his Fault, if he had not a
favorable and a speedy Answer.

The Abbot de la Riviere as being Monsieur's declared Favorite, had for a long
time had a great part in the most important Affairs of State, especially during
the Regency. He was born at Paris, of a poor and mean Family. He was a Scholar:
He had Wit, and made an agreeable Use of it, in every thing that might serve
for his Master's Diversion. This was the chief Foundation upon which he raised
himself. But after having been the Servant and Comptroller of his Master's
Pleasures, he became so likewise of his Affairs and Fortune. He was a Courtier
that studied his own Interest, rough and passionate at home, complaisant and
submissive to all that were above him, but rude and insupportable to all the
World beside.

During the Minority he was named for a Cardinal. In the mean time, Monsieur
perceived that he discovered his Secrets to hasten his own Promotion at Rome,
and advance his Fortune at Court. Then Monsieur abandoned him for ever; but
this Disgrace did not hinder him from dying Bishop and Duke of Langres, and in
great Wealth; yet condemned of all Men for having passed his Life without the
gaining of one Friend, and still more blameable, for never seeing any of his
Relations from the first Advancement of his Fortunes.

The Duke of Bouillon waited several days for an Answer to the Conference he
had with the Abbot de la Riviere, and seeing that sometimes upon one Pretense,
and sometimes another, he deferred the giving him any, he thought it his best
way to address himself directly to the Queen and Monsieur. But they avoided
speaking with him, and that with such an Air, as plainly showed him that they
did not like his Proposals. Then he returned to the Abbot de la Riviere, to
inform him farther concerning his Pretensions. After having enquired for him
several times in vain, the Duke happened one day to be in his Antichamber,
when several Persons of Quality were coming from him; he asked likewise to see
him, but a Valet de Chamber came to tell him in their Presence, that he was
gone abroad. This Usage put the Duke of Bouillon out of all Patience. He could
not refrain being in a Fury, and telling the Valet aloud, that if it were not
out of Respect to Monsieur, he would treat his Master after such a manner, that
he should have Cause to remember so base a Proceeding as long as he lived. This
Encounter was noised abroad the same day: and since Services which are above
Reward, often produce as dangerous Effects as Injuries; The Queen and Monsieur
took this Pretense of ridding themselves of the Duke of Bouillon and his
Pretensions. They proposed to the Council to have him Arrested. He was advised
of it, and, without taking leave, went Post to Turenne.

Some PARTICULARS Concerning the LIFE OF HENRY de la Tour d' Auvergne, Viscount
TURENNE.
I Don't pretend to give you here the Life of the Viscount Turenne. I wish, for
his Glory, that there might be found a Man more daring than my self, and who
had Abilities equal to a Design so vast, and withal so difficult, by reason of
the Greatness of the Subject. But though no Person would undertake it, yet
there is no need to fear, that the Memory of his Glorious Actions would be ever
lost. It is impossible without Writing his History, to give an Account of what
passed in France for forty Years together. However since I had the Honor, for
several Years, to be engaged with him in Affairs of the greatest, as well as
smallest Consequence; and that it often happens to Historians to be ignorant
of, or else to neglect some Essential Particulars; I shall endeavor by some
Historical as well as private Proceedings, to leave Posterity a True Idea of so
great a Man. What I shall say in Honor of his Memory, will deserve the greater
Credit, because I am so far from being rendered suspicious by the Favors he
has done me, that he has ruined my Fortune beyond Retrieve: However I owe Him
this Justice, to confess he did it without any Design of Injuring me.

Henry de la Tour d' Auvergne, Viscount Turenne, was of a mean Stature. He was
neither fat nor lean. In his Gate and Behavior there appeared less of
Boldness, than Modesty and Caution. His Hair was brown, his Head big, and
bowing a little forwards: his Complexion ruddy; his Eyes large and sprightly,
but covered with great Eyebrows that met both together. His Face was regular
enough; and yet there was a pleasant Air joined to something that was cloudy in
it; which Mixture made a Physiognomy that was extraordinary, and very difficult
to be painted.

In his Childhood he was of a tender Complexion; nor had he his Health well,
till after he was Twenty. He was not above Nine or Ten years old, when, having
stolen from his Governor, and being sought for a long time, he was found upon
the Rampires of Sedan, laid down to sleep upon the Carriage of a Cannon, being
resolved to pass the Night there. He had heard his Father the Duke of Bouillon
often say, That it would be a great while before he would be able to endure the
Fatigues of War: and the Young Prince thought this was a Proof sufficient to
undeceive him. He began his first Service in Holland under the Prince of
Orange, his Uncle, and was sent thither when he was but fourteen Years old.

He had naturally an extraordinary Inclination to War, which being very much
heightened by the Desire of Glory, He applied himself so earnestly to that Art,
that in his Childhood he seemed to be truly sensible of no other Passion. He
acquired a great Reputation in a little time, and being in War all his Life,
and living till 63. he at last, in all Men's Opinion, seemed fit to be compared
to the greatest Generals among the Ancients. He was born with a great deal of
'Spirit, but was less Remarkable for a Quick and Easy Wit, than for a Profound
Judgment: In Matters that were pressing, and of Consequence, he determined
without Suspense, and continued firm and faithful to the Side which he had
taken; but he was better at foreseeing the End proposed, than in providing for
the different Means by which it was attainable.

He passed his Life without any Personal Quarrel, however in the beginning he
did not always serve under Persons for whom he had much Esteem; several
likewise served under him, that had no greater Value for him: and he was joined
in Command with others, whose Humor and Manners were very inconsistent with
his own; and the more so, by reason of the Emulation and Jealousy which they
had of his Glory: for besides that he gave no Credit to Reports, and that he
despised such things as were spoke against him, He was always intent upon some
great Design, and troubled himself with very few things that were not a real
Obstacle to it.

He was never tempted by the Assurance of a present Success to any Enterprise
that might advance his own Glory, when he thought it would interrupt the Course
of a Design, greater and more useful for the State, though at a farther
distance: and naturally he was so set upon the Public Good, that, to promote
it, he often sacrificed his Private Fortune, and sometimes hazarded his own
Reputation.

He was so far from throwing the Blame of ill Accidents upon those Officers he
employed, that he never lost any Occasion of encouraging them, when they
happened to have met with ill Fortune. Amongst so many Subjects for his Anger
and Displeasure, which he must have met withal from the Time he began to be a
Commander. He never offended any Body; he was never heard to speak one
passionate Word to his Servants; and though he was naturally mild and patient,
yet a Virtue so rare, and practiced with so much Constancy, could not have been
the Effect of his Temper only.

One day when he was preparing to mark out the Lines of a Place which was to be
besieged, he found that he wanted some necessary Instruments; and remembering
that a Marshall of France, who commanded one of the Attacks, had more than he
used, he sent one of his Guards to borrow some of him. The Soldier came back
very much troubled, and repeated aloud several disagreeable things which the
Marshall said when he refused to lend them. The Viscount Turenne turning to
the Officers near him, Since he is so angry, (says he) we must even let them
alone, and do as well as we can without them. After this he attacked the Lines,
forced them, and gained all the Glory of the Action.

At this last Campaign in Flanders, several Courtiers came from the Army very
much incensed against him, but without any reasonable Ground. The Viscount
Turenne, who did not return till a Month after the King, found that from their
private Discontent, they had raised One so general, that there was scarce any
Body in the whole Court who did not do himself the Honor of speaking ill, or
complaining of him. Several of the Cabal, and some of the first Quality, spoke
to him to accommodate Matters, and to clear things with him. All his Answer
was, That he would not be at that trouble. It was enough for him to be assured
that he had given no Person Reason to complain: that he did not despair but
upon some other occasion, where perhaps he might be really to blame, the
Gentlemen of the Court would be favorable to him. Afterward they all came
back upon their own accord, as if nothing had passed, and he acted with them as
if he had heard nothing of it.

He was incapable of Hatred, but very sensible of Friendship; he was seen to
shed Tears in the Steets of Pontoise, upon the News he received at the Gate of
the Town, That the Duke of Bouillon his Brother lay there dangerously sick of
the Disease whereof he died: and his Tears were so much the more natural and
moving, because it was easily seen that he had a Mind to refrain them. He spoke
generally of his Brother with so much Modesty and Heartiness, that discourssing
with a Friend two or three days after the Duke of Bouillon's Death, he said
these very Words to him; It is believed that I know something of War, but there
is nothing truer than I might still have learned a great deal more from the
Duke my Brother; and then for Business, How far was his Talent beyond mine?

He was not always happy in the Choice of his Friends; however he bewailed the
Death of several of them: and his natural Goodness was so great, that he was
never hardened by all the Blood he had seen spilt. Nor could he hinder himself
from having always in his Mind the Design of Promoting some Person or other,
notwithstanding so much Ingratitude as he had met with.

For several Years he had no good Success in War, nay, he was looked upon as
unfortunate; however in those Encounters wherein he did not succeed, Fame has
always done Justice to his Courage and Conduct, and he has often acquired more
Glory, than those who had gained the Advantage over him. He had a very great
Ambition, which the Conjuncture of the Times, and his own Prudence, made him,
for the most part, moderate, or else conceal: but if he had lived in some past
Ages, that have been favorable to Conquerours, though he would have set no
Bounds to his own Glory, yet he easily would have done it to his Fortunes.

During the Regency in the Year 1649. Paris took Arms to drive out the Cardinal
Mazarine; the Viscount Turenne (either by the Fatal Constellation which reigned
then, or through the Discontent he had conceived at that Minister, in regard of
his private Fortune, and that of his Family) took a Resolution contrary to the
Interest of the Cardinal, but which he did not look upon as against the public
Good of the Kingdom. He commanded the Army in Germany, which consisted of
between 12 and 15000 Men, most Strangers; they had a very great Veneration for
him, which was owing not only to his Merit, but to his Impartiality, and way of
Living amongst his Officers; besides the greatest part of them were beholden to
him for their Advancement, having scarce any Correspondence at Court but
through his Means. In short, the Soldiers being entirely devoted to him, the
Principal Officers of the Army, who were absolutely his, engaged all the others
to swear, That they would follow no other General.

This Engagement was published with the Sound of Drums and Trumpets, and the
Acclamations of the Soldiers; so that never upon the Change of any Party was
there seen perhaps so general a Consent, and the Testimonies of so firm a
Dependence. He declared to the French and others, who would not enter into his
Interest, that he left them Liberty to retire; which very few did.

They marched the next day to enter into France; but upon the third day after,
the Viscount Turenne being come to Spire, to make a Bridge for the Army to pass
over, Longpr^, Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment of Foot, of Vaudecourt, came
in have to tell him, That Thoubal and Chust, two General Officers, that were
Strangers, who owed all to the Viscount Turenne, and in whom he had placed his
principal Confidence, had passed the Night in treating with Hervard, sent by
Cardinal Mazarine, who carried likewise Orders from the Queen, and several
Letters from the Prince of Conde to the Officers of the Army; so that being
gained by large Hopes and great Sums of Money (which Hervard advanced upon his
Credit, to about 12 or 1300000 Livres) they made all the Army change their
Minds, so that they were already marching another way.

This Resolution was so quick and universal, that the same Troops, which a few
days before had showed so great a Zeal for the Viscount Turenne, had infallibly
seized him Prisoner, if without losing any time, he had not made his Escape:
And this was the first time that he understood how little Security there is for
the Life and Fortune of Men, when they ground it only upon a Power which is
usurped. In the mean time, as it was impossible so extraordinary an Encounter
should not have suitable Consequences, the Viscount Turenne, the Campaign
following, was at the Head of a Spanish Army, to procure the Deliverance of the
Princes of Conde and Conti, and fought the Battle of Rethel He lost it, and
when he saw himself out of Condition to think of any thing but the Safety of
his own Person; he got apart from those that were flying, mounted upon a
wounded Horse, and was followed only by la Barge, Lieutenant of his Guards,
whose Horse was wounded likewise; after a little time they saw Five Troopers
riding full speed up to them; la Barge told the Viscount Turenne, I have but
one Pistol to discharge, and you have fired all yours; Sir, What will you do?
Die (says he) la Barge, rather than return into France to serve for a
Spectacle. Then they were set upon by two of these Troopers, who advanced
before the rest; la Barge went to one and killed him with his Pistol; the other
coming up to the Viscount Turenne, took him by the Belt, and offered him
Quarter, the Viscount Turenne killed him with a Blow of his Sword; Of the three
that remained, one who seemed to be an Officer shot a Pistol at Viscount
Turenne, and missed him: afterward they all three retired without attempting
any farther; either that they were frightened by the Death of their Companions,
or that the Destiny of France would reserve this Prince for the several
Services it expected from him. In Effect the Viscount Turenne had been lost
without Recovery, his own Horse and la Barge's being no longer able to go: but
la Vaux, an Officer in the Regiment of Blereau, passed by at that Instant, and
gave his to him to make an Escape. After these two Actions, which he never
recollected without Grief and Repentance; Posterity cannot but wonder that he
should be the next Year at the Head of one of the King's Armies, and that they
should place an entire Confidence in him. But though there be no Example of an
Alteration so quick and great, I leave it to History to show in the several
Particulars, how much, during the whole Remainder of his Life, he showed
himself worthy of it, by his inviolable Fidelity, and extraordinary Services.

He began to repair the Misfortunes which had befallen him in the two preceding
Years, by two Actions which he did in the space of 12 or 15 days; one at
Gergeau, the other at Blereau: and because I was there to see them, and that
both times he saved the Estate and Person of the King, I cannot forbear
relating them.

As soon as the Viscount Turenne had received necessary Orders for the Command
of the Army, he parted from Blois where the Court was then, and advanced by the
way of Sully and Gien, to assemble the Troops which were to serve under him.
The King went not yet to the War, nor did intermeddle with Affairs, because he
was so very young, and the Queen Mother reposed the Government of the State
entirely in Cardinal Mazarine. Some days after the Departure of Viscount
Turenne, the King went likewise from Blois to go to Orleans; but that City had
shut it is Gates against him, so he took a Resolution of going to Gien. At the
time they were passing, without any Praecaution, under the Walls of Gergeau, a
little Town upon the River Loire, the Baron de Syrop, who commanded the Army of
the Princes, attacked the Bridge of Gergeau, with a Design to pass it, and so
to fall upon the Court in its March; he was already become Master of the Gate
which is on the other side of the River, and was making a Lodgment about the
Middle of the Bridge, whilst he raised a Battery of two Pieces of Cannon to
beat down the other. The Viscount Turenne, who was advanced to cover the King,
hearing the Noise of the Muskets, left the Road, and threw himself into
Gergeau. He found there some Foot, but so ill provided of Ammunition, that the
greatest part of the Soldiers had never a Charge of Powder. Seeing the Affair
to be of such Importance, he made the Gate be opened, and the Drawbridge be
let down, and, that the Enemy might hear him, he commanded the Foot which
guarded the Curtain, that, upon Pain of Death, no Man should fire without his
Order; afterward having made all those that were with him to alight from their
Horses, himself at their Head, he went with his Sword drawn up to the Enemy;
chased them from the Lodgment they had made upon the Bridge, and,
notwithstanding all their Efforts and their Cannon, which killed or wounded 8
or 10 Persons who were near him, he drove them to the other side of the River,
and afterward broke down two Arches of the Bridge, that he might leave the
Court in perfect Security.

The King arrived at Gien, the Viscount Turenne marched thence to post himself
at Briare with the Troops he had gathered: and having learned that the Marquess
d' Hoquincourt, who came to join him with a considerable Body, was about
Blereau; He went to confer with him, and visit his Camp.

The Marshall d' Hoquincourt had a great natural Courage. He was capable of
undertaking any thing, and venturing all: but he very often did not use all the
care and precaution that might be necessary.

After they had been both to see the Marshal's Quarters, the Viscount Turenne
told him several times, that he found he lay very open, and that he would
advise him to retire by the way of Briare. He answered still, that he had
nothing to fear, and that a good Guard would secure all. In the mean time the
Viscount Turenne was no sooner upon his return to Briare, but the Marshal was
attacked. The Viscount Turenne having notice, advised the Court of it, and
marched directly to him with the Troops he had at Briare, and thereabouts. He
sent Orders to those that were at farther distance, to advance immediately by
the way which goes from Briare to Blezeau, and ordered all the Artillery to
march thither. Half a League from Briare, he learnt by some who were run away,
that the Marshal D' Hoquincourt was entirely routed. The News was soon after
confirmed by a Prisoner, who assured him, that the Enemy were coming to him,
and that he had left them upon their march: all the General Officers were of
Opinion, that they should go to the Kings Person, as being the only advice
could be taken in this Extremity, and with a force so very unequal; but the
Viscount Turenne, with a vigor of Mind proportionable to the Danger and
Importance of the Affairs, scarce staying to Answer them, gave necessary
Orders, marched on, and pressed the Troops to redouble their Diligence. La
Berge came up to tell him, that every Body murmured, and believed all to be
lost, if he did not return to the Kings Person. The Viscount Turenne Answered
him, That this was a pleasant thing to have recourse to, when Orleans had set
such an Example, even before they had received any shock; where will they open
their Gates when we shall present our selves Vanquished, Flying and Conquered?
we must perish or save all. The day before, as he returned from Monsieur D'
Hoquincourt's Quarters, he saw a Marsh, which made a long Defile: the
remembrance of this Marsh came then into his Mind, he judged by the Reflections
which he made on the situation of the Places, that before the Enemy could come
to him, they were obliged to pass by it. In this Opinion he marched on, and
came there so luckily, that he was on one side of the Marsh, at the same time
that the Enemies Troops began to appear on the other; he had not then above
3500. Men: however he stopped a Victorious Army consisting of 13, or 14000. and
Commanded by the Prince of Conde.

The Court was already much Alarmed at the Defeat of Marshal d' Hoquincourt,
but they were extremely frightened when they heard of the Viscount Turenne's
march. For they doubted not but he would fall into the same Misfortune. In this
extremity they thought the only Refuge was to get the River Loire between the
King and his Enemies, the greatest part of the Equipage was already past: they
began to Unfurnish the Queens Apartment, and the Pioneers were ready to break
down the Arches of the Bridge, when they heard Viscount Turenne's great
Success, and were assured, that after having seen the Enemy Retreat to their
Quarters, he was come back to Post himself at Briare with his Army.

The same Day Cardinal Mazarine wrote to him to have his Advice, as to the
relation he would send with all speed to Paris, and into the Country, to
prevent such reports as might be spread there to their disadvantage. This
Relation began with the Counsel which the Viscount Turenne had given the day
before to the Marshal to Retreat by the way of Briare. The Viscount Turenne
struck out this Article, saying, the Marshal was unfortunate enough, without
the addition of so disobliging a Circumstance.

He used very few words upon all occasions. He was uneasy under all long
Discourses, and unnecessary particulars; his great Application sometimes seemed
to confound him, so that the Reasons he often gave were very obscure; his
profound thoughtfulness made him often ask Questions out of the way, and
pronounce Sentences which had no Connection; he often times took up Aversions
which he did not easily lay down, and commonly rather to the Air and Carriage
of the Persons, than to the People themselves. For Example, were a Man never so
Brave, yet he could not endure that he should use any thing extraordinary for
his defense against the weather. As for those that he perfectly despised, let
them be of whatsoever quality they would, yet it was with extreme regret, that
he could bring himself to speak to them, and to keep such decencies with them
as might be necessary; and the most assured means of incurring his contempt,
was to be Vainglorious, and commend ones self. He was very unwilling People
should look upon him as a Person prejudiced, or distrustful: and whether it was
to cover his own faults, or because a Man's Mind has necessarily opposite
Sentiments, he would frequently discover such Secrets as he should have
concealed, and would appear just, sincere and open, at the expense even of his
Relations and his Friends.

The uneasiness he conceived at seeing that Men were persuaded he was soon
prejudiced by Inclination and Esteem, had so much Influence upon his Mind, that
though he was inclined always to prefer his Friends, to such favors as
depended upon himself, and to assist them with his Fortune, or engage himself
for them; yet he always spoke with less force and boldness upon their account,
than in behalf of such Persons who were known to be indifferent to, or
suspected by him. Carried either by motives of Justice, or else in respect only
of the Glory and Advantage of his Prince, he often did very good Offices, and
procured Employment for those who did not love him; so that some may have
rejoiced at his Death, who perhaps without their own knowledge, owe the places
they possess at present, to his Recommendations.

He always loved his own Family, but in the beginning he had less
considerations for it than his own Preferment, and afterward neither that, nor
his Family could stand in Competition with his Glory.

In all Encounters he relieved his Relations, even beyond his Ability, and
parted with some of his Inheritance in favor of them, being more touched with
their necessities than his own wants.

He never boasted of what he had given, and made his Presents with a modesty
very uncommon, and such as is necessary to moderate that Pride and Vanity which
for the most part attend Men's Bounty: This Virtue which is not usual in old
Age, was so natural to him, that even in latter years he bestowed his money
more liberally than ever. In short, under a Prince generous and Magnificent, in
an Age so proper to raise great Fortunes, he died with much less Estate than he
had received from his own Family.

One day when some of his Friends were talking with him concerning Riches,
Rallying and making comparisons on this Subject, he told them that it was true
that he could never comprehend the pleasure of keeping Chests full of Gold and
Silver; that for himself, if at the years end he had any considerable sums
remaining, he should be as uneasy, as if upon his return from a Feast, he
should have greater served up to him. Being in the County of Marck in Germany,
Count Conismar Marshal de Conyre, proposed to him a way of gaining 100000.
Crowns in fifteen days, by means of Contributions: he answered smilingly, that
he was much obliged to him, but after having met with several such occasions
before, without making any advantage of them, he could not bring himself to
alter his Conduct at that Age.

All the care that he took of his own Person, was only to avoid being a Sloven,
the rest depended on his Attendants, not requiring from them, either in his
Personal Service, or the ordering of his House, any Care or Diligence; so that
at Court as well as in the Army, one might often come into his Chamber without
finding any Domestic, to whom you might apply your self.

He looked over his Concerns always in gross, but seldom entered into
Particulars; and he was troubled that People took notice, that this Humor of
his increased, as Affairs multiplied upon him. He spoke generally with a loud
Voice, clear and strong; but when he told any Secret, though of the least
Consequence, he thought he could never speak low enough; and the Opinion which
Men had conceived of his Distrustfulness, was so well grounded, that he seldom
could be reconciled to himself for having made a Confident. He was
indefatigable both in Mind and Body; his Health, after he was 40, was never
interrupted but by one Fever of 8 or 10 days continuance, and by some small
Fits of the Gout a little before his Death.

In Affairs of Consequence, whether easy or difficult, he still acted with the
same Vigilance, never presuming on, or despairing of Success; yet more ready
always to take superfluous Praecautions, than omit any that were necessary. He
never spared his own Labor, though he did that of other Men, as much as the
Service in hand would permit him. He had always great Designs; and all his
Projects of War were founded upon extraordinary Prudence, and a Foresight that
looked very far. But when by Chance and the Necessity of things, he was obliged
to commit himself to Fortune, he gave himself up to it with all the Gaiety and
Boldness of a young Soldier. Those that served under him never knew of his
Designs till the very moment they were to Act them. He was more able than any
Man in the World to ruin an Enemy's Army, though much inferior to it; and to
conclude a Campaign with Advantage, though there was all the Reason in the
World to be afraid of its Success.

In the beginning of the day of a great Battle, there was nothing extraordinary
to be remarked in him: but in such proportion as the Affair proceeded and
became more difficult, you might see him as it were exalted, and providing for
every thing with a Freedom of Mind, and Steadiness of Conduct, which few Men
are Masters of in Dangers of long Continuance. However he was timorous at
Court, and in his Conversation, and no very expert Manager of his common
Concerns. There was likewise a remarkable Change to be seen in his Air and
Behavior: the moment that he came into an Army, he charmed every Body by a way
of living gay and easy. He never shut himself up for Business, his Doors being
always open; nor was there any Mark of Ostentation or Pride in his Words or
Actions: but when he was reduced by Peace to a Private Life, that Suspension of
true Glory which he always found in War, left some place in his Heart for the
movements of another Glory not so real, which rendered his Access more
difficult, even to his best Friends.

The Power of a Favorite made some Impression on his Mind; but whether
retained by his own Glory, or Fear of what might follow, he always preferred
his Liberty to the Dependencies which might advance his Fortune: and prudently
keeping such Measures as were agreeable to the Posts that Men were in. He
passed the most difficult Times without any particular Tie or Engagement. He
stood upon his own Bottom, and spoke with the Liberty and Boldness of an honest
Man, whenever he thought it necessary to his own Glory or his Master's Service.

After he had gained the Battle of Dules, and taken Dunkirk, the Cardidal
Mazarine ardently desired that he might attribute the Glory of these two great
Actions to himself; he would have had the Viscount Turenne to write him a
Letter, which should, in effect, declare, that they were owing to him alone,
who had thought of, and projected all things in his Closet, and they had done
nothing, but precisely executed his Orders. Perhaps there never appeared in
this Minister any Passion more eager than upon this Encounter. He committed the
Affair to the Count de Moret, a Gentleman of very good Sense, great Merit, his
Favorite, and an intimate Friend of the Viscount Turenne.

The Court was then at Calais, and the Viscount Turenne near Dunkirk: The Count
de Moret went two or three times to him, under other Pretenses, but in Reality
upon this Account only. Moret endeavored all he could to divert the Cardinal
from a Thought which agreed so little with his Condition and Character; He
omitted nothing likewise which he thought might induce the Viscount de Turenne
to compound for the Complaisance which he desired of him upon this Occasion; he
(among the Difficulties of a Negotiation so well intended, which did not
succeed) thought himself, at last, obliged to tell the Viscount de Turenne
plainly, That he had Reason to fear that an absolute Refusal, would have very
disadvantageous Effects upon his Fortune, since, upon the first Scruples which
he had made, the Cardinal showed himself to be very much exasperated.

The Viscount Turenne, who could not be moved by Hopes, neither was so by
Fears; he always answered as he had done already, That the Cardinal might put
into History any thing that might flatter his Ambition, and make Posterity
believe that he was a great Captain; but as for his own part, he would never be
reproached with having given him a Title to Authorize a thing so contrary to
his Honor and the Truth.

Almost at this very time, the King fell sick at Calais, and was so ill, that
he was thought to be dead. The Cardinal, not thinking that he stood fair with
the Duke of Orleans, who was only Brother to the King, would assure himself of
those who were about him; but he had Reason to fear they would not be very
favorable to him. In this Extremity he had Recourse to the Viscount Turenne:
his Design was to go and join him, in case he should be forced to retire from
Court. He sent the Count de Moret to him, to engage him to offer himself, and
to secure the Army. The Count had Order to negotiate this Affair with much
Address, and rather to insinuate things, than speak 'em; but he knowing that
this was the most improper Method of gaining upon the Viscount de Turenne, he
spoke to him in his ordinary way, without any manner of Disguise. The Viscount
de Turenne promised immediately, That he would Speak and Act publicly as a
Friend to the Cardinal; that he would represent likewise to Monsieur when he
came to the Crown, that in the Condition things stood then, it would be very
dangerous to take Affairs out of the Hand of a Minister, who was so able and so
well established. The Count de Moret judging that the Cardinal would not be
satisfied with this Answer, represented to Viscount Turenne all that he thought
might induce him to comply with his Demands. He told him, amongst other things,
that the Cardinal could never resolve to form a Party in France, and that
infallibly the Queen Mother would uphold her Fortune. That there was no doubt
to be made of the Credit she had with Monsieur, nor the Protection she would
give the Cardinal; and so by offering to follow blindly the Interests of this
Minister, the Viscount Turenne might without any Hazard, lay such Obligations
upon him, as he would always remember. The Viscount Turenne answered, That
there was a great deal of probability things would go thus, but that he would
never promise more than he now had offered, adding that no Advantage, how great
soever, was able to oblige him to give such promises as might afterward bring
him into a Necessity either to break them, or to fall into the Misfortunes
which he was now got out off.

The Cardinal was in effect so little content with this Answer, that after
having several times sworn his Ruin, he said a great many extravagant things;
sometime, as enraged; sometimes, as dejected: but the King grew well, and his
Care, or the Continuation of the War, made the Cardinal forget, or suspend his
Resentment.

He diverted himself with Men of Sense, and Letters, but had no patience with
those who professed themselves to be the Beaux Esprits. they had no share in
his Bounties, nor he any great one in their Works.

When free from business, he used to recreate himself, and especially in his
Entertainments, but without excess. He would laugh easily at pleasant Discourse
and Raillery; and he himself would make use of it in his turn, but always with
a great deal of Civility and Discretion. He was moved with such Writings as
were natural and lively, loved to read good Books, and especially History. He
made his use of it, but scarce ever spoke upon the subject.

He could not bear a moments Flattery, as such, but when it was under the
appearance of a true Friendship, and such occasions of praising him were taken
as fell in naturally; he took it easily, and then a Flatterer might insinuate
himself into him, be established in his good opinion, and reap the advantages.

He was born in the Reformed Religion, he professed it more than fifty years,
without being well instructed in it. At this Age he began to have some
scruples, and without declaring them to any Body, he endeavored to clear them
up by his reading; but this served only to multiply and strengthen them. Then
he came to Conferences, but only as by way of Conversation, lest his condition
might be discovered; The Queen Mother first apprehended it, spoke to him, and
declared, that besides the motives of his Salvation, there were other Temporal
ones, which made her ardently desire to see him become a Catholic. This
Discourse which would have wrought great Effects upon other Minds, set all the
good motions of Viscount Turenne in suspense, and threw him for several years
into great indifferency of advancing further; for it is true that he was afraid
lest his Conversion should be followed by some remarkable favor, which might
make the purity of his Intentions to be called in question, and bring a stain
upon his Glory; but at last, urged by his Conscience, he declared his doubts
openly, sometimes to the Bishop of Tournay, sometimes to the Bishop of Condom,
and to Monsieur de Boucherat Councellor of State (afterward Chancellor of
France) his particular Friends, in whom he placed a great confidence, but he
opened himself still more freely to the Cardinal Bouillon, his Nephew, whom God
would make an Instrument to perfect the Conversion of so great a Man. In short,
being convinced that he was out of the true Church, he went to make his
Abjuration to the Archbishop of Paris, without giving him any notice till the
night before. He was there only with Monsieur de Boucherat, whom he had desired
to Accompany him thither, but without having declared his design, till a few
days before.

There have been evident proofs of the sincerity of his Conversion, during the
rest of his Life, he testified it likewise by his Will, which appeared since
his Death; for after having thanked God for granting him the knowledge of his
Truth, he gave considerable Legacies to contribute toward the subsistence of
those who should follow his Example. To this end he gave to the Poor who should
be converted at Sedan, and the Lands thereon depending, the sum of 50000.
Livers, and to the Poor that should be Converted at Negrepelece, the sum of
20000. Livers; to the Poor that should be Converted at Chastilion, the like
sum; which sums he would have to be distributed to the Poor who should be
Converted in the foresaid places, or laid out in Rents for them, all at the
Discretion of Cardinal Bouillon, and Monsieur Boucherat, whom he desires to be
his Executors. This Will is punctually Executed in all points by the Duke of
Bouillon, and Monsieur Boucherat.

The Love and Veneration which the Soldiers had always for him, were much
increased in the latter Campaigns: this appeared amongst other occasions the
year before his Death, when in the midst of Winter, he made an extraordinary
march to attacque the Enemy at the Passage of the River D' Ill, in Germany.

All his Campaigns since the War with Holland, contained Prodigies of Valor
and Conduct* which would furnish matter for several Volumes, should we enter
into particulars; but after having escaped a multitude of Dangers for fifty
Years together, which he employed in War; his Army, and that of the Enemies,
facing one another, at Sulsback, in Germany, He was killed by a Cannon Bullet,
discharged almost at a venture, in a Place where they were raising a Battery.
He received the blow in the midst of his Heart, at the same instant that he
stopped his Horse to speak to Saint Hilaire, Lieutenant of the Artillery.

Saint Hilaire had one Arm carried away at the same time, and said a thing very
remarkable to two of his Sons, who wept to see him in that Condition; Alas,
Children, (said he) you ought not to weep for me, but this Great Man, (showing
them the Viscount Turenne) which is the most irreparable Loss that France has
ever suffered.

Perhaps there was never seen any Example of a Grief which was so great and
general at the same time: and I cannot think that of the Roman People, after
the Death of Marcellus, Germanicus, or Titus, could be compared to the
Condition France was in upon this Occasion; Especially, it is impossible to
express the Concern of the Soldiers; It appeared for several days together
after his Death, to be very fresh and moving.

Those who commanded the Army having caused a Halt to be made, to hold a
Council, what way they should take; the Soldiers, concerned to see the Delay of
their Resolutions, began to say aloud and with one Voice, They have nothing to
do but to let la Pie, (which was an Excellent Horse known by the whole Army,
and one that the Viscount Turenne generally mounted) go loose, and where the
poor Creature stops, let them encamp there.

In the distant Provinces, where this Prince was scarce known but by his
Reputation, the News of his Death made a very surprising Impression; the
Nobility and People, for several days together, could speak of nothing else but
the Greatness of their Loss. Many bewailed him, without having ever seen him.
Some excited to this Grief, by the Memory of his Actions; others, in
Consideration of the Services which he might still have rendered them; and all
in general, as being sensible of the extraordinary Misfortune, by which so
Great a Man came to his End.

At Paris, and the Countries thereabouts, and particularly upon the Frontiers,
which were the Seat of War, the Passion was more touching and lively; because
they knew him better, and were used to see him come back every Winter with a
new Load of Glory. In short, it seemed as if his Loss had been the entire
Defeat of an Army, or that each private Person in the whole Kingdom, had lost
their best Friend, or their whole Fortune.

Since, in his Lifetime, there came out a Comparison between Him and Caesar, I
think I may Remark, That as the small Agreement that there is between a
Monarchy and a Republic, made them tread different Paths to Glory, so their
Deaths bore no greater Resemblance. Caesar was assassinated in the time of
Peace, by his own Citizens, whom he had oppressed; and the Viscount Turenne
lost his Life in War, with his Arms in his hand: beloved by all the World, and
serving his King and Country, without any other Interest, than that of Glory,
and the Performance of his Duty.

He began to appear in the Reign of Lewis the XIII th, and being upheld by his
Merit and Quality, he passed without Favor or Disgrace, all the time that
Cardinal Richlieu was Master of Affairs.

Under Cardinal Mazarine's Ministry, Fortune used him variously, but for the
last 20 Years of his Life, he had no Reason to complain of her.

He found a thousand Occasions of gaining such a Glory, as will be immortalized
by all the Histories of Europe; and he esteemed himself so much the happier, in
living under a King who had all the Qualities desirable in a Master, and who
treated him with such Confidence and Esteem, that he might love him as a Friend.

I leave it to such as write his History to say, how far he extended the King's
Conquests, in the last War, and what his Thoughts were, touching the Affairs in
Germany. No one knew certainly what the Motives were, that made him take so
long and difficult a March to seize that Post where he was slain; all we can
learn, is, that some hours before his Death he had promised himself great
Advantages from this last Action of his Life; and he was so far from all
Presumption, that when he began to think well of his own Undertakings, other
People might take his Hopes for an entire Certainty of a happy Success; so that
if those who were at the Head of the Army after his Death, have deserved
Rewards and Praises, the Viscount Turenne being no less above them in his great
Knowledge of War, than by his Quality of General: We have Reason to think, that
the Event of a Design, which he had so long before premeditated, would have
been much more Great and more Glorious.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Thomas Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
FOLIO'S.
A Thenae Oxonienses: Or an exact History of all the Writers and Bishops who
have had their Education in the University of Oxford; from 1500. to the end of
1690. Representing the Birth, Fortunes, Preferments, and Death of all those
Authors and Prelates; the great Accidents of their Lives; with the Fate and
Character of their Writings: The Work being so Complete, that no Writer of Note
of this Nation, for near two hundred years past, is omitted. In Two Volumes.

A New Historical Relation of the Kingdom of Siam, by Monsieur de la Loubere,
Envoy Extraordinary from the French King, to the King of Siam, in the Years
1687, 1688. Wherein a full and curious Account is given of their Natural
History, as also of their Arithmetic and other Mathematick Learning. In two
Tomes. Illustrated with Sculptures. Done out of French. By A. P. Fellow of the
Royal Society.

The Works of Mr. Abraham Cowley. The Eighth Edition. To which is added, The
Cutter of Colemanstreet. Never before Printed in any Edition of his Works.

Fifty Tragedies; and Comedies. By Francis Beaumont, and John Fletcher.

Mr. William Shakespeare's Comedies, Histories and Tragedies.

Comedies and Tragedies. By Tho. Killigrew.

Sir William D'avenants Works.

Dr. Pocock's Commentary on the Prophet Joel.

Voyages and Adventures of Ferdinand Pinto; who was five times Shipwrackt,
sixteen times sold, and thirteen times made a Slave, in Aethiopia, China, etc.
Written by himself. The Second Edition, 1693.

QUARTO'S.
A Critical History of the Text, and Versions of the New Testament; wherein is
firmly Established the Truth of those Acts on which the Foundation of Christian
Religion is laid: In Two Parts. By Father Simon, of the Oratory. Together with
a Refutation of such Passages as seem contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of
the Church of England.

The Works of the Learned: Or an Historical Account, and Impartial Judgment, of
the Books newly Printed, both Foreign and Domestic: Together with the State of
Learning in the World. By J. de la Crose, a late Author of the Universal
Bibliotheques. The first Volume is finished with complete Indexes.

A Sermon before the King and Queen. By the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of
Worcester.

The Bishop of Chester's Charge to his Clergy, at his Primary Visitation, May
5. 1691.

Five Sermons before the King and Queen. By Dr. Meggot Dean of Winchester.

Two Sermons. One before the Honorable House of Commons, on a Thanksgiving, in
November, 1691. The other before the King and Queen in November, 1692. By Dr.
Jane Dean of Gloucester.

Two Sermons. One on a Thanksgiving, the other before the King and Queen. By
Dr. Talbot Dean of Worcester.

Mr. Atterbury's Sermon before the Queen at Whitehall, May 29. 1692.

Dr. Resbury's Two Sermons before the Queen.

A Discourse sent to the Late King James, to persuade him to embrace the
Protestant Religion. By Sam. Parker, late Lord Bishop of Oxon. To which are
prefixed two Letters; the first from Sir Lionel Jenkins, on the same Subject;
the second from the said Bishop, with the Discourse: All Printed from the
Original Manuscripts.

The Plagiary Exposed, or an old Answer to a newly revived Calumny, against the
Memory of King Charles the First, under the Title of Colonel Ludlow's Letter.
By Mr. Butler, Author of Hudibras. Never before Printed.

A short Defense of the Orders of the Church of England. By Mr. Luke Milbourn.

The first Book of Virgill's Aeneis. Made English by Mr. Luke Milbourn.

The Reasons of Mr. Bayes's Changing his Religion. In Three Parts. By Mr. Tho.
Brown.

Novus Reformator Vapulans: Or the Welsh Levite tossed in a Blanket. In a
Dialogue between Hick -- of Colch. Da -- I -- s, and the Ghost of William Pryn.
Written by Mr. Tho. Brown.

An Account of the Proceedings of the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Exeter,
in his Visitation of Exeter College. The Second Edition. To which is added the
Censure of the University of Oxford on the Naked Gospel.

A Defense of the said Proceedings, with an Answer to, first, The Case of
Exeter College Vindicated. Secondly, The Account Examined.

A Vindication of Mr. James Colmer, M. B. and Fellow of Exeter College, from
the Calumnies of several late Pamphlets: to which are annexed, the Authentic
Copies of the Affidavits relating to that Affair.

Popish Treachery: or, a short and new Account of the horrid Cruelties
exercised on the Protestants in France; being a true Prospect of what is to be
expected from the most solemn Promises of Roman Catholic Princes: In a Letter
from a Gentleman of that Nation to one in England.

Certain Considerations for the Establishment of the Church of England, By the
Lord Bacon. Now published with a new Preface.

A Letter to a Lord, in Answer to a late Pamphlet, Entitled, An Enquiry into
the Causes of the present Fears, and Dangers of the Government: in Discourse
between a Lord Lieutenant and one of his Deputies.

A Sermon at the Funeral of John Melford, Esquire by Mr. Easton.

A Practical Discourse concerning Divine Providence, in Relation to National
Judgments.

A Defense of the Church of England from the Charge of Schism and Heresy, as
laid against it by the Vindication of the Deprived Bishops.

The Indecency and Unlawfulness of Baptizing Children in private, without
Necessity, and with the Public Form. By Martin Strong, M. A. and Vicar of
Yeovill in Somerset.

Octavo's and Twelves.
TWelve Sermons preached upon several Occasions, by R. South, D. D. Six of them
never before printed.

Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions, by G. Stradling, D. D, late
Dean of Chichester. Never before printed: together with an Account of the
Author.

The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius Autoninus, the Roman Emperor: Translated
out of Greek into English, with Notes by Dr. Casaubon. To this Edition is
added, the Life of the said Emperor; with an Account of Stoic Philosophy; as
also Remarks on the Meditations. All newly Written by the Famous Monsieur, and
Madam Dacier.

Mr. Waller's Poems complete, in two Parts.

Sir John Denham's Poems.

Crashaw' s Poems; containing, Steps to the Temple, The Delight of the Muse,
etc. Third Edition.

Honor Redivivus: or, the Analysis of Honor and Armory. Reprinted, with many
useful Additions; and supplied with the Names, and Titles of Honor of the
present Nobility of England, etc. The Fourth Edition; adorned with several
Sculptures.

The Faithful Shepherd; with an Addition of diverse others Poems. The Second
Edition. By the Right Honorable, Sir Richard Fanshaw.

The History of Henry IV. Surnamed the Great. The Second Edition. Written in
French by the Bishop of Rodes, and made English by J. D.

Memoirs of the Court of Spain. Written by the Ingenious French Lady, and
Englished by Mr. Tho. Brown.

Memoirs of the Court of France, by the same Author.

Some Motives and Incentives to the Love of God; pathetically discoursed of in
a Letter to a Friend: by the Honorable Robert Boil. The Seventh Edition much
Corrected.

Arist. Hist. LXXII. Interpret. accessere veterum Testimonia de eorum versione,
e Theatro Sheldonian.

Dr. Busby's Greek Grammar.

The Life of that most Illustrious Prince, Charles V. late Duke of Lorrain and
Bar: Generalissimo of the Imperial Armies. Written Originally in French, and
made English.

The Morals of Confusius, a Chinese Philosopher; who flourished above 500.
Years before the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

A Voyage to the World of Cartesius: Written Originally in French, and now
Translated into English, by T. Tailor of Magd. Coll. in Oxford.

Academy of Sciences; being a short and easy Introduction to the Knowledge of
the Liberal Arts and Sciences; with the Names of such Authors of Note, as have
written on every particular Science. By D. Abercromby, M. D.

Homeri Iliados Liber primus, in qua singularum vocum significationes,
compositiones ^o derivationes annotatantur: dialecti clare and distinct
exponuntur, etc. Opera and Studio Georg. Sylvan. Par. Med. Editio secunda.
Twelves.

The Art of Practical Measuring easily performed by a Two-foot Rule, which
slides two Foot, and which is the best Measure of round Timber the common way;
as also the true Measure of Round, Square, or other Timber, of Stone, Boards,
Glass, Paving, Painting, Wainscot, etc. Gauging of Casks, and Gauging and
Inching of Tunns; containing brief Instructions in Decimal Arithmetic; the
best way of using the Logarithms, according to Mr. Tounley: the Use of the
Diagonal Scale of 100. parts in a quarter of an Inch; applied to Gunter's
Chain. And, lastly, some useful Directions in Dyalling, not hitherto published.
By Henry Coggshall, Gent. Twelves.

PLAYS.
By the Honorable Sir Robert Howard.

Five Plays in one Volume, in Folio; viz. The Indian Queen, Surprizal,
Committee, Vestal Virgin, and the Duke of Lerma.

By Mr. Dryden.
All for Love. Quarto. The Assignation. Ibid. Aurenge Zebe, Indian Emperor.
Wild Gallant. Rival-Ladies. Hamlet Prince of Denmark. Macbeth. Epsom Wells. The
Emperor of the Moon. By Mrs. Behn. The Rape; or, The Innocent Impostors. By
Mr. Braddy.
The End of the Catalogue.

