BALLIOFERGVS* OR A COMMENTARY UPON THE Foundation, Founders and Affairs, OF
Balliol College, Gathered out of the RECORDS thereof, and other ANTIQUITIES.

With a brief Description of EMINENT PERSONS Who have been formerly of the same
House.

Whereunto is added, An exact Catalogue of all the Heads of the same College,
never yet exhibited by any.

Together with TWO TABLES, One of ENDOWMENTS, the other of MISCELLANIES.

By HENRY SAVAGE, Master of the said College.

OXFORD, Printed by A. and L. LICHFIELD, Printers to the University. 1668.

Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino, Domino GILBERTO, Divina Providentia
Archiepiscopo Cautuariensi, totius Angliae Primati and Metropolitano, nee non
Academiae Oxoniensis Cancellario munificentissimo.
CVm Paternitas vestra, Praesul amplissime, in tali fastigio collocata res
nostras non solum curare dignetur, verum etiam earundum curam Visitatori
prudentissimo demandare; evidemur, cum Lystrensibus, videre deos hominibus
assimilatos ad nos descendere, labascens and anhelans nostrum corpusculum non
minus infortunio quam senio confectum exsilire and ambulare jubentes.
Quapropter hoc commentariolum quasi taurum vittatum ad vestibula aedium
Lambethanarum adducenti immolare, omniaque fausta nobis polliceri fas sit;
Idque a te imprimis, Illustrissime Praesul, Quem Academia Patronum
munificentissimum, omnisque Anglia magnificentissimum una praedicant: quippe
moles illa Oxoniensis tuis solius impensis in sublime exurgens, prae illis
omnium splendorem Academiae antehac molientium, merito superbit.

Unum pro cunctis fama loquatur opus.

Quo pacto divorum basilicas ab impietate and impuritate palam grassante
vindicabis; atque adeo Enochi seculum, pietate and charitate juxta ac mundo
nutantibus, in tantum restitues, ut haud inepte dicere licuerit caept^messe
Oxoniae invocari nomen Jehovae. Macte igitur virtute tua, Amplissime Praesul,
and Deus optimus maximus tuam Paternitatem multiplici benedictionum genere
ornatam quam diutissime servet incolumem. Sic precatur

Supereminentiae tuae Cultor humillimus. H. S.

Admodum Reverendo in Christo Patri ac Domino, Domino GULIELMO Divina
Providentia Lincolniensi Episcopo, Collegii de Balliolo Oxon: Visitatori
meritissimo.
COlendissime Praesul, Johannes de Balliolo abnepos Bernardi de Balliolo Castri
Bernardensis in Palatinatu Dunelmensi conditoris, Collegium Balliolense, in
sustentationem 16 Scholarium inchoavit, Anno Dom. 126^. Quod sic inchoatum,
Dervorgilla Domina de Galweda ab Regia Scotorum stirpe, and sic a duobus
utrinque Fergusiis oriunda (unde opus hoc Balliofergusii titulo honestare visum
est) continuavit, statutisque donavit: quas utriusque filius Johannes de
Balliolo, postmodum Scotorum Rex; diplomate suo confirmavit circiter Annum
Domini 1287. Post hujus vero obitum filius ejus Edvardus de Balliolo Rex itidem
Scotorum factus (impensis Philippi Somervyle equitis aurati and aliorum)
numerum Scholarium ibidem adauxit: in quorum gratiam, nova statuta [suggerente
eodem Philippo] Dervorgillianis addidit, Anno 1340. quae opera Simonis Episcopi
Londin: in unum corpus tande^ coaluerunt, An: 1364. Veru^ illis perperam
consarcinatis Episcopi Win^oniensis and Carleolensis medicas apponentes manus,
hodierna condiderunt, Anno D. 1507. Magistrum unicum, numerum Sociorum denarium
paremque Scholarium Collegio decernentes: quod autem nunc, interventu
benefactorum duodenario sociorum numero, Scholarium vero octodenario gaudet,
praeter quatuor Scholares oriundo Scotos, in quorum Salarium Episcopus nuper
Roffensis octoginta libras sterlingorum annuatim soluendas testamento legavit.

Verum haud latet Paternitatem vestram Nautis nocte sublustri frustra cum
tempestate luctantibus sphaeras quasdam igneas conspici solere; idque illis
tristissimum ostentum est si quando solitarius ignis est, felix, cum gemini.
Haud dissimile nobis hodie contra decumanos adversae fortunae fluctus
remigantibus accidit; cum non ita pridem solitarius ignis nobis, proh dolor,
una cum Londinatibus, naufragium minitatus est: nunc demum gemini in pectore
tuo juxta ac Reverendissimi Archipraesulis accensi, incolumitatem nobis
spondent and diuturnitatem; quo fundatores verius audituri estis quam
Visitatores; quum non minor provincia sit labans aedificium statuminare, quam
in culmen extruere: quippe illud totum simul moliri opus est, hoc moras patitur
and gradus. 'Et ne huic rei, nedum mihi deesse videar, minutum meum in hoc
gazophylacium audax conjeci, eo primordia hujus Collegii arcessere gestiens, ne
spectris vel supposititiis Mecaenatibus pro veris and legitimis diutius
parentaremus. Opus interim vestrum in se satis meriti habiturum est, dum decus
hujus duxero maximum, sub vestris vexillis meruisse.

Paternitati vestrae omni officio devinctissimus, H. S.

Neque hos nominatissimos and egregios viros praetereundos duximus, quin ipsos,
una cum ceteris, quotquot Collegium hoc honestarunt, plurima salute
impertiremus; viz.
Baronettos.
Gulielmum Dominum Sandys. Dominum Hen: Littleton, Dom: Gualterum Williams,
Dom: Johannem Lowther, Dom: Franciscum Edwards,
Milites.
Dom: Thomam Wendy militem de Balneo. Dom: Johannem Price, Dom: Johannem Finch,
Dom: Edvardum Hobbs, Dom: Thomam Hanbury, Dom: Henricum Janson,
Doctores in Theol.
Edmundum Hoskins, servientem ad Legem. Paulum Hood, Thomam Washbourn, Thomam
Good, Egidium Thorn, Obadiam Grew, Ambrosium Atfield,
Doctores Med.
Timotheum Baldwin, Doctorem L. L. Timotheum Clark, Thomam Waldrond, Robertum
Fielding, Georgium Castle, Johannem Atfield, Thomam Moor,
Armigeros.
Franciscum Popham, Ricardum Atkins, Per^grinum Hoby, Thomam Powis, Samuelem
Baldwin, Carolum Smith, Johannem Evelyn, Henricum Brown, Brigesium Nanfan,
Johannem Harris, Thomam Fowk, Richardum Coling, Thomam Horton, Richardum
Vernon, Johannem Bearcroft, Davidem Williams, Johannem Carter, Johannem Fleet,
Robertum Oldisworth, Thomam Southcot, Thomam Lister, Gulielmum Savage, Thomam
Cornwall, Matthaeum Herbert, Johannem Brown, Richardum Herbert, Samuelem
Dingley, Jacobum Pit, Franciscum Fitzherbert, Johannem Seymour, Robertum
Cresset, Henricum Pudsey, Gulielmum Oakley, Davidem Slocombe, Richardum Walwyn,
Gulielmum Bard, Georgium Skippe, Henricum Sandys, Henricum Jeffreys, Georgium
Weld, Johannem Kyrle, Robertum Rod, Johannem Spark, Jehannem Mouldisworth,
Johannem Gayer, Gulielmum Franklin, Nathanielem Adams, Richardum Lyster,
Georgium Sprye, Gulielmum Tomkins, Johannem Windford, Rowlandum Wood, Thomam
Stephens, Jonathanem Rashleigh, Humphredum Courtney, Johannem Barker,
Pontisburium Owen, Richardum Philipps, Johannem ap Thoma Wigmore, Johannem
Horton, Richardum Evelyn, Georgium Dickenson, Henricum Swale, Gulielmum
Lowther, Johannem Bear, Johannem Tomkins, Gulielmum Talbot,
Praeb: Brist:
Nothanielem Tomkins, Preb. Wig. Thomam Tomkins, Sacel. Archep. Cant. Timotheum
Woodruff, B D. Georgium Ashwell, B. D. Johannem Williamson,
Clericos.
Harbartum Boughton. Gulielmum Dowling. Gulielmum Evet. Thomam Stanniford.
Edvardum Web, Gulielmum Hide, Johannem Vernon, Johannem Vernon jun. Thomam
Carless, Gulielmum Elks, Andraeam Broomhall, Johannem Best, Nicolaum Levet,
Franciscum Wheeler, Hugonem Chibnall, Samuelem Filer, Josephum Stretch,
Franciscum Hoar, Georgium Abrahall, Bryanum Alder, Gulielmum Martyn, Richardum
Tristram, Crowch, Gulielmum Mose,

Errata majora sic corrige.
Page 5: lin. 28. for after read before, in the Marg. read derivation. l. ult.
r. mesmes. p. 10. l. 1. r. Cabasila. p. 25. r. Conncil. p. 15. l. 24. r
Dervorgilla. p. 18. l. 4. r. of. p. 20. l. 3. r. Garcionem. l. 22. for (...),
r. (...). p. 21. l. 2. r. (...). l. 33. r. (...). p. 22. in marg. l. 17. for
Heccate, r. Hecate. p 23. l. 3. r. c^essaverint. p. 24. l. penult. r. Mickle.
p. 32. l. 35. r. Siloe. p. 43. l. 35. r. Magistri. p. 44. r. suffecerint. p.
48. l. 12. for renunci, r. renunciet. l. 40. r. amittat. p. 52. l. 3. for 39.
r. 36. l. 6. r. 63. p. 56. l. 34. r. ejusdem. p. 60. l. 5. r. cassamus. p. 71.
l. penult. r. Humphredi Lancastriae, etc. p. 77. l. 18. r. Sermons. p. 78. l.
20. r. Royal. p. 85. l. 14. r. Periham. p. 114. l. 25. r. Valteline. p. 119. l.
7. for Physic, r. Philosophy. p. 120. l. 25. r. Metropolitan. p. 100. l. 23.
r. Volumes.

SECT. I.
Called also Johannes de Brittannia, in the Records of the Tower.
JOHN BALLIOL [stiled Baron by Matthew of Westminster] the son of Bernard
Balliol; who was the son of Edward Balliol; who was the son of John Balliol;
who was the son of Bernard Balliol of Bernards Castle in the Bishopric of
Durham [as appears by our Records] so called from the said Bernard the first
Founder] [as Mr. Camden writes] whom Hector Boethius the Scottish
Historiographer entitleth Lord of Balliol, Harcourt, Dampat and Horn, all
Mannours or Seigneuries in France. This John de Balliol first here named, but
the last in order of time, I find by Historians to be one of those Nobles which
were the devotes [to speak in the words of Caesar] of Henry the third of that
Name, King of England, and paid him their assistance against the Barons, Anno
1264. particularly against the Catiline of the Commonwealth [so Simon Mountfort
is termed by Mr. Camden] and is therefore deservedly ranked, both by Name and
Coat of Arms, with the Heroes of those times, on the inside of the North Aile
or wing of that magnificent Structure of the said King Henry, viz. the Abbey of
Westminster; the Aile I mean which is extended in length from the cross Aile
of the said Church, to the Belfree westward. The opposite wing is adorned with
the like number of Names and Sheilds. The said Coat of Arms of John Balliol
time has begun to eat: the tooth whereof, and that of Theon together are the
devourers, that of the being, this of the merit of things and Persons. For a
timely prevention whereof, in our present subject, it seems to me not
unseasonable to observe that the Coat of Arms of the said John Balliol, is the
very same which our College owing to him its first institution, gives, viz. a
Shield Rubies, with an Orle Pearl: the simplicity of which Coat is an argument
of the venerable antiquity of the same, as it is of the natural priority of the
Elementary bodies before the mixed: and its the very same that Hugo de Balliol
son and Heir of the said John gave; but that, Hugo, to note himself to be
descended from Alan of Galloway, great Grandchild to Fergus Prince and Lord of
Galloway by his mother Dervorgilles side, bare in the Sinister Canton of the
said Field, the Lion, as may Which, being almost 400 years since, is as much
as 240 pounds is now. h. e. six score* pound each Horse.
appear by his own Seal set to a bond, which he the said Hugh gave to the
Executors of his Father for the payment of *Ten Marks at Pentecost 1269, for
two Horses which he bought of them, as part of that personal Estate of his
Fathers, which he left to his Lady Devorgille and his other Executors for the
continuance of this College, which he in his life time, had so happily begun.
Which Bond [as well for the antiquity thereof as for the proof of some of the
premises] I thought fit to insert.

Omnibus Christi fidelibus presens scriptum visuris vel audituris Hugo de
Balliol filius and here is quondam Domini Johannis de Balliol salutem in Christo.
Noveritis nos teneri Executoribus Testamenti quondam predicti Domini Johannis
Patris nostri in december Marcis bonorum and legalium sterlingorum, pro duobus
Equis, ad opus nostrum ab eisdem emptis solvendis apud Fodringh. eisdem vel
eorum alteri infra Pe^tecosten proxime venturam Anno gratie Millefimo
Ducentesimo Sexagesimo Nono, sine actionis dilatione. Ad quam quidem solutionem
fideliter ad terminum predictum observandam, Obligamus nos Ecclesiastice
districtioni: ut ad predictam solutionem modo predicto observandam per censuram
Ecclesiasticam distringamur. Et si contingat predictos Executores dampnum
molestiam cujuslibet aut gravamen i^currere; tam hujusmodi exceptioni, quam
principali debito volumus Executoribus obligari and plenarie suis simplis
sciis. sine ulteriori probatione satisfacere. In cujus rei Testimonium huic
Scripto Sigillum Nostrum fecimus apponi.

The which Seal has this Inscription in the Ring thereof, viz. Sigillum
Hugonis de Balliol. Out of which Bond we may further observe, that as John de
Balliol our Founder was English, so the place of his residence was in England,
and that at Fodringheye, being his, not as his own Inheritance [as Bernards
Castle formerly mentioned was, where his residence he sometime also had] but in
right of his wife Dervorgille, a Lady many ways of Noble extraction, both
English and Scottish: by reason of the latter whereof, it was that John de
Balliol, another of her sons by our said Founder, came after the death of her
[and his Elder Brother Hugh] to lay a succesfull claim to the Scottish Crown.
And so I pass to Dervorgille our Foundress; but not without this short remark
upon the aforesaid Fodringheye [which is that in Northamptonshire, and belonged
to the Earls of Huntingdon, being of the Royal Race of Scotland] namely that it
was now the Palace of a Princess of Scotland, which afterward became the
Prison of its Queen Mary, who having formerly resigned up her Crown in
Scotland, did here with the like meekness of spirit, the Head that had born it.
The circumstances of whose sufferings, it is not my business to dispute or
relate; but the event gives way to this Note upon it, viz. How dangerous a
^^ing it is, first to be persuaded to lay claym to a Crown, and afterward to
fly for succor to the head that wears it.

SECT. 2.
It Is true that John de Balliol was Earl of Huntingdon and Lord of Galloway,
yet not in his own right, but in that of his wife Dervorgille who was Lady of
Balliol in right of John de Balliol her Husband; and by common right, Countess
of Huntingdon, as being Daughter to Margaret Eldest Daughter to David Earl of
Huntingdon, which David was Son to Henry Earl of Huntingdon, which Henry was
Son to David King of Scots by Maud Daughter and Heir to Voldosius Earl of
Huntingdon, which was the reason, as some will have it, why John de Balliol her
Son and King of Scots did Homage to Edward, the First, King of England, though
I much doubt whether this Earldome were suffered actually to devolve unto her,
in as much as she is, in no Record whatsoever, styled Countess or Lady of
Huntingdon, nor her Husband John de Balliol Earl thereof, though they enjoyed
the Lands and Castle of Fodringheye thereunto belonging, as has been said;
only she gave the Arms of the Earl of Huntingdon in her Seal, as in the next
Sect. I shall show. Dervorgille was also Heir at the Common Law to the Earldom
of Chester, as being Eldest Daughter to Margaret Sister to John [surnamed of
his Nation Scot] Earl of Chester and Huntingdon dying without issue, who
descended on their Mothers side from Hugh Bohun, alias Cavel Earl of Chester,
and his wife Beatrice Daughter to Lucie Lord Chief Justice, by Maud their
Eldest Daughter. But the issue Males failing, the Kings of England would not
suffer so great an Honor and Command, as was that County Palatinate to devolve
to the Distaffe, allowing to the said Maud and her Sisters something else, which
they accepted, by way of compensation, for the clearer evidencing whereof, I
shall consider the Seal she gave, the Arms she bare, and the Pedigree of her
and of John de Balliol.

SECT. 3.
Her Seal which is affixed to her Statutes, free from any defacings, Is her
Image in Front, or Face dressed in a Dowagers habit, like to that of a Nun, all
in Relief or Bosse, Bearing in her Right Hand an Escocheon and an Orle upon it,
as being Lady of Balliol: which Title you may observe to be placed first in the
Border of her Seal on this upper side. In her Left Hand she holds the Lion for
Galloway. This Galloway, says Mr. Camden, had in times past, Princes and Lords
over it: of which the first Recorded in Chronicles, was Fergus in the Reign of
Henry the First, Her Picture in the Master's Hall holds a Lion Gules i^ a Field
Argent, neither has the Lion a Crown, and therefore the Painter was mistaken
who drew it, having no pattern but this Seal she gave.
King of England; who gave for his Arms, A Lion Rampant Argent, Crowned Or, in
a Field Azur. * The Eldest Son of this Fergus was Vcthred, the Son of which
Vcthred marrying a Sister of William Morvill Constable of Scotland, begat Alan
of Galloway and Constable of Scotland, Father to Dervorgille, by Margaret
Eldest Daughter to David Earl of Huntingdon before mentioned. Below on the
Right Side of her is an Escocheon Charged with Three Garbes or Sheaves of
Wheat, as being Grandchild to Hugh Bohun alias Cavel Earl of Chester, whose
Coat that was. On the Left side below, and opposite to the last spoken of, is
an Escocheon Charged with Piles in Point, Born by her Ancestors Earls of
Huntingdon and Northumberland. In the Ring of this upper side of the Seal, is
this Inscription. viz, S. Dervorgille de Balliol filie Alani de Galewad'. On
the Reverse is a Lion in the first place in Pale with the aforesaid Coat: and
therefore it is that Galewad' is the first put in this inscription. In the
place of a Crest it has a Thistle in bud only, and not in flower; to show,
happily the possibility in her line, not the possession of the Crown in her self:
having on the right side thereof the 3 Garbes aforesaid, and on the left the
Piles aforesaid, with this Inscription in the Ring thereof, viz. S. Dervorgille
de Galewad' Domine de Balliolo.

SECT. 4.
I should not have written any thing in vindication of the name Dervorgille but
that I find others taking notice of the diverse writeings of it, as of a matter
of reproach to the person; it being in our present Statutes, Devorguilla; in
other places, Devorgoyle; in her Statutes, Devorgulla; This last only, is
capable of abuse, and that by no other then a pitiful English Rencountre. But
the Orthography of her Name is Dervorgille: which by a Gallicism usual in the
English tongue, is pronounced Dervor^ille: and the letter E in the end of the
Name, by an other Gallicism of E feminine is pronounced almost like A with us,
which has occasioned the change of E into A. But to preserve the force of the
Greek g in the G of her Name, which in the French pronunciation is lost, when
ever it comes before the Vowel E or I, some have put O between, and written it
Dervorgoyle; some U, and written it Dervorguille; some U without I, as in
Dervorgulle. All which had been superfluous, had they understood the reason
why, in the English tongue ge is sometimes pronounced je, and sometimes g^; and
gi is pronounced sometimes gi, and sometimes ji; which is, that our language
indeed is Saxon originally: but because of the Norman Conquest, the French
having made as great an impression upon it, as upon our Nation, those which we
receive from the French, or from other Languages through their mouths, are
uttered according to the French mode; but those which are Genuine, according to
our own. Hence it comes to pass that generation is pronounced jeneration, and
ginger is pronounced jinger. The same is true of gely, gender, gentle, general,
George, german, giant, Register, and so of all the rest that can be named,
because they are all borrowed words. Whereas get is pronounced get, and give is
pronounced give, so also girl, girdle, together, begin, and all the rest that
can be named, because they are genuine. And this Rule is so general that it
admits of no exception: which even learned men not observing have sought for
the reason of this diversity in the Consonants that follow, and not in the
Nation to which the words owe their beginning, or first crasis, inquiring what
ge signifies before t, and what before n: and by the like kind of vain
investigations; not unlike the observations of those who look for the wind in
the Weather-cocks Tail. Nor will it be amiss [the occasion offering it self] to
consider the pronunciation of Arch, in diverse words: which in some is
pronounced Arsh, in others Ark, as for example, we pronounce Architect as
Arkitect, and not as Arshitect. So Archangel we pronounce Arkangel and not
Arshangel. Whereas we pronounce Archbishop as Arshbishop, and not Arkbishop, so
also Archpriest is pronounced Arshpriest. The reason is because the words
Architect and Archangel come to us immediately and purely from the Latin, and
not from the French, for they have no such word as Archangel, bur their word is
Archange and no more, nor is there any of the French Fancy in Architect, which
it may call its own: whereas Archbishop seems to have a nearer affinity to
Archevesque in the French, then to Archiepiscopus in the Latin, But indeed the
dirivation of Bishop from either, is so obscure, that its accounted a word of
our own (as all words justly are wherein there is a Crasis) and the composition
of it with Arch, to be our own, and therefore we give it our own pronunciation,
which herein agrees with the French as nere as our tongues can frame themselves
to it.
as for Archpriest, it is manifestly derived from Archprestre, the French word.
Some alledg the foresaid way of considering what comes after: As for Example.
If Arch comes before a Consonant, then say they, it is pronounced Arsh, but if
after a Vowel, then it is pronounced Ark, but they are confuted by Arch-enimy,
Arch-instrument, Archer, Arched, Arch-heretick, etc. all which are pronounced
by Arsh. But to return and apply althings that have been said, to our present
purpose. Dervorgille being genuine, the G is to be pronounced as g without the
aid of those forementioned interpositions to make it good.

And now having spoken of Consonants, something may not be unseasonable to be
spoken of Vowels, in answer to the objection against (...) which comprehends
the number of the Beast, which is 666 Rev. 13. The Objection is, that the
Latins write it not by (ei) but by (i) simple; whereunto hear what Johannes
Grossius Genevensis upon the Apocalypse answers, ^'est une indigne puerilite que
cette objection la: car il est tout notoire, and que les Grecs escriuent
souvent par (^^) l' (i) Latin, and que le latins mesme prononcoient par (^^)
laquelle prononciation est encore aujoured' huy commune and ordinary enter les
Anglois. Behold here our pronunciation of the vowel (i) as (^^) approved by a
stranger which some of us affecting singularity pronounce like our (^^) never
considering, that as the French has an (^^) masculine, and an (^^) feminine,
so we have an (i) masculine, which is pronounced as (^^) and an (^^) feminine,
which is pronounced as we pronounce (^^) And albeit some do reject this word
(...), as an unfit word containing the number of the Beast. Yet first I say,
it is as ancient as Irenaeus, who alleadges it to this purpose. Secondly, it is
as, if not more, probable then (...), which Grotius says was a name of Trajan,
where he to find 666 in it, writes it with a () in the end, saying that they
commonly read it so, for a simple (s) signifies 200, and so it will be 860, and
not 666.

SECT. 5.
And now for their Pedigree, I might derive Dervorgille as high as Arletta
Mother to William the Conqueror, and Richard Earl of Aurenches, and from the
Earls of Gloucester and Oxford, and last of all from Beatrice Daughter to
Lucie Lord chief Justice. Yet I shall ascend no higher that way, then Maud the
Daughter to Hugh Bohun alias Cavel, by the said Beatrice Lucie, whom he
married, all the rest, being to be seen in Fern's second part, entitled Lacies
Nobility. Nor shall I ascend the other way any higher then David King of Scots,
who married Maud Daughter and Heir to Voldosius Earl of Huntingdon and
Northumberland, for it would prove tedious, as it is superfluous. I shall only
fill up this Sect. with that of Barclay in his Icon animorum, viz. Centum and
octo Reges a primo Fergusio in Jacobum numerantur. Which agrees with the list
of Hect. Boethius.

SECT. 6.
The foundation of this Society is commonly taken to be laid, Anno 1263. and
indeed, all things considered, it could not be later; and that because John de
Balliol, next Year following, listed himself [as also did Robert Bruis] in that
great Service in the behalf of Henry the third, against the forementioned
Mountfort, and the rest of the Baron-Rebels, during which time he could not be
vacant to such a work: wherefore the Service being like to be hot, as it proved
[He and Bruis, yea and the King himself, being taken Prisoners at the Battle of
Lewis] it is more then probable he made a timely provision for his
Eleemosynaries here, before he took up Arms. And Anno 1269. we find him to be
dead, and his personal Estate taken into the hands of his Executors toward the
continuance of the College, according to his last Will and Testament: Nor was
it likely that He should go about such a work in Oxford then, when the King
threatened the ruin of the University, upon the displeasure His Majesty
conceived against the Scholars, whereof 15000 are said to have departed from
Oxford, and most of them to Northampton, more annoying David K. of Scots
descended from Fergus.

Maud Daughter and Heir to Voldosius, Earl of Huntingdon and Northumberland.

Malcolm King of Scots the Eldest Son.

William King of Scots the second Son.

Henry Earl of Huntingdon the Third Son.

Daughter to Earl Warren a Plantagenet.

Hugh Bohun Earl of Chester.

g

g

a

^



Alexander King of Scots.

David Earl of Huntingdon.

Maud Daughter of Hugh Bohun Earl of Chester.

Alexander King of Scots.

Bernard Balliol.

* Fergus Prince and Lord of Galloway.

John, Sur-named of his Nation Scot.

John Balliol.

* What were the Arms of this Fergus see Sect. the Third.

Edward Balliol.

Ucthred Prince and Lord of Galloway.

Bernard Balliol.

Son of Ucthred.

Sister to William Morvill Constable of Scotland

To fill up this blanck, you may Note that the Arms of this Henry Hastings,
are an Escocheon charged with a Manche (i. e.) Manica in Latin, and a Sleeue in
English.



Alan of Galloway.

Margaret Eldest Daughter.

Henry Hastings.

Alda the Third some say Fourth Daughter of David Earl of Huntingdon.

John Balliol Founder of Balliol College.

Dervorgille, Daughter to Alan of Galloway and Margaret.

Rob. Bruis.

Jsabella the Second Daughter.

Hugh Balliol, Son and Heir to Jo. Balliol.

John Balliol King of Scots, Second Son of John Balliol.

Hugh Rebelled against King Henry the Third, as some say, but it may be
mistaken for Guido Balliol a Kinsman.

Edward Balliol King of Scots.

The Kings of Scotland.

This Hastings Arms are the same that the present Earl of Huntingdon gives, by
which and by the Name of Henry Hastings he is listed in Westminster Abbey with
John Balliol, our Founder, and the rest aforesaid.

John Speed makes Fergus Prince of Galloway to be descended from Henry, Earl of
Huntingdon, which by reason of the uncertainty of it I have derived it by a
Black Train.

Place this after Page 6.

the King in the Battle there, then all the Rebels Army did besides. About
which time, John de Balliol's House at Fodringheye was plundered of 100 marks
sterling, and his Cattle driven away: whereof Baldwin Wake the plunderer, one
of the Rebels party [whom Matthew Paris writes to have been taken among the
rest at Northampton] afterward obliged himself to restitution, and of
whatsoever else should be found out upon him by a lawful Jury; and all this
under his Seal, remaining in our custody. There Is another Bond besides this
from Thomas Musgrave, for a certain sum of money to be paid to Jo: de Balliol,
or to his Assigns, at Bernards Castle aforesaid, at several times; which allows
me the liberty of conjecture, That the said Balliol was dead before Pentecost,
1266. in as much as the last payment then intended to be made, was not made
accordingly, though secured under the severest penalties: which occasioned the
transmission of the Bond unto the hands of Jo: de Balliol's Executors, and
thence unto the College with other things, which we shall hereafter have
occasion to declare more at large. But that he was living at Bartholomew-tide,
1265. must be acknowledged from the then dating of the Obligation, which yet
remains uncancelled in our custody: by whose instigation [after his deliverance
out of Prison, and return to Bernards Castle aforesaid] together with that of
the King of Scots and Robert Bruis, the Northern parts remaining unconquered,
rose up and recovered all the rest of the Land to the King; the loss whereof,
had before been a sad consequent of that no less sad defeat at Lewis, as writes
Matt: of Westminster.

SECT. 7.
And that the Society was of ancienter date then the present Site of the
College is, is clear from thc place called Old Balliol Hall, in a Lease of it
long after granted us, viz. 3 R. 2. Anno Dom. 1389. by the University, Mr.
Robert Aylsham being then Chancellor thereof, and Thomas Tirwhit our Master,
which Old Balliol Hall, with its Garden and Appurtenances, was situate between
a Tenement of Saint Frideswids on the West part, and a certain Garden of the
Master and Scholars on the East, and extended it self from the Kings-street, or
Kings Highway of Candych on the South, to the Garden of the said Tirwhit
Master of the House on the North. The area whereof (Garden and all I suppose to
be meant) was 96 Foot in length from North to South, and 47 Foot in breadth at
the South end, and 41 at the other. The name of Sparrow-Hall, which the
University calls it by, might be given it before our Founder first took it of
them, or else since, by some under-Tenant of that name, who used it for a place
of entertainment for Students, the College having no longer use for it in that
kind: Of which old Balliol-Hall, the House lately leased forth to Dr. Baily's
Son, and in the possession of Jackson the Stone-cutter, must be a part,
inasmuch as in some Writings it is said to be bounded by the corner House on
the West, which must be true of part thereof, the whole (Garden and all) being
96 Foot in length, extending a great way farther. From this Old Balliol-Hall,
the Society probably removed Eastward to the next Tenement save one to it,
which may be the reason why that Tenement was called New Balliol-Hall. But be
it as it will, we find Dervorgille to have left them settled in
Horsmongers-street, in the Buildings of her o^n purchasing, which stood about
the upper end of the present Quadrangle: This being then called
Horsemongers-street, as will evidently appear by the bounds thereof East and
West, in its due place: which was also enlarged by several Halls taken in,
which stood here, as hereafter I shall show, whereof one was probably St. Hughs
Hall; but where it stood, unless at the East end of the Quadrangle, In
Dauphine, which was part of the Kingdom of Burgundy.
I cannot tell. This St. Hugh was Bishop of Lincoln, in whose Diocese Oxford
then was: He was born at * Grenoble in Burgundy, who upon the importunity of
our King Henry the second, came over and accepted the Priorate of Wittham in
Somersetshire, and afterward this said See, whose Body, after his death, which
was at London, was carried thence to the Gates of Lincoln, and thence more
solemnly to the Cathedral-Church there, viz. upon the shoulders of two Kings,
h. e. of England and Scotland; and from the Church door to the Choir, by a
great number of Prelates, Anno 1200. which was 62 Years before the Foundation
of our College, and 20 Years before his Canonization, and 82 Years before his
Bones were translated out of his Coffin into a Silver Chest, which was done the
same Year that Dervorgille gave us Statutes, and two Years before Oliver Sutton
Bishop of Lincoln confirmed our College. One thing Bishop Godwin notes of him
(besides what he cites out of Parisiensis) viz. That visiting Godstow, and
seeing the Hearse of Rosamund covered with silken Tapistry, and demanding whose
it was; the Nuns answered, That it was Rosamunds, a great Benefactrix to their
House: which he no sooner heard, then he commanded her Carkeis to be dug up
and buried in the Churchyard; affirming, That such honor ought not to be done
to a Strumpet. The like was his severity in other things from the time that he
first became one of the Chartreux.

SECT. 8.
But, to return, this unnatural War receiving now a period, and those Victories
[as all gained upon Rebels do] having made the King more King, and the Subject
more subject, a serenity of times ensued proper for an improvement of John dd
Balliols Foundation; which improvement owes it self in the first place to the
piety of Dervorgille his Lady Dowager; and next, to the bounty of succeeding
Benefactors. But before I descend so low, I shall touch upon the motives,
wherewith our Founder served himself to build this College, then styled by the
name of Balliol-hall: The first doubtless, was the honor of God, it being the
pole upon which his own Loyalty to the King, and the Charity of Dervorgille, in
pursuance of his Design, did move: whereof she has given a large Testimony in
the Preamble to her Statutes, which she left unto us, though attended with the
common Errors of those times. The second was the good of his own Soul, as
thereby purchasing the Prayers of his Beneficiaries for his good success in the
service he went upon, and for the better fitting of his Soul for heavenly
Mansions, by what accidents soever it should be divorced from his Body. I
easily yield too, that he also swimming with the stream of those Times, would
not be displeased at the thoughts of some future Commemoration of himself, at
the least imagining that it might do him good, but could do him no harm: And
more I shall not need to say, there being not wanting such as are apt enough to
draw hence Arguments against Church and College Lands, and to make the highest
improvement of those as well as of these, to the justification of their own
Sacrilege. But where such Prayers made had respect to the re-uniting of the
soul to the body, they are like to get but little by it. Commemoration of good
Persons has been anciently received in the Church; insomuch, that they no
oftener celebrated their Divine Services, then they recited the Holy Diptychs,
as may be seen not only in the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy of Dionysius Areop. c.
3. but, which is more, in St. Basils Liturgy, translated by Masius out of the
Syriack, and used generally through the whole Greek Church. In these were
written only the names of Persons both living and dead: That wherein the names
of the dead were written, was recited as proposed thereby to the Church as a
pattern of their imitation, and occasion of Thanksgiving: But the other wherein
the names of the living were registered, was recited that the Church might
follow them in their practice; or else, by their Prayers might get them
confirmed in good, or reformed from the Error of their evil way. But in process
of time these names, it seems, swelling to such a multitude, they contented
themselves with a general Commemoration, only a few Particulars excepted, as
may be seen in orher Liturgies. So that at last, the Diptychs contained the
whole Canon of the Latin Mass, as Lindanus observes upon St. Peter's Liturgy
in Bibliotheca Patrum, and that out of the ancient Diptychs of St. Gregory's
Church in Biscay in Spain: for the fashion whereof, says he, they were
distinct, a foot and a half high, ^licatiles duae valvulae, after the manner of
a Book which the Mysteries ended, were closed again. This recital was, at
first, called recitatio (...) plicarum, Dionys. Eccl. Hier. c. 3. which in
process of time came to be corrupted into (...) animarum, as is observed upon
Cassander in Liturgicis; which, if true, might give a Collateral occasion of
Prayer for the Souls departed. At length they began to bethink themselves of a
place or state from whence they would have them delivered; whether Paradise or
Abraham's bosom, or places void of all grief and sadness, and light, or green
and refreshing places, as Nicolaus Cabusila relates* in Expos. Liturg. c. 40.
whereunto they seem to have been lead by the Opinion of the Platonicks, and the
Expressions of Virgil remembered by St. Augustine, de Civ. Dei, l. 21. c. 13.
which Queree they being unable to determine, confuted themselves out of their
own Opinion: which, I believe, gave occasion to the Papists to settle upon the
profitable Error of Purgatory, and to us to expunge out of our Liturgy all
Prayers of that nature, contenting our selves with a general Thanksgiving for
Saints departed, and a general Prayer for the accomplishing of the number of
the Elect, and the hastening of Gods Kingdom, that we with them may have our
perfect Consummation and Bliss, both in Body and Soul, in his eternal and
everlasting Glory, where they rest from their labors, and their works follow
them, Rev. 14. v. 13. and less charity then this we ought not to have for them,
who had so much for us: The which, as it is our duty, so it is the happiness of
our Church that we have a set Form of Common Prayer [which none in the
Christian World have ever been wanting in, before the Introduction of the
Scottish new Fangle] but the want of an exact Rubric [such as we have] gave a
liberty of using, some one form, some another; as did Sarum, Hereford, York,
Lincoln, Bangor, etc. all of them framing a kind of Directory to themselves:
and so by circumstantial alterations, they came at last to alter the
Substantials, till in fine their very follies were held for Celebrations of
their Church Festivals, turning the holy Consecration of Bishops, and Episcopal
Administration, into a mere Christmas gamble; which is rightly observed and
justly censured by that famous Council of Basil [established afterward in
France by the pragmatical Sanction of Charles 11. by the advice of a General
Assembly of States at Burges] The Autographum of which Councils Epistolary
Transactions, with the Popes Seal affixed, was sent by Sir Tho: Roe the Kings
Ambassador at Constantinople, to our University, and received in Convocation
with great solemnity, Dr. Smith being then Vice Chancellor: The which Council I
wonder not that Mr. Gregory takes notice of, in his Episcopus Puerorum, the
most authentic Record produced in that Disquisition. One Abuse more I cannot
but note, censured in the same Session, viz. De pignorantibus cultum divinum.
which was, That when any Canon of a Church had contracted a Debt, he would
obliege himself to his Creditor by Oath; That in case he paid it not at the
time appointed, he would forbear Divine Offices, which ought not to have been
without the formality of an Ecclesiastical Censure, which Hugh Balliol obliged
himself to submit to [in case he paid not for the two Horses which had been
left by his Father, our Founder, in his last Will, for and toward the
perpetuation of the House] by the Bond recited Section. 1. Note, that there is
another pragmatical Sanction of St. Lewis, dated Anno 1268. mense Martii,
against the unjust exactions of the Court of Rome, etc. noted by Rebuffus, upon
the Concordates between Leo 10. and Francis the first, Anno 1555.

SECT. 9.
Now for that which follows: As Varro is cited to have distinguished the times
of the World, the common subject of History into three Intervals, viz. (...):
the first uncertain [i. e. to Ethnicks] which was from the Cr^ation to the
Flood, of 1656 Years: The second Fabulous [to the Ethnicks also] from the Flood
to the beginning of the Olympiads, h. e. to the Year 3174: The third
Historical, from the first Olympiad forwards: So, if it be lawful, parva magnis
componere, we may divide the subject of our College History, though not in
every respect precisely distinguishable, according to its successive Intervals:
The two first whereof, that is, the (...) and (...) I shall purge my subject of
at first, that the stream of my History may run down the clearer to these our
Times. The (...) concerns, 1. The Number of Scholars appointed by our Founder;
wherein some, having no other light to guide themselves by then our present
Statutes, have pitched upon the Number therein stated: But by the Statutes of
Sir Philip Somervile, it seems clear to me, That they were at least Sixteen;
the which were allowed one poor Servitor to attend them at the Table, by the
Statutes of Dervorgille. And this Number of Fellows [called Scholars before]
was Found by Sir Philip Somervile, in the House even then when his Statutes
were set forth: whereunto he added six Scholars under them and one Chaplain,
besides what Chaplain or Chaplains had been placed there before upon the
Charity of other Benefactors, which I shall take notice of as they lie in my
way. But be the Number what it will, it was to receive an increase or
diminution according to the increase or decrease of the Revenue, provided they
exceeded not their set Allowance; which was so large, that of poor Scholars
[which they were to be at their first reception] they might become rich, as is
observable out of the Statutes of Dervorgille, and particularly may be noted of
Walter de Fodringheye, the first* Principal [for so the Head was then called]
that ever was of the House: who being chosen out of the number of the Scholars,
did, without any addition to his former allowance, over and above the fruit of
his own providence, grow too big for the place; insomuch, that having resigned
it, he became at last a Benefactor to this Foundation, whereof he had been
formerly a Eight pence then as good as a mark now, and more.
Beneficiary, which was Anno 1311. as by the Letters Patents of the then King
does appear. In the second place, the (...) concerns their set allowance, which
seems to have been * eight pence per week; inasmuch as I find no mention made
of any less, but of an increase of thus much to Eleven pence then, as good as
18 shillings 4 pence now. Twelve pence then as good as twenty shillings now.
eleven pence per week, made by Sir Philip Somervile, in case his Rents yielded
so much, as well for the 16 Scholars of the ancient Foundation, as for the 6
Scholars of his own; though it were intended to be * twelve pence per week by
Sir William Felton, who to that end, as also for the augmentation of the number
of Scholars, gave us the Benefice of Abboldesly, and the Manor thereof, in the
Fourteenth Year of King Edward the third over England, and over France the
first; which was at, or immediately before the time of Sir Philip Scmerviles
Statutes. And then what allowance now, would answer to such so long since, I
shall not precisely determine, though I cannot judge it to have received less
then a twentifold improvement; when even in Queen Elizabeth's days, Sir Richard
Baker notes [but by the Year of our Lord, viz. 1533. which he places it in, it
must be Hen. 8. his days] that a fat Ox was sold for 26 shillings, and a fat
Sheep for three shillings four pence, and other things about the same
proportion. And even in our Records I find, that for the building of a Barn at
Abboldesly Rectory, the College contracted with one Jo: Harwold a Carpenter
for 100 shillings, Anno Dom. 1391, which now would cost 100 pound.

SECT. 10.
But the (...) is, that of Lesley Bishop of Ross, who writes, That our College
was builded and endowed with ample Revenues by Jo: Balliol King of Scots. The
second contrary hereunto, is, That Lands of great value were settled upon the
College for its maintenance, by the true Founders; but were taken away again,
forsooth, by Jo: Balliol King of Scots. These are mere Empusa's, having no more
to go with but one leg, which is the imagination of their Author. The first
whereof, needs no other confutation then the Evidence of this History, which
shows, That his Father and Mother Founded this House, and endowed the same with
a competent Revenue. I confess it is a common, but almost impardonable Error of
Historians, to pin their Faith on other Men's sleeves, when they cannot, or will
not, take the pains to find out the truth: So impatient of labor, says
Thucidides in his History of the Peloponesian War, with many is the search of
truth, that they are apt to turn to, and take for current that which is next to
hand. Five or six more besides Lesley, write the same with him, deriving it by
Tradition one from another, or else all from some single Author of credit
amongst them, which becomes like a Dog of good creance in the Pack, which at a
loss, no sooner spends, then all the rest follow him with open mouths, without
ever laying their noses to the ground: And of these, some say it was Anno 1263.
Pitsaeus says, That An. 1263. and yet in the time of Edw. 1. (which is a flat
contradiction) Jo: Balliol K. of Scots, an Exile in Engl. built this Coll.
Balaeus, in the life of our Rog: whelpdale, says, That Johannes de Balliolis
Scotorum Rex condidit Collegium Ballionease and honestis possessionibus
locupletavit.
Others, 1262. Others, 1265. all of them make their contradiction the greater in
adjuncto, by how much they are nearer the truth for the time: inasmuch as Jo:
Balliol was not King of Scots till Anno 1300, a mere Child when our College
was Founded, and then a younger Brother too. Some have Knighted our Founder,
and say, That our College was built by Sir Jo: Balliol, being then an Exile,
1262. But I demand, How could he be an Exile in England, and himself an English
Man, and three or four of his Ancestors? or what Record [for I never found any]
is it that gives him the Title of Miles, or Eques auratus? The reason of their
gratification might be in favor of his Son John, King of Scots, least the said
King should be accounted an Hibris, in Erasmus his sense in his (...); or a
Mule in the sense of those, who by a like Metaphor have called Cyrus so, for
being more noble on his Mothers then Fathers side; and that by regarding his
Personal Achievements only, being ignorant perhaps of his noble Extraction:
But I am afraid they were led hereunto by the Title of Dominus, given him in
Latin, which they had no other English for but Sir. Some come in and say, That
albeit John Balliol King of Scots builded not this College, yet he Endowed it,
or at least made large additions to the Revenue. But if this be true, then this
Revenue must be in France, England, or in Scotland. The first I never heard any
one affirm, though he might have enough there to do it withal, about Gailzard
in Normandy, the Castle whether he retired himself, and where he dyed very old
and blind, as Hector Boethius writes; albeit the other four forenamed
Seigneuries the same Hector Boethius elsewhere affirms to have been given to
Edw: of Caernarvon with the French Lady, which he the said Edward married. The
second I have searched for in the Tower of London, and found nothing of it. The
third were most likely to be found amongst the Scottish Records there: But these
were then so lately brought thither by Cromwell, that they had not been digested
into method, and now are returned again (since His Majesty's return) upon the
Petition of the Scots, inasmuch as they concerned their Estates, as was
pretended: But upon search made, there was found the whole proceeding in the
matter of the Covenant, which Argyle and his Accomplices would not have had
discovered. Till some of these can be produced to prove their Assertion, it
must pass for a Fable: and if any one of them were true, it is very probable we
might find something in our Treasury which might give us a light in the
business; it being very strange that our Predecessors should have been so
careful as to have preserved personal and such transient things, as old Bonds
for the payment of moneys, which now for hundreds of Years have been past
recovery, meanwhile neglect things of so great concern as the real Endowment of
our College. Now for the second, Where could any Land fall into the hands of
John Balliol King of Scots power to take away? If you say in Scotland, indeed
you may sooner persuade men to believe it, then to take the pains to go thither
and find it out. But I demand, How our Founder being English, should leave Land
to this College in Scotland, who never had any there, unless in right of his
Lady Dervorgille? The which, had John Balliol King of Scots taken it away,
certainly his Son and Successor Edward Balliol, would have restored again,
since we find him so much a Well-willer to his Grandfathers Benefaction, that
he confirmed the Land and Statutes unto us, which Sir Philip Somervile gave, as
hereafter more at large shall appear. I might let these things bleed to death
upon these Considerations; but that which at once cuts the Throat of the
Dispute, is, That we find John de Balliol, afterward King of Scots, confirming
his Fathers and Mothers Charity, as I shall hereafter show by the Deed it self
under Seal, so far was he from the guilt of this Sacrilege. Indeed this
Balliol, when King, making with his Scots an impression upon the Territories of
Edward the first, King of England, who had fastened the Crown on his Head
before, was rendered odious to the English for this his Ingratitude; which also
occasioned the said King Edward his Demand of those three forementioned
Seignuries, with 60000 Crowns in Gold upon the Marriage aforesaid: which was
done, says Hector Boethius, to be revenged on Balliol for joining with the
King of France against him: And it happens in Fame as in Fortune, that He who
is falling shall not want help to his precipitation. It Is the first stone that
is thrown at a Man, which may be said to kill him, all the rest being cast upon
him by example: and thus it fared with John de Balliol King of Scots: He was
guilty of this Ingratitude, and therefore Fame must render him so of the other
Crime. But Arguments seem not to be wanting for his defense in this too. The
worst that can be said of him is a kind of an Apology for him, and it is of
Tacitus, viz. That Beneficia eousque laeta sunt, dum exolvi possunt; ubi multum
antevenere, pro gratia odium redditur: which is as much as we are wont to say,
viz. That great Injuries and great Courtesies are never forgiven. The second is,
That having now no need more of the King of England for his settlement, he
thought hereby to come into favor with his Scots for his preservation, having
lost their affections before for swearing Fealty to the King of England, which
his Scots would be tender of suffering him to do; though indeed it were a due,
in regard the Scottish Kingdom, from the very first establishment thereof in
Britany, has been held of the Kings of England in Vassalage: whose several
Kings Homages are Recorded in Verse by Harding, even from the time of
Athelston, as we find in Bakers Chronicle in the time of And this Homage was
demanded by K. H. 8. and justified by the sword. See our Chronicles in temp. H.
8.
Edw. 4. The third is, That paying his devoir to the King of England, he would
have infringed the League with, and forfeited the protection of France,
signified by the double Tressure counterflowr'd, wherewith the Scottish Lion is
guarded. The fourth is, that of Buchanan, who writes, That Macduffe a great Man
in Scotland, being slain, his Brother little hoping for Justice there, appealed
to the King of England for redress: at the hearing whereof, Balliol King of
Scots being commanded to descend from the Bench to the Bar, took the matter in
great indignation. The fifth is, That herein the King of Englands Obligation
laid upon John de Balliol King of Scots, was the less, when in the decision of
the Controversy between the said Balliol and Bruis, he had done no more then
what he must have done to any of his Subjects; it being clear that Balliol was
Heir at the Common Law to the Crown of Scotland: Nay had he, in a Case between
Subject and Subject, determined an Inheritance to an Heir of a younger Sister,
he might have assigned to the right Heir something in Compensation: but what
Compensation could have been made for a Kingdom? This Act therefore of Edw. the
first, rendered him the Justinian of the Scots, as other things gained him the
title of the English Justinian. From whence nevertheless some [as Hector
Boethius notes] have endeavored to eclipse the Honor of Edw. 1. and of that
Bruis [who by the Scots was surnamed The Noble] saying, That King Edward
promised Bruis the decision of the Crown to him, provided, he would hold it of
him in Vassalage; and that Bruis should answer, That he would not betray the
Liberties of his Country for a Kingdom: and yet that the same Bruis afterward,
at the Fight at Dunbar against Balliol, should privately charge all his Friends
to give back from the rest of the Scots, upon a promise made him by King
Edward, that he should be King in case of Victory: which being so done, did so
disanimate the rest of the Scots, that they yielded the day, and became a
subject of spoil to the Enemy. But King Edward, Though he loved the Treason,
esteemed the recompense too good for the Traitor.

SECT. 11.
Now from the (...) and (...), I proceed to the (...), and herein first to the
Original Government. The House [for it is called Domus sive Aula de Balliolo]
was governed at first only by Procurators of the Founders own appointment,
till Devorgilla gave it Statutes: whereby, amongst other things, she empowered
the Scholars to choose them a Principal out of their own Company. The Tenor
whereof, word for word, and letter for letter, is as follows;

Devorgulla de Galweda Domina de Balliolo dilectis in Christo fratri Hugoni de
Hertilpoll, and Mro Willo de Menyl salutem in Domino sempiternam: Vtilitati
filiorum and scolarium nostrorum Oxoniae commorantium affectu*materno providere
cupientes, omnia inferius annotata volumus mandamus and precipimus ab eis
inviolabiliter observari. Ad Honorem sc. Domini nostri Jesu Christi and
gloriose matris sue Marie, nec non and Sanctorum omnium. Imprimis volumus and
ordinamus quod Scholares omnibus and singulis teneantur diebus Dominicis and
festis Principalioribus divino interesse officio, nec non sermonibus seu
predicationibus in eisdem festis and diebus nisi contigerit aliquem ex eis
impediri propter urgentem necessitatem vel evidentem utilitatem, ceteris vero
diebus diligenter Scolas exerceant and studio intendant secundum Statuta
Universitatis Oxonie, and secundum formam inferius annotatam. Ordinamus etiam
quod Scolares nostri teneantur, nostris Procuratoribus obedire in omnibus que
ex, nostra Ordinatione concessione commissione ad ^orum regimen, and utilitatem
pertinere noscuntur. Item Volumus quod Scolares nostri ex semetipfis eligant
unum Principalem, cui ceteri omnes humiliter obediant in his que officium
Principalis contingunt secundum Statuta and consuetudines inter ipsos usitatas
and approbatas. Predictus autem Principalis postquam legitime fuerit electus
nostris Procuratoribus presentetur, nec aliquid de suo officio exerceat,
antequam ab eis auctoritate nostra in prefata officio fuerit institutus.
Ceterum statuimus quod Scolares nostri procurant tres missas celebrari singulis
annis solenniter, pro anima dilecti mariti nostri Domini Johannis de Balliol,
and pro animabus predecessorum nostrorum omniumque fidelium defunctorum, imo
and pro nostra salute and incolumitate. Ita quod prima missa celebretur in
prima Hebdomada Adventus Domini, and secunda in Hebdomada Septuagessime, and
tertia in prima Hebdomada post octavas Pasche: and fiant predicte miss de
Sancto Spiritu, vel de Beata Virgin, vel pro defunctis secundum dispositionem
Procuratorum. Singulis etiam diebus, tam in prandio quam in Caena dicant
benedictionem antequam comedant, and post refectionem gratias agant: Et orent
specialiter pro anima dilecti mariti nostri superius nominati, and pro animabus
omnium predecessorum nostrorum imo and liberorum defunctorum, pro incolumitate
etiam nostra and liberorum ceterorumque amicorum nostrorum vivorum: Item and
pro nostris Procuratoribus secundum formam antiquitus usitatam. Et ut melius
provideatur sustentationi pauperum ad quorum utilitatem intendimus laborare,
volumus quod ditiores in Societate Scolarium nostrorum ita temperate studeant
vivere ut pauperes nullo modo graventur propter expensas onerosas; and si
contigerit totam communitatem Scolarium nostrorum in expensis communibus aliqua
septimana excedere portionem a nobis eis impersam, volumus and precipimus
districte quod ad solutionem illarum expensarum excedentium, nihil omnino
recipiatur ultra unum denarium in una septimana ab eis qui secundum
discretionem, and arbitrium Procuratorum nostrorum judicantur impotentes and
insufficientes ad t^^alem illarum expensarum solutionem faciendam. Si aequalis
portio deberet ab omnibus Sociis exhiberi, praedicta tamen nolumus excedi ad
magnam vacationem quae durat a Translatione B. Thomae Martyris, usque ad festum
B. Luce, nec etiam ad septimanas in quibus occurrunt festa Nativitatis Dominice
Circumcisionis Epiphanie Pasche and Pentecostes, nec inaliis casibus in quibus
Procuratores nostri judicav^rint illud omittendum. Volumus etiam Procuratores
nostros diligentem habere examinationem super prefata Scolarium nostrorum
impotentia and quod Scolares ipsi ad Procuratores accedant cum omni confidentia
pro eorum necessitate intimanda. Et si contigerit aliquem vel aliquos de
Scolaribus nostris contra ordinationem illam murmurare, aut occasion istius
ordinationis pauperiores verbo vel signo aliquo provocare, volumus quod
Scolares nostri teneantur sub juramento nobis prestito nomina taliter
murmurantium aut provocantium nostris Procuratoribus revelare: qui quidem
Procuratores habita super hoc sufficienti probatione, autoritate presentium
sine spe redeundi ipsum vel ipsos ejiciant indilate. Statuimus etiam, quod
Scolares nostri communiter loquantur Latinum, and qui passim contra fecerit, a
Principali corripiatur; Et si bis aut ter correptus se non emendaverit a
communione mense separetur per se comedens and ultimus omnium serviatur: Et si
incorrigibilis manserit per Hebdomadam, a Procuratoribus nostris eficiatur.
Volumus etiam quod qualibet altera Hebdomada inter Scolares nostros in eadem
domo disputetur unum Sophisma and determinetur, and hoc fiat circulariter ita
ut Sophistae opponant and respondeant, and qui in Scholis determinaverint
determinent, Si vero aliquis Sophista ita provectus fuerit quod merito possit
in brevi in Scolis determinare, tunc ei dicatur a Principali quod prius
determinet domi inter Socios suos. In fine autem cujuslibet disputationis
praefigat Principalis diem disputatione sequentis, and disputationem regat and
garrulos cohibeat and assignet Sophisma proxime disputandum, opponentem
respondentem and determinatorem ut sic melius valiant providere. Consimili modo
fiat qualibet altera Hebdomada de questione. Praecipimus etiam Scolaribus
nostris firmiter injungentes, ut a Corpore's Case (such as Will: Wright the
Master gave in the Reign of Phil: and Mary. See the Register) wherein the
Priest carried the Host. It was the Deacons Office Portare, i. e. to move and
remove the Altar, and all the Implements of it, Aug. lib. quaest. ex utroque
mixed. nam utique Altar portaret and vasa ejus; which if not St. Augustines, it
was one that lived before him, vid. Cens. in append. tom. 4. oper. Aug. p. 416.
See the Holy Table, name and thing.
Portatorium quod eis pro anima dilecti mariti nostri concessimus diligenter
custodiant, nec aliquo modo permittant illud impignorari, vel quocunque titulo
alienari. Habeant etiam Scolares nostri unum pauperem Scolarem per Procuratores
nostros assignatum cui singulis diebus reliquias mense sue teneantur erogare,
nisi Procuratores nostri illud decreverint omittendum. Vt autem omnia and
singula predicta a nostris Scolaribus tempore Procuratorum quorumcunque
inviolabiliter observentur, presens scriptum Sigilli nostri munimine
roboravimus.

Datum apud Botel in Octavis assumptionis gloriosae Virginis Marie, Anno
gratiae M C C. octogesimo secundo.
SECT. 12.
The Office of Procurators, [in whose hands had been the Government of the
House from the very first Foundation till now] did not upon the choice of a
Principal cease; the said Principal and Scholars being strictly obleiged to
obey them, as you may observe in the perusal of these Statutes of Dervorgille,
two years after the publication whereof, which was 1284 did she under her Seal,
put a final establishment to the House for perpetuity, by Letters full of Piety
and Publick-spiritedness, directed to R. Sclikebury a Minorite: to whose
discretion she thereby committed the choice of her Attornyes and Procurators to
be made in her Name; the Scholars, before this, having chosen Walter
Fodringheye to be Principal according to the Statutes. Whereupon Dervorgille
and the rest of the Executors of John de Balliol had made a Grant to the said
Walter Fodringheye, Principal, and the Scholars, of all the Goods of John de
Balliol sor the perpetuation of the House. Ad perpetuationem domus de Balliol
quam ille feliciter inchoavit and perpetuare decreverat, si mortis auctor and
vite si^i concessisset suum adimplere propositum, are the very words of the
Grant, dated Anno 1282. Whereupon diverse obligations were now Sealed to the
said Walter Fodringheye anc the Scholars, for the payment of moneys due to
John de Balliol: whereof one was from Walter Balliol Rector of Wickford, for
the payment oe 59 pounds sterling 1282: and another from Stephen de Ewn Rector
de Milford, for the payment of 44 pounds 13 shillings 4 pence, part of the 100
pound assigned to him by John de Balliol's Executors of the debt of Alan Fitz
Count [Ex debito Alani Filii Comitis] This Bond was dated in festo Sancte
Margarete 1285.

SECT. 13.
The said Grant of Dervorgille, and the rest, was backed with the Authority of
the Bishop of Lincoln by Letters under his Seal, which first gives the Society
the Style of Master and Scholars, the Tenor whereof is as follows.

Vniversis sancte Matris Ecclesie filiis, ad quos presents litere pervenerint.
Oliverus permissione divina Lincoln Episcopus, salutem in Domino.
Cum Nobilis Mulier Deoque devota Dervorguilla de Galewich Domina de Balliolo
ad honorem and laudem sum and individue Trinitatis gloriosissime Virginis
Marie genitricis vnici Filii Dei, Beat Virginis and Martyris Katerine, a^
totius Curie Celestis, and ad utilitatem totius Ecclesie Militantis and
stabilimentum Vniversitatis Oxon pro anima Nobilis Viri Pie Recordationis
Domin^ Johannis de Balliolo quondam sponsi ejus, and pro animabus omnium
Predecessorum, ac pro salute propria omniumque Successorum, Locum quendam cum
Edificiis and omnibus pertinentiis quem Domum Scolarium de Balliolo censuit
nu^oupandum, in nostra Diocesi apud Oxon, ubi viget studium generale, de novo
ordinaverit, and in subsidium perpetuum sustentationis Magistri dicte Domus de
Balliolo and Scholarium ejusdem assignaverit, eosque Philosophiam audire
decreverit, and quousque in artibus cessaverint inibi commorari, Ex quibus
incliyti moribus and scientia prediti exeuntes in religionem and alibi magnum
fructus cumulum produxerint, and adhuc majorem Domino producent, Locumque
predictum sen domum terris possessionibus ac variis proventibus in tantum pia
devotione dotaverit atque ditaverit, quod students ^ibi congrue potuerint
sustentari, sic quod nostri debitum officii charitatis and pietatis opera
comprobaverit, precipue que d^vinae laudis ampliationem, curie caelestis
venerationem and totius Ecclesiae Militantis exaltationem ac vniversitatis
predicte fulcimentum recipient and honorem. Nos dicte Nobilis Domine
devotionem in Domino commendantes sciatis dictorum Magistri and Scolarium
Locique praedicti seu domus perpetuationem cum terris possessionibus and rebus
aliis eidem domui appropriatis seu appropriandis in posterum ratam habentes,
and gratam ipsum approbamus, and tenore presentium confirmamus ^idemque
stabilitatis and firmitatis perpetue, quantum ad nos pertinet, robur
plenissimum impertimur. Salvis ^piscopali auctoritate and Lincoln. Ecclesiae
dignitate. In cujus ^ei tesstmonium sigillum nostrum presentibus est appensum.

Datum apud Lidgton Secundo Junii, Anno Domini MCCLXXXIIII.

SECT. 14.
By which Letters it appears that the House is Dedicated to Saint Katerine in
particular: whom Spondanus in his Epitome of Baronius, will have to be an
abbreviation of Hecaterina. [a Name, says he, which seems to be derived from
Hecate given by the Gentiles, she being a Gentile born viz. at Alexandria,
though afterward she might happily be called Dorothea, as Ruffinus names her at
what time she became Christian] though whence she took the name of Dorothea,
Spondanus does not find, saying she was better known by the name of Katerina,
and so she is written in the rest of our Records * as well as here, and indeed
Dorothea and Katerina have two distinct Holydaies in the Calendar, viz.
Dorothea, Feb. 6. and Katerina, Nov. 25. Now by what has been said it will
appear how little reason there is for any to marvel. 1. Why she is written with
K. and not with C. and much less upon consideration that even Karissimus is so
too. And that it is so, is evident by several writings, which is agreeable to
the manner of the ancients, with whom the Letter C of the Moderns had mostly
the force of an S, as in ASSAPION (...) assarium. So it is written in Arias
Montanus his apparatus de Siclo, and in the Specimen of the ancient Greek
Characters exhibited in Prologom* ad Biblia Polyglot. out of the Alexandrian
Mss. Ps. 1. v. 1. viz. AKAPIOSANPOSOYKEPOPEYTHENOYGASEON, etc. (...). In which
Specimen there are diverse Characters that are found indifferently both in Greek
and Latin Alphabets, which comes to pass by reason that as the Latin Alphabet
owes its Original to the Greek; so the Greeks, after the Roman Conquest,
received from the Latins both Lerters and Words too: such as (...), Mat. 27.
65. (...) Mark, 15. 16. (...) Joh. 2. 15. So that it will be in vain to inquire
unto what Alphabet the Letter C does originally belong: the inquiry should
rather be, what force it carries in either Language? In Greek it seems to have
had always the force of an S, it being a S: but in Latin it has a middle
pronunciation between that of K and S, as Quintianus Stoa has acutely noted in
verse, as may be seen in Scapula's Lexicon.

C Linguam adpulsos compellit ad usque molares.
K Fauc es formant media cum part palati.
S Cum fit peragit colliso sibila dente.
The pronunciation therefore of K beginning at the Throat, that of S, at the
Fore-teeth, that of C, between both; it follows that C has a middle
pronounciation between K and S, the which being very difficult, its pronounced
sometimes like K, and sometimes like S. For the preservation of the force
whereof in the French and Spanish Languages, where it has the consonancy of S
its noted by a little s at the foot of it: as in facon, which is pronounced
fasson, and Alanson, which is pronounced Alanson, and Garcon, which is
pronounced Garson (from whence Garcio in Sr. Philip Somervyles Statutes, comes,
h. e. a Boy. Magister habeat Gartionem fibi ministrantem) with many other words
in French. Alcamiento rebellion in Spanish, Alcan^ado obteynd Cora^on the heart
which are pronounced Alsamiento, Corason, Alcansado, with an abundance of other
words. And these things serve in short to justify the Ancients against those
Moderns, who are ever apt to censure those times and persons of ignorance, and
that so highly as if no reason could be given of many things they wrote and
spoke. I shall instance in Thomas Aquinas [because he flourished about this
time] his Synder^sis: which they will have, sorsooth to be a great piece of
ignorance; when indeed it argued rather knowledge both in the signification and
pronunciation of the Greek. The word (...) is rightly defined by him, to be a
natural habit of practick principles, which He, part 1, has written in Latin
Characters Synder^sis, because that wheresoever t follows n, it has the
consonancy of a d, as (...) is pronounced panda, a thing observed by the
natural Greeks to this day. Upon the same ground P conceive it to be, that Lud.
Vives upon St. Aust. de Civ. Dei l. 22 c, 11. excuses Tully for writing (...)
instead of (...) in his relation of Aristotle's opinion, l. 1. Tusc. q. saying
that they are the same in pronuncition. Modern Editions therefore have done
amiss in reading it (...) in the Text, and (...) in the Margin* (...) in
neither: whereby they have made it not Tullie's but an effect of their own
ignorance. Qu^ been vertendo and describends male ex Ciceronianis bonis sua
fecerunt non bon^ b Ter. E^n^ch. in prolog.
we need go no further then our own language for the proof of the An Error
observed even in Lucians time, Anno 110 who in his Dialogue called (...) (h. e.
judicium vocalium) wherein S brings his Action against T, making the 5 vowels
Judges of the controversy, says that T has not only been injurious to S, but
also to D and and THgr;, and almost all the Elements of the Letters* for says
he, Surripuit mihi meam (...) pro qua vult dici (...), quod sane contrarium est
omnibus legibus.
premises: wherein we find Abington or Abinton to be pronounced and written
Abindon or Abingdon: so also Huntington Huntingdon; Farington Farindon. Cicero
therefore in Oratory says, that Vsum loquendi populo concessi, scientiam mihi
reservavi. And Quintil. says, Orthographiam consu* etudini servire, ideoque
saepe mutari. And to Apologize, not for Letters only and pronunciation, but for
words, which we may hereafter meet with in these Records, or elsewhere, I will
allege that of the Poet.

Multa renascuntur quae jam cecidere, cadentque
Quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula, si volet usus
Quem penes arbitrium est and jus and Norma loquendi.
But to return from this digression, to our St. Katerine again, I say in the
Second place that if this, and that of Spondanus be true, they are mistaken
that have written the word with an H as Catherina: and they more, who imagine
it to be derived from (...), and therefore [imagining a mistake in the ^
Gregorian Calendar word Catherina, which our Rubric followes] they write it
Catharina, which Error both our Universities have been guilty Printed at Paris
1583.
of, in their Books of Verses upon the Arrival* of our Queen, and her Marriage
to our Sovereign Lord K. Charles the Second: perhaps led thereunto by the
Breviary and Mass Book, in both which it is Catharina, but falsely. For the
writing of the word Catharina in the Roman Calender seems to be grounded upon
the Legend of St Catherine, the sum whereof is as follows.

This could be but a Regulus, Egypt being subject to the Roman Empire, and so
had been from the time of Cleopatra. And this Regulus or Governor is said to
be, (...) the best, but a Gentleman of Rome.
There was at Alexandria a King, called * Cost^^* very rich and glorious, but
for a long time without issue, and being Pagan, offered many Sacrifices to the
Gods for issue: but, because Devils cannot Create a humane Soul, they were all
in vain: Mean while a certain Philosopher, named Alpho^abius dwelt in Greece,
to whom the said King sent to know whether he should have any issue by his
Queen? To whom the Philosopher made answer, that it proceeded not from any
defect in nature, but Divine Providence, and therefore advised him to offer
Sacrifices. But the King replying that many Sacrifices had been offered
already, the Philosopher rejoined, that though we call many Gods, yet reason
dictated that there was one above all the rest, * and therefore advised the
King The Gentiles, in those times, did make, for the most part, these divisions
of Gods. That there was One Great God, others were little ones: so Epiph^nius
l. 3. tom. 1. h^res. 76. D^us primus dat omnibus omnia; dij vero omnibus aliqua
largiuntur, Jamblichus de mist. c. 33. Alios esse superos Deos, Alios inferos.
Arnob. l. 7. which and much more, is collected of them by the Magdeburgenses,
Cent. 4. c. 15. de o^pitib^^ opinionum Gentilium*de Deo.
to cast one Image of Gold to the great God of gods, and to do Sacrifice to him
for issue, which the King commanded to be done accordingly. But besides the
intent of the Artisan, there came forth the Image of our Crucified Savior,
which when brought into the Temple, all the Idols fell down before. Whereupon
shortly after, the Queen was delivered of a Girl; which, from the ruin of the
said Idols, was named Catherina, which implies Ruin; for it is compounded [or
rather follows the composition] of (...) and (...), capio, corripi^ or
invalid^, which by reason of the aspitate in (...), is made (...) in
composition, and (...) in the Praeterperfect Tense; and therefore Pom^rius in
his Sermons de S. Cath. is mistaken, who writes her Catharina, and yet says it
signifies Ruina; whereas he should have written it Catherina; for (...) is
deturbatio, or eversio *. But to follow this Legend a little farther: She is
said to have learned 2 Cor. 10. 4* (...). ad eversionem seu destructionem
muni^ionum. 2 Cor. 13. 10. (...). ad ^dificationem, and non ad destructionem.
all the Liberal Arts by 13 years of age; for which reason, she was called
Gemma by the Masters of Greece. Her Father, upon his death bed, charged her to
worship this great God of gods, and his Image. Secondly, not to Marry any but
one equal to her self in Blood, Beauty, Learning, and Riches. Now Father and
Mother being both dead, she held the Reyns of the Kingdom with much wisdom,
afterward she traveling to Alexandria lost her way, and lighted upon the Cell
of an Hermit, where beholding a Crucifix, she said that that man and she
worshipped the same God; and after long discourse she was persuaded by the
Hermit to be Married to Christ, as having all those Conditions, which her
Father required in her Matching: She yielded, and dreaming that she was Married
to Him, found a Ring upon her Finger in the morning. After this, she confuted
many Philosophers, whom Maxentius the Emperor set to dispute with her. She
converted the Soldiers which were to guard her in Prison, and after to
Execution. She caused the Wheels to be broken which were presented to her to
torment her. At last she was beheaded, whose Body the Angels took and buried in
Mount Sinai; out of whose bones continually flows an Oil, which cures the
Members of all languid persons. The strangeness of some part of this Relation
is enough to make a man distrust the truth of the whole: Wherefore I shall
adhere to my Katerina [for if Spondanus be (as he seems) ashamed of the Legend,
I see no cause for me to be in love with it.] and that without derogation
hereby to the Honor of St. Katerine, or our gracious Queen, who bears the same
name, whom Married to our Sovereign K. CHARLES my Muse thus bespeaks.

Qualiter h. e. Portugaliae.
Imperium peperit Daughter of Pr. Edw. Son of Emanuel King of Portugal, Mother
to Theodosius Father to Ioh. Duke of Braganza.
Caterina Braganzae
Taliter id Magno pariat Caterina Brittanno.
Quae Caterina [quasi Hecaterina and per epenthesi^ Heccaterina, ab Heccate]
vir go and Martyr. Spond. ad an. 307. Hecate n. nomen est Dianae* Junoni, and
Proserpinae accomodatum: quae and tergemina dicitur vel triformis, habens
Imperium Lunae, Aeris and subterranearum divitiarum* quod C A R. II. hisce
nuptiis acquisivisse videatur.
Caterina cluens, plus quam Heccaterina vocetur
Vt cui Tergeminae sors sit superanda d Dianae.
Carolus, hac socia Thalami, Plutonis ad antra
Proferat Imperium, sub quo Mercator ad Indos
Aequora tutus aret, loculos distentus and auro
Quod Tagus and rutila volvit Pactolus arena.
Heroes pariter peperit quos regia Juno,
Baetica queis facies, huic vectigalia solvant,
Tertia ne d^sit tandem Cui summa potestas,
Lysiadum ingenio novus and monstrabitur orbis
In Luna. Imperium non est sed inane quod optas,
[Satque superque tuum variantia lumina sensit
Qualia vel rapidis velox Latonia bigis]
Carole, sed castis adolere altari^ tedis
Cum sponsa tali, and quanto felicior es, qui
Hanc cuperes, quam qui totum sibi posceret orbem!
These Verses (though Printed in the foresaid Book) I have again Printed here,
because that the Supervisors of the Press have there mistaken them.

But to return; it appears by the premises, That it was not intended that the
Scholars of the first Foundation should continue in the House any longer then
Quousque in Artibus cessaverit, h. e. till they be Masters of Art complete, in
opposition to Inceptors, sc. Beginners or Commencers, as the Cambridge word is,
which they preposterously use for such as do stand in the Act, and become
complete Masters. But the rigor of this Statute was taken off by the Pope of
Rome, as I find it verified under the hand of a public Notary, wherein is
specified the Gift of Abboldsley by Sir William Felton; which Instrument bears
date, Anno 1520, when Ri^: Stubbys was Master: though the Manor was given, and
the Appropriation of the Benefice made long before, as hereafter we shall see.
And now the fourth thing observable is, That these Letters of the Bishop give a
date to a Deed that bears none: Which is a Writing wherein Dervorgille did
confirm to God, and to the Blessed Virgin Mary, and to the Principal and
Scholars of Balliol, all the Land, with the appurtenances thereof, which Robert
Waldron formerly held in Stamfordham and the Howgh in the County of
Northumberland [besides the Lands which Sir Jo: de Swinbourn gave them there,
that are contained in a Deed by it self] the which Lands, she and the
Coexecutors of her once Husband John de Balliol, of happy memory, did buy with
a certain parcel of money, assigned thereunto by him in his last Will and
Testament, Sealed with her own Seal; which must be done before the Bishops
Letters of Confirmation: 1. Because therein mention is made of Dervorgilles
having even then endowed and enriched the House with diverse Possessions and
comings in; which, as far as I find and can guess, could not be understood of
any other then these. Secondly, because no mention is made [in this Writing] of
St. Katerine, which is an Argument that it was of ancienter date then the
Bishops Letters, which entitles her as well as the B. Virgin to the Patronage
of the House.

SECT. 15.
Now that the foresaid Lands in Stamfordham and Howgh were of themselves a
Manor, appears by the first Lease of them that ever was set since they were
the Colleges; which Lease was granted by Walter Fodringheye, the first
Principal [whom the Scholars made their Attorney to that intent] to Jo:
Lucchefield, viz. That the said Walter had let to him all the Land in the
Village of* Stamfordham and the Howgh, which belong to the Domain with the
Farms, and Rents of free Tenants, Cottages and Husbandmen, with a Mill,
Pastures and Feedings, with all other Appriseaments and Approxiaments within
and without the Village, excepting the Courts and Amerciaments, etc. and this
upon payment of 16 l. 18 s. sterling per annum, which now a Man would think
could not be less then 340 l. per annum; and so much I am informed the whole
^annor to be now at. To this, if you add the ten Marks due from Hugh Balliol*
Sect. 1. now as good as 240 l. and the 100 Marks plundered by Baldwin Wake,
worth about 2000 l. now, Sect. 6. and the debt due from Musgrave, ibid. besides
those from Walter Balliol and Steven de Ewre, as good as 2000 l. now is, Sect.
12. its enough to render the College very considerable, as being between 4000
and 5000 l. to this may be added, the Houses which Devorgille gave in Oxon,
besides the site of the College which cost her 80 Marks sterling, which is as
good as 1000 l. now is. Yet so it was, that in Anno 1403. all our Lands in
Howgh and Stamfordham, were set for 4 marks 3 s. 4 d. per annum: whereupon I
c^^^lude, That all our Manors and Demesns given by Dervorgille, were quickly
lost, those only of S^inburns gift remaining [with exemption from doing any
Suit or Service for them at the Court of Stamfordham and Howgh, as by a Letter
of Record may appear] of which Lands I take the Rent of 4 marks 3 s. 4 d.
aforesaid to be understood; which now a man would think to be improved to 50 or
60 l. This is now set with the Rectory and Demesns of Mickle Benton in one
Lease. But the loss of the foresaid Manor might give occasion to ignorant
persons of the ill report raised on John Balliol King of Scats: But why [if any
such thing had been done by any of that Family] might it not rather be by Hugh
de Balliol, elder Brother to the said John? which Hugh, never paid us for his
two Horses before mentioned: whom had he been just to his Fathers
Ele^mosynaties here, God might have blessed with longer life to the enjoyment
of that Kingdom which his younger Brother John de Balliol lived to possess; a
name nevertheless, which proved as unhappy to Scotland, as it had to England
before, and did to France afterward. Another reason of diminution of Rents
[though not of the sweeping away of whole Mannors] may be the Tenants living
upon the Borders of both Kingdoms, with whom it is no news to deceive their
Landlords. In Anno 1412. the Rectory of Benton and Killingworth, and Westdade,
with the members thereof, were set at a Rent: but sub cautione si Scoti omnia
vastaverint: so now when they have a mind to make any defalkation of Rent,
then Scoti omnia devastarunt, or some such thing must fall out, by which
Artifice they have, since the beginning of the War, not only defalcated our
Rent, but brought us 500 l. in their debt for Quarter and Contribution: yet so
honest have they been at their last renewing, that they have confessed double
the Acres which we demanded of them, according to our old Terriers; and the
reason they give, is, That the Acres mentioned in our Terriers are Bishops
Acres, one whereof is two of our Statute Acres, which* contain forty Perches in
length, and four in breadth, and in all 160: and upon the last renewing of
their Lease, they entered into a Bond of 500 l. to bring in a perfect ^e^^ier
upon Oath, within three Years, of all our Lands in the Howgh, Si^mfordham and
Muckle Benton, etc. which they holdfrom us by Lease.

SECT. 16.
Now Dervorgill^ having bought all the Buildings and place in Horsmongers
street without North-gate, in Magda^en Parish, lying between the Land formerly
belonging to Jeffrey le Sa^ser on the one part, and the Land of Walter
Feteplace on the other, of Thomas Ewe, Son and Heir of John de Ewe Burgess of
Oxford, for 80 Marks sterling [as good as 1000 l. now is] and some small quit
Rents, as appears, by a Writing without date [wherein she is written
Dervourgwilla] gave all the place, Buildings and Appurtenances which were Hers
there, to Walter Fodri^gheye Principal, and the Scholars of Balliol in Oxon:
Witness Oliver Bishop of Lincoln, and Mr. Roger Rodwell then Chancellor of the
University, 1284. which was the Man^^on of the Scholars, as may be seen upon
the backside of Ewes Deed to Dervorgille: whereon is written this, viz.
Feoffamentum See the following confirmation, from John Balliol afterward K. of
Scots, and Son to our Founder.
Thome de Ewe, de Aula nostra in qua manemus: whereof the (...) Stable and
Coach-house, with the adjoining Tenement next the Ballcourt, with other
appurtenances, were not a part; whereof more hereafter. After this, viz. 13 Ed.
1. it appears by Letters Patents, that Dervorgille obtained a License from the
King of giving to the House one Message [no^ Balls House] in the Suburbs of
Oxon: and this must be about the Year 1286. Her doing of good works continued
so long, that they trod upon her heels to Heaven: for the last time that ever
we read of any Act of hers, is 1287. when the Executors of Jo: de Balliol, with
the consent and assent of her Ladyship, resigned all their power into the hands
of Walter de Fodringheye and the Scholars, viz. as well that which they had of
or in the Goods of John de Balliol as any other, to any intent or purpose;
unless Richard de Sclikbury should happen to be alive, to whom Dervorgille had
committed the choice of Attorneys and Procurators for the House, as we said
before. After these things we find John de Balliol [afterwards King of Scots]
confirming as well the then Site of the College, as the Lands in Howgh and
Stamfordham [given by her] under his Seal [which is the very same with his
Fathers and the Colledges] in haec verba.

Omnibus Christi fidelibus presens scriptum visuris vel audituris. Johannes de
Balliolo filius Domini Johannis de Balliolo salutem in Domino sempiternam.
Noveritis me vidisse and inspexisse scriptum Karissime Domine matris me Domine
De^vorgille de Galwichia Domine de Balliolo de feofatione and perpetuatione
domus Scolarium de Balliolo Oxonie suo sigillo signatum in hec verba. In nomine
Sancte Trinitatis and individue unitatis patris fil^i and Spiritus Sancti,
Amen. Gloriosissime* Virginis Marie, Virginis and Martyris Katerine beatissime
totiusque curie celestis and ecclesie milita^tis. Ego Dervorguil: de Galwichia
D^^: de Balliolo in m^a propria viduitate and legia potestate ^o^stituta,
cupiens and volens quanda^ Eleemosyna^ Oxon: p^rpetuare ubi viget studiu^
generale, quam bone memory D^s. Joh: de Balliolo sponsus meus Karissimus cujus
anime propitietur altissimus pietatis intuitu quonda^ suscitante ibide^. Pr^
anima videlicet dicti sponsi mei perdilecti and pro animabus patris mei matris
me and omnium pred^cessorum meorum sc. and pro salute propria pro^is me and
omnium successorum meoru^ do concedo and in perpetuum pro me and heredibus meis
confirmo Mro Waltero de Fodringheye Principali and Sociis suis Scolaribus
dictis de Balliolo in Universitate Oxon studentibus and eorum successoribus per
legitimam electionem societatem illam intrantibus and in ea commorantibus
secundum quedam statuta ad hoc specialiter ordinata and meo sigillo r^borota
totam The College first settled in Horsmongersstreet.
placeam cum edificiis and omnibus suis pertinentiis quam emi de Thoma de Ewe
filio and herede Johannis de Ewe burgensis Oxon in Horsmongerstreet in Parochia
Beat Marie Magdalene in suburbio Oxon quam quidem placeam cum edificiis
predictis Principali and scolaribus and eorum successoribus pro loco
habitationis in perpetuum concedo and assigno. Quem etiam locum domum Scolarium
de Balliolo censeo nuncupari, in qua dictos Principalem and Scolares and eorum
successores in forma predicta ad dictam societatem electos perpetuo moraturos
esse decerno. Cui siquidem domui and scolaribus in eadem, concedonte Domino in
perpetuum moraturis totam terram de Stamwortham and de le Howh in Comitatu
Northumber. cum omnibus suis pertinentiis concessi assignavi and in subsidium
perpetue sustentationis predictorum Principalis and Scolarium and eorum
successorum pro me and heredibus meis confirmavi. Quam Called Waldroa before.
quidem terram executores Testamenti Domini Johannis de Balliolo, dilecti sponse
mei supradicti emerunt dudum de Domino Roberto * Walraven, pro quadam summa
pecunie in dicto Testamento ad hoc specialiter ordinata. omnia vero superdicta
dictis Principali and Scolaribus and eorum successoribus dedi concessi and
assignavi and libera voluntate mea pro me and heredibus meis confirmavi in
liberam puram and perpetuam Ele^mosynam. Et ego and heredes mei omnia predicta
dictis Principali and Scolaribus and eorum successoribus, contra omnes mortales
warrantizabimus acquietabimus and futuris temporibus defendemus in omnibus and
per omnia secundum tenorem cartarum quas cis inde confeci meo Sigillo
roboratarum. Et ut hec mea do^atio assignatio warrantizatio acquietatio and
defensio pro me and heredibus meis dictis Principali and Scolaribus and eorum
successoribus robur perpetue firmitatis and stabilitatis obtineat presenti
scripto sigillum meum est appensum: his testibus Dominis Antonio Dei gratia
tune Dunelm. Epis^. and Olivero eadem gratia Episc. Lincoln. Dominis Hugh de
Ewre, Johan: de Called Rodwe^^e before.
Swinburn, Roberto de Menevile, Waltero de Camhowe militibus, Mr^ Rogero de
Rowelle, tun^ Cancellario Vniversitatis Oxon: Mro Simone de Gandauno, tum
ejusdem ville Archidiacono, Domino Roberto de Avenel, tunc Rectore Ecclesie de
Stamwortham, Johan: de Erington, Ricardo Benewich, Willielmo de Saulton, and
aliis. Ego vero Johannes de Balliolo filius and Here Is Domini Johannis de
Balliolo, omnibus predictis inspectis and been and distinct intellectis ipsa
omnia and singula prescripta in omnibus and per omnia secundum quod liberius
quietius vel melius predictum est pro me and heredibus meis concedo ratifico
and in perpetuum confirmo. ^t ut hec mea concessio ratificatio and confirmatio
pro me and heredibus meis in omnibus and singulis perpetuum robur firmitatis
obtineant, hoc scriptum sigillo meo roboratum predictis Scolaribus fieri feci,
his testibus Dominis Gilberto de Vnfraude Comite de Angus, Roberto filio
Rogeri, Rogero de Lonecaster, Hugone de Ever, Roberto de Insula, Waltero de
Camhowe, Johanne de Swinburn, Hugone de Subyny, Roberto Bertram de Bottal,
Rogero Mandat, Rad. de Effingdene, and aliis.

There is another Grant of the same John de Balliol, to the very same intent
and purpose, and for the most part verbatim the same, witnessed by the same
persons, but written with a far different hand: Only I take one thing material
to be observed, viz. That in the Conclusion of the other, He is written barely
Filius Domini Johannis de Balliolo; but here he is written, Filius and Here Is
Domini Johannis de Balliolo: and that therefore the former was either before
the death of Hugh de Balliol, and this after; or else for that omission that
was judged insufficient, and therefore received a speedy emendation according
to the Tenor hereof. But notwithstanding this confirmation of John de Balliol,
Son to our Founders, and afterward King of Scots as has been said, I find no
Disclaimer of the Heirs of Robert Waldron, or Walraven, of the Land in Howgh
and Stamfordham, bought of him by Dervorgille as aforesaid [a thing requisite
and usual in those times] which might be the reason why we lost them. Yet does
not this free the Heirs of our Foundress, or of John de Balliol her Son, from
the obligation of the Warranties they have given us, in hec verba, sc: Contra
omnes mortales, not against their Heirs alone, warrantizabimus acquietabimus
and futuris temporibus defendemus: which might probably have wrought upon the
Royal Spirit of King James, had Doctor Lilly urged it in his Petition, and had
not his mistake in the beginning occasioned a sudden rejection thereof without
perusal; which mistake was, That John Balliol King of Scots was our Founder,
which that learned King knew to be otherwise.

SECT. 17.
Now K. Ed. 1. taking occasion to banish all Jews out of this Kingdom, with
License to sell or carry away their movables only, all their Lands came into
the Kings hands as Escheats. Now I find that of Jews Houses in Oxford, the
King, in the nineteenth Year of his Reign, granted to William ^urnel Provost of
Wells, nine Messuages, with their Tenements and Appurtenances [whereof seven
were in the Parish of St. Aldates, one in St. Martyns, and another was a School
of the Jews] one of those nine Messuages was called The Synagogue, whereunto
did belong the entrance in at the great Port or Gate, and the sollar over it;
from which great or broad Port o^ Gate, as it is thought, the House of the
Students [now Pembrook Colledge] was called Aula Lateportensis, or
Broadgates-hall. This Synagogue and Port was given to Stephanus de Cornubia,
Master of this House, and the Scholars, 35 Ed. 1. The rest of the premises,
together with ten Shops, did the same William Burnel bestow upon our said
House: For the confirmation whereof, we have License of Mortmain, and other
Letters Patents from the King, a confirmation of the Gift from Queen Margaret,
8 Edw. 2. [which King was her Son] the disclaim of Edward Burnel, Heir to the
said William, with all other circumstances of Law contained in a multitude of
Writings; which makes me wonder how it comes to pass that we have scarce one of
those Houses remaining to us in St. Aldats Parish, and none of the shops. [That
House in Grandpont [vulgo Grampool] though in the same Parish See Sect. 18. in
Alban-hall.
now, yet then in St. Michaels at the South * Port [which St. Michaels has been
since consolidated with St. Aldats] being of another Foundation] unless it were
to make way for the Building of Christ Church, called the Cardinals College.
And indeed it was mostly to that end; in recompense whereof, we were promised
Lands, Houses, or Money, but never received any, as appears under the hand of a
Public Notary of the Bishop of London, Anno 1529. The Year before the Donation
of these Houses, viz. 7 Edw. 2. I find that Henry Har^la, Professor of
Divinity, was Chancellor of the University, and so was he the Year following:
but who was the next Year I do not find: The Chancellors place being not made
perpetual before 21 Ed. 4. John Russel Bishop of Lincoln being the first that
ever so enjoyed it, as Godwin of Bishops will tell you: But this by the way.

SECT. 18.
But in order before this, I should have mentioned the gift of Richard
Hunsington and Walter Horkstow, who gave two Messuages; one called St.
Hughs-hall, the other Hert-hall, Anno 18 Edw. 1. confirmed by Letters Patents.
It appears by a Court Roll of the Major of Oxon, held Mercurii in Festo Sancti
Edw. Regis, Anno Edw. 3. 19. that we had a Tenement in St. Mildreds Parish [the
Church whereof stood where Lincoln College Ball-Court now is] called St.
Hughes-hall, which my Friend, who brought me a Transcript of the Record, would
have to be understood of this St. Hughs-hall, which I contend to be part of our
College: he supposing it not to be so, but that it was the Site of the
Divinity School [which the University pays us Rent for, to this day, whereof
elsewhere] But whatever the name of the said Site of the Divinity School was,
it is as clear as may be that they are distinct things given us by distinct
Benefactors: for this St. Hughes-hall, which I will have to be a part of our
College (together with that Hert-hall) was given, as you see, by Richard
Hunsington and Walter Horkstow, Anno 18 Edw. 1. but the place of the site of
the Divinity School was given by Jeffrey Horkstow and Richard Staynton, Anno 11
Ed. 2. He will likewise have Hert-hall here mentioned too, to be that slip of
Ground annexed to Alban-hall, which is proved to be otherwise by the same
observation. This Heart hall being given by Rich: Hunsington and Walter
Horkstow, but that piece of Land was given by Richard Hunsingoure, of the
legacy of Walter de Fodringheye, whereof elsewhere. Many Halls bearing the same
name heretofore, no Argument can be drawn Hart-hall, which remains to this day,
is confessed to be neither of these, which argues many Halls to have been of
the same name.
from the Identity thereof to the sameness of the places; * neither is it likely
that we should pay four shillings a Year quit Rent to the King for that piece
of Ground by Alban-hall (as the Record imports) and receive but two shillings
our selves from Merton College There are Writings which mention a Hart-hall of
ours, given by Ric: Hunsingoure in Saint Johas Parish, for the which we were to
pay 4 s. per annum to the Hospital of St. John: but neither could this be that
he means, for the reasons aforesaid. And now mention being made of Saint
John's Parish, we must note that there were two St. John's; the one Saint John de
Merton, which was so called, because annexed to Merton Col. the other St. John's
Chapel just opposite to that, and on the other side of the Town, which now
joins to Hert-hall: At the four Gates also of the Town, were four Churches,
viz. St. Michaels at the North Port, St. Michaels at the South Port, St.
Bodocks at the West Gate, and Trinity Chapel at the East. Bullocks-la^e is not
so called from a corruption of Bodock, but from one Bullock a Scavenger, who
obtained leave of building a House there, whose precedent others followed:
before which time, it was a void place to receive, as I am informed, the dirt
of the Town; as also all that Green was, which lies on the North-side of the
Way to High-bridge, and levelled about 30 Years since.
. Now besides these Letters Patents, I find another Charter of a latter date
for the confirmation of Chimers-hall and the Schools, as also for the
confirmation of those places for the enlargement of our House standing near
them: of one whereof Walter Fodringheye was the Donor [which three places must
be where the Site of the College now is, as St. Hughes-hall and Hert-hall
probably were] But the said Chimers-hall was in Sydyerd-street, in the Parish
of St. Edward the King; and this was given by Hugo de Sancto Yvon, and Jeffrey
Horkstow, 4 Ed. 2. whereof [sc. Chimers-hall] more hereafter. The Year before
this, viz. 3 Edw. 2. two places of Land in Horsmongers street, for the
enlargement of the House, were given by Gilbert de Pomfrait, and Thomas
Humbleton, which lay between the Land of John Slatter on the West, and the land
of the Monks of Durham on the East, containing 180 Feet in length, and 50 Feet
in breadth, which is all the East part of the College. This is half way met by
a piece of land extended from the Street Westward to the College Garden, which
we hold from Magdalen College, the Lease whereof was renewed Anno 1663. with
one other Tenement extending from the way over against the East end of St. M.
Magdalens Church, to the land of the Monks of Dunelm, now Trinity College;
passed over by Jeffrey Sawser to Walter Fodringheye, with liberty to give it to
this College by a Deed without date (but it may be known from the observation
of the time in which Fodringheye lived) obliegeing himself to acknowledge a
Fine; which I only note by the way, that Fines were then wont to be levied. And
this Tenement seeming to meet that given by Ponfrait and Humbleton, as it were
at right Angles, does therewith bound all the back parts of the College on two
sides; the one abbutting on the little Garden and part of the Backside of
Trinity College on the East, and the other on the same little Garden on the
North, and answers in length to the measure of 180. (centum and quater viginti,
as it is in the Deed) feet before given (at the least) for the length; the
breadth of 50 feet, extending from Trinity lane end, to the Chimney next the
College Gate.

In the Box, cornering the Foundation of our College.
SECT. 19.
Anno Dom. 1293. * Oliver Bishop of Lincoln did grant to the Master and
Scholars [for so they are called in the Grant] License, That, in as much as by
reason of the frequency of Disputations and Lectures, they could not attend
Divine Offices of the Parish Church [then in the Patronage of the Abbot of St.
Mary Oseney] they might celebrate them in their own Oratory within the House,
not prejudicing the Parish Church in regard of Oblations and Obventions:
Provided also, That they visited the Parish Church in the greater Solemnities
of the Year, as other Scholars were bound to do to the Parishes wherein they
lived, as in the said Grant is signified, wherein no leave was given them of
celebrating the Sacraments, which was that which the House aimed at, not only
as a convenience, but an advantage to themselves; but was never granted them
[till it was done by the Authority of the Pope] though they afterward prepared
a better Fabric, which they called by the name of St. Katerines Chapel.
Indeed its being owned by a Saint, and that such a Saint as they esteemed St.
Katerine to be, methinks should have moved the Bishop: But why they should
think to have it done upon the naked account of Chapel, more then of that of
an Oratory, there was little reason, if we regard a Chapels first institution,
which was to be only a portable Oratory, all others being fixed and standing.
The French Historians [as it seems by the Treasury of the History of France]
make mention of a certain silken Banner of a Vermillion color, called
Oriflamme, from the Flames of Fire and color of Gold represented therein;
which Ensign they say, was never born but in a Battle against Infidels: but
when once their Kings abused it against the Christians, it vanished as it came,
that is, by Miracle. This Standard was kept in the Church of St. Denis in
France (near unto Paris) wherein, as in our Westminster Abbey, their Kings are
Interred: But some say, that the English being rendered Masters of Paris,
burned the Banner with the Maid of Orleans. This Oriflamme, they say, was the
Cope of St. Denis; and that their Kings not able to have the Body of St. Martin
entire for their ordinary Guard, found a means to have his Cope, which in
French is called Chappe or Chape; and commonly their Kings, who could not
assist at the public Service, were wont to have Clergy Men who followed them
with portable Oratories, which they called Chapels and Chapelains, from this
Chappe, h. e. Cope of St. Martin, and that other of St. Denis: and so much for
the derivation of the word Chapel. Though portable Oratories Sozomen testifies
to have been first invented by Constantine, who in his Warlike Expeditions
carried about a Tabernacle, made after the form of a Temple, wherein the
Assemblies were gathered together for Gods Worship, l. 1. c. 8. But
notwithstanding these things, the Parisians think not themselves destitute of a
Guard, viz. The most Rich Cabinet of St. Geneuefue, whom they esteem the
Protectress of their City [though St. Denis be tutelar Saint of France in
general] and therefore they superstitiously ascribe the same power to this Rich
Cabinet made to the honor, and kept in the Church of that Saint there, as
others have done to Talismanical Figures: the Hebrew derivation whereof seems
to be from (...), whence comes (...) stella, draco, and (...) numerus: inasmuch
as they were Greek (...): and (...) dic^ntur effectus stellarum. Arab. (...)
tishm.
made according to and under the Figure of some Constellation or number of Stars
then ascending, called Vultus Celestes, especially Draco or Ophiuchus, for the
effects of these two are much alike, according to Junctinus in speculo
Astrologiae, viz. That they which are born under them shall be Marsi [Sons of
Circes] able to mitigate and cure the stingings of Serpents: whence some
superstitiously conceive, That the Brazen Serpent lifted up in the Wilderness,
was such a kind of Talisman. And these kinds of Fancies they have extended to
the defense of places, saying, That before the taking of Constantinople, the
Talismans thereof were thrown into the Thra^ian Bosphorus. * But if the
Constellations themselves have no These are, by some, thought to be the
Teraphim mentioned in Scripture, and that Labans Images were such, vid.
Seldenum de Dis: sir. The manner of making such, is set down by Schedius, de
Dis Germanis, cap. 31. and by Grotius in cap. 31. Genesis where the Hebrew Word is
Teraphim, which Reb. stole away, least Laban from them should learn which way
they went; or (as Josephus) that they might be a refuge against their pursuers:
but Grotius upon Judge. 17. and upon ^os. 3. notes Teraphim to signify as well
good as bad Angels. The good Teraphim (...), says Grotius upon Judge. 17.
Cherubinorum formam habuisse cens. Hieron. The Colossus at Rhodes is said by
some to have been a Talisman, which was overthrown by an Earthquake, as is
testified by Pliny; and the Brass whereof it consisted, was carried away by
Mehua the Sultan of Egypt, successor to Selym^s, Anno Dom. 660. It was seventy
Cubits in height; and although it were hollow, nine hundred Camels were laden
with it. This might possibly give Answers and Intimations of things, by such
kind of Artifice as the Papists make their Images to speak, to sweat, and to
w^ep.
such efficacy, how should the Images made under them have any? But that tbe
Constellations themselves have none, is clear from hence, namely, That they are
[according to reformed Astronomy] removed 30 degrees Eastward from the places
they once held, the virtue remaining where they were before, as receiving it by
impression made by that part of the Primum Mobile which was at first, and still
continues directly over the same places; which they leaving, leave together
with it their former virtue behind them. The like may be said of this, and of
many other Saints, viz. That they hold not those places in the reformed Sphere
and Calenders which they have held heretofore, and at this day hold in the
Roman; those virtues once ascribed to them, being acknowledged to remain in the
Christians Primum Mobile alone, who is Yesterday, to day, and the same for
ever. But that the Brazen Serpent should be a Talisman, is disproved from the
very matter of it, which naturally not cures, but increases the grief arising
from the bitings or stingings of Serpents; which was thought to have been done
by Moses of purpose, that the Cure might not owe it self to any thing in
Nature, but to the Institution of God, ordaining it purely to be a Typical
representation of our Savior Christ nailed to the Cross, upon whom whosoever
looks with the eye of Faith [as the Israelites did upon this with that of the
Body] shall be cured of the stings of the Fiery Serpents of sin. Aes
natur^liter nocet (...), sed Deus cum vim suam eximie vult ostendere operatur
per contraria, says Grotius upon Numb. 2. 9. And albeit Moses were skilful in
all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, he could not derive this use of the Heavenly
Configurations from them: for although they acknowledged these Vultus
Coelestes, yet, nor they nor the Caldeans ever used them otherwise then ad
(...); the Greeks afterward abusing them, ad fata geniturarum praenoscenda,
etc. Berosus, qui ipsefuit oriu^do Babylonius, primus scholam Graecis aperuit
Chaldaeorum discipliaae qui post tempor^ Alex: magni vixit, Salmas.
says Salmasius, de Annis climactericis in Praefat. * It cannot be denied that
the Caldeans and Egyptians made use of the Planets in their Divinations, from
whom the Jews learned their Superstition: whence the Prophet Mica says, c. 5.
v. 12. Et exscidero praestigias e manu tua, adeo ut Planetarii non sint tibi,
so Junius and Tremellius translate this, and that of Jerem. 27. 9. but this is
nothing to the Configurations of the Fixed stars. And as for any disaster that
may happen to a place, it is rather to be ascribed to Belshazzars Tekelman, as
I may so call it (then to these Talismans) viz. the Figure of a Hand writing
its doom thus: Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting,
therefore God has numbered thy happiness and finished it: The Author of
Judgments being Gods hand commonly working in means; and the subject of them,
Man, too light upon the weights. It was therefore well said of an Englishman,
who was one of the last Boat that loosed from Calais upon the surrender of that
Town to the Duke of Guise, in the time of Queen Mary; when a Frenchman calling
to him in a jeer from the shore, and asking him, When he would return again? he
answered in good earnest: When your sins are greater then ours. Though the
French, proud hereof, commend the Englishman for it; yet God does not ever
apparently use such an exact proportion of Judgments in this World, as we learn
from the example of the Tower in Shiloe: and the Heathen Poet could say, --
saepe Diespiter
Neglectus, incesto addidit integrum.


SECT. 20.
By this time now had the Abbot and Convent of Mountreul in France (by License
obtained from the King of England) sold a Soke of Land, and several Houses in
St. Lawrence Jury London, together with the Advowson of the Church of St.
Lawrence, to William [Facetus] Faucet; which said William gave them to Henry
Faucet, and the said Henry to Hugh Wickenbrook, called Hugo de Vienna: which
said Hugo de Vienna lastly bestowed them upon the Master and Scholars, Anno
1294. Next Year after this, the Church of St. Lawrence was made an
Appropriation to the College by the consent of the Incumbent, the Bishop, Dean
and Chapter of St. Paul's; and last of all by the confirmation of the then King.
The Composition then made, was, That the College should take all the Tithes,
Fruits and Oblations whatsoever, to their own use; and that the Vicar should
content himself with 100 s. per annum, arising out of the less Tithes and
Oblations: and so he did till Anno 1549. when an Indenture was made between the
College and Brogden the then Vicar, whereby the College granted him 20 l. per
annum, with a House to live in, during the time he continued Vicar there [but
not to his Successors] the Vicar having formerly lived in a House built at the
charge of the Parish, the College allowing them the Porch and Vestry by way of
Compensation, provided that this latter were used as a Vestry for ever, and not
Farmed out. This was Anno 1390. Afterward, viz. 1392. 2 Ric. 2. the College,
with the consent of the said King, signified under the Broad Seal, gave a House
to the Vicars, provided they paid to the College 20 s. per annum for ever: all
which may appear by 57 several Writings. Now the Oblations and Obventions of
such a Parish as that, could not make the Profits thereof less then 200 l. per
annum better to the College then they are, which by reason of the Reformation,
are ceased.

SECT. 21.
Anno Dom. 1310. Hugo de Warkeneby, and William de Socham, gave us four
Messuages with the Area adjoining, and the Appurtenances, in the Parish of St.
Mary the Virgin, in the street of the School of Arts, to find some Chaplain in
the Chapel of St. Katerine within our House, for the daily Celebration of
Divine Offices; which they had bought of William Solby, Burgess of Oxford.
These Houses and Places, together with the Schools formerly mentioned, Sect.
19. [besides which it does not appear that the University had any other for the
Arts] we perceive now to be lost, without as much as the honor of the name
left us, which we formerly had by the name of Balliol-hall and Balliol-schools:
and as for the Area, we must understand that into the Schools of Arts, no
Under-graduates were permitted to enter, as to the doing of any Exercise
therein, but were left to dispute in the Area, or Courtyard adjoining: which
in French being Parvis, our Answering of Generals, is thence called answering
in Parvisiis, or in Parviso: which Exercise they now perform [though in the
Schools, yet] under the protection of a Bachelor of Arts, whose Formality is a
License to read Logic, etc. to enter into the Schools, to dispute, and reliqua
peragere, qu^ ad gradum Baccalaurei in artibus pertinent: and so much for that.

SECT. 22.
Anno 13 Edw. 2. which was about the Year, 1320. twelve Acres of Meadow,
commonly called Bayly-mead, were given by Mr. Hunsingoure to the Master and
Scholars, to find a Chaplain for the celebration of Divine Offices in the
Chapel of St. Katerine, within the Mansion of the said Master and Scholars,
confirmed by Letters Patents of the said King, to be held of the Manor of
Wotton, for the Service of 15 d. per annum. King Edw. 4. afterward
understanding more Rent then this to be exacted by his Receivers, did by His
Letters Patents confirm it upon the old Rent of 15 d. per annum, though our new
Rebels reassumed those old Demands. But upon Remonstrance made by us of the
premises, This Baylymead Mr. Napper holds by his Wifes life.
they went not to trial with * us. The same Richard Hunsingoure had, before
this, viz. 9 Edw. 2. given and confirmed to the Master and Scholars of the
House of Balliol for ever, All that Tenement, with the Houses, Curtilage, and
all other the Appurtenances in the Parish of St. John de Merton, lying between
Alban-hall and Lomb-hall, which Tenement he had of the Legacy of Walter de
Fodringheye, Canon of Lincoln [and probably he who had been Master before]
witness Mr. Henry Harcla, then Chancellor of the University of Oxon, Jo:
Ducklington Major, Robert Wathington and Jo: Kilward Bailiffs, etc. This is at
present Leased to Merton College (and makes up a part of Alban-hall) the
measure whereof is specified in the Lease. In the eleventh Year of the same
King Edw. 2. Jeffrey Horkstow and Richard de Staynton, gave a Tenement within
the Walls of Oxford, in the Parish of St. Mildred; which is that whereon the
Divinity Schools stand, as is evident by the Lease thereof granted to the
University of 99 Years, beginning 1427. in the fourth of Hen. 6. Viz. Anno 1661.
which is about 234 Years since: The Lease is therefore expired * now 135 Years.
The Rent is 7 s. per annum: The measure of the Ground is precisely set forth in
the lease, together with the situation thereof, by the name of one void place
of land within the Walls of Oxon, situate between Exeter College on the West
part, and the School-street on the East: from whence one end abbuts upon
Exeter-lane toward the North [this Exeter-lane was the Pomaerium between
Exeter College and the Townwall, which before the building of the present
Chapel there, was our way to the Schools] and the other Head of it abbuts upon
the Ground or Tenement of the Abbot and Convent of Dorchester, and of
Balliol-hall, by Mildred-lane to the Southward; and it contains in length from
North to South, 171 Feet and 5 Inches; and the greatest breadth thereof in any
place is 130 Feet: For the more precise measure whereof, I must refer you to
the Deed it self, yet remaining in our custody entire without the least
violation made, Thomas Chase being Chancellor of the University, and Robert
Burley Master of the House: by both whom, it was desired that a change might be
made (as soon as by Law it could be contrived) of this land for Sparrow-hall
(which we call Old Balliol-hall) which we hold from the University at the Rent
of 2 s. per annum; consideration being to be had of the inequality of the
Rents: the overplus whereof [which is 5 s.] was to be made good to us upon
some other place, etc. as by the Deeds may appear: which thing was lately
attempted to be done, but by reason of Dr. Langbaines death, then Custos
Archivorum, to whom the management of such things did belong, it did not obtain
its effect, and that especially because the Books were drawn, and therein the
only Caution that was allowed us for the 5 s. per annum, was Beef-hall: which
because a part of Pembrook College I refused, as being no Townhouse, and
improper for us to enter into and distrain for our Rent in case of nonpayment
at the day; besides that in the same Books they had couched all other places,
where the Site of the other Schools now is, which were never intended in the
exchange. Another piece of Land anciently belonging to our House, is a Garden
and Curtilage lying between Exeter-hall [for so that College was then call'd]
on the West, and Schools-street on the East, now part of Exeter College
Garden; whereof more hereafter. And although I find but one Writing of
Manger-hall, and that without date too; yet for the antiquity thereof I shall
cast it in here, though where it stood I cannot show. But all those Halls or
Messuages whose situation is not noted, stood probably, where the site of the
College now is, viz. This of Manger-hall, together with St. Hughes-hall and
Hert-hall, Sect. 18. also Saucer-hall and New Balliol-hall, noted Sect. 7.
whereunto may be added Margarets-hall (whereof more hereafter) and of this I am
certain, but the rest I leave in medio till farther proof can be made pro or
con.

SECT. 23.
And now we having, by the charity of our Benefactors aforesaid, gained two
Chaplains, others began to entertain thoughts of a more elegant Chapel for us.
For Anno Dom. 1327. Nich: Luceby then [Custos] Warden of our House (for so he is
there called) and Mr. Thomas Otham, Chancellor of the University, and others,
were Witnesses The Abbot of Reading was one of those that had Votes in
Parliament. See Spelman's Glossarium.
to a Deed under the Seal of the * Lord Abbot of Reading: wherein is set forth,
That the said Abbot had delivered to the Scholars of the House of Balliol,
Oxon, As good as 400 l. now.
20 l. sterling for the Soul of Adam le Poleter, Burges of Reading, for the
building of the Chapel of St. Katerine of the same House: whereunto the said
Abbot added * 10 marks, besides a Glass Window of 10 l. and more (such is 10
marks and 10 l. almost as good as 400 l. now is, a Gift otherwise scarce worthy
of him, he being one of the 27 that had place in Parliament, whereof 25 were
Abbots, and the other two were Priors, viz. The Prior of Coventry, and the
Prior of St. John's of Jerusalem, according to Ascanius Tamburinius: The reason
whereof is given by Spelman in Glassario; where speaking of the quantity of the
penultima of Abbatis in the Genesis Case, he proves it to be long, by differencing
it from Abbatis, or Abatis for an Hostler, etc. thus Abbatis ad caenam, dat
equis Abbatis avenam.
his expression) for the same Chapel. And now as we had License from Oliver
Bishop of Lincoln, to celebrate Divine Offices in our own Oratory, within our
House, as has been said: The same was obtained from his Successors Henry,
John, and Thomas, which appears under the Seal of the said Thomas Bishop of
Lincoln, Anno Dom. 1346. The same License also, and upon the same Conditions as
all former were, was given by John B. of Lincoln, Anno 1368. In which last, our
Oratory is called St. Katerines Chapel, and in none of the former. But as in
those there was a tacit, so here was an express Exception of administering the
Sacraments therein: A thing very strange, when upon the Petition of the House
Pope Urban had given a License for it in the second Year of his Pontificate, as
appears by the Record thereof (the hindrance whereof had been Oblations and
Obventions, the great ^ore of those times, which was not endured to be
touched.) Besides which License of the Popes, to celebrate Sacraments and all
other Divine Services in our own Chapel, within our House, with exemption from
all Duties to be done or paid to the Parish Church; we are freed from paying of
Tithes for any Houses of ours, either in the Parish of St. Mary Magdalen, or in
all Oxford besides, as may appear by the Instrument it self, in the Box (in our
Treasury) called Magdalen Parish Box, whereunto I refer you: But because time
and some accident has begun to deface the Popes License, I shall here insert it
verbatim.

^rbanus Episcopus servus servorum Dei Dilectis filiis Magistro and Scolaribus
Collegii Clericorum domus de Balliolo de Oxonia Lincoln. Dioc. salutem
apostolic. ben. P ia devotorum Deo and Ecclesie desideria que divini cultus
augmentum ac ipsorum quietis commodu^ respicere dinoscuntur apostolico favore
prosequimur, eisque benignum impertimur assensum. Exhibita siquidem nobis pro
part vestra continebat quod vos in quadam capella sita intra septa domus
vestre de Balliolo de Oxonia Lincoln. Dioc. juxta statuta dicte domus per vos
juramento vallata singulis diebus per proprios sacerdotes divina officia facere
celebrari ac certis diebus eisdem Miss and horis canonicis personaliter
interesse tenemini. Nos vestris in hac part supplicationibus inclinati ut in
capella predicta singuli vestrum qui fuerint in presbyteratus ordine co^stituti
and alii Presbyteri dicte domus Missam and alia divina officia etiam in festis
majoribus summissa and alta voce ^ure Parochialis Ecclesie and cujuslibet
alterius in omnibus semper salvo celebrari valeatis quibuscunque
Constitutionibus Apostolicis contrariis nequaquam obstantibus devotioni vestre
auctoritate Apostolica tenore presentium indulgemus. Nulli ergo omnino hominum
liccat hanc paginam nostre concessionis infringere vel ei a^su temerario
contraire. Si quis autem hoc attemptare presumpserit indignationem omnipotentis
Dei and beatorum ^etri and Pauli Apostolorum ejus se noverit incursurum. Dat:
Avinioni xvi Kl. Maii Pontificatus nostri Anno secundo.

This cannot be understood of Urban 6. (and therefore must precede that of John
Bishop of Lincoln) inasmuch as his immediate Predecessor, Greg. 11. had reduced
the Apostolic Seat to the City, because the Italians began to revolt from it,
by reason of its so long continuance at Avignon, which had been the Seat of
four Popes besides himself; who though he was created at Avignon, dyed at Rome:
where also his immediate Successor, Urban 6. aforesaid was created, sat, and
dyed: Nor why we (having obtained this License from the Pope) should receive
another afterward from the Bishop of Lincoln (and that disadvantageous too) do
I understand, unless by reason that the Public Notary having put no
Protocollum thereunto, 'twas thought not Authentic; or else because the Bishop
thought it safer to contradict the Popes Authority, then to displease the Abbot
of Osney, in whose gift St. Mary Magdalen Parish Church then was, as is
aforesaid; or then to undergo the displeasure of God, and of his Apostles Peter
and Paul, who are there made the Vindicators of such contempt. Yet
notwithstanding all this, we are not only permitted, but enjoined to celebrate
and receive the Sacraments in our Chapel by the Injunctions of the Bishop of
Lincoln's Commissioners in their Visitation, had in this College Martii 4.
1565, which are set down Sect. 31. verbatim.

SECT. 24.
Anno 1340. 15 Edw. 3. Besides a Grant made of the Domaine Lands in Mickle
Benton by Rokysborow, an Agreement was made for the maintenance of six Scholars
above the ancient number, and one Chaplain, to be maintained out of the Lands
given by Sir Philip Somervyle, viz. Two Cottages and six Acres of Land, with
the Appurtenances in great, h. e. in Mickle Benton aforesaid, which are called
The buts: and in the Statutes of Sir Philip Somervile the Advowson of the
Church of Mickle Benton is also mentioned, with duabus carrucatis terre
arabilis, and viginti acris prati; h. e. as some interpret it, as much as two
Ploughs will Till in a Year, Charrue (which comes from * (Or Carruca from
Charrue) the Language of the Gauls (now pre erved in the Italian, French, and
Spanish Languages) being not a corruption of the Latin, as the vulgar Error is;
but the condition wherein it now is, proceeds from the light Impression that
the Latin has made upon it (as the learned Breerwood observes in his Enquiries
of Languages) And it is doubtless antienter then the Latin it self, having
Declensions and Conjugations of its own, which resemble not those of the Latin
at all: Declining all Words by Articles, as all Eastern Languages (except the
Arabic) do, and not by variation of Terminations of Cases, as the Latin and
Greek are wont to do.
Carruca) being a Plough in French, the same some say is two Hides of Land. The
which two Carrucata or Hydes of Land, together with the said 20 Acres of
Meadow, were further assured by the Release of Sir Philip's Heir, and other
necessary Circumstances of Law. The next Year after this, the Rectory of Mickle
Benton was appropriated to the College by the Bishop of Durham, as appears by
diverse Writings. An Extract of the Instrument of the said Bishop is as
follows. Habeant Vicarii totam terram ad dictam Ecclesiam ab antiquo
spectantem libere sicut Rectores tenere solebant: nec non decimas lane and
agnorum and pullanorum and vitulorum, lacticinii and alias decimas minutas
quascunque. Magister autem and scolares integre percipient decimam Garbarum and
feni totius Parochie predicte. procurationes Vicarius persoluet. Cancellum
etiam supportabit quoad modicas and quotidianas refectiones: concerning which,
we have almost 30 several Writings. Amongst which, are the Statutes of Sir
Philip Somervile, confirmed by Edw: Balliol and the Bishop of Durham. About
which time, or the Year before, the Rectory of Abboldesley, with the Manor
thereof [whereunto Beeston was annexed, though since divided] was given to the
College by Sir William Felton, for the augmentation of the Commons of the
Fellows from 8 d. to Clement 6. who sat ten Years.
12 d. the week, and for supply of Clothes and Books, with other Necessaries.
The which Rectory was appropriated to this House by Pope Clement, a competency
being reserved for the support of the Vicar there: by whom it was also granted,
that the Scholars might continue in the House after they became Masters and
Doctors, having been formerly exposed to vant and beggary [by the foresaid
rigor of Dervorgilles Statutes] All which, though it appears by a Public
Notary, Anno Dom. 1520. yet I shall fetch it from the Originals, and therein
you shall perceive the reasons why, I said before, this Benefaction was about
the same Year that Sir Philip Somerviles Statutes were made, or the Year
before. For the Deed of Gift from Sir William Felton of Abbotsley Rectory, cum
pertinentiis, to the Master and Scholars, and their successors for ever, was
first made in festo Sancti Martini in Hieme, Anno Dom. 1340. confirmed by
Letters Patents, 14 Edw. 3. over England, and over France the first; which was
a Year before Sir Philip Somerviles first Grant, which was 15 Edw. 3. as I have
already noted. Livery and Seisin was likewise given by him to Balliol College,
Anno 1340. as by another appears. Yet I find another Deed of Gift of Abbotsley,
of the said Sir William Feltons, dated 1341, Robert Skeleton being then
Chancellor of the University, which was after Sir Philip Somerviles gift, and
after his Statutes confirmed by Edw. Balliol, as is evident by the date
thereof. But the Composition of Abbotsley for the Vicar, and consequently the
Appropriation of the Rectory to the College was not made till Anno Dom. 1361,
by John Synwell Bishop of Lincoln; which was 20 Years after, and attested by
John Williams then Bishop of Lincoln Anno 1628. (Which Attestation was
occasioned by the negligence of the Society: who those rather to search at
Lincoln, then the Records at home.)
. By which Composition, The Vicar was to have 60 Acres of Domain Land, and all
manner of lesser Tithes and Oblations whatsoever, and of what sort soever; as
also all Mortuaries living and dead, the Tithes of Mills, and whatsoever is
known of Right or Custom to belong to the alterage of the Church aforesaid, and
3 l. a Year from the College: A dwelling house competent, having one Hall, one
Chamber, one Kitching, one Stable and one Grange: The College were to repair
the Chancel, and pay Archdeacons Procurations: The Vicar to repair the
Vestments and books belonging to the Church; to pay Synodals, to provide bread
and wine for the Sacrament of the Altar, Frankincense, Wax and Rushes through
all the Church, and Light in the Chancel; to pay the Tenth and Procurations of
Cardinals, and other Apostolic Nuncio's pro rata, which rate is six Mark
sterling: The College to have all the Tithe of blade and hay. And if there be
any Ambiguity, the Bishop was to decide the Controversy. Another Composition
was made by the Abbot of Huntingdon, by virtue of a Commission directed to him
from John Bokingham Bishop of Lincoln, successor to John Synwell aforesaid, at
the request of Robert Osgood Vicar on the one part, and the Master and Scholars
on the other, according to the power which the Bishop reserved to himself and
Successors in the first Composition; which Composition of the Abbot of
Huntingdon, was made according to Instructions given in his Commission, which
were only to assign to Osgood, and his Successors, a House with such and such
Rooms, which were ordered in general without mention made of the place, or of
Garden, or of ingress or egress: All which, are by the Abbot assigned to be on
the East part of the Rectory, together with Timber to build the Kitchen
back-house and barn, which had then all lately been burnt down: The Vicar was
also assigned to build a barn of 70 foot in length, and 22 foot in breadth. But
other things mentioned in the first Composition, the Abbot meddles not with, as
being besides his Commission: The which Commission was given and executed,
1364. three Years after the first Composition made. After this, the next thing
I find was a Lease made of Abbotsley for 45 marks a Year, dated Anno 1374.
(Frank Pledge and Court held, 1 R. 2.) A second made to Robert Bateman and Jo*
Sekyll, reserving the keeping of the Court, and all Emoluments thereof, and of
the Tenements, Anno 1386. A third set for 43 marks per annum, Anno 1389. And
Anno Dom. 1395. there happened a difference between the College and William
Willesthorn Vicar, on the one part, and the Parish on the other, touching the
maintenance of the Clerk of Abbotsley Parish Church, in relation to ringing
Hora aurorae, or The Day-bell, and Ignitegium, h. e. Courfue, and Offices done
for the Saints, etc. This was heard before the Archdeacon (Tho: Barry one of
the Fellows being made Proctor for the College) and composed; the Parishioners
promising to be perpetually silent for the time to come, under the Seals of six
of them set to the Instrument; and that the College and Vicar for those things
should be left to their own liberty. As for the License granted by Pope Clement
for the Scholars continutnce in the College till Masters and Doctors, it was
necessary, (though made after Sir Philip Somervyles Statutes, whereby the
inconveniences of Dervorgylles Statutes were obviated) in as much as her
Statutes were still in force; the which interfering with those of Sir Philip,
occasioned future grievances and alterations. In the next place we find a Court
held at Abbotsley, 5 H. 4. another 12 H. 4. together with diverse Rentals, etc.
The next is a Lease for 17 l. per annum, 29 H. 6. Before which I should have
noted a Lease set by William Brandon Master, and the Scholars, 19 H. 6. for 22
l. per annum. In the next place, we have a boundary of all our Lands in
Abbotsley, taken 32 H. 6. In the next place, a Rental of Abbotsley and Beeston,
annexed in the time of Thomas Cisson, Master of this College, 5 H. 8. In the
next place, a Lease for 17 l. 19 s. 5 d. per annum, Anno Dom. 1524. Item, a
Court held at Abbotsley by the Master and Scholars, 44 Eliz. the Jurors 14. the
Tenants 8. Item, a Court Baron held, 5 Car. 1. for the Master of Balliol
College, by Christopher Mead Steward; the Homage was six. Item, a Court-Roll
of a Court held in the name of the College, by Mead Steward of the Court, 7
Car. 1. Jurors five, Tenants admitted three. Item, a Lease set to Anthony Hare
for three Lives, dated 1615. at the usual Rent: The said Anthony has hereby
power granted him to keep a Court Yearly, and is enjoined to return the
Court-Rolls to the College; for which, 3 s. was to be allowed (which Covenant,
the Tenants there have never observed) the College discharging him of
Vicar-Bishop and Archdeacon. The said Lessee gave also a Bond of 500 l. for the
performance of Covenants. In the last place, I find a true and a perfect Terrar
of all Lands, Domaine and Copyhold, taken Aug. 30. 1621. And so having given
an account of Abbotsley, I return to Sir Philip Somervyles affairs, and therein
to his Statutes; which are as follows.

Edwardus Dei gratia Scotorum Rex, ex primeva fundatione. Magistri and
scolarium Aule sive Domus de Balliolo in Oxon: fundator. Universis and singulis
ad quos presents pervenerint salutem in amplexibus salvatoris. Cartam Domini
Philippi de Somervyle Domini de Wichnore militis, and statuta in eadem carta
contenta Magistrum and Scolares aule sive domus de Balliolo in Oxon:
concernentia sigillis bone memory Domini Ricardi dudum Dunelm: Episc: and
venerabilium virorum Religiosorum Dominorum Prioris and Capituli Dunelm:
Reverendi viri and discreti Domini Cancellarii Universitatis Oxon: and Magistri
and Scolarium aule sive domus de Balliolo in Oxon: una cum sigillo dicti Domini
Philippi de Somervyle consignata inspeximus, and in nostra presentia perlegi
fecimus in forma que sequitur verborum: In nomine Sanctissime and individue
Trinitatis Patris and Filii and Sp: Sancti, and gloriose Virginis Marie, and
beat Caterine Virginis and Martyris omniumque sanctorum. Ego Philippus de
Somervyle de summi rerum and bonorum opificis bonitate confisus, ejusdemque
gratie qui vota hominum pro sua voluntate ad bonum disponit and dirigit
fidenter innisus animique revolutione sepe sollicitus si quid sui nominis
honori retribuamus pro his que mihi in hac vita tribuit abundanter:
Advocationem ecclesie de Micklebenton comitatu Northumber: and in Diecesi
Dunelm: cum duabus Carrucatis terre arabilis and viginti acris prati in Campis
ejusdem ville Magistro and Scolaribus domus de Balliolo in Oxon: and eorum
successoribus in augmentationem numeri scolarium and ad sustentationem eorundem
in perpetuum pro salute anime me and dilecte sponse me Margarete and ad
honorem and gloriam Domini no^^ri Jesu Christi and S. Katerine Virginis ac
Martyris contuli caritative* quam quidem collationem spontanea and libera
voluntate ac deliberato consilio approbo ratifico and confirmo and apud eosdem
Magistrum and Scolares manner in perpetuum dispono sub forma and conditionibus
infra scriptis tam quoad personas quam ad regulas earundem annuente Domino sine
contradictione integre observandas. Hanc igitur formam quoad omnia infra
scripta de communi consensu Magistri and Scolarium predictorum statuendam
dispono. Quod ultra numerum sexdecim Sociorum secundum antiquas observantias, a
Sociis dicte domus usitatas secundum facultatum sufficientiam, dicte domui
pertinentium. Sex scolares facultati artium intendentes per socios dicte domus
de novo sint electi. in quorum electione nec non in, sustentationis gratia,
admissione, illi qui de locis propinquioribus illi loco ubi beneficia
antedicta, dicte domui per me collata situantur oriundi fuerint: dum tamen in
eis vel eo^um aliquo tres conditiones in antiquis ordinationibus nominate
videlicet magis pauperes magis proficientes and magis morigerati inveniantur
precipui sint and primi. Sit autem in dicta domo superior perpetuus in eadem
domo commorans, qui Magistri nomine perpetuo nuncupetur vir in spiritualibus
and temporalibus circumspectus qui Scolaribus in ipsa domo commorantibus ac
ministris altaris aliisque omnibus officiariis seu famulis quocunque modo
censeantur, qui ad exteriorum seu interiorum administrationem seu regimen
fuerint deputati pertineat and presit, omnesque ei tam Scolares quam altaris
ministri officiarii and quicunque alii famuli tanquam suo superiori in his que
effectum suum contingunt pareant and intendant. De conditionibus quoad ejus
institutionem electionem seu destitutionem and alia ipsum tangentia, ea
firmiter observentur que super hoc inferius sunt annotata. Volo autem and
ordino quod de numero Scolarium domus supradicte, eligantur secundum formam
subscriptam sex Socii dummodo in facultate artium fuerint regentes qui Sacre
Theology facultate audiant, quibus etiam in vacationibus aliis facultatibus
liceat intendere decreta and decretales per biennium duntaxat audire. Dispono
etiam quod electio Magistri perpetui secundum formam inferius annotatam
celebretur convocatis omnibus Sociis presentibus and absentibus justa causa and
necessaria, dummodo sine notabili difficultate venire poterint, injungat
Principalis vel locum ejus tenens omnibus and singulis in fide proficere domui
quam fideliter: duas elegant artist^s qui cum Principali domus predicte seu cum
ejus locum tenen^e in scrutinio sedeb^nt qui per communitatem electi coram
seniore secundum ejus statum in domo juramentum prestent corporale and idem
juramentum in propria persona coram eodem seniore prester Principalis quod non
per se alium vel alios aliquem vel aliquos ad dicendum pro aliquo in Magistrum
eligendo induxerit vel induce^ quovismodo contra voluntatem propriam and
spontaneam, and ad id juramentum observandum quilibet socius domus supradicte
virtute sui juramenti per eundem seniorem firmiter astringatur. Jurent etiam
omnes and singuli tactis SStis. in presentia omnium sociorum quod fideliter and
absque personali acceptatione and spe remunerationis fact vel in futurum
faciende pro tali dicant quem melius sciente^ magis potentem and majorem Zelum
habentem sciverint ad domus negotia expedienda. Quo fact^ Principalis and alii
duo per communitatem electi vota fingulorum fideliter sedendo audiant in
secretis and scribant and ipsum Magistrum fidelite^ denuncient in quem major
pars communitatis consenserit. Et si contingat aliquos vocum paritatem
obtinere, per saniorem partem communitatis nominatus in Magistrum sit electus.
Saniorem vero partem ex prerogativis in scientia and prioritate domus aliisque
consimilibus ex quibu^ unus alio vel una pars altera in Collegiis sanior solet
numerari, voca^ decerno. Electione quidem Magist^i celebrata faciat eum
Principal^ vel senior secundum statum suum in domo coram communitate jura^ quod
statuta and ordinationes per me editas fideliter observabit. Ite^ volo and
dispono quod Magister sub forma predicta electus cum licenti^ Comitatus ad
Manerium meum de Wi^henore ante officii sui executione^ mittatur and Domino
ejusdem Manerii qui pro tempore fuerit se offer^ si quis fuerit de sanguine meo
dominus dicti Manerii pro tempore illo ^ causam sui adventus exponat, qui sine
exceptiore contra formam electi^ nis seu contra personam electam and absque
omni contradictione per pr^ dictum Dominum illius Mane^ii in Magistrum dicte
domus sit receptu^ Si autem Dominus ad dictum Manerium presens non extiterit,
suffici^ si Custodi dicti Manerii se presentet and causam sui adventus exponat.
^ autem contingat hereditatem meam inter sorores esse divisam seniori so ro^i
vel ejus heredibus dum de sanguine meo fuerint ad dictum Maneri um de Wichenore
dicti Magistri sub forma prescripta fiat presentatio: d^ ctus vero Magister cum
de predicto Manerio Oxon: redierit Cancellari^ vel ejus Commissario
Vniversitatis qui pro tum fuerit, Priori seu Custodi Monachorum Dunelm: Oxon:
studentium ibidem pro voluntate Domini Prioris Dunelm: deputato and duobus
Magistris extrinsecis assidentibu^ per Principalem and unum de senioribus vel
per duos seniores presentetur: a quibus sine contradictione omnimoda
confirmetur, coram quibu^ prestet juramentum corporale ordinationes and
constitutiones per dictu^ Dominum Philippum de consensu predictorum Scolarium
editas fideliter observare, and idem juramentum prestet ad Manerium de
Wiche^or^ coram domino predicti Manetii si tempore sui presentationis ^o^inus
dictus presens extiterit, Cancellario vero vel ejus Commissario, Priore seu
Custode Monachorum predicto aut dictis duobus Magistris extrinsecis in hac
part negligentibus vel alias qualitercunque predictam confirmationem expedire
nolentibus, hoc ipso quod eisdem ut predicitur sic electus presentatus fuerit
pro confirmato habeatur. Et Consimilis forma quoad admissionem cujuslibet dicte
domus electi ad intendendum Sacre Theology and quoad ejus receptionem coram
memorato Cancellario vel ejus Commissario Priore seu Custode Monachorum
predicto ac dictis duobus Magistris extrinsecis punctim observetur. Hoc etiam
in eadem domo specialiter observetur ut circa eos qui ad ^heologiam fuerint
eligendi diligenti sollicitudine caveatur ne qui vel quis preter honestum vel
honestos castos pacificos and humiles ad scientiam habiles ac proficere
volentes admittantur, quos per communitatem de Sociis dicte domus dum tamen in
artibus rexerint eligendos esse dispono sub hac forma. Convocet Magister domus
supradicte communitatem omnibus and singulis in Sacramento Domini prestito
firmiter injungendo quod fideliter and sine personarum acceptatione favore
omnimodo and affectione quacunque postpositis alium vel alios ad facultatem
predictam eligant quos verisimiliter per experientiam probabiles ad
proficiendum in facultate predicta magis habiles and morigeratos sciverint and
ille vel illi in quem vel in quos pars major communitatis consenserit ad
Theology auditionem sint electi. Si autem contingat aliquos de eligendis
paritatem vocum obtinere, senior secundum ejus statum in domo preferatur.
Electus vero vel electi ad intendendu^ Sacre Theology in sexto anno sue
auditionis opponat and per unum annum vel duos si videatur communitati expedire
oppositionem and in nono vel decimo anno Librum Sententiarum legate and in
duodecimo vel tertio decimo anno in eadem facultate incipere teneantur, nisi ex
causa legitima vel honesta impediatur. Audiat and Magister dicte domus
quamcunque Redditus, usually written here with a double dd.
facultatem voluerit. Sic etiam Numerus scolarium pro redditibus meis dicte
domui eligendorum ut predicitur quorum quilibet undecim denarios per manus sui
Magistri vel eo^um qui ad proventus dicte domus recipiendos vel reserandos
fuerint deputati percipiat, ita tamen quod singularium sociorum commune in
dicta domo ex aliis redditibus venientium ad undecim denarios per redditus meos
predictos augeantur. Si autem victualium Caristiam accidere contingat
singulorum so^iorum dicte domus commune secundum arbitrium Magistrum and
Communitatis ad quindecem denarios inclusive septimanatim accrescant. Volo
autem quod quilibet dictorum scolarium quatuor denarios percipiat pro
septimanis maxim festivis sicut in septimana natalis Domini and Pasche and
aliis consimilibus ultra id quod solebat per septimanam predictam percipere.
Magister siquidem cameram sibi soli habeat deputatam and garcionem sibi
ministrantem qui secundum ordinationem dicte communitatis suam sustentationem
percipiat de Communi. Quia vero extraneos ad dictam domum pro negotiis ejusdem
accedentes sepius a Magist^o re^ipi oportebit Dispono quod propter sic
accedentes and communitatis honestatem pro se and suis commensalibus si sibi
videbitur expediens in Camera propria prout aliis sociis ministratus mensam
minime excessivam habeat de communi and eo tempore duntaxat; nisi egritudinis
vel alterius cause rationabilis necessitas eum urgeat and compellat. Dictus
autem Magister quadraginta solidos pro suis necessariis annuatim de communi
percipiat cum facultates reddituum meorum ad hoc suffecerint quousque per me
vel per alios seu per communitatem pro eo commodius fuerit ordinatum. Dispono
etiam quod idem Magister juramentum prestet corporale ut de sua administratione
and de omnibus bonis dicte domui spectantibus coram communitate vel aliquibus
ad sua ratiocinia audienda per communitatem deputatis annis singulis die sancte
Margarete seu tempore aliquo per communitatem assignando fidelem reddat
rationem qui suo similiter ministerio interius and exterius prout rei qualitas
and temporis seu loci necessitas aut utilitas poposcerit solicit intendat,
qui etiam annis singulis omnia bona ad dictam domum spectantia per se vel per
alium de Sociis discretum ad hoc per communitatem electum si communitati
expediens visum fuerit visitet diligenter nec non and quantitate^ bonorum in
lo^is singulis estimet and taxet, ipsamque estimationem and taxationem
fideliter in scriptis redigat and redacta in scriptis Scolaribus dicte domus
deferat and assignet, ut deinde cum sua ratiocinia fuerint audienda fidelitas
ipsorum ratiociniorum ex collectione ipsius scripture certius valeat apparere.
Et computo dicti Magistri plenarie soluto si quod de bonis dicte domus ultra
expensas per communitatem allocatas residuum fuerit infra mensem a die
solutionis sui computi Thesaurariorum custody reddere seu cautione^ palam
exponer^ aut alio modo communitati satisfacere teneatur. Quorum si qua fuerit
residua partem in usum Sociorum and partem pro oneribus supportandis prout
Magister and communitas decreverit dispono converti. Si autem contingat dictum
Magistrum brevi egritudine infirmari, plena sibi portio sua pro rata
proportione temporis vel alia sustentatio competens and minime excessiva
ministretur de communi. Aliis vero Scolaribus predictis in predicta domo
insirmantibus ex tunc dummodo pro necessitate vel utilitate domus fuerint
destinati exhibitio consimilis fiat de communi. Si autem dicti Magistri
incurabilis fuerit egritudo, nec de ejus convalescentia spes extiterit ratione
cujus ipsum Magistrum circa domus negotia laborare non posse nec ut deceret
Magistratus officium exercere communitas decreverit, eo ipso suo cedere officio
teneatur, and secundum formam electionis Magistri prescriptam loco ejus alius
eligatur and sustentationem secundum arbitrium communitatis competentem pro suo
perpetuo habeat de communi. Si autem alicujus predictoru^ scolariu^ incurabilis
fuerit egritudo propter quod ad victum alias consequendum aptus non fuerit,
novem denarios extra domum septimanatim pro suo perpetuo de communi si quicquam
uberius alibi non obtinuerit ratione reddituum dicte domus per me collatorum
percipiat caritative, dum tamen ad hoc domus sufficiant facultates. Item ordino
and dispono quod quilibet socius in sua admissione prestet juramentum corporale
quod non procurabit perse nec per alios nec scienter faciet quo minus ad
Collegium aliud uberio^is exhibitionis in dicta universitate eligatur, quod si
ipsum ad Collegium aliud hujusmodi eligi contigerit eo ipso in ejus persona
cesset domus exhibitio supradicte. Magister tamen ipse ad hujus articuli
observationem se noscat non astringi. luret etiam quilibet socius in sua ad
dictum domum admissione quod jura and possessiones dicte domus ubique terrarum
pro suis viribus defendet and conservabit, and ad eorum meliorationem fideliter
laborabit and cum ad meliorem fortunam Deo dante pervenerint in licitis and
honestis promovebit and maxim in consisiliis and auxiliis pro defensione and
conservatio^e jurium dicte domus and eorum melioratione semper adhibendis, and
quotiens opus fuerit fidele consilium dicte domui si ab eo requiratur
constanter adhibebit. Si autem dictus Magister de patrimonio aut spiritualitate
seu quovis alio modo de certo ad valorem quadraginta librarum promotus fuerit
sui officii regimine ex tunc non utatur, and a beneficio dicte domus penitus
excludatur: eandem and formam pro quolibet alio socio si quovismodo predicto ad
valorem centum solidorum promotus fuerit ordino observari. Item cum dicti
Magistri industria honestas and diligentia preceteris necessaria sit and
oportuna ne per ejus negligentiam quod absit vel insolentiam dicte domui
eveniant dispendia aut pericula graviora premissis adjicio and dispono ut cum
Magister dicte domus qui pro tempore fuerit per dilapidationem bonorum domus
predicte inutilis aut sui officii negligens executor seu luxuriosus vel
notabiliter vitiosus ut inferius de sociis notatur repertus fuerit trina
monitione per Principalem de consensu communitatis legitim^ moneatur ut ab his
insolentiis and negligentiis se omnino compescat, qui si post trinam
incortigibilis appareat aut a predictis se abstinere neglexerit, de eo
Cancellario vel ejus Commissario and Priori seu Custodi and Magistris
extrinsecis supra-dictis fiat denunciatio qui de ejus excessibus and
processibus contra eum factis summarie informati ipsum sine dilatione qualibet
ab officio Magistratus ammoveant, qui si ad predicta facienda venire
recusaverint, vel quorum si quis noluerit infra triduum post legitimam
denunciationem eis factam Principali and dicte domus communitati liceat
Magistrum hujusmodi ab officio Magistratus deponere, and ipso deposito alium
loco illius forma vero predicta in Magistrum eligere. Si autem aliquis sociorum
predictorum homicidium aut adulterium furtum rapinam perjurium sacrilegium vel
simoniam vel aliquod grave delictum committat seu gravem lapsum carnis vel
notam turpitudinis aliquam inurat quod absit per que grave scandalum in dicta
domo po^erit suscitare, aut quisquam eorum rixosus seu jurgiorum inter so^ios
suscitator creber extiterit, vel eorundem socio^um atrox percussor aut quod
plus est Magistro vel Principali seu aliis intollerabilis in societate predicta
cum aliquo premissorum per facti notorietatem seu alias legitime fuerit
c^nvictus, transgressor hujusmodi a domo and exhibitione ejusdem penitus
excludatur. Insuper Magister dicte domus associatis sibi duobus de
antiquioribus and discretioribus scolaribus dicte communitatis omnes discordias
inter eosdem scolares exortas and omnium ^urgia sive delicta levia inter eosdem
existentia absque strepitu vel dilatione infra domum propriam eorundem prout
Magistro and illis antiquioribus videbitur audiant pacificent and decidant. Si
quis etiam disputationibus sue facultatis sive scolis diebus legibilibus vel
officiis divinis debito modo non intendat, vel si in villa vel extra villam in
tempore non debito fuerit vacabundus, vel si modo minus honest in
disputationibus mensa vel aliis actibus contra Magistrum vel socium se habeat,
ratione cujus scandalum vel incommodum domui predicte vel sociis notabiliter
eveniat, volo quod Magister predictus cum illis duobus sibi associatis
quemcunque in aliquo premissorum delinquentem invenerint puniat corrigat and
remedium imponat prout qualitas delicti secundum eorum estimationem
rationaliter id exposcat. Et si quis eorum ordinationi parere noluerit
persubstractionem Commune sue per quindenam puniatur. Si quis autem hujusmodi
transgressor pro suis forsan demeritis per Magistrum and sibi assidentes tertia
vice legitime correctus and per suarum communarum substractionem totiens
punitus se ab hujusmodi malifi^iis refrenare noluerit tanquam incorrigibilis
and rebellis a dicta societate finaliter expellatur. Ejectis autem a domo
prefata omne beneficium dicte domus and participatio bonorum ipsius penitus
denegetur, and eis ratione ammotionis seu ejectionis hujusmodi contra Magistrum
domus dicte aut scolares, seu quoscunque alios de dicta domo aliqua actio
competat vel regressus sive agendo sive appellando sive querimoniam deponendo
sive in integrum* restitutionem petendo sive cujuscunque curie sive secularis
sive ecclesiastice literas obtinendo seu literis a quibuscunque vel per
quoscunque obtentis utendo contra suam ammotionem memoratam qu^ntumcunque. Si
alias probitatis and vite merita suffragentur ne bona dicte domus in levibus
inaniter expendantur. Item in ammotione dicti Magistri cum ex causis superius
annotatis fuerit ammotus censeo observandum and istud in admissione sua a
quolibet sit juratum. Ne autem ob crimina leviora ut superius expressum est vel
offensas leves ejectis aut studium desiderantibus omnis denegetur humanitas si
in posterum dig^^s penitentie fructus egerint, and Magistrum seu scolares domus
supradicte agendo vel appellando aut per modos alios superius nominatos
occasion sue objectionis nequaquam procurave^int molestari, seque ad loca and
beneficia ipsius domus humiliter petierint de novo admittantur ea ex speciali
gratia premissis non obstantibus si poterint concedi si hoc Magistro and
scolaribus videatur expediens. Ordino etiam quod per preces vel literas
alicujus domini nullus in socium predicte domus admittatur nec pensio alicui
per preces vel literas alicujus magnatum ratione redituum meorum penitus
conferatur. Capellanum siquidem in do^o supradicta esse decerno and censeo
tempore perpetuo moraturum qui per me and heredes meos dicte domui presentetur
and a Magistro and sociis absque contradictione aliqua admittatur dum tamen
idoneus fuerit and honestus pro me and sponsa mea pro anima domini Rogeri de
Somervyle pro venerabili patre domino Ricardo Dunelm: Episcopo heredibus meis
and parentibus nec non and dicte domus benefactoribus in perpetuum
celebraturus, qui se inter scolares dicte domus tolerabiliter honest and
modeste se gesserit ac dicto ministerio diligenter va^averit in dicta domo
perpetuo ^i voluerit conversetur omnem domus exhibitionem quoad victum and
cameram quam aliquis de scolaribus predictis ut superius decretum est
percepe^it pro tempore more sue in dicta domo integraliter percepturus. Quem si
publica turpitudinis nota involuerit prout de aliquo sociorum quoad ejus
correptionem and correctionem and a dicta domo finalem expulsionem nec non
occasion sue ammotionis Ammotio, herein always written with a double m m.
actionem statuta de socio vel de sociis ejiciendo vel ejiciendis prescripta
sine contradictione mei nedum meorum seu cujuscunque alterius titulo vel nomine
strictius observentur. Quo ejecto vel decedente si nec per heredes meos alius
dicte domui loco illius intra mensem postquam nobis de ejus recessu constiterit
presentetur, ad predictum Magistrum and scolares dicte domus capellani
electionem quotienscunque sic contingentem solummodo spectare dispono, qui
electus sic ut predicitur celebrabit, and si quem capellanum per me presentatum
vel per me vel heredes meos presentandum semper predictos Magistrum and
scolares eligendum ad servitia dicta ei incumbentia adimplenda ex causa
quacunque aptus non fuerit, a dicta domo and exhibitione ejusdem ammoveri
dispono, and alium loco ejus forma ut predicitur subroga^i. Capellanus vero pro
me and sponsa mea quamdiu vixerimus in omni die trium lectionum pre^erquam a
Pascha usque ad festum Sancte Trinitatis, utendo illo officio Salus Populi cum
propria collecta secret; and postill: eidem officio pertinent: celebret. In
aliis vero festis novem lectionum and duplicibus nec non in festis prius
exceptis de aliis Sanctis prout sibi videbitur opo^tunum eidem liceat
celebrate, In quibus nisi magnum duplex festum fuerit, post primam collectam,
collectam specialem dicat and in suo operimento pro nobis suppliciter and
devote exoret. Si autem me viam universe carnis ingredi contingat sponsa mea
vivente, missam de Requiem cum propriis collectis and Placebo and Surge cum
commendatione omni die trium lectionum pro salute anime me forma ut predicitur
and omnium fidelium defunctorum celebret devote aliquam collectam pro salute
sponse me quamdiu ipsa vixerit jugiter di^endo. Utroque autem nostrum viam
universe carnis ingresso Missa de Requiem pro nobis and personis predictis ac
pro omnibus benefactoribus domus supradicte forma ut predicitur per predictum
Capellanu devoti^s celebretur. Insuper singulis annis die anniversarii obitus
mei Missa de Requiem cum nota and Placebo and direge precede^tibus pro salute
anime me and omniu^ fideliu^ defunctoru^ celebretur. Cui miss and exequiis
singuli socii qui pro te^pore fuerint teneantur personaliter interesse.
Consimilis aute^ forma quoad anniversaria^ sponse me dilecte Margarete penitus
observetur. Ad hec quidem omnia and singula prescripta fideliter observa^da
quilibet Capellanus per me and heredes meos dicte domui presentatus vel
presentandus seu per communitatem electus vel elegendus dicta officia forma ut
predicitur celebraturus tactis Sacrosanctis corporale prestet juramentum. Juret
etiam Capellanus sua ad domum admissione secreta domus clam vel palam nemini
revelare unde damnum vel scandalum dicte domui socio vel sociis poterit
evenire. Qui etiam in sua ad domum admissione renunci per verba expressa omni
future Actioni Juris rem^dio cujuscunque tam Canonici quam consuetudinarii and
civilis si forsan ob sua demerita a dicta domo ipsum ejici contingat in
futurum. Juret etiam omnes ordinationes per me pro profectu dicte domus and
honestate ordinatas and quecunque alia privilegia dicte domu^ quantum in eo
fuerit observare. Item habeant dicti scolares qualibet die Sabbati missam cum
nota de Beata Virgin, quando aliam missa^ cum nota celebrate seu in Ecclesia
Parochiali vel alibi in missis Vniversitatis non teneantur. Cui miss in
honorem gloriose Virginis celebrat^ omnes Capellani intrinseci nisi ex causa
legitima fuerint impediti ceteri^u^ socii dicte domus quos propter actus
scolasticos seu propter aliam causa^ legitimam coram Magistro vel locum ejus
tenente approbatam minim^ impediri contigerit interesse teneantur. Quam quidem
missam Capell^nus celebraturus and quilibet al^us Capellanus domus predicte in
Capell^ eorum celebraturi pro me and sponsa mea teneantur specialiter exorar^
Ceterum omni die Veneris quando illam antiphonam antedictam in dicta Capella
cantari contigerit and in gratiis in mensa dicendis nomen meum and sponse me
per Capellanum seu aliquem so^ium dicte domus inte^ nomina precipuorum
benefactorum recitentur, p^o nobis specialiter exorando. Illud insuper est
attendendum quod si locus habitationis seu scolarium predictorum studio
vacantium congregatio causis aliquibus eme^gentibus que facile numerari non
poterunt ad locum alium transferat^ nihil eis commodi, juris vel possessionis
depereat in predictis redditib^ vel rebus aliis sibi assignatis vel deinceps ex
pia largitione fidelium assignandis, sed omnia eis nihilominus integra
remaneant durentque he ordinationes he and alie in posterum promulgande atque
previleg^a ipsi dom^ concessa and futuris temporibus concedenda dum tamen hanc
ordinationem tam re quam nomine teneant and observent, sic tamen quod nome^
fundationis antiquum Collegium non admittat sed sicut prius domus d^ Balliolo
nominetur. Nec est intentionis me eorum fundationem antiquam aut regulas vel
statuta tollere sed ea potius presentibus confirmare: and si quid Contrarium
legibus dictorum scolarium statutis vel consuetudinibu^ antiquis ad quas vel
que dicte scolares fuerint ^urati in hac ordinatione me^ compertum fuerit, nolo
dictos Scolares ad illud observandum aliquate^^s obligari, sed antiqua ^o non
obstante firmitur observentur. Sicut autem in premissis sex socios eligi
ratione reddituum per me dicte domui collatorum ordinaverim and quemlibet
socium and Cappellanum undecim denarios 11 d. per week then, 18 s. now. 40 s.
then, above 40 l. now: which two things made the Masters place above 60 l. per
annum, besides Chambers and all Perquisites.
septi^anatim, and Magistrum quadraginta solidos ultra communas suas pro suis
necessariis de bonis dicte domus ratione reddituum predictorum una cum augmento
communarum forma ut predicitur ordinaverim. Volo tamen and ordino quod omnia
and singula in premissis ordinata observentur, sicut and quatenus ad hoc domus
supradicte per me caritative collate sufficiant facultates. Premissis etiam
adjiciendo decerno quod si redditus in present dicte domui assignati aut in
posterum ex pia largitione fidelium assignandi excreverint numerus scolarium in
dicta domo studio Theology vacantium, quatenus augeri poterit augeatur. nisi
de conferendis in futurum per donatores ipsos aliter contigerit ordinari. Et ne
aliqui de scolaribus predictis ignorantiam horum futuris temporibus quovismodo
pretenderent statuo quod singulis annis in festo Sancte Margarete presens
scriptum coram omnibus publi^e recitetur. Item Statuo ordino and ad premissa
adjicio quod Prior seu Custos Monachorum Dunelmensium Oxon: studentium per
Priorem Dunelm: prefectus Collega sit in omnibus Cancellario predicto vel ejus
Commissario tam in admissione quam confirmatione Electi in Magistrum dicte
domus de Balliolo and prestatione juramenti de ammotione ejusdem Magistri in
casu quo fuerit ammovendus de quibus supra fit mentio nec non and illorum quos
continget eligi ad insistendum Theology facultate. Ipse quoque Prior seu
Custos cum dicto Cancellario vel ejus Commissario exerceat omnia que circa
dictos electos fuerint exercenda: sic autem idem Prior seu Cu^^os una cum
Magistris intrinsecis quibus dicte sex scolares vel plures si bona excreverint
presentari debent cum eligantur, plenam quoque potestatem cum aliis Magistris
habeat ad eosdem scolares examinandum admittendum vel etiam repellendum and ad
omnia alia exercenda circa eosdem que circa alios scolares in eadem aula
existentes per dictos Magistros extrinsecos exercere consueverint tempore
retroacto. Volo insuper statuo and dispono quod Episcopi Dunelmenses qui pro
tempore fuerint prefatos Magistrum and scolares ad denunciationem dicti Prioris
seu Custodis Monachorum Dunelmensium ad observantiam premissorum quoad
electionem sex scolarium and Capellani ratione reddituum per me collatorum ad
presens nec non ad nume^u^^ studentium in casu excrescentie reddituum eorundem
cum acciderint ut premittitur ampliandum ac quod omnia alia and singula
superius expressata possint compellere viis and modis canonicis prout sibi
magis videbitur expedite. In quorum omnium testimonium and perpetuam firmitatem
tria instrumenta tenoris consimilis sunt confecta. Quorum cuilibet sigilla
Reverendi Patris Domini Ricardi Dei gratia Dunelm: Episcopi Religiosorum
vi^orum dominorum Prioris and capituli Dunelm: venerabilis viri domini
Cancellarii Universitatis Oxon: and Magistri and scolarium Aule de Balliolo
predictorum una cum sigillo meo apponi procuravi. Quorum etiam instrumentorum
unum penes dictos Priorem and Conventum aliud penes prefatos Magistrum and
scolares tertium vero penes heredes and a^^ignatos meos volo ordino and dispono
perpetuo remanere. Et nos Ricardus permissione divina Dunelmensis Episcopus ad
rogationem Domini Philippi ac Magistri and scolarium predictorum ad
corroborationem statutorum seu ordinationum predictorum quatenus rite and
canonice sunt e^ita quatenus ad nos pertinet sigillum nostrum decimo octavo die
mensis Octobris, Anno Domini Millesimo CCCmo quadrage^^mo in Mannerio nostro de
Dukeland presentibus duximus apponendum. Jure consnetudine and dignitate
nostris and Ecclesie nostre Dunelmensis in omnibus semper saluis. Et nos Prior
Ecclesie Dunelmensis and ejusdem loci conventus omnia and singula supradicta
rationabiliter statuta ordinata and decreta per Dominum Philippum memoratum ac
autoritate pontificasi dicti reverendi patris ut premittitur roborata ad
instantiam dicti domini Philippi Magistri and scolarium prefatorum quantum in
nobis est de nostro consensu unanimi ac appositione Sigilli nostri communis
Capituli Du^^lm approbamus ratificamus and etiam confirmamus Dat: in domo
nostra capitulari Dunelm: vicesimo quarto die mensis octobris Anno Domini
supradicto. Et nos Cancellarius Universatis antedicte ad rogatum dictorum
domini Philippi Magistri and scolarium domus supradicte in testimonium
premissorum quatenus rite and legitime sunt ordinata in crastino purificationis
beat Marie anno supradicto sigillum officii nostri presentibus apposuimus. Et
nos Magister and scolares domus supradicte submittentes nos and domum no^tram
de Balliolo predictam ex certa scientia pure sponte jurisdictioni and
correctioni venerabilis in Christo Patris Domini Dei grat^a Dunelm: Episc: qui
pro tempore fuerit quod ecclesiam de Micklebenton and quoad omnia alia and
singula supradicta nos and dictam ecclesiam contingentia jurisdictionem
predicti venerabilis patris scienter in corroborationem confirmationem and
perpetue rei firmi^a^em omnium and singulorum superius expressoru sigillum
nostru^ com^^me presentibus duximus apponendum Dat: Oxon: in Au^a de Balliolo
in crastino purificationis beat Marie Anno Dom: supradicto. Nos igitur
Edwardus Rex Scotorum antedictus ac Magistri and scolarium aule sive domus de
Balliolo in Oxon: ab antiquo fundator dictam cartam atque statuta in eadem
contenta omnia and singula tanquam juri congrua and rationi consona approbamus
ratificamus and quantum in nobis estpro nobis and successoribus nostris
confirmamus non obstantibus quibus^unque statutis contra^iis privilegiis seu
consuetudinibus ab antecessoribus nostris ante hec tempora editis concessis
approbatis seu confirmatis. In quorum omnium testimonium Sigillum nostrum
presentibus fecimus apponendum. Dat.

To these Statutes thus confirmed by Edward Balliol, is put the Seal of Sir
Philip Somervyle, which is a Field (Semee) powdered with Crosses Fichees,
charged with Three Spread-Eagles: wherein it is provided, amongst other things,
That nothing contrariant to the Statutes of the first Foundation be binding to
these: of which sort, are the Rules given to Fellows to be chosen to the
profession of Divinity, when once they become Regents; and after so many Years,
to become Bachelors in Divinity, etc. as having no Foundation in, but rather
overthrowing the Statutes of Dervorgille, which allow neither Masters nor
Bachelors in Divinity to be in the House; the rigor whereof was fain to be
taken off by the Pope himself, as has been said. But to take things in that
order as they are in these Statutes of Sir Philip, the first for our purpose,
is, That over and above the 16 Fellows, which had of old been in the House, the
Fellows wete to choose six Scholars, born in places nearest to the site of the
Lands by him given, and those the poorest, the best and the greatest
Proficients. 2. They were to choose a Master by a formal Election, to be called
by the Principal or his Vicegerent; which Master was no sooner elected, then
they were bound to present him: 1. To the Lords of the Manor of Wicknore in
Northumberland (so long as they were of the Posterity of the said Sir Philip.)
2. To the Chancellor of the University of Oxon, or to his Commissary. 3. To the
Warden of the Monks of Durham (now Trinity College) and others, Masters of
Art: who without all contradiction were to admit him. The which Durham
College, or place of the Monks of Guil: Camden and alii perstringuntur.
Durham, Mr. Camden in his Britania will have to be built and endowed by Thomas
Hatfeild Bishop of Durham: so also Godwin of Bishops (in the Life of the said
Thomas Hatfeild) Pitsaeus and others whom they follow. Which Durham College,
Pitsaeus says, was for eight Monks and seven Clerks, to be placed there at the
discretion of the Prior of Durham: But they had a Prior of their own, as is
evident from these Statutes.
Put it is clear to be otherwise from the very date of these Statutes, which was
Anno Dom: 1340. whereas Durham College, pretended to be built by the said
Hatfeild, was Founded Anno 1350. and Hatfeild himself not advanced to be Bishop
of that Sea before about 1345. But it is yet more evident, in that these
Statutes were confirmed (as we see) by Richard (that is Richard Bury) Bishop of
that Sea, and immediate Predecessor to the aforesaid Thomas, which had been 10
Years before the Foundation of Hatfeilds pretended College, had the same been
of no greater Antiquity, and so our Master had been to be presented to a mere
Idea: And therefore that which the said Bishop Godwin, in the Life of the said
Learned and pious Prelate Richard Bury aforesaid, says to be an erroneous
Tradition, is a very truth, or nearer to it then the other; namely, That the
said Richard Founded the said Durham College, unto the Warden or Prior whereof
[by reason of the dependence of him and his Society upon the Priory of the
Cathedral of Durham] our Master was to be presented. But that which takes away
the Bone from both of them, is that noted Sect. 18. viz. The Land given by
Pomfrait and Humbleton, 3 Ed. 2. Anno Dom. 1309, bounded one way by the Lands
of the Monks of Durham, which was 39 Years before either of the terms
forementioned. Add hereunto the Land passed over by Sa^cer to Fodringheye,
Sect. 18. which was Anno 1282. and therefore 27 Years more, and consequently 66
before Hatfields or Bury's time. But to return, they were in the third place to
choose six Fellows out of the whole number for the study of Divinity, whereof
they were to be capable as soon as they became Regents: and the Parties so
Elected, in the sixth Year of their Election, were to oppose; and in the ninth
or tenth Year, to read the Master of the Sentences [which answers to our
Reading the Epistles of St. Paul, and is the Formality of a Bachelor in
Divinity] unless hindered by some lawful and reasonable cause. Fourthly, They
were to remember the Benefactors in the Grace, as well as Offices. Fifthly, Of
the Chaplains which were then diverse, they were to have one perpetual in the
House to be chosen by Sir Philip and his Heirs, etc. Sixthly, The number of
Scholars to be designed for Divinity, were to increase according to the
increase of the Revenues [provided that his Scholars, and those of the ancient
Foundation, had 11 d. per week] unless future Benefactors should otherwise
Ordain. Lastly, The Bishops of Durham [to whose Jurisdiction the College did
submit] had power given them to enforce the due execution of the Premises, upon
information given by the Prior or Warden of the Monks of Durham aforesaid.

SECT. 25.
Now the Beneficies of Fillingham, Risom and Bratleby, in the County of
Lincoln, did once belong to the Abbot and Convent of the Monastery of the Holy
Trinity at Aurenches [so Exaquium is called in a French Deed] in the Diocese of
Constance in Normandy, of the Order of the Benedictines. But in regard of the
Troubles at Sea, occasioned chiefly by the Wars between the two Kingdoms, the
Bishop of Constance aforesaid, at their Instance, gave License to sell the said
Livings, as appears under his Seal in Writing, dated Mar: 3. 1343. And Thomas
Cave Rector of Welwick, for the good affection he bare to the Master and 100 l.
then, as good as 1500 l. now.
Scholars of the House of Balliol in Oxon, had left in the hands of William
Brocklesby Clerk, 100 l. sterling, to buy these three Benefices; that out of
the Profits thereof, in case they might be transferred to the proper use of the
said Master and Scholars, the number of the Scholars might be increased: All
which, will appear by this following Indenture, which is the very first Record
wherein Balliol is written with a single L.

He Indentura testatur quod cum Magister Thomas Cave Rector Ecclesie de
Welwick, ob affectionem quam habuit versus Magistrum and Scolares domus de
Baliolo in Oxon: liberasset Wilhelmo de Broclesby clerico centum libras
sterlingorum ad emendum ad opus dictorum Magistri and Scolarium de Abbate and
Conventu de Exaquio in Normannia advocationes Ecclesiarum de Fylingham,
Brotleby and Rysum, in Com: Lincoln, ac idem Thomas jam defunctus in Testamento
suo ordinasset inter cetera quod si dicti Magister and Scolare dictas
advocationes habere and easdem Ecclesias in proprios usus adjungere possent,
quod de fructibus earundem numerus s^ola^ium augeretur ibidem. Ita tamen quod
ipsi servent regulas and statuta prime fundationis domus predicte, dictus
Wilhelmus de Broclesby qui cognovit se recepisse pecuniam predictam ex causa
predicta obligat se and executores suos ad solutionem dictarum centum librarum
p^o dictis advocationibus emendis ad opus Magistri and scolarium in omnibus
prout superius continetur. Ita tamen quod dicti Magister and scolares inveniant
securitatem predicto Wilhelmo de Broclesby ac heredibus and executoribus
predicti Magistri Thome ad augmentandum numerum scolarium in dicta domo quam
cito appropriationem dictarum ecclesiarum vel aliquarum earundem fuerint
assecuti juxta facultates and valorem ecclesiarum appropriatarum vel ecclesie
appropriate in hac part. Videlicet augen*do numerum suum de tot scolaribus
quot de exitibus and proficuis dicta*rum ecclesiarum seu alicujus earundem de
claro proventibus ad opus di*ctorum Magistri and scolarium poterunt
rationabiliter sustentari: qui^ etiam in dicto Testam^to continetur quod dictus
Magister Thomas volui*in eventu quo dicte advocationes ad opus dictorum
Magistri and scolarium adquiri non possent, quod dicte centum libre
liberarentur pauperibu^ scolaribus infra domum predictam de Baliolo, Ita quod
numerus scolari*um ibidem augeretur juxta discretionem dicti Wilhelmi de
Broclesby* Idem Wilhelmus volens implere voluntatem dicti Magistri Thome in ha^
part co^cedit solvere prefatis Magistro and scolaribus in eventu quod dict^
advocationes adquiri non poterunt, dictas centum libras in forma predicta. Ita
tamen quod dicti Magister and scolares eandem pecuniam ponant sub bona custodia
and eam servari faciant quousque aliquas possessione^ inde adquirere possint
pro augmentatione numeri scolarium in eadem domo: and quod quam cito aliquas
possessiones inde adquisiverint ipsi recipiant scolares in majori numero in
eandem domum and ^os sustentabu^ prout ipse possessiones adquirende ad hoc
rationabiliter sufficere va^eant. Et nihilomin^s ipse Magister and scolares
facient a die dat: hujus inden*ture in futurum aliqua specialia suffragia pro
anima ejusdem Thome i^ Missis celebrandis and aliis orationibus faciendis in
domo predicta. Proviso semper quod si amissio in Mari vel itinere vel alia
casualitas fiat (...) pecunia predicta dum tame^ ide^ Wilhelm: non fuerit in
culpa, quod ipse ve^ executores sui inde versus dictos Magistrum and scolares
non onerentur and quod expense necess^rie and solutiones ex hac causa fact
eidem Wilhelmo and executoribus suis allocentur prout idem Wilhelmus and
executores sui dicere veli^t super sac^ament^m suum. In cujus rei testimonium
fit hoc scriptum indentatum. Unde parti penes dictum Wilhelmum remanenti
sigillum commune dicte domus de Baliolo apponitur and altera pars ejusdem
indenture penes predictos Magistrum and scolares sigillo predicti Wilhelmi
remanet roborata. Dat: Londini quinto die Martii, Anno Dom. Millesimo
trecentesimo quadragismo secundo. 1342.

Now these three Benefices were accordingly bought, and the Appropriation
thereof to the Master and Scholars, and their successors, is warranted by many
Writings, particularly by two Letters Patents of King Edw: one to give License
for selling and buying of them; the other for the confirmation of the Purchase
to the College, upon the conditions aforesaid. The first whereof I omit: the
later is as follows.

Edwardus Dei gratia Rex Anglie and Francie and Dominus Hibernie:
Omnibus ad quos presents litere prevenerint salutem.
Sciatis quod cum sexto decimo di^ Maii, Anno Regni uostri Anglie sexto decimo
de gratia nostra speciali concesserimus and licentiam dederimus pro nobis and
heredibus nostris quantum in nobis fuit Abbati and Conventui de Exaquio in
Normannia quod quod ipsi de advocationibus Ecclesiarum de Filyngham, Brotleby
and Rysom, in Com: Lincoln, Feoffare, possent Wilhelmum de Broclesby, and
Thomam de Cave Clericos, habend: and tenend: eisdem Wilhelmo and Thome and
Heredibus suis de capitalibus dominicis feodi illius in perpetuum, and eisdem
Wilhelmo and Thome quod ipsi advocationes predictas a prefatis Abbate and
Conventu recipere and tenere possent sibi and heredibus suis predictis sicut
predictum est. Similiter Licentiam dederimus specialem eo non obstante quod
advocationes predicte in (...) nostra inter ceteras possessiones Religiosorum
alienigen^rum de pot^state Francie existunt: and insuper concesserimus eisdem
Wilhelmo and Thome quod ipsi advocationes predicta^ dare possint and assignare
dilectis nobis Magistro and scolaribus de la Baliolhalle Oxon: habend: and
tenend: prefato Magistro and scolaribus and successoribus suis in perpetuum:
Ita quod ipsi recepti^ advocationibus illis ecclesias illas appropriare and ea^
sic appropriat^s in proprios u^^^ tenere possent sibi and successoribus sui^ ut
predictum est. Statut^ de terris and tenementis ad manum mortuam non ponendis
edito non obstante. Ac prefati Abb^s and Conventus postmodum unanimi consensu
per scriptum suum dederint and concess^rint prefato Wilhelmo, dicto* Thoma tuno
defuncto, advocationes predictas cum omnibus juribus and pertinentiis
spectantibus ad easdem habend: and tenend eidem Wilhelmo heredibus ac
assignatio suis in perpetuum: dictu^que Wilhelmus pen carta^^ suam advocationes
easdem cum omnib^^ j^nibu^ and pertinenti^^ suis predictis Hugoni de Corbriggt
Magistre scolarium an^^ predicte and so^iis (...) scolaribus ejusdem aule
habend: and tenend: sibi and successoribus suis. Jam dederit similiter and
concess^rit virtute concession^^ nostraru^ and Licentie predicte prout premissa
(...) in nost^is literis, quam predictorum Abbatis and Conventus ac ipsius
Wilhelmi scripto and Carta predictis before exprimuntur. Nos ex abundanti and
ut predicta ceteris evidentius liqueant tum donatio^^m and concessionem
predictorum Abbatis and Conventus quam donationem and Concessionem ipsius
Wilhelmi predictorum ratas habentes and gratas eas pro nobis and heredibus
nostris sicut superius annotantur acceptamus approbamus confirmamus and
concessimus perpresentes. In cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras fecimus
fieri patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium vicesimo octavo die Februarii Anno regni
nostri Angl: decimo octavo, Reg: in vero nostri Francie quinto.

These Letters Patents did Queen Eliz: totidem verbis, confirm, together with
all other Letters Patents made by her Predecessors in favor of this College,
under her Great Seal: Which, with other Letters Patents of the same Queen
hereafter to be mentioned, are enclosed together in one long Charter Box, or
black Case. But so it was, that Fylingham, the most considerable of all the
three, the Masters of the House holding by Presentation, and Dr. Piers Master
thereof being Incumbent, He did let a Lease of 99 Years of the whole Rectory,
13 Eliz. for the Rent of 22 pound per annum, to be paid to the Master who was
then to be Incumbent, the Lessee being obliged to pay the Curate. Here then I
shall insert all Acts material that have been made in the premises, recorded
upon our Register according to the dates they bear.

Ordinatum and constitutum est ex consensu Reverendissi^i in Christo ^atris
permission^ divina Lincoln Episc: Collegii nostri de Baliolo in Universitate
Oxon: Visitatoris Magistri Francisci Babington Sacre Theology Professoris,
Magistri sive Custodis dicti Collegii, and omnium sociorum ejusdem: Anno Dom.
1560. and Anno Regni Domine Elizabethe Dei Gratia Angl: Francie and Hibernie,
Regine fidei defensoris, etc. Secundo die vero Augusti vices^^o. Vt [ob diversa
incommoda nostro Collegio de Baliolo predicto ex crebra Magistrorum sive
Custodum mutatione and discessione incidentia] quoties and quandocnnque
post-hac Rectoria nostra de Fylingham, Lincoln: Dioces: ad nostram donationem
and presentaetionem spectans vacare contigerit, jnxta statutum de Magistri
residentia Magistro sive Custodi offeratur and donet^r. Ita tamen ut quocunque
modo a dicto Collegio quilibet post-hac futurus Magister sive Custos nostri
Collegii discesserit sive per liberam resignation^m sive per justam privationem
predictam Rectoriam etiam cum omnibus suis juribus and pertinentiis dicto
Collegio relinquat impropriat^m Magistro Collegii perpetuis futuris temporibus
si fieri possit. Preterea quisque ita discedens s^lvet dicte Domine Regi^e
heredibus and assignatis suis Heriotam ut vocant and finem pro terris nostris
in veteri Woodstock and Wootton in Com: Oxon: predict: pro qualibet mutatione
and discessione Magistri sive Custodi^ a dicto Collegio pro consuitudine
debita. Ad cujus ejusdem observationem Magister sive Custos quiscunque fuerit
in prima sua admissione Visitatori admittents dabit fidem, etc.

per me Franciscum Babington, Magistrum Coll: Ball: Oxon. per me Ric:
Shaughues. per me Arthurum Garcew. per me Radulphum Lathmum.



About 10 Years after this, it was that Dr. Piers aforesaid, made the
forementioned Lease, beariug date Febr: 26. 1570. but according to the
College Register, it was 1571. and indeed it was not to commence till St.
Marks day following, which was in the Year 1571. Whereupon a Decree was made by
the Bishop of Lincoln, the Master and Fellows; as follows.

Anno Dom: 1571. die vero Maii 17.
A Magistro and Sociis Collegii de Balliolo in Vniversitate Oxon: cum assensu
Reverendi in Christo Patris Thome Lincolniensis Epis: ejusdem Collegii
visitatoris ordinatum Statutum and pro se suisque successoribus perpetuis
futuris temporibus decretum est, ut quicunque in posterum Magister sive Custos
predicti Collegii futurus est, is antequam ad officii executionem in dicto
Collegio admittatur, juramento Visitatori in prima sui admissione prestito
firmiter se obstring at ista se observaturum. Prim^ quod Rectoriam de
Fillingham in Com: Lincoln: predict: quandocunque eadem a Sociis Collegii
predicti offeratur, acceptabit, nec eam recusabit ullo modo aut ulla de Causa
quamdiu dicti Collegii Magister extiterit. Secundo quod eandem Rectoriam nulla
de causa resignabit aut relinquet quamdiu ipse Magister existit dicti Collegii:
Quandocunque tamen a dicti Collegii Gubernatione sive per resignationem sive
per deprivationem aut ulla alia de causa recedet, suum justitulum and clameum
in eadem Rectoria resignabit and relinquet intra unum ^ensem proxime sequentem.
Tertio quod quamdiu dictus Magister predictam Rectoriam de Fyllingham habuerit
persolvet singulis annis in tres publica^ Lectiones in Communi Aula ejusdem
Collegii habendas, viz. Graecam Dialecticam Rhetoricam Octo libras tr^decim
solidos and quatuor den^rios prelectoribus earundem Lectionum qui in dicto
Collegio eisdem die modo and forma quibus coteri ejusedem Collegii officiarii
eligentur, aequa portione ad quatuor usitatos anni terminos distribuendas.
Proviso tamen quod iis duobus annis quibus primitiae sive primi fructus ejusdem
Rectoriae persolvendi sunt, dicti prelectores sex libris contentierunt, eisdem
modo and temporibus quibus supradictu^ est persolvend^^. Et ut hec decreta
perpetuo observentur dictus Reverendus Pater Lincoln: Episc: and Magister
Sociique Collegii predicti nomina sua subscripserunt.

Thomas Lincoln. Adam Squier. Johannes Tunkis. Adam Hill. Robert Persons.
Johannes Wilson.



Wherefore, Anno 1659. the College called George Saunderson Baronet, Lord
Viscount Castleton, the Lessee of Fillingham, and the Incumbent Mr. Ra:
Hollingworth into Chancery, to the end that discovery might be made thereby, by
what warranty they held so considerable a thing, so much to the prejudice of
the Foundation, without Rent or Acknowledgement? Whereunto my Lord Castleton
demurred: But Mr. Hollingworth answered, That he knew not any Title we had
thereunto; which how truly, may appear not only by the Premises, and upon our
own Register, wherein his Suit with my Lord Castleton [with the very state of
the Case it self] is recorded, but also by the said Hollingworths own Letter,
which is as follows.

To the Right Worshipfnll Dr. LAWRENCE, Master of Baliol College, in Oxon
these present, or in his absence to his Vicegerent.
Worthy Sir,
All due respects premised, having very good hopes now to overthrow that
unreasonable and most unconscionable long Lease of the Parsonage of Fillingham,
whereof your College is Patron, I am bold to crave your assistance, as
heretofore I did from Dr. Parkhust and the then Fellows, in my former
chargoble Suit, whom I ever found ready in that kind, as some I suppose of your
now Fellows may well remember. Nor indeed does it make only for my benefit,
but for the Colleges also, to have the said Lease overthrown, there being many
Years yet to come therein. Neither do I desire to put you to any charge, but
only request, That I may have Dr. Pierce's admission to the Mastership of the
College by the Bishop of Lincoln, Anno 1570. mense Maii, as I remember, under
Seal to show in evidence before the Judges, as I had it before, being a very
material thing in the Case, and I shall faithfully return i^ again to the
College as I did before, either by this Bearer Mr. Ellis, or his Father, or
whom you shall be pleased to appoint, and ever remain,

Yours, in all good Offices to be commanded, Rod: Hollingworth.
Land: June 2. 1647.

In which Letter, he very truly professes the Patronage of the said Benefice to
remain in us, and our readiness to assist him in the overthrowing of the Lease,
etc. For my Lord of Lincoln, Williams (whose Chaplain Mr. Hollingworth was) did
by his Letter to the Master and Fellows [at the reading whereof I was present]
signify, That the said Living was in the Lapse, with desire that we would give
Mr. Hollingworth a Presentation; and if so, then his Lordship would add only a
Corroboration thereof, to the end that the College might not suffer in their
right to the Advowson: which desire of his Lordship we yielded unto, and gave
him a Presentation under Seal. But what use he made thereof, I cannot say: but
two of our Fellows did afterward travel to Lincoln Assizes to testify on his
behalf, where Mr. Hollingworth obtained only a special Verdict; the which
(Troubles coming on) enforced Mr. Hollingworth to a Composition. But it seems
by the aforesaid Letter, that in 1647. he revived his Suit, and then brought my
Lord to terms, which, as I have heard, made up Mr. Hollingworth's allowance, in
all, to be worth 60 l. per annum, with the 22 l. per annum reserved upon the
Lease. And whether this were well performed to him, or he pleased with the
allowance, I cannot say; but so it was, that, since the King came in, he tried
another fall with my Lord Castleton, who, at the Assizes, laid him on his back
upon a mere misnomer: for he writing himself sometimes Rodolphus, sometimes
Radulphus, sometimes Radolphus, his Adversaries found out that he had been
presented by the one, and brought his Action by the other: He offering to
justify them to be all one, whereunto the Judge is said to have replied, That
then Joan Both derived from the same Original.
and Jane were both one name. [He was either surprised in the business, or else
he wanted a good and able Lawyer to extricate him out of that present
difficulty; such was St. Ives in the matter of his poor Hostess at Tours in
France. We read in the Annals of Britania Armorica, written in French by Alan
Bouchard, but afterward augmented and Printed in French at Paris, 1531. that
in the Year 1303. this St. Ives was eminent, born in the Bishopric of
Treguier, one of the nine in Britany aforesaid, all whose Bps. are suffragans
to the Archbishop of Tours: He is famous (amongst other things) for pleading
the cause of that his Hostess, a poor Widow of Tours, against two crafty
Merchants, who delivered her a full Purse, upon condition that she should not
deliver it to either singly, unless they came both together. A little after,
one of them, under pretext of an urgent necessity, required the Purse of her,
which she delivered to him, pretending that his Fellow stood by the goods he
had bought in the Market in expectation of the money. The Purse was no sooner
thus delivered to the one, then the other came to demand it; nor would he take
any answer, but brings his Action against her for 200 Crowns of gold, which he
pretended to have been in the Purse. The Night before the hearing, St. Ives
came to her House, and demanding what news, she said, Very bad on her part, for
to morrow she was in danger of being condemned in 200 Crowns of gold. St. Ives
received a relation of the matter, bade her fear nothing. On the morrow, the
Case being opened by the Plaintiff, St. Ives said, That he was for the Widow
(he was a professed Advocate for those who went to Law in forma pauperu^) and
that she had with much ado procured the money, and said, Let them according to
their Conditions come both in place, and they should receive it; which answer,
the Judge allowed of. Whereupon that cunning Merchant waxed pale with fear; and
the matter being further examined, he was hanged within three days, as one who
might have put Iron into the Purse instead of Gold. How many cheats were here
complicated, I shall not now stand to observe, nor how the Law is many times
made use of to undo persons, and rob them of their right. This St. Ives was,
upon the Petition of the Country, Sainted 50 Years after his death. He was a
Priest and an Advocate too, and was buried in the Cathedral Church of Treguier,
with this Epitaph, Sanctus Ivo fuit Brito; Advocatus, and non latro; res
miranda. For want of such a Lawyer, our Hollingworth was fain to become
nonsuited.] The rectifying of which mistake (if he intended it) was prevented
by his death: who indeed, during his life, did so well season that great Parish
with his Doctrine, that he left not behind him one Factious or Fanatic person
in the place. But a question may be made, Why the Masters of the House, bound
by Oath to accept of the Presentation to the Rectory of Fillingham, by virtue
of the foresaid Decree of 1571, did suffer it to Lapse into the hands of
Strangers? whereunto I answer, That that Obligation was taken off by a later
Decree; the Tenor whereof is as follows.

Anno Dom. 1615. Jan. 14.
Unanimi consensu Magistri and omnium sociorum Collegii de Balliolo in
Vniversitate Oxon: una cum assensu Reverendi in Christo Patris Ricardi Episc:
Lincoln: ejusdem Collegii Visitatoris diversas ob causas specialiter moventes
and ad ejusdem Collegii bonum atque emolumentum and ad vitanda quedam gravamina
apprime spectantes Concordatum ordinatum atque statutnm est nosque supra
nominati concordamus ordinamus atque statuimus Actum illud and Decretum, Anno
Dom. 1571. Die mensis Maii 17. De*Rectoria Fillingham in Com: Lincoln: a
Magistro Collegii virtute juramenti in prima admissione prestandi acceptanda
atque non resignanda neque relinquenda quamdiu dicti Collegii Magister existit
reliquisque inde consequentibu^ circumstantiis de cannonibus in Ecclesia
Fillingham and Lecturis in Collegio Magistri sumptu habendis ab hoc tempore
irritum ac nullum fore. Idque eadem qua decretum est autoritate irritum facimus
cassumus annullamus and numero decretorum expungimus, Ne deinceps de jure
valeat Neve ultra Magister ulla ejus particula teneatur. In cujus rei fidem and
testimonium. Nos omnes supradicti Visitator Magister and Socii nomina nostra
Subscripsimus, die and anno supradictis.

R. Lincoln. Rob: Sarum, Mag: Coll: Ca: Morley. Jo: Chenellm. Edw: Wilson.
Nath: Williams. Rob: Chepman. Rob. Godfrey. Jo: English. Jo: Churchar. Gul:
Armeston.


SECT. 26.
Margaret-hall beforementioned, Sect. 22. was bought by Cave and Brocklesby,
both mentioned in the recited Indenture and Patent of Fillingham, Rob: Paynink
then Chancellor, and witness to the Grant. And in the tenth of Ric: 2. I find a
License from the King to Hamond Haskman and Thomas Cinlow, to give three Tofts
and one Garden, with the appurtenances contiguous to the House of the Master
and Scholars of Balliol-hall, for the enlargement of their Mansion; and this
written Margarets-hall on the backside thereof, in a hand as old, if not the
very same, as that within is. But that these two are the very same [is very
improbable] the Indentity of names being no good medium to infer the sameness
of things, as before I have noted; besides the vast interval between 14 Edw. 3.
(for about that time Brocklesby lived) and 10 Ric. 2. viz. 46 Years. In the
same foresaid 22 Sect. we made mention of Saucer-hall; this was given 13 Ed. 3.
The Year before, that Message of ours in St. Giles's Parish, together with the
Land in Walton-fields thereunto belonging, was given 12 Edward 3. One other
Tenement in St. Giles's Parish was given 6 Edw. 3. A third Message and Garden
in St. Giles's Parish, was given 39 Edw. 3. The House and the Appurtenances in
St. Peter's Parish in the Bailey, given by Jo: Burton Bedel of the University, 49
Edw. 3. There are also six Writings tied together, of six Houses in St. Ebbs
Parish: whereof one was given in the Reign of Edw. 3. another by George Nevil
B. of Exon. The corner Tenement, over against Candych, was given 1 R. 2. but
when or how the Tenement adjoining to it, which is now the South-part of the
Katherine-wheel, came to be the Colleges, I do not find; the said Tenement
seemed to have belonged to St. Fridisweds, as being formerly described to be on
the west-part of Old Balliol-hall. I thought it might possibly have been
exchanged for the Synagogue and great Port in St. Aldats Parish, which were
taken away, together with the rest of our forementioned Houses, npon the
building of Christ-Church; but that I find under a Public Notaries hand, 1529.
that we never received any thing in compensation of them, though largely
promised, as before is noted, Sect. 17. That which now is the Katherine-wheel,
was given us 3 Ric. 2. as being described in the Deed to be directly opposite
to the East End of Magdalen Church. In the same Year also, John Duke and Julian
his Wife, gave a Message and Shop in St. Giles's Parish: so that four
Messuages were given in St. Giles's Parish, but three of them only remain to
us: whereof, unless two united and made one since, I cannot show a reason. And
last of all, a shop under a room belonging to Oriel College in St. Marys
Parish, was given 8 H. 4. which is part of Mr. Cryps's shop, late Bookseller
in the High Street. There is mention made in a Deed without date (and therefore
very ancient) of a Message situate between a Tenement of the Universities,
called Old Balliol-hall on the West, and a Tenement of the Master and Scholars
of Balliol-hall, called New Balliol-hall; which Tenement stood next to, or upon
part of that ground where now Hammonds Lodgings do stand, which have been
formerly called the New buildings. I shall show hereafter how it came to be
called Hamond-hall, or Hamonds Lodgings. These Lodgings were either intended to
be drawn out farther, or else were cut off to make room for the Masters Garden,
as appears by the Door and Mortaises for Joysts left, to be seen at the end
thereof. But that there have been Buildings farther Eastward from thence,
appears by the Oven, and other Evidences found upon the late reparation of the
Wall toward the street adjoining; which Ovens mouth was found to be lower then
the ground we there tread upon, so much is the Earth swelled up again toward
its natural rotundity; if it be true, that (as some Geographers would have it)
the Earth in general has such inclinations, and is daily experimented in the
parts thereof: where we see the Mountains willing to abate daily of their proud
tops, by the abundance of stones falling from thence toward the Valleys; and
the humble Valleys swelling up, as if they would meet them half way for an
accommodation into a level, as is experimented in all Meadows, and may be seen
by our old Colleges, whereof time has half buried some in that Earth they
once stood above; and had done all the rest, had they not been kept from
sinking quite into their Graves, by the bounty of Pious Benefactors: Were these
things to be ascribed, as some think, to the sinking of Buildings, 'twere
strange that they should never leave sinking, and that so equally too, that the
Eaves, for the most part, hold the same proportion of height in every part, and
the same level as ever they did. But be it as it will, the present excrescences
of some parts of the Earth are so inconsiderable to the whole, that it holds
the proportion of a moth or dust to a ball, as some note Cleomedes to have
affirmed. We usually say, That the Earth and the Sea make one Globe, and
therefore without all consideration (as some have had) of the depth of the Sea,
the highest Mountain in the World has been found scarce to bear such proportion
to the semidiameter of the Earth, as is that of one to a thousand.
Nevertheless, the uneveness of the Earth, how small soever in it self, is of
much concern to those that people it, for the advantage that is in it, as well
for the convenience of habitation, as for quantity of ground, which is much
greater, being measured by the Arks, then by the Hypoteneuses or Subtenses
according to which it were to be measured, were it perfectly round: unto which
roundness, notwithstanding, did the Earth incline, it would not receive its
accomplishment in the time that the World (according to the Opinions of Men) is
to endure, the motion toward it being so slow as it is: which may be proved
from the buildings which are noted, Sect. 19. to be given by Sawser to
Fodringheye, to be confirmed to the College, which are none else but the
Masters Stable and the adjacents, though served at first for Lodgings for
Scholars; which, I am confident were never since that time, new built; and yet
the Earth is not swelled up above four or five Foot in this Four hundred Years
space.

But in the Condition, wherein now it is, it something resembles the old
remainder of Brasenose College or Hall in Stanford in Lincoln shire, but that
that stands more upon the declining of a Hill: alike squalid it was and had
nothing [when I visited it] remaining in it self whereby to own that Name,
besides the Brazen Nose which held the Ring of the Door. And now to stay the
Reader a little longer, I would have him note that some Cantabrigians, willing
to prove their University the Ancienter of the two, would have ours to be of no
longer standing then that Brazen-Nose and of the return [for it was no more] of
part of it from thence [which gave occasion to that Oath given to Proceeders,
Quod non leges vel audies Stanfordiae tanquam in Schola generali] which was at
the least 100 years after the first Foundation of this our College. Old
stories are not enough to decide this, or any other Controversy, but real
Records only: Now a Record they have, but none ancienter then Maud the
Empress, as I have heard Sir William le Neve ^larenti^ux confess, (though a
great Champion for Cambridge Eldership) which Record is to be found in the
Tower, and it is a Patent which she gave them for [and what was it?] the Founding
of a Grammar School, which is not enough to entitle it to the Name of a
University, ot Studium generale. Had ours learned its Accidence no sooner then
that, it would not have been so early espoused to the Liberal Arts, and
Divinity it self, as to have brought forth Three Thousand Children, which the
malice and violence of the Townsmen enforced to depart hence to Cambridge,
Reading and Maidstone, in the time of K. John; though in a short time they
returned to their Mother again, and that at the Petition of the Town it self,
who therein professed that they could not subsist without them. And this gave
the first occasion of that Duty of the City of Oxford, of Swearing to maintain
the Privileges of the University, as another did of Offering 63 Pence; all
which may appear by the Records of our University under the Seal of the Town of
Oxon. The Oath is to be taken at the appointment of the Vice Chancellor: and
the Offering of 63 Pence (which is for the 63 Scholars which were slain) is
yearly upon St. Scholastica's day, which is Feb. 10. Now I do not The
Townsmens Oath took its rise from the suspendium Clericorum in K. John's time:
But the Offering on S. Scholastica's day, not till the great conflict, Anno 29*
Edw. 3.
marvel that they returned from Reading and Maidstone, yet it seems strange that
they should be so easily brought back from Cambridge, if it were at that time a
University or Studium generale: but the Petition of the Town, backed with the
Mediation of the Bishop of Tusculum, the Popes Legate then here, did prevail
with them to return to this place, so famous, that it deserved the Name of The
Foundation of the Church, in the time of K. H. 3. and continued so numerous,
they swarms of Scholars, fled to Stanford in the Reign of Edw. 3. where they
remained till called back to their old Hive, wherein they have ever since lived
under the same Privileges with the rest, who made room for them, the want
whereof has ever been the occasion of new Colonies, as well of Men as of Bees.

SECT. 27.
This our College did not long flourish under the Statutes of Sir Phillip
Somervyle interfering with those of Dervorgille, for Anno 1364. Simon Bishop of
London was specially deputed Commissary from the Apostolical Sea to do what in
Equity he judged meet, in order to the peace and quiet of the House, upon view
had of the First and Second Statutes, and upon further information, which
otherwis^ might be given him. The Letters Apostolic by him with all reverence
received, did he send to be perused, and to be ordered by Mr. John Hethingham
Chancellor of the University of Oxon, and Hen. de Whitfield Provost of Queens
Hall in Oxon, both Professors of Divinity, and Mr. Ralph Orgum Inceptor in the
Civil Law, to be transcribed; with Command by Apostolic Authority to send him
those Letters back again with true Copies of the first and second Statutes, and
such further faithful informatiou as might enable him the said Bishop of
London to proceed in the premises accordingly. This done, the said Bishop of
London gave us a new body of Statutes: Which could I come to the sight of, I
would have here inserted; But I find them not in our own Archiues, not yet in
the Registers Office of the Bishop of London, if those I employed to search
there deceived me not. I wonder how we should loose such a Monument as those
were, by which the College was governed for so many years, even till the
Compiling of our Satutes now in force. Nevertheless it seems, by what I shall
show, it was therein provided, that in Case any statute seemed too These
Rectors made inquisition into the gravamina, and certified, as under Seal*
appears in Clarkenwell^* Box, London.
rigorous or too remiss in the Judgment of the Rectors (which were, it seems,
first ordained by those Statutes, and dyed with them too) and of the Master and
major part of the Company, it should be in the bosom of the Bishop of London
to relieve or reform, which was twice done afterward. viz. Annis Domini 1433
and 1477. the occasion whereof will appear by the recital, which you shall
have of the first Correction entirely, without omission of any thing; the
second in part only, the rest containing merely the times and matters of
disputations; between which, and our Statutes concerning Disputations now in
force, I find no material, yea scearcely circumstantial difference, which
renders the transcription unnecessary, my business being not to write what
every one in the College knows already. The thing that the Bishop of London's
Statutes would be seen for, is, chiefly whether therein any mention be made of
a Visitor of the College, and how qualified, and with what power vested?
because Q. Whether Jo. Longland were not by these Statutes Visitor who is
reckoned up in our Register among our Benefactors as Visitor, or whether so
chosen after the new Statutes?
in the book of our Statutes now in force. C. 2. which is, De horum Statutorum
editionis causa and condit^orum auctoritate, it is said that Visitator quidam
ex fumo exiguo eam excitavit flammam, quae and Magistrum and Socios profugavit,
Collegii bona profuse effudit, unumquodque a suo ordine removit. However I
observe from these corrections, that as the Second Statutes ordained a Master
above the Principal, so these did set up Rectors above the Master: and as the
foresaid Clause of our present Statute seems to imply, a Visitor above all. And
happily these Rectors might be in lieu of Procurators, whereby the House was at
first governed, as has been said, and those not abolished by the choice of a
Principal till the death of Ric: de Sclikebury, to whom the nomination of them
was committed, or the death of Dervorgille in whose name they were to be
nominated by him: but without any Proviso made for a supply of their mortality.
The first correction of the Bishop of Londons Statutes, runs thus:

Universis Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae filiis, ad quos presents literae
pervenerint. Robertus permissione divina London: Episc: salutem gratiam and
benedictionem. Cum inter Statuta Collegii aulae sive domus Balliol: Oxon:
Lincoln: dioces^^s inter cetera reperiatur quoddam statutum in quo sic cavetur.
Quod si contingat quod aliquod statutum premissum videatur sociis nimis grave
vel nimis remissum secundum judicium Rectorum Magistri and majoris partis
Comitivae, habeat tunc Episc: London: potestatem dictum statutum corrigendi
mitigandi diminuendi addendi mutandi, nec non aliud statutum faciendi, quod
sibi ad honorem Dei and utilitatem dicti Collegii videbitur expedire. Ac
insuper cum inter statuta reperiatur quoddam aliud sub hac forma. Imprimis
statutum est quod in dom^ de Balliolo semper sint tot scholares quot commode ex
fructibus redditibus proventibus ejusdem domus secundum limitationem expensarum
infra in statutis annotatam poterunt sustentari, qui de seipsis habeant unum
Magistrum cujus officium duret quamdiu se been gesserit in off^cio, propter
tamen defectum notabilem ammoveatur sub forma inferius annotanda vel si
beneficiatus fuerit ad verum valorem december librarum annuatim vel qualitercunque
sibi fuerit provisum perpetuo aliunde ad tantam summam, quo casu post tres
menses a tempore pacifico possessionis adepte, dictarum december librarum ipso
facto noverit se ammotum. Quod quidem statutum prout sufficienter informamur
videtur Rectoribus Magistro and majori parti Comitive dicti Collegii fuisse and
esse nimis grave atque damnosum propter nonnulla pericula and incommoda que
occasion ejusdem statuti prefato Collegio sepius evenerunt, and verisimiliter
amplius evenient in futurum nisi celerius de oportuno remedio sit provisum. Nos
igitur volentes hujusmodi periculis and incommodis obviare ac utilitati and
quieti dicti Collegii Magistri sociorum and scolarium ejusdem cum favore
prospicere, ad instantiam rogatum and supplicationem prefatorum Rectorum
Magistri Sociorum and Scholarium predictum Statutum sub forma subscripta
duximus corrigendum mutandum and emendandum, and sub forma subscripta
corrigimus mutamus and emendamus and in loco il^ius statuti inseri volumus
subscriptum statutum. Viz: Imprimis statutum est quod in domo de Balliolo
semper sint tot Scolares quot commode ex fructibus redditibus and proventibus
ejusdem domus secundum limitationem expensarum infra in statutis annotatam
poterunt sustentari Qui de seipsis habeant unum Magistrum cujus officium duret
quamdiu se been gesserit in officio licet ad quancunque summam promotus fue^it,
aut aliunde sibi perpetuo ad summam hujusmodi sit provisum, propter tamen
def^ctu^ notabilem ammoveatur sub forma inferius annotanda, and quicunque
vacant officio Magistri ibidem fuerit eligendus liceat sociis sive scholaribus
ipsius domus de aliis quam de seipsis si hoc eis videatur expediens
beneficiatum vel non beneficiatum eligere in Magistrum, dum tamen sic electus
socius juratus ejusdem domus prius extiterit cujus officium duret sicut prius
ouamdiu been se gesserit in officio licet ad quamcunque summam promotus fuerit,
vel aliu^de perpetuo ad summam hujusmodi provisio sibi fiat: propter tamen
defectum notabilem ammoveatur sub forma in statutis before annotata. Quod
quidem statutum nostrum hujusmodi sic denuo factum in loco prioris statuti de
cetero precipimus and mandamus firmiter observari Juramentis predictorum
Magistri and Sociorum sive scolarium priu^ prestitis and aliis si que visa
fuerint huic statuto contraria non obstantibus quibuscunque. Que omnia and
singula Vniversitati vestre innotescere volumus per presents. In cujus rei
testimonium sigillum nostrum fecimus his apponi, Dat: in Mannerio nostro de
Stebbenhith Octavo die Augusti, Anno Dom: MCCCCXXXIII. and nostre
consecrationis anno secundo.

The which Statute concerning the Master, and that concerning Disputations,
were both amended afterward by Thomas Bishop of London. That concerning the
Master was amended by the Insertion of this Clause, viz.

Vel aliqui^ olim Capellanus ejusdem domus qui in dicta domo continue st^^ri^
per annum and ampli^s and post ^ beneficiatus fueri^ competeter.

By which Clause inserted, was given a liberty of choosing one who had been
formerly Chaplain, as well as one that had been formerly Fellow, into the
Masters place. That which concerned Disputations, was much like that now in
force with us, and ends thus, viz.

Proviso semper, Quod si placuerit Magistro dicte domus dispu^are respondere
replicare interesse aut regulare predictas disputationes tam logica^ quam
Philosophicas quinetiam Theologicas, quod hec poterit exequi ad ejus litertatem
and in Magistri absentia regat vicem gerens and in eorum absentia senior socius
presens qui non est arguens vel respondens. Que quidem statuta nostra hujusmodi
sic denit^ facta in locis priorum statutorum de cetero precipimus and mandamus
firmiter observari Juramentis predictorum Magistri and sociorum sive scolarium
prius pres^itis and aliis si que visa fuerint his statutis contraria in aliquo
non obstantibus quibuscunque. Que omnia and singula Vniversitati innotescere
volumus per presents incujus rei testimonium sigillum nostrum apposuimus. Dat:
in Mannerio nostro de la Wykh: An. D. MCCCCLXXVII. Aug. XXVII. and
consecrationis nostre XXVIII.

SECT. 28.
In the fourth Year of R. 2. the Master and Scholars of our College, called
then Balliol-halle, gave to Canterbury College, now part of Christ-Church
Oxon: a message called Chimer hall, formerly mentioned, lying toward
Kings-street, called there Sydeard-street East, and the Garden of the said
Canterbury-Colledge West, North and South [which must be just opposite to Oriel
Colledge] as appears under the eal of the said Canterbury College: In which
Seal is represented [in regard of that Colleges dependence on the Prior of
Christ-Church in Canterbury] Austin the Monk, in a Pulpit with his Cross and
Banner, Preaching to the barbarous Infidels [for such the Saxons then viz. When
that Austin was senthither.
were] with this Inscription in the Ring of the Seal, which is not oval but
orbicular; viz. Sigillum Collegii Aule Cantuarie in Oxonia: upon which
consideration, the Prior and Convent of the said place granted, Anno Dom: 1393.
and in 17 R. 2. to Mr. Tho: Tyrwhit Master, and the Scholars of our said
College, and their Successors, an annual Rent of 26 s. 8 d. to be taken off
their Manor of Newington and its Appurtenances, in the County of Oxon, at the
Feasts of Easter and Michaelmas, by equal portions for ever: which Grant was
the same Year confirmed by the said King his Letters Patents, with License to
distrain upon the foresaid Manor in case of non-payment at either or any of
the said Feasts. But upon the dissolu^ion of Religious Houses, and the return
of the Lands into their Crown, the Rent was not paid, till Dr. Cotes, Master of
our College, and the Scholars thereof, had it decreed to them and their
Successors, by the Chancellor and Court of Augmentations, in 34 H. 8. to be
paid, together with the arrearages due from the dissolution, by the hands of
the particular Receiver of the Court of Augmentations of the Revenues of the
Crown, in the said County of Oxon, for the time being. All which, may appear by
the Exemplification of the said Decree under the Great Seal, and several other
Writings in our Archives in Oxford, and Canterbury Box there. This Rent was
received down to the taking away of Cathedrals, by the late Rebellion, and that
for many Years by the hands of Auditor Squib in London, who told us, That we
were never like to receive it more, unless we bought some of the Lands
belonging to the Church of Canterbury, and so got it allowed in the Purchase.
To this purpose a Solicitor was employed at Worcester-house, for the Purchase
of a Quit-rent of about 38 s. per annum, upon a Manor in Kent, or some other
such small matter then left unsold. But since that time, I never heard of the
Solicitor or Business: It may be that the greediness of Purchasers went
between him and home; for Men having devoured the whole dishes of the Church,
they were ready to fall together by the Ears for the scraps. But how the
dissolution of Canterbury Church, either first or last aforesaid, should
extinguish our Rent settled in manner aforesaid, restat inquirendum. At present,
this Rent is acknowledged to be due from the Receivers of Kent: To which
purpose, Sir Edmund Sawyer, Auditor for Kent, gives a Debentur; which being
shown to Mr. Owen, Receiver for Kent, he pays it, and has paid since the
coming in of the King. After this, one House was given to the College in
Grand-pont (vulgo Gram-pool) called by the name of Rack-hall, situate in St.
Michaels Parish at the South Port [which Parish is now part of St. Aldats]
which had been the Land of Thomas Coventry Burgess and Alderman of Oxford, sold
by him 8 H. 6. the several Conveyances are 18. this House is now Leased to
Crayford the Baker. And Anno Dom. 1443. 22 H. 6. the Abbot of St. Mary de Osney
granted to our College a Tenement in Juse-lane, near the then The Law School
stood on the North side of Christ-Church Quadrangle, in the Parish of St.
Frideswide (for it has been a Parish.)
Law School; the which, because a Lease long since expired, I shall make no
further enquiry after, nor reckon it amongst our Losses, though passed over to
the Cardinals College, when White was Master, as ^y the Deed appears.

SECT. 29.
Though Thomas Chase, a York Man by birth, were Master of this House, 12 H. 4.
about Anno 1410. yet he became not our Benefactor till he was Chancellor of the
University; which was, 1427. 4 H. 6. or later. When he built the lo^er part of
our Library, adjoining to the Hall (at which time the Hall it self probably
might be built) the upper part thereof, which is adjoining to the Chapel, was
built by Robert Abdy Master of this House* about which time, that which is now
the Mastets Hall, was built by B. Gray (the great Furnisher of our Library with
rare Manuscripts) as appears by his Coat of Arms engraven in Stone upon the
three Brachets, under the outside of the Bay Window thereof. The very fashion
of the Building speaks it to have been the Chapel, and to have been done after
the mode of those Times; unto the Building or Glazing whereof, George Nevil (of
whose several Preferments you shall hereafter understand) might contribute, in
as much as his Coat of Arms are to be seen yet in the West Window of the same
place; together with Beauchamps Coat of Arms, who was Earl of Warwick before
this George Nevil's Brother: But Beauchamp's Heirs males failing, the Earldom
of Warwick devolved to his Sister, whom Nevil marrying, he was created Earl of
Warwick in her Right, if I well remember. But be this as it will, this said
Hall having been a Chapel, and built no longer ago, it makes void the common
Cabale, that it was a Parliament House. Indeed, Parliaments are sacred things,
and not mis-becoming a Chapel, when not employed to Religious Exercises; nor
am I ignorant, that the House of Commons at Westminster was once a Chapel:
moreover, I have seen Courts of Justice made after the fashion of this said
Hall, with such a Bay Window at the East end thereof, for the celebration of
Divine Offices therein, even the Courts fitting, which take no more notice
thereof, then of the Elevation of the Host, which they are warned of by the
ringing of a little Hand-bell, whereupon they all uncover and adore: But the
time of Parliaments held at Oxon, or of the building of the Room, makes it
incapable of either of these uses. We had many Benefactors in those times,
mentioned in the Windows of our Library, whose bounty was mostly employed in
building, and partly in adorning the College with Windows, or enriching the
Library with Books. In the East Window of the Library, looking into the
Chapel, is the Picture of St. Katerine, in the right light thereof, with her
Wheel before her, and her Sword behind her, with this Motto* Si servitis ei,
vos tegit aula Dei.


In the other light is Thomas Chase and his Fellows adoring her, with this
Motto.

1. Hic tibi dans celis Thomam Chase comitantes. 2. Hanc patrona velis munire
domum famulantes.
In the first Window, on the South side of the Library, is the Coat of Arms of
George Nevil [which are the same with those in the Masters Hall aforesaid, and
on the top of the Divinity Bedels staff which he gave] in pale with the Arms of
his Archiepiscopal Sea, in the first light: and in the second light of the same
Window, is a Coat of five Annulets argent, in a Field gules, quartered with
Chequey, Or and Sable, with this Motto, in a wreath about them; viz. the first
about the first, and the second about the second.

1. Fige dies cursum nec perdat virgo triumphum. 2. Conditor ecce mei Skipton
Ricarde fuisti.
And now since mention is made of the Arms of his Archiepiscopal Sea, which was
York, it is requisite to know the difference between these and those of
Canterbury. Canterbury bears a Staff in pale Sol, and upon the top of that a
Cross patee Luna, over all a pall Luna, but not fringed. But the ancient Arms
of York differed from these, in that the Cross on the top of the staff was Sol,
and the pall was fringed, as there may be seen: though the Arms of the same Sea
be at present clean another thing, but when thus changed, I cannot show: nor
do I find that the Heralds at this day do So they did at the Funeral of
William Juxon, Archb. of Cant.
paint the present Archiepiscopal Arms of Canterbury in any thing differing from
those anciently appropriated to the Sea of York.

The two Coats of Arms in the second Window, on the same side, have likewise
these Verses in a wreath about them; viz. The first, the first; and the second,
the second.

1. Inclitus ille Thomas Horrow fenestratuit me. 2. Ad tempus mensis vocitati
rite Decembris.
The third Window in the like manner has two Verses.

1. Gaudeat unita totalis and hec comitiva. 2. Claram luce fore Carpenter nempe
Johannes.
Below is,

Orat^ pro anima Johannis Carpenter, and Johannis Herys, with the Picture of
John Herys, not of John Carpenter. Johannes Harrisius primus and precipuus
Thomae More secretarius, 1579. confessor, obiit Namurci regnante Eliz. scripsit
collectanea ex Sanctis Patribus. But I suspect that this is not our Herys.

The fourth Window, in the first light, has a Coat that bears pale of nine
pieces Azure and Gules, over all a Chevron Argent, charged with three crosses
pometees Or, and a Mitre on the point. with this Motto, 1. Me tuus Antistes
Vigornia fecit honor.


The second has this Motto; viz.

2. Conditor ipse mei Warter Ricarde fuisti.
The fifth Window has Bishop Gray's and Abdy's Arms (whereof more anon) with
this Motto, 1. Hos Deus adjecit, Deus his det gaudia celi. 2. Abdy perfecit
opus hoc Gray presul et Ely.


Under is, 1. Orate pro bono statu Magistri Johannis Spens.


The sixth Window.

1. Hi duo mitrati pro donis sint memorati. 2. Sint consummati celesti sede
locati.
The seventh has in one light, the Arms of Thomas Percy Earl of Worcester,
which are the same with the Earls of Northumberland in University College
Hall: and those of Nevil Earl of Warwick in the other light, with these Verses
in Wreaths about them.

1. Sunt benefactores Comites hic nobiliores. 2. Luceat eterna Lux his
requiesque superna.
The Eighth is in honor of William Firbit of Bridlinton in Yorkshire.

Firbit Wilhelmus semper sit mente retentus.
or, commune.
Et Bridlintone domus additur extra corone.
The Ninth, Has aliquando fores vitro clausere priores.
Claustri Mertone vigent mercede corone.


The Tenth has a Scheme of the Holy Trinity in one, and the Blessed Virgin
Mary with the Babe, in the other; given by Robert Brotliber of Malvern in
Worcestershire, with these Verses.

Gilberti Brotliberi Malvernensisque Johannes.
Contiuuis annis place at sociis ministrare.
And now mention being made of Malvern: it were worth a Man's Journey to go to
see the Fabric of the Church viz. The Church of the Priory of Gr: Malvern.
thereof, built after the Model of Gloucester Cathedral; but especially the
Glass Windows, wherein are to be seen all the Stories of the Old and New
Testament, every one of them underwritten what it is: amongst which, is to be
seen the Picture of the Holy Trinity, by as great a Solaecism as Brotlibers and
John of Malverns Scheme is done by Ingenuity: to represent a visible Nature by
colors, is as if a Man should go about to paint white with a Chark-coal, or
light with darkness it self; to say nothing that it entrenches upon the Heresy
of the Anthrop^morphites: But, Qui fingit sacros, auro vel marmore vultus,
Non facit ille deos; qui rogat, ille facit.


On the North side of our said Library, the first Window has the Arms of
Bishop Gray, which are a Lion rampant arg: in a Field gules, a Border engrail'd
argent: and Abdy's Arms, which are a Shield argent, a Chevron sable, between
three Eagles displayed of the second. I call them Eagles, not Eaglets or
Allerions, because they have both feet and beaks; for Geliot written in French.
Geliot in his Indice Armorial, says, That Allerions sont petites aigles qui n'
ont ny bec ny jambes: that is to say, Allerions are little Eagles, which have
neither beak nor legs: The Verses in Wreaths about these are, 1. Conditor ecce
nevi structus h^^us fuit Abdy. 2. Presul and huic Edi Gray, libros con^^lit Ely.


Below this, is, Orate pro bono statu anime Magistri Roberti Abdy Magistri
hujus Collegii, qui istam partem edificavit.

The Second Window has Arms, and these Verses about them in Wreaths, as all
the other have; viz.

1. Me fecit socius hic Stanhop nempe Radulphus. 2. Militis esto memor Wooddem
Deus optime tutor.
The Third Window harh Nevils Arms in pale with those of the Sea of York, in
one light, and by themselves in the other.

1. Sit presul alma tibi requies sine fine Georgi. 2. Me fordas vitream Stavely
Wilhelme fenestram.
The Fourth Window has these Verses in a Wreath about the Coats of Arms.

1. -- Somnum -- 2. Me P^trus Pekkam vitravit sponte fenestram.
The Fifth Window has likewise about the Arms, Asperaflabat hyems brumoso
frigore fervens.
Cum Miniorita vilis fuit ista fenestra.
Peneath is, Orate pro Johanne Burton, quondam socio hujus domus.


The Sixth Window has the Arms of Tho: Chase, which are a Shield argent,
charged with three Talbots heads erased sable. A Talbot is properly any Dog
yoaked (like a Hog) to keep him out of the Vineyards, when the time is for them
to be fenced. But our Heralds, it seems, restrain it to dogs of Chase; but the
Verses are, 1. Condidit hanc Edem Thomas Chase meque vitravit. 2. Huic superis
sedem des sibi nate David.
Below is, Orate pro statu and anima Magistri Thomae Chase de Ebor: Th:
Professoris, Cancellarii Hiberniae, Oxon: et S. Pauli, London: olim hic Socii
fratris mei, Anno Dom. 1431.

The Seventh Windows Verses imply, That Clifford Bishop of London was a greater
Benefactor, then to own the Glazing of a Window.

1. Clifford Ricardus Antistes Londoniensis. 2. Fusis expensis tale non avit
opus.
Given by Nich: Herbury, Archdeacon of Gloucester, therefore underwritten thus;
viz.

Orate pro anima Magistri Nich*Herbury, quondam Archi: Gloucest:

The Eighth Window, given by Jo: Patrick, valet of the Wardrobe to Humphrey
Duke of Lancaster and Gloucester, has the Dukes Arms, which are those of
England, but bordered argent, with these Verses, 1. Fecimus hanc claram vitro
splendente fenestram. 2. Vt gratis nostri meminerit debitis.
Orate pro anima Johan: Patrick, quondam valette de Wardroba Lancastriae, Ducis
Gloucestriae.

The Ninth Window.

1. Me fecerant quos scuta notant prius hic comitantes. 2. T. Skeleton dicti
milesque Whelpdailque Robertus.
The Tenth.

Hanc Socii quondam duo perfecere fenestram.
Wombwelle Robertus, Thomas Barryque vocatus.
These Arms of Wombwelle and Barry, and Chase too, are in the Windows of the
Colledge-hall. This Barry was Fellow here, 1395. as is noted before, and
consequently lived in the time of Chase.

The false Meter and Grammar, is not to be ascribed to the ignorance of the
times (which produced so many Learned Men, even in this College, Ubi tunc
temporis nobilium juvenum corona celebris renascentem imbibebat eloquentiam, as
hereafter you shall hear) but to the Glaziers or others, who composed such as
these according to their own understanding, or some traditional Conceptions.
There Is one Marble Gravestone in the Church of St. Burien, near the Lands-end
in Cornwall, which having a Cross on it, the People take it to be some* Deans
Gravestone [for the Parson is now called Dean of Burien, and it had once
Prebendaries too, as Mr. Camden writes] but that it is no such matter, that
which is engraven in the border thereof, does sufficiently testify: The true
reading thereof may be this,

Clarie la femme Geffrei
De Bolleit is a place in that Parish, which I had occasion to know,
accompanying some Friends that have Estates in the Parish.
Bolleit gist icy,
Dieu de l'ame ayez mercy!
Qui prient pour l'ame auront
Dix jour de pardon en ce mond.
I showing my Transcription to a Gentleman a Roman Catholic, and an Antiquary,
asked him, Who promised that ten days of pardon to whomsoever should pray for
her soul? He answered, That it was a traditional thing, and ad placitum
sculptoris, who might have put 100 days as well as ten, had he pleased: The
Application is easy.

SECT. 30.
I do not find any conveyance to the College of the Houses now leased out, one
to Formerly to Rich: Carter, Anno Dom. 1626. then commonly known or called by
the name of the Golden Phoenix.
Miller, and the rest to the Bradshawes, in St. Margarets Patens, and Rood-lane
in London: but I find several Letters of Attorney made, for giving of
possession from person to person, from the time of Edw. 3. to 1 Edw. 4. when
Robert Kirkam, Custos Rotul: Cancellarie, Richard Friston Clerk, William
Morland, Parson of St. Mary Bow London, gave power to Robert Abdy Clerk, to
give Livery and Seisin of them to George Nevil, Bishop of Exeter, and Lord
Chancellor of England, William Bishop of Ely, William Lambton, Robert Lowson,
and William Appilby, Clerks, who, it is like, were Trustees for the College
(William Lambton being then, or the same Year, Master) which was the way they
took, it seems, during the Wars between the Houses of Lancaster and York,
without mention made of the trust, for fear of Forfeitures, I suppose, and may
be collected from the Pardons which the College sued forth under the Great
Seal of K. H. 6. and K. Ed. 4. yet in our College, we have another Pardon from
K. Ed. 6. too, which must be upon some other account. But now for the situation
of the foresaid Houses; it was thus described, viz. between a Tenement of the
College of the B. Virgin Mary by Guild Hall London on the West part, and a
little venue called St. Margarets Patyns-lane on the East part, and a little
venue called Smiths-lane, alias, St. Andrews Hoberds-lane on the South, and a
Tenement called Patesden Rent on the North part. I find also, that after the
end of the said Wars, John Segden Clerk, and Master, or (Gardianus) Warden of
our College, and [confratres) Fellows, did set a Lease of the said Houses to
three Citizens of London for 20 Years, at the Rent of four Marks sterling,
dated Anno 1473. and 12 Ed. 4. As for our Farm at Odyngton in Oxfordshire,
anciently called Otyndon, in a Deed without date: I find it by the said Deed to
have been the Land of William le Pour, Son and Heir of John le Pour, who by
that Deed conveyed it to William, the Son of John Urlewyne of Otyndon. After
this, viz. in the time of Ed. 3. I find it to be Brahall's Land of Otyndon,
passed over to him by Stryvyn of Otyndon. Afterward, it came to be the Land of
one Saunders, 1 H. 5. in which name it seems to have continued till 5. Edw. 4.
when it was conveyed by a Daughter and Heir of Thomas Saunders, and her Husband
William Wellis of Otyndon, to Nich: Blunt and Agnes his Wife, who made a
Release thereof to William Kyrby of Otyndon and Alice his Wife, Apr: 20. in 3
H. 7. which said Kyrby and his Wife, upon the same, conveyed it to John Russel
Bishop of Lincoln, James Stanley Dean of St. Martins London, William Bell,
William Stephyns, John Smith, Richard Barningham, John Southwood, Clerks. But
by another Deed of April 27. in the same Year, did the said Blunt and his Wife
grant it to the said Kyrby and his Wife, who, upon the 29 day of the same
Month, conveyed it to William Bell, John Smith, Richard Barningham, John
Southwood, Clerks, in trust, it is like, for the College, William Bell being
then, or soon after, Master of the House, whom Richard Barningham succeeded.
The Conveyance is general, of all the Messuages, Lands and Tenements, Meadows
of Pasture and Pastures, with the Appurtenances, which were the aforesaid
Blunts. This said Farm is now held by a Lease of Lives, granted to Abraham
Watson, and has been so held by him and others time out of mind.

SECT. 31.
Richard Barningham Master, and the Scholars of Balliol, obtained Letters from
Pope Julius, directed to Richard Bishop of Winchester, and to the Bishop of
Carlisle [upon the Motives expressed in the second Chapter of our now Statutes;
which is, De Statutorum editionis causa and conditorum auctoritate] make us a
new Body of Statutes, which was done accordingly, Anno Dom. 1507. (and
testified by a Public Notary, with his Protocollum put thereunto) wherein the
number of Fellows is stated to be ten, with a Master over them, which are bound
to apply themselves to the study of Divinity, and to take Holy Orders upon
them, at or before four Years standing Masters of Art. The Master, and every
Graduate Fellow, is to have the Presentation of one Scholar, to be approved by
the Master and the two senior Fello us: the business of which Scholars, is to
serve the Master and the Fellows by whom they are presented, provided they be
not so exercised and oppressed with business, as to hinder their studies. Of this
number of Fellows, two are to be Priests before elected, though but Bachellors
of Arts, whose peculiar Office is, to say Mass daily: and these were in lieu of
the several Chaplains beforementioned, who by little and little came to have
the same Privileges as Fellows. One Lease I have observed to be set by the
Master, cum consensu totius Capituli; and the Bishop of London's Statutes makes
them as capable of being chosen Masters of the House as any of the Fellows:
wherefore, in these Statutes, they are incorporated into our Society, and bear
the name and privilege of Fellows in every thing, besides the performance of
Divine Offices, which is their own Peculiar. This Statute concerning the two
Priest-Fellows, has been generally observed, unless it be in the clause of
their being ordained Priests before their election: for I find upon our
Regester anno Dom: 1564 Maii 12. that George Godsell Bachelour of Art was
chosen in socium sacerdotalem, albeit he was not ordained: but took an oath to
be ordained, Quam primum fieri potuit, which might give an occasion to the
Decree made by William Bishop of Lincoln, Doctor Lilly Master and the Fellows,
in our book of Statutes, which are the most exact and concise body that ever
was made us; to the perusal whereof I must refer the Reader; and shall make my
further observation only upon that of the Visitor. By these Statutes we are
enabled to choose a Visitor of our own, after the same manner and form as the
Master is to be chosen. Hereupon I find that Richard, Bishop of Winton became
Visitor of the College acting as Visitor, insomuch that Anno Dom: 1511. Feb:
16; he sat judicially Visitor, received the Resignation of Richard Barringham
B. D. also swear and admitted Thomas Cisson lawfully elected Master into the
Room of the said Barningham, as may be seen in the Box of Admissions of
Masters. To the said ^ishop of Winton succeeded Lawrence Stubbys: which Lawr:
Stubbys resigned his office of Visitor into the hands of W. White Master of the
College 25 H: 8. But after this viz: An. D: 1545. William Wright was admitted
Master by the Bishop of Lincoln as being Visitator Generalis, for so he is
called in the instrument of the said admission [prestito juramento de
observandis statutis and consuetudinibus Collegii in quantum humana fragilitas
patitur] upon the same account I conceive it was that the Archbishop of
Canterbury admitted Doctor Lawrence Master, by reason of the suspension of the
Bishop of Lincoln, Anno 1637. I have heard indeed, that the said Bishop of
Lincoln demur'd to the visitation of the Archbishop Laud, but he prevailed not
in it: for his Grace proceeded in his Visitation of Lincoln Diocese, as
fotmerly Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury had done, Anno 1411. Jan: 21, in the
sixteenth year of his translation, as appears by an Instrument under the Seal
of the said Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, which remains with us being
concerned in the Visitation in regard of the Appropriations which we hold of
Abboldsley and Saint Lawrence* the one in the Diocese of Lincoln, the other in
London: whereof we were called to, and did show Evidence of the Appropriation,
as by the Instrument aforesaid more fully may appear; wherein although he be
styled, Legatus Sedis Apostolicae, yet he adds, Jure nostro Metropolitico
actualiter visitantes. But to go on: In the Charter for the Foundation of
Christ-Church, Oxon: bearing date November: 4. in the 38 Year of H. 8. there is a
Proviso, in haec verba, viz.

Proviso tamen, Semper quod dictus Episcopus Lincoln: and successores sui
habebunt omnem and omnimodam jurisdictionem and potestatem infra Collegia
vocata Lincoln College, Oriel College, Brasenose and Bayliole, quae antehac
idem Episcopus aut antecessores sui sive eorum aliquis ratione fundationis sive
dotationis eorundem Collegiorum sive eorum aliquis habuerunt tenuerunt vel
exercuerunt, habuit tenuit vel exercuit.

The Proviso leaving the Bishop of Lincoln in his former power in these
Colleges, notwithstanding the erection of the Bishopric of Oxon, it appears
on our Register, That upon Jan: 2. 1557. the Visitation of Tho: Watson Bishop
of Lincoln, began by Commissaries, which were, Mr. Wright Archdeacon of Oxford,
and Master of this House, Tho: White Warden of New Coll: both Doctors of the
Laws; which Visitation continued till the said Reverend Father was Imprisoned
at London, Anno 1571. Tho: Bishop of Lincoln, with the consent of Adam Squire
Master, and the Fellows, made us Decrees, which are in number seven, all entered
in our Statute Book. All the following Decrees written in the said Statute Book
[excepting that concerning Fellow-Commoners, dated Anno 1610] are a Collection
of Decrees, made not only 1574. but formerly: for I find upon our Register the
Decree concerning the payment of Battles within 15 days after the end of the
Quarter, to be made verbatim 1554. [which was about seven Years after the
foresaid Proviso] subscribed, Jo: Lincoln. James Gloucester, Master. Jo: Smith.
Gul: Talerius. Anth: Garnet. Brianus Nedamus. Alanus Higginsonius. Bartimeus
Greemes.


Anno Dom. 1565. Nicholas Bishop of Lincoln, and Visitor of the College of
Balliol, cited the Master and Fellows to a Visitation, forbiding them all
Elections. Nevertheless they, in obedience to the Statute, admitted Thomas
Coventry and John Tunkis Fellows, having fulfilled their Year of Probation;
especially since the Bishop of Lincoln could not Inhibit an Election prescribed
by Statute: And by their date, it should be the same Bishop that by his
Commissioners made us these Injunctions following.

Injunctions ordained by Mr. Thomas Goodwine, Mr. Lawrence Humphrey Doctor of
Divinity, Mr. Richard Barber, Commissioners to my Lord of Lincoln, in their
Visitation had in Bailey College in Oxon, the 4th of March, Anno Dom. 1565.
left to be perpetually observed within the said College, and confirmed with
the putting of their hands in the Margent.
1. IMprimis, it is Ordered and Decreed, That the Communion shall be duly
ministered and given into the hands of the Communicants, according to the Order
set forth in the Book of Common Prayer; and that all and every person and
persons being of lawful Years and Discretion, shall at the least three or four
times in the year reverently receive it, and that the contemners or refusers
thereof shall pay every time 3 s. 4 d. at the discretion of the Master to be
levied.

2. Item, That all Fellows-Commoners, and others, sojourning within the House,
shall resort to the Chapel in the time of Service and Common Prayer; and then
and there shall behave themselves in such godly manner, that they hinder not
the Word of God to be read or sung, or disturb others: which Ordinance
whosoever breaks, shall pay 12 d. and if after admonition, and twice
correction, he or they do refrain to come, as is above ordained, then he or
they, whosoever he be, shall be at the discretion of the Master, put out of the
House.

3. Item, That Public Prayers in the Morning shall be said in the vulgar
Tongue, as is through the Queens Majesty's Dominions used; and that every
common Scholar or Bachelor within the said House, not frequenting the said
Prayer, shall for every time so offending be punished with stripes, if he be
under correction, or else have one farthing set on his head, at the discretion
of the said Master.

4. Item, That as well Divine Service, as the Sacrament of the Supper of the
Lord, shall be said in the Chapel of the said College, to the which, all the
House shall diligently repair, and not to the Parish Church.

5. Item, That all Primers; not allowed by the Queens Majesty, and all
superstitious Books, be neither in Public Prayer had or used, but be brought
and delivered to the Master forthwith, to be abolished.

6. Item, That such Books for Divine Service be brought and used in the said
College, as is mentioned in the Queens Majesty's Injunctions; as the Bible,
Communion Book, David's Psalters, and the Book of Homilies.

7. Item, That all the Service be distinctly and openly pronounced, as it is
set forth in the Book of Common Prayer.

8. Item, That the Prayers at the usual times, and the Graces at Meals, shall
be said or sung within the said College, without Invocation of Saints, or
Prayer for the dead.

9. Item, That the Master bring with him all his company to the Sermon,
especially if they be solemn and ordinary, otherwise the absent shall pay 2 d.
at the discretion of the Master, if he be not upon reasonable cause licensed by
the Master.

10. Item, There shall be a Minister chosen within one Month, according to the
Statute.

Scripta per me Johannem Ball, notarium publicum Linc: Dioces:
10 Martii, Anno supradicto in meo proprio cubiculo in Collegio sive Edibus
Christi in Vniversitate Oxon.
These things I have heaped up together, as belonging to the Visitor, and the
exercise of his Authority here; though some of them, in order of time, were
done after those that follow; viz. The buildings of the Chapel.

SECT. 32.
The Chapel, called the new Chapel, that now is, was built in the Reign of K.
H. 8. (at the charge of the House, assisted probably by the contribution of
Friends) for I find, that in the 13th year of the reign of H. 8. [which was
about Anno 1521.] an Agreement was made with a Mason of Burford, for the
finishing of the 3 Windows thereof on the Quadrangle side, and one Window of
the Treasury on the same side; the rest may be presumed to have been finished
before, viz. 9 H. 8. which by a mistake in our Register is written 19 H. 8.
which if true, it were after the glazing of the Windows: But how long it was,
before it received its perfection [both for Stone-work and Lead, with the Frame
that bears it up] I cannot show precisely: But that it was before Anno 1529. is
evident by the date of the glazing of the Windows, it being then, that Lawrence
Stubbys gave the East Window, which is so fair, that the Founder of Wadham
College is said to have offered the Society 200 l. for it, to glaze the East
Window of his Chapel, as representing in lively Colors and exquisite
Postures, the Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ: but the Chapel
being fair, they thought not that Window too gaudy for it; and I would they had
not thought the Leads too heavy, I am sure others did not, for weaker Frames at
the Schools upon which they were laid. The South Window was at the same time
glazed by Richard Stubbys, containing the whole Story of the Martyrdom of St.
Katerine: The next to that, was of the Gift of Dr. Wentworth, Fellow of this
House, containing the story of Hezekiah's sickness and recovery: that opposite
thereunto, containing the story of Philip and the Eunuch, was the same year
given by Richard Atkins Esquire; of Gloucestershire, and Fellow-Commoner of this
College; about which time, the whole Chapel was lined and adorned with
Joyners work, at the cost of the College and of many Benefactors, one of the
greatest whereof was Mr. Popham of Littlecot, who had been of the House, and
gave One hundred pound; in memory whereof, his Arms engraven in Wood, are
placed over the Screen doors of the Choir. The second best, was Mr. Boughton,
Sub-dean of his Majesty's Chapel Royol, who gave 50 l. so that now it gives
way to none of those of the lesser Colleges for beauty and proportion. One of
the Chapel Windows appears, to be given by one of the Comptons (a Knight) Sir
William Compton, of the Ancestors of the now Earl of Northampton, both by his
Name and Coat of Arms, and probably he gave toward the structure it self: for
his Charity was great, if it were answerable to his Piety, which his posture
(with his Ladies) wherein he is represented in the same Window, shows to be
devout. 1530.

SECT. 33.
In the 31 Year of Hen. 8. The site of the Monastery of Clerkenwell, was settled
by Act of Parliament upon the Duke of Norfolk; and in the 35 Year of the same
K. H. 8. it was settled, by the consent of the Duke of Norfolk, upon the King
again by Act of Parliament; then in the 37 Year of his Reign, he granted it to
Walter Henley and John Williams, Knights, to be held in Capite. After the death
of Sir Walter Henley, his Widow Dame Margaret Henley, conveyed one Message,
two Gardens, and one Cottage or little House, to John Bell, 7 Edw. 6. (wherein
Bell afterward lived) after this the said Lady Henley married Thomas Roberts
Esquire: The same Roberts sold the Sisters House and Garden to John Bell, Nov. 19.
2 and 3* Year of Phil: and Mary, and he the said Roberts and his Lady
acknowledged a Fine. This Sisters House, and the beforementioned Message,
with the Appurtenances aforesaid, the said John Bell did give to our College,
March 9. 2 and 3 of Phil: and Mary. After the death of John Bell, our College
was questioned in the Exchequer for the House, Gardens and Cottage, sold by my
Lady Henley, and given by John Bell without License (the whole Case is recited
in a Copy of a Roll out of the Exchequer) thereupon the transgression was
pardoned by Letters Patents, Febr. 1. 3 and 4 of Phil: and Mary; and the Houses
by the same Letters Patents confirmed to the College. But Elizabeth Sackville
the Prioress being living (3 Eliz.) was thought to have a right to the Sisters
It being her Freehold for her life, the like I heard urged by Sergeant
Maynard, at a Committee in the Painted Chamber, on the behalf of the Heads and
Fellows of Houses in Oxon, saying, That it was their Freehold, and they could
not be disseis'd thereof, nor disfranchised of the Corporation: whereunto Serj.
Wild, then Chairman, answered, That though Sir James Bag were one of the
Corporation of Plymouth, He was nevertheless disfranchised by a Decree of the
Star Chamber: But Sergeant Maynard replied, That by a motion made, showing it
to be against Law, he was restored.
House, which she did the same Year, September. 8. release to the College; The
bounds whereof, are the Church on the West, John Bells own House, bought as
aforesaid, on the East of it, and the Church Yard on the South, as appears by
the Deed, and several Leases since set by the College of all the Houses, which
are also noted as being within the Precinct of the said Monastery, not only by
the said Leases, but also by the Original Deeds. Part of one of the Gardens
belonging to the premises [for now they stand divided into three] has been
challenged by the Parish there; insomuch, that one Goodcoale, sometimes
Minister of the same, being Confessor to the condemned Persons in Newgate, did
[in the time that Dr. Juxon was Bishop of London, and Lord Treasurer] cause a
door which had been Masoned up, to be broken open [which had been the way for
the Prioress to come into the Church] and the dead Bodies of Executed persons,
with others who dyed of the Plague of Pestilence, to be buried there; out of
which, it is like, he sucked some advantage. But complaint being made by us to
the said Lord Treasurer, his Lordship made an Order, remaining still with us,
for the quiet possession of the premises; which we continued till Anno 1659.
when they, taking advantage of the Times, put us to new troubles. But the Day
no sooner began to dawn, then all those Spirits betook themselves to their Dens
again. The end for which that sometimes Reverend Bishop of Worcester did give
the premises to the College, was, for a stipend to be paid to two Scholars
born within the Diocese of Worcester, whose Will therein has been ever
observed. This Bishop, John Bell, by the Arms Robert Hooper was Master, 10
Eliz. not mistaken for Richard Hooper Master. See in Clerkenwell Box, and that
o^ admissions.
over the Gate of three Church Bells, is judged to have built that and some of
the Front of the College: but hereof we have no other testimony.

SECT. 34.
In Oxford and Canterbury Box, there is also a Deed to Exeter College for
exchange of our Land beforementioned adjoining to that House, for a House and
Garden lying near to ours: which House and Garden must be, by the description
thereof, upon part of that ground where Hammond's Lodgings now stand: for it is
set lying and being on the North part of the way, leading from Balliol College
to Magdalene Church, on the West part of the Wall of Balliol College
aforesaid, and therefore it extende^h it self further that way then now it
does, viz. quite to the low Wall end without* and on the East part of certain
Tenements belonging to Balliol College aforesaid. Upon further consideration
of the aforesaid exchange, the Rector and Scholars of Exeter College, did
covenant to pay to the Master and Scholars of Balliol aforesaid, a yearly Rent
of 2 s. 6 d. for ever, to be issuing and going out of a Tenement of the said
Rector and Scholars in Magdalene Parish, to be paid at the Feast of St. Michael
the Archangel only; and for non-payment thereof, the Master and Scholars of
Balliol may, by the same Deed, distrain upon the aforesaid Tenement; or (in
case of insufficient Distress to be found there) upon any other Tenement
belonging to the said Exeter College in the City of Oxon, or Suburbs thereof:
All which, appears in an Indenture under the Seal of the College of Exeter
aforesaid, dated October. 6. Anno 14 Eliz. After which exchange so made, I
suppose the said House was new builded; from whence, it obtained the name of
the New Buildings: but whether done by the College, or any Tenant in
performance of Covenants made with the College, I cannot show. But I find it
to have been Leased out to one John Wilson, at the time of William Hammond's
benefaction. The Lease it self I have not seen; but it appears by an Indenture,
bearing date Febr: 14. in the 36 of Q Eliz. That William Hammond of Guilford,
in the County of Surrey Esquire lent to John Apsley Esquire in the County of Sussex,
the sum of 1100 l. for non-payment whereof, he was to be seized of a Rent
charge of 100 l. per annum, to him and his Heirs for ever. But then, in case
the Rent charge were redeemed by the payment of the said 1100 l. then the Will
of him the said Hammond was, That the said Eleven hundred pounds, with Three
hundred pounds more, should be paid over to my Lord Mountague, Anthony Garnet,
and John Brown Esquire for the advancement of our College. The said Garnet, with
the consent of the other two, did receive several sums as part of the said 1100
l. and namely 200 l. at one time: which 200 l. was lent to Dr. Ainsloe, Doctor
in Physic, for the good of the College, till the rest should be received: for
the payment whereof, the said Ainsloe and Sir Henry Lee became bound. Moreover,
the said Ainsloe became bound to the said Lord Mountague in a Bond of 100 l.
for the payment of 20 l. per annum for diverse Years. Now my Lord Mountague,
Ainsloe and Brown being dead, there passed a Decree in Chancery against Garnet
aforesaid, that the said two Bonds should be delivered to the College; and my
Lady Mountague, with the rest of the Executors and Assigns of my Lord
Mountague, did appoint George Abbots, Master of Arts of the College, to
receive that 200 l. of Ainsloe, and upon Receipt thereof, to pay it over to the
College, further enabling the College to ask and take of the said Executors
of Hammond the said 300 l. mentioned in the said two Obligations. Now whether
the said George Abbot, or the College, did receive any part of the
forementioned sums, it appears not. But I find that the foresaid Garnet, in
pursuance of the said Decree, did surrender the forementioned Lease of the New
Lodgings [thence called Hammonds-hall] to our College, by his Deed, bearing
date 35 Eliz. which Lease had been bought by the said Garnet, and the rest of
Hammond s Executors, as is probable, to the same intent and purpose: The which
Tenement, by this means, became part of the site of the College, and so
remains. By which, and diverse other cases of our own, we may see how the
Charity of good Persons is mostly left unto the trust of those, who either
neglect it, or lick their own Fingers with it: so that very little or nothing
falls, as here it did, to the share of those to whom its intended. Only by the
taking in of this Lease [which time and patience would have worn out] we gained
Lodgings for two Fellows more, which were added to the Foundation by the
Charity of Peter Blundel, and the Lady Periham.

SECT. 35.
To all Benefactions already mentioned, and some hereafter [because lying
together with others of later date, but of more moment] to be mentioned, we
have a License of Mortmain added, with a Besides the Pardons granted by H. 6.
and Ed. 6. which are in the Box of Admissions of Masters, and of the Foundation
of the College; which Pardons are formerly mentioned.
Charter for the Being and Style of our College; which [having been formerly
diverse, and many Inconveniences ensuing thereupon, being sometimes written
[The Principal and Scholars] sometimes [the Principal and Fellows] sometimes
[the Warden and Scholars] sometimes [the Master and Fellows] sometimes [the
Master, Fellows and Scholars etc.] as in the said Charter is observed] is
thereby appointed to be [The Master and Scholars of Balliol Colledge] and none
other: The which style we use to this day; and have so used it ever since the
date of the said Charter, which was Auno 30 Eliz. Who by other Letters Patents
laid up, together with these, in the same Charter Case, had formerly, viz. 29
Eliz. confirmed not only the Foundation and Statutes of John de Balliol, but
also other Letters Patents before*mentioned; with others given by her
Progenitors for the behoof of this College, which are therein verbatim
recited. The ancient Benefactions I find Recorded likewise in the Tower,
verbatim.
So that were all other Records of our College lost, and these mentioned in
this Section only remaining, we had enough to show for the substance of all
our College Revenue; excepting some few Candle-Rents here in Oxon, and other
accessions to this House, of greater moment indeed, but made after the date of
all the Premises. And upon this alteration of the Style of the College, a new
Seal was Fabricated, with the Image of St. Catherine in it, having her Sword in
one hand, her Wheel in the other, and her Crown upon her head, with the several
Coats of Arms placed, as in Dervorgilles Seal beforementioned: the Seal in use
immediately before, being the Image of the B. Virgin Mary, in bosse or haut
relief (as the French call it) sitting with a Crown upon her head, with the
Babe in her hands (nobili sane solacismo) as Beza calls it (upon another
occasion) environed with St. Kat: and all the Saints, with this engraveur in
the Ring; viz. Sigillum commune Domus Ball: servata, sancta, pia virgo domui
tuae de te propitiam.

SECT. 36.
In K. James's Reign, many things were done for our College, some of them
relating to things of ancienter date; one is concerning our Quarries at
Heddington, which, though time out of mind in the possession of our College
and of their Lessees, yet Mr. Broom, Lord of that Manor, pretended title to,
endeavoring by all means to suppress the Landmarks thereof, having gotten into
his own hands some Evidences which appertained to the College in relation to
the Premises. But upon complaint made by the College in the Chancery, 10 Jac.
It was Decreed [and the Decree we have under Seal] that we should enjoy the
said Quarry, and Land thereunto belonging, as it was meered out by one Richard
Comely, containing on the West side 21 Pole and 5 Foot, at 16 Foot and a half
to every Pole; on the East side 20 Pole and 5 Foot: In the breadth on the North
end, 7 Pole and 15 Foot, and on the South end 8 Pole: Mag: Coll* Quarry lying
on the West side of the said Acre, and the Land of Magdalen College lying on
the North side thereof, and the Land of Mr. Broom on the South and East-sides.
By the same Decree we have also free liberty of digging, carrying away, using,
employing, converting, etc. as by the said Decree in Odyngton Box more at large
may appear. But before this, viz, August 36. Anno 1605. Mris. Mary Dunch gave
an Exhibition to the College, charged upon North-morton in the County of
B^rks, as by the Composition thereof appears. And Jan: 20. 1607. John Brown B.
D. and Vicar of Basingstoke in Hampshire, formerly Fellow of University
College, but first Scholar of this House, confirmed by Indenture to us, 2 l.
12 s. per annum for ever, as a Rentcharge out of certain Lands in Rutherwi^k
in the said County of Southampton, for one Exhibitioner or Scholar; to be paid
him by 12 d. per week, according to his residence, as by the Composition more
fully may appear.

SECT. 37.
Although our Land at Tackley, and some of our Lands at Old Woodstock and
Wotton, are anciently belonging to our College, and confirmed by the Letters
Patents mentioned in the former Section [but of whose gift I do not find] yet
because other of our Lands there [and those the greater part of all] were
bought in K. James's his Reign, I shall mention them together in this place.
The Land at Tackley appears upon our Register, to be confirmed to us by K. H.
8. who took us Tenants for it.) The ancient Lands in Woodstock and Wotton, I
find confirmed unto us by the same K. H. 8. by the name of one Message and one
Yard Land in As appears by a Courtroll of 33 H. 8.
Old Woodstock, called Heynes; one other Message and half Yard Land in Old
Woodstock, called Jewels; and one more Message and half Yard Land in Wotton;
and this done by receiving our Homage for them: but it appears by a Survey,
that Balliol College has two Yard Land and a half in Wotton and Woodstock,
which is half a Yard Land more then in the Homage is mentioned: All which, and
many more, seem to have been the Lands of Thomas Harrow Clerk, and passed over
by him to diverse persons jointly, 9 H. 8. as it is recorded in our Register, by
a full recital of the Deed it self. The other Lands of ours in Old Woodstock,
are the third part of the Certes (now written Sartes) bought of Thomas Ely and
Nicolas Lucie, for 6 l. 6 s. 8 d. in 11 Jac: reputed worth 1 l. 13 s. 4 d. per
annum, as amongst other things by the Deed is expressed. See Nashes surrender,
13 Jac. Rex. Annoque Dom. 1615.
Seacoales, with other Lands, and the rest of the Sartes bought of Hierome Nash
for 700 l. being part of moneys given by Peter Blundel, Founder of Tiverton
School in Devon, in the last Year of Queen Eliz: upon which consideration, 13
Jac: our College did agree with his Feoffees to maintain one Fellow and one
Scholar for ever, to be chosen and sent from Tiverton School as aforesaid, as
amongst other things may by the Composition appear. Before the purchase of
these Lands of Hierome Nash aforesaid, he the said Nash was Tenant to our other
Lands, which lying intermingled with his, a Controversy arose, Which were
ours? and which were his? whereupon, by mutual accord of the College and him,
ours were set out precisely, as appeats by a Deed to that purpose, bearing date
October. 16. Anno 13 Jacobi. The particulars of the Land, afterward purchased by
the College of him the said Nash, are expressed and bounded in a Schedule
annexed to our Deed of purchase, bearing date, November: 24. following; which
Lands, together with others of the said Nash in Old and New Woodstock and
Wotton, were the Lands of William Seacoal of Stanton-Wyard in the County of
Oxon, who conveyed them to Michael Nash, by a Deed bearing date, October. 9. Anno
6 Eliz. Now these Lands thus bought of him are so small, and the charge is so
great, that the said lands were set almost at a Rack-rent to defray it; and
falling into the hands of beggarly Tenants, the College has of late Years,
lost at least 200 l. by them: So that the Damnum emergens, by letting in these
new comers, and these to share in Offices and Perquisites; and the Lucrum
cessans, by the lessening of our Rent, makes the old Foundation groan under the
burden, which happened to be the greater by the dis-honesty of the Chapman,
who sold away the best parcels of his land to others; leaving to us the open
Fields, wherewith he thought us as easy to be taken, as Larks are there by a
Day-net: and some of those, it is thought, were our own before too. And lastly,
That no allurement might be wanting to catch us by, he tempted us with a
handsome well-situated House: not forgetting that of the Poet.

Aspicis ut veniant ad candida tecta columbae
Accipiat nullas sordida turris oves.
These misfortunes some have ascribed to the unluckiness of the place, it being
never known that any Man thrived upon it: But this has been the usual Apology
for bad Husbandry, which is the reason why our Chapman sold it, and our Tenant
grew poor upon it, besides the Suits in Law wherewith he was continually
embroyled, for land of his own adjoining. I should rather ascribe it to the
nonperformance of Blundel's Will, by establishing a Fellow and a Scholar, he
intending it for two Scholars only. Some will be ready to say, That it has
followed Fortunam Loci, h. e. the College which was cheated in the first
Foundation lands, and has been since many times abused, as herein, so in other
things before, and hereafter to be mentioned, ascribed to the superstitious
uses whereunto the House was consecrated, viz. the honor, not of God only, but
of the whole Choir of Heaven, to whom Prayers, Supplications, and Intercessions
were wont to be made. Whereunto I answer, That this has been ever the Argument
of Sacrilege, and at this day is, for the sales of Bishops lands and other
Church Revenues, and holds as well against the most flourishing Colleges of
England as against this. But in the first place, these Benefactions were no
Acts of constraint, they being all done or intended before the persons lay upon
their Deathbeds, and consequently not solicited thereunto by their
Confessors, which was the matter of an Anno Dom. 1646.
Appeal, I remember, once at Rouen in the great Chamber of Parliament, viz. for
the Cassation of a Testament, whereby the Testator gave all his movables and
one Years Rent of his lands to a Religious House, inasmuch as the Curat having
his soul in his hand, one would presume it to have been done by an Act of
constraint: for by the Civil Law, it is not permitted to any one to persuade a
Moribund to bequeath any thing to any person but his Tutor, his Physician, or
his Servant, inasmuch as the last Will ought to be free. The matter was so
learnedly and readily argued on both sides, that the Court gave no Sentence in
the Cause. On the same day there was another Process, touching a Testament
which had been signed by the Testator before it was read unto him, by reason of
the feebleness of his hand, not able to expect the reading thereof: whereupon,
the Appellant demanded the Cassation of the same: But it was pronounced good by
the sentence of the Court, as a thing freely intended by the Testator.
Secondly, then I say, That though those Constellations of Saints were in her
[as in others] religious Horoscope, as carried away with the common Error of
the Times; yet she made God, whose honor is first regarded by her, the Lord of
her Ascendent. The like has the good Lady Periham done [those Constellations
being by the Reformation removed out of the places they held in our Founders
time] who for the promoting and increase of Learning and Religion, has annexed
one Fellowship and two Scholars places to the old Foundation for ever, with 40
s. per annum to the senior Fellows Scholar; but with a more equitable Proviso
then any is in Blundel's Composition, and more suitable to that of the Founders
Statutes; which is, That the Revenues decreasing, the allowance of her
Eleemosynaries should decrease proportionably: which otherwise, had not been
agreeable to the Founders Statutes, wherein it is provided, that Decrescentib
us reditibus decrescat numerus Sociorum: Wherefore she chose rather to have
part of the maintenance of her own Scholars withdrawn, then in this case leave
them to rob us. And all this was done by the direction of George Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, as is recited in an Indenture of mutual Release
between his Grace and this College, to whose discretion it was by her wholly
left, to what uses, and in what College in Oxon her Charity was to be
employed. To the end and purpose aforesaid, the said Lady Beriham did (18
Jacobi) give to the said Archbishop the Farm called Borough-farm, with all the
Members and Appurtenances whatsoever in Medmenham and Hambleton, in the County
of Bucks, yet in lease for about The Lease dated 18 Jac.
13 Years to come; which Interest of his Graces, did he Release to the College
by the foresaid Indenture, dated October. 9. in 4 Car. 1. Annoque Dom. 1628. But
some of the Trustees judging part of this Estate See the Boxes of Borough-Farm
and Prince-Risborow.
to lie convenient for themselves, took it, and left us that at Prince-Risborow
for it. Thus our Pious Benefactrix beteem'd her Scholars reasonable Messes of
Commons, but her Cooks licked their own Fingers in dividing of them. Not far
from this Prince-Risborow, we have another Farm of an ancienter Donation, viz.
at Morton near Tame, conveyed by George Nevil Archbishop of York, to several
Trustees, 14 Ed. 4. conveyed to Nevil by Botelet, conveyed by Botelet to
Jacket, conveyed to Jacket by Pyron, and to Pyron by Wolundun, 14 Ed. 3. and so
up, till we come to Writings without date. And besides this, I do not know of
any thing that I have not mentioned, unless the George in Woodstock, bought of
one Mead (13 Car. 1.) with 100 l. given us by a Benefactor, and 60 l. added
thereunto.

SECT. 38.
Seven Fellowships and six Scholarships, given by William Tisdale, were upon
the point of being settled here, upon such terms as should be agreed upon
between the Abindonians and the College, and allowed by George Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury his Grace. Three hundred pound of the Money given by Tisdale to
the foresaid intent and purpose, was delivered into the hands of the College,
wherewith (with the addition of 40 l. or thereabouts) were bought Caesar's
lodgings, with all the Houses and Appurtenances adjoining, for a present
Receptacle for the said six Scholars, which were there received and settled
accordingly, receiving their Exhibitions by the hands of our Bursars, viz.
Dring, Lee, Crabtree, Allen, Bowls and Read: whereof Crabtree dyed of a stab
with a Knife, given him by the unlucky hand of a Fresh-man of three Weeks
standing: the rest continued here in expectation of a settlement for themselves
and the intended Fellows here (whereof they were to be the first) which was to
be upon the mutual accord of this College and the Abindonians, by whom they
were to be sent hither from that School. At the last, Articles, such as the
Abindonians desired, were agreed on by the College, subscribed by the Master
and Fellows: which are as follows.

Articles of Agreement, between the Major, Bailiffs, and Burgesses of the Town
of Abington, and the Master and Scholars of Balliol College, concerning the
Incorporating into the said College seven Fellows and six Scholars, of Mr.
Tisdale's Foundation, mutually assented unto, if so be it shall seem good to
the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace.
IMprimis, It is agreed, That the said College be endowed with the Lands
purchased for the Fellows; provided, That if the said Lands and Endowment shall
be by any means impaired, there shall be a decrease of the number of Fellows
and Scholars, according to the Statute of the ancient Foundation.

2. That the surplusage of the Money that remains of the Profits of the said
Lands, amounting unto about Eight hundred pounds, be delivered to the use of
both the Foundations.

3. The seven Fellows and six Scholars of Mr. Tisdale's Foundation, to be
Incorporated and made parcel of the Body, by the name of Master and Scholars:
But by their private Orders, and in the House to be distinguished; viz. Mr.
Tisdale's Fellows, and Abingdonian Scholars.

4. The said College to provide convenient Lodgings for the Scholars of the
said Foundation, during the time they shall continue Scholars.

5. That the Scholars already chosen, shall so continue, until such time that
Money be raised out of their Revenues for to provide convenient Building to
receive the full number of the Foundation, and then the said Scholars to be
Fellows, and more Scholars chosen. Provided, That the Money levied out of the
Yearly Rents, shall remain in the Chamber of the Town of Abingdon, until such
time that there be raised a competent sum to erect Buildings, uniform to the
said College, the College allowing Ground for the said Building; and that the
Election of the said Fellows and and Scholars respectively, shall be immediately
after the finishing of the said Building.

6. That out of the said Eight hundred pounds, or thereabouts, all charges in
settling of the said Lands by Conveyance, or otherwise, shall be discharged.

7. That the seven Fellows of Mr. Tisdale's Foundation, shall equally receive
all Profits and Commodities with the Fellows of the ancient Foundation, and
shall be equally capable of all Offices, Preferments and Privileges whatsoever
in the said College.

8. That the six Scholars of Mr. Tisdale's Foundation shall receive the full
allowance by the Will, or what shall answer in full proportion to the said
allowance, as shall be suitable to the Customs of the College.

9. That the six scholars of Mr. Tisdale's foundation shall enjoy their said
places until they shall be Masters of Arts, or until either by death,
resignation or preferment, according to the statutes of the said College,
their places shall become void.

10. That in a void place of any scholar, the election of one other to be made
within three months by such, and in such manner as is limited by the Will, and
then to be presented and admitted, if he be worthy.

11. That the Master of the College for the time being, shall receive out of
the Revenues of Mr. Tisdale's donation, the sum of Twenty*pounds by the year.

12. That there being seven fellows and six scholars chosen out of the said
school of Abington, no more of the said school be chosen into any place of the
ancient Foundation.

Subscribed, Jo: Parkhurst, Magister Coll: Bal. Edw: Wilson. Johannes English.
Johannes Churchar. Tho: Crane. Tho: Chambers. Aegid: Thorn. Johan: Pits. Rich:
Trimnell. Rob: Parry.


Whilst these things were pending, the Abingdonians, instead of pursuing the
intent of Tisdale, which was to make his Fellows and Scholars an additional
part of a Foundation, entertained thoughts [by the help of the Charity of
Whitwick] of Founding a new College of it self; which they did effect, without
regard had at all to the said Condescensions of our College [though published
time enough to have hindered it] which could not have been greater, without
manifest Injury to the ancient Foundation, violence offered to the Statutes
themselves: which thing was so little regarded in Blundel's Composition, that
it is to be feared, That it has been none of the least occasions of those
various Providence we have seen come to pass, and ad beneficium and
beneficiarios. The place the Abingdonians pitc'd on, was Broadgates-hall, where
that they might take such footing, as that nothing might be able to remove
them; they made the Earl of Pembroke, then Chancellor of the University, the
Godfather of this new Christened Hall, calling it by the name of Pembroke
College: King James the Founder of it, who then reigned; but (ad onera and
costagia) at the cost and charges of Tisdale and Whitwick, allowing these only
the privilege of Foster Fathers, as appears by the Natalitia which I shall
here insert.

NATALITIA COLLEGII PEMBROCHIANI OXONII. 1624.
Reverendissimo in Christo Patri Georgio Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi dignissimo,
totius Angliae Primati and Metrapolitano, patrono nostro colendissimo.
QVi te non audet accedere, non novit benignitatem Tuam, Praesul Amplissime;
qui te multis interpellat, peccat in mores, Ecclesiam, Rempub. quibus sub
pientissimo Rege, optimoque Principe, prudentissima tua pietas praesidet.
Paucis ergo habeto gratitudinem Tuorum Pembrochiensium, rationem redditam
actorum in natalibus Collegii hujus nuperi; in honorem and solatium Tuum, qui
benefacta Tisdalli Tui non male locata laetabere. Tisdalli Tui vere dicimus,
affectu, institutione, benefaciendi foelicitate Tui. Propensissime Is semper in
te affectus, multis annis a te religiose, pi^ institutus, ad hanc munificentiam
piam per te edoctus, animatus. Per illius piam memoriam; per pietatem Tuam, Te
submisse obtestamur, Reverende Pater, nos velis fundatore nostro, amico Tuo
orbatos, inter filios tuos numerare. Putato, ut Legatum Tisdalli munificum Tuae
fidei concreditum, sic Legatoris nos Tuae tutelae commendatos. Quo obsequio
filii nativi patri devincti sunt, aut esse debent, eodem nos paternitati Tuae
obstrictos habebis; inter reliquos Magistrum Collegii, Eum qui per 30 plus
minus annos, pietatem, doctrinam, prudentiam Tuam vere, intime est reveritus,
futurus semper est

Amplitudini Tuae devotissimus Servus, Tho: Clayton.


COllegium Pembrochiae in Vniversitate Oxon: ex fundatione Jacobi Regis ad
onera and costagia Thomae Tisdale and Richardi Wihgtwicke, constat ex uno
Magistro, december Sociis and december Scholaribus cum privilegiis and immunitatibus
concessis per Literas Patentes Regias datas Junii 29. 1624.

Hae literae patentes lectae fuerunt public in Aula Collegii Pembrochie
Augusti 5. 1624. Quo die admissus fuit Magister Collegii, and facta est
Transmutatio Aulae Lateportensis in Collegium Pembrochianum.

In qua transmutatione habitae sunt Orationes sequentes.

Thomas Brown Studiosus non Graduatus Commensalis Collegii.
SEntio Lateportenses (salvam enim adhuc vobis antiquum hoc nomen, mox
antiquandum) sentio, inquam, aures vobis ad unum omnibus arrectas quo se ferat
Oration mea avide expectantibus, and, ut ita dicam, auditurientibus an in
invidiam Pembrochianorum an in gratiam dicturus surrexerim: Quaenam vero sunt
ista perperam interpretantibus mala, quae a me quasi in Aulae funere lamentis
veris, atque quod dicitur, spirantibus (...) velitis? En, Aulam vestram vagam,
and (...) (quem enim hujus domus patrem, aut fundatorem recolimus? in tutelam
recepit Mecaenas nobilissimus, de Aula Collegium, de Lateportensi suo indito
nomine Pembrochiense, de lateritia, ut ita dicam, idque si durationem spectes,
vere marmoreum facturus, quod ne ipsa quidem invidia, nisi fluens aspiciet. An
illum qui hujus beneficii author, and fundus nobis extitit, qui mutationem hanc
parturiit, pietatis criminis rerum sistemus, postulabimus benevolentiae datique
nobis recte aestimantibus beneficii invidiam faciemus? Quis tam improbus, and
nulla front qui haec dicat? Quid enim? jura nostra, si quae fuerint, salva
omnia, quanquam quae Lateportensium jura, quas privatas rations putemus tanti?
ut cum de communi bono agitatur, non prorsus jaceant, and Collegio Pembrochiano
fasces submittant? Eadem tamen jura omnia, idem Magister and Principalis,
eaedem aedes, nisi quod nobiliores, Lateportensis Pembrochiensis and vice versa
Pembrochiensis Lateportensis, Tros Tyriusque hoc tantum discrimine, quod nos
prius titulo nescio quo forte Ironico appellatos, jam vere magnificum nomen
insigniet. Quis ergo Lateportensium cum ex Aulae antiquae ruderibus Phaenicem
Pembrochianam excitatam viderit (quod nunc tantum non fit) non ostentabit
damnum suum, and gratulabitur sibi tam utilem nominis jacturam? Intret jam
Pembrochianum in portas nostras, nec non etiam in animos; hanc Latiportensem
nostram apud te (vir ornatissime) (...) deponimus, durum enim fuerit dicere
telinquimus, apud te, inquam, auspicato deponimus mox pro Aula Collegium, pro
Principali Magistrum recepturi.

Johan. Lee Art: Baccalaur Scolaris Collegii.
QUidni demorsos Cleanthis ungues sapere, and lucernam olere Ciceronianam
debet, quae arae Lugdunensi adornatur Oration? ne Oratoris incuria cum Ajace in
spongiam, and fama in dentem impingat Theoninum. De mea igitur fama quidni
jacta videatur alea? cum in hoc Areopagitarum Theatrum velut in Epicurei
intermundia subito delapsus sim homuncio, festina nimis obstetricante editam
proditurus Orationem quasi ex somnifero vacunae foco, ipsoque Epimenibus specu
prodeuntem. Elegissem (Academici spectatissimi) Tacitae potius cum Numa
litasse, quam in tam celebrem irruisse conventum, illotis (quod aiunt) manibus,
and salsa minus mola propi^io Tisdalli Genio litaturus; nisi maluissem a vobis
medium imperitiae digitum, quam ab illo conversum ingratitudinis pollicem
demereri. Meum me huic scopulo Prometheum affixit pientissimo Tisdallo
gratulandi officium; qui suos huc usque passus videtur manes foelici Aesonis
omine nunc demum recoquendus, novaque cum Eu^yclice donandus vita. Gallum
debemus, candido serenissimi Claytonis Aesculapio cujus unius beneficio velut
gustato Glauci gramine, nostri in his aedibus revixit Tisdallus; and lugubri
Libitinae suspensa Cupresso nactus est vivacem nominis in aeternum victuri
Cedrum. Euge, Abingdoniensis, plaude nunc demum, propitiae Junoni litato,
Genioque indulgeto Schola, quae Solemn hodiernum, tanquam illam Acessei lunam
avidis jamdudum oculis expectasti: En foelix unione notandus, tibi jam tandem
illuxit dies, in quo foelici opem ferente Lucina, Musas enixa es Pembrochianas.
Totum nunc certe lustrum elapsum est, ex quo tu harum aliquas immaturo quasi
Semeles partu radi obstetricante Minerva exclusisti: quae celeberrima Ballioli
seminaria veluti Jovis foemori insutae and excoctae Pembrochianos nunc gestiunt
coronare lares. Hasce Musas (ornatissimi Lateportenses) quae vestrum in limine
faventem salutarunt Janum, facilem Jovis vestri Hospitalis tesseram
impetraturas spero. Adeo ut sanctum quasi Jovem lapidem juratae vobiscum
ineuntes foedus in unum cum Apolline vestro coalescant Hermophroditum. Piis
indies precibus vestro litant Hymenaeo, and deorum omnium conjugalium incerant
genua, genialem Dei vestri tutelaris ambientes torum; speramus tam pias Musas
(faventibus Gratiis) voti damnandas, earumque (nulla interim Penelopes texenda
tela, aut moris nectendis) Zonam solvendam praestolamur. Ne gravemini (viri de
Musis meritissimi) omnibus dejectis de cardine controversiis, ad quas
componendas nova plerumque viri plac^ opus est; obviis ulnis procantes
amplexari Musas: quae si vestram demereri gratiam poterint, de alterius
cujuscunque Museae spleen, and formicae bile, nil pensi habent. Insuper, ut
nihil desit, quod suam Caio Caiam legitimis pactam tabellis arctissime
conjungat, orandi estis, ut deponcano and antiquato Lateportensium nomini
nuncium mittentes, nomine gaudeatis succidaneo, and libenter (quod been vortat)
Pembrochienses audiatis. Amandetur interim ad Chrispini Lippi scrinia cum
blattis ac tineis rixatura multiloqua invidiae (...), quae suas a ventis
ferendas in nos eructabit de plaustro contumelias incassum nostrum per tam
Latas portas egressuram exprobraturas Myndum. Pinge duas angues (pia matter
Accademia) quo minus profana ausit invidia in cineres mingere Tisdallinos; ex
his enim speramus aliquando (nullis interim expectandis Graecorum calendis)
magnificas Musis surrecturas moles, reliquarum aemulas, prae quibus Memphitica
pyramidum miracula in Augiae stabulum commigrasse viderentur. Agite
(celeberrimi Pembrochienses) vestrum solamini, and exhilarate Larem, quem
(deterso vetustatis situ) velut exutum pannis Ulyssem opulescere videmus,
Tysdalli in prima cera haeredem futurum: quem per se clarissimum magis indies
inclarescere non dubitamus, magnas quoquo versus literarum colonias deducturum.
Suam hinc arripiat Zoilus calumniandi ansam, qui nedum in scirpo non tam
invenire, quam facere satagit: qui saniosas vitiorum vomicas obelo suo indignas
summa tantum cute titillare solet; at protractae in arenam virtuti
Rhinoceroticam semper impingit narem: Naevos vellicare (...) susque deque habet
invidia: in amabili quocunque, vel ipso Veneris sandalio gestit scabros
fatigare dentes; and praetereuntium digito si quid dignum occurrat, in hoc suum
vel frangere genuinum non gravatur. At vero non vereor eam soboli Tysdallinae
vaticinari famam, quam albo invidiae calculo insignitam, vel ipse inclusus
tauro Perillus reboaret; eamque his aedibus gloriam non dubito accessuram, quam
vel ipse quoque livor (salvis Codri iliis) plenis in perpetuum decantabit
buccis. Interim quam arcto nexu munificentissimo Tisdallo emancipati sumus? qui
nos haeredes ex ass constitutos, nec non ornatissimo Whitwicko qui plus quam
sextula aspersos in tantum fortunae supra omnem invidiae aleam positae spem,
erexit censos capite homunciones. Grata etiam memoria semper recolendus est a
nobis, qui ad clavum Ecclesiae Anglicanae sedet Reverendissimus Praesul,
fiduciarius Tisdalli haeres; qui nostras utroque cornu nutantes jamdiu fortunas
grato tibicine suffulcire dignatus est. Caeterum (Mecaenas ornatissime,
dignissimique municipii Abingdoniensis proceres) nobis aere vestro plane
obrutis, aut novae impetrandae sunt tabellae, aut tristes quam primum
advenerint calendae, luridus miseris expectandus Druso: nisi malitis, ut
conductae a Musis Cratiae suspensis nostris omnium bonis libellos dejiciant se
vobis in aeternum obligaturae. Ut ut (vigilantissime Collegii Pembrochiani
magister) tuos tibi semper indelibatos exopto honores, quibus siqua uspiam
Aesopica intumescens in bovem rana illud ex veteri comoedia (...) ^ggannire
ausit, (vindice Nemesi) ruptis demum iliis debitas luat coaxantis invidiae
poenas. En habetis (Academici) ad nictantem plane lucernam nulla olei impensa
elucubratum Collegii Pembrochiani encomium: in quo concinnando res postulavit,
ut pluteum c^deret caput scaberet, ungues ad vivum roderet redivivus aliquis e
vobis eloquentiae Camillus. At rem dicam, duplicem impresentiarum nactus sum
Spartam, ad quarum alterutram satis pro merito ornandam, lateribus Milonis and
toto Ulysse opus esse videatur: hunc enim pulverem emensus, jamjam a Baliolensi
accersor pluteo, ad commovendam Gowrian^ machinationis camarinam. Dum duplicem
hanc humeris Aetnam sustineo, a posticis temperate sannis (Academici) meque in
tantas angustias redactum, curvatis a tergo ciconiarum collis nequaquam dignum
judicate, utcunque rem tanti ponderis tam dissolutis aggredientem scopis. Quod
unum reliquum est vos ad unum omnes (ornatissimi Academici) per sacrum
Academiae Genium oratos velim, ut piae munificentissimi Tisdalli urnae
pientissimis parentetis votis: Mollem tam charo Musis capiti cippum precamini:
and bonis avibus inauguratas vestris auspitiis approbate, calculis ornatae,
faustisque acclamationibus Musas salutate Pembrochianas.

Matthew: Turner, Art: Mag: Prelector Philosophiae.
EOne res jam recidit (Lateportenses) ut nos veteres Coloni migremus, and novis
istis in nostra domo regnum possessuris jure and loco cedamus? Sane quod dixit
Tribunus quidem plebis apud Livium, cum plebi connubio patritio interdictum
esset, quid hoc est aliud, inquit, quam exilium intra eadem maenia, quam
Relegationem pati? idem de Lateport: (...) forte a re nata alienum, and (...)
non erit: Intra eosdem parietes nostros, intra eadem tecta, non relegationem
quidem, aut exilium, sed quod aeque novum est, (...), sed migrationem pati, sed
in propriis penatibus tantum non hospites videmur. Quin si sero resipitis
aliquid Lateportense, obviam itis hominibus (...) in aliena nec vacua quidem
illa invadentibus, quin interceditis Collegio, quin jura vestra vobis a
majoribus tradita sarta tecta servatis, and Aulam vestram (...) animam agentem,
and vix tantillum spiritus reliqui habentem, quo haec novissima verba jam
abituriens in auribus vestris (...) relinquat, Aulam, inquam, antiquam; jam si
fas fit dicere, moriturientem, quam ne fuisse unquam posteri nostri forte vel
fando audituri sunt, ab imminente morte asseritis, and a novo isto nomine
vindicatis. (...). Quid enim est ratione recte subducta, cur quis tantas hac in
re tragaedias excitet, cur coelum quasi ac terras misceat, and in invidiam
Pembrochianorum ore plus quam tragico exaggeratum eat mala nostra, nondum
constituto, an si ponitus excusserit, mala, an secus, fuerint: Siquidem rem
recte aestimantibus fortasse etiam imputandam fuerit nobis hoc damnum non adeo
prout prima videbatur front incommodum, and non spernendi beneficii loco
censendum. Ecquis enim parvi faciat novarum familiarum adjectiones, and novae
adaugendam hanc nostram Coloniam quasi (...) cujusdam accessionem. Non ignoti,
nescio qui de triviis homines, diverso Rectore, diversis affectibus quasi ex
alio genere mortalium repent in unum collecti huc confluunt, eadem omnes
castra and Hyberna tendimus. Idem nobis mutato titulo, non animo Magister, and
Principalis, Tros Tyriusque huic nullo, nisi virtutis discrimine spectatur: and
quod hujus beneficii caput est, Aula nostra Reverendissimo Domino
Archiepiscopo, illi Britanniae nostrae oraculo, and honoratissimo Domino
Cancellario nostro, literarum and Literatorum patrono, nec non vobis (quibus
haud minima debetur gratia) Abingdoniensibus, tanti aestimata est, ut quasi de
sparsis Absyrti membris nullo firmo quidem inter se vinculo colligatis,
annuente Regum optimo Jacobo, in corpus been compactum, omnibusque quod
speramus Whitw: Tisd:
numeris absolutum, impensis and sumptibus nobilis illius Piorum (...)
coalesceret, and instar decantati istius in fabulis Aesonis, aetate deposita
venerandos illos antiquitatis canos jam revirescentes ostenderet. Com: Pemb:
Quid tandem aliud est Collegium Pembrochianum, quam Aula Lateportensis recocta,
addo etiam renata, and si nobilem illum hujus Domus aeternum (...) addiderim,
certe hodierno die Aulae nostrae Encaenia agere, non Dns. Dr. Clayton Princip:
funus ducere videamur. Quibus tandem herbis, nisi in animo tuo (Medicorum
pater) olim insitis, quo alio quam tuae humanitatis succo, quibus nisi virtutum
tuarum (...), and carminibus posita canitie repubescit Aula Lateportensis;
Fallor, aut sola tua (...) bonitas, te etiam silente, viris optimis author
erat, ut in alia Musarum domicilia tantum (...), in nostru^ oculos infigere^t,
quo philtro, quo fascino obstricti, nisi quo, tu, in omniu^ affectus
gratissima^ exerces Tyrannide^? Qua tande^ in re (...), Lateportenses, aut jure
nostro decedimus, vel specie tenus nisi forte quaedam s^t, ut Imperiorum, ita
Collegiorum and Aularum arcana, nescio quae, ego non video, ut autem fuerint,
fuerint etiam alia insuper incommoda (nam quid fere undique placet?) quis tam
adeo de faece homnncio est, qui id quod sua tantum interesse putat, publico
bono antiquius habeat, aut sua causa and privatis nominibus aegre ferat
communem utilitatem? Certe non solum non dubitaverim, sed etiam contenderim,
nominem esse, ut ut hujus domus (...), and indigenum Aulae Lateportensis
Alumnum, qui non obvia voluntate affirmet (...) hac mercede valde placuisse
sibi ^a^num suum quantum quantum fuerit, and non protinus exclamet tanti
fuisse. Rations putemus, Lateportenses (gratiam vero mihi facite erro^is
hujus, nec dum enim scio, tam obviam, and familiari apud nos consuetudine
receptam Dom. Dm. Clayton Magistrum.
appellationem dediscere) Rem, inquam, ad calculos vocemus, Sociis aucti sumus,
qua vero re, (...) diminuti? In animum illum vere Lateportensem, nullo unquam
inhumanitatis pessulo obditum, sed bonis omnibus late patentem intromissi illi,
quid, an continuo nos ejecti: Nunquam sat scio hic obtinebit vetus illud verbum
invidia plenum, (...). Nihil intererit inter Magistrum and Principalem, nisi
quod nunc a pluribus amabitur, coletur, qui ipse omnes ut ut plurimos amabit ut
singulos. Hujus quidem humanitate freti, non solum non iniquis animis ferimus
hos transitus rerum, sed pronis etiam, and quod dicitur, obviis ulnis
amplectimur. Quin igitur non disparibus frontibus honorem portas nostras
pulsantem intromittimus, and unanimi salutantium (ut ita dicam) vultuum
concentu unum, eundemque virum amplissimum (in cujus pura puta industria
Lateportensis gloriae cardo vertebatur, and olim Pembrochianae vertetur.)
hodierno, (ut ad honoris cumulum accedant etiam auspitia) hodierno, inquam,
die, quinto quidem, sed vel reclamantibus poetis, vere nobis festo, non (...),
ultimum Aulae Lateportensis, and primum (quod faeliciter vortat) Collegii
Pembrochiani divino, humanoque calculo approbante Magistrum auspicato salutamus.

Tho: Clayton Medecinae Professor Regius Magister Collegii.
Dr. Prideaux Vicecancell: Oxon: Rob: Baro Dormer: Gul: Dormer, frater Baron:
Dnus J: Smith Dnus Francis: Godolphin, equites aurati* Dr. Featly.

Procuratores Academiae.

Magistri alii multi, Aula plena. Major item Recordator and Burgenses Abing:


NOn ego, vos Domini, longo sermon morabor,

Multae sint gratiae tibi, Revere^de, qui secu^do jam itinere benigna tua
opera, hoc ipso in loco, me and res meas, Aulares, Collegiales promovere
dignatus es; vobis multae, Honoratissime Baro, cum honorabili fratre tuo,
Ornatissimi, amicissimi omnes, qui presentia vestra benevola Aulam hanc Aularum
antiquissimam, Collegium hoc Collegiorum novissimum ornare voluistis. Nemo,
puto, hoc mihi Magisterium invidebit: ego mea omnia infra invidiam, sunt apud
me miseranda multa, magnum nihil, nihil invidendum. Nec est, quod mihi
succenseat quispiam si quis haec benefacta, alibi locata voluerit, expectarit.
Testem habeo, in Domo mea omni exceptione majorem, neminem (been novi)
contratestantem, me nec magnates, nec minores, plane nullum, nec verbo, nec
scripto, nec pretio, nec prece, de hac Prefectura sollicitasse. Quu^ vero ita
placuerit serenissimae Majestati Regiae, Augustissimo Jacobo, Monarcharum
optimo, Regi a Salomone sapientissimo, literatissimo, Literarum Patrono maximo,
quum ita voluerint Reverendissimus Archiepiscopus, Ecclesiae, Academiae,
Collegiorum, literatorum, Pater pientissimus, Honoratissimus Cancellarius
noster, mihi speciatim semper colendus, nobis Pembrochianis, Academicis omnibus
aeternum honorandus, Alii magnifici* ornatissimi, probi viri, qui de nobis non
male senserunt, Provinciam capesso lubens. In qua administranda non tam
laetabor de commodo aut imperio, quam de amore meorum and occasion, quae
dabitur, benefaciendi merentibus been. Deus optimus maximus, imperia, obsequia
nostra, conatus, studia, proposita omnia dirigat in gloriam suam bonum
Ecclesiae and Reipublicae, in honorem Academiae, and Collegii Pembrochiani.

Now this Rejeton or Rejecton, is Emissarius Palms, or an Off-set.
Rejeton had no sooner taken root, then the Master and his company called the
Master and Society of our College into Chancery, for the restitution of the
foresaid 300 l. which had been employed toward the Purchase of the Lodgings
aforesaid: whereunto the Society at first were generally inclined to demur [my
Lord Keeper Coventry, who had been of the College, promising a gracious
hearing] but in fine, it was referred to my Lord of Canterbury aforesaid; who,
upon hearing, determined that the College was to pay the said 300 l. to the
Master and Society of Pembroke College (decreeing the Lodgings and Garden
adjoining to our Master, as a compensation of the loss of the 20 l. per annum,
which He and his Successors should have had, if the Pembrokians had been settled
with us; and the rest of the adjoining Tenements to the payment of the
Lectures, which failed with the failure of Fylingham) upon the Decree made
1615. Sect. 25. But knowing our Treasury to be empty of such sums, bade us go
home, be obedient to our Governor, and Jehovah jire^ Deus providebit: whereupon
his Grace paid down 50 l. of the said 300 l. presently; the other 250 l. we
gave Bond for, to be paid half yearly till the whole were satisfied. The which
sums, as they grew due, His Grace did likewise pay; which we expressed our
thankfulness for, by so many several Epistles: which being written by the
Fellows severally according to seniority, it came descendendo to my turn to pen
the last. Now this 300 l. together with 100 l. more, which was probably
employed to the making of the present Seats and Shelves in the Library, we owe
to his Grace. So that if Stars had any special influence upon inferior things,
we might safely say, That this College has been subject to unhappy ones. And
amongst all its Chronoeratores or Domines Temporum, it is hard to judge whether
has had the more malignant Aspect upon it, viz. The Thievish glance of
Mercuries Eye, or the Fiery looks of Mars: yet we have never wanted
Benefactors, who have lent us Bladders which have kept us from sinking: Amongst
whom, one eminent has been the late Right reverend Father in God, the Lord
Bishop of Rochester, who has added to the honor of our Founders, in the
enlargement of their Foundation, four Scholars, with 80 l. per annum
maintenance for them, in haec verba.

Item, I give out of my Manor of Swayton, for the maintenance of four Scholars
in Scotland fourscore pounds yearly and for ever; which said Scholars shall be
placed in Balliol College in Oxford, there to enjoy their Annuities or
Exhibitions until they are Masters of Art, and fit to be admitted into Holy
Orders according to the Church of England. And the said Scholars are to be
chosen from time to time by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of
Rochester.

To say nothing of the advantage that may hence accrue to the Scots themselves
(in the capacity they have already by our Statutes of being ^hosen Fellows
here, as well as any other persons of any place or Nation ^^atsoever are) that
to us will be (besides the Obligation of Interests) the filling of Chambers,
Tuition, taking of Degrees, Honor, etc. things whereunto our College seems to
be mainly designed; which Baits, whilst others nibble at, I wonder they should
go about to prove them shadows to us, who have lost one part of five of our
College Revenue, by the late dreadful Fire in London, besides what damage it
has sustained by the late unnatural War, and the Fine upon renewing of the
Lease of the Impropriation of St. Lawrence Jury London, now within two Years
and half of expiration, which could not have been less worth then Five or six
hundred pounds at 10 Years purchase.

SECT. 39.
But whatever has been the condition of this College, as being a part of the
Material World: It gives way to few in relation to the Intelligible, as I may
so say, It having been the Nursery of so many Learned Persons, and others
desirous of good Letters: A List of some whereof I am now to exhibit.

Walter de Fodringheye.
The first Principal, who became a Dignatary, viz. Prebendary of Lincoln.

Johannes Duns Scotus.
There Is as much contending for the breeding place of this rare Man, as has
been for the birth of Homer: We conjecture him to have been of this College of
Balliol, inasmuch as he was by Country of Northumberland, and of Duns there, as
might be seen not only in Pitsaeus, but before every Volumn of his Works in
Mss. in our Library, of the gift of Bishop Gray, but torn off in the time of
the late War; and for that in Northumberland was the first Endowment of our
College. He lived Anno 1300. which was after Dervorgilles Statutes (but before
those of Sir Philip Somervyle) yet not after the time when it was granted by
the Pope that the Scholars might live in the House after they became Masters of
Art: and therefore he might for that reason depart from this to Merton
College. But if this be not current, I shall give you in exchange

William Bishop of Worcester.
But whether he were William de Lynna, or William Whitlesey, afterward
Archbishop of Canterbury, I am not sure: whereof this was Bishop of Worcester,
38 Ed. 3. that the 43 of Edw: 3. and immediate successor of this Whitlesey. I
find not either of them challenged by others.

Jo: Wickleff.
Mentioned in five several Writings in Abbotfley-Box, by a Public Notary,
April 9. 1361.
There were two of the name Masters of this House: The later is he of whom we
now write: He was first Fellow hereof, then Master, and w^ he that gave the
name to the Wicklevites. His Letter written to the Pope, is to be seen in Fox*s
Acts and Monuments. Whom Balaeus commends as liberally, as Pitsaeus spends his
black mouth upon. He was public Reader in Divinity in the University. He set
up the Doctrine of the Waldenses, who were called Lollards in England; who
being also written Lolleards, seem to be so called quasi Low-Lords, that is,
Levellers: who though Reformers of Religion, yet the hostile manner wherein
they assembled themselves, gave occasion to the Laws which were Enacted against
them, Temp. Hen. 5. and of that Oath given to the High Sheriffs of Counties to
persecute the Lollards to death: (That which Mr. Fox in his Acts and Monuments
urges against Alanus Copus, in defense of Sir John Oldcastle, the Lord Cobham
(that the Act of Parliament was falsified, in that the consent of the Commons
was not found in it) proves only that the Commons had then no Vote in
Parliament, as to the making of Laws; but the falsifying of the Act, it proves
not at all.) Which damnable Doctrine of Rebellion, Religionis ergo, cannot be
ascribed to Wickleff, the University giving testimony to his great Learning and
Integrity of Conversation, Anno Dom. 12 Years before the Council of Constance,
and 29 Years after his death.
1402. And all our College Records wherein he is mentioned, do speak him a Man
of great Trust, in the Reign of K. R. 2. which things were witnessed by his
very Enemies. He is said to have written 200 Volumns against the Pope: He
translated the Bible into English. See the Catalogue of his Books exhibited by
Balaeus. His Bones were, by the Decree of the Council of Constance, taken up
and burned 41 Years after his death, which Council was called Anno Dom. 1414.

Jo: Waltham.
He was Fellow of this House, and Sub-Dean of York: He gave as a Legacy to the
College Notingamum Anglum in Mss. super quatuor Evangelia. Although he be
placed in our College Library Catalogue, Anno 1492. or thereabouts, yet the
very writing of Balliol with a double LL in the midst of the word, shows it to
be at least as ancient as the gift of Fylingham, etc. when it began to be
written ordinarily with a single L, (which was 1343.) as I have observed; which
variation begat writing of it sometimes Bailey College, sometimes Bayliolle,
sometimes Bayly-hall College, whereby the true Founders came to be forgotten,
instead whereof Men became the Adorers of Fancies. This kind of negligence,
about those times, became the Mother of Ignorance, which spread it self so far,
that it stirred up the Industry of aftertimes to correct it.

William Wilton.
Fellow of this House, Professor in his Faculty: but in what that was, Pits
does not know; but it could be no other then Divinity by the Statutes of this
House made by Sir Philip Somervyle: After which, he lived here and wrote many
things; namely, Super Priora Aristotelis. l. 2. Quaestiones de Anima. l. 1.
Mss. Bibl: B. C. Super Ethica. l. 10.


He was Chancellor of the University of Oxon: 1373. according to Twine Apol:
antiq: Oxon: but noted to have given Books to our Library, 1492. There were two
other Wiltons mentioned by Pitsaeus, both named John; one lived 1310. the
other, 1360. In neither of which is our College concerned; and Tho: Wilton,
1470.

Roger Whelpdale.
He was Fellow of this House, and afterward Provost of Queens College Oxon:
as they of Queens would have him to be; but of this Balaeus takes no notice:
and lastly Bishop of Carlisle, a great Mathematician. He wrote many Books,
whereof these are to be found in our College Library.

Summularum Logicalium. l. 1. De Universalibus. l. 1. De Aggregatis. l. 1. De
quanto and Continuo. l. 1. De Compositione Continui. l. 1. De rogando Deo. l.
1.
According to Balaeus, he lived in the time of Edw. 3. He is noted to be the
first that enriched our Library with Manuscripts, besides those of uncertain
donation.

Thomas Chase.
He was Dr. of Divinity, Fellow, and afterward Master of this College,
Chancell: of Oxon, Ireland, and St. Paul's London. He built part of our Library,
vid. Sect. 29.

Humphrey Duke of Gloucester.
He was Duke of Gloucester and Earl of Pembroke, of the Royal Blood: for he was
Son of Henry the fourth, Brother of Hen: 5. Uncle (and Protector) to Hen: 6.
chief of the Kings Bedchamber. He was a great Lover of Aretine and Gandidus,
Italians, as Leland witnesses: He was of this House, and one of the most
Learned and Eloquent of his Age: He built that magnificent Structure of the
Divinity School, and Library over it [though some do conjecture from the great
number of Coats of Arms in the roof of the Divinity School, that this was built
by a common contribution] It is said, That order was given for the taking of it
down, as a thing too superbe for a Building of that nature, which he enriched
with 129 of the rarest Authors procured from Foreign parts at a very great
charge, besides innumerable other Books of less value. After whose Example the
other two parts of the Library, which cross this at both ends, was founded and
furnished by Sir Thomas Bodily [since which time it has received the access
(amongst others) of rare Manuscripts of the gift of William Earl of Pembroke,
Sir K^n^lm Digby, William Archbishop of Canterbury; together with the whole
Library of Mr. Seldom, which is therein placed by the appointment of his
Executors, Men eminent for their Learning, and skill in our Municipal Laws.]
And this Building has received such further improvement, as if it strove not
only to fetch out, but to go beyond the Copy given by our Duke Humphrey: for
the great Gate of the Schools, and Tower over it, is of that height and
excellence, that I know nothing of that nature comparable to it, being adorned
on both sides within the Quadrangle, with five Stories of double Pillars of
five several orders and dispositions, viz. The Tuscane, Dorick, Ionick,
Corinthian and Italian; all improved by the skill of Architecture, which will
not be solely espoused to the Fancies of Antiquity. Add hereunto the Theater
now on Building, begun by the most Reverend Father in God, Gilbert Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, which once finished will as far exceed all the rest,
as any one part thereof now goes beyond the other. So great a promoter was this
Duke of Learning as well by the pattern he left behind him, as the cost he was
at, and that as well of time bestowed in study, as in money employed toward
the work aforesaid. He was a skilful Astronomer, and wrote, Tabulus
directionum. l. 1. Ad Abbatem Sancti Albani. l. 1. De sua donatione. Ep. 1. Ad
viros cruditos. l. 1.


At length, in the Parliament at Berry, Feb. 24. he was stifled with
Feather-beds at midnight by the Suffolk Faction: His Body was honorably
Interred at St. Albans, Anno 1447. Temp. Hen: 6.

Rob: Twaytes.
He was Master of this House, and Dean of Aukland: and more of him I cannot
write, unless that he gave Books to our Library, which though many others have
done, I note him as being a Dignatary, 1451. which, or any other promotion, he
might hold with his Mastership by the Bishop of Londons Statutes, a thing which
by former Statutes was not allowable.

John Tiptoft.
He was of noble Parentage, but nobler for his Achievements, and most of all
for his Inclinations to good Letters. His Father was John Tiptoft, a Peer of
this Realm, his Mother the incomparable Lady Jocosa; by both of these he was
consecrated to Virtue and good Letters, born at Everton in Cambridge shire,
says Leland, brought up in this College, wherein, says the same Leland, Tunc
temporis and Nobilium juvenum corona celebris renascentem imbibebat
eloquentiam. He was created Earl of Worcester, and at 25 Years of age Lord high
Treasurer (High Constable, says Camden, Pitsaeus, in Appendice Cent. 2. calls
him Rob: Tiptoft, and sets him in Anno 1294. in the reign of Ed. 1. but falsely.
in Worcester shire) of England: and was Beheaded, Anno 1471. He wrote many
Orations full of Roman Eloquence.

To Pope Pius the second. l. 1. Ad Cardinales. l. 1. Ad Pa^avienses. l. 1.
Epistolarum ad diversos. l. 1. Et ejusmodi alia plura.
He Translated out of Latin into Enligsh, Publius Cornelius, and Caius
Flaminius, of true Nobility. l. 2. Cicero de amicitia. l. 1. Et de Senectute.
l. 1.
and other good Authors.

Jo: Freus, vulgo John Free, or Phreus in Leland.
London and Bristol contend for the Birth of this John Free. Leland will have
him to be his Cuntryman, h. e. a Londoner.
He was Fellow of this College: He became an admirable Philosopher, Lawyer and
Physician: He became Public Reader of Physic at Ferraria, afterward at
Plorence and Fadua, where he was made Doctor in the Faculty. He wrote to his
Mecoenas Tiptoft abovesaid, Earl of Worcester Expostulationem Bacchi. l. 1. De
rebus Geographicis. 1. Petrarchae Epitaphium. 1. Epistolas familiares. 1.
Carmina diversa. 1. Epigrammata. 1. De Coma paruifacienda. 1. Per plagiarios
surreptos: as Dr. James testifies: but these two, and only these, are in
Manuscript in our Library.
Librum Geographiae. 1. Contra Diodorum Siculum poetice fabulantem. 1.




He translated out of Greek into Latin, these following, as Balaeus testifies.

Diodori Siculi Bibliothecam. l. 6. Xenophontis quaedam. 6. Synesium de
Calvitio. 1.
And many other things wherein he employed his Pen well; for a Translation
which he dedicated to Paul the second, Pope of Rome, he was rewarded with the
Bishopric of Bath and Wells, a Month after he went to Rome; where he dyed
before he could be Consecrated, but not without suspicion of Poison from some
Competitor. 1465.

George Nevil.
That great Earl of Warwick, Richard Nevil [who, as in a stage for some Years,
did set up and depose Kings at his pleasure] had a Brother which was this
George Nevil, whom yet but young, he promoted to high Honors: for, being
Chancellor of the University of Oxon [where he studied and became Fellow of
this Colledge] he was consecrated Bishop of Exeter, Nov. 25. 1455. not yet 20
Years of Age. Afterward, viz. 1460. he was made Lord High Chancellor of
England, till his Brother the Earl being sent by K. Edw. 4. upon an Embassy
into France, he was put out of his Chancellorship, and another, viz.
Stillington, Bishop of Bath and Wells substituted in his place. But afterward,
Henry the sixth being taken, George Nevil was permitted to be promoted to the
Archbishopric of York, and consequently Metropolitan of all Scotland. Three
Years were not hence expired, when Edward was divested of his Kingdom,
committed to the Custody of this Archbishop of York: and Hen: the sixth being
delivered out of Prison, restored to his own again, which he had before held
for almost 40 Years. But Edward enduring an easy Imprisonment, made, by the
aid of his Friends, an escape, recoverr'd his Kingdom, took K. H. 6. and this
Archbishop [who had formerly taken him into Custody] But mindful of former
Obligations, he let him, viz. Nevil Archbishop forth again; but suffered K. H.
6. to be murdered in the Tower. And it was scarce a Year after, but K* Edward
committed him Prisoner again, and plundered him of the worth of 20000 l. at his
House at Moor in Hertford-shire (among which, is recorded a Mitre set with Gems
of a great value, whereof the said King made himself a Crown) Time and death
having lost him his Friends before; He lay Prisoner after this for the space of
four Years, at Calais and Guines in great want, the Revenues of his Bishopric
meanwhile being sequestered for the use of the King. This his Calamity began
1472. and he was, 1476. by the Intercession of his Friends, let out of Prison;
and dying of Grief, he was buried in his own Church. In his time, did Pope
Sixtus the fourth divide the twelve Bishoprics of Scotland from York, and
subjected them to St. Andrews, which he erected into an Archbishopric. This
our Nevil was a Benefactor to our College in Books, Building, etc. And at his
Installation, he made a Feast of a Magnificence unheard of in our Age, Recorded
by Bishop Godwin (Bishop first of Landaffe, and then of Hereford.)

The Bill of Fare.
Of Wheat, quarters 3000 Hogsheads of Beer 1200 Hogsheads of Wine 0416
Hipocrist Hogsheads 0002 Fat Oxen 0080 Wild Bulls 0006 Fat Weathers 1004
Porkers 0300 Calves 0300 Geese 3000 Capons 3200 Pigs 0300 Peacocks 0100 Cranes
0200 Goats 0200 Chickens 2000 Pigeons 4000 Rabbets 4000 Bitours 0204 Ducks 4000
Hernsewes 0400 Phaisants 0200 Partridge 0500 Woodcocks 4000 Plovers 0400
Curlewes 0100 Quails 0100 Egrets 1000 Rees 0200 Stags above 0400 Bucks above
0400 Roes above 0400 Hot Venison Pasties 1506 Cold Venison Pasties 4000 Dishes
of Gelly parted 1000 Dishes of Gelly plain 4000 Tarts 0400 Cold Custards 4000
Hot Custards 2000 Pikes 0300 Breams 0300 Sea Calves 0008 Porpaises 0004
Ministers or Officers serving at the said Feast.
Earl of Warwick, Steward of the Archbishop. Earl of Bedford, Treasurer. Lord
Hastings, Controller. Lord Willowby, Sewer. Baron of Buckingham, Cup Bearer.
Sir Richard Strangways, Taster. Nine Knights Martials of the Hall, besides
Esquires and Servants. Sergeant of the Basin to the King was here so. Keepers
of the Plate*
John Graystock John Nevil
John Braynock Over-seer of the Hall.
Guests in the Hall.
High Table.
The Archbishop himself. Bishops of London Ely Durham on the right Hand. Duke
of Suffolk Earl of Worcester Earl of Oxford on the left.
Second Table.
Ten Abbots and eleven Priors.
Third Table.
Five Barons and eight and forty Knights.
The fourth Table.
Dean of York. Dean of St. Severine. Canons of York.
The fifth Table.
The Mayor of York. The Major of the Staple of Calais. Chief Citizens of York.
The sixth Table.
Four Barons of the Exchequer. And Lawyers six and twenty.
The last Table.
Four Kings Servants.
Guests in the chief Dining Room.
At the Upper Table.
The Duke of Gloucester* Sister to the Duke of Suffolk at his right hand.
Countess of Northumberland at his left hand. Countess of Westmorland at his
left hand. Two Daughters of the Earl of Warwick at the same Table.
The second Table.
Four Barons and Twelve Noble Matrons.
The third Table.
Their Waiting Gentlewomen.
Guests in the second Dining Room.
The first Table.
One Duchess. Two Countesses. Three Baronesses.
The second Table.
Two Baronesses. Eight other noble Ladies.
Guests in the great Dining Room*
First Table. Bishops four viz.
Lincoln. Lichfield. Exon. Carlisle.
The second Table.
Three Earls. Two Barons. Three Bannerets.
Third Table.
Fourteen Gentlewomen. Fourteen Gentlemen.
In the Hall again.
Gentlemen (...) Yeomen 412 twice.
In the Sollar.
Servants of Nobles 400 twice.

In other places.
Officers and Servants 1000. Cooks 62. Scullions, etc. 515.
The first Course consisted of Fifteen Dishes. The second Course Of thirty
three Dishes. Which I must refer you to Bishop Godwin for.

Thomas Gastoing.
He was Doctor in Divinity, Fellow of Balliol College, and Chancellor of the
University: This may be the same with Thomas Gasconius in Pitsaeus, and Thomas
Gascoign, called also Vasco in Leland. Hunfletae inter Brigantes nobili l^co
natus, says he. Pitsaeus notes him to be Anno 1460. and that he wrote many
things, viz. Dictionarium Theologicum. lib. 3. Septem flumina Babyloniae. l. 1.
Veritates ex scriptura. l. 1. Ordinarias lectiones. l. 1. Sermones
Evangeliorum. l. 1. Vitam Hieronymo Stridonis Senioris viri ad miraculum cum
eloquentis, tum docti, quem mirifice coluit.


Ita Balaeus etiam.

Stephanus de Cornubia.
Stephanus de Cornubia was Fellow of this House: He traveled beyond Seas, and
became Doctor of Physic in Paris, Anno 1460. He has left no memorial of
himself with us, but the gift of Galen's Works to our Library; but has
written, Subtiles suas and omni admirations dig^as moralitates, viz. In
Pentateuchum. libros 5. In libros Regum. l. 4. In 12 Proph-minores. l. 1. test
Pitsaeo.


William Gray.
He was Bishop of Ely, Doctor in Divinity, born of a Noble Family, viz. of the
Lord Grays of Codnor. His ingenuity and towardliness gave occasion to the great
care that was taken for his Education, which began in this our College.
Afterward, at Ferraria in Italy, he was an Auditor of Guarinus Veronensis, and
got to himself praise by his skill in polite Language, and various knowledge of
things. He is said to have written much both before and after he* received his
Mitre at Rome: Neither was he a mere Scholar, his Wisdom making him K. H. 6.
his Procurator at Rome. After his return thence, he was made Chancellor of
England. He gave all his Books, consisting of rare Manuscripts, to our Library;
built part of our College, and bestowed much upon the building of Ely
Cathedral, where he was buried, Anno Dom. 1478. More of this Prelate in the
next that here follows, viz.

Robert Abdy.
Robert Abdy a Gentleman of a good Family, as is evident by his Coat of Arms,
was bred up in this College in the time of K. Hen. 6. became Fellow here about
the first Year of K. Edw. 4. Anno 1461. and Master of the same about the 17th
of K. Edw. 4. viz. Anno 1478. in which place he continued till the time of his
death. He built half of the present Library of our College. The forementioned
William Gray and he are nevet put asunder in places where they are remembered,
as particularly in the College Library: wherein are [as I have formerly noted]
21 Windows curiously painted; every Window having two Coats of Arms, with
Verses in painted Wreathes about them: In one of which Windows on the South
side their Arms are placed, and none's else [for each Window has two only] the
Verses about them are, Hos Deus adjecit, Deus his det gaudia coeli.
Abdy perfecit opus hoc, Gray Presul and Ely.


And in the uppermost Window, on the North side, their Coats likewise are with
these Verses, Conditor ecce novi structus hujus fuit Abdy.
Praesul and huic Aedi Gray libros contulit Ely.


This Robert Abdy lies buried in the Nave of St. Mary Magdalen Church [within
the Parish whereof this College stands] under a Marble stone, which had once a
border of Brass about it, signifying his Quality and the time of his death; but
it is now lost. In the middle of the said Stone is yet remaining his Image in a
Plate of Brass, with these Verses under his Feet.

Testis sis Christ quod non jacet hic lapis iste
Corpus ut ornetur, sed spiritus ut memoretur.
Quisquis eris qui transieris tu respice plora:
Sum quod eris, fueram quod sis, pro me precor^ora.
Abdy.

John Tartays.
He studied many Years in this College, as Balaeus witnesses, even till he
became Master of Arts; he wrote Summas Logicales. l. 1. with other things
Quaestiones Naturales. l. 1. with other things
which he testifies to have been in our Library.

Richard Clifford.
Richard Clifford, supposed only to be brought up here because not challenged
by others, and a worthy Benefactor to this House; as is employed, though not
particularized in the 7th Window on the North-side of our Library, in these
Verses, Clifford Ricardus Antistes Londinensis
Fusis expensis tale non avit opus.


He was first Bishop of Worcester, where, having sat about six Years, he was
translated to London, October: 13. 1407. and Anno 1414. being sent to the Council
of Constance, he made a Latin Oration before the Emperor and Cardinals. In that
Council that Of 50 Years continuance, begun by Clement the Antipope at
Avignon, against Urban: 6. fitting at Rome: to Clement succeeded Benedict: 13.
in the same Schism; but, according to Caranza, Greg: 12. who promised to resign
his Pontificate, in case Benedict like*wise would uot refuse it: but Benedict
leaving Avignon, and flying into Catalonia, Gregory entered the Revocation of
his Promise: both of them were deposed by the Council of Cardinals at Pisa in
Italy, and Alexander 5. substituted in this place, which increased the Schism:
hereupon Gregory flies to Ariminum, where he remained till the Council of
Consia^ce: Alexander 5. lived at Bo^onia. vid. plura Sect. 23. in fine.
lasting Schism had an end, and Martin the fifth was declared the sole true
Pope. In his Election it was, by the Authority of the Council Ordained, That 30
Electors should be added to the Cardinals, whereof one was to be our Bishop of
London: neither were there wanting amongst them that thought of making him
Pope. Certainly he was the first that nominated Cardinal Columna, who, with the
consent of the rest, was declared Pope, and took on him the name of Martin.
This Prelate dyed August 20. 1421. and lies buried in St. Paul's, near to the
Tomb of Sir Christopher Hatton.

Dr. B^le.
Fellow of this College, and Archdeacon of Ely, 1478* a Benefactor to our
Library.

John Bell.
John Bell brought up in this College Doctor of the Laws, Archdeacon of
Gloucester: He was confirmed Bishop of Worcester, August 11. 1539. where when
he had sat only four Years, he left it, as his Predecessor had done before
him. He afterward lived and dyed in his own house in Clerkenwell London, which
he left (inter alia) to the College: and was buried in the same Parish Church,
where he lies undet a plain Marble-stone on the North-side of the Chancel, with
this Epitaph engraven upon it.

Contegit hoc marmor Doctorem nomine Bellum.
Qui belle nexit Praesulis officium.
Moribus, ingenio, vitae probitate vigebat,
Laudato cunctis cultus and eloquio.
Anno 1556. Aug: 11.
John Cotes.
Brought up in Magdalene College Oxon, Master of this House, and afterward
Bishop of Chester, 1556. Mariae 4. thus Bishop Godwin of Bishops writes, but
there is some mistake in it: I find George Coats Doctor of Divinity to have
been Master, 1539. John Cotes I find not at all.

James Brooks.
James Brooks was Master of this College, Anno 1554. and Bishop of Gloucester
at the same time, where he succeeded Hooper. He was a Learned Man and an
Eloquent Preacher: But by delegation from the Pope he condemned to the Fire
those Excellent Men, and Holy Martyrs, Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer, who were
burnt in the Town-ditch, commonly called Candych, over against this College.

John Piers, and Adam Squier.
John Piers was Doctor in Divinity, Dean of Christ Church, and Master of this
College both together: He was admitted here, May 23. 1570. resigned it again,
1571. He was consecrated Bishop of Rochester, 1576. and then made Almoner to
the Queen. From Rochester he was translated to Sarum: at last, Anno 1588. after
the death of Archbishop Sandys, he was advanced to the Archbishopric of York,
dyed 1594. The next Master was Adam Squier, D. D. and ^ great Mathematician. I
know of nothing he has left in Writing behind him.

Robert Persons.
Robert Persons was Socius Sacerdos of this College, commonly called
Chaplain-Fellow; and consequently entered into ^^oly Orders when but Bachelour
of Arts [for so it is required of every one that is to be chosen
Chaplain-Fellow] He resigned his Fellowship, Anno 1573. Feb. 13. with
dispensation granted him to keep his Chamber and Scholars as long as he
pleased; and his Commons to be allowed him till Easter following: But
afterward he turned Jesuit, received Orders from the Church of Rome, and
became Rector of the English College there, Anno 1587. He wrote Responsum ad
Edictum Reginae Angliae. l. 1. De Sacris alienis non adeundis. l. 1. A
Christian Directory, or Book of Resolution, an excellent Piece, in two parts.
l. 1. Novam Anglic: reip: reformationem. l. 1. De 3bus Angliae conversionibus.
English. l. 3. Martyrologium Catholicum, against Fox. l. 1. Censuram Catholicam
contra Hanmerum. etc. l. 1. The Defense thereof, Anno 1582. l. 1. Contra
Edvardum Cocum de antiq: legibus Ecclesiast: Angl: extat. 1606. l. 1. De
successione Regni Angliae. l. 1. Modestam admonit. contra Fr: Hastingum. l. 1.
De mitigatione erga Catholicos in Anglia. English. l. 3.


These are all reckoned up by Pits.

There Is a Manuscript written with his own hand in our Library, styled Epitome
controversiarum hujus temporis. By all which appears, That it was the wisdom of
the Society to use that gentleness and moderation as they did, toward a Man of
his excellent parts, wavering in his Religion, and already wandering in his mind
toward Rome, to the end that thereby they might allure him to stay: which had
they prevailed upon him to have done, it had been good service to God, and an
acceptable one to the Queen of England, which the events of things proved to be
true.

Christopher Bagshaw.
About the same time was Christopher Bagshaw Fellow of this House; afterward,
likewise changing his Judgment, he traveled beyond the Seas, and being a Man
of parts, became Doctor in Paris, and one of the Faculty of Sorbon. He lived
long after this, even to the time of King Charles the first, as I have been
informed, and was wont to say, He hoped to see a reduction of England to
obedience to the Church of Rome, and then he would come and repossede his
Fellowship again here, inasmuh as he was never expelled, nor did he resign his
place as Father Parsons had done.

Robert Crane.
Robert Crane Fellow of this House, a Man of that prudence in the Eye of the
University, that he was chosen Proctor thereof, 1581. nor could it be said of
him as 'twas of that Emperor Galba, viz. That he was omnium consensu dignus
Imperio si non imperasset: for they approved of his government so well, that
they made choice of him the Year following: and all this when Proctorships went
not by Cycle but by Suffrages, and so continued to do till the Cycle was
thought fit to be made as best suitable to the present time.

Thomas Holland.
Thomas Holland was Fellow of this College, Dr. of Divinity, and Regius
Professor, all at one time. He was chosen Rector of Exeter College, and a
great Patron of Dr. Prideaux, as appears by Dr. Prideaux's own Epistle to him,
put before his Introductory Tables to the Greek Tongue, a task imposed upon him
by Dr. Holland, whom he thus bespeaks viz. Pietatis and eruditionis nexu, non
spectabili minus quam suspiciendo viro, D. D. Hollando, S. S. T. Professori
Regio, omnibus a me nominibus patrono venerando. It were a sufficient Eulogy of
either, to say they were Friends one of the other; which puts me in mind of the
Epitaph of Sir Fulk Grevil in Warwick Church, viz. Servant to Q. Eliz.
Councellor to K. James, and Friend to Sir Philip Sidney. He never went any
Journey, but he took solemn leave of his Fellows, with this Benediction.
Commendo vos dilectioni Dei, odio Papatus and omnis superstitionis. He went
beyond others in Reading, and beyond himself in disputing. Him succeeded Robert
Abbots.

Thomas Wenman.
Thomas Wenman was Fellow of this House, and Public Orator to the University,
1595. He has left nothing, neither would he leave any thing in Writing behind
him: because that whatsoever he had left us, must needs have fallen short of
his Perfections, inasmuch as the best part of an Orator dies with him.

Robert Abbots.
He was of this College and Fellow here: from hence he became Parson of
Alhallows in Worcester: from thence he was preferred to a Living in
Leicestershire, which had been refused by Dr. Reynolds, President of Corpus
Christi, and George Abbots then Master of University College: from thence he
was chosen Master of this House, and then made Regius Professor of the
University, in Divinity, whose Patent for the place is in our Treasury, in the
Box of Admissions of Masters. He was also a frequent Preacher: He wrote all his
Sermons in Latin only, and Preached them out of the Latin Copy: they were begun
to be translated into English by a Mr. Chapman a worthy person.
Fellow of this College, but he receiving small encouragement from whence he
expected much, went not through with the work. After that the said Robert
Abbots had, by Writings extant, confuted the Errors of the Pontificians, he was
consecrated Bishop of Sarum, Anno 1615. One Book not yet Printed, is his
Commentary upon the Epistle to the Romans: the Original Manuscript Copy whereof
is in the University Library. In this, says B. Godwin, he matched the
happiness of Seffride B. of Chichester, That he, being a Bishop, saw his
younger Brother Archbishop of Canterbury, viz. George Abbots. Him succeeded in
this College, the Reverend and Learned Doctor Parkhurst.

George Abbots.
George Abbots was Fellow of this House, proceeded Dr. in Divinity here, then
he became Master of University College; afterward consecrated Bishop of
Coventry and Lichfield, 1609. December: 3. and the beginning of February
following, he was translated to London; where he had not sat a Year, before,
by the prudent judgment of King James, he was designed Successor to Bancroft
at Canterbury, and Privy Councellor; whose Learning, Eloquence, Vigilance, and
unwearyed Study in Writing, in a Man so overwhelmed with business, Posterity
will celebrate, though I be silent, says Bishop Godwin. He wrote a Book of
Geography, which Dr. Heylen took for the groundwork of his. Another Book
called, Look beyond Luther. A third contains his Questions stated in Vesperiis.
He new published Foxes Acts and Monuments, with an addition of the Persecution
in the Valtoline.

Lawrence Kemis.
Lawrence Kemis was Fellow of this House, Companion in Travel, and Councellor
in Designs to the Renowned Knight Sir Walter Rawleigh, who gave him his History
of the World which he bestowed on our Library. Sir Walter not For one was sent
with him that looked narrowly to him.

See the Declaration of King James upon that Voyage.


capable of his advice in one thing abroad, he chose [and an ill choice it was]
rather to become felo de se, then scrupling an (...), to return home and become
a State-criminal. This fact of Kemis was like that of Torquatus Silanus, who
killed himself upon a bare accusation. Tac. Hist. l. 15. c. 8. of whom Nero
said, That he should have had life granted, if he would have expected the
Judges clemency. Here was the difference, That the Case of Torquatus Silanus
was better, but his Judge worse then that of Kemis.

Hen: Bright, Mr. Moor, and Dr. Hyde.
Henry Bright was Probationer-Fellow of this House, and afterward chief
Schoolmaster at Worcester for above 40 Years before his death: the number of
Scholars under him and the Usher, were usually 300: out of which he furnished
the Universities, and especially this College, with many Scholars well
grounded in the Latin and Greek Tongues, 3 or four whereof were usually Fellows
of this House together. A Man he was of that incomparable diligence and method
in his Vocation, that he seemed to be born to that only: this and his
temperance, spoke him a Man natum ad reformandos hominum mores. He became
Prebendary of that Church of Worcester (in which City he was born) seven Years
before his death; for which Prebend a Patent had been procured him before by
one that had been his Scholar, and at last Lord Keeper of the great Seal of
England, viz. Lord Coventry. At the same time Mr. Moor was Prebendary of the
same Church, formerly Fellow of this College too. And Dr. Hyde Prebendary of
Sarum, once of this College, Father to the Reverend Dr. Tho: Hyde late Chanter
of Sarum, and sometime Commoner here.

Tho: Lord Coventry, and Tho: Coventry Fellow.
Thomas Lord Coventry was of this College, a great Lawyer: who became Kings
Attorney [in which Dignity he procured Mr. Bright's Patent aforesaid] last of
all Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, wherein he lived for the space of 17 or 18
Years, which he resigned up by his death. He was born in Worcestershire, Father
to my Lord Coventry who was likewise of this House; and Son to Thomas Coventry
sometimes Fellow of this House (and afterward a Judge at Westminster) see
Sect. 31. and more in the description of Tho: Lord Coventry the second.

Dr. Wakeman.
Dr. Wakeman was Fellow of this College, a Learned Man: but has left no
memorial of himself, besides Sermons Preached at Court, etc. Printed 1605, and
a Treatise called the true Professor.

Dr. Tho: Holloway, and Mr. Boswell.
Dr. Thomas Holloway born in Worcester, and Scholar to Henry Bright there,
Chaplain-Fellow of this House, afterward Vicar of St. Lawrence Jury London; an
excellent and assiduous Preachet there: exceedingly respected of his
Parishioners, which is wonder, he being presented by the College: After his
death, immediately succeeded him Mr. Boswell (Fellow of this House too) after
his return from Spain, with the Earl of Bristow: which Mr. Boswell gave many
Books to our Library, a Person of known equal worth and integrity with the
other.

Edmund Lilly.
Edmund Lilly D. D. was many Years Master of this College, as appears by the
Catalogue of Masters. He was an excellent Divine, universally read in the
Fathers, all whose Opinions he would reckon up upon any Question at Divinity
Disputations in the College; and that with such volubility of Language, and
rivers of Eloquence, as made all covet to hear him, and his very Enemies to
admire him. He was Chaplain to Q* Eliz. and had been preferred by Her, had not
his long-winded Sermon displeased Her, when State-business occasioned Her to
enjoin him brevity.

Mr. Wilkinson. 1610.
Mr. Kery*
Mr. Wilkinson Fellow of this House, dyed in the Vacation after the Act,
wherein he was completed Master; of which Act he was designed senior: in which
place he came off with universal approbation. He left Logic and other Notes
behind him, which are since either lost, or under a Hos ego versiculos, etc. He
read the Logic Lecture with that vigor, eloquence, and prolixity, that drew
on every Scholars admiration, and his own death: whom Mr. Kery endeavoring by
hard and unseasonable study to fetch out, dyed likewise young. There have not
been wanting those since, who, for their assiduity in the same, have deserved
equal commendations with them: But these late times have taught men to have
more care of their Lives, and less of their Duty.

Mr. Wood.
Mr. Wood was bred up at Tiverton School, and Fellow here in that Composition
place: A Man of singular Parts and Learning. His head would, and did endure
study several whole days and nights together, without intermission, eating,
drinking, or sleeping, which his Body could not long do: and this occasioned a
lameness in his leg, upon which he dyed. A little before his death, he went to
the Chapel upon Crutches, and Preached a Sermon, taking this for his Text,
Have pity on me, O my friends! for the hand of God has touched me. That this
eminent person lived no longer, I reckon among the misfortunes of that place.
Him one White should have succeeded in the Fellowship, but was rejected by the
Society for his deformity; which was a Canonical Impediment to one who was
necessarily to be Priest, but kept his Scholars place as long as he lived in
the College, which was till Master of Arts, Anno 1624.

Jo: Popham.
John Popham Esquire; of Littlecot, was of this House Fellow-Commoner, and Pupil to
Mr. Chambers, admitted with his Brother, Anno 1618. gave us 100 l. toward the
lining of our Chapel: in memory whereof (as the greatest Benefaction toward
that work) his Arms are placed upon the Sk^eens of the Chapel, just over the
door.

Dr. Tho: Clayton.
Dr. Clayton was of this College, where he proceeded Master of Arts:
afterward he became Principal of Broadgates-hall, and Master of Pembroke
College, Regius Professor in Physic for many Years. He was a good Linguist,
to whom great Avicenne might speak and be understood without an Interpreter. A
good Divine too: and this his skill he did so seasonably exercise toward his
Patients, that it rendered him worthy of double honor.

Dr. Denison, and Tho: Bunbury.
Dr. Denison, Doctor of Divinity of this College. He lived many Years Vicar of
St. Mary's in Reading, an excellent Preacher: He wrote an acute Treatise of
Auricular Confession, etc. Him succeeded Dr. Bunbury of this House too, but
sequestered, and created Doctor, 1642.

George Sing.
George Sing was Commoner of this College, and Master of Arts here, 1617.
Afterward preferred in Ireland by the Lord Primate Hampton, to be his
Chancellor and Vicar General: After that, viz. about Anno 1639. advanced to the
Bishopric of Cloyne; and from thence to the Archbishopric of Tuam, in which
Dignity he dyed.

Elias Fareley, and Mr. Kery.
Elias Fareley was born in Worcester, Scholar to Henry Bright there:
Afterward, viz. about Anno 1617. admitted of this College, where he proceeded
Bachelour of Arts: But as soon as he had time for Master, he crossed the Seas,
and became Priest in the Church of Rome, and at present he is said to be the
chief Favorite of the Popes, and in likelihood to be the next Cardinal. A while
before his flight, I heard him make an excellent Oration before the Master and
all the College, upon this Theme, viz. Achillis lachrymae Patroclum mortuum
sic alloquuntur: which though in his own turn, yet he intended as a Funeral
Oration upon Mr. Kery then late Fellow of the House, a young Master of Arts, of
great expectation with all, and no less in the affection then the judgment of
this Fareley. But at another time [whether before or after this, I do not
remember] he declaimed upon this Theme, viz. Propria quae maribus foemineo
generi tribuuntur; for which he was justly reproved, by the Reverend Master,
Dr. Parkhurst, as arguing a levity of Nature so incident to those that change
their Religion, that Astrologers do undertake to find this in their Horoscope,
vid. Junctinum in speculo Astrologiae.

John Greaves.
John Greaves was of this College, from whence, for his singular Learnng, he
was chosen Fellow of Merton College. He made a great improvement of his
knowledge by his Travels into the East: Last of all, he became Public
Professor of Astronomy in Oxford, and Gresham College London: He wrote a
Description (or rather published it) of the Grand Sigours S^raglio, Anno 1653.
He Translated out of the Arabic, Abul Feda. Out of the Persian, Nasiroddin Al
Tusi, and Shah Kolgi. He has written a Discourse of the Roman Foot, and
Denarius. A Description of the Pyramids of Egypt: and translated a Tract, De
siglis Arabum and Persarum Astronomicis, out of Anonymus Persa. And besides,
the Geographick Tables of Nassir Oddin, the Persian aforesaid. He has
translated a second of Vlag Beigi Tartari. Vna cum Hypothesibus Planetarum Shah
Kolgi, aforesaid. He has himself written, Elementa Linguae Perficae.

J: Clabrook.
At the same time that this J: Greaves was chosen at Merton College, stood S^
Clabrook of this House: who missing a place turned Popish Priest, and now at
last is advanced to the dignity of a Chanoine in some of the hither parts of
France or Flanders, as I am informed. A great Opiniatre he was; but so
conscionable, that he took order for the discharge even of the least of his
Debts here.

Tho: Lawrence, D. D.
Thomas Lawrence was Scholar of this House, then Fellow of All Souls; and
lastly Master here, and Margaret Reader in the University, and consequently
Prebendary of Worcester: an excellent Preacher, exquisite in the Elegancies of
the Greek and Latin Tongues. Bishop Elect to a Sea in Ireland: but Death and
the Rebellion hindered his Consecration. The Headship of this College he
resigned under his hand, Anno 1647.

John English Tho: Chambers
both of Worcester.
John English was born in Worcester, Scholar to the foresaid Hen: Bright. He
became Fellow of this House, and Dr. of Divinity, Anno 1630. And lastly
Prebendary of Gloucest: till wearyed by the Rebellion, and wasted by a Quartain
Ague, he dyed, Anno 1648. Contemporary with this, was Tho: Chambers, the
greatest Tutor at that time in this College.

Edward Sylvester.
Edward Sylvester was born in Mansfield in Notinghamshire, Master of Arts and
Bachelor of Divinity of this House: a professed Tutor in the Latin and Greek
Tongues, in a private House in Oxon. He bred up many Scholars to the
Universities, whereof three he lived to see Heads of several Houses at one time
in this of Oxford. He was Interpreter to Metrophanes Critopylus.

Matthew Turner, Thomas Saxby.
Matthew Turner was of this College, from whence he went to be a Tutor in
Broadgates*hall, where he became Reader in Physic: upon which account he made
one of the Orations in the Natalitia of Pembroke College, Sect. ^8. He had
skill in the Oriental Languages: He wrote (as he professed to me) all his
Sermons in Greek. He was Chaplain to the Leiger Ambassador, Viscount Slego in
Paris; by whom he was preferred to Hom-Lacy, and another Benefice in
Herefordshire: where he dyed about the Year, 1656. This Matthias Turner was
Scholar here to Dr. English, and so was Thomas Saxby: this was of the
Foundation till Master of Arts, after which time he became a Preacher in London
at Fanchurch: He imitated Mr. Shute of Lombard*street, and went beyond him.
Lastly, he became Vicar of Sunning near Reading, where he dyed much about the
time of the others decease.

Dr. Tooker.
Doctor Tooker Commissary for Berkshire, Dr. LL. whom I thought not fit to
omit, to let the World know that this College has afforded Lawyers (as well
as Divines and Physicians) in which Faculty this Doctor Tooker was eminent. He
was a Benefactor to our Chapel.

Metrophanes Critopylus.
Metrophanes Critopylus was a Grecian born, and came into England to be
instructed in the Doctrine and Discipline of our Church; and in order
thereunto, to learn the Latin and English Tongues. To these ends, he addressed
himself to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Abbots, who sent him to this
House, where he continued till about the time of his departure out of England,
which was about Anno 1622. After his return into his own Country, he became
Patriarch of Alexandria, which in the Council of Nice, was ordained to be one
of the Patriarchal Cities; the other three being Antioch, Rome, and
Constantinople. He wrote, as some suppose, the Confession of Faith, which went
under the name of Cyrill Patriarch of Constantinople, in Greek, ach^th, 1629.
which Confession was with a Censure upon it, Printed at Rome, 1632. the Title
whereof is, (...). that is, The condemnation of the Confession of the
Calvinists, as it was set forth in the name of Cyrill Patriarch of
Constantinople: with this Condemnation and Confession is Printed an Answer to
the Anathematisms of Cyrill Patriarch of Alexandria, and Predecessor to our
Critopylus; wherein the said Anathematisms are acknowledged to be genuine,
though they decry the said Confession as spurious. [And indeed Cyrill himself
confesses, That they were at first written in Latin, but by himself, and
afterward turned into Greek by himself also: whereunto he added Answers to
certain Interrogations concerning the principal Heads of Controversies between
us and the Church of Rome: in every one whereof he declares for us, and against
them, Anno Dom. 1631. ach^a.] The said Anathematisms, as in the matter of
Primacy, the great sore of all that must not be touched, so in most things
besides, are most contrariant to the doctrine of the Church of Rome transcribed
from his own hand, ach^ h. e. 1616; wherein he styles himself thus. viz: (...).
h. e. Cyrill by the mercy of God, Pope and Patriarch of the great City of
Alexandria, and Judge of the whole World. Nay Cyrill of Constantinople himself
was said, by the hereafter mentioned Conopius, to have been strangled by the
contrivance of the Romish party, because he refused to acknowledge the Primacy
of the Pope at old Rome [for Constantinople is called new Rome by the Greeks
themselves, and particularly in the premises] which his successor was contented
to swallow whilst gilded over with the hopes of a Patriarchate. The Patriarch
of Mosko believes (and all the Russians with him) that he has gotten this bone
from them all; albeit it is not 400 years since they received the Christian
faith; nor 80 years since he was first styled Patriarch; contenting himself
before with the Title of Metripolitane. Their Religion could not be sound, they
receiving it from the Greek Church with all their superstitions: and as for the
Patriarchate; The Patriarch of Constantinople being banished by the Turk from
Constantinople, he resided in Chio, which the Russians call Sio, till about
Anno 1588; the Patriarch of Constantinople or Sio being banished, as some say,
by the Turk; or as others say, deprived by the Greek Clergy, came to Mosko;
where he resigned his Patriarchate, and translated it thither; since which time
they are made believe, that they have a Patriarch invested with the same right
and authority that the other had: of which superstition of theirs the subtle
Greek made good advantage, and departed with a rich booty into Poland, whether
their Patriarcship were current or not.

Nathaniel Conopius.
Nathaniel Conopius was a Cretan born, and trained up in the Greek Church; He
became (...), or Primore to the aforesaid Cyrill Patriarch of Constantinople:
upon the strangling of whom by the Visir [the Grand Signeur of the Turks being
not then returned from the Siege of Babylon] he fled over, and came into
England, addressing himself with Credentials from the English Agent in
Constantinople, to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Land, who allowed him
maintenance in this College, where he took on himself the Degree of Bachelor
in Divinity, about Anno 1642. And lastly, being returned home, he became Bishop
of Smyrna. He spoke and wrote the genuine Greek [for which he was had in great
Veneration in his Country, others using the vulgar only] which must be
understood of Prose too, for Poetical Greek he had not, but what he learned
here. As for his Writing, I have seen a great Book of Music, as he said, of
his own Composing: for his skill wherein, his Countrymen in their Letters to
him, styled him (...): but the Notes were such as are not in use with, or
understood by any of the Western Churches: Yet I have often heard him sing
these Words, and this Tune following, which we have set to our Notes.

^ (...).

That their Music was sung in parts, the difference of Ages inferring
different Voices; and the difference of Voices, common to Men of the same Age,
do sufficiently prove. For Schot in his Natural Magic proves, That a Symphony
may be made by Beasts, which he demonstrates by an Iconism of Cats and Sicilian
Asses, according as they have been experimented to have done by an artificial
Contrivance, supplying their want of reason. But whether the parts of their
Church-musick were generally counterpoint [as the Learned Mr. Gregory of Christ
Church has said] I cannot say. But it seems by Clemens Alexandrinus, Paed. l.
2. c. 4. that Chromatick Harmony was known to, and in use with some in his
days, though disallowed by him, which Opinion of his, was agreeable to the
custom of that Church under Athanasius, where (in singing) the Voice was but a
little varyed, which ^ight be called a loud Reading rather then Singing: which
kind of Music St. Austin also approves, though St. Ambrose's way [who first
brought it into the Latin Church, as the same Saint Austin testifies in his
Confessions] he does not disallow. And the said Clemens himself admits of
modest and chaste Harmony, which he opposes to such Chromatick Music as is
described by him to be A wicked and artificial flexure of the Voice, used in
their Bacchanalian and Meritricious Meetings, not much differing from some
Cathedral Music which I have heard in France, where one (in the time of Divine
Service, and he the Organist of that Church) upon the Organs played set
Almaines and Corantoes instead of Voluntaries. So that the result of all will
be only this, viz. That it is not meet to sing Holy Hymns with Tunes borrowed
from profane Songs: which one (whom I could name) endeavoring to introduce
here in England, was justly censured in the High Commission, who, it seems, did
herein imitate Ephrem Presbyter of the Church of Edessa: Quem Theod^retus ^i^
(say the Magdeburgenses, Cent. 4. c. 6.) ad impios, sed suavis^^mos modos,
Harmonii cujusdam, accommodasse pias and sacras materias. That otherwise
Chromatick Music [in a good [and now current] sense] which Clemens takes in an
ill, may lawfully and lawdably be used, we learn from the example of David
himself; of whom hear St. Austin, de Civ. Dei, l. 17. c. 14. Erat autem David
vir in Canticis eruditus, qui Harmoniam Musicam non vulgari voluptate, sed
fideli voluntate dilexerat: eaque Deo suo qui verus est Deus mystica rei magnae
figuratione serviens, and diversorum nomine s^norum rationales moderatosque
concentus, concordi varietate compactam been ordinatae Civitatis insinuat
unitatem. h. e. David was a Man skilful in Songs, who loved Musical Harmony not
with a vulgar delight, but with a faithful desire: and thereby serving his God,
who is the true God by a mystical representation of a great thing; and under
the notion of diverse sounds, he insinuates rational and moderate Concents by
an agreeable variety, the compacted unity of a well ordered City. The truth
whereof, God grant may ever flourish in this Church, and in this College in
particular. Amen.

Christopher Prior.
Christopher Prior the Son of Tho: Prior Prebendary of Gloucester, was brought
up under Mr. Langley Schoolmaster of Gloucester College. He was Scholar of
this College, and the first that I as Fellow ever presented. He became Doctor
in Divinity and Principal of New-Inne Hall, whereunto the Marquis of Hartford
then Chancellor of the University [whose Chaplain he was] nominated him,
Rogers being sled over to the Parliament party. Afterward he was made
Prebendary of Sarum in the room of Dr. Prideaux, whose Preferment to the
Bishopric of Worcester made it for him: These Preferments, with others of
equal value, lost by the prevalence of the Rebels party, he had regained with
Jobs Compensations, had he lived till the return of the King; which Death
prevented half a Year before. He came hither the best Grecian that ever since
my time has been admitted of this College, and was furnished with other parts
of Learning accordingly, which he lost no time to improve.

Peter Wentworth.
Peter Wentworth was first of Magdalen-hall, then Scholar of this House, where
he proceeded Bachelor of Arts, and was at the same time Collector by a general
suffrage, no^ Proctors nomination. He was Fellow here, and after, having taken
the Degree of Doctor in Divinity upon him, he was preferred to the Deanery of
Armagh in Ireland; which I may call not an Archiepiscopal only, but a
Patriarchal Deanery, the Archbishop of Armagh (whose Cathedral that is) having
three other Archbishops subject unto him, which cannot be said of any one of
the Western Church, besides the Pope of Rome. He outlived this Dignity, lost
his Children, and all that he left there upon his flight into England: where
being extremely weakened by a dead Palsy, wherewith he had been a long time
affected, he chose rather then to return to a place so fatal to his Body and
Estate, to settle upon the Parsonage of Hasley in Oxfordshire, whereof he dyed
Parson. The place he dyed at was Bath, Anno Dom. 1662.

Thomas Lord Coventry, the second.
Thomas Lord Coventry, Father to the Lord Coventry now living. He was Pupil
here to Edw: Wilson B. D. and Fellow of this College, under whose Tuition he
profited in virtue and good letters; besides the honor he had to be Son to
such a Father, as was Thomas Lord Coventry Lord Keeper of the Great Seal
aforesaid. Stapleton de Tribus Thomis, writes of one of his Predecessors, Sir
Thomas Moor, That after Sentence given in a certain Cause, called for another:
whereunto answer was made, That there was none depending; which he caused to be
registered in perpetuam, rei memoriam. And although the like happened not in
this Thomas's time, 'twas not because he came short of That Thomas in clearness
of Judgment, and quick dispatch of Causes, but by reason of the contentious
disposition of the Times wherein he lived; which filled not that Court only,
but that of Requests too, with Suits, where Men came to be relieved against
their own Acts: whereunto he was wont to answer, That he sat not there to make
Wise men of Fools. [It is there also said, Sir Thomas Moor being a Member of
the House of Commons, Temp. H. 7. and opposing the unjust exaction of the K.
promoted by Empson and Dudley, was moved to acknowledge his Error; who
answered, That he had committed none: neither would ever confess himself
guilty, where he was not sure of pardon. This had been to expect relief against
his own imprudent Act in a Criminal Matter, as Lord Keeper Coventry's Orators
aforesaid craved in Civil Causes, and in both to be made Wise men of Fools.]
Yet in this viz. Lord Keeper Coventry.
he excelled that Thomas, viz. That he dyed not in jest.

Robert Smith.
Robert Smith, Son to Sir John Smith by the Lady Isabella, Sister to the Earls
of Warwick, Holland and Newport, was, with his Brother Charles* Scholar to Mr.
Silvester aforesaid here in Oxon, and afterward of this College: where he
spent his time in the study of good Letters, till he took on him the Degree of
Bachelor of Arts. He then traveled beyond the Seas [as his Father had done
before, who dyed in Sienna in Italy] After his return he married the Countess
of Sunderland, a Lady of incomparable Beauty, and a true Sidney; by whom he had
a Son not long before his death: In whom also dyed all the virtue and sweetness
of disposition, that a mere Mortal Nature was capable of, and answerable to
that of his Grandmother by the Fathers side, First married to Sir Tho: Smith,
Father to Sir John aforesaid, and afterward to Sir Robert Sidney Earl of
Leicester, Grandfather to the Countess of Sunderland by a former Wife.
the Countess Dowager of Leicester, under whom he had his first education.

Davenport and Wild Chief Barons.
Davenport, him I should have named as contemporary with my Lord Keeper
Coventry: He was of this House, and became a known excellent Lawyer (and was
wont to say, That Sir Edward Cook commented learnedly, but it was upon a wrong
Littleton.) Last of all Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and so continued
till his death, He was one of the common Contributers to the last adorning of
our Chapel, as was Lord Chief Baron Wild, who was about the same time of this
House: whose sole Daughter and Heir has been many Years married to the Right
Honorable Lord De la War, one of the antientest Barons of this The third
Baron.
Kingdom. But forasmuch as I am uncertain whether the said Baron Wild be dead, I
have not given him a distinct place in my Calender: and here I shall desire my
Reader to let him stand as a Statua Mercurialis to point out the excellencies
of his Daughter, as the way to true honor.

Sir William Throckmorton.
Sir William Throckmorton, was Son to Sir Thomas Throckmorton of Tortworth in
the County of Gloucester: He lived in this House Pupil to George Abbots
(afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, as has been said) Fellow of this
College, who to his dying day was wont to call Sir William his Son. A Pupil he
was worthy of such a Tutor; for he had proved the Eye and Mouth of that County,
had not his expense in the preservation of the Forest of Dean [in the Confines
whereof his Ladies Estate lay] caused his unhappy Retirement. He was Friend to
the Church and Churchmen, and settled so many Impropriate Tithes upon the
Parish Church of Tyrley, as doubled the Vicarage thereof, he being then Lord of
that Manor.

Sir Baynham Throckmorton.
Sir Baynham Son to Sir William was likewise of this House, Pupil here to Dr.
Thorn, now Archdeacon of Buckingham: He was of Clowerwall in the Forest of
D^an, which descended unto him by his Mother [and is now the seat of his Son,
called also Sir Baynham Throckmorton, one of the Knights of Parliament for
Gloucestershire.] He was a faithful Soldiar and Servant to the King, and dyed
one of his Majesty's Privy Chamber.

Dr. Higgs.
Dr. Higgs was Fellow of this College, and Tutor here to the now Reverend
Rector of Lincoln College Dr. Hood: He became Beneficed in the West, where,
after he had lived many Years, desired nothing more then to see his old Mother
this College again; which he did, and dyed in the way homeward before the War.

Lord Wenman.
Lord Wenman was Fellow-Commoner of this College; whose worth is so well known
in these parts, that what I could write, would be but a diminution to his
Merit. He gave us a very fair Silver and gilt Bowl: but of such Monuments, the
late Rebellion left us none. He being but lately deceased, may conveniently be
placed here.

Edward Wilson.
Edward Wilson, B. D. and Tutor to Thomas Lord Coventry, as is aforesaid, was
much a Scholar, and as much a Gentleman: who after having lived many Years
senior Fellow of this House, was Beneficed at Bampton, whom resigning his
place, The Reverend and Learned Dr. Thomas Good, now Canon of Hereford,
succeeded. He was taken at length with a dead Palsy, under which he labored
diverse Years: during which time, he made Plutarch much of his Diversion, and
Bellarmine, De art been moriendi, much of his serious study (wherein one in
his condition could not be very assiduous.) Let no man startle at this; for
Bellarmine, notwithstanding the much ado that he makes about the merit of good
Works in his Polemical Divinity, professes here, That it is the safest way to
trust in the Mercies of Christ. Lastly, for a memorial o^ himself, he left us
the Brazen Eagle in the Chapel.

Dr. Gerard.
Dr. Gerard was a greater Friend to the Church, then his Brother Sir Gilbert,
though a Church Tenant. He was first Fellow Commoner of this College; from
whence he was chosen Fellow of All Souls, where he became Professor of the Laws
in this University.

Dr. Page.
Dr. Page was of this House, where he lived till he was of some reasonable
standing, Master of Arts; and was then chosen Fellow of All Souls, where he
proceeded Dr. of Divinity, and a worthy Divine he was, very well versed in the
Greek Fathers. Wind was a great enemy to him, and he as great an enemy to the
Winds and Tempests of Religion: to which end, he wrote a Book called The
Peacemaker, or a brief Motive to Unity and Charity in Religion. He translated
Thomas a Kempis, of the mitation of Christ, whose Legacy, to the Church was
Peace. He wrote against Prin, concerning the bowing at the name of Jesus: and
another Tract of Schism, occasioned by another. At last, he dyed in a good old
age at his Benefice, leaving his Books, etc. to Mr. George Ashwell sometimes
Scholar of this House, and afterward a Worthy Fellow of Wadham, but at present
Rector of Hanwell.

Mr. Rous.
Mr. Rous, alias Rus, was Scholar of this House, and afterward Fellow of Oriel
College, and Protobibliothecarius of the University for many Years. He was
successor to Dr. James, and predecessor to the Learned Dr. Thomas Barlow, the
Reverend Provost of Q. C. and Marga^et Professor.

Sir Robert Parkhurst.
Sir Robert Parkhurst, Son to Alderman Parkhurst sometime L. Major of London
(and so Nephew to Dr. Parkhurst our Master) was of this House, where he lived
studiously and soberly: but of his Achievements I am not able to give any
account. Only he gave diverse Books to our Library.

Thomas Hicks, and John Parkhurst.
Thomas Hicks was born about Stratford upon Avon, and was educated in quality
of a Commoner in this House: where he lived till he was of some good standing
Master of Arts: and then was made Chaplain of Christ Church, by the worthy Dean
Dr. Duppa, to whom he dedicated his Translation of some of Lucian. He was a
skilful Limner as well as Poet, and drew the Picture of the Reverend Dr.
Parkhurst, as he sat at Divine Service, or Divinity Disputations in the
Chapel, and presented it to his acceptance. And could he have drawn the Image
of his mind, as he did it in Face or Front, as Limners are wont to speak, he
might have presented that as comely as this: for he was a Man of singular
Learning, Gravity and Piety, frequent in Preaching, and vigilant in the
Government of this College, whereof he was Master, as may be seen in the
Catalogue; whom we owe to Magdalen College wherein he was educated: He was
sometimes Proctor of the University, then Chaplain to Sir Henry Nevil Lieger
Ambassador at Paris, who gave him afterward the Benefice of Shillingford; next
he became Chaplain to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Abbots, who gave him
Newington, both which he resigned by his death, aged 74 Years, having left his
Headship of this College one or two Years before.

Francis Finch, and Sir John Finch.
They were both Scholars to Mr. Sylvester aforesaid here in Oxon, and
afterward Fellow-Commoners of this College. Francis betook himself at length
to the study of the Law, and became Barrister: He had not been long in
practice, but he dyed; yet he lives still in those several pieces of Ingenuity
he left behind him, wherein he falls not short of the best of Poets: and
because Est finitimus Oratori Poeta, he might have proved excellent in that
too, having so incomparable a precedent as his Brother Sir Heneage Finch. As
for Sir John, he betook himself to the Study of Physic, traveled into Italy,
and there became Doctor in the Faculty, and public Reader thereof in several
places. He has been in England, and visited this his aged Mother since the
return of the King, but is gone back into Italy again, where his further
Achievements I must leave Posterity to celebrate.

* Thomas Price.
Thomas Price was Scholar of this House, of my nomination, afterward Fellow of
the same, and dyed May 1665* not yet Bachelor of Divinity, but as Learned of
his time as any that I ever knew of this College. He went Chaplain in the
Voyage to Algiers, and the taking possession of Tangiers, whereby he came to be
acquainted with the Impression that Arabic, wherein he was skilled, made upon
the Spanish Tongue. He was as mindful of Courtesies as any, and forgetful of
Injuries beyond parallel; which made him seem best to those that stood most in
his way to preferment.

He made a Copy of Verses in commendation of one that had been his Competitor
for a Fellowship the first time he stood, and got it from him. The which
(without robbing the other of that his due) may serve in a sort for his own
Epitaph; viz.

Pungente homines stylo
Erubescat pagina.
Salvo homine tui recidit vulnus
Ingenii acies:
Nec toxica effundit Calamus
Acutus sane, non aculeatus.
Moribus vivere malles, quam more:
Alienam agit vitam saeculi vivens genio,
Et extra se quaerens Exul:
Seipsum perlegit Stoicus.
Et Statim
Sphalmata corrigit.
[Arctatur humano Cortice malorum Ilias]
Vitiorum speculando contrahit imagines,
Non vitia:
Quid ni istas dicam Ideas
Mentis Harpyiarum (...) Arab: Est imago magica sub certo Horoscopo insculpta
and consecrata ad rem ipsam fugandum. Dicuntur etiam (...) qui imagunculas
concineant mirabisi saepe eventu. Coel: Rhod: Lect: antiq: l. 1. c. 15.
Telesmata?
Aut Animalis Paradisi Spectra in Paradiso formidabili forma qui terrebant
Adamum ne illuc rediret.
(...)?
Perpendat Lector,
In anoche, and apoche
Passionem, and quadragesimam,
Epictetum, Arrianum, Simplicium,
Stoae olim incolas
Jam Portae Proselytos.
John Lee.
This was he who made one of the Speeches written in the Natal: Coll: Pemb: and
one of the six Scholars sent from Abingdon School to our Coll: of Baliol, which
were afterward translated from hence to Broad gates now Pembrook College. He
was an indefatigable Student, and of proficiency answerable. He died soon after
his going to Pembrook College. It may be said of all the other five together
compared to him as was answered of of Mercuries Picture in the fable compared
to Jupiter's and Juno's. viz. That he that would buy these two, should have the
third into the bargain: He wrote an Interlude never published, or Acted.

Mr. Berry.
He was first Scholar of Corpus Christi College, from whence he was removed to
this house, and Fellow of Peter Blundells foundation here, so made by the
appointment of Sir John Popham Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench
Westminster, Anno 1601. a man of that learning and integrity, that he may seem
of purpose to be set here as a Copy for all his Successors in that place to
write after. He has left only two sermons in print behind him, viz: an Assize
Sermon, and a Visitation Sermon, very well worth the perusal. He was many
years Cannon of Exeter, and dyed Anno 1667. aged 87 years; such was his
symmetry of parts, and exact temper of body, that he might have lived to an
hundred years, had he not contracted an ulcer occasioned by a fall.

Sir Edmund Fortescue, Fellow Commonerand Edmund Ellis, Fellow of this House.
Sir Edmund Fortescue Knight, sometimes Father to our Sir Edmund, preferred
Edmund Ellis to the Benefice of East Allington in the County of Devon, after he
had continued a worthy Member and Fellow of this House for many Years together.
After the death of both these and the return of the King, our Sir Edmund was, I
had said, created Knight and Baronet; but that it cannot be said of him, that
Materiam superabat opus, much less that it was ex nihilo, unless the Name and
Resemblance which a King bears of God will have his Acts of Regality called
Creations. It were a sufficient Eulogy of him to say no more, then, That he was
one who deserved such a Wife as his now Relict was: Yet I shall add the
Character given him by the Pen of Edmund Ellis, son to the aforesaid Edmund,
and Fellow of this College too, but now Rector of the said East Allington,
whereunto this our Sir Edmund Fortescue presented him.

In Memoriam Clarissimi Viri Dni E. F. Militis, and Baronetti.
Ante Annos Animum gessit,
Nec sibi, nec Aliis sa^is notus:
Variam habuit, and Fluctuantem Indolem
Suo nimirum Vacillantem Pondere.
Sub ipsa Juventute maxima exhibuit Gemi Politici Indicia:
In SENATUM tandem adscitus,
Quando non fuit in Terris quo ultra pergeret,
In Patriam emigravit Coelestem.
Decembris 30. -- 66. Posuit E. E.

FINIS.
Procurators, Principals and Masters.
PRocurators first ordained 1263. 45 Hen: 3. Appointed by Dervorgille 1266. 48
Hen. 3. Walter Fodringheye, Principal 1282. 08 Edw. 1. Hugo de Warnakeby 1296.
22 Edw. 1. Stephanus de Cornubia 1308. 34 Edw. ^. Richard Chikewelle 1309. 03
Edw. 2. Henry de Seton 1323. 17 Edw. 2. Nicolaus Luceby 1327. 01 Edw. 3. John
Wickleff 1340. 14 Edw. 3. Hugo Corbrigg 1344. 18 Edw. 3. John Wickleff 1361. 34
Edw. 3. Thomas Tyrwhit 1374. 47 Edw. 3. William Lambert 1406. 08 Hen. 4. Thomas
Chase 1410. 12 Hen. 4. Robert Burley 1424. 02 Hen. 6. Richard Stapilton 1429.
07 Hen. 6. William Brandon 1432. 10 Hen. 6. Robert Twaytes, alias Thwates 1451.
29 Hen. 6. William Lambton 1461. 01 Edw. 4. John Segden 1473. 12 Edw. 4. Robert
Abdy 1478. 17 Edw. 4. William Bell 1496. 10 Hen. 7. Richard Barningham 1504. 18
Hen. 7. Thomas Cisson 1511. 03 Hen. 8. Richard Stubbys 1518. 10 Hen. 8. William
White 1525. 17 Hen. 8. George Cotes 1539. 31 Hen. 8. William Wright 1545. 37
Hen. 8. James Brooks 1547. 01 Edw. 6. William Wright 1555. 03 Ph: and M.
Francis Babington 1559. 02 Eliz. Anthony Garnet 1560. 03 Eliz. Richard Hooper
1563. 06 Eliz. Robert Hooper 1567. 10 Eliz. vid. Sect. 34. in Margin* p. 79.
John Piers 1570. 13 Eliz. Adam Squier 1571. 14 Eliz. Edmund Lilly 1580. 22
Eliz. Robert Abbots 1609. 06 Jac. John Parkhurst 1616. 13 Jac. Thomas Lawrence
1637. 12 Car: 1. George Bradshaw 1646. 21 Car: 1. Henry Savage. 1650. 03 Car:
2.

Note, That all the Masters [except Walter Fodringheye, the first] preceding
Barningham, are here set down, not according to their Admissions, which are not
known, but according to the Dates of some Acts done by them, or in their time;
the Records whereof we have remaining with Except those of Chikewelle and
Seton, temp. Ed. 2. which I owe to the Town Archives.
us. So that if any be omitted, it is because they were Faineants or Bibulus's.

Nam Bibulo fieri Consule nil memini.
A TABLE Referring to the ENDOWMENTS OF THIS COLLEGE.
NOrth Morton. Sect. 36. p. 82. Berkshire. Beeston. 24. p. 38, etc. Bedfordsh.
Borough Farm. 37. 84, 85. Bucks. Prince Risborow. 37. p. 85. Rotherwick. 36. p.
82. Hampshire Abbotsley. 24. p: 38. Huntingdo^ Canterbury Rent. 28. p. 66.
Kent. Fylingham. 25. p. 52. Lincolnsh. Risome. 25. p. 52. Br^tleby* 25. p. 52.
St. Lawrence. 20. p. 32. London. St. Margarets Patyns 30. p. 72. And Rood Lane.
30. p. 72. Clerken-well. 33. p. 78. How. 14. p. 23. etc. Northumb. Stamfordham.
14. p. 23. etc. Mickle Benton. 24. p. 37, 40. Westlade and Killingworth. 24. p.
ibid. Morton in Tame Parish. 37. p. 85. Oxfordsh. Old Woodstock. 37. p. 82,
etc. Wotton. 37. p. 82, etc. Tackley. 37. p. 82, etc. New Woodstock. 37. p. 82,
etc. Steeple Aston. 22. p. 34. Odington. 30. p. 37. Heddington. 36. p. 82.
Divinity School. 22. p. 34. Oxford City and Suburbs. Exeter College. 34. p.
80. Merton College. 22. p. 34. Magdalene Parish. 38. p. 85, etc. The same 26.
p. 60. etc. The same. 18. p. 28. The same. 16. p. 25, etc. St. Giles's Parish.
26. p. 60. St. Mary's Parish. 26. p. 61. The same. 21. p. 23. St. Martyns
Parish. 17. p. 27. St. Mildreds Parish 22. p. 34. St. Edwards Parish. 18. p.
29. St. Aldats Parish. 17. p. 27. St. Ebbs Parish. 26. p. 60. St. Peter's in the
Bailey. 26. p. 60. St. Michaels at the South Port. 28. 67.

A Table of MISCELLANIES.
ALlowance of Fellows. Sect. 9. Balliol College Schools. 21. Balliol King of
Scots. 10. Battle at Dunbar. 10. Bachelour in Divinity. 24. Brazen Serpent. 19.
Cambridge Antiquity. 26. Canterbury College. 28. Chaplain-Fellows first made.
31. Chaplains distinct from Fellows. 21, 22, 24. Chapels. 19. 1. Chapel, 19.
2. Chapel. 19. 3. Chapel. 29. 4. Chapel. 32.
Characters. 14. Commencement, the Cambridge word conf: 14. Corpore's Case,
what? 11. Dedication of the College to St. Katerine. 14. Divine Offices. 19,
23. Divinity School. 22. Durham College above 60 Year ancienter then either
Hatfield or Bury's time, the pretended Founders. 24. Earth swells up daily. 26.
St. Edwards Parish. 18. (...). 14. Establishment of this College by 1.
Dervorgille. 11. 2. Bishop of Lincoln. 13. 3. John Balliol King of Scots. 16.
4. Edw: Balliol K. of Scots. 24. 5. Queen Elizabeth. 35.
Exeter College. Sect. 34. Fillingham. 25. Founders of this College, who, and
when. 6. Garcio and Garcon, what? 24. Genealogy. 5. Generals. 21. Halls, as
Alban-hall. 22. Brasenose-hall. 26. Broadgates-hall. 17. Chimers-hall. 28.
Herte-hall. 18, 22. Hammond-hall. 26. St. Hugh's-hall. 7, 18, 22. Lomb-hall.
22. Manger-hall. 22. Margaret-hall. 22, 26. New Balliol-hall. 7, 22. Old
Balliol-hall. 7. Rack-hall. 28. Sparrow-hall. 7. Saucer-hall. 22, 26.
Hills daily sink down. 26. Homage done by Scotland. 10. Homage done by John
Balliol K. of Scots. 2. St. Hugh, 7. St. Ives. 25. Jews banished. 17.
Juse-lane, or [in other Writings] Jury-lane. 28. Katerine, unde? 14. Letters
Patents. 25, 35, 17. Levellers. 39. Library of the College. 29, 39. Library
and Schools. ^. License from the Pope, etc. for celebration of Divine Offices.
2^. Lollards, what? 39. Masters of this College. 3, 13. Mackduffe. 10. Maud
the Empress. 17. Meadows grow higher. 26. Metrophanes Critopylus. ps. St.
Michael's Church at the South Port. 17. St. Mildreds Church. 22. Mitigation of
Statutes. 24. Mortmain. 35. Music in Gods Worship, what kind? 39. p. 121.
Number of Scholars at first. 9. Offerings by Townsmen, why? 26. Oriflamme. 19.
Parliament at Rouen. 37. Parvisum, or Parvisia. 21. Pembroke College. 37.
Primacy of Pope denied by the Greeks. 39. p. 120. Principal. 11. Procurators.
11, 12. Pronunciation of Letters. 14. Portatorium, what? 11. Prayer for the
dead. 8. Queen of Scots. 1. Rectors of this College. 27. Risome. 25. Russians,
when converted to Christ* etc. 39. p. 120. Sacrilegious Objections answered,
37. Site of the College, first where? 7, 16. Statutes of 1. Devorgille. 11. 2.
Sir Philip* Somervyle. 24. 3. Bishop of London. 27. 4. Present Statutes. 31.
Style of the College, what? 35. Synderesis. 14. Talismans. 19. Tekelmans. 19.
Testaments ought to be free. 37. Tithes, the College freed from in Oxford. 23.
Visitors. Bishop of Durham. 24. Bishop of Winchester. 31. Bishop of Lincoln.
31. Others. 31. Others. 27.
Writers, and others eminent of this College. 39. Wickleffe Master of this
House. 39. Yorks Archbishop, Primate of Scotland. 39. p. 104. Yorks Archbishop
deprived of Scotlands 12 Bishoprics. ibid.
FINIS.

