A New Letter FROM LEGHORN, From Aboard the VAN-HERRING To a MERCHANT in
LONDON, Fully discovering the present State of that SHIP.
SInce my last to you, it is almost impossible to believe what an Alteration
there is in the state of our Ship; for since the dissolution of our Council of
Officers, all things seem to contrive the welfare of the Captain, the
Lieutenant being placed in another Ship; though some rash and missed Sailers,
that belong to our Ship, spoke unbecomingly of him, yet since his remove has he
behaved himself with that Generosity and Bravery, that he has acquired already
the Repute of a most excellent Commander; and one who in the eyes of the
generality of the Sailers, is fitted with Resolution, Courage and Policy
sufficient to batter down all that evil Opinion that the Factious Seamen have
conceived of him: His noble Acts for the Ships safety, where he now Commands,
having procured him a general respect, that whenever he has been pleased to
walk out of his Great Cabin, (as there so) in all the smaller Cabbins he has
been entertained with such Volleys of Joy and Respect, which could proceed from
no other hearts than what were really tied to him in Loyalty and Affection: The
Ship where he Commands being in a most thriving Posture ever since she has been
under his Conduct; his Counsel, as it were, putting a new face upon things, and
all matters conspiring with his Merits, to raise him from those Clouds of
misapprehensions his Virtues had labored under. And now, like the Sun, he
begins to shine with greater Splendour: That plaster and dirt which Envy and
Malice did so plentifully throw upon him, now are washed off; so that every
Sailer perceives how he has been misled; and no doubt but the greater and
better part of the Ships-company do blame themselves for so rash a conjecture
as once they entertained of him. This digression should not have prevented my
pursuit of my former design, had not I been desirous of your being undeceived
by some advice you had in one of my former Letters, that it was suspected the
Lieutenant was a Mohammedan; and truly many of our Ships-Crew did give it out so
to be: but to the joy of our Company, and of all good Sailers, we have Letters
that inform us, that by a certain Test and Sacred Banquet, that is usually
taken Aboard to discriminate a Mohammedan from a Christian, he has made it
apparent to the whole World, that he is a Man sound in his Faith, and firm in
his Resolution, which was always so great as would not suffer to be Catechized
by the Inquisitive Sailers. Now having made a repair of my former Error, I
shall proceed to give you the best Account I can of the state of our own Ship:
For after the discharge of the Council of Officers, who notwithstanding they
were the most choice men the Ship did afford, and who always were had in great
Veneration by the Sailers; yet under some heats, did do those things that the
Captain could not bear withal, neither we^e their Actions so pleasing to the
Ships-Company, as could render them free from blame: for when they accord with
the Captain, it renders our Ship the most considerable Vessel in Europe; and
it is observable, that when the Captain and the Officers correspond, our Ship
has increased in wealth, and abounded with the bravest Sailers in the World,
insomuch that our prosperity has been envied and malign'd by all our
Neighbors. But the Mahometans of one part have ever been restless, to unlink
the chain of Love, that ever was desired by the Captain to be preserved
irrefragable: So have they by Plots and stratagems endeavored the confusion of
the Captain; they paying a Religious Allegiance to another Commander, and
deeming it part of their duty to propagate their Sect by any action, the
cruelty or horridness thereof never affrighting them from their designs; such
inhumanity did they practice when they murdered our Boatswain, who endeavored
to check their Villainy; and since that have they openly Assassinated one of the
Captains Officers, that was faithful in putting the Laws of our Ship in force
against them: But many of these Bell-Wethers of mischief are brought to condign
punishment, the loss of their lives being a forfeiture justly due for their
disloyalty; so restless are they in malice, they cannot think themselves wicked
enough when living; but even when they are ready to dwindle into another Orb,
they profess the greatest innocence conceivable, and that with the severest
Protestations, that either Religion or Rhetoric can invent, thinking thereby
to amuse the Ships-Crew, and force them into a charitable opinion of their
dying Asseverations; this has prevailed upon some considerable Sailers; but
most are of opinion their High Priest dispenses with them to be Liars even to
the last gasp: But it is hoped when the Captain and his Council of Officers meet
next, some effectual course will be taken with them, that they that do not
conform to the Rules of our Ship, may be put on Board another Vessel, that they
may no more disturb our desired repose; the most excellent Captain having often
caused Proclamation to be made through the Great Cabin, that they should not
dare to approach his presence, nor within a certain distance of his Cabin, and
withal threatened them with the severest inflictions the Law would admit; but
their boldness is too great to be so easily overcome, extremity it self is
little enough to curb their insolence: but 'twere well our renowned Captain had
no other Enemies, for then with more ease they might be dealt withal; but these
Mahometans, as is reported, Spawn other Creatures, that go under diverse
Appellations, that are equally as pernicious to the welfare of the Ship, the
Mahometans making use of them, as the Monkey did of the Cats foot; for though
they pretend great Antipathy against those they were Brooded by, yet it is too
too manifest they Center in the same conclusion: For as the first are close
contrivers of Ruin and Devastation, and when in Power, the propagators of
Blood, Massacre and Rebellion; so the other party, their younger Brethren, they
forment Jealousies, nourish and foster evil Opinions of the Captain and the
Government, though a more excellent Commander, or better Discipline in
Spiritual and Civil administration no Ship in Europe can pretend to; and this
humor is so natural to these Factors of Division, that it is almost the sole
Artifice they have to maintain their Post, and in this they are mighty
industrious and indefatigable: for if any Office of Trust or Profit happens to
fall in the Great Cabin, where they have power to Elect, they are sure to
choose one of their own Color, one that shall be as obedient to their Whispers,
as a Child ought to be to the commands of his Father. And for the better
effecting their designs, some that make a great bustle in the Ship are firm to
their Interest: Some being designed for Counsel and Conduct, and others
appointed to put their Commands in Execution; neither are those of a lower Rank
less valued by the Factionists, for their great Zeal for the Cause: for at a
common Assembly in the Great Cabin, the other day many thanked our Captains
Bailiffs for their mighty Service, that would not agree the Captain should be
celebrated for his most auspicious Government; these Men, though their
Principles are not so Bloody, are of a more Morose conversation than the
Mahometans; yet have they that profound reverence for their Party, that they
will never believe any of them to be naught, till they are put in the Bilboes,
and then they leave their Candidates, as it is said the Devil forsakes the Witch
when under the custody of the Law: this most manifestly appears by their
declaiming against a little Weezle-faced Sailer, who for writing and dispersing
Pamphlets against the Captain and his honest Sailers, was Adjudged to stand an
Hour with his Head looking through a Loophole of the Ship, and to pay the
Captain 500 l. And to eause him the better to remember his follies, his Papers
were Burned before his face, by the hands of the Ships Executioner; yet though
according to his own Prophecy, he had thousands to stand by him, and rejoiced
extremely when he was discharged of his Wooden-Ruff; yet whooping and hallowing
costs nothing, no Money is yet allowed for the discharge of this sufferer in
the Cause; neither can I hear, though the Elephantine Agent has given a
Manifesto of his large Sufferings in the Cause, that any of the Ships-Crew has
yet presented his Lady with so much as a Silver Bodkin toward reparation:
These Whistlers please the Faction, whilst they serve their turn, but when
that is over, or they ruined, then farewell. This is evident in a late Example of
one, that really was a Mohammedan, pretending to know of great contrivances
against the Captain; such were his Discoveries to be, the like was never heard
on; this Doughty piece is greatly cried up; the Bethelians addressing the
Captain daily for a Pardon for this Squire, that would unravel that Clew that
we have been laboriously endeavoring these years past: Oh here was discourse
enough for the Playerites, the Jenkites and Slomanites, our Coffee-rooms were
big Aboard, expecting the Mountanous product of his fertile Invention; never
was Inchantress hugged by Old Nick more than this man was caressed by these
State-Pedlers: But the Captain grows Old, and having had several Shams put upon
him, would grant such a Caitiff no Pardon, that by a most pernicious Libel had
endeavored to take away his desired Life and Government. So much was his Cause
espoused by these Partyzans, that would the distributers of Justice in the Ship
have admitted of it, they would have impeded the natural course of our Laws;
but the slip of the Law running at him, Justice seized him, and by a deserved
Death made some satisfaction to that Goodness he had offended. No sooner did
this Fate overtake him, but his old acquaintance, that admired him, cried out
upon him, as the veriest Villain that ever breathed; such a Metamorphosis is
not usual: before he was a person of indubitable sincerity, but now not to be
trusted, not a word to be believed that he says: It Is to be feared he told
Tales, and after his Death some Relative might accuse some of the other Party,
that is the difference, no credit to be given to such a Heretic; so near do the
Maxims of the Bethelians and Mahometans hang together. But much more to the
amazement of all men in the Ship, some Mohammedan Witnesses, whose breath has
slain some of the Ships-Crew they Swear against, and their Testimony reputed
then to be as Valid as the best Christians, by virtue of which one of no mean
Rank in our Ship lost his Head; yet when they came to Swear, and that (in
conjunction with some Christian Witnesses) against a Pragmatick JOYNER, that
used to Wainscot Cabbins in our Ship, and so had the opportunity to villifie
the Captain and his Conduct, and invectively to calumniate his Administrations,
for which many of the honest Sailers were extremely angry with him; but the
Jenkes-men at their smoaky Rendezvous backed him on, until at last he was
Puppy-snatcht, and put under the Hatches, in order to a Trial: but when his
Case, which was too wicked to be mentioned, came before the Jurats of the Great
Cabin, though Five Witnesses Swear pat against him, (for Reservations best
known to themselves;) they made an Ignoramus of the Knave, to the amazement and
wonder of all the honest s^^^ers. For these Witnesses, like Dragons, devoured
the Mahometans, but their Evidence is not proof against a Traitorous Railing
Shimei: But it is to be hoped that the Jurats of a Lesser Cabin will give this
Rabshekah the Reward of his Wickedness. Since which a Broken-Sailer disgusting
his natural employment, which was to fit the Ships-Crew with Rugs and Blankets,
observing these Divisions, must needs be a Solicitor in the Great Cabin, being
covetous of being like his Master, (who loves to fish in troubled waters) his
Tongue being too long for his Mouth, the Captain and his Council have found
Cause sufficient to clap him also under the Hatches: And though they were
formerly the Right-hand-men of the Bethelites and Jenkites, yet now the best
Livery they give these Brethren in Iniquity is, they were Idle Prating Rascals,
and not to be owned by sober Seamen: Thus have I seen a Whore wipe off her
spots from her face when she pleases.

Thus stand things at present; but I must not omit to tell you, that these
Triflers in Policy do not forget to amuse the Sailers, by telling them now the
Council of Officers is discharged, the Captain intends to Rule Arbitrarily, to
Inslave the Ships-Company, to Govern uncontroulably, as it is said the
Algerine-Captain does his Vessel. But as soon as ever the Captain understood,
that the Jenkes-men had poisoned his honest Sailers, with apprehensions so
remote from his thoughts, he immediately issues out his Royal Declaration,
giving Ample satisfaction to all the Ships-Company, that the Laws of the Ship
shall be the Square of all his Actions; and as he will not do Illegal things
himself, so will he not suffer it in his Council of Officers, nor in no single
Officer whatsover: These condescensions of the Captain met with general
Applause and acceptance from all the Sailers: Every Cabin in the Ship have
most humbly Addressed the Captain to accept of their most unfeigned Thanks for
this his most Gracious Promise, especially that he has assured them he will
often call his Council of Officers. This unanimous acknowledgement of the
Christians has dampt the Mahometans, confounded the Bethelites, disordered the
Jenkes-men, to see, that Maugre all their Whispers and Invectives, all the
lying Pamphlets they could disperse, yet the Captain remains Great in the
Hearts of the Christians: this puts these Busybodies upon trying their
Strength once more, by endeavoring to set up Petitions, to Dun the Captain for
that which he has already most solemnly Promised, viz. to call his Council of
Officers, which when they meet, I hope, they will with one mind, join to curb
the growing of Mahometanism, and stop the Madness of those Spirits, that dare
to Malign, either the Captain or his Government. When other things occur they
shall be imparted to you.

J. S.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, at the Black Bull in Cornhill, near the
Royal Exchange, 1681.


