AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST Quakerisme: Wherein these Following QUESTIONS Are Opened,
the Truth concerning them Proved, the contrary Arguments Examined and Confuted.

Whether the Scriptures, or the Light in every man be our Rule to Heaven?
Whether the Light in every man be a Saving Light? Here Something also
concerning Immediate Teaching. Whether Perfection, viz. a State free from all
Sin, be attainable in this Life? Whether Baptism with Water be an Ordinance of
Christ binding us? Whether the Supper be an Ordinance of Christ binding us?
Whether Justification be by the Righteousness of Christ imputed?
By Stephen Scandrett, Minister of Gods Word,

1 Cor. 3.13. Every man's works shall be made manifest; for the Day shall
declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire: and the fire shall try every
man's work, of what sort it is.

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside,
near Mercers- Chapel, 1671.

TO THE GODLY READER.
A Brief Account of Two Disputations between George Whitehead, Robert Ludgater,
etc. Quakers, and the Author.
BEing informed of the great number of Quakers in and about Old-Samford; and
considering the destructive Opinions of those that teach among them; the
certain eternal ruin of them, if in all things they should believe and
practice according to the Doctrine, of some at least, of these Teachers: As
Paul's Spirit was stirred in him, when he saw the Athenians wholly given to
Idolatry; so my Bowels yearned toward this misguided Flock; of which, many, I
am persuaded, truly breathing after Salvation, are led away, as those two
hundred men that went after Absalom in the simplicity of their hearts, and know
not whither these Teachers are leading them. What might be done to stop the
erroneous course of this people? If these that take upon them to preach among
them, saw the evil of their own ways, it would be a good step to the reducing
of many. Is it impossible that these should be informed? I told a Friend that
lived near the place, I could willingly discourse with some of their Teachers,
had I an opportunity, aiming only at a private Conserence. About a year after,
this person directs two Quakers to my House with a Letter, which when I opened,
I found, that whereas I had challenged to dispute with them, they required
these may be the Questions, etc. and that time and place may be agreed upon. I
wondered at this Language, for before, the Quakers utterly disclaimed any such
thing as a Challenge: Yet considering that a Dispute would draw Quakers to it,
who are utterly averse from hearing any that preach the wholesome Doctrine of the
Gospel; and thus there might be an advantage of clearing up the Truths of God
before them: it may be the Lord will convince some of them at least, and so
rescue them from that destruction their Teachers are drawing them into. I
consented. Paul's practice in the School of Tyrannus, was my Encouragement and
my Hope, trusting in the Lord for help, and setting his Glory, the advancement
of Truth, and the salvation of souls before mine Eyes.

The Place being appointed, the Day come, George Whitehead appearing my
Antagonist, I demanded, Whether he would grant the Scriptures to be a Truth, or
no? This Principle being yielded, to bottom an Argument upon, I required
silence, to begin with Prayer: This was flouted at [Thou have thy God to seek.]
Thus did he, showing a scornful, proud, self-confident Spirit, deride the
solemn Worship of God, who is to be sanctified in all things; especially in
undertakongs of this nature; in that he only can enlighten and lead us into
Truth, and all assembled stood in need of his teaching. Gods people surely are
a Generation of such as seck his face: I returned not reviling for reviling, I
came for another purpose: I further pressed for silence. He continuing to
dissent: I did however, though the more briefly, seek Gods presence among his
people, and his Vindication of what is Truth. This done, Concerning the
Scriptures, I asserted them to be a most certain and infallible Rule. He bids
me prove it. This was my Argument: [That which is given by Inspiration of God
to guide us to heaven, cannot but be a most certain and infallible Rule: But so
are the Scriptures.] He granted the Scriptures were given by inspiration; but
instead of showing how these may deceive us notwithstanding (which indeed is
impossible) he rambles, and runs out in an impertinent Discourse, as if he were
preaching, rather than disputing. And this was his manner, when to prove the
Scriptures a trying Rule, I urged an Argument from the example of the Bereans.
That which God approves of is our Duty: But God approves of it, that we try
Doctrines by the Scripture: This therefore is our duty. He would not hearken to
this argument, nor attempt to give any answer at all to it, though repeated
three or four times: but flies to another thing, rambling tediously. Indeed to
prove Perfection he brought several Arguments and Scriptures, one after another
somewhat closely; and having received distinct Answers to them, he fairly
ceased, being unable to make good his Assertion; and heard my Argument to the
contrary: But then grow mose tedious again in his repetitions and
impertinences. I was too mild toward him. But when entering upon Justification,
I saw that he hid himself in impertinent, long answers; and that the day was
now far spent; that I might not be prevented in what I chiefly designed, the
discovery of the only way of Justification by Christ's Righteousness imputed;
that people might see whither these Teachers were leading them; and prevent, if
God saw good, their everlasting damnation of body and soul: I resolved, I would
not regard him; but deliver something to the People touching this point for
their instruction and safety. Three Arguments I delivered, and enlarged my self
on them freely and fully to the People, and would not be interrupted; pressing
them, as they desired to escape condemnation at Gods Bar, to look for
Justification in nothing else but the righteousness of Christ imputed; to fly
to Christ, and build only on his Blood and Righteousness, as that alone that is
able to satisfy God for their transgression. And having done this, I commended
all to God by Prayer, and went away. The People seeing how I was hindered by
this man's tedious enlargements, desired another days dispute. I told G. W. by
a Letter, that if he would give it in Writing, that what Question is asked
pertinent to the point in hand, it should be answered expressly by affirming or
denying it, the Question being capable of such an answer; I was willing to meet
him a second time: And that it might be lawful for others also to speak, his
friends and mine, that so we might carry the Dispute on, and the People attend,
through this veriety, with less weariness. He uses many shifts to keep off
from this engagement; I being peremptory, knowing without this he would ramble,
but not dispute; at length he gives this under his hand! [I do intend according
to my understanding to be as positive and intelligible in my Answers to
Questions pertinent, as I can; and in my Answer to signify an Affirmation or
Denial, if the Question be capable of such an Answer.] Having this Engagement,
I did hope he would keep close to the point; or at least that I should force
him to it. I met and put him to his affirmation, or denial; either the
Scripture is a full Rule or not? Either Gods will laid down in Scripture is the
only Rule or not? Whilst he expressed himself pertinently, I listened giving him
all Liberty; but when he began to ramble (for he knew not how to keep bounds,
having run wild so long) I checked him, and required his affirmation or denial.
And thus holding him to it, the Lord was pleased much to succeed my attempts;
They were forced, though with as much reluctance as a Bear to the Stake; they
were forced, I say, to acknowledge the Truth; and this in the very essential
Differences between us and them. It was acknowledged openly that [the
Scriptures are a full Rule.] That, [The will of God laid down in the Scripture
is the only Rule.] That, [The will of God reveled by the Light in every man,
without the Scripture, is not the only Rule.] And if these things be granted,
what becomes of Quakery? What is Quakery but the setting up of the Light in
every Man as a Rule to Heaven? They granting the first, bruised Quakery very
sorely; granting the second they knocked Quakers down to the ground; granting
the third they fetched out the very heart blood of Quakery. Let but these three
granted truths live in the hearts of all, and Quakery must needs give up the
Ghost; it is impossible there should be one Quaker on the face of the Earth.
For, if the Scriptures are a full Rule: It cannot be denied but that all those
who walk according to this Rule in uprightness are in the way to salvation. A
full Rule will, if practiced, safely bring us to glory. What reason possibly
can there be to desert this, to be guided by the Light within? If the will of
God revealed in the Scriptures be the only Rule, then all other Rules are false
Rules, and no Rules; then who ever walks by any other Rule, is not in the way
to heaven, must needs perish at last and be damned for ever: What bloody
enemies are they to the souls of men that counsel and direct them to seek
salvation by walking after any other Rule; what great Reason have we to cleave
to Gods will laid down in Scripture; there being but one way to heaven, and
this is it? Men must seek the way to heaven where it is to be found, if they
would not miss of it. Again, If the will of God (as much of it as is) revealed
by the Light in every man, without the Scriptures, be not the only Rule to
salvation; when there is but one, this cannot be any Rule at all to salvation:
those that walk by no other Rule but this, must not look to be saved; those
that counsel to walk by no other, make themselves guilty of the blood of souls.
Suppose a City had but One only way leading into at; a man were to be burnt
alive if he gets not into this City by the evening; in his travel asking one
the way, he bids him open such a Gate on the right hand, and he should see
before him the only way that leads into the City: asking another, he
acknowledges that if he opens the Gate on the right hand he should see before
him the only way; yet bids him take a Lane on the left hand. If through the
Gate on the right hand be the only way; how can the Lane on the left, be any
way at all leading into the City? If the Traveller takes that Lane, he loses
his Life, and the Mis-informer is guilty of his death. By this is appears, from
what has been confessed; that the Light in every man is no way at all to
Heaven; that he that walks by no other Rule, is to burn everlastingly in Hell;
and he that acknowledgeing Gods will laid down in Scripture the only Rule,
counsels to walk by no other Rule save the Light in every man, is a Murderer of
souls, a wilful contriver of their damnation. Oh! that God would give such to
see their Crimson Transgression, and break their hearts, and turn them to
himself, that they may be saved. If not; that he would at least rescue a
miserable flock out of their devouring mouths. And yet I see but little hopes
of the former, for though thus overborn by the Power of Truth, they have the
Face still to appear against it, and in Print vapor as if the day were their
own; and [ their Women Friends are able to confute us shattered Priests. Glory
of Christ's Light within. p. 11.] Thus Bankrupts, unable to subsist make a
flourish; fain would they keep up their credit in the World, though they cannot
their estates. But where was this flourish then, when refusing to affirm or
deny the will of God in Scripture, the only Rule; I challenged them all seven
upon the stage, One by one, to deny it if they durst; and they heavy-hearted
men durst not a good while give me any Answer: deny it they could not, the
truth is so plain to assirm it they saw were to knock down to the ground their
unsound Opinion. If they repent not of their errors, they will be far from
glorying at the Bar of Christ. In their Narrative I can easily overlook their
Reproachful speeches. Presbyterian Priest, p. 3. Shattered Priests, p. 11. Dead
men, because Cromwell the Light of their eyes is dead. p. 13. Ignorant Opposer.
p. 35. Defective, Bawling Fellow, acting like a Fiddler, etc. This is very much
the strein of other Writings: A very strong Argument against our Doctrine. It Is
easy to see they want Bullet, when they are fain thus to shoot Dirt. I can
easily pass by their Railing Language also. The Devils sinful Agents and
Messengers. Contenders for the Devil, Error, darkness, and the works thereof,
p. 3. The Lord does Judge, and will shortly manifest who are such. How vain are
they in their envious Counsel? Giving that we have bread, they advise to detein
it from us. p. 10. Do they think the Lord will ever cease to be Levies
Inheritance? Or that our Doctrine would die with us? Neither they, nor all the
Gates of Hell joining with them, though we were removed, shall ever be able to
prevail against it. How injurious to their own souls are they, usurping Gods
Throne of Judgment! A Company of Hypocrites. p. 10. The God of this World has
blinded their eyes. p. 17. Are they Gods to know that these things are so?
Really in Hell, imptatively in Heaven. p. 37. It is in their powers to save and
damn whom they please? Their vain glorious boasting renders them Real Objects
of pity and compassion. We have been forward to suffer. p. 5. We have been the
sufferers that have endured the storms for them; they have been ready to run
away. p. 11. The earth indeed has helped the Woman; the Lord did so ordain it.
Were their cause good, their call clear, and their carriage holy, their
sufferings had been acceptable to God. But they suffer not for the upholding
all Gods Ordinances in the purity of them, rather for Preaching down Baptism,
for Preaching down the Supper, for Preaching down the Scripture as no Rule that
will guide to Heaven, and instead of these Ordinances of God, they set up an
Ordinance of their own, which God never appointed for his Church, Dumb
Meetings. In extrao^dinary cases we read of Prophets, and others Dumb for a
time; but which of the Prophets, which of the Apostles ever did ordinarily,
from week to week assemble Gods people together, and was in like manner dumb
amongst them? Or where did God ever command his Church to meet from time to
time, to sit and look one upon another. The Cause being bad, it is impossible
they should have a Call from God. They are then but Will-sufferings. And yet if
both Cause and Call were good; this vain glorious carriage would of it self
spoil all. Our Savior bids, when they Persecute in one City, fly to another.
And he himself could withdraw into a desert place in time of his Disciples
fears. And when the Jews sought his Life, could walk no more openly. And the
Apostles according to Christ's Counsel and Practice, could withdraw from place
to place; yet so, as still going on with their work. But these must be seen in
the same place, however threatened; and then to boast of it when they have done,
as if they had wrought some meritorious work; to set up themselves as such
Saints for this; and to despise others, who when they have a Call, can through
Gods assistance, and do submit to sufferings; at other times rather choose to
tread in the steps of Christ and his Apostles: These, says God, are a smoke in
my Nose. The proud, vain glorious Pharisees lost all their Prayers. Vain
glorious Ananias and Saphira, after they had parted with a great portion of
their estates to be reputed Religious, must part with their Souls also. Above
all persons therefore boasting sufferers are to be pitied, because they are
like to be double sufferers, and but single gainers; they have their reward.
But there is One thing in their Narrative relating to my Brethren, which I dare
charge them withal, that is, Slander, as I verily believe. They give out p.
10. That some of us employ men (for they call them our Agents,) to go from
house to house to beg money for us: And p. 11. That some of us have compacted
with the Ministers of the Parish, to give them a part of the money if they will
permit them to make again of their slock by Preaching to them. If they prove
not these things true, they must needs be looked on as guilty of slander. And
there are two things in it relating to my self, which I complain of. Vnupright,
dis-ingenuous dealing; and falsehood. Of the former, because when they write
G.W. his proofs, they sometimes make no mention of my Answers. They omit
several of the Arguments I urged in both Disputes. They lay not down the
strength of others as urged. They lay down what frivolous thing they please as
an Argument of mine, which I never brought in as an Argument. p. 28. This is
not a full Light, for God created the Stars which are not a full Light. Also
p. 29. If it convinces of sin, then not of the contrary. These are none of my
Conclusions. They moreover impute harsh and uncouth specches to me. p. 19. That
I should say; the Light in its common operations is given to Unbelievers. p.
28. That it is not given to all. And p. 38. By the Righteousness of Faith
Justified persons are sanctified. These are none of my sayings. Of falsehood the
Latter, I complain in many particulars. They affirm, p. 4. That I should say,
The Light within might save them that have not the Scriptures. I never affirmed
this, a full account of what I said follows in the close of that Question
[Whether the Light in every man be saving.] And again, p. 33. That I should
say, Go Baptize ye Rebels. Though I called them Rebels, and proved it, of which
too afterward; yet I affirm this a falsehood, I never looked on such fellows as
Ministers of Christ fit to Baptize. Further, p. 7. It was usual with this S. S.
When he could not Reply, to make a noise. I know nothing urged pertinent, but
it had its answer. I affirm it to be a falsehood, that any thing that was urged
I could not answer. Moreover, p. 24. They give out that I dired them to affirm
or deny before they refused. Another falsehood. p. 12 These Priests hold men are
Imputatively Righteous, whilst Actually sinners. Take sinners for Persons in
whom sin is not perfectly abolisht, and those that are Righteous by Imputation
are such; Gal. 2.17. Eccl. 7.20.
take sinners for Persons allowing themselves in sin; and this is a gross
falsehood. G. W. Would have impudently fastened upon me, this assertion in the
Dispute; That I said, Water Baptism is necessary to Salvation. I then checked
him to his Face, and renounced it openly as not said by me. Yet against all
this Light, these men have the Faces to fasten it still upon me. I affirmed
then, and do still, the contempt of it is Damnation: Yet it is not necessary,
as Faith is necessary. The Thief was saved without it. To these falsehoods I
shall add, with reference to G.W. That having bargained and agreed with me
under his hand to signify his affirmation or Denial to all Questions that
should be asked pertinent to the point in hand; whether I demanded his
Affirmation or Denial, ten, or fifteen, or twenty times or more (for I
frequently did it, yet could scarce at all get it from him. I do not remember
one time; for when I extorted the Concessions mentioned, 'twas one of his
Brethren by, that yielded to me; he was obstinately neutral; durst not deny,
the things were so plain: yet would neither be Ingenuous nor faithful to
confess the truth, any other way then by his silence, or his not openly
contradicting him that did confess it.) I do pronounce him guilty of falsehood
so many times as he refused to affirm or deny. And are these the Saints? The
men that are immediately sent from God? Infallibly inspired by the Holy Ghost
that they cannot err? In Thaxtead I have been credibly informed, a Quaker
styled this G. W. an Angel from heaven; A very black one, if he be. These two
last things complained of engage my Pen; because I see the Doctrine of Christ
sharing with me in my sufferings by them: which I must not brook. My design in
Writing being the Readers Profit; I shall not barely relate the Particulars of
the Disputes, but pointing at them as I go, shall (God assisting) handle the
six Questions in Order, Opening them as far as I judge needful; laying down
Scripture or Reason for what we hold, examining what the Adversary has said
against it, whether in the Dispute, or in the Narrative since, or in his Book
styled the Divinity of Christ, or any other of his Writings that come to hand.
And herein, I hope, I shall deal more heartily with my Adversary then I have
been dealt with all my self, not bauking his strength, but improving it rather.
For Truth fears no Weapons. Doing this I shall commit all to a good God, even
the Bishop of our souls; who will bring all his sheep into his fold, and cause
them to hear his voice, and give them eternal life; never suffer them to
perish, nor any to pluck them out of his hand. You that are Godly, do and will
strike in with the design of my endeavors, by your prayers: That Truth might
prevail and find more generally entertainment in the hearts of men; to the
advancement of Christ's Kingdom, glory of Gods name, and eternal blessedness of
never-dying souls. And my request for you is, that having received the Love of
the Truth, you might by Christ be rooted and grounded therein for ever, and so
at last be presented holy, unblameable, and unreproved in his sight. This God
will do for you, and it is the rejoicing of

One unworthy to be reckoned among you, STEPHEN SCANDRETT.

To the Misguided FLOCK Commonly Termed QUAKERS, Especially in and about
Samford.
YOU will bear with me in this Application, allowing every man to speak
according to the Light of his own Conscience. For your sakes, Brethren, did I
engage in Disputation; for your sakes, in good will, and true compassion to
your souls do I also now write. My design in it falls in with your desire; even
that you might have an undeceiving persuasion touching the way to Heaven and
Glory; that walking therein you may not miss of everlasting Rest when you are
departed hence. How you may attain this persuasion, is a matter of very great
importance, and well worth a strict inquiry: Do but think with your selves how
others might attain it. A Jew, a Turk, a Papist, an Independent, a
Presbyterian, an Anabaptist; If they should say, our present persuasion is
undeceiving, because our hearts assure us therein, or because our Teachers do
so instruct us, or because we have an infallible spirit which will not suffer
us to be deceived in any thing; your Light would tell you they took not a
(...). But if looking up to God for illumination and (...) ^earch for, and
examine the grounds of their own and others Opinions; and what they see upon
good grounds to be truth, that they embrace, whoever rejects it; what they see
upon good ground to be error, that they cast aside, whoever countenanceth it;
would not your Light tell you, this were a better and a safer course for them?
Now be your own Judges; is not that a good and a safe course for you to take,
which is so for others? You may not then say, it is impossible I should be
deceived touching my present Opinion, because my heart persuades me it is
right. As a Papist may not thus argue, so neither may you: For the Heart is
deceitful above all things. He that trusts to his own Heart is a Fool. Lean
not, says God, to thine own understanding. Neither may you say, it cannot be
that I should be mistaken in this, for such and such have taught it. A Turk, a
Socinian may not thus pin his Faith on another sleeve; for deceitful workers
transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ: therefore neither may you:
Our Savior cautions you; take heed that no Man deceive you: commands you, call
no man Master on Earth: and threatens too, Cursed be the man that trusts in
man. Nor may you say, it is impossible I should be out, for I have an
infallible spirit that will not suffer me to err in any thing. As a
Presbyterian, an Independent, an Anabaptist may not thus build his considence;
so neither may you. It is incumbent on you as well as on them, to try the
spirits whether they be of God. Your work then is, looking up for special
assistance, to examine the grounds of what you and others hold, to prove all
things, that you may hold fast that which is good. And truly a well grounded
knowledge, is a very choice mercy. Wisdom and knowledge, says God, shall be
the Stability of thy times and Strength of Salvation. For your furtherance
herein, if the Lord shall add his blessing; I put this small book into your
hands: It will present you with the grounds of what your Teachers hold for
truth; and what we hold, Read, and Judge which have clearest reason for what
they hold, which have Scripture taken in its true sense and meaning. And as
Elijah said to Israel, If God be God, follow him; if Baal be God, follow him.
So say I to you, If what we teach be well built upon a sure foundation, embrace
it. If what yours teach be rightly drawn from sound Principles, cleave to it
for ever. Remember it speaks a Generous and a free Spirit, to be able with
Candor and Impartiality to read an Adversary. But unless Gods spirit enlightens
your mind, you may see truth, and not perceive; it unless he sanctifies your
heart, you may perceive it, and not embrace or practice it: You must therefore
needs beg for the gracious presence of God with you, if you would benefit your
souls by reading. Examine your selves also whether you have a Love of the
Truth, a Readiness to acknowledge and close with it, whether it shall appear to
be your own opinion, or ours? If you are resolved in heart to cast away our
doctrine, though it should never so clearly appear to be the truth of God; to
retain what you have received from your Teachers, though it should never so
plainly be discovered error; to what good intent can you read? It is not Truth
you are for, but a Party. But if you can be willing to take in Truth on which
hand soever you find it; then are you capable to aim at and receive profit by
Reading. What do you say? How do you find it with you? If our present Opinion
shall appear to be Truth, we can hold to it: That's not so difficult a business.
But what if the contrary Opinion proves true? If it should indeed, we hope
through Gods grace we should not reject it. Only Truth leads to Heaven: we
should otherwise provoke God to give us up to strong delusions to believe a lie
that we might be damned. This is like Persons that are in good earnest for
Heaven. But it is good for you to consider before hand, that it is no easy
thing to part with an Opinion, you have been long wedded to, and it may be
commended, and contended for; to be reconciled to an Opinion, at which you
have, it may be, for several years taken distaste, and opposed; and to expose
your self to disgrace, by openly, as it were, proclaiming your own ignorance
during that time; and by becoming unconstant to what you have so long
professed: to bear the reproach, ill will and malice of your own Party; they
will contemptuously call you Apostates, and what not. What do you now say to
the matter? Can you still hold your purpose? Now you begin to stagger. The
Devil is an utter enemy to Truth; he knows it leads to Heaven. In this case
therefore he will be prompting, what ever hazard thou do run, spare thy self.
Concerning the Kings Messenger said the Prophet, See how this Son of a Murderer
has sent to take away mine Head; look when the Messenger comes shut the door,
and hold him fast at the door. Unless the great God of Heaven and Earth stand
by you, thus will you deal with Truth, if our Opinion appear to be it; you will
look on it with as much malignity, as on a spiteful enemy that would take away
all that ever you have, you would be sure to bar it out of your hearts. But the
Lord will enable all his savingly to take in his Truth. Concerning such, the
Apostle could say, God has chosen you to Salvation, through sanctification of
the Spirit, and belief of the Truth. Seek therefore your help from the Lord. If
he shall graciously transform you by the renewing of your mind, in spite of
flesh and blood, Earth and Hell, you shall prove what is that good and
acceptable and perfect will of God. And so shall your persuasion be
undeceiving; so shall your hopes be such as makes not ashamed. The Desire as
well as Design of

Your Souls hearty Friend, STEPHEN SCANDRETT.

AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST Quakerisme.
Concerning the Scriptures compared with the Light that is in every man, as to
their being our Rule.
BY a Rule, understand not an Artificial Rule; that Instrument by which
Artificers are guided; but a Moral; that Instrument that God makes use of, to
direct and bind us to our duty, that we directed by it, and obedient to it, may
obtain Gods favor, and be saved.

By the Light in every man, understand, 1. Not the special saving Illumination
of the Spirit of God, whereby we are able to discern effectually the Mysteries
of the Cospel; for though the truly sanctified have this Light, Matthew. 13.16.
Blessed are your Eyes, for they see; yet not any in their unregenerate state, 1
Cor. 2 14 The Natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God; for
they are foolishness to him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually difcerned. 2. Much less the In-dwelling Spirit of God; P. 26. He
consounds the Spirit and the light. making both one.
For though the truly sanctified, as before, have him dwelling in them, to help
their Infirmities; to lead them into all truth: to quicken, comfort,
strengthen, and cause them to walk in Gods Statutes, 1 Cor. 3.16 Know ye not
that ye are the Temples of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? Yet
the Spirit of God is not thus in every man. Jude v. 19. These are they who
separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. 3. Not the Light of the
Gospel; as the Word is used. 2 Cor. 4.4. Lest the Light of the glorious Gospel
of Christ should shine into their hearts. For the Gospel is not given to every
man. Psalm. 147.19. He shows his word unto Jacob, his Statutes unto Israel; he
bath not dealt so with any Nation: and as for his Judgments, they have not
known them. And where the Gospel is given, all do not receive it into their
hearts, that it should be within them. Acts 13.46. It was necessary the Word of
God should first have been spoken unto you, but seeing ye put it from you, we
turn to the Gentiles. 4. Not Christ, who is called the Light of the world. For
Christ Personally is in Heaven. Acts 3.21. Whom the Heaven must receive till
the times of Restitution of all things. Christ spiritually, or the Image of
Christ, consisting in Knowledge. Righteousness and true Holiness, is only in
the Regenerate: for in whom he thus is, to them he is a sure ground of hope of
Glory. Col. 1.27. Christ in you the hope of Glory. But every man has not a
sure Ground to hope for Glory. All in whom Christ thus is, are approved of God.
2 Cor. 13 5. Christ is in you except ye be Reprobates or unapproved. Is every
man approved of God? Again, Some are without Christ. Ephesians. 2.12, At that time ye
were without Christ. The Body that is without the Soul, has not the Soul in
it: and he that is without Christ, has not Christ in him. 5. But understand,
that Principle of Knowledge that is indeed to be found in every man: For Christ
lights every man that comes into the world. This Principle therefore is in
the disobedient, as well as the obedient. To. 1 18. The wrath of God is
revealed against all unrighteousness of men, who hold the Truth in
Unrighteousness. Those that will not live the Truth, have however a principle
in them whereby they know much of it; it is in the Heathen as well as the
Christian; The Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the things
contained in the Law. If they had not a principle whereby to know these things,
how could they do them? It will render the whole world of ungodly men
unexcusable at the last day; even those that have not the Scriptures, as well
as those that have: For they cannot say but that they understood something of
Gods Will, which yet they have not practiced. This Light (let men term it how
they please) is nothing else but man's Reason: For since it is none of the four
Lights first mentioned, let any tell what else can it be? Take away any of
those Lights from within a man, he still has Light, or a Principle of
Knowledge remaining in him: But take away Reason, the remaining Light is gone.
In this Controversy, this principle we call not Reason, so much as Light. Yet
the Light that is in every man to prevent Mistakes.

By Scripture understand not Paper, Ink or Letters; but the Truths and Will of
God, as written in the Books of the Old and New Testament. The Terms opened, we
come to the Business.

The Essential difference between Us and the people called Quakers lies here.
They hold, that the Light in every man is the Rule that directs to Heaven; that
the Scripture therefore is to be embraced so far only as it agrees with this
Light. We hold, That the Scripture is the Rule that directs to Heaven; that the
Light within every man therefore is to be regarded so far only as it agrees
with the Scripture. Now, though we both agree, that neither of these is wholly
to be cast off; yet that men might see, which of them is to be embraced as the
highest and safest Rule, which of them is to be rejected in competition with
the other, I assert these things concerning the Scriptures: 1. That they are a
full Rule. 2. That the Will of God laid down in them is the only Rule 3. That
they are a Trying Rule. 4. A Binding Rule, and that in those things of which
the Light in every man says nothing. 5. An infallible Rule to Heaven. If these
things be made good; and on the contrary, so much cannot be said for the Light
in every man that it is a full Rule: that Gods Will as much as is revealed by
it, is the only Rule, that it is a trying Rule, a bin ing Rule in those things
in which the Scripture says nothing, an infallible Rule and Guide to Heaven:
then it will appear we have greater reason to cleave to Scripture than to the
Light that is in every man, as the highest and safest Rule to Heaven. I assert,
1. The Scriptures are a full Rule: a Rule discovering all things necessary to
Salvation: the whole Mind and Will of God concerning his Churches duty,
according to which, if we sincerely endeavor to walk, it is impossible we
should miss of Heaven. This Assertion they would have me prove in the second
Dispute: Nay, said I, we will differ: first you shall grant it or deny it.
Loath they were to grant; deny they could not: But being pressed to it, it was
acknowledged, that the Scriptures are a full Rule. And so ought all men to
acknowledge; for says the Holy Ghost, Prove. 30 7. Add thou not unto his words,
lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a Liar. There needs no addition to Gods
Words written to make them a full Rule to Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. All
Scripture is given by inspiration of God; that the man of God may be perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto every good work If the Scriptures can direct Gods
Church and People to every good work, then there is not any duty they are bound
to, not any good Work, but they are there directed to it, consequently they are
a most full Rule unto Salvation. What good reason have all to cleave to this
Rule? It cannot he denied, that they who walk by it, take the right way to
Salvation, Rev. 1.3. Blessed is he that reads and keeps the words of the
Prophecy of this Book.

These men seeing their Cause wounded by this Acknowledgment, would fain lick
themselves whole again by this Addition, p. 9. Though the Will of God laid down
in Scripture be the Rule, and p. 27, the full Rule, yet this Will is that we
should follow the Light within, and the Spirit of God, within, to guide us into
all Truth. A. They speak impertinently here of the Spirit, which by the
Scriptures, and not without, leads all the faithful into all Truth: The Spirit
is one thing, the Light in every man, of which we now dispute, another. When
they say it is Gods will laid down in Scripture, that we follow the Light
within. I ask, Do they mean that we follow the Light in every man as a full
Rule? Then let them show, where does the Scripture point at this Light as a
full Rule. Do they mean, that we follow this Light, and go not against Reason
and Conscience in those things which it is able to direct us, agreeing with the
Scriptures, indeed amongst a thousand Commands in Scripture, this is one, Isa.
46 5, 6, 7, 8. God calls on those that would worship him by similitudes, to
show themselves men, to act according to reason, which is able to tell them
that nothing visible can represent Gods Excellencies. I said before, that the
Light in every man is not wholly to be cast off; nor do any of us say the voice
of Conscience is to be slighted, but obeyed, so far as it speaks according to
Scripture: this derogates nothing from the fullness of the Scripture. How would
these miserable men unsay what they have said? Will they say that, that single
Command of regarding the Light in every man in what it can speak according to
Scripture, is of it self alone all the fullness of the Scripture? Alas, this
were to say that there is nothing else in all the Scriptures, but that one
single Command repeated over and over; for if there be a thousand more, and
Exhortations and Reproofs, and Threats and Promises, and approved Examples, and
Gospel-Discoveries, etc. they do all concur to the fullness of the Scripture.
the Wound bleeds still: a fullness they have acknowledged to be in Scripture,
and cannot go back. Whoever them give themselves up to walk according to
Scripture rule, cannot miss of Heaven: whoever cast off the Scriptures either
in whole or in part, cast off that rule that would fully guide them to Heaven,
our Adversaries themselves being Judges.

Obj. But G. W. objects, p. 27. You granted we have but part of the Scriptures

Answ. Do these men fight with themselves? Would they prove the Scriptures no
full rule, and yet acknowledge they are? Some Books the Prophets wrote are lost
indeed, as the Book of Nathan the Prophet, and the Prophecy of Ahijah the
Shilonite, and the Vision of Iddo the Seer, 2 Chronicles. 9.29. The Book of Themajah
the Prophet, 2 Chronicles. 12.15. and others. Yet what was the Canon, and what God
designed to be his Churches Rule in all future Ages, is entirely preserved, and
shall be unto the end of the world, Matthew. 5.18. Heaven and Earth shall pass,
but one jot or one title shall in no wise pass from the Law (the Churches Rule)
till all be fulfilled. 2 Pet. 1.19. We have a more sure Word of Prophecy, unto
which ye do well to attend, as unto a Light that shines in a dark place,
until the Day (of Glory) dawn, and the Day star arise in your hearts; till
having overcome, Rev. 2.26, 28. the Lord Christ be received into your hearts by
Vision, as now by Faith. Thus we may see cause to rejoice in the Scriptures as
a full Rule to Heaven, though many Writings of the Prophets are lost.

Can this he said for the Light in every man, that it is also a full rule?
Concerning it, I yield, that without the Scriptures this Light is able to
discover something of God and his Mind and Will unto us. It can reveal that
there is a God, that he is to be feared, loved, trusted in, worshipped, that
his Name is to be reverenced, that some time is to be set apart for his
worship; that Parents are to be honored, Magistrates submitted to, Children
provided for; that we are to love one another, not take away one another Life
unjustly; that we are to fly Adultery, Stealing, Cheating, Lying, to tender our
Neigbours good Name. These things have been found amongst Heathens, that enjoy
not Scripture nor supernatural Revelation. And in these things, because the
Light in every man speaks according to Scripture, we are to attend unto it. But
^. I deny that it can without the Scripture show to us our whole duty; or that
without the Scripture it can show to any enough to save them. Yea, I deny that
this Light can of it self, and without supernatural Revelation direct any to
take one step toward Salvation. I shall first examine whether this Light can
be proved a full Rule, then confirm what is here laid down.

G. W. affirmed, The Light in every man to be a full Rule: And thus undertook
to prove it:

Arg. 1. If it he a spiritual Light, as wrought by the Spirit of God, then it is
a full Rule: But I had acknowledged it thus a spiritual Light.

Answ. I do still acknowledge that if its Denomination be taken from its
Efficient, it is to be called spiritual; for it is the Spirit creates Reason in
us. But it is improper to take a Denomination thence: Rather it should be taken
from its End and Use, and then, because it reveals only Moral Duties, it would
be properly termed Moral. But as to his Argument; I bid him prove his
Consequence; he bogles, and could make no work of it. Then I bid the people
mind what pure Argument he brought: As though one should say, If the stars were
created by the Spirit of God, they are a full light, able to make it Day. The
Scriptures are as the Sun, a full Light to guide us to Heaven: The Light in
every man, but as a Star, no full Light to travel by.

Arg. 2. If it convinces of Sin. Righteousness and Judgment, then it is a full
Rule: But so it does.

Answ. It convinces not of Justifying Righteousness, viz. The active and
passive Obedience of Christ; for it reveals not Christ at all.

Rep. It does reveal Christ. Proof 1. Romans 2.14. If the Gentiles do by nature
the things contained in the Law, then it reveals Christ.

Answ. They may do things contained in the Law, and never know Christ. It Is not
the Law, but the Gospel that reveals Christ.

Proof 2. If the Grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared to all men,
and teaches to look for the appearance of our Savior, then it reveals
Christ.

This Grace appears by the Gospel where it comes; and the Gospel teaches to
look for our Saviors appearance. Prove that the Light in every man reveals
this Grace, or teaches to look for the appearance of Christ. He adds, Proof.
3. p. 29. The Light was given to believe in before they were Believers:
Therefore it reveals Christ to Unbelievers.

Answ. The Light which we are to believe in is Jesus Christ himself, and not
that Principle of Knowledge that is in every man. And before we believe in
Christ, even that we may believe in him, he is revealed to us by the Gospel,
not by the Light that is in every man. Proof 4. Ibid. The Light shined in men's
hearts before they did believe, to give them the knowledge of the Glory of God
in the Face of Jesus Christ. Therefore it reveals Christ to all, even
Unbelievers. Answ. Read the place, 2 Cor. 4.6. God who commanded the Light to
shine out of Darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the
knowledge of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. A. 1. Mark, It Is not
said (the Light) but (God) has shined. 2. The true sense is, God by the Gospel
propounding the Object, and by his Spirit enlightening the Eye, gives and
increases the saving knowledge of Christ in his chosen; and thus first they
become Believers, and afterward more and more are strengthened in their Faith.
And does this prove that the Light in every man reveals Christ to all? to those
that have not the Gospel? or that without the Gospel it reveals Christ to any?
(has shined into our hearts) Had not they the Gospel?

Arg. 3. If the Light in every man be an increasing Light, p. 28. does
gradually lead men out of Darkness and Sin, as men take heed unto it, though it
reveals not all things at once, then it is a full Rule: But it is an increasing
Light; for it is said, To every one of us is given Grace according to the
measure of the gift of Christ. Christ gives such a measure now; a greater
afterward. And, p. 29. The path of the Just is as the shining Light, that
shines more and more unto the perfect day.

Answ. This Argument, though not so well managed in the Dispute, of any, had
the greatest show of reason in it: But when it was Answered, that the Light in
every man never grew up to make of it self, and without the Scriptures, any
discovery of Christ, all was dashed presently. And there needs no more to be
said now. For though the use of Reason grows in a Child, and now it reveals
Stealing unlawful, then Lying etc. and these first dimly, then more clearly;
yet never attaining of it self to reveal Christ, it must needs leave men in
that dark state in which Damnation is unavoidable: The Gospel must deliver from
this dark state. The Light in every man cannot do it. If it were possible this
Light could lead out of all Sin whatever, unable to reveal Christ, it must
needs still leave men in a state of Damnation. The Grace that indifferent
measures is given to Believers enjoying the Gospel, as also the path of the
Just who embrace Christ as revealed to them in the Gospel, these put men into
the state of Salvation indeed; but they are one thing, the Light in every man
another.

Obj. It might be thus objected, If we obey what this Light can reveal
according to the measure of it, God will accept us: For in every Nation he that
works Righteousness is accepted of him. And what is not revealed does not
bind. p. 33. The Church of Corinth was not to make the Epistle of the Church of
Rome their Rule.

Answ. 1. Promulgation indeed is necessary to the Obligation of a Law; till
therefore the Church of Corinth had knowledge of the Epistle to the Romans,
they were not bound to make it their Rule: But after knowledge, they were
bound. Therefore if we should obey this Light only, which in its highest
measure cannot reveal Christ, we should not work Righteousness, that we might
be accepted. For God having given us Scriptures, requires more of us than this
Light reveals: And neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision,
but Faith which works by Love.

Obj. p. 32. The Saints of old were according to their several seize, to
walk by the same Rule, and God would reveal to them, Ph. 3.16. Therefore this
Light is a full Rule.

Answ. 1. The Saints; what is that to every man? 2. They were to walk according
to their several seize: what they had got out of the Scriptures. By the
same Rule, the Will of God laid down in the Scriptures, so far as they
understood it. What Is this to those that have not the Scriptures? What is it to
the Light that is in every man?

3. God would reveal more to the Saints. But where is any promise that God will
reveal Christ to every Heathen that walks according to his Light, though he
never enjoyes the Scriptures or the Gospel? Much less, where has God ever
promised that he will immediately by his Spirit reveal savingly all necessary
Truths to them who in comparison of a Light they have in common with the
Heathen, despise the precious Scriptures? Christ is a Mystery made manifest by
the Scriptures of the Prophets, Romans 16.25, 26. But he that trusts to his own
heart to make manifest Christ to him, is a Fool.

Obj. P. 29. We have a more sure Word of Prophecy, unto which ye do well to
take heed, till the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your hearts. Therefore
by minding this Light within, by degrees it will reveal Christ to us. They draw
not these Conclusions; but I am so far from hiding their strength, as they have
done mine, that I had rather improve their Arguments to the utmost for them.

Answ. 1. Prove that by the Dawning of the Day, or the Day Star arising in the
Heart, is to be understood Christ's first appearance in Grace unto their Souls.
Had not Christ thus appeared to them already? were they not Believers?

2. Prove that by the Word of Prophecy is to be understood the Light in every
man. Can this Light help every man to Prophecy? are all Prophets?

3. The Word of Prophecy is the Scripture, in which are written the true
Prophesies of God. Unto which we are to attend as long as we live on Earth;
even till the Day of Glory dawn, and the Day Star, Christ Jesus, after that we
have overcome, Rev. 2 26.28. arises in our hearts, taken in by Vision, as now
by Faith.

Arg. 4. If the Spirit guides Believers into all Truth, p. 28. then the Light
of this Spirit within must needs be a sufficient (or full) Rule.

Answ. 1. It is not said that the Light in every man guides into all truth.

2. Nor is it said, that the Spirit guides every man, yea, or any man without
the Scriptures, into all truth.

3 The true sense is, That the Spirit speaking in the Scriptures, and
enlightening the minds of Believers, shall lead them into all Truths necessary
to Salvation. It Is weak to argue, Believers who enjoy the Spirit speaking in
the Scriptures, have a full Rule; therefore every man has, even those that
enjoy neither the Spirit nor the Scriptures, but are left to the mere Light
that is in every man to guide them.

Thus it may be seen, that neither in the Dispute, nor by the improvement of
his Arguments then urged, nor by his Additional Arguments, has G. W. made good
his Assertion, that the Light in every man is a full Rule.

I shall now (because I look on this point as the very Seat of the
Controversy) lay down what I urged, and might have been urged to prove, That
the Light in every man is not a full Rule; and consequently no Rule at all by
it self to Salvation.

Arg. 1. If God saw good that even in Innocence this Light which we bring with
us into the world, should not be man's full and whole Rule, nor after to Moses,
nor after to Christ's time, nor in Christ's time, nor in the Apostles days then
there is little reason to fancy it is a full Rule now. But God saw good that
even in Innocence this Light should not be our full and whole Rule; for to this
he added a Brohibition of eating the Tree of Knowledge, to be parts of Adam's
Rule; nor after to Moses; for they were to offer Sacrifices, and be
Circumcised: Nor after to Christ; for the Ceremonial Law was part of their
Rule: nor in Christ's time; for he observed the Ceremonial Law, and also
submitted to Baptism: Nor in the Apostles days; for they upheld the Ordinance
of Baptism and of the Supper: None of all which things could this Light of it
self, and without supernatural Revelation, direct us to, as our Duty: and
therefore neither may it be looked on now as our full or whole Rule.

Obj. Touching Innocence, G. W. objected, Adam could discern by his Light
within, he ought to abstain from that Fruit.

Answ. After and by the positive prohibition he was able to know it. But it was
asked him, Could he have discerned it by the mere Light he brought with him
into the World without the positive Prohibition? He acknowledged, He could not.
So, in the positive Institution of Christ, it was replied; G. W. if he would
not shut his Eyes, might by the Light within him, understand, that the
Celebration of Baptism and the Supper, is the Churches Duty; though without
those Institutions promulged, no man with all his Light is able to find it out.
Here let it be taken notice, that he granted in effect, the whole Argument: For
he granted, that before the Prohibition came, his Light could not discover what
was Gods pleasure touching the Tree of Knowledge; and yet he yields, that God
made abstinence from this Tree his Duty: which is the whole contended for, And
if even in Innocence, Man's perfect Light must not be the whole of his Rule; but
to vindicate his absolute Dominion, and to maintain his just Prerogative, would
at his pleasure, impose duty on man, over and above what his Light within could
show a reason for; what a miserable Mistake is it to imagine that now man's
decayed Light should, by Gods appointment, be the whole of that Rule we are to
walk by? But though all was thus granted, and is very plain; yet troubled to
see it go so ill with his Cause, he cavils, p. 30. much to this purpose; Was
not God in Adam?

A. God is one thing, Adams Light another, created of God in him. God could
reveal his pleasure as he did by the Prohibition; but Adams Light, without that
Prohibition, could not show Adam, what was Gods Pleasure, as to this Tree; as
himself has acknowledged.

He objects further, p. 30. mightily to the purpose The Scriptures were not
Adams Rule.

A. Draw the Conclusion. Therefore Adams Light, without the prohibition, could
discern that it was Gods pleasure he should not eat of the Tree of Knowledge.
These things hang closely.

Obj. Abraham, Enoch, had a Rule before the Scriptures were written: the
Penmen also; directing them in writing.

These Impertinencies seem to prove something, though nothing to the Point in
hand. I therefore answer, 1. Though the Scriptures were not Adams Rule, because
then not written, yet to abstain from the Tree of Knowledge, was part of his
Rule in Innocence: To believe in the Seed of the Woman for breaking of the
Serpents Head, was part of his Rule after the Fall; as also Sacrificing:
Circumcision part of Abraham's Rule: All and every of which Duties, the Light in
every man could by no means find out without Supernatural Revelation. God was
pleased to reveal these Duties immediately to select persons, as Adam, Abraham;
and from them, by Tradition and Preaching, to communicate them to his Church in
following Generations. And thus it appears, that before the Scriptures were
written, the Light in every man was not his full Rule; but Gods will
supernaturally revealed, and conveyed to posterity by Tradition and Preaching
part thereof. But now it pleased our Gracious God supernaturally to reveal his
whole Will touching his Churches duty to the end of the World, unto particular
men, moving them by his Spirit to write (which motion was their Rule for that
Action) the same, and commanding others to transcribe Copies; that so our
guidance to Heaven might safely be conveyed to posterity; not lost through
neglect, nor forgotten through the slipperiness of his peoples Memories; nor
altered by relating it from mouth to mouth; nor corrupted by the Relation of it
made sometimes by wicked men. So that, as before the Scriptures were written,
Gods Will made known partly by the Light in every man, partly by Supernatural
Revelation, and conveyed to posterity by word of mouth, Tradition and
Preaching, was the full Rule of the Church then living; so the same Will of God
more clearly and brightly made known by Supernatural Revelation, and conveyed
down to us most safely by the Holy Scriptures of the Prophets and others, is
our full Rule, in which we are to triumph, as guiding us comfortably to Glory
and Salvation.

Obj. Touching the Ceremonial Law, he objects, p. 31. As for those Laws of
Ceremonies and Shadows to the Jews, Salvation does not depend upon them.

Answ. This is much to the purpose: The Query is, whether those Laws were not
part of their Rule before the death of Christ? and whether the Light in them,
without the promulgation of those Laws. could discover them? Though our
Salvation does not depend on the Jewish Ceremonies, yet had not the neglect of
them before Christ's death, been sin to a Jew? Had not the contempt of them
then been the hazard of his Soul? Then it follows, that these Laws were part of
their Rule, and that the Light within them, was not their full or whole Rule.
The same is to be said for the Supper and Baptism in the Apostles days. These
were part of the Churches duty, yet the Light within, without the help of
Supernatural Revelation, or the Institution promulged could not discover it.

Obj. p. 8. If the Light within does not dictate Baptism nor the Supper, then
if you Baptize, you do it not as lead thereto by the Light within.

Answ. 1. Would these men prove that the Light within, without the help of
Supernatural Revelation, can see Baptism and the Supper a Duty? Why then are
they against it, rebelling against the Light within?

2. By the help of Supernatural Revelation, even the Scriptures, our Reason can
tell us, our Consciences can convince us of our duty herein. And we dare not
shut our eyes against the Truth, lest we perish for ever. But were it not for
Scriptures, our Light within could say nothing here. To conclude, Since
something which the mere Light within could not reveal, has been the Duty of
Gods people, from Adam in Innocence, to the Apostles days, it follows that in
all that time, the Light within was not their full Rule: And certainly that
Rule that comes short of what the Church in the Apostles days went to Heaven
by, cannot be a full Rule to us.

Arg. 2. That which does not reveal many duties which we are bound to perform,
cannot be to us a full Rule, and safely bring us to Glory: A full Rule reveals
all our duty, whatever God would have his Church do, and is pleasing to him.
But this Light in every man does not reveal many duties which we are bound to
perform. We are bound to believe that the Father is God, the Son God, the Holy
Ghost God, and that these three are one God: But these are high mysterious
Truths, which without Supernatural Revelation, the Light in every man can no
way discover. We are bound to believe the Resurrection of our Bodies, a
fundamental Article of our Faith; but Reason cannot assure us of this: to seek
for a new Birth; but mere Reason cannot apprehend this, nor the tendency of it,
no more than whither the wind goes: To pray that Gods Kingdom might come, his
Spirit might govern within us, and cause us to bring forth fruit; hearing the
Word; But this is a Mystery, Mark. 4.11, 20. We are bound, not to have the
least motion or inclination in our hearts to sin against God [Thou shall not
covet]. Consequently, to repent of any such Motion; fly to Christ's Blood for
the pardon of it; but by the light within Paul had not known Lust, except the
Law had said Thou shall not covet. We are bound to believe and repent of our
Fall in Adam, and consequently fly to Christ for recovery; but laying aside
Scriptures, this light cannot reveal that Adams eating the fruit of a Tree
should be our Fall. We are bound to keep the first day of the week a Sabbath to
the Lord, one day in seven we are enjoined in the fourth Commandment, the
seventh from the Creation is not now the day, Col. 2.6. Let no man judge you in
Meat or Drink, or in respect of a holy day, or the New Moon, or of the Sabbath
days. It must then be one of the other six; and which does the Scripture point
out unto so much as the first? John was in the Spirit on the Lords day. And the
Disciples met on the first day of the week to break Bread. The bare light in
every man cannot show this. We are bound to celebrate the Ordinance of Baptism:
Go Baptize. The Ordinance of the Supper: Do this. By all this it appears this
light cannot be a full Rule. As much duty as it can reveal, ought to be done:
these things which it cannot reveal, ought not to be left undone. If we would
safely get to Heaven, we must with Caleb. fully follow the Lord, obey him in
all his Commandments, and not those only this Light reveals. Herod could do
many things.

Arg. 3. My chief Argument is this; That which reveals not Christ, cannot
possibly be a full Rule, or by it self any Rule at all to Heaven. But the Light
in every man, without Supernatural Revelation, can make no discovery of Christ.
Therefore it cannot possibly be a full Rule, or by it self be any Rule at all
that can guide any to Salvation. The Major I prove; That that reveals not
Christ, can of it self be no Rule at all to Heaven. Two things will clear this.

1. There is no Salvation but by Christ. God has indeed exalted Christ to be a
Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of Sins:
But there is not Salvation in any other. Acts 4 12. For there is none other
Name under Heaven given among men whereby we must be saved. 1 Cor. 3.11. Other
foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. John 14.6
No man comes unto the Father but by me. As there is but one God, so there is
but one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. They
that are without Christ, are without God, without hope, Ephesians. 2.12.

2. There is no Interest in Christ without Knowledge and Faith in him. This is
that which the promise of Christ and all his Benefits is made unto, Gal. 3 22.
That the Promise by Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.
This is the Condition of the Promise of purchased Salvation, Mark 16.16. He
that believes shall be saved. How can any be supposed to obtain Interest in
Christ, and Salvation purchased by him, that has not the Qualifications to
which Christ is promised, that comes not up to the Condition of the Promise?
Again, whom God has decreed to save, on them he does infallibly bestow Faith
and the Knowledge of Christ. Acts 13.48. As many as were ordained to eternal
life believed. All that are to be saved, shall know Christ, Isa. 54.13. All thy
Children shall be taught of God. That it is to know Christ, See John 6.45. They
shall be all taught of God; every one therefore that has heard and has
learned of the Father, comes unto me. Further, This work he has committed
unto Christ to bestow the knowledge of himself on all that are to be saved,
John 17.2, 3. Thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life to as many as thou have given him. And this is Life eternal, that
they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.
Those that are given to Christ, are all to be saved. Eternal Life is to be
given to them all: and since this is eternal Life to know Christ, it follows
that the knowledge of Christ is to be given to them every one. And this follows
too, to whomsoever the knowledge of Christ is never given, to them eternal life
is never given.

The Minor I prove; That the Light in every man reveals not Christ. Had not God
said, Genesis 3.15. I will put enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy
seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy Head. How could Adam with all the Light
that was left him after the Fall, ever have understood, that it was the
Gracious Design of God to save lost man by a Savior, the Seed of the Woman? 1
Cor. 2.11. What man knows the things of a man, save the Spirit of man which
is in him? Even so the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God.
Hence it is that the whole Doctrine of Jesus Christ in Scripture is called a
Mystery, 1 Timothy 3.16. And without Controversy great is the Mystery of
Godliness, God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of
Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up to
Glory. Christ's Love to his Church is a Mystery, Ephesians. 5.31, 32. For this cause
shall a man leave his Father and his Mother, and shall be joined unto his Wife,
and they two shall be one flesh. This is a great Mystery, but I speak
concerning Christ and the Church. Every Truth that bears any relation to
Christ, is a Mystery, precious, but secret, hid in God, that which the Light
every man has that comes into the world, could never find out, were it not for
Supernatural Revelation. Yea, the very Angels of God, who greatly excel us in
knowledge; the Church being supernaturally taught of God, have from it received
Light to understand this Mystery, Ephesians. 3.9, 10. To make all men see what is the
Fellowship of the Mystery which from the beginning of the world has been hid
in God: To the intent that now unto the Principalities and Powers in Heavenly
places might be known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God. The Light of
every man cannot possibly give the knowledge of Christ: Only Christ himself can
do this, Luke 10.22. No man knows who is the Son but the Father, and who the
Father is, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him. Where therefore
the Gospel comes not (for Christ reveals himself by the Gospel) for all the
Light men brought with them into the World, they have been there utterly
destitute of all knowledge of Christ, Isa. 55.5. Thou shall call a Nation that
thou know not, and Nations that know not thee, shall run unto thee. Yea,
Christ has not been so much as named amongst them, Romans 15.20. I have strived
to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was named.

Obj. G. W. in a Book styled, The Light and Life of Christ within, would prove,
That this Light can reveal Christ, p. 46. because it can reveal God. And Christ
is God. If it be told him, that Christ is not our Savior considered merely. as
God, but as God-man, that has suffered for us: he objects, John 8.58. Before
Abraham was I am. John 17.5. Glorify thou me with the Glory I had with thee
before the world was. He was before he took our Nature, and was he not a
Savior then

A. Let it be considered how Christ is our Savior. He is our Savior by
purchasing Forgiveness and Salvation for us by his Blood; and he is our Savior
by applying that purchase to us. This purchase is the Groundwork of our
Salvation: Had there been no purchase, there had been no application of the
things purchased. Before Abraham was, Christ was our Savior as God, who was to
become man, and shed his Blood for us, to purchase our Pardon and Salvation;
and so he applied to us what he was to purchase. Now he is our Savior as
God-man, that has already purchased our pardon and Salvation, by shedding his
Blood for us. To prove that he is our Savior considered merely as God, is to
prove, that he saves us, though he never did, nor ever was to take our Nature
upon him, and shed his Blood for us. Truly had he never been desigued to this,
he had not been our Savior any more than he is the Savior of the Fallen
Angels, whose Nature he was not to take on him. Those therefore who before
Abraham was, knew not Christ, as he was to be the Seed of the Woman, knew him
not as the Savior: And so now, those that know not Christ as God in our
Nature, who by his death has purchased forgiveness and salvation for us, know
him not as our Savior.

Obj. He objects further, John 6.41. I am the Bread which came down from
Heaven. Ephesians. 4.10. He that descended, is the same that ascended.

Ans. Does this prove that Christ is not our Savior as God-man, purchasing
forgiveness for us, suffering in our stead; but as God only? This rather
confirms the contrary. For this was his main end in coming down from Heaven,
that he might take our nature on him, and by dying purchase forgiveness for us,
that having finished this work, he might ascend again. This proves him our
Savior as God-man.

Obj. p. 70. His Divine Nature has given us all things that pertain to Life
and Godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3. To which may be added Isa. 45.15. O God of Israel
the Savior. These Scriptures prove him a Savior as God.

A. As his Manhood concurs with his God head in applying his purchase to us,
Romans 5.10. We shall be saved by his Life. Chap. 4.24. He was raised again for
our Justification. Chap 8. 34. He lives for ever to make intercession for us.
So his Godhead concurs with his Man hood in applying his purchase to us; and
thus his Divine Power gives us all things that pertain to Life and Godliness.
But this has nothing in it to prove, that considered merely as God, he is our
Savior; and that he never as God man, purchased Salvation for us, or that he
applies salvation to us without any respect to his purchase; or that his
manhood does not at all concur in applying salvation to us; God is our Savior,
but in saving us he give us nothing but what is purchased. Let it be remembered,
that since Christ as God-man did purchase our salvation, and still his Manhood
concurrs with his Godhead in applying it, Christ as God man is our Savior, and
not as God only. And to deny that Christ is our Savior as God-man, is to
contradict all promises and Prophecies concerning Christ as the Son of Man, the
Seed of the Woman, the seed of Abraham, of David, that a bone of him shall not
be broken, that he should be a man of sorrows. In the old Testament. And to
contradict the whole History of the New; and indeed the whole Gospel of Christ.
What says he of himself? Rev. 22.16. I am the Root and Offspring of David. As
God the Root, as man the Offspring. And what was his main design in taking our
nature? Mind that Scripture, Matt. 26.28. This is my blood of the new Testament
which is shed for many for the remission of sins. His design was, by dying for
us to purchase our pardon and consequently salvation. Act. 20.28. God purchased
the Church by his blood. This never could be, excluding his manhood. As God man
then he is our Savior.

It follows, If the light in every man can of it self Reveal Chrst as our
Savior; then it must without the help of supernatural Revelation, discover
that the Son of God took our Nature on him; that he did dye for us; that he did
purchase forgiveness and salvation for us by his death. If it cannot Reveal
these things it cannot reveal our Savior; for by these things he is our
Savior. Let me a new propound my Argument. That that Reveals not Christ as
God-man, that has dyed for us, to purchase our forgiveness; cannot be a full
Rule, cannot guide us to salvation. But this Light cannot so Reveal him. I
prove the Major by that Scripture. John 6.53. Except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of man and drink his blood, ye have no life in you; Except by a lively
Contemplation of your humane nature assumed into one person with my divine
Nature, faith in Gods mercy springs, and is daily nourished and strengthened
and quickened in you. Your souls are not sanctified, not reconciled to God and
his ways, you have no heart to serve God in sincerity, so as to be accepted of
God and to live with him in Eternity! You are dead in your sins: If life
Eternal be to know him as Jesus Christ whom the Father sent, John. 17.3. Then
not to know him as Jesus Christ whom the Father has sent, is to be deprived of
Eternal life. The Jews therefore though they trust in a promised Messiah, yet
not looking on him as already sent, they perish. God has now set him forth to
be a propitiation through faith in his Blood, Romans 3.25. If we have have not
faith in his blood then there is but little hope to have Gods wrath turned away
from us. But the light in every Man, as has been shown, cannot of it self
reveal Christ at all, much less thus reveal him. We have a Maxim in Philosophy,
nil fit in intellectu quod non fuit prius in sensu. All our knowledge comes in
by our senses. And it holds good here, for as we in this age, could never have
known that there was such a man as Alexander the great, were it not that we
read and hear of him; so by the bare light in every man never could we attain
to know that Christ was born, that he lived a sinless life, that he suffered
death; suffered for our sins, by the appointment of the Father; and thereby
obtained Eternal Redemption for us; and that he rose the third day, and is now
removed up into glory. God does not ordinarlly give us this knowledge any other
way but by our senses, Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing, verse. 14. How shall
they believe in him of whom they have not heard, This knowledge then comes not
from our light within, but from our light without, viz. the Gospel, read or
preached to us. The Conclusion, 1 hope, is now evident that this light in every
man is no full Rule; nor by it self, is it any Rule at all to Heaven.

Object. G. W. Divinity of Christ, p. 41. Then all the Gentiles that have not
the Gospel preached to them perish.

Answ. 1. The Scriptures Reveals but one way of Salvation for the Jew, and for
the Gentile or Heathen, and that his knowledge of, and faith in Christ, Romans
3.30. Seeing it is one God shall justify the Circumcision by Faith, and the
Uncircumcision through Faith, Gal. 3.8. The Scripture foreseeing that God would
justify the Heathen through Faith Preached before the Gospel unto Abraham. 2.
Therefore where God designs the saving of any among the Gentiles, he does bring
them to the knowledge of Christ, and works faith in them; and this ordinarily
by the Gospel which the word of Faith, To. 15.12. There shall be a Root of
Jesse, and he that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles; in him shall the
Gentiles trust. 3. Therefore, where the Gospel is not given, generally they
perish. Where no Vision is the people perish.

Object. Divination of Christ. p. 40. This lays the blame upon God that they
are not saved.

Answ. Methinks Men should dread to oppose so clear a truth by so desperate a
deduction, least God condemn them for Blasphemers of his Majesty at the last
day. A fallen creature without a Savior cannot be saved, now is the blame to
be laid on God that Devils are not saved, because God provided not a Savior
for them? What a wicked and hellish Position is this, (if God gives not every
sinner what is necessary to Salvation, the blame is to be laid on God that he
is not saved?) Without Regeneration no man can be saved; is the blame of every
damned man's perdition to be laid on God, because he did not Regenerate him? Is
God thus a debtor to sinners? Who has first given to him? By sin all mankind
has forfeited salvation, God was not bound to provide for us a Savior, any
more then for the fallen Angels; therefore it cannot be he should be bound to
give the Gospel to every one of us, though without this we ordinarily perish.
The Gospel is Gods own, and may he not without blame do what he will with his
own? give it to whom he please? and deny it to whom he please? Have not all men
by sin deserved to be deprived of it, though some men more then others? If then
we have it, let us humbly adore Gods grace vouchsafeing favor above desert: If
others go without; Let us commiserate and pray for them, let us tremble at Gods
wrath, through which their Land is darkened; let us justify the most holy God,
not dealing worse with them then they have deserved: Though, as has been
manifested without the Gospel, the light in every man give not the least
knowledge of our Savior; and so cannot of it self giude us one step toward
Salvation. For no obedience is any step in the way to Heaven, till it flows
from faith in Christ's blood for Pardon and Reconciliation.

2. I come now to my second Assertion, to set forth the Scriptures worthiness
to be embraced as the chief and highest Rule. It Is this, That the will of God
laid down in the Scriptures is our only Rule to Heaven and Salvation. I
demanded of G. W. an Affirmation or denial, but could have neither. I read his
promise to him and to all the people, and urged him to affirm or deny, but
still he refused. The writings abstractively, says he, that is the Ink and
letters drawn upon the Paper, are not the only Rule, When my Assertion was, The
will of God laid down in Scripture, is the only Rule to Salvation. This I pressed
him still to deny or affirm He would not, nor would he many others times
signify his affirmation or denial to my Questions propounded, though he had
made an agreement with me in Writing to do it; not being as good as his word,
and making himself so often guilty of false-hood. The Lord give him to see the
evil of it. When I saw I could get nothing out of him, I challenged him to deny
his Assertion if he durst. He still stood off. Then I challenged all the rest
on the stage there, one by one, pointing to them singly, to deny it if they
durst. All mute. At length Robert Ludgater, Granted that the will of God
revealed in Scripture is the only Rule. And thus in effect it is acknowledged
that they only are in the way to Heaven who walk according to Gods will
revealed in Scripture. And there is good reason for his grant. For if the
Scriptures be a full Rule, revealing all; Gods will laid down there must needs
be the only Rule. What can be more then all? No other Doctrine to be Preached,
1 Timothy 1.1.3. None are to be wise, (...), above what is written, 1 Cor. 4.1.
(...), By many parcels God spoke in times past; in these last days by his Son,
H^b. 1.1. In regard Gods speaking to us by his Son is opposed to his speaking
to us by many parcels or parts, it follows that by his Son he has spoken to us
his whole Will; so that now we are not to expect any parcel or part more to be
revealed to the end of the World, to guide and bind his Church. Yea, they are
to be accursed that preach any other way to Salvation, than what is written
Gal. 1.8. Though we or an Angel from Heaven preach any Gospel unto you, than
that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. The Gospel that Paul
preached is written in the Seriptures.

After this Grant, one might wonder to see what they write, Glory of Christ's
Light within, p. 10. Without spiritual illumination of the Understanding, the
Scriptures cannot be understood; therefore this spiritual Light in the
Understanding is a Rule to know the Scriptures by.

Answ. It seems after a Grant that Gods Will laid down in Scripture is the only
Rule, they bethink themselves of another. But a Rule is one thing, clearness in
the eye to see the Rule another, Gods Will laid down in the Scripture is the
Rule to Heaven; Spiritual Illumination, the clearness of our Understanding to
see the Rule.

Obj. ibid. Presbyterian Ministry put false interpretations and glosses upon
Scripture.

Answ. A Calumny: The day will reveal who do this. At present it suffices that
it is granted tacitly, that Gods Will leading to Heaven is laid down in
Scripture, expressly, that Gods Will laid down in Scripture is the only Rule to
Glory: For hence it follows, that he only is in the way to salvation, that
walks according to Gods Will laid down in Scripture.

Can so much be said for the Light that is in every man? that the Will of God
revealed by it, is the only Rule that guides to Heaven. They would not in the
Dispute affirm this. Yet something R. Ludgater did say, viz. That the Light
within did discover that which is the only Rule. To which it was answered, that
the enlightened Understanding of Believers did indeed in Scriptures discover
Gods Will, which is the only Rule to salvation. But it was asked, Is the Will
of God as much of it as is revealed by the bare Light in every man without the
help of Scripture, the only Rule to Heaven? To which R. L. answered No. So that
here is an acknowledgment that Gods Will, as much of it as is discovered by the
Light in every man, is not the only Rule to Heaven. Hence it follows; 1. That
the Light in every man by it self, or so much only of Gods Will as this Light
by it self can discover, is no Rule at all to Heaven; for there is but one way
thither. 2. That they who teach men to attend to, and walk by that Light only,
which they brought with them into the world, do direct them out of the way to
Salvation. 3. That Gods Will revealed barely by this Light, and Gods will
revealed by the Scriptures are not every way the same; because his will
revealed in Scripture is the only Rule: revealed by this Light it is not,
according to confession: They thus differ, that the Scripture reveals much more
than this Light, and that in points necessary to Salvation. 4. That the
Scriptures are not to be rejected; but we are bound to believe and obey them,
in those things they discover over and above what this Light can of it self
discover. 5. That those who will make this Light that every man has, their
only Rule, rejecting of Scripture in those things this light cannot discover,
are out of the way to glory and Salvation, are miserable and to be pitied.


3 I assert, the Scriptures are an Infallible Rule to heaven. To clear things.

1. By the Scriptures, understand the Scriptures taken in their right sense.
This caution might seem needless for the words of Scripture taken in a wrong
sense, are not Scripture so much as our own fancy; but it is to prevent mistakes.
2. This Light in every man cannot of it self help any, spiritually to
understand the sense of the Scriptures, p. 17. l. 3. says he, an unconverted
man cannot understand the Scriptures. I over look the censure there. 3. This
Light does not always find out the true sense of Scripture, it is ordinary for
men to found their contrary opinions on the Scripture. Paul p. 17. l. 5.
enjoying Scripture, but for all this, Light missing the sense, persecutes the
Saints. 4. Yet this Light may possibly stumble upon the true sense of Scripture
in all points necessary to Salvation; the Scripture is perspicuous in these:
and many destitute of the special Illumination of the spirit and all saving
grace, have been Orthodox in these points. 5. The Spirit of God does by a
common operation help men to understand the true sense of Scripture; hence the
ungodly amongst us believe those truths, which Turks and Jews, p. 16. l. 3.
Will not be convinced of. 6. The Spirit of God by a special operation helps the
Saints spiritually to apprehend the true sense of Scripture. p. 15. The
Inspiration of the Almighty gives understand. And this in all points necessary
to Salvation. The spirit says Christ shall lead you into all Truth. The duty
of all, is to look up to God by prayer for his spirit in a right manner to
understand the Scriptures.
1. They are in themselves, an infallible Rule. That is, 1. A Rule that cannot
deceive us. 2. A Rule which if we practice, in all it requires of us, we cannot
possibly miss of Salvation. Three things necessarily concur to make a Rule thus
Infallible. 1. It must reveal truth, for this only leads to heaven. 2. It must
reveal nothing but truth, it must be incapable of revealing any error instead
of truth, otherwise it may possibly deceive us, and we miss of heaven. 3. It
must reveal the whole truth, at least all necessary to salvation; otherwise
following it we may come short of Heaven.

That the Scriptures are in themselves an Infallible Rule. I proved in the
first dispute (for there I then began.) 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. All Scripture is given
by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, etc. that the man of God
might be perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work. He fled from the
argument by a rambling discourse, but neither then, nor since in his book has
he answered it. Let the judicious read, p. 15. The proof here is clear: For,
that reveals Truth to us, nothing but Truth, all Truth necessary to salvation,
must needs be in it self an Infallible Rule to heaven. But the Scriptures
reveal Truth; given by divine Inspiration: Nothing but Truth, all Scripture is
given; no part given by the suggestion of Satan; nothing dictated by a
principle of darkness: Psalm. 12.6 The words of the Lord are pure words. All
Truth, able to furnish to every good work. Therefore an Infallible Rule in
themselves.

2. They are an Infallible Rule to us. That is, we can be sure; or good and
undeceiving grounds, that all dictates and directions out of the Scripture are
from God, and sufficient to guide us to salvation. The Miracles of the Penmen,
the Efficacy of the word working so good a change, on so many in all ages; The
Innate Characters of divine Authority stamped on the word, as the Holiness,
Majesty, Sublimity, and Truth of Prophecy; suffice abundantly to satisfy our
hearts, they are from God; all from God. And satisfied in this; their own
Testimony, their excelling fullness, compared with any other Rule what ever, and
the Consolation of our Spirits upon our Universal and sincere obedience to God
speaking in them, give us sweet assurance that they are a sufficient guide to
Salvation. From one of the Characters mentioned, the Truth of Prophecy; the
Apostle Peter has full assurance that the Scriptures are a most safe Rule to
walk by, 2 Pet. 1.19. Nevertheless we have a more sure word of Prophecy,
whereunto ye do well that ye take beed.

Can so much be said for the dictates and directions of every man's heart? That
they are an Infallible Rule to us? That as men may be sure, that all directions
out of the Scriptures are from God, so they can be sure, on good and
undeceiving grounds, that all directions out of their hearts are from God. It
will be said, the comparison is not rightly stated, it should be, so all
directions of the Light in every man are from God. To this I answer, So far as
men make the Light within their Rule, they have nothing to walk by, but
dictates or counsels out of their own hearts. Let but the Question then be
stated, as that it might meet with the concerns of men as to their practice,
and it must be thus: I shall not therefore alter the stating of this Question,
though in the handling of it, I shall not wave that Query, whether all
directions of the Light be infallibly from God?

1. Can it be said that out of our hearts we are sure, proceed no dictate or
direction from darkness or error within, as we are sure no directions out of
scripture proceed from any such principle? Not only in the Unregenerate is
there darkness (ye were sometimes darkness) but in the Regenerate also: The
word of Prophecy shines in the hearts of believers, yet it shines there in a
dark place, 2 Pet. 1.1, 19. compared. And this darkness abides whilst on earth,
1 Cor. 13.12. Now we see in a Glass darkly. That (Now) is whilst on Earth. 1.
Because opposed to (Then) which is after this Life is ended. 2. Because it is
as long as Faith, Hope, and Charity abides, verse. 13. And (Now) abides,
Faith, etc. and that is whilst we live on Earth, darkness and error within will
be prompting amiss.

Have all Men that know the Scriptures as much reason to say, we are sure no
iuward Counsel that we have, proceeds from the suggestion of Satan; as to say
no Scripture-Counsel is suggested by him? Within men are to be found many evil
motions from Satan, 1 John 4.1. Try the spirits, for many false Prophets are
gone out into the World. The Devil is a busy Agent; He filled the heart of
Ananias and Saphira to lie to the Holy Ghost. He put it into the heart of Judas
to betray his Master.

Obj. These were unconverted.

Answ. Are all Converts free from his Temptations? Remember the Devil had
access to Adam, even in Innocence; to Peter: And why are Saints bid resist him,
steadfast in the Faith? And to put on the whole Armor of God? It is now
impossible for men to go astray, walking after the Counsels, they find within,
as it is impossible to go astray walking after the Counsels that are found in
Scripture? Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice O young Man in thy youth, and walk in the
ways of thy beart and in the sight of thine eyes; but know, that for all these
things God will bring thee to Judgment. If a man says, I shall have peace
though I walk after the imagination of mine own heart; the Lord will not spare,
but then the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man.
Can this please God, that every man should do what is right in his own eyes?

3. Can it be said that the Light in every man dictates in his heart the whole
Truth, as much as is necessary to salvation? What though it should be able
infallibly to tells us, that we ought not to commit murder, or adultery, and
direct us in some other few moral duties? Yet as long as it cannot infallibly,
reveal all Truth necessary to salvation (for as has been shown, it is no full
Rule) it cannot possibly be an infallible Rule to heaven.

4. Can it be said that every man has an infallible Spirit of discerning the
Counsels of this Light within him; from the Counsels of darkness, sin and error
within him, and of Satan that has access to him? If every man had such a
spirit, yet were not this Light to be preferred, because it reveals but few
truths in comparison of the Scriptures. But the unconverted have not. p. 16.
Paul mistaken was unconverted. And says our Savior, They that kill you shall
think they do God service. They find no counsel in Scripture putting them upon
this; therefore they must find it in their own hearts: It Is the Counsel of
darkness and error, yet taken for the Counsel of their Light; for they approve
it and think it to be from God. They are not therefore infallibly guided in
judging the counsels of their hearts. Nor have the converted this infallible
spirit of discerning the dictates of Light within, from the dictates of
Darkness. The young Prophet could not discern when the old one counseled in
the name of the Lord to come back and eat Bread, 1 King. 1.18. David thought he
should please God by bringing up the Ark though in a Cart: 'Twas by the Counsel
of his own heart, not of the Scriptures. Nathan thought David might build God a
Temple, 2 Samuel 7.2, 3. Since no man has an infallible Spirit of discerning
between the Counsels of Light and Darkness in the heart, how can men say of
every motion in their hearts, I am as sure this is, and this is not from God,
as they can say of all the Counsels in the Scripture, I am sure these are from
God? When men have their right sense of what is counseled in their hearts they
may possibly take Error for Truth; When they have the right sense of what is
counseled in Scripture, they cannot. We need no infallible Spirit to help to
discern the Counsels of Light and Darkness in Scripture; for all there comes
from God. To make the Counsels of the Scripture our Rule is safe. To make the
Counsels of our hearts, dangerous. It Is the way to be led into a thousand
errors. A deceived heart has turned them aside.

5. May it not be possible for the Light in every man to dictate some error for
Truth, at least through our fault, forcing it to speak when it should be silent?

Obj. It might be objected, that I confessed it to be a Light wrought by the
spirit of God in every man and how possibly can a Light of the Spirit of God
direct amiss?

Answ. 1. The Spirit the Creator, who speaks in the Scripture cannot possibly
fall from his goodness, and dictate Error. But things created are in their
nature mutable; may fall from their goodness, and dictate Error; as is to be
seen in many of the Angels, and in our first Parents. Consider Evahs Judgment
which was wrought by the Spirit of God, Genesis 3.6. The Woman saw that the Tree
was to be desired to make one wise, (She saw) 'twas an act of her Judgment or
that power of judging, which the spirit of God had, in perfection, created in
her. (She saw that the Tree was to be desired) 'twas false, She erred. Here you
see what the Spirit of God reveals is mutable and falls from its goodness, and
so dictates Error. And if Evahs Judgment failed her, may not our power of
judging what is Gods will, what not, call it Light or what you will; fail us,
though created by the spirit of God?

2. This Light that Gods spirit has created in us, is now placed there where
it meets with much Darkness and Vice to corrupt it: But a corrupt Judge will
pass a wrong sentence.

3. Paul persecuting the Church acted according to his conscience, Act. 26.9. I
verily thought with my self that I ought to do many things contrary to the name
of Jesus of Nazareth. The Scripture sets forth Conscience by thoughts, To.
2.15. Their Conscience bearing witness, and their thoughts mean while accusing
or excusing one another. Therefore Paul's Conscience put him on to persecute.
The great Query is whether Paul's Conscience did act according to Paul's Light,
or against his Light, or according to his Darkness only, his Light standing
Neuter. Not against his Light; for Paul not having studied the Scriptures
sufficiently concerning Christ; not having attended to the Doctrine of Christ,
preached by his Disciples, was not informed concerning Christ; the light he
brought with him into the world, unable to reveal that there should be a
Christ, much less that this Jesus of Nazareth is he; he therefore had no Light
concerning Jesus of Nazareth for his Conscience to act against, and further,
though a man may act against his own light, yet a man's Conscience never acts
against his Light: Hence is it, that when a man acts against his Light, he acts
against his Conscience also; this ever siding with his Light. If it should be
said Paul's Conscience acted according to his darkness only, his Light standing
Neuter; I ask, what Light was that that stood Neuter? Any Light able then to
reveal Jesus of Nazareth to be the Christ? Since he had no such Light, no such
Light could stand Neuter. Let it be considered, God sets up Conscience in man
to act according to the best present Light in him. This cannot be denied.
Hence, when Conscience has not satisfying light to act by, it is doubtful, and
refuses to encourage to act: when it has light discovering such an action
contrary to Gods Will, it restrains from doing it; if it be done, it accuses,
condemns: When it has light representing such an action pleasing to God, it
puts on to do it, excuses, approves a man for doing it. And does it with any
confidence encourage to do a thing, unless a man's best present light be
positively for it. Since Paul's Conscience did positively put him on to
persecute the Church, and this with all confidence (I thought verily) I
conclude Paul's Light stood not Neuter; but his present Light, his best present
light, all his best present light was positively for persecuting the Church of
Christ. Now judge whether this light within may not dictate Sin for Duty,
Error for Truth.

4. It is possible for darkness to prompt Error in stead of Truth: But this
Light which the Spirit of God has created in every man is darkness: Therefore
it is possible, nay very easy, for this Light to prompt Error, and hard in
some cases to do otherwise. That it is darkness I prove, Matthew. 6.23. If thine
Eye be evil, thy whole Body is full of darkness. Some peoples eyes are evil,
and if their whole bodies be full of darkness, it follows, that there no true
Light at all in them; the Light that is, is real darkness. It therefore is
added, If the Light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness?
Luke 11.35. Take heed that the Light, which is in thee be not darkness. If
there were no danger that a man's Light should be darkness, what room were there
for this warning; It is therefore uudeniable that there is a Light in man which
is but darkness. And I ask, what Light is that? Not Christ himself in the
Saints; not his holy Spirit that dwells in them; not the Light of the Gospel
taken in by Faith; not the special illumination of the Holy Ghost. Tell us
then, what Light can it be, but the Light we brought with us into the world;
the Light that is in every man? He that has no more but this Light, is all
Darkness; Therefore it is said, Ephesians. 5, 8. Ye were sometimes Darkness: All
darkness: Ye had then not one Dram of Light in you: the Light you had, was
but Darkness.

Q. But how can this be? If it be Light, it is Light; how can it be, and not be
the same thing?

Ans. It can of it self without Scripture, teach Moral Duties; that God is to
be worshipped, Parents obeyed, etc. as has been hinted often; and in this
respect it is Light. But it cannot reveal Christ of it self. When he is revealed
by the Striptures and preaching of the Gospel, it cannot discern him, nor any
other spiritual Mystery of the Gospel, for they are spiritually discerned, the
Natural man with all his Light cannot reach to this. And in these two respects
it is mere darkness; no more able to guide a man to Salvation than darkness it
self.

Obj. We may not put Light for Darkness.

Ans. When Christ evidently hints, the Light within may be darkness, must he be
thus reproved, You may not put Light for Darkness? That which in respect of
Morals is Light, he calls Light; and the same, being in respect of Spirituals,
real Darkness, he properly calls it so. He does not therefore put Light for
Darkness: And G. W. himself acknowledges, Div. of Christ, in Answer to Mr.
Dawson, p. 42. That the Natural man bath not power to discern spiritual things.
Is not his Light darkness then? What he adds, yet he has a power to receive
them; is very odd: For how do men receive spiritual things into their Souls,
but first by discerning them, then approving and embracing them? His Reason is
miserable; for after Conversion, he does, says he, receive them. He might as
well have said, the Unconverted has power to receive spiritual things; for
after Conversion he does discern them. It Is as if he should have said, When
Sampson was an Infant he had power to carry the Gates of a City up the Hill;
for when he was a man he did it. In Conversion we receive a new Light, and a
new Heart, which is a new power to receive spiritual things.

This Light that is wrought in us by the Spirit of God, when put upon it, to
direct us how to obtain Pardon and Justification, bids us seek it by the works
of the Law, never pointing to Christ: therefore, at least being forced to speak
through our fault, where it should be silent, as being unable to direct herein,
it both can and does misguide. It will be yielded in terms I think, that there
is no Pardon or Justification without Faith in Christ. And it has been proved,
that this light of it self cannot speak one Syllable of Christ, therefore it
cannot tell us how to obtain Pardon and Justification. If then we will force it
to speak in this point, it must needs speak Falsehood, if any thing. See it thus
directing, Romans 2.13, 14. The doers of the Law shall be justified; for when the
Gintiles which have not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law,
these having not the Law, are a Law to themselves. The Apostle lays down the
way of Justification by the Law of works. [The Doers of the Law shall be
justified] He proves it; for the Light of Nature puts the Gentiles upon doing
of the works of the Law, that they may be justified; having no knowledge of the
Law of Grace, which direct to Christ by Faith for Justification, they walk by
the Law of works; which is no way to Heaven for a fallen Creature. The like we
may see in several of the Israelites, Romans 9.32. They sought for Righteousness,
not by Faith, but by the works of the Law. And that the Light within them, did
put them upon this, we may see chap. 10.2. I bear them Record that they have a
zeal of God. This they did then in a zeal for God, designing his Glory, and to
do his will. But never does a man any thing in zeal to Gods glory, but when his
Reason, his Judgment, his Conscience, his best Understanding, the best Light he
has, puts him on: And that this is not the way to obtain Justification, is
evident, chap. 9.32. The works of the Law are called a stumbling Stone. It is a
truth indeed that the Doers of the Law shall be justified: but no man can
possibly be a Doer. He that has once, in thought, word or deed, in all his
life broken the Law, is not a Doer of the Law, but a Transgressor; therefore
this is no way for our Justification, because in our hearts are motions of
darkness and error; because Satan has access to insinuate evil into us;
because the Light we brought into the world does not reveal all necessary
Truths; because we have not an infallible Spirit to discern these few Truths it
does reveal, from Errors suggested in our hearts; and because it is possible
for this very light it self to suggest error, we are not sure upon good
grounds that all Counsels out of our hearts are from God; as werare sure all
Counsels out of the Scriptures are from God. No can we so safely walk after
Counsels out of our own hearts (for the Counsels of the light within come out
of our own hearts) as we can safely walk after Counsels out of the Scripture.
These are infallible to us, the other not.

Before I end, I must answer what he brings to prove this Light an infallible
Rule.

Arg. 1. p. 17. l. ult. Christ. bids us believe in the Light. He would not have
us believe in that that might deceive us.

Answ. John 12.36. Whilst ye have the Light, believe in the Light. The words
intimate they were like to lose the Light, according to the Threat, Matthew.
21.43: The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you. The true sense here, is,
Whilst ye have the Gospel, believe in me the Light of the world. It Is not,
Believe in the Light you brought with you into the World. Nor was this to be
taken from them. Not believing in Christ, they were to carry this to Hell with
them to torment them for their Sin.

Arg. 2. The Scripture is not to be preferred before the Spirit. p. 13. The
Spirit is greater than the Scripture. p. 17. And you did acknowledge the Spirit
revealed as certainly the mind of God as the Scripture, ib.

Ans. 1. This is nothing to the point; the Light in every man, one thing, the
Spirit another.

Ans. 2. Though the Counsels of Gods Spirit in Believers hearts be in
themselves, as certainly the Truths of God (and the Spirit is not to be
quenched) as are his Counsels in the Scriptures; for he can never lie: Yet are
they not to Believers so certainly the Truths of God. Believers are not at all
times so readily certain, they are indeed the Counsels of the Spirit, as they
are that the Scriptures are. We have a more sure word of Prophecy. More sure
than what? Not only than the Counsels we find in our hearts, not only than the
Counsels of the Light within us; but more sure than the direction or Voice of
God himself speaking to us, immediately, or not by the Scriptures, 2 Pet. 1.17.
There came a voice to him from the excellent Glory, This is my Beloved Son. v.
18. This Voice we heard. v. 19. We have also a more sure Word of Prophecy. The
Scriptures containing the Prophesies of Christ, are to us a more sure Rule than
the immediate voice of God himself; though in it self what God immediately
speaks, is as certainly truth as what is spoken in the Scripture.

Answ. 3. The Controversy being about a Rule, the Spirit should not be opposed
to the Scriptures. For the Spirit properly is no Rule at all. The Spirit
enditing and speaking in the Scriptures, is not the Rule, but the Authr of the
Rule. The Spirit bringing Scripture to remembrance, even what Christ has
spoken, and thereby directing us, is not our Rule, but puts us in remembrance
of the Rule. The Spirit enlightening us to understand Gods mind in the
Scripture, is not our Rule, but our spiritual Oculist strengthening our Eyes to
see the Rule. Nor is the Illumination of the Spirit a Rule at all (as he often
supposes) the Artificers Rule is one thing, the clearness of his Eye, to see
the Rule, another: for our rule to Heaven is one thing, the clearness of our
Understanding, given by Gods Spirit to discern the rule, another: The Rule
objectively sets Gods Will and our Duty before us; the Spirits illumination
brightens our Understanding to apprehend it so set before us. And if the Spirit
be not a Rule, much less is he a greater Rule than the Scriptures: He should
thus have expressed himself to speak to the Point; The Dictates, or Counsels,
or Directions of the Spirit of God immediately, and without the Scriptures, are
to all men a more infallible Rule to Heaven, than the Directions of the Spirit
of God in the Scriptures are to those that have them. And if he had well proved
this, he had manifested, that there is some foundation for his Religion. But
neither can he, nor all his Brethren prove, that Gods Spirit does without the
Scripture reveal to every man the whole mind of God, as much as is necessary to
bring him to Heaven. God spoke immediately to Moses: Did he then thus reveal to
every man as much as to him? Does he now? Are all Prophets? If he should
vouchsafe to reveal a little to any of his, and not by the Scripture; they have
also a more sure word of Prophecy, etc. But since he does not reveal to any
without the Scriptures, all necessary Truths as he does by it; to desire and
prefer the Spirit teaching without the Scriptures, before the Spirit teaching
by the Scriptures, as a more infallible guide to Heaven; is to desire, and
prefer what God denies us, before that which God vouchsafes us; to hanker with
Evah after the denied fruit; to dislike with the Israelites, the Mannah that
came from Heaven. We must not frowardly prescibe to God; the Spirit immediately
teaching shall be my Guide to Glory; the Spirit teaching in the Scriptures
shall not. We ought thankfully, and admiring his Grace, accept of that Guide to
Glory, he chooses for us.

4. I assert, The Scripture is a Trying Rule: That is, a Rule able to prove or
manifest Truth to be Truth, Falsehood to be Falsehood, in all things that concern
our Faith and Conversation. A Rule by which we may, and ought, when we have any
reason of doubting, to try for our own safety, Opinions, Doctrines or Spirits,
whether they are of God or no.

Arg. 1. That which discovers the whole Truth, is able to try every Opinion,
Doctrine and Spirit: But the Scriptures are a full Rule, discovering the whole
Truth.

Arg. 2. By that which we know to be infallible, we may and ought to try what
is doubtful: But we know the Scriptures are an infallible Rule: Therefore by
them we may, and ought to try, whatever, as to Faith and Conversation we doubt
of, 2 Pet. 1.19. When the Apostles had said, We have a moresure word of
Prophecy, he adds, unto which ye do well to attend: He means for trial and
proof of Truth. He had asserted the Doctrine of Christ to be no Fable, ver. 16.
We have not followed cunningly devised Fables. To help their Faith, he minds
them, v. 17. of the Voice from Heaven he heard in the Transfiguration. Bnt,
says he, we have a more sure word of Prophecy; more sure to prove the
Doctrine of Christ, and so confirm our Faith in it. Therefore, he adds, you do
well to attend to it, that is for this end.

Arg. 3. That which the Holy Ghost approves of, is our duty, and for our good:
But he approves of it, that we try Doctrines; yea, the Doctrines of the Spirit
of God, by the Scripture, Acts 17.11. These were more noble than those of
Thessalonica, in that they searched daily whether these things were so. This
Argument was fled from in the first Dispute, and neither then nor since
answered in their Book.

Arg. 4. What Rule Christ directs us to try by, himself, his Apostles also made
use of for this purpose; is our safe, trying Rule. But our Savior directs us
to the Scriptures, John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, they are they which
testify of me, that I am the Messiah; the things the Jews doubted of. He
himself made use of it, Luke 24.26, 27. The Disciples doubting whether he were
the Messiah, because put to death: Ought not, says he, Christ to have
suffered? and beginning at Moses, and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them
the things concerning himself. His Apostles likewise, Acts 2.24. God raised
Christ from the dead; for David did so prophecy of him, Thou will not leave my
Soul in Hell. Acts 15. The Question being, whether Circumcision were necessary
to Salvation? concerning this, they decreed according to the Scripture, v. 15.
To this agree the words of the Prophet, as it is written, etc.

Arg. 5. We may safely embrace what agrees with Scripture; for what agrees with
Truth, is Truth: We may safely reject all that is contrary to Scripture; for
what is contrary to Truth is Error: Yea, we may safely reject, as to Faith and
Conversation, what is beside the Scripture; for what is more than our full
Rule, is more than what is needful, is vain; Mark 7.7. In vain do they worship
me, teaching for Doctrine, the Traditions of men. Col. 2.18. Beware lest any
spoil you through Philosophy or vain deceit after the traditions of men, after
the Rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. Therefore the Scriptures are
a safe trying Rule.

Can so much be said for the Light in every man, that we may safely try by this
in all cases?

1. Can that which is scanty, discovering but a small part of Gods Will,
suffice to try in all Cases? 2. Can that which Christ calls Darkness, that
which is fallible it self, keep us from being deceived? 3. Can that readily
give us satisfaction in all doubtful cases, which, it self, is often to seek?
Looking within, all that we can see, when we are in doubt of a thing, is a
Dictate, Inclination or Consideration for it, and another against it: Now we
are to see, and need another Rule to try which of these comes from our Light,
which from our Darkness. Whereas every direction of Scripture is sure, and
needs not be tried. Having our Rule to seek, we are like to have our
satisfaction to seek also. 4. If this be a trying Rule, then a man may do
whatsoever is right in his own eyes. Then publishing Heresy to infect others,
is no sin, nor to be punished by God or man; as long as the person does it
according to his Light within: No, nor Drunkenness, nor Whoredom, nor Theft,
nor Self-Murder by fasting; supposing the Light within puts any upon it: And it
has been proved, the Light within may approve of sin, as it did of Persecution
in Saul. 5. If this be the trying Rule, then it follows, contradictory Opinions
may possibly be on both sides true. G. W. says, his Light tells him, that the
Light in every man is a sufficient and safe Rule to guide to heaven; I am
assured in my very Conscience, and from the Scripture, it is not. He says,
Baptism with water, and the Lords Supper are no Ordinances of Christ, now
binding the Church: I am assured from all the Light within me, and from the
Scriptures, that they are. If what he speaks be according to his Light indeed,
as what I speak, is according to mine; then it follows, we do both hold Truth,
whilst we contradict one another; for whatsoever agrees with the trying Rule,
is Truth.
Obj. p. 18. He that does Truth, comes to the Light that his deeds may be made
manifest that they are wrought in God.

Ans. If he had proved that the Scripture speaks here of the Light in every
man, he had done something. verse. 19. This is the condemnation (says Christ)
that Light is come into the world, and men love Darkness. Christ speaks of a
more full Gospel Light, which was then come into the world, and not before:
whereas the Light in every man was in the world ever since men were in the
world. And we know what Christ calls darkness. The sense then is this;
Gospel Light shines now more than before (and at this day in the Holy
Scriptures) but men follow the dictates of their dark Understandin, their Light
within, even their own apprehensions, rejecting Gospel Light. This is the
Condemnation.

5. I assert, the Scriptures are a Binding Rule, and that in those things which
the light in every man does not of it self teach.

Arg. 1. The Scriptures did bind in Moses time, and after to Christ's, and in
the Apostles time, even speaking of things which this Light without
extraordinary Revelation cannot discover. And if so, still. To deny that the
Scripture did in these things then bind, is to say it had been no sin for the
Jews before Christ death. To reject the whole Ceremonial Law; or for the
Corinthians to reject the Apostles directions touching the Lords Supper.

Arg. 2. If the Scripture does not bind us in such things, it will follow we
are not bound to believe that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are all three
one and the same God; or that there shall be a Resurrection of the body; that
we are not bound to keep the first day of the week a Sabbath to the Lord; nor
to seek for Regeneration; nor to repent of our Fall in Adam; nor mourn for our
corruption of Nature, or for any first motions to sin; that we are not to be
Baptized, or Receive the Lords Supper; no nor believe in Christ at all for
justification, nor to embrace the Gospel; consequently that the contrary is no
sin; for this Light of it self without supernatural Revelation teaches us none
of these things.

Arg. 3. Gods commands cannot want Authority, must therefore needs bind us,
even in those things this light cannot teach. But the Scriptures contein such
commands. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. This is his command that we
believe in his Son, do this in remembrance of me. Go teach all Nations
Baptizing them. This argument was urged in the second dispute, not answered
there nor since in their book.

Arg. 4. If we are to be saved in obeying Christ fully, that is, in things this
light speaks nothing of, as well as in other things to be damned, not obeying
Christ in those things this light does not of it self require; then in these
things the Scriptures do certainly bind us. But the former is true, Ezekiel.
18.21. If the wicked will turn and keep all my statutes he shall surely live,
not only do what the Light in every man teaches; but all my Statutes. Heb.
5.9. Christ is the Author of eternal salvation to all that obey him, and we
know he has commanded us in those things, this light cannot of it self teach,
Jo. 12.48. He that receives not my word (is not, Do, this, Go baptize, his
word?) The word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last day,
To. 2.16. God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my
Gospel: The Gospel contains commands and mysteries, this Light of it self
cannot find out. Luke 16.29. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear
them: The Scriptures of Moses and the Prophets, taught things above the reach
of this Light; if men therefore will escape that place of torments, they must
obey the Scripture in such things as well as other. 2. These. 1.7, 8. The Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire,
taking vengeance on them that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. The
Gospel still prescribes things above what this light can of it self reaveal or
reach. The Lord God awaken these men. How fearful is it to reject the
Scriptures, as not binding in those things this Light cannot teach us?

Obj. But we must not do any thing because we see it written in the Scripture
but must obey the spirit of God moving in our hearts within.

Answ. 1. The spirit dwelling in all believers, is sometimes a sweet mover to
duty, though no indwelling spirit, yet by common convictions, he strives with
unbelievers who do resist the Holy Ghost: The duty he puts men upon is
agreeable to the Scripture, and his motions are not to be quenched.

Answ. 2. The things commanded in the Scripture are to be done, whether the
spirit inwardly puts men forwards or no, Look over these Four last Arguments
again. Otherwise supposing the spirit never putting forward within, it had
been no sin for the Jews before Christ's time to reject all the Ceremonial Law,
nor for us to omit all those duties hinted in the Second Argument. Gods
commands cease not to be Gods commands, either because the spirit does not
within put men on to obey them, or because they are written; therefore we are
to obey them though the spirit within puts not on. And this is to obey the
spirit, or to obey God. Therefore according to the Fourch Argument, Though men
should say the spirit did never inwardly put them on, they are certainly to be
damned who obey not the voice of God in Scripture. And to these I add this
Fifth Argument. Otherwise some wicked men in living contrary to the Scriptures
do not sin, cannot be damned for so doing, for some have sinned away the
motions and strivings of Gods spirit, are past feeling, given up to reprobate
sense. 6. We are to hear what the Spirit of Faith says to the Churches, and
this is written.

Answ. 3. Yea, Because a thing is written in the Scripture, are we to do it. If
my Faith in God or Christ be weak, and I find it written, (fear not, I am with
thee. You believe in God, believe also in me,) I will, in Gods assistance roll
my self and act faith on God and Christ for this reason, because I see these
sweet words in the Scriptures of God. If I feel any want what ever, and light
on these words, Ask and ye shall have, Call upon me in the time of trouble. Be
careful for nothing, but in every thing let your requests be made known to
God,) because I find these sweet commands in Gods book, I will with Gods help
take heart and fall to pray. I appeal to any man's Conscience, whether I do not
well in so doing. This Induction might pass for the First Argument, and the
Second is this. For seeing a thing written in Scripture, I am the more sure it
is the mind and Will of God, all Scripture being by divine inspiration,
therefore I thought for this very reason the rather perform it because I find it
written. Arg. 3. And why does God command us to read, but that we should obey?
Deuteronomy. 17.19. The King shall read in the book of the Law, all the days of his
Life that he might learn to keep all words of this Law to do them. The end of
our very reading must be practice. A 4th. Arg. from Examples, see in the close
of the Letter that follows The Scripture binds, and that in those things of
which the Light in every man, by it self says nothing. And dares any man say
that this Light does bind the Church of God, in those things the Scriptures do
not teach? Let no man be wise above what is written. And now let the Reader
judge, which is the highest and safest Rule to Heaven; the Scriptures or the
Light in every man. Gods will laid down in Scripture is a full, only,
infallible, trying, binding Rule to Heaven, and that in those things of which
this Light says nothing. Gods will, so much of it as is discovered by this
Light, is no Rule at all to heaven, because no full Rule; not the only Rule,
hardly distinguishable from the dictates of darkness, Sin and Satan;
insufficient to try all Doctrines by; not at all binding the Church in those
things the Scriptures do not teach.

To conclude; Mind what a dreadful thing it is, to walk by a false Rule, to take
that for the way to heaven which is not.

1. It is Condemnation, 2 These. 2.11, 12. God shall send them strong delusion,
that they should believe a Lie: That they all might be damned, who believed not
the Truth. It is a fearful thing to be bound hand and foot for ever, to be in
utter darkness, among Devils, in a Lake of fire, unable to die, God langhing at
our calamity, because we rejected his Counsels, and chose our own ways; a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. 2. It is Damnation
after hope. Mistakers think they see the right way to Heaven, and therefore
hope: but to be damned after hope, how greatly will this augment the Misery? 3.
it is to be damned after pains-taking to be saved, after Zeal, after
Conscientiousness in walking, as a man supposes, according to the Will of God.
The Pharisees were conscientious in keeping the Law, and setting up their own
Righteousness for Justification; but through their Error missing of Christ's
Righteousness, after all their Zeal and Conscientiousness in doing what they
did, they are damned and lost to all Eternity. How unconceivably miserable it
is to be deceived! It is our safety, our great wisdom to walk by such a Rule as
cannot deceive us. Scripture-Counsel is full, and all by divine Inspiration:
Walk sincerely according to this Rule, thou can not err, thou can not be
damned. If all the dictates of Light within were infallibly the Truths of God,
yet heart. Counsels are some of them from Darkness and the Devil; walk after
these though never so warily, thou may possibly err, possibly thou may
lose thy Soul. To say, I will forsake all the Counsels of darkness that are
within me, and walk only after the Counsels of the Light within me; is, as if
thou should say, here is a Cup of Wine mixed with poison, I will drink out
only the wine, and leave the poison. Friend, the Scriptures are a Cup of pure
wine; no Counsels of Sin, Error, Darkness, Devils, mingling with the Counsels
of God: Is it not safer drinking there?
Whether every man be enlightened with a saving Light?
SO much having been spoken by me, and granted by the Adversary, touching this
Light, compared with the Scriptures; I did deservedly explode this Question out
of the Second Dispute; where I had but little time left for discussing the
following Questions. Yet now I must not decline it.

Upon two accounts may a Light properly be denominated Saving.

1. If it reveals objectively all Truths to us necessary to Salvation. This may
be called saving, because if we obey it in all things, we shall certainly be
saved. Thus the Scriptures, or the Gospel contained in them, are an external
saving Light: External, I say, because it must have entrance by our Senses,
Romans 1.16. The Gospel is the power of God to Salvation. Ephesians. 1.13. The Gospel
of Salvation. Acts 11.14. Words by which we may be saved. 2. If it enlightens
our Understanding effectually to apprehend all Truths necessary to Salvation so
revealed. This may well be called saving, because it puts us actually into a
state of Salvation, and infallibly brings us to Heaven. Thus the special
Illumination of the Spirit in Believers, is an internal saving Light, John
17.3. This is Life eternal to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou have sent. I say, the special Illumination; for there is a common
Illumination, not saving: It causes to receive the Seed with joy; to taste of
the heavenly gift, and of the powers of the world to come; but it does not
effectually prevail with the whole Soul to prize above life, and so entertain,
and steadfastly cleave to the truths and ways of God. This premised;
1. I affirm, that the Light in every man is not in this latter sense saving.
It does not enlighten any man's Understanding effectally to apprehend all Truths
necessary to Salvation, though they should be revealed before him.

Arg. 1. What God gives not, man has not; a man can receive nothing except it
be given him from above. But God does not give to every man a savingly
enlightened understanding. Therefore every man has it not. I proved that God
gives it not to every man, Deuteronomy. 29.4. The Lord has not given you eyes to see
to this day. This was urged the first Dispute. G. W. p. 19. They did see, v. 2.
You have seen all the Lord did.

Ans. What are we to understand by Eyes not given? Not an understanding
enlightened only with that Light that every man has; for with this they saw all
the Lord did: therefore an understanding effectually and savingly enlightened.
This had not been given them to that day.

He objects, They did close their eyes, therefore God did not enlighten them.

Answ. It was impossible they should close the Eyes of an effectually, savingly
enlightened understanding; for they never had such eyes to close. All men then
have not a saving Light.

Arg. 2. Darkness cannot savingly enlighten. The Light in every man is
darkness, as has been already proved. And who puts darkness for light, if not
he that puts the dim light of every man for an effectual and saving
Illumination?

Arg. 3. A saving Light breaks the heart for sin, Luke 22.61, 62. The Lord
turned and looked on Peter; and Peter remembered the words of the Lord, and he
went out and wept bitterly. Changes the heart, 2 Cor. 3.18. All we beholding
as in a glass the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from Glory
to Glory. Gives Soul satisfaction in God, Psalm. 89.15, 16. Blessed are they
that know the joyful sound; they shall walk O Lord, in the Light of thy
Countenance; in thy Name shall they rejoice. Causes the Soul to come to
Christ, John 6.45. Every one that has heard and learned of the Father, comes
to me. And engages the heart to Obedience, Psalm. 119.102. I have not departed
from thy Judgments, for thou have taught me. 1 John 2.4. He that says he
knows him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar. But all men have not
their hearts broken, changed, satisfied in God, closing with Christ, and Gods
ways: Therefore every man's Light is not saving. How can that be called
effectual, which does not effect these things? And if it does not effect these
things, it never says. And how can that be called saving, which never saves?

Obj. p. 18. Many rebel against, grieve, resist the Spirit; therefore are given
up to hardness.

Answ. But if they had had an effectual saving Light, they had not rebelled
against, grieved and resisted the Spirit, their hearts had been changed, they
had closed with Christ and his ways. This very Rebellion proves they never had
a saving Light.

Obj. Man is not a Block or a Beast, that saving Light inevitably and
irresistably should force a change upon a Rebel.

Answ. No, no, but it does infallibly, irresistably, in a most sweet manner,
turn, change, and win and prevail upon him to close with Christ and his
Commandments. Saul was a Rebel, but when it pleased God to reveal his Son in
him, Gal. 1.15. Immediately he consulted not with flesh and blood. And there is
10: one taught of the Father, but comes to Christ. Not a Soul that knows God,
but he keeps his Commandments, John 10.16. Other sheep I have, which I must
bring. Then they must come, and cannot stay back; so irresistably by Love does
Christ win them.

Arg. 4. If a greater by far, and a higher Light be not effectual and so
saving, much less is this Light that is in every man, saving. But as has been
hinted, there is a common Illumination of the Spirit, that goes along with the
Preaching of the Gosplel; yet not effectual. This, having the advantage of the
Gospel, can help a man to so far more than the dim light of Heathens can either
reveal or discern.

Arg. 5. That Light that leaves men in a natural estate, can never save: For he
that is in his natural estate, is a Child of wrath. But this Light within
leaves all the ungodly in their natural estate.

Arg. 6. That Light which cannot help a man to understand Spiritually the
things of God, can much less effectually win him to embrace and live to Christ,
that he might be saved. But this Light, though it can help to understand
literally, yet not spiritually, the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14. with all his
Light, the natural man cannot know them.

Arg. 7. That which leaves men under a disability of coming to Christ, of
breaking off their sins, of obeying the Law of God, is far from saving: But
this Light leaves men under a disability of coming off from their sins, Jer.
13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his Skin? then may you who are accustomed to do
evil, learn to do well. Their Light could not deliver them from Impemtency. A
disability of coming to Christ, John 6.44. No man can come unto me except the
Father draw him. Without drawing by a special Illumination, for all his Light,
he is left under an impossibility of coming, Rom 8.7. The carnal mind is enmity
against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God, nor indeed can be. All
his Light cannot rescue him from an impossibility of obedience. Can such a
Light save?

Arg. 8. If this Light could be effectual to man's Salvation, then the special
illuminations of the Spirit given, or promised, would be needless, John 16.8.
The Spirit shall convince of Righteousness. Isa. 54.13. All thy Children shall
be taught of the Lord, Jer. 24.7. I will give them an heart to know me. But God
does nothing in vain: therefore every man is not enlightened with a saving Light.

2. I affirm, that the Light in every man is not in the former sense saving. It
does not objectively reveal all Truths necessary to salvation. This is already
abundantly proved, when I proved this Light no full Rule. To all there, I shall
here only add,

Arg. 1. If the natural man with all his Light, cannot so much as understand
those spiritual Truths which are necessary to salvation, when they are by the
Gospel or Scripture objectively revealed unto him, it is but a wild fancy to
imagine, that this Light can, without the Gospel and Scripture, find out, and
objectively reveal these spiritual Truths. But when they are objectively
revealed, he cannot know them. He, who when he is plainly shown, is not
apprehensive of the Mystery of a Trade, would never take it of his own head.

Arg. 2. If this Light can objectively reveal all Truths necessary to
salvation; then there was no need that God should inspire holy men to write the
Scripture. Men might have done well enough without them; are little or nothing
advantaged by them. The Heathen, for a Rule, are in as good a condition as we.
The Scripture reveals all Truth necessary to salvation, and their Light can do
this. But God was not about a needless work, when he inspired the Penmen of the
Scripture, Romans 3.1, 2. What advantage has the Jew? Much every way: chiefly,
because that unto them were committed the Oracles of God. The Heathen without
the Covenants of promise are without hope, Ephesians. 2.12. Therefore this Light does
not objectively reveal all Truths necessary to Salvation.

Now let us see what Arguments G. W. has to prove that every man is enlightened
with a saving Light.

Arg. 1. p. 28. Nehem. 9.20, 26. Thou gave them also thy good Spirit to
instruct them, nevertheless they rebelled. Therefore all are savingly
enlightened. To this our Opposer gave no Answer.

Ans. No wonder; when it was never urged in my hearing. The Israelites had a
saving external light, viz. the Spirit of God speaking in the Scriptures and in
the Prophets. What Is this to prove, that those who have not the Scriptures,
have soch a Light?

Again, The Spirit was given to instruct them, but not by any effectual
Illumination, otherwise they had not been rebellious. Their Rebellion proves
they had no internal saving Light.

Arg. 2. p. 26. The Spirit or Light of God is greater or more universal than
the Scripture, and contains that which the Scripture contains, and more.

Answ. Those bare Assertions without Proof, deserve to be rejected without
Answer. And here he confounds Light and Spirit. The Light is Universal in
respect of the Subject, they have it that have not the Scripture, not in
respect of the Object; it reveals not all the mind of God, as does the
Scripture. The Query is not, what the Spirit of God can reveal, he can, no
doubt, reveal all, and add to the Scripture if he please: But whether he
actually does reveal all saving Truths to all Men without the Scripture. This
should be proved.

Arg. 3. p. 10. Will you deny immediate Revelation, that the people might pin
their faith on your sleeve?

Ans. This man knows we direct people to the Revelation of the spirit in the
Scripture, therefore his own light here condemns him. If I could find out any
better arguments of his, I would produce them. But take them, such as they are.

Arg. 4. p. 17. Christ is given to be a Light to the Gentiles, and Gods
salvation to the ends of the earth.

Answ. And so Christ is externally by the Scriptures and Gospel preached, and
internally by his spirit effectually enlightening; both ways, a saving Light to
all the Gentiles that are saved. Here Is nothing to prove that every man is
effectually enlightened, or externally taught all necessary truths, by Christ
immediately and without the Scriptures.

Arg 5. p. 31. Whatsoever may be known of God, is not manifest within?

Answ. (...) That which is commonly known, his external power and God head; Not
his grace, favor and mercy in Christ, without which all other knowledge is in
sufficient.

Arg. 6. It might be argued, If Heathens have not the knowledge of truths
necessary to salvation, how are they left without excuse?

Answ. Because God is not bound to reveal Christ to every man, and what Truths
are revealed, every man sins against them; And they are condemned, not for not
believing in Christ, but for those sins, Romans 2.12. They that have sinned
without Law, shall perish without Law. And if their acting coutrary to their
shallow Light shall render them inexcusable. How great will his condemnation
be, that casts off the saving Light of Scripture, and will walk only after such
dim Light as is in Heathens? This is the Condemnation, that Light is come into
the world, and men love darkness, more than Light. They cannot say we never
heard that Christ shed his blood for remission of sins, if we had, we would
have believed. But this argument might be farther improved, thus. If their
living contrary, to their Light renders them without excuse, then if they had
lived up to their Light, they had been saved.

Answ. 1. This is but a frivolous supposition, for none ever did, none ever
could live up to their Light; that is, from the beginning of their knowledge,
to the end of their days, perfectly do every thing they know to be their duty.
Romans 3.9.

2. But suppose they had, this had been no coming up to the condition of the
Coyenant of works; for this Light is not able perfectly to discover it. Psalm.
119.96. I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy the commandment is
exceeding broad. If by the help of Scripture, and that measure of the spirit
that was given to David, he was not able to see the utmost bounds of Gods Law;
much less can this dim Light of it self reveal them.

3. Nay, suppose this Light had been able to discern perfectly the whole
condition of the Covenant of works; and once more, suppose they had been able
from the beginning of Life, to the end to fulfill this also; yet being fallen
creatures, being by nature the Children of wrath; if God had not some way or
other revealed Christ to them, they had most certainly perished; for the
Covenant of works is no way of salvation for fallen man, Gal. 3.21. If ever he
be saved it must be by the Covenant of Grace, that holds forth Christ. The sum
is this, This Light revealing Duty, their disobedience did render them
unexcusable; not revealing Christ, their obedience could not have excused them;
for is not he a fighter against God, that says, they were unjustly by nature
the Children of, wrath? Admire we Gods grace for a revelation of Christ. If we
sincerely live our Light, that is, the precious Scripture; though our
unavoidable failings are many, our God in Christ will save us.

Arg. 7. p. 19. Why should God give to man this Light, surely Gods good will
and end is to convince them of sin, that they may see and hate it, and by
degrees be drawn out of it, and so find mercy and peace and satisfaction with
the Lord in forsaking sin and embracing Righteousness.

Answ. 1. Suppose we should perfectly be drawn from sin to holiness, without
faith in Christ's blood for remission, never should we find mercy and true peace
with God; but standing charged with past guilt, should every moment be liable
to the everlasting wrath of God.

2. Gods good end in giving this Light is to reveal moral duties, and sins
against nature; that avoiding these sins, and practicing these duties, we might
be delivered from temporal judgments, as Nineveh was; and might enjoy the
Lords common savours.

3. Gods gracious end in giving us the Scriptures, is, that seeing and
embracing Christ Righteousness, and Gods Mercy in him; our souls might
sincerely be reconciled to his Will, and so living to God we might be sure of
mercy, favor and salvation.

Arg. 8. They usually bring that Scripture Luke 17.21. Behold the Kingdom of
God is with you.

Answ. Gods Kingdom is to be considered, either as to the Common, or as to the
special Administration of it.

1. As to the Common, and this is whereby God does restrain, convince, make
offers of Christ and Grace, and sometimes give a taste of the heavenly gift; by
the preaching of the word, and the common operation of the spirit, carrying the
word into the Consciences of men; for the word of God is quick and powerful,
piercing to the dividing asunder of the Soul and Spirit. God had so set up his
Kingdom in them, as he had not in the Heathen. They are therefore called the
Children of the Kingdom, Mat. 8.12. Of the Kingdom only in this common
Administration of it, for they were to be cast out; and the Kingdom of God was
to be taken from them. 2. As to the special Administration of it; and this is
whereby God awakens souls, unites them to Christ by a lively Faith, makes them
willing subjects, and stablishing them in their obedience, preserves them to
glory; by his word, and by his spirit, powerfully applying it to their hearts,
inlightning, renewing, quickening, comforting, and daily assisting them. God had
not thus set up his Kingdom in the Pharisees; for his Kingdom, as to this
Administration of it, is not in word, but in power: 1 Cor. 4.20. Is not meat
and drink, but righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17.
Is never to cease while the world last, Dan. 7.27. Whose Kingdom is an
everlasting Kingdom. Hence then cannot be concluded either that there is a
Light effectually saving in Pharisees, or the unconverted; or that there is a
Light objectively saving in every man; for though the Pharisees had in them
such a light, which if they had embraced sincerely, they had been in the way to
salvation; yet this was forced into them by Christ's Preaching his Miracles, and
the common operation of the Spirit. They did not bring it into the World with
them.
Quest. It was asked me in the first dispute, (I shall speak according to my
best remembrance, I know I must give account.) If an heathen obey his Light,
may he be saved? And then, not having so fully seen into this point, I was shy
and answered, I was not to Judge them that are without.

Quest. I was afterward asked, If a man improves his Light within him, may not
he be saved? I answered, he may; and added, if he improves, that is, studieth
Scripture, and looks up to God for a blessing, he may. That night reflecting
upon his passage, I was very much disturbed in my spirit, because I did not
more fully speak to this point, laying down the manner how upon improvement he
might be saved, and expressing the Truth on the contrary side. What might
unskilful people conclude from this Assertion? Next day my wife destitute, and
near her Travail, begging with Tears that I would seek her out an habitation, I
could not in the least regard her; I could easily embrace any self-abasement to
prevent the damage of any soul through mistake. To effect this as much as
might be; I drew up and dispatched a Letter to G. W. with a Paper containing the
same things to Thaxted, where the dispute was, to be openly read among them.
The Letter follows.

A LETTER sent to G. W.
Beloved Friend.
TOuching one Query in the Disputation, (whether if a man improve the Light
within him, may he not be saved?) My Answer was, that if he improve it that is,
make use of it in studying the Scripture, and look up to God for a blessing, he
may be saved, I judge it needful to acquaint you with my meaning how he may be
saved. It Is this, God may (I do not say, certainly will, much less that be is
bound, I disown Pelagianisme) so bless him, as to give him to see, embrace and
endeavor to practice his whole mind revealed in the Scripture; that is, (to
speak with reference to you) to sanctify the Christian Sabbath; seek
justification by the Righteousness of Christ imputed, repent if his sinful
nature, and sinful motions of his heart; submit to the Ordinances of Baptism
and the Lords Supper, and in other things universally incline his heart to
please him; thus may the Lord, through grace, save him. I was defective in the
Disputation, that I did not manifest this so weighty a matter. Yea, and that I
did not manifest the Truth on the other side; which is this. For a Person to
whom Scriptures are given, to practice no more then what the Light that is in
every man does dictate; rejecting the Scripture, as not obliging, in those
things that this Light does not discover, is to fling away his own salvation.

Arg. 1. That Person that erres in the Doctrine of Justification by Christ's
Righteousness only, and so sets up something else instead of this Righteousness
for justification, cannot possibly be saved, Gal. 5.4. But this Light that is
in every man does not dictate that justification is by Christ's Righteousness
only.

Arg. 2. That Person that in many things lives and dies in allowed Rebellion
against the mind and will of God revealed, cannot be saved. But having
Scriptures, to practice no more then what the Light in every man does dictate,
is to live and dye in allowed rebellion against the mind and will of God
revealed in many things.

1. This Light does not dictate that the Christian Sabbath is to be kept; but
God in Scripture commands, Remember the Sabbath, that is, one day in seven,
which the Lord shall choose; in Gospel times, it is not the seventh from the
creation: Let no man judge you for the Sabbath day, and if it must be one of
the other six, which does the Lord more clearly in Scripture point at, then the
first day? To keep it holy, do no manner of work. To practice no more than what
the Light that is in every man does dictate, is as good as to say, I will not
remember the Sabbath, I will work on that day. 2. This Light does not dictate
that Lusts, or first motions of sinful principles, much less the principles
themselves are sins, and so to be repented of; and that we are to fly to Christ
blood for pardon, Romans 7.7. But the Scripture sends us to Christ for pardon for
all sin, calls to repent of all sin; manifests, that the first motion, to
sins are sins, (thou shall not covet.) That the Principles inclining hereunto
are sins: they are called sin dwelling in us. To act no further then the Light
that is in every man does dictate is all one as to say, I will not repent of
the first motions of my heart to sin, nor of any sinful principles in me; I
will not fly to Christ's blood for pardon for them. 3. This Light does not
dictate that Baptism by water is Gods will: But God in Scripture commands, Go
Baptize. In what sense, Philip, who could not be without the mind of Christ
herein, may assure our Consciences. Acts 8 36, 37. Look here is water. But to
go no further then the Light that is in every man does dictate, is as much as
to say; do thou Lord command, go Baptize? I will not baptize nor be
baptized. 4. The Light that every man has, does not dictate that we ought to
celebrate the Lords Supper; that is, to meet, to take bread, signifying the
body of Christ by institution, and give thanks, and break it, and give, and
take, and eat in remembrance of Christ; to take Wine, and having blessed, give
it, signifying Christ's blood by institution, and take, and drink to show forth
the Lords death. But the Scriptures manifest this in all particulars, clearly
to be the mind and will of Christ, and to the sanctified, 1 Cor. 1.2. God in
the Scripture commands, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. Take eat, do this. To practice no
further then what the Light that is in every man does dictate; is to say to a
commanding God, I will not take, I will not eat. And this in these four
particulars is Rebellion. Therefore that Person who having the Scriptures, will
practice no more then what the Light that is in every man does dictate, cannot
be saved.
Have the commands of Christ's no Authority over men's Consciences? Or do his
commands cease to be his commands, for being written? Does not Christ say, the
word that I have spoken shall Judge you? Jo. 12.48. And is not he resolved to
take vengeance on them that obey not the Gospel? 2 These. 1.7.8. Truly these
words, Repent, Believe, Baptize, Do this: Yea, and now (by reduction) Remember
the Sabbath, are, though written, not only the words of Christ, but they are
Gospel also. Woe, Woe to those Persons at the day of Judgment, that are then
found to have lived and dyed in Rebellion against Christ's commands by these
words. These words shall Judge them, and for disobeying the Gospel, Christ will
take vengeance on them. To conclude, blame was laid on Israel, that of a long
time they had not kept the Passover as it was written, 2 Chronicles. 30.5. But in
Nehemiahs time, the People of God finding it written that they should keep the
feast of Tabernacles; on this motive, obeyed, Neh. 8.14. And it is said, v. 17.
There was great gladness. They were assured they pleased God in so doing. And
the mother of our Lord was careful after the days of her Purification to offer
a sacrifice, as it was written. Knowing it was written she knew she was bound,
and heartily obeyed. These instances are in things, the Light in all men does
not dictate, as it does not dictate Justification by Christ's Righteousness,
Repentance and Faith in Christ's blood for pardon of sinful motions of the
heart, and sinful Principles; the observation of the Christian Sabbath,
Baptism, and the Supper. The former things instanced, the Scriptures declare
abolished: These the Scriptures no where reveal, they are abolished. The God of
all grace then, open your understanding to see your duty, and obey fully and
not by halves; that following God fully with Caleb and Joshua, you may be
accepted of the Lord.

Your Truly well-wisher in Christ Jesus, St. Scandrett.


Thus it appears the words I delivered in the Dispute, taken in a right sense,
are no way in themselves derogatory to the Truth of God. I am willing to hear
defective, because I did not fully explain my words in the dispute. But I
cannot but complain of disingenuity and falseness, when I see p 4. They have
given out that I should say, (This Light within might, through the blessing of
God, with a good improvement, save them that have not the Scriptures.) By what
I have written, it is clearly otherwise.

Quest. I desire to answer one Query more, to give full satisfaction touching
inward Light. It Is this, Is not the immediate teaching of the Spirit the
highest and safest Rule to heaven? Is it not safer to walk by the immediate
teachings of the Spirit in our hearts, than by the teaching of the Spirit in
the Scripture? and to entertain the spirits teachings in the Scripture no
further then they agree with these, than to entertain these no further than
they agree with the Spirits teachings in the Scripture? This Query is weighty.
And indeed the whole Controversy stated anew. I must be large in the solution
of it. First, Therefore I shall open the Terms, then lay down my Answers.

1. Let us remember, nothing is a Rule to heaven but it Reveals Law and Gospel,
our whole Duty. 2. Let us understand the ways of the Spirits teaching.
1. He teaches us Physically, by enlightening our minds. Thus Gods Spirit so
assures our hearts that Jesus is Christ, that there is no need in the least we
should enquire of men the truth of it, 1 John 2.27. The Anointing which ye have
received, abides in you, and ye need not that any man teach you. John was
confident Seducers should never be able to persuade them that Jesus was not the
Christ. Hence also Paul could curse an Angel that should preach any other
Gospel than what he had delivered. This Teaching is no Rule at all, but an help
to see the Rule. 2. He teaches us Morally or Objectively, propounding or
setting before us Gods Mind or Will to embrace and walk by, 1 John 14.26. The
Comforter shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance
whatsoever I have said unto you. These Teachings (which take in the things
taught) are a Rule; for we must walk according to them. And of this way of the
Spirits Teaching, must we understand the Question. 3. Let us be informed what
is the immediate teaching of the Spirit. There is a Mediate, which is done by
Means; by the Scriptures, as in the last mentioned. The Spirit brings these to
remembrance, and thus we hear a word behind us, saying, this is the way, walk
in it, when we turn to the right hand or to the left, Isa. 30.21. By the
Ministry: Thus the Spirit of Christ in the Prophets, 1 Pet. 1.11. Testified to
the Church beforehand the sufferings of Christ. And by other means; even by the
works of Creation, and the Light in every man, propounding the Creation to be
considered, he helps us to conclude a God; thence, that he is to be worshipped,
etc. I say, Gods Spirit by these teaches us; for in him we live, move, and
have our being; without his help the world could not come into consideration;
without his help no such Conclusion could appear hence deducible. By the use of
Reason the Spirit teaceth the Heathen Moral Duties.
The immediate teaching of Gods Spirit must be that which is done without
means. Thus God neither by Adams Reason, nor any Scripture, nor by the works of
Creation; but immediately, by himself, taught him that he must abstain from the
Tree of Knowledge: And after his Fall, that the Seed of the Woman should break
the Serpents head. And afterward enjoined Circumcision to Abraham, the
Ceremonial Law to Moses, speaking to him face to face. Immediately by himself
did he inspire into the Penmen of the Scripture what they were to write,
thereby to discover to his people what he would have them to do. When he put
Prophesies into the mouths of his Prophets, sending them with Denunciations
against any; as the young Prophet against Jeroboam, Jonah against Nineveh; when
he taught Paul the Gospel by Revelation, all was by his immediate teaching.

The Terms opened, I shall now lay down what I judge the Truth touching this
Point, in twelve Answers.

Answ. He who is immediately taught of God, his whole Duty, has higher honor,
than he that is taught it by the Scriptures.

Answ. 2. He that walks by the immediate teachings of the Spirit, cannot
possibly err in so doing. Gods Spirit is a Spirit of Truth. But,

Answ. 3. I know but one man, of all who ever were in the world, unto whom,
Gods immediate teachings were the highest and safest Rule to Heaven: This was
Moses. Before the Scripture was written, God did immediately reveal to him the
Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial Law: The Ceremonial Law was their Gospel: Here
Moses had the full, the then only, the infallible, the trying, the binding
Rule, by immediate Revelation delivered to him. Therefore I conclude, Gods
immediate teachings were to Moses the highest and the safest Rule to Heaven.
But can any man show a second? Adam had in innocence immediate revelation; it
was but part of his Rule, and so no Rule of it self to heaven. Had Adam obeyed
Gods immediate prohibition, and violated the Law of Nature written in his
heart, he had not retained his Innocence: bare forbearing that fruit would not
have brought him to heaven. When afterward, Christ was immediately revealed,
suppose he had believed in Christ, but wholly neglected that remnant of the
Moral Law that still was in his heart, would that Faith have saved him? Single
out any of the Prophets, who had immediate revelation, as to particular things;
did not the Book of the Law written by Moses, bind them? even those Commands
which could not all certainly have any necessary and apparent connection with
what Truths God immediately inspired into them; that they viewing only what was
immediately taught them, might herein see, and hence conclude all their duty;
as to have no need of any recourse at all to any thing Moses wrote, to help
them to know and perform any part thereof? David was so read, though a Prophet,
in the Scripture, and thence learned to fear God, Deuteronomy. 17.19.

Ans. 4. It makes for our safety, to look up, earnestly to pray, and use all
means for the Illumination of Gods Spirit; that the eyes of our understanding
being enlightened, we may know what is the hope of the Fathers Calling, and what
the riches of the glory of his Inheritance in the Saints. Unto Believers God
does thus reveal that which Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor can enter
into the heart of man to conceive. Hereby it is, they see Eye to Eye; that is,
brightly; Faith being the Evidence of things not seen. They see the King in his
Glory. And this he does accompanying the Ministration of the everlasting
Gospel, Luke 4.18. He has sent me, says Christ, to preach recovering of sight
to the blind. The Gospel therefore is called the Ministration of the Spirit.
This we must attend upon, as Lydia did, that we might have our hearts opened;
and may be able to comprehend with all Saints what is the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height; and to know the Love of Christ which passes knowledge.
This we may hopefully watch for; God has covenanted, I will put my Laws into
their minds: and purposed, to destroy the face of covering cast over all people.

A. 5. And for our furtherance in holiness, let (me step a little out) we are
to look up for Gods gracious Spirit to sanctify, assist and comfort us. He is
the Spirit of Faith and Love, as well as of a sound mind The Spirit of
Holiness. And Gods Covenant is to put his Laws into our hearts as well as into
our minds. This obtained, we shall be Vessels meet for our Masters use. God
has likewise covenaned to put his Spirit into the hearts of his people, to
enable them to walk in his Statutes. Without him we can do nothing. But
strengthened with all might according to his glorious power, nothing shall be
too hard for us. If God be for us, who can be against us? We shall be able to
do all things through Christ strengthening us. And has not the Son of God
promised to send the Spirit as a Comforter? Gods Spirit does shed abroad Gods
Love in the hearts of Believers; does make known to them the things freely
given them of God; does witness with their Spirits that they are the Children
of God; does seal them. If we obtain the Spirit in this operation of his;
though we had even never so much desponding, shut up against all comfort and
hope, we should presently find strong Consolation; for when he gives
quietness, who then can make trouble? As we stand in need of, so we may with
good hope look up for Gods Spirit to sanctify, assist, comfort us.

A. 6. (To return again) When we are at a loss at any time for Gods will and
the way we should walk in, we may very safely look up for the Mediate Objective
Teachings of Gods Spirit, to be directed. As heretofore, when Gods people
wanted direction in a particular case, they enquired of God, (as in the case of
going to War, or the like) God did immediately show them his will; so now have
Gods people good grounds to believe that God will mediately teach them, and
resolve all their doubts in necessary things, if they heartily seek it of him.
Christ has said, The Spirit shall bring to your remembrance, Acts 15. Gods
Church was troubled with a doubt necessary to be determined [Whether the
Gentiles must be circumcised?] Peter brings an Argument from experience, to
prove, they need not. James minds his Argument, v. 14. Simeon has declared how
God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his
Name. And to this, says he, agree the words of the Prophet. Who brought this
to his mind? Here we see it fulfilled* that the Spirit brings suitable
Scriptures to remembrance to teach Gods people in doubtful cases. This is the
mediate objective Teaching of the Spirit.

A. 7. But what warrant have all men, nay, Gods people now, to expect a
Revelation of all Truths necessary to salvation, by the immediate objective
teachings of Gods Spirit? It is not for us to expect and promise our selves or
others this, if the Lord has no where promised it. Can it be proved, when
Christ says, The Spirit shall lead you into all truth, that this is to be
understood without means? without the Scripture? When God says, They shall
teach no more every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, know
the Lord; for they shall all know me: The sense is, they shall not teach as the
unconverted are to be taught, who believe not, who have no saving knowledge of
God at all: So they who have received the anointing, need not, as doubting and
unbelieving persons, that any teach them that Jesus is the Christ. Can it be
proved that the words are to be understood in that sense, as to exclude the
Ministry from edifying the Body of Christ till we all come in the unity of the
Faith? This Assertion, That God is pleased objectively and immediately by his
Spirit to reveal to all men, or to his own people at least, all Truths, and all
Duty necessary to Salvation, so that they need not mind the Scripture; but only
wait for these immediate objective Teachings: is the Wile of Satan, whereby
evil men take people off from what they acknowledge the full and the only Rule,
to lead them into a thousand Errors. I prove it an Error by these Arguments
following:

Arg. 1. God has promised, that in order to his peoples instruction in matters
necessary to Salvation, his Word shall concur with his Spirit to the end of the
world. Therefore it is not his pleasure to teach his people these necessary
Truths immediately, or without the word; much less to teach all men. The
promise we have, Isa. 59.21. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says
the Lord, my Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy
mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy Seed, nor
out of the mouth of thy Seeds Seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for
ever.

Arg. 2. God never, from the beginning of the world to the Apostles days, so
taught his Church; much less all men: Therefore it is without reason, to
imagine, he does so now. Not in Innocence; for the Moral Law he taught Adam by
that Light he was created with; which Moral Law contained necessary Truths to
his Salvation. In Moses's days, though he himself was so taught, yet none else;
the Church was taught mediately by Moses his Ministry. In the Apostles days,
the Church was taught by their Ministry. The Apostles themselves had immediate
Revelation; the Prophets also: but, 1 Cor. 12.29. Are all Apostles? Are all
Prophets?

Arg. 3. Excepting Moses, there cannot a man be shown, to whom God by immediate
Revelation discovered all Duties necessary to Salvation: Paul might seem the
most likely; but though the Gospel was so manifested to him, yet not the Law;
this was partly by the Law of Nature, partly by the consideration of the works
of Creation, especially by the Scriptures. How fond is the Conceit then, that
the whole Church should now be so taught?

Arg. 4. Had it been Gods purpose in Gospel times, to teach all men; nay, to
teach his whole Church immediately all their Duty; then would he not have
provided for this end, Scriptures; inspiring his word into Holy men, and moving
them to write it, and enduing them with the Spirit of Prophecy, and the Spirit
of Miracles, to render them credible; that without hesitancy his Church might
embrace the word wrote by them, for the undoubted Truth of God.

Had this been Gods pleasure, he would not have appointed a Ministry, and that
to continue to the end of the world; for this very end to instruct his Church
in those Truths that are necessary to Salvation. Go, preach, says Christ, I am
with you always, to the end of the world. And he gave some Apostles, some
Pastors and Teachers for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body
of Christ, till we all come into the unity of Faith. Did God provide Scripture,
and appoint Ministers, with an intent not to use them? but to do all
immediately by his Spirit, without them? When God gives Means, he does not
ordinarily work without means, but by them. It is worth observation, where the
Scripture and Ministry are vouchsafed, the Heathen attain only to know Moral
Duties; nothing of Christ. Is it not because God concurs to teach them, with
the means they have, the Law of Nature; but does not supply the want of means,
they have not, to teach them immediately Jesus Christ? Where therefore he has
given Scriptures and the Ministry, he does not ordinarily teach without them.
Men may as well expect God should ordinarily preserve life and strength without
Bread.

Arg. 5. Immediate teachings were extraordinary things: Therefore not to be
expected by all men; nor ordinarily, and for continuance, by the Church. Look
on them in Abraham, in Moses, in Samuel, or any of the Prophets, they were
extraordinary. Those persons chosen above any for God thus to reveal himself
to: The Revelation at certain times only, 1 Samuel 3. The Lord called Samuel, and
to him denounced Judgment upon Elies House. It was so extraordinary, that all
Israel, v. 20. from Dan to Beersheba, took notice of it, and hereby knew that
Samuel was established a Prophet of the Lord. And v. 21. It is said, God
appeared to him again in Shiloh. This was no ordinary thing. Daniel's and
Ezekiel's Visions no ordinary things; nor were Joseph's, and Nebuchadnezzar's,
and Pharaoh's Dreams, nor John's Revelation. Every one, nay, every Believer
must not look that the Sun should stand still at his Prayers, or the Sea be
driven back for him. This were to confound ordinary with extraordinary.

Arg. 6. He that is by the Spirit immediately taught the Gospel, can say, I
received it not of man, neither was I taught it, but by Revelation of the Holy
Ghost. But every Believer cannot say so: Therefore every Believer is not
immediately taught the Gospel.

Arg. 7. If immediate teaching be a sufficient Rule to Heaven, then Believers
need not hear the Word, or read the Scriptures: But God commanding Believers
(Be swift to hear, Remember the Law of Moses my Servant. Unto the word of
Prophecy ye do well to attend. Thou shall read, Deuteronomy. 17.10.) puts them not
upon a needless duty.

Arg. 8. If every Believer has immediate teachings, then every one of them can
write Gods mind as infallibly as the Penmen of the Scripture. Then every
believer may add to the Scripture, and enlarge the Churches Canon. Whereas,
Heb. 1.1. God did deliver the Churches Canon by parts, (...), but now by his
Son; which opposed to the former, discovers the whole Canon is by Christ
delivered; no more parts, that may be added, are now to be expected.

Arg. 9 They that hold this, must either say, God immediately reveals the same
Truth and Duty that are contained in the Scripture, or diverse from these: If
the same, this is to say, God does that of which there is no need at all,
because it is done already: that he does that in an extraordinary way, which he
has already done in an ordinary: He feeds Israel with Manna, after that they
are furnished with the Corn of Canaan. If diverse, this is to say, there is
another way to heaven beside that that is laid down in Scripture. But it is
acknowledged, that Gods will laid down in Scripture is a full Rule, an only
Rule.

Arg. 10. Satan casts evil motions into us; the Spirits are to be tried; false
Teachers to be convinced: Therefore it is false that we need not mind the
Scripture, but only wait for immediate teachings. Having already proved Satan's
access to believers, the Antecedent is clear. The Consequent I thus make good.

1. If we cleave not to the Rule given, the Scripture, and try by it, it is
easy for Satan to prevail with us to embrace his injections for good. If our
first Parents, in a state of perfection, and knowing it was the Devils Counsel,
not holding to the Rule given, were prevailed upon; much more may we, who are
not always so sure it is Satan, when he is busy with us, and who have not
attained to Adams perfection. 2. Spirits cannot so well be tried, false
Teachers cannot at all be convinced, by immediate teachings, as a Rule. By the
Scripture they may. Two things in order hereunto, are to be examined; the
Doctrine of the Spirits, and the Lives of the Teachers. Suppose then a Jew
should teach, the Messiah is not come pretending immediate Mission and
Revelation for this: G. W. to convince him, tells him, it is a false Doctrine;
for I am sent and taught by the Spirit immediately, that he is come. The Jew
laughs at him, and tells him he is deluded: G. has no more to say. But when
Apollos took the Jews to task, Acts 18.28. He mightily convinced them, and that
publicly, showing by the Scripture that Jesus was Christ. Again, If a man
walks naked in the Marketplace, crying out against sin, if another kills
himself by Fasting; if a third gives himself up to commit Fornication; and all
these pretend immediate Revelation their warrant, it is not sufficient to their
Conviction, for a man to tell them, I am immediately taught of God; that in you
these are sins. The other will deride, you fancy your self so taught of God,
but you know not the depths of the spirit as I do. I am a Prophetess, says
Jezebel, Rev. 2.20. But Gods word written in the Scripture plainly condemning
these things in all, convincingly shows them odious every where, and is enough
to stop their mouths that dare plead for their Lawfulness.
Arg. 11. I shall add this. The spirit does not immediately reveal the whole
Bible to Believers; therefore, he does not reveal immediately to them all their
duty. For, it is their duty to believe all that is there taught, to practice all
that is there commanded. The Scriptures a binding Rule to prove this. Thus it
appears, immediate Revelation of our whole duty is not vouchsafed: therefore
have we no warrant to expect it. To look for it is presumption; to fancy we
have it is to pride our selves in a Lie; and will cause to despise the
Scripture.

Answ. 8. To refuse the teachings of Gods spirit in the Scripture unless so far
as they agree with immediate teachings within, cannot be safe. It is to limit
and tempt the Lord, to impose upon him; as saying, thou shall immediately teach
me first, or I will listen to nothing in thy Scripture. According to this, an
Heathen coming amongst us and reading or hearing the Gospel must not entertain
it, because it was never immediately taught him by the spirit. A Child must not
obey any thing of the Scripture till it be first immediately taught him. But,
If any shall take away from the words of the Book of this Prophecy, God shall
take away his part out of the Book of Life, Rev. 22.19. Cursed be he that
confirms not all the words of this Law to do them, Deuteronomy. 27.26. The
Scriptures are binding.

Answ. 9. It cannot but be very safe to attend unto, and obey the Teachings of
Gods Spirit in the Scriptures. There is no inward Revelation can be more sure.
As to us, the Scriptures are a more sure word of Prophecy, and unto it we do
well to give heed. And Blessed is he that Reads, Rev. 1.3. If through the
assistance of Gods Spirit, with sincerity, integrity, constancy a man walks
according to Scripture Rule, he cannot possibly miss of Salvation.

Answ. 10. The Holy Ghost will not be offended to have any of his other
teachings tried by his teachings in the Scripture. This he approves in the
Bereans, safely may we therefore embrace what is agreeing with the Scripture;
safely reject what agrees not with it. Gods will laid down in Scripture being
the only Rule.

Answ. 11. To make immediate teachings without trial, our Rule, is to expose
our selves to a thousand errors.

Answ. 12. The teaching of Gods Spirit in the Scripture is the highest and
safest Rule to heaven. It is most safe to walk by this. It is not safe to
refuse the teaching of the Spirit in the Scripture, because we find not
immediate Teachings that agree therewith, but very safe not to entertain
immediate Teachings of the Spirit until we know they agree with Scripture,
because we are enjoined to try the Spirits. And now by all that has been
spoken hitherto, it easily appears that Quakers have have no saving Rule, by
which they walk, no sound foundation on which they build. We are built on the
Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets laid down in Scripture. This is our Rule,
this is our foundation; here we fetch all Doctrines for our Faith, hence all
directions for our practice. But what is their Rule, their foundation? If they
say the Light in every man; then they must fetch all their Doctrines, all their
directions hence. But this is sand; for it reveals but a small part of their
duty, and not a word of Christ. This failing, they usually fly to immediate
Revelation. If this be their Rule, their foundation; they must receive hence
all Doctrine, all direction necessary to salvation. If they receive some only,
it is but a sorry foundation; they cannot build on it, for full direction. If
they look for the knowledge of all Doctrines, all Duties hence; they build on a
Castle in the Air, a mere fancy; for though God can, he does not, he never did
immediately teach his Church all they were to believe and practice.

Whether perfection, that is, a state free from all sin, be attainable in this
Life?
LEt the Reader consider one thing, that though the Scripture speaks of
perfection sometimes in this sense, Heb. 12.23. The spirits of just men made
perfect. 1 Cor. 13.10. When that which is perfect is come. Yet not always when
it makes use of the word, Job 1.1. Job was a perfect man, yet not without sin;
for he cursed his day. Phil. 3.15. As many of us as are perfect. It signifies
not free from all sin, for in this sense, says he, ver. 12. I am not already
perfect. Hence it follows an Argument from the use of the word in Scripture
(as, I spoke wisdom among them that are perfect etc.) concludes, not unless it
be first proved that the sense of the word in that place be, free from all sin.

In the First Dispute, G. W. objected many things. As,

1. Christians to destroy the works of the Devil. It was Answered, So he will
in his time. He took Six days to create the world, when he could have done it
in a moment. Thus he mortifies sin more and more in this Life; and will remove
its being in the next.

Quest. But why will he not in this Life?

Answ. It is his good pleasure.

Quest. p. 22. Can he see good not to abolish it? Can he see the Continuance of
evil good? Or that his Commands should not be kept?

Answ. He sees good to suffer the ungodly to go on in sin, for the eternal
advancement of his Justice. If it were not so, how easily could he change them?
He sees good to suffer Corruptions, in part mortified, in his Saints to keep
them humble, exercise them, drive them to his blood and Righteousness for
shelter from wrath; and to render the infinite perfection of his merits, and of
his Fathers pardoning grace, to all eternity, more resplendent and glorious.

Ob. 2. Then his pleasure and commands are contrary, for he hids us be perfect.

Answ. God commands to offer Isaac, he purposes Isaac shall not be offered.
This shows, he does not efficaciously will every thing he commands. Yet though
here is a seeming, here is no real contrariety. By commanding he made it
Abraham's duty, his pleasure was to make it Abraham's duty Yet was it his
pleasure it should not indeed be performed: What real contrariety is here? If
he had further Objected: God commands us nothing but what he enables us in
this life to perform. Answ. He commands us from the beginning of Life, to the
end of Life, to continue in all things written in the Law to do them; yet he
enables none of us to obey this command; because he will not save us without
Covenant of Grace, and the continued sinless obedience of Jesus Christ our
surety.

Ob. 3. Either sin is perfectly remeved in this Life, or after death: If after
death, whether does it remain one moment after death?

Answ. It suffices me to be assured from Gods word, it is not done away in
this Life: it shall in the next. Let the Lord take his own time to effect it.
Because I see mention of Purgatory, p. 20. I further add; that, since no
unclean thing shall enter the Kingdom of Heaven; since Christ is to present us
holy, unblameable, unreproveable in his sight; a glorious Church not having
spot or wrinkle: As part of what Christ has merited, touching this point, is
applied from time to time, to a Believer, whereby he dies unto sin by degrees;
so at his death, the whole of Christ's merit is applied immediately, whereby sin
is for ever totally abolished, and the soul prepared to see God to his
unspeakable comfort, face to face.

Ob. 4. But it is the end of the Ministry, which is to continue till we come to
a perfect man, Ephesians. 4.13.

It was Answered, That perfect man is Christ, with all his Members; for he
consists of many (till we all come to a perfect man) And he is thus to be a
perfect man in the other world, not this.

Quest. Is the Ministry to continue in the other World?

It was Answered, The Ministry is to continue to the last Trump; and to the
last Trump will sin be in the Saints, but then in a Moment will the Saints be
changed and perfected, and in the same moment will the Ministry cease. In the
second dispute he urged. ver 12. Christ gave Teachers for the perfecting of the
Saints. Here I asked, how long was the Ministry to continue in perfecting of
the Saints, whether till death or no? After a pause, he answered, not so long
as death. I gave him a Scripture to prove, that the Ministry and Scriptures
were perfecting the Saints as long as they live. Deuteronomy. 17.19. The King shall
read therein all the days of his Life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his
God. If he is to learn to fear God all the days of his Life. Hence thus I
argue; whilst the Ministry and Scriptures are perfecting the Saints, they are
not perfected. As whilst a Carpenter is building an house, the house is not
builded; whilst God was creating the world, the world was not created. In the
very moment when the world was created, in that very moment God did cease from
creating. But the Ministry and Scriptures are perfecting the Saints all the
days of their Life; therefore the Saints are not perfected all the days of
their Life. He answered, the Jews are under another dispensation or Covenant. I
asked, in regard the Scriptures were perfecting the Jews all the days of their
Life; whether he would grant that the Jews at least were not porfected all the
days of their Life? here he was gone, for he knew not how to deny it, being
made so plain, though, he would not grant it: I could get no answer from him:
Here we may see how false that Assertion of theirs is, that there is no coming
to heaven for any in the other world, who are not first freed from all sin in
this. It is evident God brought the Jews to heaven, yet was not one of them
made free from sin in this.

Ob. Psalm. 119.1. Blessed are the undefiled. It was Answered.

1. In point of Justification, Believers are in Christ their head spotless,
clear as the Moon, fair as the Sun.

2. In point of Sanctification, through renewing and assisting grace, they do
not allow themselves in any known sin, but in Gods fear oppose all; and this is
their evangelical perfection or sincerity.

Ob. 6. Psalm 119.3. They also do no iniquity. To which may be added Divin. of
Christ, p 3. He that abides in Christ sins not; does not commit sin; in
whose spirit is no guile.

Answ. 1. They allow themselves in no sin, but sincerely strive to do their
duty.

Answ. 2. So far as regenerate and acting from the regenerate part, they do no
iniquity; a Parallel place is Romans 7.17. It is no more I that do it, but sin
that dwells in me. Where Paul manifestly distinguishes between his
regenerate and unregenerate part, nor is this Tautologie, as G. W. insinuates.
Glory, Christ's Light, p. 21. For to say a man acts from his regenerate part,
speaks the springing of his actions from a right principle; to say he does no
iniquity, speaks the conformity of his Life to a right Rule. It follows not
hence the Saints are perfectly free from sin, for when Paul in this sense did
no iniquity, sin dwelled in him. Nor will G. W. say, I suppose, no man is
regenerate but who is perfectly free from sin. Otherwise though he boasts of
being in the Light, he must be unregenerate; for he confessed he had not yet
reached perfection.

Ob. 7. But guilt cannot be taken away, whilst the being of sin remains.

It was answered, it can. To. 8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. This
intimates there is flesh in such, though guilt is removed. The Apostle speaks
of himself, who was then regenerate and in Christ, and so had guilt gone, yet
acknowledged a Law of sin in his members.

In the Second Dispute this being asserted, Eccles. 7.20. was urged, There is
not a just man on earth that does good, and sins not. The Just person is one
that is justified, his guilt gone, yet he sins. To this there was no answer
given: It was said in the first dispute, Job. 9.19. If I sin thou will not
acquit me.

Answ. If I sin as do the wicked, with allowance. Thus, he that is born of God
does not commit sin, and God will by no means clear such as are thus guilty.

Ob. 8. Heb. 12.22.23. You are to come to God the Judge of all, and to the
spirits of just men made perfect.

Answ. This speaks of spiritual comeing by faith, whereby the Saints on earth
enjoy communion with God, and the Saints in heaven; not at their having
attained unto the perfection of the Saints in heaven. Will he say, they have
attained to the perfection of God himself. For it is said, ye are come to God.
Will he say every of the Hebrews had attained, to be perfectly free from all
sin, so as to have no evil thought in them any more for ever; as it is with the
Saints in heaven? p. 20. The Scriptures, says he, speaks not of any perfection
of the body; Yet, he goes on and would fain prove such a perfection, from hence
that it ought to be. It seems then he asserts a perfection that he grants the
Scripture speaks not of: But his Argument is weakness it self. Duty is one
thing; Power. or Possession another. These Eight Objections were all answered
in the first Dispute, so that he had nothing more to say in vindication of
either of them. He was not so ingenuous, as to write my Answers, lest he should
discover the sandiness of the foundation he builds his doctrine on. I find
other objections in his Divin. of Christ.

1. In the Epistle, He has perfected for ever them that are sanctified.

Answ. Meritoriously. The sanctified need no other sacrifice to fly to all
their days. Will he say, none are sanctified that have any sin in them?

2. Christ cleanses from all sin. He has washed us from our sins in his own
blood.

Answ. What sin is cleansed, is cleansed by Christ's blood: Christ blood from
time to time cleanses away all guilt from Believers. It cleanses away the
reigning power of sin in this Life, the being in the next; not in this, for
John, washed and cleansed, confesses, 1 John 1.8. If we say we have no sin, we
deceive our selves.

3. He will througly purge his Flooer?

Answ. Separate the ungodly from the Righteous.

4. Can the work of faith and grace be sinful?

Answ. Faith it self can be imperfect, therefore the work of faith. Lord I
believe, help my unbelief. Imperfection is sin, for perfection is duty.

5. Page 20. He that is born of God, overcomes the World. God has made my way
perfect, 2 Samuel 22.23.

Answ. Though he has his failings, his course of Life is holy, notwithstanding
all opposition from the world, or other enemies. Will they say none is born of
God, but who is free from the being of sin? then no Quaker is born of God; for
the man cannot be brought that is perfectly free from all sin. Nor can it be
proved that by perfect is meant free from all sin. David had failings in the
end of his days, and he acknowledged his house, was not so with God; but David
asserts the Perfection of his warlike attempts, not of his graces; as the
context shows.

6. Such as are in Christ have cast off the old man?

Answ. The Reigning power of sin. Have crucified the flesh,

Answ. It is dying a lingering death. Faith Purifies the Heart.

Answ. Casts out the reigning power of sin; from time to time delivers from an
evil frame, purges out evil thoughts, and motions, though still others
succeed. It is said, Romans 6.6. That the body of sin might be destroyed.

Answ. In the other Life it shall, in this our work is, verse. 12. Not to let
sin reign, not to obey it in the lusts thereof.

7. In whose spirit is no guile?

Answ. Who having sin, does not cloak it, but confesses it plainly, and is
sincere, desiring mercy; as appears in the next verse. Psalm. 32.2, 3. When I
kept silence, my bones waxed old.

8. Are not all the Works of the Spirit of God perfect? They glory much in this
Objection; but there is nothing in it. For,

Answ. 1. The Operation or working of the spirit is always perfect, he works
in infinite wisdom, by infinite power.

2. The Work or thing wrought is always perfect for its part, nature, or kind;
a bud is a perfect bud. An Embrio is a perfect Embrio. The least Dram of
grace true and not counterfeit.

3. Every saving grace, though but like a grain of Mustardseed, shall be
perfect in degree also in Gods time. As was the work of Creation.

4. But every saving work of the spirit is not presently perfect in all those
degrees of perfection, it is to attain unto. 1 These. 3.10. Praying that he
might see your face, and perfect that which is lacking in the Faith.

5. Nor does every saving grace wrought by the spirit of God, forthwith exclude
the being of all sin. Which is the perfection enquired after. To affirm this,
is to say in whomsoever is any sin, in him Gods spirit never wrought any grace;
that since Moses chode at the waters of Meribah, God never wrought meekness in
him.

9. That the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us?

Answ. 1. Sometimes the word [fulfil] signifies no more then sincerely to obey
the Law, whether in part, or in whole. In part, Ja. 2 8. If ye fulfll the Royal
Law according to the Scripture, thou shall love thy Neighbor. This is but
part, for there is another part of the Law requiring Love to God. So Gal. 6.2.
Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ. That is that
part of the Law which requires this duty. In whole. 1 Chro. 22.13. If thou
take heed to fulfill the Statutes and Judgments which the Lord charged Moses,
then thou shall prosper. Be strong. And in this Life we receive grace, thus to
fulfill the Righteousness of the Law, that is sincerely to obey every precept,
so far as we attain to understand it.

Answ. 2. Sometimes the word (fulfill) is used to signify, most perfect exact
and through conformity to every title of Gods Law. Mat. 15.17, 18. I came not
to destroy the Law, but to fulfill. And thus in the other world, Gods people
shall attain to fulfill the Righteousness of the Law; but not in this. He that
affirms it, must prove it.

Answ. 3. Yet our Divines understand the Righteousness of Justification. This
being the Scope of the Aposile, to prove no condemnation to believers, because
the Gospel or Law of the Spirit of Life frees them from the condemning power of
the Law of Works; because God sent his Son and condemned our sin in him, who
had perfectly obeyed the Law; that through the imputation of what Christ has
done and suffered, we might be looked on, as if from the beginning of Life to
the end, to have obeyed the Law as creatures, to have satisfied it as sinners.

10. You plead for Sin. This is in every ones mouth. An opprobrious and gross
slander.

Answ. 1. Do we say it is lawful to sin? Let it be considered who do more call
men off from sin, they or we? Their Light without the Scriptures will help to
call men off from Lying, Injustice, Uncleanness, Disobedience to Parents, and
such like Duties of the Law of Nature. And do we tell men it is not needful to
forsake these sins? We urge men to forsake these; and to the observance of the
Christian Sabbath: we press to secret Prayer, and prayer in the Family; to
begging of God a Blessing on the food we take, after the example of Christ, we
press to repent of the very being of an evil thought in us, arising out of our
hearts; and of a Nature inclining us to offend; we press the Celebration of the
never abolished Ordinances of Baptism and the Supper; we press to seek
remission by the Blood of Christ. All these, according to the Doctrine of the
Apostles, on whom, with the rest of the true Church of God, we are built; and
according to the unerring Rule of Gods word written. Who do press men unto
Holiness? who do call men off from Sin more than we?

Answ. 2. Do not we denounce against men, that if they allow themselves in any
Sin and Wickedness, they must perish to Eternity.

Answ. 3. Do we not say, it is the duty of all to be perfect, and to press
after it; to watch against all, even the least sins; to repent of every
failing, and fly to Christ's blood, and Gods free Grace for pardon.

Answ. 4. We do indeed tell men that God will accept of their sincere and true
endeavor to do all, flowing from Faith in his Grace, and the Merits of Christ,
though they cannot attain to be quite free from Sin. It may be, he will say,
this Doctrine encourages to Sin: But I say, this Doctrine naturally
encourages to strive against Sin, and endeavor after Holiness; whereas the
contrary discourageth and takes men off from their endeavors. If two Companies
of Children were to run a Race, and one should say to this Company, there are
strong men at the end of the Race; if you run as strong and as fast as they can
run, you are to enjoy a rich inheritance, but if not, you are to die: Another
should say to that Company, though you are not able to run as last as men, and
as strongly, yet if you do your best endeavor, and hold out, you are to enjoy
the rich inheritance; I ask which of these two did speak most to the
encouragement of their Companies? The former spoke to the cutting off their
endeavors, by despair, the latter to the putting of Courage and Life into
them. Thus it is here: says the Quaker to his Company, In Heaven, which is the
end of the Race, there are the Spirits of just men made perfect, you must obey
as perfectly as they; there must be no sin at all in you, and then you shall
obtain Salvation; but if otherwise, you must look to perish. Says the
Scripture-Minister to his Company, Though you cannot attain in this life to be
as pure as those in heaven; yet, if by Faith you fly to Christ's Blood and
Merits, and sincerely endeavor to please God in all things, and hold out thus
to the end, God will graciously accept and save you. I appeal to the very
Consciences of all Quakers now, who is it that does most encourage to press
after Purity and Holiness? Must they not according to this Doctrine, say, I
must be quite free from all sin here, or burn in hell to all eternity; I have
tried to get free, these 3, or 6, or 10, or 20 years, and could never all this
time attain it; and what ground can I have of better hopes for the future, than
I have had all this time? I may not look for it. And if I may not come to
heaven, unless in this Life I get free from all sin, I am shut out from Mercy;
to what purpose shall I press after Holiness? Such must needs be the workings
of their hearts, who will believe there is no salvation without perfect freedom
from sin in this Life.

I come now to lay down more Arguments against this Doctrine, having already
urged one, from Ephesians. 4.12. And the first shall be of Instruction, because I am
persuaded men therefore plead for this Perfection, because they know not what
it is.

Arg. 1. We should not speak an idle word; for this we are to give an account
at Judgment: we should not have one vain thought in us: How long shall vain
thoughts lodge in thee? We should not have one Wandering thought in Prayer,
Eccles. 5.3. The Holy Ghost calls a wandering Prayer, a Dream: we should not
have one inordinate desire: Thou shall not covet. We should not have one evil
imagination against our Neighbor: Let no man imagine evil against his Brother
in his heart. We should not so much as conceive any evil in our hearts, Acts
5.4. Why have thou conceived this thing in thy heart? ( G. W. cuts my Argument
short. p. 21.) But I asked him, Whether a state of freedom from all these sins
were attainable in this Life? He had the face to tell me it is. But the
Consciences of all enlightened persons, Observers of their own hearts, will
bring in testimony against him. What says Nehemiah? Chap. 13.22. Spare me, O
my God, according to the greatness of thy Mercy. In the Dispute I urged Job.
And if any were perfect in this sense, surely he; the holiest man then on
Earth: But what is his Testimony? Job 9.21. (...) What I perfect? I should not
know my Soul. He abhors to entertain such a thought. How did Paul find it?
Phil. 5.12. Not as though I were already perfect. Paul was sensible of his
imperfection. Compare this with v. 15. Let us therefore as many as be perfect,
be thus minded; that is, let as many as are well grown in Grace, see and be
sensible of our imperfection, or let not any pretend to be well grown in Grace,
that will not look on himself as imperfect. These holy men knew, God saw
something in them which ought not to be there; and if our hearts condemn us,
God is greater. Therefore cried holy David, Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into
judgment with thy Servant; for in thy sight shall no flesh living be justified.
And God himself testifies, Genesis 8.21. The imagination of man's heart is evil
from his youth.

But p. 21. God called Job perfect.

Answ. And Job afterward denied himself to be perfect. Therefore God speaking
true, he was perfect, that is, upright, sincere, well grown in Grace. Job
speaking true, he was not perfect, that is, not free from all sin.

Self-justification, p. 22. we do not own:

Answ. Yet you must own speaking true: Either Job denying himself to be
perfect, spoke truth or falsehood; if truth, Job was not perfect; if falsehood,
he was perfect.

But he did attain Perfection afterward, Job 23.10, 11. I shall come forth as
Gold, my foot has held his steps.

Answ. Though to that time he had been upright and steadfast with God, and was
confident should so persevere, yet was he not free from sin; for after this,
Chap. 40.4. I am vile, says he. And that enlightened person that observes the
workings of his own heart must, and cannot but say so too.

But, p. 21. Victory over vain Thoughts is attainable.

Answ. Thoughts prevailed against, and cast out, return again; and their being
in us, is Sin, Acts 8 20. Thou bast thought that the gift of God might be
purebased with Money. Since then he attempts only to prove Victory, not Freedom
from evil thoughts, he speaks not to the point, deserves no Answer. Yet to that
Scripture, Prove. 12.5. The thoughts of the Righteous are right. I answer, that
deliberate thoughts, the determinations, purposes of a righteous man (which
carry the bent of his heart with them) are, for the main, right; in opposition
to the Counsels of the wicked. Will he say, there is no man righteous that has
any evil thought in him?

Arg. 2. To dive a little deeper. We should not have one evil principle in us
inclining us to offend God. This is called Sin, Romans 6.12. Let not sin reign.
Romans 7.17. Sin dwelling in me. chapter 7.8. Sin taking occasion by the Law, wrought
in me all manner of Concupiscence. It is called the Body of Sin, c. 6.6. The
Law of Sin, c. 7.23, 25. I asked, Was such a state attained in this life, as to
be wholly free from all evil principles? He stuck not to say, it was
attainable. To prove the contrary, I urged, John 15.2. Every Branch in me that
bears fruit, he purges it. If the Father purges, there must be something to
be purged out. He acknowledged it. This must be an evil principle inclining to
offend God. He denied it not. But his Answer then was agreeable to p. 22. After
a while all evil Principles are purged out, and then the Father cease from
purging. But to this effect was the Reply; this man whom you suppose to have
all evil principles purged out of him, either is in Christ bearing fruit, or
not. It was answered, He is. If he be in Christ, bearing fruit, then, said I,
the Father purges him; for every Branch in him that bears fruit, the Father
purges. If the Father purges him, he has evil principles to be purged out,
whatever you suppose to the contrary. G. W. must not contradict our Savior,
and say, I know a Branch in thee, bearing fruit, that the Father does not
purge. He cease to answer, and falls to oppose, p. 22. He washes us from our
sins in his blood. It is answered already, being the second Objection out of
Divin. of Christ.

He opposes further: Because it is the Fathers purging, sin must needs be
perfectly purged out.

Answ. Then every fruitful Christian is instantly freed from all sin. Indeed he
shall in Gods time: But hence it follows not, but that the Father purges, and
purges as long as this Life lasts to perfect the work. It was asked whether
the branch be not of the nature of the Vine?

Answ. We are partakers of the Divine Nature, and from Christ receive Grace for
Grace. What then? Will he dare to say, that as soon as a person is a partaker of
renewing Grace, and the Spirit of God, that he is incontinently free from all
sin? or does it follow, he shall before death. Let him prove the Consequence;
or show us the man that is freed. The Spirit of God, who knows all men, tells
us, there is none free, Prove. 20 29. Who can say I have made my heart clean, I
am pure from my sin?

Arg. 3. Where there is not perfect knowledge, there cannot be perfect
practice: For a man's acceptable practice cannot exceed his knowledge.
Whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin. But there is no man has perfect knowledge,
Psalm. 19.12. Who knows his Errors? cleanse me from secret faults. There is no
man that does not offend more than he takes notice of. And this Ignorance
remains during life, as has been proved from 1 Cor. 13.9, 11. Now we know in
part.

Arg 4. If all persons whatsoever do sin whilst on Earth, then there is none in
this life perfectly free from sin: But on earth all persons whatsoever do sin,
1 Kings 8.46. There is no man that sins not. Genesis 8.21. The imagination of
man's heart is evil from his youth. His Imagination or Fantasy should be
always profitably employed, either propounding to the apprehension and
judgment spiritual Objects, or carnal, in a spiritual manner, to preserve the
Soul always in a holy frame; but from our Youth, nay, our Childhood (the word
will bear it) it is otherwise. And this is not spoken of the old wicked world;
they were gone: but of Noah and his Family, Eccles. 7.20. There is not a just
man upon earth, that does good, and sins not. I ask, whether the supposed
perfect man be upon earth? If on earth he sins, Jam. 3.2. In many things we
offend all. Where is the man then that is perfectly free from all sin? It has
been objected to me James speaks not of himself or any in a gracious state, v.
9. Therewith curse we men. James was no Curser; he speaks of the unregenerate
only.

Answ. It is not said, therewith we all curse men; for then James had
necessarily included himself. But though the matter spoken of does necessarily
exclude James, in v. 13. yet the manner of speaking does necessarily include
him, in v. 2. It is not In many things we offend; but in many things we offend
all. So it is most evident and clear, that there is no person, no not one, in
this life perfectly free from sin. And since we may have redemption, even the
forgiveness of our sin, through faith in Christ's Blood; and the acceptance of
our persons also, why should we be backward to entertain this Doctrine?

Touching Baptism with water, whether it be an Ordinance of Christ, binding us?
OBserve the Question between us and them, is not Whether Infants or persons at
age shall be Baptized? but, Whether any are to be Baptized? The Question is
not, Whether Presbyterians or Anabaptists, etc. are to Baptize? but, Whether
any, whether true Ministers of Jesus Christ, whoever they be, are to Baptize?
For, if any Ministers whatsoever are to baptize any persons whatsoever with
water, then their Doctrine is false; then the Question in hand must be yielded
up, that Baptism with water is an Ordinance of Christ binding us. To prove the
point:

Arg. 1. What God has instituted for his Church, and not repealed, is still
binding: But God has instituted Baptism with water for his Church, and not
repealed it: Therefore Baptism with water is still binding.

Obj. Against the Major Proposition they object; No Dictate binds, but what
proceeds from the Light within; for, p. 13. We are to worship God in newness of
Spirit.

Answ. As if we could not worship God in newness of Spirit, when we obey the
Dictates of God himself in the Scripture, Psalm. 119.4, 5. Thou have commanded
us to keep thy Precepts. O that my ways were directed to keep thy Statntes. A
gracious soul keeping Gods Statutes in Scripture, and Gods Commands to keep
them, can from Faith and Love heartily, and with longing desire embrace and
close with them. Those therefore that care not to obey Gods Voice or
Institutions in Scripture, have reason to suspect themselves strangers to this
newness of Spirit. But the Major is evident from the binding power of the
Scripture. The Minor has three parts. That Baptism was instituted of God. That
it was instituted for the Church. That it was never repealed. I prove them
singly.

1. Baptism with water has been instituted of God. First God gave John
Commission to baptize with water, John 1.33. He that sent me to baptize with
water. The Institution was after confirmed by Christ, Mat. 28.19. Go, teach all
Nations, baptizing them.

Obj. Says G. W. Here is no mention of water. It is spiritual Baptism we are
to understand.

Answ. That we are to understand Baptism with water, these Arguments.

Arg. 1. Christ commands them their Duty. But though it be their duty to
endeavor to baptize spiritually or convert men; yet it is not their duty to
convert men; for supposing their diligence, it is not their sin if persons be
not converted, or spiritually baptized. God never gave them power thus to
change men's hearts. Their work is one, the Holy Ghosts another.

Arg. 2. If teaching be external, baptizing is external. You may as well say,
they are to do the Spirits Office in teaching internally, as the Spirits Office
in baptizing internally. Its evident, they are enjoined a work in their power,
and a work distinct from the work of the Spirit, in that his presence to do his
work is promised, whilst they do theirs.

Arg. 3. Paul would not have thanked God he baptized so few, 1 Cor. 1.14. if
baptizing spiritually had been his work.

Arg. 4. If we are to understand spiritual baptism, then as many as the
Apostles baptized, were certainly sanctified: but what was Simon Magus? Acts
8.13.

Arg. 5. If this be Christ's meaning, and there be no other Baptism in the
Church than spiritual; then every Believer and sanctified person is already
baptized; and no more is to be done to him, as signified by this word. But
Christ requires that even Believers be baptized, Mark 16.16. Cornelius was a
devout man, sanctified already, and the Holy Ghost fell on him; yet after all
this, he is baptized, Acts ^0. Crispus and many Corinthians believed, yet were
also baptized, Acts 18.8. Nay, therefore baptized, because Believers.

Arg. 6. If the Apostle did afterward baptize with water, then we are to
understand Christ as commanding Baptism with water: but they did. This was
denied in the Dispute. proved from Acts 8.36. See, here is water, what does
binder me to be baptized. And, Chap. 10.47. Can any man forbid water, that
these should not be baptized? I asked, how can we assure our Consciences better
of the meaning of Christ, than by the practice of the Apostles? It was
answered, The Apostles knew not the mind of Christ. Here Robert Ludgater's
Impudence called for pity. Here Is a Fellow, said I, takes upon him to know the
mind of Christ better than the Apostles. Upon which, he was blank'd, and
neither he, nor any of the rest attempted to give any Answer to this Argument.

2. Baptism with water was instituted for the Church, Mat. 28. Teach all
Nations, baptizing them. It was not instituted for one or several persons by
name, but all Nations, Acts 8.5. In the City of Samaria, Philip baptized both
men and women. Acts 18.8. Many Corinthians believed, and were baptized. So the
Eunuch was baptized with water; Cornelius also, and his Company, Acts 8.36. and
10.47. already mentioned. The extent both of the Institution and of the
Practice, prove, it was instituted for the Church.

3. This Institution of Baptism by water for the Church, was never repealed:
Show when.

Obj. John must decrease, Christ must increase.

Answ. John's honor must. As the Light of the Morning Star decays by the
Rising of the Sun. Here is no Repeal; and Christ confirmed the Ordinance after
John's death.

Obj. There is but one Baptism.

Answ. True; but this has two parts, the Outward, or the Sign, which is water,
applied by the Minister: the Inward, or thing signified, which is the Question
of a good Conscience. This we obtain by the Spirit, rendering the outward means
effectual, which is far from repealing it.

Obj. Then it is but the outward part of Baptism that is contended for.

Answ. We agree in this, that the question of a good Conscience is necessary.
We differ in this, whether the use of water, as signifying it, be a binding
Ordinance?

Obj. There is a distinction between Baptism of water and of the spirit, as
between John's Baptizing with water and Christ's with the holy Ghost and fire.

Answ. 1. The Scripture calls sometimes the work of the Minister, sometimes
the work of the spirit, Baptism: and they differ as much as the sign and the
thing signified in one and the san e Ordinance.

2. John's Baptism and Christ's are in substance the same, for when John Baptized
with water, the spirit of Christ was given to purge and sanctify; and when
Christ Baptizeth with the Holy Ghost it was in the use of water. Ephesians 5.26. He
sanctifies the Church with the washing of water by the word. Here is nothing
yet to prove a Repeal.

Ob. Divin. of Christ, Second part, p 49. The substance come, the shadows fly.

Answ. 1. By the substance do you mean sanctifying grace, and the Question of a
good Conscience? [Lord what will thou have one to do?] since Christ says, Go,
Teach, Baptizing; had you that substance, you would stand for this Ordinance of
Baptism with water. When the Eunuch, the three thousand, Lydia, the Jailer were
converted, they were for it.

2. The true substance abolishing shadows, is not Christ in us, or his Image
drawn over our souls in sanctification; he was thus in the sanctified when the
shadows ought to be upheld; but Christ in our Nature dying for us. And this
substance Christ personally considered, has established Baptism with water, as
has been shown. This objection therefore contains Blasphemy against Christ, it
is as much as to say to Christ instituting this shadow, thou forgetest thy
self: thou know not what thou do; but will men be wiser then Christ? beware

Ob. 1 Pet. 3.21. Baptism saves, not the putting away the filth of the flesh.

Answ. This [not] is not an absolute Negation, but comparative; and signifies
[not so much] for our Savior, Mark 16.16. tells us plainly; Baptism does
conduce to our salvation.

Ob. Paul was not sent to Baptize.

Ans. The same answer serves here. Preaching being a more weighty work, Paul
committed Baptizing to his Assistants, as Christ did to his Disciples. The same
manner of speech we have, Hos. 6.6. I will have mercy and not Sacrifice,

Page 34, It Is Objected, Being wicked, their Sacrifices were not accepted.

Ans. But will you say, sacrificing was not their duty, when God gave them
Commandment for it? till Christ's death, God did require it.

Ob. If mercy and knowledge of God had born sway among them, there had been no
need or occasion for Sacrifices.

Ans. 1. Since it did not, according to confession there was need of
sacrificing; yet says God I will have mercy and not sacrisice: The sense then
must needs be [not so much.]

2. Man bringing guilt with him into the world, had he been able all his days
to live like an Angel, there had been need of offering sacrifice for that guilt.

3. Sacrificing being then Gods Institution, Holiness did not disoblige men
from it; but rendered them the more conscientious to do their duty.

Ob. The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit.

Ans. And does a broken Spirit disoblige him that has it from obeying Gods
Institution? Let it be remembered, nothing but Christ's death puts an end to the
sacrifices of the Law. Though God valued mercy, and valued a broken Spirit
above Sacrifice, yet his Institution could not cease binding to the Jews till
the death of Christ.

Ob. If Paul bad a command to Baptize, he would not have thanked God for not
obeying.

Ans. If Christ's institution had been only a spiritual Baptisin, and not a
Baptism with water, he would not have thanked God that he Baptized so few. He
had a command to Baptize, but if his Assistant did it, he was not obliged to do
it over again. He only thanks God it was done by other hands, not his own,
least they should have taken occasion, had he baptized them, to say he did it
in his own name.

That Paul had a command to baptize is evident. 1. From that general precept,
[Go, Teach, Baptize.] He being a Minister of Christ, and an Apostle, and the
institution of Christ not ceasing in his days, it must needs be that Paul was
included in that Commission. 2. Had he not command, he had sinned in baptizing
any, 1 Cor. 1.14, 16. Lydia, the Jailer, running without being sent; had not
John (greatly sinned if he had baptized, and had not been sent of God? so had
Paul. 3. Baptism is Gospel. Paul had a Commission to dispense the Gospel. 1
Cor. 9.17. A dispensation of the Gospel is committed to me. Therefore he had a
Commission to dispense Baptism. It was said Baptism is not Gospel. And answered
what is instituted by Christ after his death must needs be Gospel, but Baptism
was instituted by Christ after his death. Here they had no more to say; and the
thing is plain, either it is a Legal, or it is an Evangelical institution. What
is appointed to signify Christ already come, is in a most proper sense
Evangelical.

Page 34. It is now objected, The Gospel is everlasting.

Ans. Baptism with Water is to last to the end of the world, and the benefit
and fruit of it, to the chosen, to all eternity. So the Preaching of the Gospel
is to last to the end of the World, and the benefit and fruit of it to the
chosen for evermore. Thus it appears they cannot prove that the Ordinance of
Baptism with Water is repealed. And indeed being no part of the Ceremonial Law
which was put an end to by Christ's death, nor of the Judicial Law, which was
but temporary; since it was appointed to continue after his death, how fond
must it needs be to imagine a repeal.

Arg. 2. What is instituted to continue to the end of the world binds still.
Baptism with water was instituted to continue to the end of the world. Go,
preach, baptizing, I am with you always to the end of the world.

1. The command was given to them, not as Apostles, but as Ministers; for so
was the command of preaching; it being a matter not requiring any extraordinary
call or qualification for it. But Ministers are to continue to the end of the
world, Ephesians. 4.11.13. Therefore all Ministers are concerned in the command, and
must obey it as long as Christ continues then.

2. When Mtathew uses the expression, (...), in other places of Scripture, he
understands according to our translation here, the end of the world. Mat,
13.39, 40, 49. The Harvest is the end of this world. At the end of the world
the Angels shall sever the wicked. Therefore, by this expression here, Mat.
28.20. he understands the end of the world, and not of that present age. As
long as this world lasts Christ will be with his Ministers to bless this
Ordinance administered by them. Now let the World judge whether those that teach
among the Quakers be not Rebels against Christ, as I called them; Christ says,
Go, Baptize; the language of their practice is (if they have been baptized) I
renouace my Baptism, if any of them were born Quakers, (for Quakers is but of
yesterday) I never was, never will be baptized, I neither will baptize, nor
suffer others to be baptized. If allowed rebellion does not constitute a Rebel,
what does? yet I am far from looking on the Administration of Baptism as the
duty of any of these men, because they are no true Ministers of Christ; herein
they are rebellious only, in that they take themselves to be Ministers of
Christ, and yet refuse the Administration, The point being clear that Baptism
with water is Gods Ordinance binding us: is it not our wisdom to submit to it?
Christ sanctifies his Church by the washing with water; promises, he that
believes and is baptized shall be saved. Are we not enemies to our selves and
children, if we reject a means of Sanctification, a means of Salvation? Is not
God a Jealous God in matters of his worship? Has he not said, cursed is he
that diminishes? and who can be guilty of diminishing if he be not, who pulls
down where God has not pulled down, but has set up? Had it not well nigh cost
Moses his life, that he neglected the Circumcision of his child? And when God
had instituted Circumcision, did he not threaten, the man child not circumcised
the eight day shall be cut off, he has broken my Covenant? Genesis 17.14. These
things are written for our example and for our learning; for whom God has
instituted Baptism to be of that use to us, that circumcision was of to the
Jews. The Lord has said, Call upon me, fear me; the same Lord God has said,
Go, teach, Baptizing, The Pharisees rejected the Counsel of God against
themselves, not submitting to this Ordinance, Christ submitted to it: whether
shall we chose to imitate Christ or the Pharisees?

Whether the Lords Supper be an Ordinance of Christ binding us?
For this also take these two arguments.
Arg. 1. What is ordained of Christ for his Church, and not abolished, still
binds; but such is the Lords Supper. It was Instituted by Christ, Mat. 26.26,
27. And as they were eating, Jesus took bread and blessed it, and brake it, and
gave it to the Disciples, and said, take, eat, this is my body. And he took the
Cup and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it. It was
instituted for his Church, 1 Cor, 11.23. For I have received of the Lord that
which also I delivered unto you. v. 24. This do in remembrance of me. He
delivered the very command of Christ to them, being a Church of Christ: plainly
discovering that they were all bound to the observance of it. Let any show now
where did Christ ever repeal this Institution.

Ob. Divin. of Christ, Second part, p. 50. The Apostles condescended to the low
capacity of the Corinthians, as not grown up to that spirituality, to see
through the outward shadows. Their example is no President?

Answ. 1. The Apostle delivered to them the command of Christ. ver. 24. This
do, ver. 25. This do. He warns them of unworthiness, under penalty of making
themselves guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. He enjoins them with due
preparation to obey the commands of Christ. ver. 28. But let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat. Is all this but an Indulgence or Sufferance? Paul
presses to have the Institution of Christ in a right manner obeyed in his
Church.

Answ. 2. Could not the Corinthians see through the outward shadows? were they
not believers in Christ who is the substance of all the shadows? were they not
sanctified in Christ Jesus? chapter 1.2. Yet the Apostle enjoins them obedience to
the Institution of Christ.

Answ. 3. Either the Apostle did deliver to them the commands of Christ, or
not, and they were to obey the Apostles commands as the comands of Christ or
not. If they were to obey the Apostles comands as the comands of Christ; then
are they to be our President: For we are to obey the commands of Christ as well
as they. Here is no manifestation of a repeal.

Ob. It could not in reason or truth be enjoined all others that succeed, who
spiritually enjoy the Communion of the body and blood of Christ, where none of
their disorders have any place.

Answ. 1. This Objection seems to yield that Christ ordained the Supper for
weak Coristians, who are subject to Disorders; but not for strong: and the
Corinthians are a President for such weak Christians. Then why at least do not
those: who look on themselves as Teachers from Christ, among Quakers, enjoin,
as Paul did, such weak ones, to partake of this Ordinance? Are there no weak
ones among them?

Answ. 2. Will this man take himself to be wiser than Christ, and wiser than
the Holy Ghost, who inspired Paul to enjoin the Corinthians according to the
institution of Christ? There was not one sanctified Corinthian but had
Communion with the Body and Blood of Christ. And many of them were well
grounded in Grace, chapter 1. v. 5. In every thing ye are enriched by him, in all
utterance, and in all knowledge; and yet these even these, are enjoined to
partake of the Lords Supper, Will he say the Holy Ghost did not act in reason
or in truth?

Answ. 3. A grown Christian may grow more, and he that has Communion with
Christ may have further Communion, and he that is strong may yet have more
strength, and so by this Ordinance be further and further helped on to
Salvation. There does appear then very good reason why the Holy Ghost should
enjoin strong Christians this duty of partaking the Supper.

Ob. p. 51. They who know a beginning in the Spirit ought to wait for this
spiritual appearance, and coming of Christ, and not turn back again to shadows.

Ans. 1. He condemns Paul's practice, which he approved of before. If
condescending Paul acted according to the mind of Christ, then true Ministers
ought thus to condescend and put weak believers upon receiving the Supper, that
they might act also according to the mind of Christ. ^e ye followers of us,
says he, as we also are of Christ. But if weak believers must not partake of
it; because a shadow, then Paul should not have condescended to give them the
Lords Command, putting them upon receiving: examine your selves, and so eat.
Will this man become Paul's Teacher, and pretend to know Christ's will better
then Paul?

Ans. 2. According to this Doctrine, the Corinthians ought to have rejected the
commands of Christ by Paul. [Do this, let a man examine himself, and so eat.]
We do know a beginning in the Spirit, and must we return to shadows?

Ans. 3. As if partaking of the Supper were inconsistent with waiting for a
more full manifestation of Christ; or Naaman washing in Jordan, could not
expect from God a cure of his Leprosic. It is the duty of all believers in the
use of means, which the Lord has appointed to expect his presence and his
blessing; and in the use of such means it may be had. If God appoint the
blowing of Rams horns, in their obedience, Israel may expect the fall of
Jerico's walls. And so in the use of the Supper, it being of the Lords own
appointment, we may expect his gracious presence, 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of
blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? We may
expect the confirmation of our faith touching pardon, Mat. 26.28. This is my
blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.

Answ. 4. Though it be a shadow, yet an Evangelical shadow, a shadow of the
Lords own appointing, and which he never yet repealed. And shall not this be
dear to every gracious soul? Who is not bound to uphold the unrepealed
ordinances of Jesus Christ? As every Jew was bound to uphold the Passover in a
Holy manner, till Christ's death did put an end to it: So is every Christian
bound to uphold the Lords Supper, Christ having neither done, nor said any
thing to cause the celebration there to cease. And therefore where the Lords
unrepealed ordinance are contemned, they may talk of Christ's spiritual
appearance, but they may wait long enough, and with small hope to obtain. The
Lord thy God is a jealous God. He speaks with reference to instituted worship,
as the Supper is. Contemn this, expect the Lords burning wrath, never look for
his gracious presence, it will not be vouchsafed. Might a Jew have said, I have
had a beginning in the spirit. I must wait for a spiritual appearance of the
Messiah; I will not turn back to this shadow of the Passover. What says God?
Number. 9.10.13. He shall be cut off from his people. See the severity of God in
point of instituted worth. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Thou shall not diminish. Such are more
likely to pull down a curse upon their heads, than obtain the spiritual sense
of Christ.

Arg 2. What is appointed to continue till Christ's coming at the end of the
world, is still binding. But so is the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.26. As often as
ye at this bread and drink this cup, ye do show forth the Lords death till he
come.

1. Ob Life of Christ within, p. 40. we do not read of another coming in the
flesh yet to be expected, Divin of Christ, p. 49. Christ the enduring divine
substance ends all types and his comings and appearance in the flesh. The
Disciples were witnesses of his coming after the Resurrection, of his spiritual
coming, and Christ promised some of them should not taste of death till they
see the Son of man coming in his Kingdom. Matt. 16.28. But there is no coming
in the flesh to be expected.

Ans. 1. That Christ is to come in the flesh; that is to say, our humane nature
glorified at the end of the world; take these Scriptures, Heb. 9, 28. Christ
was once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him
shall be appear the second time, without sin unto salvation. Christ has once
appeared already in our nature, and he is to appear a second time; which
bearing relation to the former, must needs be also in our nature, 1 Cor. 1.7.
Ye come behind in no gift waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. He
was come to them spiritually already, this therefore speaks of his coming in
the end of the world to Judgment, 1 These. 4.17. The Lord himself shall descend
from Heaven with a Shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump
of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first, then we which are alive and
remain shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in
the air, so shall we ever be with the Lord. G. W. Did the Apostle live to a
personal coming? Ans. The Apostle speaks in the person of believers, some of
them will be then alive. This cannot be understood of a spiritual coming in
this life. 1. He was so come to the Apostles already. 2. Does the Lord come
spiritually with a shout? etc. does the dead in Christ then rise first? Are
those to whom Christ comes spiritually, caught up with the dead raised, into
the Clouds to meet the Lord in the Air? 2 These. 1.7, 8. The Lord shall be
revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance
on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ;
who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord. Is all this done at Christ's spiritual coming to a Soul? Rev. 1.7. Behold
h^ comes with Clouds, and every eye shall see him. Does every eye see him,
when he comes spiritually to a particular Soul? Acts 1.11. Ye men of Galilee,
why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? this sane Jesus which is taken up from you
into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into Heaven.
He went up in his humane Nature, therefore so shall he come down. Mat. 24.30,
31. Then shall the Tribes of the Earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man
coming in the Clouds of Heaven with power and great glory; and he shall send
his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather together his
Elect. Mat. 26.24. Hereafter shall you see the Son of man suting on the Right
hand of Power, and comin the Clouds of Heaven. So Mark 14.62. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22.
Phil. 3.20. Jude 4. Acts 2.20. If he never read these Scriptures, now he may;
and see that Christ's first coming in the flesh ends not his second, as he
speaks.

Answ. 2. Whatever Coming that 16th. of Matthew. speaks of, it shall not hinder
his last visible coming in the Clouds at the end of the world. The Scripture
must needs be fulfilled. The Sense may be this; that Christ ascending to take
possession of his Kingdom, they shall by Faith see him exercise that his
Kingly power by his Word and Spirit.

Obj. Div. p. 49. He has tarried above sixteen hundred years.

Answ. 2. Pet. 2.3, 4. There shall come in the last days Scoffers, walking
after their own Lusts, and saying, where is the promise of his coming? For
since the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were at the
beginning of the Creation. Ver. 9, 10. The Lord is not slack. But the Day of
the Lord shall come as a Thief in the night. Matthew. 24.48. But and if that evil
Servant shall say in his heart, my Lord delayeth his coming, etc. Ver. 50, 51.
The Lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looks not for him, and
shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with Hypocrites.

Obj. 2. If they should say as some of these words [ Ye do show forth the Lords
death till he come] are either to be understood of Christ's coming after his
Resurrection, or of his coming in his Kingdom, which his Disciples saw before
their death; or of his spiritual coming; but by no means of his last coming.

Answ. 1. Why by no means of his last coming? what convincing Argument is there
for it?

2. It cannot be understood of either of those mentioned, and therefore it must
of his last.

1. Not of his coming after his Resurrection; for if it were to cease then, the
Apostle would not after that have enjoined it upon the Corinthians. 2. Not of
his coming in his Kingdom, which the Apostles saw, for the same reason. Because
this coming was eminently seen, when Acts 2, The Disciples were filled with the
Holy Ghost, and spoke with other Tongues; Christ shedding this forth upon them;
and Peter so preached, that about three thousand Souls were added to the
Church, 3. Not of his spiritual Coming. 1. This would imply, That Christ
appointed this Ordinance for the Unconverted, to whom he has not thus
spiritually come: whereas these men will neither yield that converted or
unconverted should partake.
2. The Apostles were already converted, unto whom Christ did administer it:
and so were the Corinthians, that did partake of it, and unto whom the Apostle
by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, enjoined it. They came behind in no Gift.
They were enriched in all knowledge; therefore they knew the spiritual presence
of Christ with them. Christ's spiritual Coming therefore puts not an end to this
Ordinance. Therefore it must needs be that only his second coming in the flesh,
or his last coming at the end of the world, that shall put an end to this
Ordinance. If they will cavil at Christ's appearing in the Flesh, let them know
that Christ will change our vile Bodies, and make them like his glorious Body:
And yet, says Job, In my flesh shall I see God. So that when Jobs Body is a
glorious Body, like Christ's, yet does it not cease to be flesh. No more does
Christ's.

Obj. Div. p. 50. If Christ's coming in the Spirit be not the end of the Lords
Supper, where then is the Mystery and inward Spiritual Grace signified by the
Outward Sign?

Answ. This man seems better pleased with his Conceits than Christ's Truth; and
when he cannot by Reason persuade, he would by Sophistry cheat men into a
belief of Error. Is the Contest about the Design? Is it not about the
Cessation of the Supper? He speaks not to the Point. If the Argument had been
framed thus, What is the Design of the Lords Supper, that attained, is the
Cessation of it: But Christ's Spiritual Coming is the Design. The Ma^or
Peoposition would have carried as much Truth in it as this. The Design of
Preaching is to form Christ in us: as soon as Christ is formed in a man,
therefore he must he preached unto him no more. The design of eating is to have
Hunger satisfied to be strengthened. If therefore a person has once satisfied
his hunger, and strengthened himself by eating, he must never eat more.

It being clear that the Supper is an Ordinance of the Lords own appointing,
never repealed, nay appointed to continue till Christ's coming in the end of the
world. Is it not Rebellion against the Lord, to reject it? And shall we be
found as Pharaoh, crying, Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice? When
the Lord has appointed it for our good, to further our spiritual Communion
with him, nourish, strengthen our Faith, and help us in our Obedience, shall we
reject this Love of Christ? Shall we deprive our own Souls of this Spiritual
Food? Indeed had men only appointed it, we could have no warrant to use it, no
ground to expect Gods blessing in the use of it. In vain do they worship me,
says God, teaching for Doctrines, the Commandments of men. But since it is the
Lords own Institution, there is good to be hoped for from it, Deuteronomy. 12.28. It
shall go well with thee and with thy Children after thee for ever, when thou
do that which is good and right in the sight of the Lord thy God. This
Ordinance is such a thing. What though it be a Sign, a Shadow? If God sets us a
Shadow, a Brazen Serpent, it shall not be in vain to look up unto it. What if
it were true, that we were perfect? Yet if the Lord will appoint Adam, even in
Innocence, the use of a Sign, the Tree of Life, he has reason to rejoice in
it. And truly by instituted Worship, in a singular manner does God try our Love
or Hatred of him; as we may see in the Second Commandment: He will show Mercy
to thousands of them that love him; punish the iniquity of Parents upon their
Children unto the third and fourth Generation of them that hate him. God
reckons those that are Conscientious Upholders of instituted Worship, Lovers of
him. To conclude therefore; Let us examine our selves, and so let us eat: for
if we would judge our selves, we shall not be judged of the Lord.

Whether we are Justified by the Righteousness of Christ Imputed?
THis is a Point of great moment. A man may err in many other things, and yet
be saved, as by fire; but an Error in the substance of this is certain
Damnation: All therefore had need be well informed about it.

By the Righteousness of Christ, understand, his Active and Passive Obedience,
or his fulfilling the Law in his own person, when on Earth, and his suffering
to the death, according to the will of his Father. By the Imputation of it,
understand, Gods making it over to us upon believing; his giving, granting,
vouchsafing it to us, reckoning or accounting it ours.

As for the word [Justifie] the Scripture sometimes, but very rarely, uses it
to signify, to make just by inherent Holiness, or to sanctify, Tit. 3.5, 7.
He saved us by the washing of Regeneration, that being justified, etc. It is
used in contradistinction to Sanctification, 1 Cor. 6.11. But ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified, etc. And thus mostly: We are therefore to
take it in this latter sense; In which it has two significations, all
belonging to the same thing. It signifies, to declare Just, Luke 7.35. Wisdom
is justified of her Children. Psalm. 51.4. That thou may be justified when
thou speak. To Absolve, Acquit or Discharge, Romans 8.33. It is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? Prove. 17.15. He that justifies the wicked, and
he that condemns the ust, are both abomination to the Lord. Here it cannot
signify to make just; for this would be no abomination to the Lord.

As to the thing signified. 1. Justification implies an Accusation, true or
false. When a Father commends his Child charged with no crime, this is not
Justification, but Praise. The Devil may bring false accusations against us.
Had man continued in the State of Innocence, no true Accusations could have
been brought against him. But now Moses, or the Law of God is the true Accuser
of every one of us, John 5.45. There is one that accuses you, even Moses in
whom ye trust. The Law says, Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things written in the Book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3.10. The true
Accusation or Charge that it brings, and at the Day of Judgment will bring
against us, is this: Thou have broken the Law; for thou have not from the
beginning of thy life to the end thereof done every thing required in it. The
Law will thus charge us; for it is not abrogated or made null: If it were, no
wicked man could be condemned by it. But our Savior tells us, Luke 16.17. It
is easier for Heaven and Earth to pass, than one tittle of the Law to fail. And
we are assured, Romans 2.12. He that has sinned in the Law, shall be judged by
the Law.

2. Justification does necessarily suppose an Apology or a Defense made by or
for the Party accused. For if there be nothing pleaded on his hehalf, the Judge
may not justify, but must condemn him. This Defense is but two ways to be
made; either proving the Accusation false; So Wisdom is justified of her
Children. This world censures the Wisdom of God foolishness, but her Children
honor her. And so would a good Angel be justified, if accused; the Accusation
would be proved false, and that he never from the first moment of his Creation,
once sinned against God: thus he is capable of being justified by inherent
holiness. Or if the truth of the Charge cannot be denied, Justice demanding:
What have thou to say for thy self, why thou should not be condemned? the
only defense is by pleading, Though I am guilty, yet satisfaction has been
made for that guilt. Because therefore the same fault cannot be twice punished
after satisfaction, it is as if it never were. This is the only way of Defense
we have at Gods Tribunal. We cannot plead, we never broke the Law; for we have
all sinned, and come short of the Glory of God; But we must plead Satisfaction
made to the Law and Justice of God, for our guilt, by our Surety the Lord Jesus
Christ, and evidence our right to the benefit of this Satisfaction, by our
Faith in his Blood, even such a Faith as has wrought by Love.

3. Justification does formally denote a Declaration that the Party accused is
Just or Innocent, and an Acquittance of him by the Sentence of the Judge. But
this Acquittance, as to us fallen Creatures, is a proper Absolution or Pardon.
Had Adam in Innocence been accused, his Justification had been a Declaration of
him Innocent in his own person, and an Acquittance of him from all penalty of
the Law, as not deserved. Our Justification is a Declaration of us (who have
been guilty in our own persons) just, or innocent, through the Satisfaction or
Righteousness of Christ our Surety, made over and reckoned to us, through Gods
free Grace, upon our delieving; and an acquitting of us from all penalty of the
Law, though deserved, which is properly Absolution or Pardon. So that though
Adam in Innocence, or a good Angel, could be justified without a Pardon, yet
it is impossible we should be justified any other way, but by being pardoned. To
sum up our Doctrine: If the Question be, What is it to be justified? The Answer
is, to be declared just, and to be absolved. If the Question be, Who is it that
does justify or pronounce us just, and absolve us? The Apostle answers it,
Romans 8. It is God that justifies. If the Question be, We are guilty in our own
persons; for what is it that God does justify us? The Answer is, for the
Satisfaction or Righteousness of Christ. Romans 5.18. By the Righteousness of
one, the free gift came upon all men to Justification and Life. If the Question
be, What is it that gives us interest in Christ's Righteousness, or upon which
it is imputed or reckoned to us? The Answer is, Our Faith, Romans 10.10. With the
heart man believes unto Righteousness. If the Question be, What will evidence
our Faith to be living and sound Faith? The Answer is, Our sincere Obedience to
the Law, Jam. 2.24. You see then how that by works a man is justified, and not
by Faith only. We are justified by works, as evidencing our Faith living; by
Faith, as giving Interest in Christ's Righteousness; by Christ's Righteousness
imputed to us, as constituting us righteous, and satisfying for our Guilt; for
the sake of which, God does impute us righteous, and absolve us. This is the
Doctrine we teach.

G. W. on the contrary teaches, that Justification is by Faith in Christ, and
by the Works that follow Faith, without Christ's Righteousness imputed. In this
we agree, there must be a working Faith, or no Justification. And we must
believe in Christ for Sanctification. In this we differ, whereas according to
the Law of God, this Charge is, and will be brought against us; You have not
from the beginning of your Life to the end perfectly obeyed the Law: It is
therefore demanded, what have you to say, why you should not bear the Curse? He
says, Faith in Christ, and the Works that follow, without any mention of
Christ's holy Life and Sufferings, is our sufficient defense against this
Charge; is, that which constitutes us righteous before God as the Law requires;
and for which consequently God does declare us righteous, and acquit us in
Judgment. We say, that Christ's holy Life and Sufferings is our only Defense or
Apology against this Charge, the only thing that can constitute us righteous
according to what the Law requires; the only thing for which God does declare
us righteous in Law, and for which he absolves, and frees us from the Curse of
the Law; as being imputed, and made ours upon believing. And again, Christ's
holy Life and Sufferings, being the only thing for which God does justify us;
We say, that Faith in Christ's Blood and Righteousness, as the only thing that
can satisfy the Demands of the Law, and Justice of God, is the only justifying
Faith; and that Faith that overlooks this Object, Christ's Obedience to the
Death, as the only thing that can satisfy the Demands of the Law and Justice
of God, is but a Souldestroying Faith, whatever it be. He on the contrary
holds, that Faith in Christ for Sanctification only, is enough to bring him to
Heaven.

The Controversy thus stated; I come now to prove we are justified by Christ's
Righteousness imputed, and not without it: From which, if I make it good, the
other point clearly appears; That that Faith which carries not out the Soul to
Christ's Righteousness, to have it imputed, is but a Soul-destroying Faith.

Arg. 1. No man can be declared Righteous in a Legal sense, but who has the
Righteousness of Christ imputed to him: But every one that God does justify,
he declares righteous in a Legal sense: Therefore there is no man justified
but who has Christ's Righteousness imputed to him. The Minor is proved from
what has been already manifested. To justify, is to declare just; to declare
just in a Legal sense; because it is to discharge him from the accusation of
the Law; and in justifying, God does judge us by the Law, though by the Gospel
also. The Major will easily appear, if we consider what it is to be righteous in
a Legal sense. It is to be invested with a sinless Righteousness, from the
beginning of Life to the end thereof; for this the Law requires. It does
require perfection, not only in the end of our Lives, but in the middle also,
and in the beginning. It never allows us to sin. If at ten years of age a
person commits Murder, and then lives according to the Law of the Land in every
tittle forty years; then arraigned for this, he pleads, that after that Offense
he continued to live exactly according to the Law; the Judge cannot pronounce
him innocent, and so acquit him, because the Law did not allow him to commit
Murder any part of his Life. In regard God wants not knowledge and proof of our
Offenses, if we have had but one evil thought, or have committed but one sin
only, all our days, if he looks not on us in his Son, reckoning his sinless
Righteousness to us, how should he declare us righteous in a Legal sense? For
the Judgment of God is always according to truth, Romans 2.2. Having Christ's
Righteousness imputed, we are invested with an everlasting Righteousness; he
did not sin, nor was there any guile in his mouth; a spotless Lamb. We have
that on, which is a through conformity to the Law from the beginning of Life to
the end of Life. But this Righteousness not put on by Faith, we are not
invested with any thing for which God should declare and pronounce us righteous
in the sense of the Law; for every mouth must be stopped all the world is
become guilty before God.

Arg. 2. If we are justified or pardoned upon the imputation of Righteousness
without works, then by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness: But so we are,
Romans 4.6, 7. David describes the blessedness of the Man to whom God imputes
Righteousness without works; saying, Blessed is he whose iniquity is forgiven.
The former Proposition appears hence: because there are but two ways whereby a
Creature who has a Law given him, Do this and live, failand dye, may be
justified, either by pleading he has done this, and not failed from the
beginning of life, to the end; and so he is to be justified by his works, as
Angels are justifiable: Or if he has not such works, by pleading the
Righteousness of a Surety. It follows therefore, since we have no such works,
and yet Righteousness is imputed, it must be our Saviors; for he is our Surety.

Obj. G. W. Divin. of Christ, p. 64. says, This Righteousness is not without
the works of true living Faith, but without the works of the Law of works,
which (in the following Page) he explains to be the Ceremonial Law, requiring
Circumcision. For, says he, if it should be without the works of Faith, Paul
and James would clash.

Answ. 1. He knows we hold, that he who has Christ's Righteousness imputed,
has works of sincere Obedience also: that Faith which gives interest therein,
is a working Faith: This James contends for; and that works manifest our
Justification, because they manifest the soundness of our Faith. A person is
arrested for a Debt of one hundred pounds, which he has borrowed, and paid,
and received an Acquittance for; the Judge clears him: It might be said, he was
cleared by his Acquittance, as evidencing Payment, for which the Judge cleared
him. Thus according to James, Abraham was justified by Works, as evidencing his
Interest in Christ's Righteousness, for which God justified him.

2. He acknowledges that Righteousness is imputed without works of the Law of
works. This is all I contend for. For hence I conclude, that Righteousness
which is imputed, must needs be Christ's sinless Obedience from the beginning of
Life to the end: because God being true, who has said, [Do this and live, fail
and die] and we having all failed, there is no way for us to be justified
without the Imputation of Christ's never-failing righteousness.

3. He errs, calling the Ceremonial Law a Law of Works; in giving this, the
Lord gave a Law of Grace to his people; that which supposed them fallen, and so
unable ever by their works to attain to Righteousness, and pointed at Christ
their Remedy.

4. I suppose he looks on the works of Faith as constituting that Righteousness
which God is said to impute. But then,

1. He would make the Scripture speak thus, that God imputes works wrought by
us, without works wrought by us.

2. And if the works of Faith be our justifying Righteousness, then either the
works of Faith before we are perfect, or after only. If before, it follows,
imperfect works are justifying Righteousness, and that God will declare them
righteous or conform to his Law, who are not so; for imperfection is not
conformity to Gods Law: and that God will acquit them as innocent, who are
breakers of his Law; for imperfection is a breach of Gods Law. How can this
consist with Gods truth, who has said, Cursed is he that continues not in
all? Imperfection is no such continuance. If works of Faith only after we are
perfect, be our justifying Righteousness, according to this Doctrine, all the
people called Quakers, must look on themselves as in a state of Condemnation;
for none of them are yet perfect, end not having reached perfection, they have
not a justifying Righteousness, so are not yet justifiable; and dying in their
present state, they must all look for damnation, and to perish for ever: a most
sad and uncomfortable Doctrine.

3. But were the works of Faith perfect, yet could they not be a justifying
Righteousness, because not a perfect obedience to the Law, from the beginning
of life to the end thereof. Who dares say, Gods Law does not require this? And
if this be the thing Gods Law requires, and God says, Cursed be he that
confirm th not all the words of this Law to do them, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Show how it
consists with the vearcity of God to justify him that has not in the
beginning of Life, as well as in the end, done all the works of the Law, nor is
yet invested with the sinless everlasting Righteousness of Jesus Christ.

4. He himself excludes the works of Faith from constituting out justifying
Righteousness: For he excludes the works of the Ceremonial Law. And will he
say, that Abraham did not in Faith circumcise his Son?

5. Since it is not said, he imputes any thing we have performed, for
Righteousness: but he imputes Righteousness; and since Righteousness in point
of Justification is exact conformity to the Law of God from the beginning of
life to the end: it necessarily follows, that the Righteousness imputed is
something granted distinct from whatever has been performed by us, and that
Christ's Obedience to the Law whilst on earth, is the thing granted; for this
only can be called Righteousness in point of Justification.

Arg. 3. As we are made sinners, and condemnable by the Disobedience of Adam;
so are we made righteous and justifiable by the Obedience of Christ, Romans 5.19.
As by one man's Disobedience many were made sinners, so by the Obedience of one
shall many be made righteous. But the former is by Imputation, therefore so is
the latter.

G. W. in answer to Mr. Danson's Synopsis, p. 20. tells us, We are made Sinners
not by any imputation, but by a real participation of Adams Sin.

Answ. As if these were inconsistent; whereas, We could not be partakers of
Adams sin, were there no Imputation. Adams sin was his eating the forbidden
fruit; we are not partakers of this by our actual commission of it, it must be
therefore by Gods imputation. It cannot be said, we are partakers of Adams sin,
in that we are personal Offenders. Let the words be weighed. [By one man's
Disobedience many were made sinners,] It is not here said, By many personal
Disobediences we are made sinners (though this be true.) Adams sin of eating
the forbidden fruit, is really ours, by it are we made sinners, and this must
needs be through imputation. The 12th. verse clears it. (...) In whom we all
have sinned. Children are not excepted; and yet many of them never committed
actual Transgression. If it be said, through Adams sin we are deprived of Gods
Image; our Natures are corrupt; It is true; this confirms our Doctrine; for
this is the punishmem of the first Transgression: but how can it be that we
should be conceived in sin, brought forth unclean, and deprived of Gods Image,
and thus bear the punishment of Adams first sin (before we were ever capable of
actual Transgression) but that we sinned in Adam? God reckoned that first sin
to us as ours? God does not punish that person in whom he does not first see a
transgression. We conclude therefore, we are made sinners not only by personal
evil, but by imputation of Adams sin also. And because we are made righteous by
Christ's Obedience, as we are made sinners by Adams Disobedience, it follows,
this is by imputation also, and not by conversion only, as G. W. p. 21. would
have it.

This Text says not, We are made righteous by the Obedience of many, that it
should be understood of every man's own Conversion; but of one. As the
Disobedience Adam wrought in his own person on earth, makes us sinners; so the
Obedience Christ wrought in his own person on the earth, makes us righteous;
which must needs be by Gods imputing, reckoning, and making over to us, when
Believers,

Arg. 4. For what God frees us from the Curse of the Law, for that does God
justify us: But for Christ's Sufferings imputed does God free us from the Curse
of the Law: Therefore for Christ's sufferings imputed, does he justify us. The
Major is evident; for to be justified implies an acquittance or freedom from
the Curse of the Law. The Minor also Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from
the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us. It is for the sake of Christ
sufferings we are freed. And if it be not imputed, and so made ours and
reekoned to us as under gone for us, how should any of us reap the benefit of
it? or one more then another? And if we were not discharged from the Curse for
the sake of Christ's sufferings imputed, but for faith, and the works that
follow, without the imputation of Christ's sufferings, then Christ bore the
Curse of the Law for us in vain.

Arg. 5. What was Typified in the Ceremonial Law, is certainly accomplished.
But the imputation of Christ's sufferings was Typified in the Ceremonial Law,
Exodus 24.8. Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on the people, and said
behold, the blood of the Covenam. Heb. 9. The Holy Ghost tells us this was in
order to remission. What did this sprinkling Typisie but the imputation or
application of Christ sufferings to us? There is no pardon, no justification
without it, 1 John 1.7. Christ's blood cleanses from all sin: Yet if it be not
applied, how can it cleanse? Gods promise therefore is, Isa. 52.17. He shall
sprirkle many Nations. And Heb. 12.24. Christ's blood is called the blood of
sprinkling; Ye are come to the blood of sprinkling; because it cleanses only
as it is applied unto us.

Arg. 6. For what we are freed from condemnation, for that we are justified.
But for the death of Christ imputed or reckoned to us are we freed from
Condemnation, Romans 8.34. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died.
Therefore for Christ death imputed are we justified.

Arg. 7. From the express testimony of the Holy Ghost, Romans 5.9. Much more then
being now justified by his blood shall we be saved from wrath through him. Romans
3.24. Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in
Christ.

Arg. 8. For what God does pardon and accept us, for the same does he justify
us. For to be justified is to be pardoned, and the ground of justification is
the ground of acceptance: But we are pardoned for the sake of Christ's death
imputed, Col. 1.14. We have Redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of
our sins: Ephesians. 1.6. We have Redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of
sin. Matthew. 26.28. This is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for
many for the remission of sins. We are accepted for the sake of Christ our
surety, whose sufferings and righteousness are imputed, and so made ours. Ephesians.
1.6. We are accepted in the Beloved. 2 Cor. 5.19, 21. God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them. For
he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we may be made the
righteousness of God in him. It is evident that for the sake of what Christ
has done and suffered, we are pardoned and accepted. And indeed there is no
other way to obtain pardon, Heb. 9.22. Without sheding of blood there is no
remission. Nor to be accepted. Exodus 17.3. What man soever there be of the
house of Israel, that kills an Ox or a Lamb or a Goat, ver. 4. and brings
it not to the door of the Tabernacle, blood shall be imputed to that man; he
has shed blood, and that man shall be cut off from his people, v. 5. to the
end the Children of Israel may bring their sacrifices to the Priest. This
Typifies, that if we think to have the best services that we are enabled to
perform accepted immediately as from us, and not for the sake of Christ our
Priest presenting them to the Father for us, in the merit of that sacrifice he
offered once for all; they are so far from acceptance, that for this God will
cut us off from his people: He will as soon accept of Murder from us as such a
service. It remains therefore that Christ's obedience to the death of the Cross,
is the only righteousness for which, made ours, God does justify us.

Arg. 9. I did argue by a similitude in the second dispute for explication
sake; because they do so much detest to hear of a righteousness wrought without
us, and will be justified by no righteousness but what is wrought within them.
Thus I form my Argument. If the Righteousness we are justified by, is a
garment, a Robe, even the best Robe, then we are justified by a Righteousness
wrought without us. For our Garments are not wrought within us, but without us;
and we may well conceive that the Holy Ghost makes use of this similitude as
for other ends, so for this in point of justification, to illustrate how that
Righteousness for which we are justified, is wrought without us, even by our
Savior Christ when he was upon the earth here, obeying his Father to the
death: But the Righteousness we are justified by, is a Garment, etc. In this
Dispute I found nothing at all of solidity in my Adversary, so much as in his
Answer to this, The upright put on Zeal for a Cloak, and Rightcousness for a
Garment; (which is true of the Righteousness of Sanctification,) and is this
Righteousness wrought without them?

Answ. Hence it follows, the Holy Ghost does not always using this similitude,
intimate to us that that Righteousness which is put on, is wrought without us.
However he may sometimes. And that he does, Luke 15.22. Bring forth the best
Robe, and put it on him, I thus prove. By this Robe the Holy Ghost understands
Christ's Righteousness, even obedience unto death: For, not to speak of
increated Righteousness, even the essential and incommunicable Righteousness of
God, which never was wrought within or without, but is the Eternal Godhead:
There is a four fold Righteousness.

1. The sincere obedience of an upright man. 2. The perfect but loosable
Righteousness of the first man in Innocence. 3. The perfect but, confirmed
obedience of the blessed Angels. 4. The perfect, everlasting and infinitely
precious obedience of the Lord Jesus Christ, when he was in our Nature on the
earth, doing always those things that pleased the Father. This last must
necessarily be understood by the best Robe. For this Righteousness of Christ is
better than the first, because that was not a Continuance in all from the
beginning of Life: Then the second, because that was not a Continuance in all
to the end of Life: Then the third, because that is but the Righteousness of a
Creature; whereas this is the Righteousness of God himself. For God in our
Nature obeyed God; and this is Righteousness of infinite value and excellency,
the very best Robe. It would be horrid blasphemy for any to say, his own
Righteousness, that which he himself is enabled to perform in his own person,
is a better Robe then this Righteousness of the Son of God. Since then God
bestows Righteousness on a returning Prodigal, and styles it the best Robe, he
would have us to understand by it a Righteousness wrought without us: There
being none wrought within us so good: We are justified then by that
Righteousness of Christ which he wrought without us.
Arg. 10. Either we are justified by Christ's Righteousness imputed, and so made
ours upon believing, or we are justified by the Deeds of the Law: the Apostle
knew no Medium, nor is there any revealed. For either we must be justified by
our own personal obeying Gods Law or Will, or by our sureties obeying it for
us. Our own personal obediences to Gods will are the deeds of the Law. Whether
we obey in our own strength or Gods strength, they are the deeds of the Law;
whether we obey from Faith, or without Faith, they are the deeds of the Law:
For the Law requires what we do, otherwise it were not obedience. But how sull
is the Scripture telling us, by the Deeds of the Law shall no flesh living be
justified? The only way of justification then is by our Sureties obedience for
us, which must therefore be imputed to us, and so made ours; how otherwise
should we reap benefit by it?

Arg. 11. That for which we are justified must be of that worth as to redeen
our lost souls. But Christ's sufferings only, no Righteousness wrought by us, is
of that worth as to redeem our lost souls. Therefore for the sufferings of
Christ, and not for any Righteousness wrought by us, are we justified. This
Argument God enabled me, the first Dispute, to press with full enlargement on
the Consciences of the People to secure them from the soul-destroying error of
this man. He hints it, p. 23. And all he answers is, such away of ustification
shuts out sanctification and holiness; which is indeed no Answer, but an
Objection. To which I answer, it shuts it out from being our justifying
Righteousness: For if Sanctification and Holiness were it which redeems our
lost Soul, and for which, we are acquitted, in vain did Christ suffer for us
that we might be redeemed and acquitted thereby. But it does not shut it out
either as inconsistent, or as a needless thing, Romans 3.31. Do we make void the
Law through Faith? God forbid: Yea we establish the Law. It is so far from
being inconsistent, that they are inseparable, and the one a means to the
other: Flying out of our selves, as seeing nothing but matter of condemnation
in our selves, to Jesus Christ by Faith; and apprehending the purity and
holiness of our Saviors heart and life, the sufficiency of his sufferings to
redeem our souls from wrath; and that on his account God is ready to forgive
and receive us to favor; hereupon our hearts turn to God, we dislike our sins,
we are sweetly engaged to please God in all things. Thus God purifies our
hearts by Faith. Thus are we sanctified by Faith which is in Christ. And a
lively Faith will work by love. And though Holiness be not needful to
constitute a justifying Righteousness, yet is it needful to testify our love
to God and Christ for providing such a Righteousness for us, and to please God,
and to honor God; and that we may be a good example to our neighbor; and that
we might have a good evidence of the foundness of our Faith; and to testify
our subjection to God who requires it of us. But to return, I prove the Major.
Our souls were lost, Luke 19.10. The Son of Man is come to save that which was
lost. 2 Cor. 5.15. All were dead. Matthew. 20.28. The Son of man is come to give
his life a Ransom for many. If our souls were not lost and undone, what need
this? we were liable to the Curse, because we had not continued in all; this is
to be lost. And if we were lost, that for which we are justified must needs
have worth in it to redeem lost souls. What is not sufficient to redeem our
lost souls, cannot be sufficient to justify us. It is impossible to be
justified, and yet left in a lost condition. The Minor has two parts.

1. No Righteousness wrought by us is of worth to redeem our lost souls.
Consider the worth of our souls. The Body is more then raiment, the natural
life is more to us then all the world: Skin for Skin, and all that a man has
will he give for his Life. How precious is the soul, capable of an everlasting
fruition of God, capable of everlasting torments in hell? what can we give to
God worth our souls? Consider what it is to have our souls lost; it is to have
them obnoxious to Gods curse, which if we have it will be an everlasting
destruction from the glorious presence of God, an everlasting torment in the
flames of hell. Go ye cursed into everlasting fire. Now what can we give to God
proportionable to so great a loss, to so great sufferings? Sanctification and
Holiness, or a little faith and the works that follow: This is likely to do.
There is no real Sanctification, no real Holiness, till by Faith a person flies
out of himself to Christ for redemption. But if it were otherwise, could this
redeem our lost souls? At Dice a man loses an estate of Ten thousand a year:
he to whom it is lost gives the Looser a Cottage; the Looser would fain give
this Cottage to have his estate again. Thus sillily thou actest who think
that thy lost soul may be redeemed with any thing of thine without the merit of
Christ's blood and sufferings. If Faith and the works that follow, if
Sanctification and Holiness without Christ's dying for thee could suffice to
redeem thy lost soul, Christ gave his Life a ransom in vain.

2. Christ's sufferings are of that worth that they are abundantly sufficient to
redee^ our lost souls. If not, I am willing mine should perish everlastingly.
But he is God blessed for ever who purchased the Church with his blood, Act.
20.28. In his sufferings then there is worth enough, worth abundantly enough to
redeem our souls for ever: Heb. 9.12. He has obtained eternal Redemption for
us. We may be as confident of it as we are that we live. Our soul is precious,
and Christ's blood is as precious, and far more precious, 1 Pet. 1.17, 18. We
are not redeemed with corruptible things; but with the precious blood of
Christ. Let us then with Paul abhor all sanctification in us, all Holiness, all
works of Faith, whatever is wrought by us; in comparison of what we spy by
faith in Christ, And let us put our whole trust in Christ's sufferings, for the
redemption and acquittance or discharge of our lost souls, from whatever
damnation they are by sin exposed unto; that is, for justification.

Arg. 12. For that only does God justify us, which does suffice to turn away
his wrath from us. But Christ's sufferings only, not any thing done or suffered
by us, is that for which God does justify us. This Argument was also pressed
the first dispute, and enlarged. And there not being one word of answer
pertinent in his book, I proceed, and prove the former Proposition. Gods wrath
has been kindled against us. A Fire, says God, Deuteronomy. 32.22. is kindled in
mine anger, and shall burn to the lowest Hell. Tophet is prepared. Adam (unto
whom God said, in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall die the death) sinned,
and kindled Gods wrath against himself and all his posterity; for we are by
Nature the Children of wrath. In our own persons likewise we have failed of
continuing in all, and hence is Gods wrath up against us; for the Law works
wrath. If Gods wrath has been stirred up against us, it cannot be that we
should be justified till his wrath be turned away. God burning in his wrath is
ready to condemn us, to take vengeance on us, to consume us as fire; not to
justify and acquit us from our ill deserts. That therefore for which we are
justified must suffice to turn away Gods wrath from us. The next Proposition
consists of two parts.

1. Nothing done or suffered by us, suffices to turn away Gods wrath, Heb.
10.5. Sacrifice and offering thou would not. Isa. 40.16. Lebanon is not
sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient for aburnt offering. ver.
15. The Nations are but as a drop of the Bucket. How can it be that we poor
nothings should be able by doing or suffering any thing, turn away the wrath of
this Great self-sufficient Sovereign offended with us? Can fallen Angels do or
suffer any thing? When we are made to suffer in our own persons, it is for
ever, for ever that we suffer, because miserable worms we never can suffer
enough, that his wrath should be turned away from us. And if burning Ten
thousand Millions of years in Hell is not enough to turn his wrath away; how
little reason is there to imagine, that a little faith, and the works that
follow, should suffice? If this were enough, then in vain did Christ say, Heb.
10.7. Lo, I come to do thy will O God. In vain was Christ our Passover
sacrificed for us; for what end did he come, for what end was he sacrificed for
us, but that he might make atonement for us, that he might make Reconciliation
for the sins of the People, that he might turn away wrath, and so the
destroying Angel might pass over us?

2. Christ's sufferings do suffice to turn away Gods wrath from us. 1 Jo. 2.1,
2. We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, And he is
the Propitiation for our sins. Heb. 13.12. But this man after he had offered
one sacrifice for sins, forever sat down on the right hand of God. Ephesians. 5.2.
Christ has loved us, and given himself for us an offering and asacrifice to
God, for a sweet smelling savor. Let us then place no confidence in
sanctification, holiness, faith, and the works that follow, as if these (saying
aside Christ's death on the Cross) could turn away Gods wrath and render God so
well pleased with us, as to discharge, acquit, justify us; but let us by true
faith repose all our trust in Jesus, who offered himself a sacrifice for us,
for justification, deliverance from wrath to come; He is the only hiding place
from the storm; the only covert from the tempest.

Arg. 13. That for which God justifies us must suffice to satisfy his justice
for our transgression. But Christ's sufferings only, nothing done or suffered by
us, can suffice to satisfy Gods justice for our transgression. Therefore
Christ's sufferings, and not any thing done or suffered by us, is that for which
God does justify us. Justice is satisfied upon transgression, when it has
duly punished it. This premised, I prove the Major. We having not continued in
all, God will not justify us without satisfaction to his justice for our sin.

1. We may judge of this by Gods dealing with fallen Angels, there being no
provision made for the satisfaction of Justice for their fall; God will never
justify them: but they are to be condemned, and bear their deserved punishment
for ever. Why should we imagine that God will justify any of us, who have
fallen as well as they, never punishing our fall, as justice does require?

2. We may conclude it from Gods Law; the contents whereof are all equal, holy,
just, and good. In the Law we may take notice of three things, each of which
are conclusive of the point in hand.

1. Gods Judgment, which is always according to truth; and he has judged
that whoever of us, in the least tittle, do break so equal, so holy, just, and
good a Law, we do deserve his Curse. If he had not thus judged, he would not
have added this sanction to his Law, and said, Cursed is he that continues not
in all. God judges this but a meet and deserved punishment. And shall we
imagine that God will not do what is meet to be done? That God should not act
according to his own Judgment? Hence I think, we may conclude God justifies
none of us without punishing our sins.

2. Gods Truth, God having said in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall die
the death, and cursed is he that continues not in all; does not his truth
engage him to execute his justice in punishing sin? should mercy offer to
pronounce any man absolved, his sin unpunished, Truth would stop the mouth of
mercy, and say, hold, I have said, Cursed is he that continues not in all, and
I cannot but be true. Hence I conclude, no offender is justified but his sin is
punished to the full.

3. Gods will and purpose; In the day thou eatest, thou shall die the death. If
it be his will and purpose to punish sin in us, he does it. Whatsoever the Lord
pleased, that did he. Then no fallen man is justified but is sin is punished,
and so justice his satisfied for that his sin.

4. We may demonstrate it from Gods not sparing his own Son, Romans 8.32. He that
spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all. What made Gods justice
lay on so? did Christ ever by sin provoke to this? will God punish where there
is no sin? This is an Ocular demonstration. The Faith of a Believer that is
justified can here see Justice punishing his transgression; and that he is not
justified without full satisfaction to Justice, God has punished then the sins
of all that are justified in Jesus Christ. And the Holy Ghost tells us, Heb.
2.10. This became God. It became him for whom are all things, and by whom are
all things, in bringing many Sons unto Glory, to make the Captain of their
Salvation perfect through sufferings. Did it not become God to act according to
his Judgment? according to his Truth? according to his Justice? having
executed his justice on some of his offending Creatures, fallen Angels; not to
let the sins of his other offending Creatures, fallen Men and Women, to go
unpunished? The point is clear, That for which God justifies us who have been
Transgressors, must be that which satisfies his Justice for our Transgressions.
The next Proposition has two parts.

1. Nothing done or suffered by us, can suffice to satisfy Gods Justice. Every
known sin is a wilful rejection of infinite Goodness, a free choice of infinite
Displeasure, a bold contempt of Infinite Majesty, presumptuous Rebellion
against infinite Sovereignty; and a disdainful making him a Liar, who is
infinitely a Lover of Truth: It therefore carries insinite demerit with it; and
nothing short of infinite punishment, or sufferings of infinite wrath can
possibly suffice to satisfy for it. But what proportion to Infinity can any
thing we do or suffer, bear? Why do men lie in Hell to all eternity, but
because they are not able to bear a Curse proportionable to the Infinity of
Gods perfections, against whom they have offended? Faith, and the Works that
follow, can this without the imputation of Christ's Sufferings, satisfy Gods
Majesty for our sin? It is Blasphemy against God, it is most damnable Idolatry
to suppose it. It is to debase God, and make him our Equal; this is Blasphemy:
It is to exalt our selves, and make our selves Gods Equal; this is Idolatry in
the highest degree. For there is none but Gods equal, and this is God himself
in our Nature, that is capable to satisfy God for sin, Zach. 13.17. Awake, O
Sword, against my Shepherd, against the man that is my fellow, says the Lord
of Hosts. If we crawling worms can satisfy Gods Justice any way for our sins,
then Christ received the Stroke of Gods Justice in vain.

2. Christ's Sufferings suffice to satisfy Gods Justice. To compremise this
Argument; If when we lay under the Sentence of Death, Christ became Surety for
us, had our sins imputed to him, died for us, God accepted his person, his
Sacrifice, and for his sake turns away his wrath from us, forgives us, frees us
from Condemnation, is reconciled to us, saves us; then Christ's Sufferings do
suffice abundantly to satisfy Gods Justice for our sins. But the Antecedent is
true, therefore the Consequent also.

1. We lay under the sentence of Death, Ephesians. 2.3. We were by nature the
Children of wrath, even as others. 2. Christ became our Surety, Heb. 7.22. By
so much was Jesus made the surety of a better Testament. 3. He died for us, 1
Cor. 15.3. Christ died for our sins according to the Scripture. 4. God accepted
of his Sacrifice, Ephesians. 5.2. He gave himself for us an Offering and a Sacrifice
to God, for a sweet smelling Savor. 5. God accepted of his Person, Heb. 8.1.
Now of the things which we have spoken, this is the sum; We have such an High
Priest who is set on the Throne of the Majesty in the Heavens. 6. For his sake
does God turn away his wrath from us, 1 John 2.2. He is the propitiation for
our sins; He saves us from the wrath to come. 7. For his sake does God forgive
us, Col. 1.14. In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, the forgiveness of
our sins. 8. For his sake does God free us from Condemnation, Romans 8.1. There
is therefore now no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. 9. For his
sake is God reconciled to us, Romans 5.10. If when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son. 1. Pet, 3, 18. Christ also has once
suffered for us, the just for the unjust to bring us to God. 10. For his sake
he saves us, Romans 5.9. Much more then being now justified by his blood, shall
we be saved from wrath through him. What can we desire more to manifest that
Gods Justice is fully satisfied for our sins by the sufferings of Christ?
Christ's Sufferings then are the hope set before us, and God has spoken with an
Oath, That by two immutable things in which it is impossible for God to lie, we
might have strong Consolation, who are fled for refuge (from the Stroke of Gods
Justice) hither. Christ's sufferings fled to by Faith, are they, for which God
will justify us. For in regard they have fully satisfied Justice for our sins,
we may be confident they will secure us from Condemnation; it being against
Justice it self to punish those sins a second time, that have been punished to
the full already, Against this Doctrine of Satisfaction, G. W. Div. of Christ,
objecteth many things. I shall briefly run them over, and reduce them to five
Conclusions.
Obj. 1. Satisfaction is not needful. Cannot God command his wrath? p. 62.
Cannot he satisfy and please himself? Man can pardon without satisfaction:
this were to render God more cruel than man, 62. Such Blasphemy is this man not
afraid to utter: The Lord convince and humble him. But I answer; Can thou
Reader, see fallen Angels tormented in hell to all eternity, because Gods
Justice is no way satisfied for their sins, and yet say, what need is there for
any satisfaction? When God judges it meet all sin should be punished, when in
his Threats he has declared his Will and Purpose for it, bound himself by his
Truth and Faithfulness; can thou yet say, what need have I of any Savior to
satisfy Justice for my sins? When God spared not his Son, will thou say, what
need these Strokes of Justice? Yet if this Doctrine be true, God is cruel in
this man's eyes. Possibly he will say too, If God does damn the Impenitent, if
he damnes the fallen angels, he is cruel; for he can command wrath. Can a King
forgive all violation of his Laws without punishing any, and reign? It would
not be his perfection, to do this, it would be his sin. Eli's not punishing his
Sons, cost him dear; and so did the like offense cost David. The Lord would
have us forgive private Injuries for his sake, who will make us satisfaction,
when the Offender cannot; as he himself is willing to forgive us for Christ's
sake, who has made him satisfaction, which we cannot, Ephesians. 4.32. Forgive one
another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. And since we have
assurance that it is the free pleasure and purpose of God, according to the
truth of his Word, and as he judges it meet to punish all sin; and that he
has punished our sin in his Son: how vain is it now to question, Cannot God
appease his own wrath? If God will not justify us without satisfaction, we are
not to look for it any other way; but rather admire and heartily embrace his
Mercy, in that for Christ's sake, he is willing to forgive us.

Obj. 2. Christ's Sufferings could not be any satisfaction to Gods Justice for
our sins: For they were Persecutors that imputed sin to him. p. 63. Nothing but
a Creature suffered. He suffered by sinners, and under the burden and weight of
their Transgressions. His tender Spirit suffered for Transgressors, foreseeing
wrath coming on them. p. 58. He suffered not eternal death, not that height of
revenge as goes against Reprobate Angels, p. 9. Not infinite Wrath, page 45.

Answ. Whatever Persecutors did, it must not be denied that God laid on him the
iniquity of us all: Nor that God made his Soul an Offering for Sin, though men
were Instruments of part of his Sufferings. Not only did he grieve foreseeing
men's misery; but he bore the killing stroke of Gods Justice, to prevent the
misery of all that believe in him. Without his Death Justice would not suffer
that we should be forgiven, Without shedding of Blood there is no Remission.
For the sake of his Death, Gods wrath is appeased toward us; he forgives,
accepts, loves, saves us. What can be more evident than that Gods Justice is
satisfied in his Death? And for that person, who is God, to suffer a Temporal
Death (though in his humane nature only) this is of infinite value; an infinite
abasement, a stroke of infinite wrath; for had not Gods wrath against sin been
infinite, he would not thus have struck a person of infinite worth and dearness
to him, interposing as Surety between him and us miserable sinners. For God in
our Nature to suffer what he did, this is more than for Men or Devils to suffer
Gods eternal wrath or revenge; this wrath more clearly shines in the Infinitude
of it, in thus smiting the Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of
his Person, than in the eternal damnation of Men and Devils in the unquenchable
Flames of Hell.

Obj. 3. It cannot be that God should punish our sins in Christ to satisfy his
Justice; God does not hate his Son, p. 52. God bears Infinite love to his Son.
His Law is, the Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father, but every man
his own sins.

Answ. That Law admits exceptions; One is this; Except one man voluntarily
becomes Surety for another; In this case, Gods Law is, Take his Garment. And he
that is Surety for a Stranger, shall surely smart for it. In regard then,
Christ voluntarily became Surety for us, in punishing him for our Sins, God
does not act contrary to this Rule. And in regard Christ could conquer his
Sufferings, and they, according to the everlasting appointment of God, were to
be a Step to his own eternal advancement, as well as the Salvation of his
chosen; it was an act of Gods Dear Love to choose him forth for this
Undertaking, though for a time he poured forth his wrath upon him for our
Iniquities, Isa. 42.1. Behold my Servant whom I uphold, mine Elect in whom my
Soul delights.

Obj. 4. Christ's death did not make satisfaction to Gods Justice for our sins.
God promises pardon upon our repentance and turning, p. 40. If satisfaction be
made, what need could there be of Christ's Intercession? p. 15. Why are not all
out of Prison, and Fetters? Why does the Debt of Obedience still remain? p. 60.
Why are those for whom Christ died, still punished? p. 61.

Answ. It is for Christ's sake that God does pardon upon repentance; there is no
pardon for fallen Angels promised upon their repentance, because Christ
satisfied not for them. But having purchased Salvation for us, at the hands of
Justice, by his Intercession he obtains the purchase at the hands of free
Grace; and so applies it to us. Christ's Death does so glorify Gods Justice in
our Salvation, as if therein he had put forth no act of Grace: Christ's
Intercession does so glorify Gods Grace in our Salvation, as if therein he had
put forth no act of Justice. This Satisfaction was designed for all them, who
through special Grace, in time believe. These all are delivered here from the
guilt and reigning power of their sins; and so are out of their Fetters; and
shall hereafter be delivered from the being of sin. It is required of them,
that they be obedient, which is but Gratitude. Being disobedient, they shall be
corrected, for their good; which is but Love and Kindness. They are to suffer
nothing from revengeful wrath; nothing in order to the satisfying of Gods
Justice; they shall never come into Condemnation.

Obj. 5. This Doctrine is man's Invention. Did Christ satisfy that man might
take liberty to sin? As if a Prince should grant an Act of Indemnity, that his
Subjects might spread Dung on his Face, p. 48.

Answ. How will mad men spurn away Gold, and cast Dirt on those that tender it
to them? Since Mankind fallen, must needs, according to the truth of Gods Laws
established, perish for ever, as well as fallen Angels, if we had had no
Mediator to expose himself to the Stroke of Gods Justice engaged and resolved
to punish our sins: Since for Christ's sufferings sake it is, that we are
pardoned, accepted, saved; all this according to the unerring Scriptures of our
most glorious God: He must shut his eyes against the Sun, who will not see that
this Doctrine of Satisfaction is according to truth: Nor does it tend to
Licentiousness: If a discovery that the least sin deserves Gods infinite wrath;
that upon commission of the least sin nothing can free us from everlasting
burnings, but the Death of Jesus Christ in our stead; that for the sake of
Christ's death God is most freely ready to forgive all our sins; if this tends
not to break the heart for sin, to turn the heart to God, to engage the heart
with everlasting indignation against what is displeasing to the Lord; what is?
Nor can this Writer nominate one of us, that encourages men to take liberty of
sinning from the consideration of Christ's satisfaction. Nay he cannot but know
that our common doctrine is, none are sharers in the benefit of this
satisfaction, but those who have such lively apprehensions of it by Faith, as
kindles love to God and Christ above their lives, and engages their hearts in
all obedience. It is true such have many faylings, but far from open petulant
derision and contempt of God; their unavoidable infirmities are their burden,
in these they can read their own deserts, even to have them as dung cast back
into their faces, and to be rejected for them; but their sin is their misery,
they loath themselves, and cease not to make their spotless Savior, who bled
for them, their refuge; and thus in him they have peace, comfort, safety,
Salvation. The Lord convince and humble slanderers, and establish his own
people in his Truth.

Concerning Election and Reprobation.
I Should not have meddled with this deep mysterious point, but that by his
additional depravation of Gods truth, he has engaged me thereunto. I shall
therefore God assisting, briefly lay down, manifest, and vindicate the truth,
so far as I see it opposed. And here, this Proposition. That God did most
freely, unchangeably, and from all eternity choose some particular persons, to
partake of saving grace and salvation by Jesus Christ, for the praise of the
glory of his grace. From whence it will necessarily follow, that he has
reprobated, or passed by others. I must manifest this by parts.

1. Gods Act, which essentially takes in the object thereof, he has chosen
some particular persons, 2 These. 2.13. God has chosen you. Jo. 15.19. I have
chosen you. Ephesians. 14. He has choseu us. This being directly denied I shall add
Arguments.

Arg. 1. Particular persons in time receive mercy, are converted, made to
persevere, are saved; therefore did God decree this before hand. For God
works according to the Counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11.

Arg. 2. God has made absolute promises of the first saving grace; Ezekiel.
36.25, 26. I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be clean. A new
heart will I give you. Chap. 11.19, 20. I will give them one heart, and I will
put a new spirit within you: I will take the stony heart out of their flesh,
and give them a heart of flesh, that they may walk in my Statutes, Jer. 31.33.
This is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel in those days,
says the Lord, I will put my Laws in their inward parts. Isa. 54.13. All thy
Children shall be taught of the Lord. These promises are but a declaration of
his purpose or Decree; and they are not made concerning all, but particular
persons, whom God has in his eye to save; otherwise every one would be made
clean, would have a new heart, a heart of flesh, Gods Law written in his heart,
would be taught of God, and so come to Christ; but experience shows the
contrary.

Arg. 3. Persons by name, are particular persons; but God has chosen persons
by name: Rev. 13.8. All that dwell on the earth shall worship the beast, whose
names are not written in the slain Lambs book of Life from the foundation of
the world. So may the words be read.

Arg. 4. All that are chosen do infallibly believe in time, and partake of
Christ's Righteousness: Act. 13.48. As many as were ordained to eternal life
believed, Romans 11.7. The Elect have obtained it: Therefore some particular
persons were Elected; for if all were Elected, all would infallibly believe,
and so partake of Christ's Righteousness.

Arg. 5. Jacob was a particular Person, and loved, before he had done any good
according to Gods purpose of Election; Romans 9.11.

Arg. 6. God knows his Elect from others, and this not only after, but also
before they are called. 2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God stands sure, having
this Seal; the Lord knows them that are his. Jo. 13.18. I know whom I have
chosen. Jo. 10.14. I am that good shepherd, and know my sheep. ver. 16. Other
sheep I have, which are not of this Fold; them also I must bring, and they
shall hear my voice. Therefore are they particular Persons. These and not
others that the Lord has chosen. Jo. 6.37. All that the Father gives me shall
come to me.

Arg. 7. This appears from the very Nature of Election, for where all are
taken, or all are left, there can be no Election.

2. The end and intendment of this Act. This, with respect to Man is, that he
might partake of saving grace. Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us that we
should be holy; That we might also partake of Salvation by Jesus Christ. 2
These. 2.13. God has chosen you to Salvation. 1 These. 5.9. God has not
appointed us to wrath, but to obtain Salvation through Jesus Christ our Lord
with respect to God, that the glory of his grace might be praised, as we have
it expressed, Ephesians. 1.6. verse 11, 12. Predestined that we should be to the
praise of his glory.

3. The Properties of his Act.

1. Most freely did God Elect those that are Elected. Romans 9.11. The Children
not being yet born, neither having done good or evil, that the purpose of God
according to Election might stand, not of works, but of him that calls; it
was said the elder should serve the younger, as it is written, Jacob have I
loved, and Esau have I hated. Though these last words were spoken when Esaus
posterity was the border of wickedness, Mal. 1. Yet, whatever G. W. says, p.
45. were they spoken to signify the free choice that God long before bad made
of Jacob and his seed; which free choice was manifested in those words of Love
concerning Jacob, the elder shall serve the younger, for they were spoken
before the Children had done good or evil: nothing had Jacob done to move God
thus to preserve him before his brother. And further the Apostle tells us this
was done that the purpose of Gods Election might stand or take place: So that
God did but Act then as he had decreed of old to do. And further yet, the
Apostle tells us, this Election is not of works, but of him that calls. No
man's good works foreseen are the things that move God to choose, but it is the
mere good pleasure of God who effectually calls and prevails on whom he will.
This is further manifest from Ver. 16. It is not of him that wills, nor of
him that runs, but of God that shows mercy. The Truth is we have naturally
no will to that which is spiritually good; how should we when we cannot know
the things of God? when holiness and faith in Christ are foolishness to us? so
Ver. 18. He has mercy on whom he will. The Apostle goes on Ver. 21. Has not
the Potter power over the Clay, of the same Lump to make one Vessel to honor,
another to dishonor? The Lump is Men and Women to be created; the making of
Vessels, is Gods creating mankind with a decree of permitting their fall; the
making of this Vessel to honor, that to dishonor, is Gods creating such a
person with a Resolution to recover him out of his fallen state by saving
grace; this resolution is most free: such a person with an intention to leave
and never recover him out of his fallen state by renewing grace. Thus God does
not make any a wicked creature as G. W. imagines we must say, p. 46. Nor does
God consume any man merely as his own workmanship; but God endures with much
long-suffering unregenerate men, and they fit themselves for destruction. This
he that is recovered will acknowledge. 2 Timothy 1.9. Not according to our works,
but according to his purpose. The reason of God saving us in time by the
washing of regeneration is not to be fetched from our works, any thing that we
have done; but from Gods purpose of old, who freely and of his good pleasure
did decree it. Ephesians. 1.5. Predestination unto the Adoption of Children by Jesus
Christ, is according to the good pleasure of his will.

2. Gods Election is unchangeable. He will certainly bring in, he will never
finally reject that soul he has taken liking to. Christ must bring in his
sheep, and he hates putting away; nor shall it be possible to deceive the
Elect. Psalm. 33.11. The Counsel of the Lord shall stand for ever, the thoughts
of his heart to all Generations. Election is that product of Gods counsel, the
determination of infinite wisdom consulting. Romans 9.11. The Purpose of God
according to Election must stand. So that here is purpose upon purpose; a
purpose to save such a soul, and a purpose not to alter that purpose, but
infallibly to bring it to pass. Men change their purposes for want of
foreknowledge; but nothing can fall out, not sin it self, causing God to alter
his purpose; he foresaw all, and can give repentance. From this Doctrine, grace
will not cause a Child to sin the more boldly, but to loath himself the more
for sin. As in other things, the Lord purposes, and none disanulleth it, Isa.
14.27. So in this Psa. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he, in
heaven, and in earth and in the Sea, and all deep places.

3. From all Eternity did God Elect. In time does God convert, and cause to
persevere; but Acts 15.18. Known unto God are all his works from the foundation
of the world. Ephesians. 1.4. According as God has chosen us in him before the
foundation of the world. 2 These. 2.13. From the beginning has God chosen you.
Rev. 17.8. Whose Names were not written in the book of Life from the foundation
of the World.

Obj. p. 41. This puffs up.

Answ. It works self-abasing admiration of Sovereign grace, it gives great
rest, and engages the heart of a sincere believer to an utter detestation of
all sin.

Obj. If the everlasting state of persons is thus secured, all Warnings are
impertinent and vain.

Answ. No, God that decrees their salvation, decrees by such warnings to work
in them his fear, and a holy caution to keep in his ways that they may be
saved. From this Doctrine of Election, thus manifested, thus vindicated by most
evident consequence, appears the Truth of the Doctrine of Reprobation. viz.
That God has rejected or refused others from all Eternity, or Decreed never to
convert them by bestowing saving grace on them; but for sin to damn them, for
the praise of the glory of his Justice. For if God has chosen some, who can
deny that he has refused others? And the Scripture, if we will believe it,
will make it manifest in all the parts of it.

1. That God has refused some particular persons. Jo. 10.26. You are not my
sheep. Romans 11.7. The rest were blinded. Romans 9.18. Whom he will he hardens.
Peter deserved hardening as well as Judas; that God hardens Judas, not Peter,
proceeds from the mere pleasure of his Will. He makes, as the great Potter,
what Vessel he pleases to dishonor; that is, God makes him with an intention
to suffer his fall, and never recover him by renewing grace.

2. That God has from Eternity thus refused them. Jude 4. There are certain
men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this Condemnation.
Rev. 17.8. Whose Names were not written in the book of Life from the foundation
of the World. Add this Argument. As there are Particular Angels whom God
suffered to fall, though he could as easily have preserved them from it as he
did the rest: so there are Particular Men and Women whom God never recovers by
saving grace out of their fallen condition, though he could as easily have
recovered them as others, if he had pleased; but he endures them with much long
suffering to fit themselves for destruction: Therefore from all Eternity did
God decree thus to do concerning them in particular, for known to God are all
his works from the foundation of the world.

3. That God has decreed to damn these persons for sin. Prove. 16.4. The Lord
has made all things for himself, yea even the wicked for the day of evil. He
damneth particular persons for sin; therefore of old did he decree to damn
those particular men for sin, 2 Pet. 2.12. As Beasts, made to be taken and
destroyed

4. That all this is for the praise of the glory of his Justice. Romans 9.22.
What if God, willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, endured
with much Long-suffering, Vessels of wrath fitted to destruction? And though
God has no pleasure in the death of him that dies, considered barely as his
Creature; for he is willing to receive to mercy every returning Sinner; yet if
a person perseveres in wickedness, as such, God will laugh at his Calamity, and
mock when his fear comes.

This Doctrine of Reprobation being the Truth of God according to Scripture,
from it I draw these Consectaries.

1. That it cannot be inconsistent with his Prohibitions, p. 42. Eat not. His
Conditional Promises, If thou do well, shall not thou be accepted? If you
seek the Lord, be will be found of you. Whosoever believes shall not perish;
shall not abide in darkness. His Conditional Threats. If thy heart turn away,
thou shall perish. If you forsake him, he will forsake you. His sending his Son
into the world not to condemn the world. His giving his Spirit to instruct them
in these things. His setting Life and Death before them in the Promises, and in
the Threats. Or his giving men up to their Lusts for sin. For there can be no
Repugnancy in Gods actions between themselves. On the contrary, all these are
subservient to the Sovereign Design of Gods Decrees: the magnifying his Mercy
and Grace in the salvation of all the Elect, who enabled by his special Grace,
to believe and obey, are saved, according to the Promises: the magnifying his
Justice, or making known his wrath in the Reprobates, who, according to the
Sovereign Dominion of God, left to themselves, reject Christ, and increase in
their Rebellion against God, and so are justly given up and damned, according
to the Threats.

2. That God is neither partial nor cruel in decreeing to deny saving Grace to
some, whilst he decrees to give it to others; that he is not the Author of sin,
in decreeing to permit, or in fore-ordaining it, p. 41, 42. For what God does,
can neither be partiality, nor cruelty, nor unholiness. Is he partial that
gives his Alms where he pleases? Is he cruel, that never denies any due
Compassion? Who can prove, that converting, confirming Grace is a due Debt to
every fallen man and woman? Who has first given to him? Or is the Judge cruel,
that hangs up a Murderer? God does actually damn none, but the finally
impenitent, Acts 2.23. Christ, being delivered by the determinate Counsel and
Foreknowledge of God, you have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and
slain. Chap. 4.27, 28. Against thy Holy Child Jesus, Herod, and Pontius Pilate,
with the Governors and People of Israel, were gathered together, to do
whatsoever thy Hand and thy Counsel determined before to be done. Is God the
Author of Sin in determining or fore-ordaining the wicked actions of these men?
It is one thing to decree the permission of sin, or to fore-ordain it; another
thing to commit it. Between Gods fore-ordaining the sin, and the actual
commission of it, came in the Will and Wicked Hands of men. This Will, and
these wicked hands were the Author and Cause of sin, and not Gods
Fore-ordination.

3. That it does not become us to have the least Risings of heart against it,
and say, as p. 41. If any are reprobated, they cannot avoid Hell and Damnation
whatever they do. Or as p. 45. Then the blame of man's Damnation is to be laid
on God. This is the same with that, Romans 9.19. For why does he yet find fault,
who has resisted his Will? What the Apostle speaks in the following Verses,
must quiet us, Nay, but O man, who art thou that reply against God? Shall
the thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Has
not the Potter power over the Clay, of the same Lump to make one Vessel to
Honor, another to Dishonor?

4. That it tends not to drive any to a sinful Despair, p. 41. It is indeed a
dreadful Doctrine, and to be trembled at; yet does it leave room for comfort.
It tends to make an impenitent man that loves his sin, to despair of Salvation,
whilst such; but this is a good Despair. But it tends not to make any that have
not sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost, how vile soever they be, absolutely
to despair. Had the Lord passed by all, there had been no hopes for any, Romans
9.29. Except the Lord had left us a Seed, we had been as Sodon, and been made
like unto Gomorrah. But though all fallen Angels are, all fallen men and women
are not reprobated. This is some comfort, and it importunately urges all, in
compassion to their own immortal Souls, to turn from sin to God in Christ, and
to seek after good Scripture-Evidences of their Election. I shall lay down two
or three.

1. Have thou ever had a heart to choose Christ? Joh. 16.16. You have not chosen
me, but I have chosen you. He that can assure his own Soul, that he has chosen
Christ for his Savior, for his Teacher, for his Governor, for his Portion,
with his very heart and dearest affections, may be confident he is a chosen
Vessel of Mercy.

2. Have thou an heart to believe in Christ for Salvation? John 10.26. You
believe not, because you are not my sheep. He that can be assured that seeing
himself lost in himself, and renouncing all trust in his own performances,
places all his confidence in the Obedience and Death of Christ, for Pardon,
Acceptance, shelter from wrath, and the salvation of his Soul, as Paul, who
knew whom he had believed, and was persuaded that he was able to keep what he
had committed to him against that day; this person has no ground to fear
Reprobation. Those that are not the sheep, do never thus believe.

3. Has God given thee power over thy Corruptions in some good measure? a
heart to pray sincerely? and a holy Conversation, so that thou live not like
the generality of thy Neighbors? 1 Pet. 2.9. Ye are a chosen Generation, a
Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People. Because ye are chosen and
dear to God, therefore does Grace reign over sin in you; therefore have you
hearts to seek God uprightly. Therefore are you lovers of Holiness, and your
Conversation differs from other men.

4. Is your heart spiritually tender? Romans 11.7. The Election has obtained it,
and the rest were hardened. Romans 9.14. He has mercy on whom he will, and whom
he will he hardneth. You are not a Despiser of Mercy, a Neglecter of Salvation,
a presumptuous person, giving your self up to known sinful Practices; but had
rather lose your life than miss of Christ; do grieve for what hardness you
find; do fear God; and would in nothing offend him. Are these things to be
found in Reprobates? Let Gods Word give your heart security that you are not
Reprobates. Yea, if heretofore you did in truth experience these things, but
you are now afraid you have lost all; for you have greatly fallen, as did
David; you are sorely scourged, as was Job; your Faith is even giving up the
Ghost, with the Disciples, We thought it had been he: yet are not you fallen
from Grace, God has not forsaken you, Psalm. 89.30. If his Children forsake my
Law, and walk not in my Judgments, I will visit their Transgressions with a
Rod; nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor
suffer my righteousness to fail. Nor have you totally forsaken your God. Peter,
I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not. Nor ever shall you totally
forsake him; for the foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal to it, the
Lord knows them that are his. There is a Recovery for you, who have seemingly
lost your Faith. Thomas, reach hither thy singer, and behold my hands; and
reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side; and be not faithless, but
believing. And you shall yet find more strength against the Devil and your own
Corruptions; more wariness, love to God than ever, Romans 8.28. All things work
together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according
to his purpose. Therefore still hope you in God, still trust in your faithful
Advocate. Seek the Lord and his strength; seek his face evermore. Never cast
him off, that will not break a bruised Reed. Strive to be more and more holy in
all manner of conversation. Faint not, nor be dismayed; the Lord is your God
for ever and ever; he will be your Guide unto death: He will not forsake his
People; because it has pleased the Lord to make you his People.

I have now, through Gods help, finished this Work; and do hope, that through
these poor Labors of mine, God will give some that are mistaken, others that
are staggering, to discern the dangerous Errors of these People, and avoid
them. And surely, if Persons whose hearts the Lord has framed, with all
readiness of mind, to embrace Truth, and only Truth; if Persons to whom Truth
is precious, because proceeding from God, and leading to him again; if these do
but see that where there is no Election among fallen Creatures, there is no
Salvation; which is plainly visible in the fallen Angels; they will readily and
gladly, and thankfully embrace the Doctrine of Election. If these were but
persuaded that they are cursed who ever diminish from Gods Word; they will be
afraid to reject Christ's Ordinances of the Supper and of Baptism by Water. If
these heartily believe, (and they will) that Christ did not die in vain: Oh,
they will be torn Limb from Limb, rather than part with that most precious,
soul-saving Doctrine of the Imputation of Christ Death and Sufferings, to lost
Sinners for Justification. If these do but yield, Salvation is not now
attainable by the Covenant of Works; that this Law is now weak through the
flesh, that it cannot give Life: How will they at once let go all hope of
attaining perfection in themselves here, and desirously seek to have Christ's
Righteousness imputed to them, that they may be found in him; blessing,
praising and admiring God, that he was graciously pleased to provide it for
undone Sinners, and invite them to it. If these persons do but seriously
consider that Adam fallen, notwithstanding all the Light he brought with him
into the world, was not able to attain to the knowledge of Christ, till God
revealed him. They will surely conclude, the bare Light every man brings with
him into the world, cannot be saving. And if these persons do but believe
verily, the Lord does bestow on his Church and People a safer and better Rule
to walk by, than he bestows on the Heathen that know not God; they will embrace
the Scripture for their Rule, and not prefer the Light that is in every man, as
a safer and better Rule. These are the Truths I contend for; and these, I doubt
not, will be precious in the eyes of those whom God loves to the end of the
World.

FINIS.

