A SERMON Preached at the Assizes in St. Mary's Church in Leicester At the
Request of George Ashby Esquire; High Sheriff of the said County.

By Thomas Sawbridge Vicar of Harstone, July the 25th. 1689.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for Francis Ward, Bookseller in Leicester, and are to
be Sold by R. Tailor in London. 1689.

A SERMON Preached at the Assizes in St. Mary's Church in Leicester, etc.
Isaiah the 1.26. And I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy
Counselors as at the beginning: afterward thou shall be called the City of
Righteousness, the faithful City.


WHat was but here promised to the Jews, is, thanks to the Divine Providence
and the Care of our Gracious King and Queen (as we hope) in a great measure
granted to us of this Age and Nation, and of this Scripture may I use the words
of our Savior, concerning another Part of this Prophesy; this day is this
Scripture fulfilled, and that not only in our Ears, but to our Eyes, we at this
time beholding the happy Instruments of our Reformation, restoring to us our
just Laws and Liberties, even such Judges as were at the first, as well as such
Counselors as were at the beginning; and therefore have good ground to hope
our City shall become Righteous and a Faithful City; that we shall be a Nation
beloved of God, and protected by him, and that in return thereto we act and
live as those who prize these Mercies, and live up to those great ends for
which God has done such great things for us already, whereof we rejoice, and
not the least, for this of the Text, that we have our Judges as at the first,
and Counselors as at the beginning; From which words, to adapt my Discourse to
the Time and Persons present, I shall consider.

1. A Truth implied; That the welfare and happiness of a Nation, and
particularly of this, greatly depends upon the having good Judges and wise
Counselors. 2. I shall consider what is meant by Judges as at the first, and
Counselors as at the beginning.
1. That the Prosperity of a Nation very much depends upon its having good
Judges and good Counselors. As to the last I shall not discourse at this time,
only this, that since the Wise man tells us, In the multitude of Counselors
there is safty, and where there is no Counsel the People fall, that without
Counsel Purposes are disappointed, and that no great thing is to be taken in
hand but with good advice. It Is a happiness to a People where their Prince
makes choice of, and is advised by, wise Counselors, since for want thereof
things are not seldom carried on at a strange rate, and meet with a Fate
answerable to such rash and unadvised Undertakings. And did I think it
convenient, I want not matter to enlarge on this Point as to this Nation; but
it is needless, since for the want of such Counselors, or rather having lived
under such a one as the Wiseman mentions, Whose way is right in his own Eyes,
has not hearkened unto Counsels, we are sufficiently convinced of this Truth.
And so I pass on to the other Part of the Proposition, Judges as at the first;
and that first in general, good Judges do highly promote the Interest of a
Nation.

1. From the Justice of Divine Providence; when Justice is acted, and Judges
act justly, when neither Bribery, nor Injustice, Oppression, nor perverting of
Judgment are in a Nation, God has promised, yea granted, Security to such a
People, and this I might make evident in that all Gods promises are
conditional, and that as to National Concerns and Public Blessings, we can have
no assurance of the enjoyments of Prosperity, but by the living up to the Rules
of our Profession, and that it is righteousness that exalts a Nation; That
justice and righteous Judgment are commanded and commended in Scripture, I hope
none will deny, and in this Sense our Case is like that of the Jews in the days
of Samuel, If we shall still do wickedly, we shall be consumed both we and our
King, and particularly in the case of doing Justice and executing just
Judgment, the Scriptures are plain, since this has stopped and removed
Judgments; and the want thereof caused God to deal severely with his People: Of
many such places, I shall beg leave to remind you of some few, Deuteronomy. 16.18.
Judges and Officers shall thou make thee, in all thy Gates, and they shall
Judge the People with just Judgment; Thou shall not wrest Judgment, thou shall
not respect Persons, neither take a Gift, -- that which is altogether just
shall thou follow, that thou may live and inherit the Land which the Lord
thy God gives thee. No security of a Nations Prosperity like the due and
impartial executing of Judgment and Justice; Justice which at once adorns and
upholds the State, Justice that Establishes the Throne and exalts a Nation,
Justice that Bond and Ligament of Society, which holds the Building all
together. So that there is no surer Symptoms of a decaying State then the want
of due Administration of Justice, and when good Judges are turned out, we may
say as Elisha said of Elijah; Ah the Horses and Chariots of Israel, yea as if
the Ark it self was gone, the Glory of Israel is departed, hence the Prophets
termed such Times evil Times, and such Crimes Crimes of a high and provoking
Nature, Amos 5.12, 13. For I know your manifold Transgressions, and your mighty
Sins; they afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside the poor in
the gate from their right. Therefore the prudent shall keep silence in that
time, for it is an evil time. Alas! Alas! What can that Nation expect, where
such Judges are? or what can they do to avert those Judgments they feel or
fear? or have any hopes of being happy, unless they follow the advice before
subjoined, even hate the evil, and love the good, and establish Judgment in the
Gate: and then it may be that the Lord God of Hosts will be gracious with the
Remnant of Joseph, in vain we boast and think our selves secure as living under
a Happy and Easy Government, protected by good and wholesome Laws, and above
all, having Gods true Religion professed and maintained amongst us, since all
this signifies nothing, unless as the Prophet advises, v. 24. We let Judgment
run down as waters and Righteousness as a mighty stream. The due and impartial
Administration of Justice is that which has removed Judgments, and when
Phineas executed Judgment, the Plague was stayed: this can only secure to a
Nation the Providence of God, without which our Riches, our Strength, our
Wisdom, our Forces at Sea, or at Land, will stand us in no stead; if God be on
our side we need not fear what Man can do against us; nor can we take any
better course to have God on our side, than by taking heed to do Justice: then,
and not till then will God pour out his Blessings upon us, Jer. 7.5. If you
thoroughly execute Judgment between a Man and his Neighbor: If ye oppress not
the Stranger, and the Widow, and shed not innocent Blood in this place, then
will I cause you to dwell in this place in the Land I gave to your Fathers for
ever and ever, the same is repeated, Cap. 22. with this promise, v. 4. For if
ye do this thing indeed; then shall there enter in by the Gates, Kings sitting
upon the Throne of David, riding in Chariots and on Horses, he and his
Servants, and his People, but if ye will not hear these words I swear by my
self says the Lord, that this House shall become a Desolation; To name no
more, this is the last Remedy, this is the only way to stop or retard an
impending Judgment, Jer. 5.1. Run ye to and fro through the Streets of
Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye
can find a Man, if there be any that executes Judgment, that seeks the
Truth, and I will pardon it. And that de facto, this is true, is observable of
all Ages and People. God ever rewarding that Nation with Prosperity, which was
careful to observe public Justice, as was eminent in the Government of the
Romans, who as St. Austin observes were recompensed to their keeping Faith and
doing Justice, and to the Jews God himself appears, as to the Truth of the
Proposition; viz. That the due Execution of Justice very much tends to the good
and welfare of a People, Jer. 22.15. Did not thy Father eat and drink, and do
Judgment and Justice, and then it was well with him? He judged the Cause of the
Poor and Needy, then it was well with him: So much good, or so much evil, do
good and evil Judges bring upon a Nation.

2. It Is evident that good Judges do promote the Interest of a Nation from the
End, Office and Authority of Judges. The End and Office of a Judge is to
preserve Public Peace, to see that no Man suffer Injury; that every one enjoy
his own; they are for the praise of them that do well and the punishment of
them that do ill; now if the Judges be corrupt or negligent in their Places,
Virtue will be discouraged, and Vice grow insolent, and the Manners of Men grow
dissolute and licentious, and the whole Nation in a short time be disordered
and come to Desolation. For where the Magistrate fails in his Duty, and is
corrupt, Great Men will soon presume of Impunity, and mean Ones by their
Example will be trampling upon Authority, and then a Nations Case is like that
of the Jewish Anarchy, every one will do what is right in his own Eyes. Judges
and Magistrates, as well as the Supreme Powers, are ordained not for their own
sake, but for the Peoples Safety, that they may have those to whom they may
always resort, and upon whose determinations they may depend in all their
Difficulties and Necessities, and to this end, and for this very purpose, has
God granted the Power and Authority, and for this Cause we reverence them,
yield them Honor, and pay them Tribute, because they are Gods Ministers for
our good; and are continually attending on this very same thing, hence have
they those Appellations of Fathers, intimating that all good Magistrates should
have a Fatherly Care over, and bear a Fatherly Affection unto, those, that are
under them, they are also termed Shepherds both in profane and sacred Writ,
and ought to feed and defend their Flocks, and do that to the State which David
did to his flock, not suffer the Lion or Bear to take or hurt one poor Lamb
amongst them. Indeed this is a Duty we all owe to our Neighbor, but Judges and
Magistrates are more especially obliged to use the utmost of their Power, to
let no opportunity slip, of helping those to right that suffer wrong, to stand
by their poor Neighbor, who by Great, Rich or Covetous Men are oppressed, to
protect them from Injuries, and to deliver them out of the hands of such, as
are too Mighty, or too Crafty for them, endeavoring by force or fraud, to
deprive them of their Lives or Livelihoods, even such good Judges shall judge
the People according to Right, and defend the Poor, they shall keep the simple
Folk by their right, defend the Children of the poor, and break in pieces the
Oppressor: In a word, the Magistrate is placed on high, on purpose to take
notice of the Actions and Demeanors of others, and to censure them; and nothing
less then a sincere and constant Adminstration of Justice will add weight to
their Words, win Awe and Esteem to their Persons, preserve the Authority of
their Places, put Life and Activity into their Spirits, and enable them
cheerfully to do the Work of their Calling, and thereby render the Prince and
People Happy, there being (for want of Justice) no complaining in the Streets.

And 3dly, This is evident from the contrary, nothing tending so much to the
Ruin of a Nation, as corrupt Judges, who soon loose that Authority and Esteem
which is due to their Places; for can those Magistrates Condemn Injustice in
others, of which they are so notoriously Guilty themselves, and when the
Magistracy is contemned, the Prince by whose Authority they act, is not much
valued, and the Government is unhinged, stands loose and tottering, and ready
to be dissolved upon every Discontent. You know the Elders of Israel, thirsty
after a Change of Government, but durst never attempt it till the Sons of
Samuel by turning aside after Lucre, by taking Bribes, and perverting Judgment,
gave them too fair an Opportunity to move it; and I could easily show what
Evils have ensued upon the like occasions in other Nations; To conclude in
general, the Benefits of good Judges are such and so many that no Nations can
be happy without them. These are they which repress all Disorders, protect the
Innocent, keep Peace, uphold the Kings Throne, and turn away Gods Judgments
from a Nation, and now what is said of good Judges in general, is eminently
true of this Nation in particular, as may appear, from the Nature of our
Government, and the Laws we are to be governed by; We of this Nation are under
such a happy Constitution, that whatever is bad in all Governments is excluded
this of ours, and what is good is included in it. For tho we are governed by
One, yet it is by Laws made Authoritate Parliamenti, the Legislative Power being
in the King, Lords and Commons. And the Essentials of this Government are these
two, That no Law can be made or repealed, or totally dispensed with, but by
this Power, and That the Kings govern according to the Laws they have made; and
therefore as we swear Allegiance to the Prince according to Law, so the Prince
also ties himself by Oath to govern us by Law; now if the Judges act according
to Law, as by Oath they are bound, no Subject can be much injured; and in this
Sense, I humbly conceive, is to be understood that Maxim in our Common Law,
that the King can do no Wrong; since the Law being his public Will, the
Magistrate is to act by that, tho the Prince at some time should command him to
act otherwise: I hope I need not prove that the Happiness of this Nation
consists in the Kings just Government, and the People's due subjection; when
there is no Misunderstandings between the Prince and the People, but each
concur to make the Commonwealth Happy; now this in a great measure depends upon
Judges, who not only assist at the Making and Penning of all Laws, but are to
hear and determine Controversies between the Prince and his Liege People; for
tho it be our Duty to press home Obedience to lawful Authority, it is the Judges
who are to tell us, what Obedience is due, and they properly, and not Divines,
are to determine Points of this nature; it is not for Divines (says the Learned
Sanderson) to meddle in these Matters, whereof they are not competent Judges,
nor do they come within the compass of their Sphere, they ought to be left to
the cognizance and determination of Statesmen and Lawyers, who best understand
the Constitution of the Government, and the Force and Effect of the Laws of
their respective Countries, and are therefore presumed, to be the best able to
judge the one (by Constitution) in whom the Sovereignity resideth, and the
other (by Law) how the Sovereignity is bounded and limited in the Exercise
thereof. It Is sufficiently known the Monarchy of this Nation is limited, and
what the Sovereign has, he has by Law; and the same Law which grants the King
his Legal Prerogative, does also as firmly secure to the People their just
Liberties and Properties; and there is none here but knows there are sundry
Cases, in which the Subject (in maintenance of his right and property) may go
to Trial with the King, bring his Action and have Judgment against him in his
own Court; and the Judges in such Cases are bound by their Oaths and Duties to
right the Party according to Law, against the King, as well as against his
meanest Subject: Now if they are corrupt, and through Fear, or for Preferment,
act otherwise, we may easily conceive what mischief they may do in the Nation.

2. The Judges are Judges of Oyer and Terminer to hear all Causes, and to
determine according to the known and standing Laws of the Land: So that each
Man may have a fair Hearing, and probably a just determination of his Matters.
Besides, the Judges are Overseers, and may hinder corruption in others. And
here I cannot but take occasion to show, how our Law empowreth the Judges of
Assize to inspect all, any ways concerned, and if they are careful they may
regulate, and in a great measure prevent those Abuses, which too often are in
the Grand or Petty Jury, in the Accuser, Witness, Pleader, Attorney, and
inferior Clerks and Underofficers; since the Judge is not only bound to
pronounce Sentence according to Law, but it is his Duty to see that none of his
Subjects have Damage. The Kings Majesty, says the Lord Coke, at his Coronation,
is sworn to do Justice to all his Subjects, which in his own Person, it is
impossible to perform; and therefore his Highness is constrained by his
Ministers, Deputies, Justices and Judges, to administer Justice to his People;
unto them, and into their hands is (as it were) delivered the Kings own Oath;
see then the Dignity and Charge of Justices. and Judges of Assize. Assignavimus
vos Justiciarios nostros, we have assigned you our Justices, and you may
administer Justice unto our Subjects, then (says he) by the Kings Commission,
the Kings Oath is put into our hands; now he that does not forbid an evil, when
he may, commands it. Judges then are chiefly entrusted with the Kings Laws, and
have a superintendency over all other at the Assizes, whose duty is to see how
others do theirs, and to find out what is amiss in any, and to check and punish
all as they deserve, and surely when the Judge himself is just and impartial,
the Accuser, Witness, Jurors, Lawyers, and all other inferior Officers, if they
be not also just, will yet be afraid and not dare to act unjustly barefaced and
openly, many such things I fear, want a Reformation, and good Judges are the
Sanctuary to which every injured Person flys in distress. For Princes be they
never so good, yet cannot know their Subjects wants, they see with others Eyes,
and hear with others Ears, and are informed by others Tongues, and act by
others hands; it cannot be supposed those Constellations which attend the
Southern Pole should take notice of our Hemisphere, or intermix their
influences with those over our heads, each Agent must act within the Sphere of
its activity; then therefore the Reverend Judges, who by the benefit of the
Circuit, have advantage of viewing the whole Kingdom, and all the Corners
thereof, may see those Enormities wherewith any Part is infested, and are the
only Able and Authorized. Persons to apply their Remedies, and thereby restore
Church and State, Prince and People, yea the whole Nation to its Pristine
Health and Soundness; upon You chiefly depends the happiness of this Nation,
you who know our Laws, and have Power to put them in Execution; our Laws are
made by Authority of Parliament, for the good of the People, but it is you that
put life into them, which if not duly executed are but dead Letters, ye are the
leges Loquentes, and by the due and true Execution of our good and wholesome
Laws, you shall free this Nation from infinite Mischiefs, and secure to us all
that is near and dear to us in this World; and that it is so, I might further
show from the Evils which have happened to this Nation by corrupt Judges; but
such Judges as we had lately, the late Beneplaciti, have outdone all their
Predecessors in this Point, and we need only call to mind their unjust and
illegal Proceedings, and the Slavery they were bringing upon the Nation, and we
must needs conclude, that the happiness of this Nation depends upon our having
good and upright Judges. The Sum of what I have said is this, that good Judges
are the Pillars, that bear up the State and hinder it from Dissolution; that
it is in them to make a Nation flourish, and a People glorious, their
Righteousness exalting a Nation, and their Sin a great reproach to any People,
that by them, and their just Judgment, the Kings Throne is Established, and in
a Sense made perpetual, that it is in their Power to stop the Fury of God, and
hinder or retard a direful Judgment, you may procure a Blessing for a Curse.
More I might add, but I hope the present Judges, out of a consideration of what
they owe to God, to their Majesty's, to the whole Nation, and to their own
Consciences, will so act, hear and determine all Causes according to the Word
of God, and the known and standing Laws of the Land, allowing the King his
Legal Prerogatives, and the Subject his just Liberty and Property, and in every
Case pronounce such just and righteous Judgment, that it may seem needless to
speak to the Ear, what in our days will be so visible to the Eye, we seeing our
selves happy in that we have Judges at the first, which brings me to them, who
I hope are come to us, just Judges, viz. To show you what is meant by Judges as
at the first and in this I shall be brief, and I shall first consider Judges as
at the first, in general, and secondly in particular. 1. Judges as at the first
in general, such as God constituted at the first, and of these it is required,
that they be Men of Wisdom and Understanding, Men that fear God and hate
Covetousness, Men of Integrity and Courage, Lovers of Truth, having no respect
of Persons, a word or two of each Quality.

1. Judges at the first were required to be Men of Wisdom and Understanding,
Deuteronomy. 1.13. Take ye Wise Men, and Understanding, and known among your Tribes,
and I will make them Rulers over you. And the charge which is subjoined
requires all Judges to be such, even that they may be able rightly to judge
between their Brethren, and the Text tells us, the Cause which he knew not he
searched it out; and he then acts as a Judge as at the first, who when he has
heard both Parties with equal Patience, who has duly examined the Witnesses,
considering who they are, and what they say, and well weighed all Evidences and
Circumstances, and trying all other just ways of finding out the Truth, then
pronounces Sentence accordingly.

2. Judges at the first were required to be Men of Integrity and Courage, Deuteronomy.
1.16. And I charged your Judges, saying, hear the Cause between your Brethren,
and judge righteously between every Man and his Brother, and the Stranger that
is with him, they shall not respect Persons in Judgment, but they shall hear
the small as well as the great, good Judges, and such as were at the first,
used Indifferency in the Administration of Justice, considering the Cause,
abstract from all Relation but that of Right and Equity, having no respect of
Persons or partial Inelination to any side.

3. Judges at the first were to be Men of Courage, and indeed without this
Quality the Law grows weak, and useless; what fignify good Laws if the
Magistrate have not Courage enough to put them in Execution, yea for want of
this, Magistracy becomes contemptible, and the Oppressors grow Insolent, and
like those in the Psalmist, cry, who shall say unto us, what do ye? We are
Rich, we are Great, and what Judges dare meddle with us, and therefore Jethro
required this in a Magistrate, viz. That he should be a Man of Courage, and
Job, speaking of such a one, tells us, he broke the Jaws of the Wicked, and
pulled the spoil out of his Teeth.

4. Judges at the first were to be Men that feared God, a Virtue very requisite
in all Magistrates, and therefore the Wicked, the Wrongdoer, the Oppressor, and
such as do Violence, are in the Scripture, said, to have no fear of God before
their Eyes, and Abraham despaired of any Justice in the Men of Gerar, because
he thought the Fear of God was not in that Place. The Fear of God, says
Solomon, is the beginning of Wisdom, and it is the Fountain of Justice, this was
urged by Moses, and repeated by good Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Take heed what
ye do: for ye Judge not for Man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the
Judgment. Wherefore now, let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do
it: for there is no iniquity in the Lord our God, nor respect of Persons, nor
taking of Gifts.

5. Judges at the first were to be Lovers of Truth, they should make it their
business, and count it their Delight to do Justice, and not only should they be
Lovers of Truth themselves, but discountenance Fraud and Deceit in all others,
such as false Accusations, false Witnesses, crafty and cunning Pleaders, by
whom a bad Cause is made a good one; and in some others, we all know, Malice,
Flattery, Ambition, Covetousness, etc. are apt to give being to many false and
unjust Accusations, and the Inventors and Teachers of such Accusations, are
cunning, and use many Arts and Tricks to give them the color and face of
Truth. Now the Magistrate, as a Lover of Truth, should be jealous and use his
utmost skill and industry in all suspicious Causes, to sift and bolt out the
Truth, and make all such as have a hand in such unjust Causes, all informing,
promoting, pettifogging Rascals, Examples of his Severity; not in the least
encouraging any such make-bates, who are the plague and pests of the Nation,
the brood of Cain, who flew his Brother, and Children of the Devil, who is
stvled the Accuser of the Nation, who was a Liar and a Murderer from the
beginning.

Lastly, Judges at the first, were to be Men hating Covetousness, Exodus 23.8.
Thou shall take no Gift: for the Gift blinds the Eyes, and perverteth the
words of the righteous, Oh the mavelous Power of Money! Oh powerful Guineas,
that work upon Men, yea Men of Wisdom, and Men that are Righteous, stopping
their Ears, blinding their Eyes, and hiding their Heads, that they neither
hear, nor see, nor act justly in a Cause; and those Judges who will receive
Bribes, or may be dealt with or spoken to in their Chambers, do not respect the
Cause of the said innocent Person, nor the Law but Gifts; I might in this be
large, but enough if not too much, because I speak to those, who, I hope,
detest and abhor all such vile Practices, and may we be so happy as to have no
corrupt Officers, no pact Jury, or any other who will receive a reward to
pervert Judgment, and get the day of their Adversary, when his Cause is more
righteous then theirs, thus much I have ventured to say of Judges as at the
first, in general; a word or two of Judges as at the first, in reference, to
this Nation in particular.

1. Then Judges as at the first must be lawfully Constituted, being
Commissioned by the Sovereign Power, and their Commission extends to hear and
determine all Causes between Party and Party, and also between the King and the
Party depending, to Acquit or Condemn all such Prisoners, as for any Offenses
against their Majesty's Crown and Dignity shall be brought before them: So that
their Commission is large and absolute, they having Authority by Virtue of
their Commission, as in the Person of our Sovereign, to judge in Causes that do
concern the Life and Death of the Subject. And all this that Justice may by
them receive a full, sound and perfect Execution. Now note they are to act as
their Commission, says the Lord Coke, does appoint, limit and command: We
then, says he, the Justices of Assize and Goal Delivery, are by his Majesty
appointed to Administer Justice unto his Subjects, but quo modo, not according
to our Will, Conceit or Opinion, but Secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Maneriae
Anglicanae, which Law, Custom and Manner must be Executed with Judgment,
Understanding and Equity; for we must know our selves, and the place wherein we
are, we must know and understand each Cause before us brought, and according to
our Knowledge and Understanding we must uprightly judge according to Equity,
without, in the least sort, being drawn by respecting either Person, or
Quality, to bear a partial Hand in the Execution of Judgment. Briefly, says he,
the Office of a Judge is to hear each Party speak solemnly, to answer or object
directly, to see (as near as may be possible) each Truth substantially proved,
and then to Judge with an upright Heart, according to Justice and Equity, never
in any one thing making a conclusion before a conscionable, wise and judicial
consideration. As to the Causes they are to enquire of, they are, says he, such
as these by whom the King is most disobeyed, his Estate disturbed, and Kingdoms
threatened, and that the Peace be inviolably kept, of which and much more you
may see in the Chapter of Judges, and amongst the rest, that they take care of
Religion, and therefore Judges as at the first, as I could instance in several
Charges, were wont to let those who heard them, know, that they ought to be
very careful in such Matters. And here of a plain Instructor I become a humble
Petitioner to the Reverend Judges, to the Worshipful the Justice, to the
Gentlemen of the Grand Inquest, and all in Places of Eminency, in the behalf of
the Established Religion of the Land, against her many, and sometimes too
powerful Enemies; I hope, I need not, to you at least, make mention of those
Maxims, of our Common Law, that nunquam prospere succedunt humana, ubi
negliguntur divina, that summa est ratio quae pro religione facit, that gravius
est divinam quam temporalem laedere Majestatem, that Religion and Justice are
the main Pillars of the Commonwealth, and that the Frame of our Magna Charta
is, that the Church of England shall be free, and shall have all her whole
Rights and Liberties inviolable.

Lastly, That his present Majesty has sworn to maintain the Church England, as
it is by Law Established, now I beseech you according to these Maxims, and as
you are entrusted with the Kings Oath, and are bound to act according to Law,
maintain the Church by Law Established, against all her Adversaries whatsoever,
and chiefly I entreat you, against Atheists, Haters of Episcopacy, and
Contemners of our public Liturgy. First, lend your helping hand against all
those Athiests, who make a mock at Religion, and all that is Sacred, or but
Serious amongst us; neither you, nor we, can make Men truly Pious, or banish
Impiety out of the Nation; but you may, yea ought to be, careful of Religion;
as that which is the best Security to the Nation, since neither Forts nor
Castles, Armies nor Navies, Arms nor Ammunition, Men nor Money, to say nothing
of Allies and Confederates, the Staff of Egypt, are not so powerful to support
the Crown of a Prince as Religion. You are here in the Kings Name, and act by
his Commission; let me entreat you then to act under him as Defenders of the
Holy Ancient and most Catholic Faith, taught and professed in this Church of
England; suffer not this holy Religion to be despised, let not this be openly
derided, droll'd upon, ridiculed or turned into Burlesque and Mockery, as if
our Young Squire and Witty Spark, had no way to show his Wit and Breeding then
by exposing the Clergy, and making a Ridicule of Religion, who indeed (how
witty soever he thinks himself) is a greater Fool, then he in the Psalmist,
saying in the Street, what he only did in his Heart, there is no God. As to the
second, those who are sworn Enemies to Episcopacy, and never had good Will for
Bishops unless when in their Power; I know you cannot persuade them to lay
aside those ill and unjust Principles they have unwarily imbibed from some
Teachers, much less persuade them to admit of this Government as Apostolical;
but I hope, you will not suffer any bitter Spirit, in Pulpit, or Press, to
burst forth into Scandalous and Slanderous Libels, bitter Pasquels and railing
Pamphlets, whereby they Slander that Sacred Government, which (by the joint
Confession of all Reformed Divines) and by the most irrefragable Arguments of
our own, is proved to derive it self from the Times of the Blessed Apostles,
without any interruption or alteration; for tho the Bounty of Religious Princes
have thought meet to grace the Function with some Accesses of Tithes and
Maintenance, as yet they are by Law in this Nation, who that is Wise, or who
indeed, but a Fool, will thence argue, that the substance or any essential Part
thereof is in the least part altered by such gracious Munificence? And that I
may not seem to digress, know Episcopacy is settled by Law, and the Lord Coke
long ago observed, that the Opposers of Episcopacy strove to shake in sunder
the whole Frame of this Imperial Government; for if (as they desire) says he,
the Form of our Civil Law was Abrogated, then should our Common Law, and it of
necessity, fall together; for they are so Woven and Incorporated together, as
that without the one, the other cannot stand, and of this he gives the truest
instance, again, says he, without the Grave Assembly of the Reverend Bishops,
his Majesty's High Court of Parliament should be unfurnished, no Law being
there enacted, but that which is by the King, his Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
concluding that those that would have no Bishops amongst us, do, in their
designs, strive to pluck from his Majesty and the Dignity of his State, the
Right Hand of Government, and as much as in them lies, break in sunder the
Golden Frame of just Authority; for if no Bishops, no Laws; if no Laws, no King.

Lastly, As to her Enemies who contemn and deride our Litany, that Public Form
of Prayer, used in our Churches, tho you cannot persuade Men to Worship God in
Unity and Uniformity, as was commanded in the days of Queen of Elizabeth of
Blessed Memory, yet suffer not the Public and Established Worship of the
Nation, to be deprived of its due Honor and Esteem, as that which being
selected out of Scripture, and the Ancient Models of holy Church, and continued
by the holy Martyrs, our blessed Reformers, and has received abundant Supplies
of Strength from the zealous Commendations of all our Protestant Princes, and
the Establishment of many Parliaments, as that which was the happy means of
bringing many out of Popery, and does, in a great measure, prevent that
Confusion, Tautology, Irreverence, not to say Blasphemy, too frequent in
extemporary Prayer; in a word, tho you cannot persuade all Men to frequent the
Church of England's Religious Service, and to live in Communion with it; yet
assure your selves ye shall do eminent Service to God, to their Majestys, to
the whole Nation, and in a great measure contribute to her Peace and Safety, if
ye in your several Stations, by your Grave Speeches and Pious Example shall in
public, and when occasion is offered, make it your business earnestly to
recommend the Welfare, Order and Constitution of this Church, as that which is
agreeable to the Scripture, and the Practices of the purest Ages in the
Christian Church, as that which has been looked upon, and has proved the main
Bulwark of the Reformation against Popery in all Ages; and therefore is that,
against which Rome has ever so bitterly inveighed, and by Power and Fraud
labored to overthrow, as that which best suits with the Civil Government,
neither encroaching upon the Kings Prerogative, nor the Peoples Liberty, as
happens both from the Popes Supremacy and the Kirks Independency, no Cannon can
be made in England, but by the Consent and Authority of the King, nor any so
made is of force, if contrary to the Laws of the Land, as that Constitution
which is most agreeable to the Genius of the Nation, and Temper of Englishmen;
there being no other sort of Church Government, so well pleasing to the
generality of the People, as this; for whatever Constitution (of all the
contending Parties of this Nation) should chance to get uppermost, it would
have more Enemies then this has; and so unless we would have none, and nothing
but Confusion, we ought in Point of Prudence to stick to this; for tho it has
had, and Oh! still has, many and great Opposers, yet has it kept its ground;
nor could all the Force and Fraud of Rome quite overpower her: For this Church,
which regularly shoke off the Roman Yoke, watering the infant Plant with he
Blood, has for above a hundred Year been upheld by the unwearied Pains and
great Learning of the Prelatic Party, nor can the World show such strength of
Argument and Solid Confutation of the Church of Rome's Works as in the Writings
of the Church of England Men; again, that it is a Constitution capable of
preserving it self, not pragmatical, like the Conclave or Consistory, to
Arraign Kings and States, and make the Assembly or Conclave above the
Parliament: Yet her Superiors have by Law an undoubted Right to be present at
those Debates, and the making those Laws which concern the good of the People,
and so in a great measure able to provide against any that attempt her Ruin;
again, as that Constitution which is not only good at home, but praised and
admired by all Foreign Churches abroad; as the Honor as well as Defense of the
whole Reformation: And Lastly, as that which has secured to us our Laws,
Liberties and Lives, these being the Men, who dared to oppose (tho modestly)
the Dispensing Power, and would not yield with the Trimmer, nor be wheadled
with the Dissenter, to set up Popery and Arbitrary Power; and therefore I hope
every good Magistrate and considerate Englishman (tho they bear with the
Infirmities of the weak where such are) will yet have an Eye to all those who
have any ill will at Sion, and such as watch to break down all our Carved Work
with Axes and Hammers, that labor with might and main, to render the Church of
England odious in the Eye of the People, and with both hands cast Fire into the
Sanctuary, endeavoring by ill and untoward Speeches to alienate the Hearts and
Affections of the People from the Church of England, and to raise Scandals upon
all that at this day shall speak or write in Her just Defense, loading the
Conformable Clergy with Contempt, and, as far as they dare, exposing them in
all Companies, as well knowing if they can but eject the Shepherd, or dress him
up in a Wolves Skin, the task is not great, the whole Flock being then an easiy
Prey; but I hope we have Judges as at the first, and the King will have
Counselors as at the beginning, then who will say that we want any ordinary
and legal Security to make us Happy; Oh! may all our Magistrates prove such,
and may we all act and live as they direct us. Then may this Nation again take
root downward, and bear fruit upwards, then may Ireland be reduced, and the
Monsieur tremble, and we be happy at home, and feared abroad. Oh! may we thus
live under the Protection of a Wise and Just Government, eating the Fruit of
our Labor! Oh! well are we, and happy shall we be; yea, happy are the People
that are in such a Case; To that end, and for the continuance of these his
Mercies, let us in the words of our Church (in the Homily for Obedience)
heartily thank God for his great and excellent Benefit and Providence
concerning Kings, let us pray for them, that they may have Gods Favor and
Protection, that they may ever in all things have God to be their Guide, let us
pray, that they may have Wisdom, Justice, Strength, Clemency and Zeal to Gods
Glory, the Good of Christian Souls, and the Commonwealth; let us pray they may
rightly use their Sword and Authority for the Maintenance and Defense of the
Catholic Faith, and of their good and honest Subjects; and let us pray for our
selves, that we may be godly in Holy and Christian Conversation, and so shall
we have God on our side; and then let us not fear what Man can do unto us; so
shall we live in Obedience both to our most Merciful King in Heaven, and to our
most Christian King on Earth; so shall we please God, have Peace of Consclence,
Rest and Quiet here, and Eternal Bliss hereafter, Which he grant us all, who
was delivered to death for us, and is now set down at the Right hand of God in
Heaven.

FINIS.

