ROME'S CONVICTION; OR, A VINDICATION OF THE Original Institution OF
Christianity; In Opposition to the Many USURPATIONS OF THE CHVRCH of ROME; And
their frequent VIOLATION of DIVINE RIGHT.

Clearly Evinced, By Arguments Drawn from their Own PRINCIPLES; And Undeniable
Matter of Fact.

By John Savage, Gent.

London, Printed by T. N. for Gabriel Kunholt, at the King's Head over against
the Mews, near Charing Cross. MDCLXXXIII.

TO THE MOST RENOWNED MONARCH Charles the II. OF England, Scotland, France and
Ireland KING, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most Dread Sovereign,
WHither should This TREATISE of Religion Fly for Protection, but under the
Wings of Your Most Sacred Majesty? Duly Entitled to the Glorious Prerogative
of Defender of the FAITH; Hither therefore it Connaturally tends: but makes its
Approach in an Humble Posture, Dazzled, as it were, with the Glory of so much
Majesty. Its Author likewise Falls Prostrate at Your Royal Feet, earnestly
Imploring Your PRINCELY Protection of these his weak Endeavors. He comes Full
Fraught with a Confident Hope, that where such Power and Goodness Reigns, he
cannot suffer a Repulse. And being swayed by the Memory of Your Past Favors,
the sense of Gratitude, as well as Duty, has Immutably Fixed him in this
Resolve: That a Deep-Rooted Loyalty, Animated with a Fervent Zeal for Your
Majesty's Royal Person, Government, and Prerogatives, shall ever be the
Indeleble Character of,

Your Majesty's Most Loyal, Most Submissive, and Most Addicted Subject, John
Savage.

TO THE Reader.
HAving had a more then ordinary inspection into the Doctrine and PRINCIPLES of
the Church of Rome; I have (upon this Account) been earnestly moved by some
Persons of Honor, and Worth, to Write something in Opposition to that Church;
and at length I was wrought to a Compliance. In the pursuit whereof, I have had
no consideration of the Unkindness and Ingratitude of some of the Church of
Rome toward me, but have proceeded with all imaginable Candor and Sincerity,
wholly divested of all Ranker, Spleen, and Animosity, against their Persons:
But, I deemed it no way repugnant to Christian Charity to use my best
endeavors, to open a way to Truth. And if sometimes my Pen seems to be Dipped in
Gall, yet this only is a product of Zeal for the Doctrine I have undertaken to
defend, in opposition to theirs, without the least intending to infringe the
Laws of Morality.

The Heads of Doctrine contained in each Disputation of this Treatise I have
several times Proposed to the Learned Doctors of the Church of Rome that I
could meet with (of several Religious Orders) quasi tentando, by way of
Discourse. P. Worsleus Soc. Jesu Leodii.
One tells me, That these Difficulties were indeed insuperable, if scanned by
the Light of Reason; but yet we were all obliged to captivare intellectum in
obsequium fidei, to captivate our Understanding in Obedience to Faith. P.
Haseur Recollecta Namurci.
Another Answers by way of Admonition, That it was not safe, but on the
contrary very dangerous, to penetrate too deep into the Mysteries of Faith. A
Third Alleges, P. Derkennis, Soc. Jesu, Lovanii.
That I had as good Question the Verity of Scripture, as submit the Definitions
of Councils to the Scrutiny of Reason; because the Scripture also contains very
great Difficulties, and seeming Contradictions.

To all these I Reply, That Divine Faith consists of Two parts; the Material
Object, which is the thing we Believe, and the Formal Object, which is the
Motive why we Believe, and that is dictio Dei, God's saying, or revealing it.
Wherefore, when a Mystery is proposed to be Believed as an Article of Faith,
though I have no Evidence in attestato, in the thing Revealed, because I cannot
demonstrate the Truth of it by Human Reason; yet if I have Evidence, or
Certainty, in attestante, that is, I am sure God says it; then with a Blind
Obedience, and with a firm Adhesion, I assent to it: But if it be Doubtful, and
Ambiguous, whether it be a Divine Revelation or no; then to Institute a strict
Inquiry, Whether it be truly and really attested by Divine Authority or no, is
an act of Prudence, and therefore not dangerous, but secure and laudable. But
how shall we know assuredly whether it be a Divine Revelation or not?

First, I Answer, That no New Revelations are to be admitted, but such as are
contained in Holy Writ, in the Canonical Scripture.

Secondly, I Answer, That if the Mystery proposed drive us to such Extremities,
that no Assent can be given to it, without denying some one of the Prima
Principia Lumine Naturae nota, First Principles known by the Light of Nature,
which the Wit of Man cannot avoid, then we may certainly conclude, that if it
be a new Doctrine not contained in Scripture, or if it be evidently
inconsistent with the Light of Nature, in both cases it comes not from God, but
is a mere Human Invention; And we ought not to Believe by Divine Faith, that
which is backed only by Human Authority.

As for the Difficulties of Scripture, those which are Seeming Contradictions,
are most Historical, and are Solved by those Authors, who, ex professo, have
Written so many Large Tomes of the Interpretation of Scripture. Other
Mysteries, which are Speculative and Doctrinal, as a Virgin to Conceive; the
Incarnation of the Divine Word, and the Hypostatical Union; the Mystery of the
Sacred Trinity, etc. there is no one of all these that is destructive of the
Light of Human Reason, or that will reduce us to a necessity of denying the
Truth of any of the First Principles. Since therefore we admit of all Canonical
Scripture as the Word of God, we ought to Believe it by Divine Faith. For
certain it is, that as God's Infinite Veracity is incapable of asserting such
things, as are impossible; so likewise, by the same Rule, God (who is the
Author of Human Reason) is incapable of Imposing upon Man's Understanding, a
necessity of Believing that which is false, or impossible; for if false, it is
destructive of his Veracity, which would un-God him; if Impossible, it is
inconsistent with Human Reason. And yet all things are to be granted to the
Divine Omnipotence, that involve not a manifest Contradiction.

And this may serve as a Reply to the Answers of the aforementioned Doctors.

I shall therefore proceed, in order to examine the Controverted Difficulties,
which this Treatise contains, as they are digested under their respective
Heads, whereof each has his Peculiar Disputation, and the Disputations I
Subdivide into Sections.

In the Second Disputation of this Treatise I have Inserted most of the Ancient
Rituals and Liturgies of the Latin, Greek, and the Eastern Churches, which
Morinus Translated out of the Greek, and Syrian into Latin. And, as this
Translator was tied to give the Literal Sense of the Originals, without
Mutation; so also I deemed it Illegal to make any change or alteration in the
Latin Version, which in some places is obscure, and obsolete, but I have
rendered the true and genuine sense thereof in English, to the best of my
capacity.

And because the Pretended Infallibility of the Church of Rome is the
Foundation and main Prop, which supports their Confidence, Inductive to several
Determinations and Decrees, whereby they seem to Wage War with Heaven; I deemed
it expedient in the First Place, to Detect the Weakness of this Foundation;
but, this being a Negative Design, the most proportionable means to accomplish
my end, is, to refel the Arguments which they produce, for the establishing
this Non-erring Prerogative.

And yet the Chiefest Argument they Allege, is but a Fallacious Illusive
Circle; for, they prove the Infallibility of their Church by Scripture, and
prove the Canon of Scripture by the Infallible Testimony of the Church, without
Qualifying either Part, to prove the other, but Rely upon the Support; that
these two Administer to each other, which, in effect, is to prove neither.

Notwithstanding, I Insist not much upon this Argument, but mention it, and so
proceed. I should have Instituted a more Minute Indagation and Refutation of
it, had I not seen it safely deduced, by a more Learned and Skilful Pen; and,
with that Success, that his Antagonists will scarce Attempt another Contest
with him, in this Particular; for the Wit of Man, though backed with all their
Learning, will never be able to make it out.

It seems strange, how such Points of Doctrine, as are mentioned in this
Treatise, and others also, not here Treated of, could be so Publicly
Introduced into a Church of so Large an Extent, without great Contention, and
Intestine Broils; yea, without the least Opposition, or Contradiction.

For it is certain, that they have many amongst them, who are very Learned, and
Able Divines, whose Intellects are sufficiently qualified with deep
Penetration, and Perspicacity, and yet none Reclaims, nor calls those Strange
Dogmatical Points in Question. The reason is, because the Church of Rome is so
strongly Immured, and Fenced on all sides, and has such variety of Arms, and
Weapons, to suppress her Opponents, that she seems formidable to all; for, if
any one, either by Word, or Writing, should testify any dislike of her
Decrees, or Definitions, he is first branded with the Infamous Note of an
Heretic; and if he do not Recant, the Church has other Remedies: next follows
Suspension from his Priestly Functions; there are also Ecclesiastical Censures,
and Excommunications; there is Excommunicatio Major, and Excommunicatio Minor;
some are Latae Sententiae, some Sententiae Ferendae; some are a Jure, others ab
Homine; some are Reservatae, others non Reservatae, whereof there is a Long
Catalogue in the Bulla Coenae; there are also Interdicts for whole Nations and
Kingdoms; And which is worst of all, in Italy and Spain; if the Sancta Matter
Ecclesia be opposed by any, there the Inquisition lies gaping for them, and
ready to Swallow them up Alive.

All which strikes the most Audacious of them into a Pannick Fear; they dread
the Punishment, and therefore Industriously shun the Means of Incurring it.

Hence the Supine Neglect in their Divines of Attempting to Reform, or prevent
such Errors, though never so Repugnant to their Judgments; for, besides the
forementioned Penalties, they must also expect (if they be Readers) to be
Deposed from their Theological Chairs, and Expelled the Academy, and then
Degraded.

And hence that Profound Severity of their Popes and Councils, in framing their
Definitions; for being Conscious of their Immunity from Opposition, they are
hence raised to a Confidence of Attempting any thing.

Wherefore, since none that are Subject to the Roman Jurisdiction have so much
Resolution, as to Struggle with the many Obstacles and Arduity, as they will
certainly meet withal, to Obviate their Design, of Opposing those Errors.

I have here undertaken to Refute some of them; in the Prosecution whereof I
have taken a Method far different from that, of other Learned, and Worthy
Authors, who have Treated of the same Subject; for, my main Scope and Drift, is
to Refel the Errors of Rome, by their own Principles; wherefore I lay down
their Tenets, before I establish my own Assertions, hereby to make it appear,
how little constant they are to themselves; for their Practice and Belief, are
wholly inconsistent with the Dogmatical Principles of their Learned Divines,
and sometimes clash with the Definitions of their Popes, and other Councils,
which I shall make appear.

So that this Bulwork (though against them) is raised by their own Labor and
Industry, and furnished with Arms and Ammunition, drawn from their own
Magazine; yea, and Manned by their own Oracles, the Divines; for though they
dare not apply their Doctrine to oppose the Councils, so to Commence an
Intestine War, yet I shall here do it for them, and draw from thence such
Illations, as Legally Issue from their Principles, to subvert their Pretended
Articles of Faith.

Hence the Reader (if not Praecautioned) may take occasion to deem me a
Defender of their Doctrine; whereas in Reality I only suppose it, according to
the Laws of Disputation, Ad hominem, to make such Deductions from thence, as
are destructive of each particular Point of their Faith, and Practice, which I
Impugn; and this in effect is no other then to pronounce their Destruction by
their own Hands. Perditio tua ex te Israel. For, though many of those
Principles, (which are the Groundwork of my Discourse) are common to both
Churches: yet others there are, which peculiarly are admitted by the Church of
Rome only.

So we all agree in the Notion of a Sacrament, but differ in the Number of
Sacraments, etc. yet with them, I Suppose (not Grant) Seven Sacraments; thereby
to make it Appear, that they Transgress against Divine Right, by Changing the
Matter and Form of Ordination, and by Invalidating Clandestine Marriage, etc.
which they Acknowledge to be both Sacraments.

So that the Proofs of the several Positions of this Discourse, are Reduced to
Formal, or Ritual Sillogismes, whose Premises are made up, for the most part,
of their own Acknowledged Doctrine, and Matters of Fact, both which are
Undeniable; and this Duality is sometimes backed with Phylosophical and
Theological Principles, or Canon Law; all which they Admit of.

And hence, by Legal Deductions, is drawn the Verity of the Assertions, which
are Diametrically opposite to their Pretended Faith and Practice.

In the Prosecution whereof, I have confined my self to as much Brevity, as is
Compatible with the Right Understanding, and True Meaning, of the Respective
Points of Doctrine here Treated; for Prolix Perorations, in so Serious a
Discourse, would be Irksome to the Author, and Tedious to the Reader.

And now I must Implore the Favor of the Benign Reader, to Indulge me now and
then, the use of Scholastical Terms, which, upon some Incident Occasions, are
more Pathetical, and Significant, in expressing my Meaning, then others,
especially considering, that in order to the stopping of all Gaps, and Starting
Holes, I am sometimes Necessitated, to Soar above the Ordinary Strain of
Doctrine, to Evince the Coherency of my Positions with the Principles of
Philosophy, and Scholastical Divinity, which though Abstruse, and Speculative,
yet is Avowed by their own Champions.

Dispute I. Of the pretended Infallibility of the Church of Rome.
The Preface.
THE natural and acquisite knowledge of Man's intellectual Faculty could never
pretend to any specifical degree of Clarity, above those obscure Notions which
by foreign Species we draw from several Objects; wherefore the Representation
being weak, the Understanding is seldom certainly assured of the true State of
the Object. But the Church of Rome pretends to a higher Prerogative, above the
rest of Mankind, viz. an Infallibility in her decisions, that is, a
determination to Truth, and an incapacity of falling into any Falsity or Error;
wherefore I deemed it worth the Examination, whither this superexcellent
Faculty be grounded upon any sure Foundation, or an assumed and pretended
Privilege, like his Holinesses usurped Power to Lord it over Kings, and to
Depose them, and dispose of their Dominions at his pleasure; as if Emperors,
Kings, and Temporal Princes were but his Tenants at Will, and he the
Proprietor, or Landlord.

SECT. I. Wherein consists the true Notion of Infallibility?
TO the end we may with greater perspicuity trace the Divines of the Church of
Rome in their Principles, we must first premise a fourfold Knowledge that the
Understanding is capable of: There is an abstractive, a quidditive, an
intuitive, and a comprehensive Knowledge. The first is a weak and imperfect
representation, framed by borrowed Species, gathered first by the external and
internal Senses, and thence transmitted to the Understanding, which are but
virtual representations, and as it were the Seeds of the Object, by means
whereof the Vital Power, together with these Species, as con-causes, produce a
formal image or representation of the Object: And this abstractive Knowledge,
is peculiar to the State of Man in this Life. A quidditive Knowledge is a
clearer Representation, framed by the Understanding, instructed with proper
Species, by means whereof it penetrates into the essential Perfections and
peculiar Faculties of the Prototypon, or thing represented. An intuitive
Knowledge is that which, by the proper Species of the exemplar, distinguishes
in what State the Object is, whither existent, past, or to come; and herein it
resembles that Science in God, which the Divines call Scientia visionis. A
comprehensive Knowledge includes the two former; and moreover represents all
the Perfections, Powers and Faculties of its Object explicitly, in order to
all its Connotates and Correlatives, explicating distinctly all the variety of
effects that may proceed from such a cause, and discovering all and singular
the innate Powers and Faculties thereof, with reference to all external Objects
that have any connection, dependence, or relation to it. And because these
external Objects are infinite, therefore this comprehensive Knowledge is
peculiar to God alone, but the two former are imparted to the Blessed Angels
and Souls of the Faithful, who by their Beatifical Vision see God quidditively
and intuitively.

Moreover there are three degrees of clarity, or certainty, whereby various
Acts of the Understanding do variously represent their Objects. The first is
Probability, which by reason of its weakness and imbecility is always
accompanied with a virtual or formal Ambiguity, and Fear that the contrary may
be true, because the motives that are inductive to the assent bring no
assurance, but only a seeming resemblance with the Truth. The second is a Moral
certainty, which, though there be a possibility of its failing, yet seldom or
never errs; as one that never was at Rome, yet has a Moral certainty that such
a City is extant, because he has often heard the concurring Testimonies of so
many that have been there. The third and highest degree is the certainty of
Infallibility, which is always accompanied with Truth, and imports also an
incapacity of Erring, so that all Physical, Mathematical, and Metaphysical
demonstrations, and all those Truths which Philosophers call Prima Principia,
as Nihil potest simul esse and non esse. Omne totum est majus sua part. Quae
sunt eadem unitertio sunt eadem inter se, etc. all these are invested with the
certainty of Infallibility. To this also belongs all acts of supernatural
Faith, which are truly grounded on Divine Revelation.

This being premised, we now come to inspect the peculiar nature of that
Infallibility, which the Doctors of Rome attempt to affix to their Church: And
though the word Church, taken in its greatest latitude, include all the Members
thereof, wheresoever dispersed, yet their Divines commonly restrain the meaning
thereof to an Oecomenical Council, indicted by the Pope, promulged by the
Emperor, furnished with a sufficient number of Fathers and Bishops, wherein the
Pope, by himself, or his Legate, presides, and confirms the Canons and Decrees
of the same, by his Apostolical Authority; so that a Council, with all these
Requisites, is that which they call the Church, and assert it Infallible in all
its Canons and Decrees, yea and some of the Popes Candidates affirm, That his
Holiness also participates of this high Prerogative, when he speaks ex
Cathedra, though no Council be then sitting, which the Jesuits, the Popes
Minions, struggle hard to maintain against others of the same Church.

Another difficulty has been started amongst them, How this Infallibility
affects their Church? Whither it be an inherent quality, possessing the minds
and understandings of the Fathers and Bishops in Council, essentially
determining them to truth; or else an extrinsical assistance, whereby the Holy
Ghost inspires them with Truth, and protects them from Error. But I leave them
to debate these difficulties among themselves, for it is not the scope of this
present discourse to examine what they call their Church, and how this
Infallibility affects it, but only whither this singular favor be really
granted to them, or whither they unjustly pretend a Right to it for the better
satisfaction of their Followers, and making a more copious access of Proselites.

SECT. II. The Grounds of the pretended Infallibity of the Church of Rome are
proposed.
GReat Acquisitions are seldom made and maintained without great Art and
Industry. A considerable part of this sublunary World, are wrought into a
belief, That the Church of Rome is the only Oracle of the Universe, whose
Doctrine is always true, and not capable of Error: how many Kings and Princes
are swayed by this persuasion? and by this means testify a high Respect and
Veneration for the Sea of Rome, who Commissionates her Emissaries, the Divines,
Preachers, and Confessors, to inculcate this Doctrine to the credulous
Believers all the World over; and he who writes best on this Subject expects no
less than a Cardinal's Cap, or a Bishopric, for his Reward: The Divine Prints
it, the Preacher promulges it, and the Confessor takes hold of opportunity,
times, and seasons, to settle it in the minds of his Penitents. Princes have
commonly Divines, Preachers, and Confessors of their own Subjects and Nation,
to whose conduct they presume they may safely trust the regulating of their
Consciences; yet these Men, though never so Heterogeneal in Dialect and
National differences, make but one complex, or collection, of the Popes
Negotiators, whose main scope and design is to maintain and improve the
Prerogatives of their great Master, by all the subtle arts and sedulous
industry they are capable of: What plausible Arguments do they use to persuade
people that their Church cannot Err? and the illiterate Vulgar greedily swallow
this Bait, which confirms them in their servitude and slavery, and makes them
prompt to submit to all the Prescripts of the Sea of Rome, not regarding the
arduity thereof.

And among other marks of the Popes greatness, this of Infallibility is chief;
for upon this Link hangs immediately his Supremacy, his Temporal pretended
Power over Kings and Princes, etc. because these Titles are deduced from his
being universal Pastor, which the non-erring Councils have declared him to be;
so that the Councils Infallibility is the Root of those Prerogatives, it is the
main Pillar which supports the Magnificence and Greatness of the Church and
Court of Rome, and if this should fail, that Superstructure would fall to utter
Ruin and Desolation. This therefore is the great Bulwark which dreads no
opposition; this is the main Fort that still remains immovable against all
attempts; this is the Ship of St. Peter, which though tossed and agitated upon
the swelling Billows, by Raging and Tempestuous Storms, yet never sinks. Well
may there be some attempts upon the outworks, by light Skirmishes and
Velitations, in Controversies of less moment, which if by immediate Arguments
they cannot repel, recourse may still be had to the main Fort, and if that
begins to open upon the Enemy, by Thundering Infallibility in his Ears, Lord!
who can withstand it? This will soon defeat him, and dissipate all his attempts.

But upon what grounds does the Church of Rome arrogate to it self this high
Character, First Proof.
in exclusion of all others? Why this is drawn from an irrefragable Testimony,
it being grounded on the Promises of Christ himself; for this is the Church to
whom Christ has promised, That the Gates of Hell should never prevail against
it: This is the Church, to whom Christ's word is engaged to send it another
Paraclite, the Spirit of Truth, that should lead it into all Truth. This is the
Church to whom Christ said, I will be with you till the end of the World. And
finally this is the Church, committed to the care of St. Peter, first Pope
thereof, to whom Christ said, Thy Faith shall never fail, which is meant of all
other Popes, that by a lineal descent succeed him. And who dare attempt to
evacuate Christ's Promises? Hence it comes to pass that the Bishops and Fathers
assembled in a general Council, though of themselves weak and subject to Error,
yet being the chief Members of the Church, for Doctrine and Dignity, and being
the Representative of the whole, are rendered Infallible, as being backed by
Divine Authority, by virtue of Christ's Promise; they do not now determine
matters of Faith, and dogmatical points, as mere Men, but are as it were
Deifi'd, in order to this Function, by a supernatural quality, infused into
them, and inherent in their Intellects, or else by a previous disposition, and
concomitant operation of the Holy Ghost, which determines them to Truth, and
protects them from Error: They are but the Organ to deliver Truth, but the
Divine Oracle is the Dictator; they are but the instruments which convey those
Mysteries to the knowledge of Mankind, but the Spirit of God is the principal
Agent; so that th^^ Canons and Decrees come from them full fraught with the
Divinity, which renders them Infallibly certain; for the Holy Ghost, every
Session, attends the motion of those great Men, to regulate all their
Proceedings by the never erring Rule of his infinite Veracity, whence it
ensues, that to pick quarrels with their Definitions is a high Temerity; it is
to wage War with Heaven, or by the weak scrutiny of humane discourse, to
examine the truth of such Mysteries as Heaven has revealed; which if they
should contain any seeming Error or Contradiction, yet our understanding must
adhere to them, as infallibly true, because our Reason is guided only by
obscure Notions, and abstractive Acts, which draws in foreign Species by the
mediation of the Senses, which give but a glimmering light to the
Understanding, and often suggest Falsity for Truth: but the Decrees of Councils
are sacred, and carry the Seal of the Holy Spirit enstampt upon them, by whose
directions they are framed; wherefore it is no less than a Sacrilegious
Presumption, to Question the Truth of them, for this is to oppose Human Reason
against Divine Authority. This is the substance of their first Proof, drawn
from the Authority of Scripture, which at first appearance, seems great and
glorious, a specious pretense to work upon the credulity of the ignorant Vulgar.

The second Proof is grounded in Reason; but before we propose it, we must open
the way, by putting the Reader in mind that the Divine Word, the Second Person
of the Sacred Trinity, considering the deplorable condition of Mankind, by the
Fall of Adam, resolved upon an efficacious Remedy, to assume Human Nature, and
by an Hypostatical Union to be Phisically United, and become on with Flesh and
Blood, and in that Nature to suffer death, and thereby to offer to his Eternal
Father an infinite Treasure of Merits and Satisfaction, to make an atonement
between God and Man, and to satisfy for Man's transgressions, even to the rigor
of Justice, because the satisfaction was made in the same specifical nature
that offended, and it was made to the full equality of the Crime, because the
Meritorious Cause thereof was a Divine Person, of infinite Dignity, and
therefore his Actions were of infinite Worth. But because it was not permitted
to every individual Person to draw from that infinite Mass of Satisfaction and
Merit, in what measure he pleased (this privilege being reserved for the Pope
alone to grant out of this stock by his Indulgences, what quantity, and to whom
he deemed expedient) therefore a Church must be ordained, and a method
prescribed how to apply the benefit of Christ's Passion to each one in
particular; To this end our great Redeemer instituted Sacraments, to be the
organs and vehicles to convey the Fruit of his Passion to the Receiver; and
this is secunda post naufragium tabula, whence the Church of Rome says in her
Public Office, O felix culpa quae talem meruit Redemptorem.

This being supposed, The second Proof is grounded on this consideration, that
the principal design of our Redeemer was to draw Souls to Heaven,
notwithstanding the loss sustained by Original Sin, for to this end he offered
his satisfaction, to this end he merited habitual and sanctifying Grace,
transient and actual Graces, prevenient, concomitant, and subsequent Graces, to
illuminate the Understanding, to move and incline the Will, to embrace Good,
and shun Evil. Wherefore this being the end intended by Christ, it follows that
apt and fit means were also appointed, that had proportion with the obtaining
of this end; but one necessary means to accomplish what Christ designed, is the
Gift of Infallibility, without which the Church might fall into Error, and from
one Error into another, and hereby deviate and swerve from its original
institution, and at length utterly fall away, and instead of conducting Souls
to Heaven, it would lead them to the precipice of eternal ruin and
destruction, and so evacuate the Fruit of Christ's Passion, and put an obstacle
to the obtaining of that end which he efficaciously intended. And yet we must
all suppose that the incarnate word was endu'd with an illimited Power, his
Knowledge and Wisdom was infinite, so that he perfectly knew what means were
necessary to accomplish his design, and wanted no Power to effect it, which
notwithstanding could never be efficaciously attained, without this
Infallibility; whence it necessarily follows, that Christ communicated to his
Church this special Preservative of always teaching truth, without being
subject to Error. This briefly is the full strength of their second Proof.

Thus you see the grounds of this Doctrine are seemingly convincing, and
plausible enough to induce such to an assent, who either cannot, or will not,
by a studious consideration penetrate into the depth of them, but will rather
acquiesce, than stretch their understanding by a rigid scrutiny and inquisition
to detect the fallacy thereof. But certainly in a matter of such moment we are
not to take up all this upon trust, nor blindly to give our assent, till we
have industriously waighed and pondered the whole matter, that so we may be the
better able to give an account of our belief, which is the drift of the
subsequent Section.

SECT. III. The Decision of the present Controversy.
THe Assertion is, That the Church of Rome enjoys not this Infallibility which
they so much pretend to The first Proof, Such a previous necessity to Truth,
would destroy Liberty, and take away the laudability and merit of human
actions. Note, That in the progress of this Discourse I shall argue ad Hominem,
that is, I shall take along with me their own Principles, and for the most part
ground my Refutation upon them. They all grant Liberty and Merit in such human
actions as have conformity to the dictamen of Conscience; for in this consists
the morality of our Actions, that they are consonant or dissonant to the
synderesis of the Agent, but if an action be extorted by an antecedent
necessity, there can be no exercise of Free Will, nor Merit in it, nor Liberty,
because that Power only has liberty, which after all prae-requisites and
causes are put, has a power to work and not to work; whereas if there be a
prae-ordination by Gods Decree, that the Members of a General-Council shall be
determined to Truth, then their decisions are wholly destitute of Liberty and
Free Will, because Gods efficatious Decree, that has a previous influence upon
the action, draws with it an indispensable necessity which destroys Free Will;
neither can it be meritorious, because Merit supposes Liberty, and consists in
the laudability of the action; and how can that action be laudable, which a
fatal necessity forces from the Will? Can any one deserve Praise for doing that
which he cannot avoid?

Hence I conclude, that Merit and Free Will are not compatible with that
Infallibility which the Church of Rome pretends to, which is inconsistent with
Gods Providence, in order to Mankind, who was Created, and Born free, in full
possession of the liberty of his will, and therefore shall be Judged according
to his own Actions, which could not be, were there any necessity or restraint
put upon them; Thus we see how this doctrine inverts the order of Divine
Providence, and imposes a necessity, either of contrariety, or contradiction
upon Humane actions.

A confirmation of this Proof may be drawn from the practical proceeding of
Councils, who seldom or never determine any thing till after a long and serious
Debate, and sometimes with great fervor and animosity of Parties, in opposition
to each other (as it happened in the Council of Trent) upon contradictory Points,
one Party Affirming what another Denied. All which supposes a liberty in their
debates and determinations; for if by an Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, they
were all fixed in Truth, What need any Debate or Consultation? for this can only
have place in such Resolutions as depend upon Humane Prudence alone. And if
each Member of a General Council has the immediate Assistance of the Holy
Ghost, How comes it to pass, that when two are of different Opinions, the one
Denies what the other Affirms; and though they may both speak as they think,
yet in reality they cannot both speak Truth, for two contradictories cannot be
both true; Must then the Spirit of God be made the Author of both? as though he
suggested Truth to the one, and Falsity to the other? if not, then he that
contends for the Erroneous part, is deserted by the Holy Ghost, and agitated by
some other Spirit of the Prince of Darkness, which allways opposes truth; but
hence it would follow, that Satan acts in General Councils, and that some of
the Members of Councils are not inspired by the Holy Ghost, and consequently
not Infallible.

The Second Proof is a Refutation of the Grounds of the Adverse Party. A
Negative Tenet, as this is, cannot be better proved, than by showing the
falsity of the Affirmative Contradictory; First then, as to their Argument
drawn from Christ's Promises expressed in Scripture. I demand, Whence they have
an Assured Infallibility, that Scripture contains the True Word of God? They
Answer, That this Infallible Church of Rome has Defined it so to be, and
proposed it to the People to be so believed. I demand again how they make out
the Infallibility of their Church? They Answer, By Christ's Promises in
Scripture. A special Argument, no better than a plain vicious Circle; for they
prove the Infallibility of the Scripture, by the Church, and the Infallibility
of the Church by Scripture; and prove neither Independent of each other. By
this way of Arguing Mahomet and his Alchoran may be proved Infallible. For the
Alchoran says, That Mahomet was inspired by God, who spoke in his ear in the
form of a Dove; and Mahomet says, That the Alchoran is the Word of God,
manifested by Divine Inspiration; therefore both Mahomet and the Alchoran are
Infallible. This is the same Argument applied to another subject.

The Protestant Church of England has as great a Veneration for Scripture, and
as strong and firm adherence to it as any can have, yet are not so highly
presumptuous as to arrogate to themselves a degree of Evidence, or
Infallibility exceeding that which the Motives Inductive to their Belief bring
with them: But I shall not need to insist upon the Invalidity of this Argument,
because it has lately been so Learnedly handled by that Worthy and Profound
Dr. Edw. Stillingfleet Dean of Paul's, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty,
against Mr. Edw. Worsley, a Learned Jesuit, then residing at Antwerp, who had
formerly, for many years together, been a Reader of Divinity in the Jesuits
College at Liege, where he Taught the whole Body of Divinity, yet could never
extricate himself out of this Labyrinth wherein Dr. Stillingfleet had involved
him, by this Argument: to which I refer the Reader.

This Circle being therefore laid aside, let us examine if the Scripture
Independent of the Churches Definition, bring with it this Infallibility or no.
The Scripture is questionless of it self Infallible, but it is not so to us:
for we have but a Moral certainty of the Infallibility of Scripture, and that
it is truly, and a part rei, the Word of God. The reason is, because though we
admit that what the Prophets and Apostles have left Written, was truly dictated
by the Holy Ghost, yet they who drew Copies from those Originals, wanted that
support, they were mere Men, and carried their Humane Infirmities about them,
and in after ages, as the Scripture was handed down to Posterity, the
Amanuenses, by Ignorance, Malice, or Neglect, might commit some Error, either
by excess, by defect, or by alteration, whereby their Copies might disagree
with the Originals of the first Hagiographers, at least we have no
Demonstration, nor Revelation to assure us of the contrary; and when Printing
came in, the same difficulty occurs, in relation to them that Corrected the
Print. But when it was Translated into several Languages, the difficulty is yet
greater; for beside the former casualties, admit the Translator to be an
exquisite Linguist, yet the Sense of Scripture is so very nice, that in his
Translation he might innocently express, what the Holy Ghost by the Original
never meant. Besides, that only part of Scripture is admitted, by both
Churches, as the Word of God, which is Canonical, And what Infallible Rule have
we to know, what part is Canonical, what Apocryphal? Again, in that part that
is received as Canonical, there are so many high Mysteries, some seeming
contradictions, not pervious to the Natural capacity of Man's understanding to
reconcile; the several senses thereof are so various, some passages are to be
understood Literally, some Morally, others Allegorically, some others
Tropologically, or Figuratively. How many Volumes have been Written by the
Learned in both Churches, to interpret the meaning and true sense of Scripture?
and in some places with Contradictions, and Oppositions, to each other, yet
after all we fall short of any Infallible Certainty herein: for instance, there
have been above Fifty several Senses given by Interpreters of that short
Sentence, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my Body. And one Verse in the Psalms
has puzzled the Learned of them all, viz. Increpa feras arundinis, Psalm. 68.
v. 30.
congregatio taurorum in vaccis populorum, ut excludant eos qui probati sunt
argento, in English thus: Rebuke the wild beasts of a Reed; the congregation
of Bulls in the Cowes of the people, that they may exclude those that are tried
with silver. Instances of this nature are frequent in Scripture. Humane
Tradition has brought the Scripture down to these our times, yet Humane
Authority is not Infallible, wherefore all these particulars being duly
pondered, Where will the Romanists find that assured Infallibility which they
pretend to?

As for the Second Proof from the strength of Reason, we admit Christ's
Omnipotence, Omniscience, his infinite Prudence, and Wisdom, with all other his
Divine Attributes; we also grant that our Redeemers Intention of being
Incarnate, Suffering Death, etc. was to save the Souls of Men; but this was to
be consistent with, and subordinate to that state wherein the Almighty, by his
infinite Wisdom and Providence, had placed Man in his first Creation, that is,
with a full possession, and use of his Liberty and Free Will, which our
Redeemer never intended to infringe, for that would subvert the Order of Gods
former Providence: So that by the Fruit of Christ's Passion we are furnished
with all necessaries to live a godly and a righteous Life, which without the
Grace of Christ, would not be in our power to do, for bare Nature has no
proportion of it self to Merit, ne quidem de congruo, nor to any Supernatural
Reward, as St. Augustine Teaches, against the Pelagians and Massilienses: so
that the Supernatural Graces that we receive by Christ's Merits, give us a
power to do good, and shun evil, but impose no necessity upon us to lay hold of
them, and improve them to our own good, for this depends upon our own free
election; therefore when we transgress against Gods Precepts, it is not for
want of all necessary means to observe them, but it proceeds from the Pravity
of our own Wills, which choose rather to follow the suggestion of the sensual
appetite, than submit to the conduct of Reason, and therefore are blameworthy,
for we had the power to do good, and avoid evil, and would not.

So that although of our selves we can do nothing in order to heaven, yet every
individual Member of the Church, by the Grace obtained by Christ's Passion, is
enabled, but not necessitated, to save his Soul. Non ego sed gratia Dei mecum.
It is not I, but the Grace of God with me. And if the Church should fall into
an Error (as the Church of Rome has done) the members thereof are not thereby
deprived of the usual Means of Salvation, neither does that Error prejudice
them as long as they remain in an invincible Ignorance of the Truth. But if the
Church by multiplying error upon error, should fall from being a Church, which
could not be, but that the wisest and most learned should take notice thereof,
and detect the errors, then these are bound in conscience to desert it, and
detest their errors, who consequently would remain constant and faithful to
truth, and so would continue the True Church.

And indeed, the Second Proof proposed in the Second Section proves too much,
and is to be solved by the Romanists themselves; for they Assert, that the end
of Christ's Suffering was to save all Mankind, that is, every single person of
Humane Nature, and therefore apt and proportionable means ought to be
instituted, without which this end could not be efficaciously obtained; whence
it ensues, that every individual person must have this Infallibility, yea, and
impeccability also, lest Christ's design should be frustrated: which is the
same way of Arguing as is contained in that Proof, and the illation as
evidently ensues; which notwithstanding we all grant false and erroneous, for
then none could be damned. Thus you see the grounds of the Romans
Infallibility, how specious and convincing soever they appear, yet thoroughly
examined, and the fallacies detected, they vanish to smoke.

The Third Proof: That Church which has committed Errors, and still perseveres
in them, is not Infallible; But the Church of Rome has committed errors, and
still persists in them, as I shall prove in the following Disputations of this
Treatise, ergo, The Church of Rome is not Infallible: for that Church that
actually does err, has a power to err, because been valet ab actu ad
potentiam: and it is evident, that that Church which has power or capacity to
err, is not Infallible; for Infallibility excludes a power of failing.

There yet remains to solve such Objections, as may be proposed against our
Assertion contained in the beginning of this Section.

SECT. IV. An Answer to the Objections proposed against the nullity of the
Church of Rome's Infallibility.
THe first Objection: None can Question but that such Promises as our Redeemer
has truly made to his Church, shall be fulfilled; but we have a Moral
certainty, that the Promises specifyed in the Second Section were truly made by
Christ, for we admit a Moral certainty, That the Holy Scripture is truly the
Word of God: Whence it ensues, that we are Morally certain that the Church of
Rome is Infallible.

First, I Answer, That this Objection destroys it self; for it contends for an
Infallibility, and proves it by a Reflex act of Moral certainty; whereas
Infallibility excludes a power of Erring, and Moral certainty includes that
power, so that the result of both would be, a Fallible Infallibility, which
involves a Contradiction. This is much of the nature of a Sillogisme, wherein
the conclusion semper sequitur debiliorem partem; so that if one of the
premises be scientifical, the other only probable, the conclusion will be only
probable; the reason is, because in the conclusion, the two extremes are
therefore identifi'd between themselves, because they were in the premises
identifi'd with a third; wherefore if one extreme be certainly identifi'd with
a third, the other only probably, they can but be probably identifi'd with each
other, for this identity is destroyed by separating either of the extremes from
the third. For application, The Infallibility of the Church depends upon these
two Principles; First, That we are Infallibly certain that Christ's Promises
are performed. Secondly, That we are Infallibly certain of the thing of fact,
that Christ did Promise; if either of these fail, the Infallibility fails;
and if either of these be only probable, the Infallibility is reduced to a
probability only; now though Moral certainty be the highest degree of
Probability, yet it comes as far short of Infallibility, as this Argument does
of proving it.

Secondly, I Answer: That the Church of Rome is too forward in arrogating to
themselves alone, such Promises as Christ made to his Church; for to say
nothing of the Church of Rome in Primitive times, yet since their manifold
Innovations and Superstructures, the Protestant Church is the purer, and freer
from Error; and consequently has more right to lay hold of those Promises then
the Church of Rome.

The Second Objection: Though the Church, taken barely by it self, and without
the support of that Testimony from Holy Writ, should not be Infallible, yet
backed by the Motives of Credibility, it will be rendered absolutely unerrable;
for these Motives do so peculiarly affect it, and as it were point it out to be
the True Church of Christ, that it dissipates all the Clouds of Ambiguity,
which blind the incredulous; For who can consider the lineal descent and
succession of Chief Pastors, the austerity and holiness of life exercised in
Monasteries, of both Sexes; the Miracles wrought by the Members of this Church,
with the Blood of so many Martyrs, the effusion whereof does daily irrigate the
same, and renders it more fertile, with other Motives of this nature, which all
are the Badges of this Church. Who, I say, can seriously ponder this, without
framing an Infallible Judgment, that the Church of Rome is the True Church of
Christ? There is certainly a strict and Metaphysical connection, between these
Motives, and the True Church, for it is not consistent with the Divine
Goodness, and veracity of God, to cooperate to such a Delusion, as this would
be, if these Motives should indicate a False Church, subject to Error, which
would make God himself the Author of this Error: We may therefore hence
conclude, the Church of Rome, in which such great Wonders are so frequently
wrought, to be the True, and Infallible Church of Christ.

The First Answer: Among all the Doctors and Divines of the Church of Rome, I
never knew of any that asserted this strict and metaphysical connection of the
Motives of Credibility with the True Church, but only Cardinal Lugo. Yet I have
seen a whole Torrent of Authority of other Doctors of the same Church, of the
contrary opinion, who all affirm, that the collection of these Motives, may
possibly affect a false Church; wherefore let these Authors solve this
Objection.

The Second Answer. All these Motives of credibility are fallacious, as
depending upon Humane Authority, and being subject to many casualties and
deceits; and first for the succession of Chief Pastors, whose Jurisdiction, by
an Illegal Usurpation, extends it self de facto, over the whole Body, but is
limited de jure, to the Diocese of Rome only; and how long together has the
Body been without a head, as if it had been defunct? and then Monster-like, it
appeared with two heads, it being hard to decide which of them had most right.
And what is to be said of Liberius Pope, who subscribed the Arians Heresy, and
joined with them; and of Vigilius, who approved and condemned the same Doctrine
in the three Chapters? Must these also be links of continuation in the
Succession? Surely they were not Infallible. Consider the manner of their
Election, when there occurs a vacancy, there will not be wanting those in the
College of Cardinals, who have ambition enough to aspire to such a dignity,
whereto is annexed a Temporal Principality, a Triple Crown, with many splendid
Titles, which makes the Succession sure; But how few are there in the
Consistory, who are swayed by Piety, and Religion, to give their Suffrage only
for such a Person as is duly qualified for so high a Prelacy? But, when they
have entered the Conclave, What a Bundle of Ambition is there shut up together?
How many are there that take their Measures from By and Sinister ends? some
from Ambition, others from Humane Policy, others again from Self-interest; some
give their Votes for such a Cardinal, because he is of the Spanish Faction,
they having a Pension to uphold that Faction. Others choose another, because he
is of the French Faction, whose Pensioners they are; Others choose one who is
most addicted to themselves, hoping that by his Promotion, they shall become
great and powerful; another again, who conceives himself fit to be elected,
casts away his own Vote upon one that is most unlike to be chosen, lest his
Suffrage, by making access to the Party of his Competitor, should promote him,
and deprive himself of so high a Dignity. What stuff is this, to have an
influence upon the Electors of a Chief Pastor? nay, How remote is all this from
Infallibility? As for Austerity, I believe that many out of a true Motive of
Piety are wrought to embrace it; But how many more are there that glory in
their gross and vile habit, and so are proud of their seeming Humility? and in
stead of holiness of life, How many enormous crimes are committed within those
private Walls? they have their Pride, Ambition, and Factions one against
another, especially among the Female Sex. For Miracles, How many thousands have
been cried up as true, and afterward decry'd, when the Fallacy was detected?
And how many have the repute of Martyrs, who in reality were Malefactors,
deserving death? But how many Martyrs have the Romanists made in England, by
putting them to death merely in odium fidei? wherefore it is plain and evident,
that all these particulars being doubtful and uncertain, no Infallibility can
be hence evinced.

The Third Objection: They whose reason and understandings are convinced of the
truth of the Roman Religion, are bound in conscience to believe it as the true
Church of God. For there is a Divine Precept still incumbent upon them, which
commands them not to sin; therefore it commands them the necessary means to
avoid sin: but as they stand convinced, the necessary means to avoid sin, is to
believe it to be the true Church of God; but it cannot be, that God should
command Men to believe an error, or that which is false; therefore it is an
infallible truth, that the Church of Rome is the true Church of Christ: for
else God would command us to believe falsity, and error, and so God himself
would be the Author of it.

First, I Answer, by retorting this Argument: The Greeks, for Example, who hear
their learned Doctors, and Preachers Explicate and Preach their Doctrine of the
Trinity, that the Holy Ghost does not proceed from the Father and the Son, but
only from the Father by the Son, which they propose with so much plausibility,
and seeming truth, that the hearers are convinced of the truth thereof, as
belonging to Faith; in this case God commands them not to sin; and consequently
commands the necessary means to avoid sin, which is to believe that Doctrine as
an Article of Faith; which notwithstanding is false and erroneous. I ask the
Romanists, Whether in this case God commands the Greeks to believe this error?
and if they solve this Argument, they will solve their own.

Secondly, I Answer, That in the case proposed in the Argument, I admit a
Precept of not sinning; but I deny any Precept of believing the Church of Rome
to be the true Church of God. Nay, such a belief, upon the first appearance of
truth, would be a sin; for such an easy belief, upon ungrounded, though
plausible Arguments, in a matter of Moment, is an act of rashness, and
temerity, which, I am sure, are no virtues; and consequently not commanded by
Gods Precept. The reason is, because where there are several means to attain an
end, though the end be under Precept, yet no means in particular falls under
the same Precept, as in the case proposed, They who seem to be convinced of the
truth of the Church of Rome, ought in prudence to suspend their Judgment, to
Read Authors that Treat of such matters, to Converse with Men of Integrity,
Piety, Knowledge, and Learning, and then seriously to ponder, and maturely to
consider the whole matter; this is an act of Prudence, and Discretion, and
consequently no sin; so that the Persons in the Case proposed are not
restrained to one only means of avoiding sin, but may make use of any that is
sit, and apt in order to that end. Else they must acknowledge the Protestant
Church to be True and Orthodox: for they who are convinced that this Church is
the true Church of Christ, are commanded not to sin; and so to believe that the
Protestant Church of England is the True Church of Christ, which must be so,
because God cannot command us to believe an Error.

But you may Instance, That an Infallible Church is certainly better then a
Fallible one, and the infinite goodness of God is such, as always to determine
him to do that which is best; and consequently in this case has made his Church
Infallible, this being best. I Answer: The Principle on which this Instance is
grounded, is commonly rejected by the Roman Divines; In 1 partem, D. Thomae.
for though Granado a Spanish Jesuit does fusely contend to establish a
necessity in God to do always that which is best; yet I have heard him
earnestly impugned by other Professors of Divinity, of the same order, and in
the same College of St. Hermeingildus, where Granado himself Taught it, and
Printed it; and though he have some Sectators in this Point, yet a far greater
number of Doctors, of several Orders, Teach the contrary.

The case stands thus: Here are two of Gods Attributes, viz. his Liberty, and
Infinite Goodness, brought in competition with each other: Granado, to maintain
the Goodness of God, detracts from his Absolute Liberty, and Freedom; which
notwithstanding is as Essential to God, as his Goodness. Other Authors
industrioufly contend to defend the Attribute of Goodness, without prejudice of
liberty; for without any such fatal necessity of restraining the Omnipotent, he
has an ample field wherein to display his Goodness. That we have our Being is
an effect of Gods Goodness; that we are replenisht with all Necessaries, and
Conve^^ences in this life, flows from his Bounty and Goodness; that we were
Redeemed when we were lost in Adam, was Gods great Goodness toward us; that we
are now furnished with all Necessary Means of Salvation proceeds from Gods
Goodness; and the Ineffable and Eternal Goods of Heaven, which we hope for, are
no other then the products of Gods Infinite Goodness and Mercy. Besides, we are
no competent Judges whether a Fallible, or Infallible Church be best; for the
second in it self seems best to us; yet the All-seeing Eye of God, who
perfectly comprehends all the circumstances thereof, together with all the
combinations and Subordinations of one thing toward another, in relation to
the Divine Intention, it may be, for ought we know, that a Church liable to
error, All things considered, may be the best.

Thus you see, according to my intended purpose, I have delivered the Substance
of what I Designed in this matter, Methodically, and with as much Brevity as
was consistent with the clear understanding of the same; Wherein, First, I
proposed several Principles and Maxims of the Roman Doctors, necessary and
useful for the subsequent Discourse. Secondly, I gave you the grounds of their
pretended Infallibility, without dissembling any thing of their full strength.
Thirdly, I set down my Tenet, and Proofs thereof, destructive of that
Infallibility. And Fourthly, I solved their Objections: which Method I shall
observe for the future, and hereby we may consider, upon how weak a foundation,
this Main Pillar of the Church of Rome is grounded, whereby the whole structure
becomes disjoined, and ruinous.

Dispute II. Of the Intrenchments of the Church of Rome upon Divine Right, by
changing the Essentials of their pretended Sacraments.
The Preface.
MAny Censures of the highest strain, has the Church of Rome thundered out
against the Protestants, for Separating from her Communion, and deserting her
Tenets in that Latitude, as she professes them; whereas, notwithstanding, the
Protestant Church, did most Religiously embrace all the Doctrine and Practice
instituted by Christ, and expressed in Holy Writ; and rejected only the
Corruptions and Innovations, which had no Authority but Humane; she separated
the pure Gold from the Dross, and the Wheat from the Cockle; and by this means
continued the true Church of Christ, pure and undefiled. But what Censure does
the Church of Rome deserve, who, by a bold and a high attempt endeavors to
incroach upon Divine Right, by making a change and reformation, in the Original
Institutions of Christ himself? as shall appear by the several Sections of this
Disputation.

SECT. I. Of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome relating to this present
Controversy.
THere are various Principles, and Dogmatical Decisions, of the Church of Rome,
much conducing to this present Discourse, whereof some are defined by their
General Councils; others are promiscuously Taught and Asserted by their
Divines. And because I here intend to argue ad hominem, that is, out of their
own Doctrine; I shall therefore do them no wrong, by drawing such illations
from thence, as shall clearly evince their violating of Divine Right; by
endeavoring, as much as in them lies, to make an Essential change in their
Sacraments, which they acknowledge Instituted by Christ himself.

First therefore, They admit Seven Sacraments, to wit, Baptism, Confirmation,
Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Order and Matrimony. And though they
ground themselves upon several Texts of Scripture misunderstood for the
practice of them, yet it is a business of greater arduity to prove them all
Sacraments; but to satisfy their Sectators, they need no more then to tell
them, that these are all defined, to be Sacraments, by the Council of Trent, in
these words; Si quis dixerit Sacramenta novae legis non fuisse omnia a Jesu
Christo Domino Nostro instituta; Trid. Sess. Can. 1.
aut esse plura vel pauciora quam septem, videlicet, Baptismum, Confirmationem,
Eucharistiam, Poenitentiam, Extremam Vnctionem, Ordinem, and Matrimonium: aut
etiam aliquod horum septem non esse vere, and proprie Sacramentum; Anathema
sit. If any one shall say, That the Sacraments of the New Law were not all
Instituted by Jesus Christ our Lord: Or that they are more or fewer then Seven,
namely, Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Order,
and Matrimony; or also, that any one of these, is not truly and properly a
Sacrament, let him be Accursed. But because it is not the drift of my present
design to examine the truth hereof, I shall therefore wave it, and only suppose
it to be their Doctrine.

Secondly, They admit, that all Sacraments were Instituted by Christ himself,
for as much as concerns the Essence and Substance of them, and consequently it
exceeds the limits of any Humane Power, either to abrogate, or to alter any
thing of that which is by Divine Right established, and that they were all
Instituted by Christ is also defined by the Council of Trent, as above, and
Asserted by their Divines.

Thirdly, In every Sacrament they distinguish between the Essential, and
Accidental parts of it; the Essential parts they place in the matter and form;
the Accidental parts are the Ceremonies, Prayers, Unctions, and Actions, which
are used in the Administration of them, which they call not Sacramenta, but
Sacramentalia. And whenever the Essential parts are daily applied to the
Receiver, though the Accidental parts are omitted, yet the Sacrament is valid:
But if either of the Essential parts be wanting, that is, if either the true
matter, or the true form which Christ instituted be not applied, then the
Sacrament is void, as their Divines Teach: For example, in the Sacrament of
Baptism there is materia proxima, and materia remota, a remote, and an
immediate matter: the remote is the natural Element of Water, the immediate is
the Lotion, or the action, whereby the Baptiser applies the Water to the
Baptized; during which action the Essential Form is to be pronounced by the
Baptiser in these words: I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and the Son,
and the Holy Ghost. In this matter and form consists the whole Substance and
Essence of this Sacrament, and therefore if by reason of the weakness of the
Child, or by any other incident casualty the other Ceremonies cannot be
performed, yet the Child is Truly Baptized, though performed by the Midwife, or
any other person, because all the essential parts of Baptism, instituted by
Christ, are duly applied to the Child, though the Unctions, Prayers, and other
Ceremonies be omitted; and they insist so earnestly upon these essential parts,
that in case no other Water could be had but Rose Water, or some other Liquor
that has affinity with Water, they hold the Sacrament not valid, because the
Matter instituted by Christ is wanting, which is the natural Element of Water.

Fourthly, They hold that though the Matter and Form be the whole Essence of
the Sacrament, yet if they be not conjoined so as to make up one thing, the
Sacrament is null, and of no effect; for the form must be applied to the matter,
and have a moral concomitance with it, or else it cannot have a moral union
with the same; if therefore the Water in Baptism be applied to day to the
Baptized, and the form pronounced to morrow, there will be no Baptism, nor
Sacrament, for the words would be false, which signify a present Lotion.

Fifthly, Of all the seven Sacramentss which they admit, they assert that only
three, to wit, Baptism, Confirmation, and Order, do imprint upon the Soul of
the Receiver an indelible, spiritual Character, never to be blotted out, so as
those Souls which receive any of these three Sacraments, after separation from
the Body, will appear in the next World, with these characteristical Notes
instampt upon them, some with one, some with two, others with all three,
according to their respective differences, they having an essential
discrepation from one another, each of them denoting the Sacrament from whence
they proceeded. Hence they infer, that none of these three Sacraments, when
once validly conferred, can be reiterated, or received twice by the same
Person, and that it would be a Sacrilege to attempt it; because they frustrate
the effect of the Sacrament; yet if there arise any doubt of the validity of
the former collation, then a strict inquiry is to be made how grounded that
doubt is, and if it be still found ambiguous, then that Sacrament is to be
again conferred sub condition. But if it be evident that there was wanting
either the true matter or the true form, which are all the essentials, or the
right intention of the Administrer (which is also necessary;) In this case the
Sacrament is to be conferred again absolute. Having thus made a brief
reflection upon the Principles, and Practice of the Church of Rome, in what
relates to this matter: I now proceed to prove ad hominem, their trespasses
against Divine Right, by deviating from Christ's Institutions, and introducing
in place thereof their own humane inventions, but shall desire you first to
take a cursory view of the ancient Rites of Ordaining Priests.

SECT. II. The Practice of Antiquity in the Collation of Priesthood.
ORdination is received amongst the Romanists, not only as a Sacrament, but
also as one of those that imprint a Character. So the Council of Trent: Si quis
dixerit ordinem, Conc. Trid. Sess. 23. Can. 3.
sive Sacram ordinationem, non esse vere, and proprie Sacramentum, a Christo
Domino institutum, etc. anathema sit. And again, the same Council declares: Si
quis dixerit, Trident. Sess. 7. Can. 9.
in tribus Sacramentis: Baptismo scilicet, confirmatione, and ordine, non
imprimi characterem in anima, hoc est signum quoddam Spirituale, and
indelibile, unde ea iterari non possunt, anathema sit. If any one shall say,
That Order or Holy Ordination, is not truly and properly a Sacrament,
Instituted by Christ, let him be Accursed. And if any one shall say, That in
three Sacraments, to wit, Baptism, Confirmation and Order, there is not
Imprinted in the Soul a Character, that is, a certain Spiritual Sign, not to be
blotted out, and therefore cannot be renewed, let him be Accursed. And to this
subscribe all their Divines; which their Universal Practice and Belief
confirms. There are seven Orders in use among them. Albert. Mag Lib. Theolog.
c. 36.
Septem sunt ordines, says Albertus Magnus, Scilicet, Ostiarius, Lector,
Exorcista, Acolytus, Subdiaconus, Diaconus, and Presbyter, qui omnium ordinum
est perfectissimus and terminus aliorum: There are seven Orders, says he, to
wit, the Dowkepeer, the Reader, the Exorcist, the Candle-bearer, the
Subdeacon, the Deacon, and the Priest, which is the most perfect of all, and
the end of the others. And of this last only we shall here Treat.

That we may with more perspicuity penetrate the difference between the present
Doctrine and Practice of the Church of Rome, and the Custom of all the
Christian World, from Christ and the Apostles time, by compering the one with
the other, I (...) expedient here to give the (...) view of the Ancient Rituals
of the Latins, the Greeks, the Syrians, Maronites, Nestorians, Jacobites,
Eutichians, the Copticks, the Egyptians and the Aethiopians, which were
dispersed all the East over as far as China, and incorporated among the Tartars,
the Persians, the Turks, etc. and the Nestorians alone had among them above a
Thousand Bishops. And first we'll begin with the Latins.

A Pontisial written Eleven hundred years since for the Ordination of Priests
according to the Latins.
This Ritual was Written in a most splendid and magnificent Character, which
from France was conveyed to Stockholme in Sweathland, and thence, by a great
price, redeemed, by Christina Queen of that Kingdom, after she had abandoned
her Regal Government, as Morinus relates who saw it, and Transcribed it into
Latin; which I shall here set down word for word, to avoid Repetition, when
the same occurs in other Rituals.

Allocutio ad Populum in Ordinatione Presbyteri.
QVoniam dilectissimi Fratres, Rectori navis, and navigio deferendis eadem est
vel securitatis ratio, vel timoris, communis little debet esse sententia, quorum
causa communis existit; nec frustra a Patribus, reminiscimur institutum, ut de
electione eorum, qui ad regimen altaris adhibendi sunt, consulatur. Quia de
actu and conversatione praesenti, quod nonnunquam ignoratur a pluribus, scitur
a paucis. Et necesse est ut facilius quis obedientiam exhibeat Ordinato, oui
adsensum praebuerit Ordinando. Fratris nostri, and compresbyteri conversatio
quantum nosse mihi videor, probata, ac Deo placita est, and digna, ut arbitror,
Ecclesiastici honoris augmento. Sed ne unum fortasse, vel paucos, aut decipiat
assensio, aut fallat affectio, sententia est expectanda multorum. Itaque quid
de ejus actibus, aut moribus noveritis, quid de meritis sentiatis, Deo test
consulemus. Debet hanc fidem habere caritas vestra, quam secundum praeceptum
Evangelii, and Deo exhibere debetis, and proximo, ut huic testimonium
Sacerdoti, magis pro merito, quam pro affectione, aliquid tribuatis. Et qui
devotionem omnium expectamus, intelligere tacentes non possitmus. Scimus tamen
quod est acceptabilius Deo, aderit per Spiritum Sanctum consensus unus omnium
animorum, and ideo electionem vestram debetis voce publica profiteri. Per
Dominum, etc.

Oration ad Presbiteros Ordinandos.
Oremus dilectissimi Deum Patrem omnipotentem, ut super hunc famulum suum, quem
ad Presbiterii munus elegit, coelestia dona multiplicet, and quae ejus
dignatione suscipiunt, ejus exequantur auxilio, per Dominum, etc.

Item alia.
Exaudi nos Deus Salutaris Noster, ut super hunc famulum tuum benedictionem
Spiritus Sancti, and gratiae sacerdotalis effunde virtutem, ut quem tuae
pietatis suspectibus offerimus consecrandum, perpetua muneris tui largitate
persequaris. Per Dominum, etc.

Consecratio.
Domine Sancte Pater, omnipotens aeterne Deus, honorum omnium dignitatum, quae
tibi militant distributor, per quem cuncta firmantur amplificatis semper in
melius naturae rationalis incrementis, per ordinem congrua ratione dispositum,
unde Sacerdotalis gradus, and officia Levitarum, Sacramentis mysticis instituta
creverunt, ut cum Pontifices summos regendis Populis praefecisses, ad eorum
societatis, and operis adjumentum, sequentes ordines viros, and secundae
dignitatis elegeris; sic in eremo per 70 virorum prudentium mentis Moysi
Spiritum propagasti, quibus ille adjutoribus usus in populo, innumeras
multitudines facile gubernavit. Sic and Eleazaro, and Ithamar filiis Aaron
Paternae plenitudinis abundantiam transfudisti, and ad hostias salutares and
frequentiores Officii Sacramenta sufficeret meritum Sacerdotum. Hac providentia
Domine, Apostolis filii tui, Doctores fidei conntes addidisti, quibus illi
orbem totum secundis praedicatoribus impleverunt. Quapropter infirmitati quoque
nostrae, Domine, quaesumus, haec adjumenta largire, qui quanto magis
fragiliores sumus, tanto his pluries indigemus. Da quaesumus omnipotens Pater
in hoc famulo tuo illo Preshiterii dignitatem: innova in visceribus ejus
Spiritum Sanctitatis, acceptum a te Deus secundi meriti munus obtineat,
censuramque morum, exemplo suae conversationis insinuet. Sit providens
cooperator ordinis nostri, eluceat in eo totius forma justitiae, ut bonam
rationem dispensationis sibi creditae redditurus, aeternae beatitudinis praemia
consequatur.

Consummatio Presbyteri.
Sit nobis fratres communis oration, ut his qui in adjutorium, and utilitatem
vestrae salutis eligetur, Presbiteratus benedictionem, Divini indulgentia
muneris consequatur, and Sancti Spiritus Sacerdotalia dona privilegio virtutum,
ne impar loco deprehendatur obtineat per suum, per Dominum, etc.

Item Benedictio.
Sanctificationem omnium Author, cujus vera consecratio plena benedictio est. Tu
Domine super hunc famulum ill. quem Presbyterii honori dedicamus, manum tuae
benedictionis eum infunde, ut gravitate actuum and censura vivendi, probet se
esse seniorem, his institutus disciplinis quas Tito, and Timotheo Paulus
exposuit, ut in lege tua die ac nocte omnipotens, meditans, quod elegerit
credat; quod crediderit doceat; quod docuerit meditetur, justitiam,
constantiam, misericordiam, fortitudinem in se ostendat, exemplum probet,
admonitionem confirmet, ut purum atque immaculatum ministerii tui donum
custodiat, and per obsequium plebis tuae, corpus and sanguinem Filii tui
immaculata benedictione transformet, and inviolabili caritate in virum
perfectum in mensuram aetatis planitudinis Christi in die justitiae aeterni
judicii, conscientia pura, fide plena, Spirito Sancto plenus persolvat. Per
Dominum, etc.

Consecratio Manus.
Consecrentur manus istae, and sanctificentur per istam unctionem, and nostram
benedictionem, ut quaecunque benedixerint, benedicta sint, and quaecunque
sanctificaverint sanctificentur. Per Dominum, etc.

Item alia.
Vnguantur manus istae de oleo Sanctificato, and Chrismate Sanctificationis,
sicut unxit Samuel David in Regem, and Prophetam, ita unguantur, and
consummentur, in nomine Dei Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, facientes
imaginem Sanctae Crucis Salvatoris Domini Nostri J. Christi, qui nos a morte
redemit, and ad regna coelorum perduxit. Exaudi nos pie pater omnipotens
aeterne Deus, and praesta quod te rogamus and oramus. Per Dominum, etc.

The Speech to the People at the Ordination of a Priest.
BEcause, most dearly beloved Brethren, the Pilot and Passengers are equally
concerned in their security, or fear, their opinion ought to be common, seeing
their cause is common: neither in vain do we remember, that it was ordained by
the Fathers, That we ought to consult about the Election of those, that are to
be advanced to the Regiment of the Altar. Because few men know, what most are
ignorant of, a Man's actions and present conversation. And it is necessary that
every one will willingly obey him Ordained, to whose Ordination he gave his
Assent: The Conversation of our Brother and fellow Priest, as far as I do know,
is approved and pleasing to God, worthy, as I Judge, of this Augmentation of
Ecclesiastical honor. But lest perhaps one or a few may be deceived by
consent, or deluded by affection, we must wait for the opinion of many;
therefore God being witness, let us consider what ye know of his Manners and
Actions, what ye think of his deserts. Your Charity ought to have this belief,
which according to the Gospel, ye owe to God and your Neighbor, that ye grant
your Testimony to this Priest, rather for Desert than Affection; and we, who
expect your Pious Vote, cannot understand those that are silent: Yet we know it
to be more acceptable to God, that by the Holy Ghost there shall be an
unanimous consent of all, and therefore ye ought to profess your Election by a
Public Voice. Per Dominum, etc.

The Prayer at the Ordination of Priests.
Most dearly Beloved, Let us pray God the Father Omnipotent, That he would
multiply his heavenly gifts upon this his Servant, whom he has chosen to the
Office of a Priest, and what Gifts they receive by his favor they may execute
by his help. Per Dom. etc.

Another.
Hear us God our Savior, and pour out the Blessing of thy Holy Spirit, and
Virtue of Sacerdotal grace upon this thy servant, and that whom we offer to be
Consecrated to the sight of thy Piety, thou may assist with the perpetual
bounty of thy Gift. Per Dominum, etc.

The Consecration.
O Lord Holy Father, Omnipotent Eternal God, the distributor of all honors and
dignities to those who fight for thee, by whom all things are confirmed, always
enlarging the increase of reasonable nature for the better, through order
disposed by an agreeable reason, whence the degree of Priesthood, and Office of
Levites, instituted by Mystical Sacraments, increased; that, seeing thou have
placed Archbishops to rule thy people, that thou would choose Men of
subsequent Order, and of a second Dignity, for the assistance of their Society
and Labor; So in the Wilderness, by the prudence of 70 Men propagated the
Spirit of Moses, who using those Assistants among the People, he easily
Governed innumerable multitudes; and likewise thou did transfuse into Eleazar
and Ithamar, the sons of Aaron, the abundance of their Fathers fullness; and
that the Merit of Priests should suffice for saving Sacrifices and Sacraments
of a more frequent Office. O Lord, by this Providence, thou have added to the
Apostles of thy Son, Doctors of our Faith, their Companions, wherewith they
filled the whole World with prosperous Preachers. Wherefore, Lord, we beseech
thee, bestow such Assistance on our infirmity, who by how much we are more
frail, by so much the more we stand in need thereof. Give, we beseech thee,
Omnipotent Father, that Dignity of Priesthood in this thy servant; renew in his
bowels the Spirit of that Holiness, let him obtain the Gift of the Second
Merit received from thee, O God, and let him insinuate a Censure of his Manners
by the Example of his Conversation, let him be a provident cooperator of our
Order, let the form of all Justice shine forth from him, that when he shall
give a good account of his Stewardship committed to him, he may attain the
rewards of Eternal Bliss.

The Consummation of the Priest.
Brethren, Let it be our common Prayer, that he who shall be elected for the
help and benefit of your Salvation, may, by the Indulgence of Gods gift,
obtain the Benediction of Priesthood, and by the Privilege of his Virtues,
lest he be found unmeet for his place, he may obtain by his own, the Sacerdotal
Gifts of the Holy Spirit. Per Dominum, etc.

The Benediction.
O the Author of all Sanctification, whose true Consecration is a plenary
Benediction; Thou, O Lord, upon this thy Servant, whom we Dedicate to the honor
of Priesthood, pour out the hand of thy Blessing, that by the gravity of his
actions, and censure of living, he approve himself an Elder, instructed in the
Discipline, which Paul expounded to Titus and Timothy, that, O Omnipotent God,
day and night meditating in thy Law, he may believe what he has chosen, what
he has Believed he may Teach, what he has Taught he may Meditate; he may show
forth in himself Justice, Constancy, Mercy and Fortitude, may approve his
Example, may confirm his Admonition, that he may preserve the Gift of thy
Ministry pure and undefiled, and may transform, by his Immaculate Benediction,
the Body and Brood of thy Son, through the obedience of thy People: that as a
perfect Man, with inviolable Charity to the measure of age, of the fullness of
Christ, in the day of the Justice of Eternal Judgment, he may acquit himself
with a pure Conscience, with a full Faith, being filled with the Holy Ghost.
Per Dominum, etc.

Consecration of the Hand.
Let these Hands be Consecrated and Sanctified by this Unction, and our
Benediction, that whatever they Bless may be Blessed, and whatever they
Sanctify may be Sanctified. Per Dominum, etc.

Another.
Let these Hands be Anointed with this Holy Oil, and Chrisme of
Sanctification, as Samuel Anointed David for a King and a Prophet, so let them
be Anointed and Completed in the Name of God the Father, the Son and the Holy
Ghost, making the Sign of the Cross of the Lord our Savior Jesus Christ, who
Redeemed us from Death, and brings us to the Kingdom of Heaven. Hear us, Pious
Father, Omnipotent Eternal God, and perform what we entreat and pray of thee.
Per Dominum, etc.

A Ritual taken out of the Fourth Council of Carthage.
WHere these words are contained: Presbyter cum Ordinatur, Episcopo eum
benedicente, and manum super caput ejus tenente, etiam omnes Presbyteri qui
presents sunt, manus suas juxta manum Episcopi super caput illius teneant.

Another taken out of the Fourth Council of Carthage.
WHen a Priest is Ordained, the Bishop Blessing him, and holding his hand upon
his head, likewise all the Priests that are present, shall lay their hands upon
his head, by the hand of the Bishop.

The Ritual of Gelatius Pope, Written 900 years since.
ORdo qualiter Romana sedis Apostolicae Ecclesia, Presbyteri, Diaconi vel
Subdiaconi eligendi sunt. Mensis primi, quarti, septimi, and decimi Sabbatorum
die in duodecim lectiones ad Sanctum Petrum ubi Missae celebrantur. Postquam
antiphonam ad introitum dixerint, data oratione, adnuntiat Pontifex in Populo
dicens: Auxiliante Domino Deo, and salvatore nostro Jesu Christo. Iterum dicit:
Auxiliante Domino Deo, and salvatore nostro Jesu Christo, eligimus in ordine
Diaconi, sive Presbyteri illum Diaconum sive Subdiaconum, de titulo illo. Si
quis autem habet aliquid contra hos viros, pro Deo and propter Deum cum fiducia
exeat, and dicat: verumtamen memor sit communionis suae. Et post modicum
intervallum mox incipiunt omnes Kyrie eleison, cum Letania; hac expleta,
ascendunt ipsi electi ad sedem Pontificis, and benedicit cos a quo vocati sunt,
and descendunt. Stant in ordines suos benedictione percepta.

Sequitur oration de bened require ipsam in quarto aut decimo mense.

The Ritual of Gelatius the Pope, Written 900 years since.
THe Order how Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, are to be chosen in the Roman
Church of the Sea Apostolic. On the Sabbath of the First, Fourth, Seventh, and
Tenth Month, at the 12 Lessons at St. Peter's Church, where Masses are
celebrated. After they have said the Antiphon to the Introitus, after Prayer,
let the Bishop declare among the People, saying, Our Lord God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ assisting us. Again, he says, Our Lord God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ assisting, We choose into the Order of Deacon, or Priest, that Deacon, or
Subdeacon of that Title. If any one have any thing against these Men, for Gods
sake let him come forth with coufidence and speak: yet let him be mindful of
his Communion. And after a small interval, all forthwith begin Kyrie Eleison,
with the Letany: this completed, the Persons chosen step up to the Bishops
Seat, and he Blesses them from whom they are called, and they go down. They
stand in their Orders the Blessing being received.

Then follows a Prayer of Benediction, as in the Fourth, or the Tenth Month.
What follows is all as above.

Ad Ordinandos Presbyteros.
Oremus dilectissimi, etc. the same in substance as above. Then follows
Consecratio. Consummatio Presbyteri. Item Benedictio. All the same as above.

A Ritual of above 800 years standing.
This Ritual and the next were taken out of a Written Book kept in the
Pontifical Chamber of the Vatican, which the Pope used when he Officiated. It
may be seen in the Fifth Tome of St. Gregory.

POstquam antiphonam ad introitum dixerint, data oratione, venit Archidiaconus
and offert eum qui ordinandus est, Pontifici, ita dicens: Postulat sanct a
matter Ecclesia Catholica, ut hunc praesentem diaconum ad onus Presbyterii
ordinetis. Interrogat Episcopus: Scis illum dignum esse? Respondet offerens:
quantum humana fragilitas nosse sinit; and scio, and testificor ipsum dignum
esse ad hujus onus officii, etc. Tunc annnnciat Pontifex Populo: Auxiliante
Domino Deo, etc. the same as in the Ritual of Gelatius, then follows, Oration ad
Presbyteros Ordinandos Consecratio. Hic vestis and casulam: Benedictio Patris
and filii and Spiritus Sancti, descendat super te, ut sis benedictus in ordine
sacerdotali; and offeras placabiles hostias pro peccatis, at que offensionibus
populi omnipotenti Deo, cui sit honor and gloria in secula seculorum. Then
Consecratio manus; as above, and nothing else.

A Ritual of above 800 years standing.
AFter they shall have said the Antiphon to the Introitus, after Prayer, comes
the Archdeacon, and presents him who is to be Ordained, to the Bishop, saying
thus; The Holy Mother, the Catholic Church requires, that ye Ordain this
Deacon here present to the charge of Priesthood. The Bishop Asks, Do you know
him worthy? The Archdeacon Answers; So far as humane frailty is suffered to
know, I both know and testify him to be worthy to undergo the burden of this
Office. Then let the Bishop say to the People, Auxiliante Domino Deo, etc. By
the help of the Lord God, etc. Then the Prayer and Consecration, the Priestly
Vestment, etc. The Blessing of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost descend upon
thee, that thou may be blessed in the Priesthood, and may offer acceptable
Sacrifices for sins and offenses of the people to Allmighty God, to whom be
Honor and Glory for ever and ever.

A Ritual taken out of a very ancient Manuscript of the Vatican.
This contains nothing different from the former, but only a word or two here
and there changed, without any essential difference.

There are Three other Rituals, the one belonging to Corbie in France, another
is a Ritual that was used in England 800 years since, and now belongs to the
Church of Roane. The Third belongs to the Church of Remes, and was Written
about 800 years since, which all agree with that above.

There is another Ritual 700 years old: This did belong to one Constantinus
Caetanus, Abbot of a Monastery near Rome, which contains all that the former
Rituals have, but is more ample, and adds more Ceremonies and Prayers, not any
way belonging to the Essentials of Priesthood, except that which is specified
toward the end; for the Bishop having recited the Consecration, he totally
omits that which is contained under the Title: Consummatio Presbyteri, as in
the first Ritual; then he puts the Stole on the right shoulder of him that is
to be Ordained, saying, Accipe jugum Dei, jugum enim ejus suave est, and onus
ejus leve; Receive the yoke of God, for his yoke is sweet and his burden
light. Then he puts on his Casula, or Vestment, saying, Stola innocentiae
induat te Dominus: God put thee on the Stole of Innocence. Then follows the
Benediction: Deus Sanctificationum, etc. as in the first Ritual; which done,
Capiens oleum facit crucem super manus ambas, ita dicens: Consecrare and
sanctificare digneris Domine manus istas, per istam unctionem, ut quaecunque
consecraverint, consecrentur, and quaecunque benedixerint benedicantur and
sanctificentur in nomine Domini nostri Jesu Christi.

Hoc facto, accipiat patenam cum oblatis, and calic^^^ cum vino dicat Accipe
potestatem, (...) sacrificium Deo, Missamque cebb^^re, tam pro vivis quam pro
defunctis in nomine Domini.

Benedictio.
Benedictio Dei Patris, and silii, and Spiritus Sancti descendet saper vos ut
sitis benedicti in ordine Sacerdotali, and offeratis placabiles hostias pro
peccatis at que offensionibus populi omnipotenti Deo, cui est honor and gloria
per omnia.

Taking the Oil, he makes a Cross upon both his hands, saying thus; O Lord,
vouchsafe to Consecrate and Sanctify these hands by this Unction, that
whatever they shall Consecrate may be consecrated, and whatever they shall
bless, may be blessed in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

This being performed, let him take the Paren with the Offerings, and the
Calice with the Wine, let him say, Receive the Power to offer Sacrifice to God,
and to say Mass, both for the Living and the Dead, in the Name of our Lord, etc.

The Benediction.
Let the Blessing of God the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost
descend upon ye; may ye be blessed in the Order of riesthood, and may ye offer
Attoning Sacrifices for the Sins and offenses of the People to Almighty God; To
whom be Honor and Glory, etc.

This is the first Ritual that I can find, which contains the touching of the
Chalice with Wine, and the Pattene with an Host, with this Form, Accipe
potestatem, etc. as above, which the Church of Rome has ever since retained to
this day.

Another Ritual belonging to the Church of Men's, of 450 years standing,
contains all that the former has: But in the Margin, it is written, that the
Bishop says to them that are Ordained, Accipe Spiritum Sanctum; quorum
remiserit is peccata, remittuntur eis, and quorum retinueritis retenta sunt,
etc. post sumptionem corporis and Sanguinis Jesu Christi, antequam dicatur
postcommunio, tunc Episcopus trahat unicuique casulam deorsum per scapulas,
osculans eum, and dicens: Pax Domini sit semper tecum.

Receive the Holy Ghost; whose sins ye remit, are remitted, and whose sins ye
retain, are retained. And after the receiving the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ, before the saying of the Post-Communion, let the Bishop let down the
Vestment from their shoulders, kissing each of them, and saying, Let the Peace
of our Lord be always with you.

This addition is all the difference between this and the last Ritual; and in
the perusal of these, and several other Rituals, I never met with any power to
Remit and Retain sins, communicated to the Ordained by such plain and express
words, after they had received the power of Priesthood. Yet by the Custom of
some Churches, this form Accipe Spiritum Sanctum quorum, etc. is used in the
beginning of the Ordination of Priests, and accompanyeth the Imposition of
hands; But the present Practice of the Church of Rome is to give this power
about the end of the Mass, by the Imposition of Hands, as the Matter; and the
words, Accipe Spiritum Sanctum, etc. as the Form. And because the Modern
Rituals of the Latins contain nothing of moment more, then what the Roman
Pontifical expresses I shall therefore wave them, lest it might prove tedious
to the Reader.

SECT. III. A brief Account of the Rituals of the Greeks, Maronites, etc.
WE begin with the Greeks, and because the Ancient Rituals have no more in them
then what is contained in those of a later date: I shall omit the former, for
after them, to transcribe the more modern Pontificals, were, actum agere, to do
the same thing twice.

A Greek Ritual, Written 800 years since, kept in the Liberary of Cardinal
Franciscus Barbarinus.

Ordinatio Presbyteri.
Postquam allata sunt Sancta dona, and in sacra mensa reposita sunt, and
completus est Sanctus Hymnus mysticus Cherubicus, charta consueta traditur
Archiepiscopo in qua scriptum est: Divina gratia quae semper infirma curat, and
deficientia complet, promovet hunc N. Deo amabilem Diaconum in Presbyterum.
Eaque lecta ita ut omnes audiant, qui ordinandus est adducitur, eoque genu
flectente, tria crucis signa facit super caput ejus, habensque manum et
impositam, haec precatur.

Deus qui es principii and finis expers, qui omni creatura long es antiquior;
quique denominatione Presbyteri eos honorasti, qui digni judicati sunt, in eo
gradu sancte administrare verbum veritatis tuae, Ipse omnium Domine, complaceat
tibi hunc, quam a me propter politiam irreprehensibilem, modumque agendi
inculpatum, and fidem constantem promoveri probasti, magnam illam gratiam
Sancti Spiritus tui suscipere. Perfectum redda servum tuum, ut tibi in omnibus
placeat and pro data sibi a providente virtute tua, magno illo sacerdotali
honor, digne sese gerat and conversetur: quia tua est potentia tuum est
regnum, and virtus, etc.

Tum facit Presbyterorum unus Diaconi precem in hunc modum. In pace Dominum
deprecemur: Pro suprema pace ac salute: Pro pace universi mandi. Pro
Archiepiscopo nostro N. ipsius sacerdotio, auxilio, perseverantia, pace, ac
salute, and operibus manuum ejus Dominum deprecemur.

Pro eo qui nunc promovetur Presbytero and salute ipsius Dominum deprecemur. Vt
clemens and hominum amans Deus, immaculatum, and irreprehensibile, largiatur
illi Sacerdotium deprecemur.

Pro piissimo, and a Deo custodito Imperatore Nostro, etc. Et cum a Presbytero
haec habetur oration, Archiepiscopus consimiliter manum tenens super caput
illius qui ordinatur sic precatur.

Deus qui potens es in virtute, cujus prudentiam scrutari nemo potest, qui
supra omnes hominum filios, admirabilis es in Consillis, Ipse Domine, and hunc
qui Presbyterii gradum subire, and adipisci voluisti, reple dono Sancti tui
Spiritus, ut dignus sit sine crimine and querela, assistere Altari tuo,
praedicare Evangelium salutis tuae, sancte administrare verbum veritatis tue,
offerre tibi dona and sacrificia spiritualia, renovare populum tuum per
lavacrum regenerationis; ut ipse occurrens in secundo adventu Magni Dei, and
salvatoris nostri Jesu Christi unigeniti filii tui, administrationis propriis
gradus and officii, been gesti, secundum multitudinem bonitatis tuae, mercedem
recipiat. Elata voce: quia benedictum est and glorificatum magnum, and maxim
honorabile nomen tuum, etc.

Amen dicto, orarii, sive Stolae partem quae posterius est, in partem
anteriorem deducit, ipsumque phelonio inducit, and osculo ei dato, cum caeteris
Presbyteris sistit. Tunc ait Diaconus: persiciamus preces nostras Domino.
Postquam autem levatum est velum a Sanctis donis and populus dixerit, dignum
and justum est, tunc tradit Archiepiscopus Presby tero ordinato in manus panem
unum e disco, tenentemque manibus panem sibi traditum, and imponentem caput
supra ipsum inclinat supra sacram mensam, sicque manet donec dicatur, Sancta
Sanctis. Tunc ordinatus restituit Archiepiscopo panem, omniumque Presbyterorum
primus communicate, and ab Ordinatore Sancti sanguinis fit particeps.

After the Sacred Mysteries are brought, and exposed upon the Holy Table, and
the Holy Mystical Cherubical Hymn is completed; the accustomed Paper is
delivered to the Archbishop, wherein it is thus written: The Divine Grace, that
always cures that which is infirm, and supplies defects, promotes this Deacon
N. beloved of God, to Priesthood: which being Read, so as all may hear it, he
that is to be Ordained is brought forth, and while he is kneeling, the Bishop
makes three signs of the Cross upon his head, and having his hand upon him,
Prays thus:

O God, who art without beginning or end, who in Antiquity far exceedest all
Creatures, and who have honored those with the Title of Priesthood, who are
deemed worthy in that quality to be holy Administrators of the Word of thy
Truth. Thou Lord of all things, vouchsafe to confer the powerful Grace of thy
Holy Spirit upon him, whose promotion, by me, thou have approved of, by reason
of his irreprehensible policy, his unblameable actions, and his constant Faith.
Render thy servant perfect, that he may please thee in all things. And
according to the gifts issuing from thy provident virtue, let him, by his
Conversation demean himself worthily of that great honor of Priesthood,
because thine is the Power, thine is the Kingdom, and Virtue, etc.

Then one of the Priests makes the Deacons Prayer in this manner, Let us pray
the Lord in peace: for supreme peace and safety; for the peace of the whole
World; for our Archbishop N. for his Priesthood, his help, his perseverance,
peace and safety, and for the works of his hands let us pray the Lord.

For him that is now promoted to Priesthood, and for his safety let us pray the
Lord, that God, who is clement and a lover of Mankind, will confer unto him an
immaculate and irreprehensible Priesthood.

For our most Pious Emperor, protected by God, etc. And when the Priest has
accomplished this Prayer, The Archbishop likewise holding his hand upon the
head of him that is to be Ordained, Prays thus:

O God, who art powerful in virtue, whose prudence no Man can penetrate, who
above all the sons of Men art admirable in thy counsels. Thou, O Lord,
replenish with the gift of thy Holy Spirit this Person whom thou would have
obtain, and perform the Functions of Priesthood, that without crime and
complaint he may assist at thy Altar, Preach the Gospel of thy Salvation,
holily Administer the Word of thy Truth, Offer to thee Spiritual Gifts and
Sacrifices, renew thy People by the fountain of Regeneration; that he occurring
in the second coming of the Grace of God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, thy
only begotten Son, according to the multitude of thy goodness, may receive the
reward of his proper Administration, degree, and office well performed.

And then with a clear voice: Because thy Grace and most honorable Name is
Blessed and Glorified.

Then having said, Amen, he takes that part of the Stole that was behind, and
places it before, and put him on a Casula (that is, a Priestly Vestment) and
giving him a Kiss, places him among the other Priests. Then the Deacon says,
Let us complete our Prayers to the Lord. And after the Holy Mysteries are
unvayled, and the People have said, It is worthy and just: Then the Archbishop
gives into the hands of the Ordained Priest, one piece of Bread from the
Patene, and holding the Bread delivered to him in his hands, and holding his
head over it, inclines upon the Holy Table, and so he remains until the Holy
to Holies be said. Then the Ordained restores to the Archbishop the Bread, and
receives the Communion before all the other Priests, and by the Ordainer is
made partaker of the Holy Blood.

Another Greek Ritual of about 700 years standing.
This in all things agrees with the former, only in the end it is added, Deinde
alios communicate, orationemque post ambonem recitat, and septem diebus Missam
celebrat. That is, then he Communicates others, and recites the Prayer standing
behind the Bishops Seat, and seven days together celebrates Mass.

Another Greek Ritual, or Liturgy of about 300 years standing, belonging to the
French Kings Library, differs nothing from the former.
Another Greek Ritual of a later date, which only differs from the former in
this, that when they pray for the Bishop, for him that is to be Ordained, for
the Emperor, in this Ritual it is added: Pro hac urbe, pro liberatione nostra
ab omni tribulatione. Auxiliare, serva, miserere, custodi nos, intercedente
sanctissima immaculata, and super omnia benedicsa Domina Nostra Dei genetrice
and semper Virgin.

For this City, for our deliverance from all Tribulation, preserve, have Mercy
and keep us, by the Intercession of the Most Holy Immaculate, and above all
things blessed, our Lady Mother of God, and ever Virgin.

In this Liturgy it is also commanded, that he who is to be Ordained Priest be
30 years of age.

Another Greek Ritual kept in the Vatican.
In this there is only this difference: That Post reposita dona, etc. to these
words is annexed, Ordinandus a Primo Pre sbytero ducitur ad sanctam mensam,
traditque chartophylax Episcopo chartam scriptam, Postea proclamat
Archiadiaconus, Attendamus.

Tum Episcopus exandientibus omnibus circumstantibus, legit quae in charta
scripta sunt, sic dicens: Divina gratia, etc.

Et respondetur Kyrie Eleison; Ordinandus vero utrumque genu flectit super
altaris crepidinem. Quo facto, Episcopus ter signo crucis caput ejus signat,
manumque super eum tenens impositum precatur.

Deus qui es sine principio and fine qui omnis creaturae Rector es, and
curator, etc.

He that is to be Ordained is led by the Chief Priest to the Holy Table, then
the Keeper of the Archivium (which contains the Writings and Records) delivers
to the Bishop a Written Paper, Afterward the Archdeacon proclaims, Let us
attend.

Then the Bishop, in the hearing of all the bystanders, Reads all that is
Written in the Paper, saying thus: The Divine Grace, etc.

And it is answered, Kyrie Eleison: And the Ordained kneels upon the step of
the Altar; which done, the Bishop makes three signs of the Cross upon his head,
and holding his hand upon him, Prays.

O God, who art without beginning or end, who art the Governor and Protector of
all things, etc.

Another Greek Ritual taken out of a later Manuscript.
This contains a Constitution of Philumenus, in these words; Ego dilectus a
Domino vobis Episcopis sic constituo: Repositis supra mensam, etc. Et completo
Hymno Cherubico, stat in solea ordinandus in Presbyterum, tum egredientes duo
Diaconi ipsum ex utraque part accipiunt, and deducunt usque ad portas Sanctas,
ibique eum dimittunt Diaconi, and excipiunt duo Presbyteri, primus and
secundus, terque circumdant Sanctam mensam hymnum canentes: Sancti Martyrs qui
praeclare decertarunt. Tum sic incipit magna and elata voce is Presbyterorum,
qui lingua est expeditiore.

Offertur Religiosissimus Diaconus N. frater noster ut ordinetur in Presbyterum
Sanctissimae Ecclesiae N. etc. Sciendum autem quod cum canunt Sancti Martyrs,
etc. Sedet Episcopus in parva sella ante sanctam mensam; illique gyrando, cum
pervenerint ante Episcopi conspectum, inclinationem, reverentiae causa faciunt,
ordinandusque genu Episcopi desuper pallium deosculatur. Postea surgit
Episcopus, and ad ipsum accedit ordinandus, terque ab eo caput ipsius signatur:
Deinde fronti Sanctae Mensae impositus, flectit quoque ambo genua and
exclamante Diacono; Attendamus, Episcopus, imposita manu dextra super caput
illius, statim exclamat dicens: Divina gratia, quae infirma semper curat, and
deficientia supplet, promovet hunc religiosissimum sacrum Diaconum in
Presbyterum. Precemur igitur pro eo ut mittat super ipsum gratiam Sancti
Spiritus. Dicto postea ter Kyrie eleison, iterum ipsum ter signat, manumque
tenens ipsi impositam, Diacono dicente Dominum deprecemur, orat: Deus qui es
principii and finis expers, etc.

Exclamatione sacta, dicit Protopapas voce demissiore, it a tamen ut qui
praesentes sunt respondere possint, haec Diaconica. In pace Dominum deprecemur,
etc. as above. Amen dicto jubet eum surgere, and transfert orarii partem
posteriorem in anteriorem dextri lateris, diceus: Dignus, postea phelonio ipsum
induens, exclamat iterum, dignus, idemque canunt ti qui sunt in sanctuario and
cantores; and sic osculatus Episcopum and Presbyteros, abiens consistit cum
Presbyteris, and legit Contacion, sed Diaconus in loco consueto subsistit,
dicitque: Compleamus orationem nostram Domino, etc. Cum vero sancta consecrata
fuerint, and dicturus est, it a ut fiant participantibus, accedit Ordinatus,
eique sanctum panem tradit Episcopus sic dicens.

Accipe hoc depositum, and illud custodi usque ad adventum Domini nostri Jesu
Christi, quia illud a te est repetiturus. Ipse vero eo accepto, Pontificis
manum osculatur, and revertitur ad locum in quo prius steterat, manusque ponit
super sanctam mensam dicens apud se Kyrie Eleison, and Miserere mei Deus. Cum
aeutem dicendum est Sancta Sanctis tum ordinatus reddit Sanctum panem, and ab
Episcopo primus communicatur. Dicit insuper orationem post ambonem. In English
thus:

I, beloved of the Lord, to you Bishops give this Constitution, when the Sacred
Mysteries are placed upon the Holy Table, etc. and the Cherubical Hymn being
ended; let him that is to be ordained Priest stand in the floor, then let two
Deacons go forth, and one of each side let them lead him to the Holy Gates, and
there let the Deacons leave him, and then let two Priests receive him, the
first and the second, and let them go three times about the Holy Table, singing
the Hymn: Holy Martyrs who have gloriously fought, etc. Then let one of the
Priests that can speak best, with a high and a clear voice so begin.

Our Brother N. this most Religious Deacon, is here offered to be ordained
Priest of the most Holy Church N. etc. but you must know, that when they Sing
the Holy Martyrs, etc. the Bishop sits on a little seat before the Holy Table:
and they in going round, when they come in sight of the Bishop, bow to him out
of reverence; and he that is to be ordained kisseth the Bishops Knee upon the
Pall. Then the Bishop rises, and he that is to be ordained comes to him, whose
head is three times signed by the Bishop with the sign of the Cross; then being
placed at the Front of the Holy Table, he kneels down; and the Deacon
pronouncing aloud, Let us attend. The Bishop putting his right hand upon the
Ordaineds head, pronounces these words: The Divine Grace which always cures
that which is infirm, and supplies that which is deficient, promotes this most
Religious holy Deacon to Priesthood. Let us therefore Pray for him, that the
Grace of the Holy Ghost may come upon him: and then Kyrie Eleison being three
times repeated, the Bishop again signs him three times, and having his hand
upon him, the Deacon saying, Let us beseech the Lord, the Prayer is said, O God
that art without beginning and end, etc.

The Pronunciation being made, the chosen Priest, with a loud voice, so
notwithstanding as they that are present may answer, Prays thus: Let us beseech
the Lord in peace, etc. as above, and Amen being said, he commands him to rise,
and removes the hinder part of his Stole to the forepart of his right side,
saying, worthy: then putting on his Priestly Vestment, with a loud voice says
again, worthy: and the same do they say that are in the Sanctuary, and the
Singers, and Kissing the Bishop and the Priests, places himself among the
Priests, reads the usual Lesson. But the Deacon remains in his usual place, and
says, Let us complete our Prayer to the Lord, etc. But when the Holies are
Consecrated, and he is to say that all is ready for the partakers: He that is
ordained approaches, and the Bishop giving him the Holy Bread, saying thus:

Receive this Pledge, and keep it till the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
because he will require it of thee; he receiving it, Kisseth the Bishops hands,
and returns to his former place, and puts his hands upon the Holy Table, saving
to himself, Kyrie Eleison, and, Have Mercy upon me O God. But when the Holy to
Holies is to be said, then the ordained restores the Holy Bread, and is first
communicated by the Bishop, and moreover says the Prayer standing behind the
Bishops Seat.

The Order of conferring Priesthood by the Syrian Maronites, as follows.
THe Maronites, before their Reconciliation, were esteemed Heretics, as
holding but one Will, and one kind of operation in Christ, which was the
Heresy of the Monothelites. Their Ritual for Priesthood runs thus:

Primum venit ille quem elegit gratia, and utrumque genu flectit, manus habens
ante se junctas, benediciturque ab Episcopo dicens: benedic Domine, tum
Episcopus signat eum cruce inter oculos, etc. Interea Archidiaconus thus offert
dicitque benedic Domine: stemus omnes pulchre in oratione and reliqua. Iterum
atque iterum continuo and omni tempore Domino supplicemus: Domine pro
redemptione, auxilio, open, and remissione hujus servi tui, N. qui hic adstat,
and impositionem manus Divinae accipit. Dona ei Domine gradum in Ecclesia, and
sacerdotium perfectum, etc. Oremus igitur, and precemur, and supplicemus, and
clamemus, dicamusque tribus vicibus Kyrie Eleison. Episcopus precatur, and
dicitur, Sanctificasti Deus, and Symbolum. Interea Archidiaconus ducit eum manu
dextra and dicit: Offerimus Sanctitati tuae, O Pater sancte, and elect Dei
Domine N. Episcope, hunc Dei amantem qui hic adstat, ut impositionem manus
Divinae accipiat, ex ordine Diaconi ad ordinem Presbyteratus super altar
Sanctum Ecclesiae Sanctae Sancti Domini N. civitatis benedictae, and amantis
Christi N. Est autem subjectus beatitati vestrae, Pro co clamemus and dicamus
tribus vicibus: Kyrie Eleison. Episcopus precatur: Divina gratia quae semper
infirma curat, and deficientia supplet promovet hunc religiosissimum sacrum
Diaconum, in Presbyterum. Diaconus in pace Domino supplicemus. Episcopus
precatur, Diaconus proclamat istud Domini Ephrem. Stemus omnes in oratione
coram eo qui novit abscondita, etc. Episcopus imponit dexteram suam super caput
ejus, and dicit: ordinatus est in Ecclesia. Archidiaconus clamat N. Presbyter
ad Altar Sanctum Ecclesiae Sanctae istius loci N. Episcopus N. Presbyter.
Archidiaconus Psalmum: Laus huic Pastori. Postea legunt hunc Apostolum:
Fratres, posuit onim deus in Ecclesia sua primum Apostolos, etc. datque ei
Evangelium ut legate. Sequuntur preces, dein ter Kyrie Eleison. Episcopus
precatur, and thus datur ei, circumducuntque ordinatum per Ecclesiam, and
adferunt ei Evangelium; dum autem circumducunt eum dicunt Positam: Ascendit
Moses in Montem Sinai, etc. Postea instruit eum de officio suo. Explicet ordo
Presbyteri.

Maronites.
First comes he whom Grace has Elected, and being on both his knees, having
his hands joined, says to the Bishop, Your Bessing my Lord: and is blessed by
the Bishop: then he signs him with the Cross between his eyes; In the interim
the Archdeacon offers Frankincense, and says, Your Blessing my Lord: Let us
all stand in Prayer, and the rest. Again and again, continually, and all the
time let us Supplicate the Lord: O Lord, for the redemption, help, assistance,
and remission of this thy servant N. who stands here, and receives the
imposition of the Divine hand; Give him, O Lord, a degree in the Church, and
perfect Priesthood. Let us therefore beg, and pray, and supplicate, and cry
out, and say, Kyrie Eleison three times. The Bishop Prays, and says, Thou have
Sanctified, O God, and the Creed. In the mean time the Archdeacon leads him in
his right hand, and says, We offer, O holy Father, and Elect of God, Lord N.
Bishop, to thy Sanctity, this Lover of God, who stands here, to receive the
imposition of the Divine hand, from the Order of Deacon to the Order of
Priesthood, upon the Holy Altar of the Holy Church N. of the blessed City that
loves Christ N. for he is subject to your Blessedness. For him let us cry out
three times, and say, Kyrie Eleison. The Bishop Prays: The Divine Grace, which
always cures the weak, and supplies defects, promotes this most Religious Holy
Deacon to be a Priest. The Deacon says, In peace, let us beseech the Lord. The
Bishop Prays. The Deacon proclaims this Ephrem of our Lord. Let us all stand in
Prayer before him, who knows all hidden things, etc. The Bishop puts his right
hand upon his head, and says, He is ordained in the Church. The Archdeacon
cries aloud; N. Priest at the Altar of the Holy Church of this place. N. the
Bishop. N. Priest. The Archdeacon begins the Psalm: Praise to this Shepherd,
etc. After they Read, this of the Apostle: For, Brethren, God has placed in
his Church, first Apostles, etc. and gives him the Gospel to Read. Prayers
follow, and thrice Kyrie Eleison. The Bishop Prays, and Frankincense is given
to him, and they lead him round about the Church, and bring the Gospel to him;
and whilst they lead him, they say,

Moises Ascended Mount Sinai, etc. After he instructs him in his Office. Here
ends the Order of Priesthood.

The Ritual for Priesthood used by the Nestorians.
PRimum incipiunt Pater Noster, etc. Et Praesul precatur: virtus tua Domine,
etc. complete media parvitate nostra Ministerium hoc Spirituale doni
Sacerdotalis, etc. scito Domine, quod in omni laudi, and in omni prece, and in
omni canone adorant ordinandi ad terram usque prostrati. Primum praesul
abscindit capillos illius qui ordinatur, and cingulo ligat lumbos ejus, and
dejicit cucullam ejus super humerum ejus sinistrum, and ingrediens stat in
medio secretarii. Archidiaconus orat, pacem Praesul precatur: Stolam Domine
Sacerdotii, etc. O tibi sacerdos quam magnus est gradus cui tu ministras, etc.
Venite accedamus ad Sacerdotium, etc. Stola Domine Sacerdotii veteris, and
novi, qua induisti veraces tuos, hac indue adorantes te, qui manus suas
extendunt coram throno divinitatis tuae, etc. Sacerdotes qui digni facti estis
Angelorum statu, cavete ab iniquitate. Oration. Oleo Sanctitatis Domine unge hos
servos tuos, etc. Christ Sacerdos veritatis, cujus Sacerdotium nunquam omnino
praeterit, operari erga servos tuos id quod adjuvat, and indue illos splendore
and decore ut Sacerdotio fungantur tibi praeclare and caute, etc. Item:
Spiritus Sanctus Paraclitus qui descendit and habitavit super Discipulos, ipse
Domine descendat super capita te adorantium, etc. Et accedit ad ordinandos, and
utrumque genu eos flectere jubet, simul extendentes manus suas super occulos
suos. Et profert Archidiaconus, Oremus. Pax nobiscum. Et repetit Praesul
demisse Gratia Domini nostri Jesu Christi, qui omni tempore, quod deficit
supplet, cum beneplacito Dei Patris, and cum virtute Spiritus Sancti sit omni
tempore nobiscum, and perficiat manibus nostris ministerium hoc tremendum and
excelsum in redemptionem vitae nostrae. His dictis, vocem attollit: Nunc and
semper. Deinde signat. Et profert Archidiaconus Pax eum. Repetitque Praesul
hanc manus impositionem, manu dextera posita super caput ejus qui ordinatur
dicitque demissa voce: Deus noster bone, etc. Et juxta traditionem Domine
Apostolicam quae propagata est ad nos usque in ordinatione ministerii
Ecclesiastici: Ecce offerimus tibi hos servos tuos ut sint Presbyteri electi in
Ecclesia tua sancta, and pro iis oramus omnes. Deinde signat eorum capita;
dicitque Archidiaconus: Tollite occulos vestros in excelsa suprema, and
postulate misericordiam a Deo clemente, pro his, and his Diaconis, qui
ordinantur and constituuntur Presbyteri in Ecclesia Dei cui sunt selecti: Orate
pro illis. Et dicit Praesul super eos demisse dum dexteram super eorum capita
imponit: Domine Deus fortis, etc. Tu ergo Deus, magnus virtutum, Rex omnium
seculorum, respice etiam nunc in hos servos tuos, and elige eos electione
sancta, per habitationem Spiritus Sancti: donaque illis in operatione oris sui
sermonem veritatis, and elige illos ad officium sacerdotale, etc. Tunc signat
capita eorum and imperat eis ut adorant prostrati in terram, and surgent.
Postea Praesul cucullam accipit quae posita fuerat super humerum uniuscuiusque
eorum, and ea illum induit, tollitque orarium de ejus humeris, and illius
pectori imponit. Et accipit Episcopus ipse, librum adorandum Evangeliorum, and
tradit eum in manibus illius qui ordinationem accepit, eumque signat inter
oculos pollice dextro, dicitque separatus est, sanctificatus est, perfectus
est, consecratus est N. in opus Sanctum Ecclesiasticum, and in ministaerium
Sacerdotis Aaroniticiae. In nomine Patris, etc. Dein Praesul tollit ab eis
Evangelium. Ille vero qui ordinatus est nectit genua: Praesul vero baculum suum
accipit, etc. Dum autem dicitur Canon, apprehendit Archidiaconus eos qui
ordinati sunt, and jubet eos salutare Altar, and Episcopum, and Sacerdotes,
and Diaconos; illi autem osculantur capita illorum. Finit ordo impositionis
manus Presbyterorum.

Nestorians.
FIrst they begin the Pater Noster. And the Prelat Prays: Thy virtue, O Lord,
complete by our weakness this Spiritual Ministry of the Sacerdotal gift, etc.
Know, O Lord, that in every praise, and in every Prayer, and in every Canon
those that are to be Ordained do adore thee prostrate upon the ground. First
the Prelate cuts off the hair of the Ordained, and girds his loins with a
Girdle, and casts his Cawle over his left shoulder, and entering, stands in the
middle before the Altar. The Archdeacon Prays for Peace: The Bishop Prays; Give
him, O Lord, the Stole of Priesthood, etc. Consider, O Priest, how great is the
degree to which thou art called. Come let us proceed to the Priesthood, etc. O
Lord put him on the Stole of ancient and modern Priesthood, wherewith thou have
clothed thy true believers, with this, clothe these that worship thee, who
stretch forth their hands before the Throne of thy Divinity, etc. Ye Priests
who are made worthy of the State of Angels, beware of Iniquity. A Prayer. O
Lord anoint these thy servants with the Unction of thy holiness. O Christ the
Priest of Truth, whose Priesthood never fails, operate upon thy servants that
which may be most helpful, and indue them with splendour and beauty, that they
may perform their Priesthood to thee with Perfection and Caution, etc. Item:
Thou, O Lord, let the Holy Ghost who descended and dwelt upon thy Disciples,
descend upon the heads of those that adore thee, Then he comes to them that are
to be Ordained, and commands them to kneel, they extending their hands before
their eyes, etc. The Archdeacon says, Let us Pray: Peace be with us: And the
Bishop with a loud voice says, The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
always supplies that which is deficient, with the good liking of God the
Father, and the virtue of the Holy Ghost, be with us ever, and perfect by our
hands, this dreadful and high Ministry for the Redemption of our life. Having
thus spoken, he raises his voice; Now and for ever. Then he signeth him with
the Cross. And the Archdeacon says, Peace be to him. And the Bishop again
putting his right hand upon the head of the Ordained, says with a low voice,
Our good God, etc. And, O Lord, according to the Apostolical Tradition, which
has descended to us in the Ordination of Ecclesiastical Ministry, lo we offer
to thee these thy servants, that they may be elected Priests in thy Holy
Church, and for them we all Pray, etc. Then he signeth their heads with a
Cross, and the Archdeacon says, Lift up your eyes to the highest Heaven, and
implore Mercy from the God of Clemency, for these, and these Deacons, who are
ordained, and confirmed Priests in the Church of God, to which they are set
apart. Pray for them: And the Bishop with a loud voice, putting his right hand
upon their heads, says, O Lord God of power, etc. therefore thou O God, the
great God of virtue, and King of all Ages, now also look upon these thy
servants, and elect them by thy holy election, through the inhabitation of thy
Holy Spirit, and in their Preaching, indue them with the Word of Truth; and
Elect them to the Sacerdotal Office, etc. Then he again signs their heads with
a Cross, and commands them to Worship prostrate on the ground, then to rise.
After this the Bishop takes the Cawle which was put upon their shoulders, and
puts it on them, and takes the Stole from the shoulder, and places it upon
their Breast. Then the Bishop takes the Book of the Holy Gospel, and puts it
into the hands of the ordained, and with his right Thumb, signs them between
the eyes, saying, N. is separated, sanctified, is perfect, is Consecrated in
order to the holy work of the Church and Ministry of the Aaronitick
Priesthood, In the Name of the Father, etc. Then the Bishop takes from them the
Book of the Gospel, and the ordained kneel. Then the Bishop takes his Pastoral
Staff. etc. and while the Canon is Read, the Archdeacon takes the ordained,
and commands them to do reverence to the Altar, to the Bishop, to the Priests
and Deacons, and they kiss the head of the ordained.

Here ends the Order of Imposition of Hands for Priesthood.

The Order of conferring Priesthood practiced by the Eutichians, and the
Jacobites.
THese two Sects I join together, because they Profess the same Doctrine, and
differ only in name; the Jacobites assume their denomination from one Jacobus a
Syrian, Disciple of the Patriarch of Alexandria, which was a Professed Eutichian;
This Jacobus made it his chief endeavor to settle this Belief; and by himself,
and his adherents, did it so successfully, that at length they were numerously
entertained in at least Forty Kingdoms, in the East, and in Africa, under the
Patriarch of Alexandria. The Eutichians therefore and the Jacobites agreeing in
their Doctrine, the same Liturgy and Ritual were common to both. They both
held, That there was such mixture and confusion between the Divine and Human
Nature in Christ, by reason of the Hypostatical Union, that there resulted a
Third Nature distinct from both, if taken apart, which they call a Theandrical
Nature. Yet they deny that the Humane Nature was converted into the Divine
Nature, for that imports a destruction of the Human Nature, without which no
Conversion could subsist. This Doctrine has no less Conformity with the
Monothelites, than opposition with the Nestorians; here being a sure ground for
the Monothelites to work upon, for if there be but one Nature in Christ, then
there can be but one Will, and one Series of Operation, which is the Doctrine
of the Monothelites; but all this is repugnant to the Doctrine of Nestorius,
who held Two Persons in Christ; and proved it thus: A Complete Nature, and a
Person are the very same thing; but in Christ there are two Complete Natures;
and therefore Two Persons. This Argument was very vexatious to the Fathers, and
has puzzled all our Ancient and Modern Divines, and yet to this day there is no
Satisfactory Answer given to it. But Eutiches, in his Principles solved it
clearly, by Denying the Minor, for he held but One Nature in Christ, and
consequently but One Person. But consented to Nestorius in the Major, and so
might institute a Sillogisme against him thus: A Complete Nature and a Person
are the same; but in Christ there is but One Complete Nature; and therefore but
One Person. But this is to destroy one Error by another.

Wherefore the Eutychians and Jacobites agreeing in Doctrine, agreed also in
their Rites and Ceremonies; and from Three Manuscripts sent from Goa ( the
Metropolitan City of the East Indies) to Lisbon in Portugal, this Ritual is
drawn out.

Presbyter, quando ordinatur, stat coram Altari, subter gradus ipsius, caput
habens apertum and inclinatum donec perficiatur oblatio. Tunc Episcopus tondet
in formam crucis, capillos ejus qui ordinatur, traditque eum institutori suo,
and praeceptum dat illi, de perfectione doctrinae suae, and ordinis sui, etc.
Statim postea apprehendit Episcopus manum ejus dexteram, dicitque Spiritus
Sanctus vocat te, cumque introducit ad Altar, and procumbere facit super duo
illius genua coram Altari, manus habentem junctas ante se, and orarium
Diaconatus super se, etc. Archidiaconus hoc praeconium proclamat: Gratia Domini
Nostri Jesu Christi, quae omni tempore perficit defectus nostros secundum
voluntatem. Dei Patris, in virtute Spiritus Sancti adsit iis qui hic
offeruntur, etc. Ipsa est quae vocat; and offert ex Ordine Diaconorum, ad
Ordinem Presbyteratus N. Presbyterum ad Altar Sanctum and divinum domus
genetricis Dei Mariae, etc. Precemur igitur omnes, ut descendat super eos
gratia and illapsus Spiritus Sancti, etc. ter Kyrie Eleison, and reliqua.
Episcopus ponit manus suas super mysteria, and extendit brachia sua,
colligitque and contrahit ea tribus vicibus super corpus and sanguinem,
accipiens ex calice in pugillum suum dum colligant ea, and cooperiunt peplo,
seu linteo Sacro. Postea revertitur ad illum qui est ordinandus, and imponit
manus super caput ejus easque illi admetitur: iterumque attollit manus,
porrigens brachia sua in altum, easque deprimit tremulas super caput ejus,
hocque tribus vicibus facit Episcopus ipse, oculis ipsius desuper cum timore
aspicientibus. Post hoc ponit dexteram suam super illius caput, and tegit manus
and caput illius qui ordinatur cum Phaina. Dextera illius ponetur super ejus
caput, and sinistra hinc and hinc movebitur, circumferetque sinistram suam
tribus vicibus super cervicem ipsius and faciem, etc. Invocatio Spiritus
Sancti, etc. Postea revertitur Episcopus ad occidentem ad eum qui ordinatur,
imponitque dexte. ram suam super caput ejus and eum signat inter oculos, sic
dicens: Ordinatus est in Ecclesia Sancta Dei. Archidiaconus dicit: N. Presbyter
ad Altar Sanctum domus genetricis Dei. Episcopus addit N. Presbyter ad Altar
Sanctum, etc. Episcopus: In nomine Patris, etc. Cum autem confecerit tria
crucis signa, tunc qui consecratur Sacerdos, redit ad Altar, hanc mystece
dicens orationem: Suscepimus gratiam tuam Domine, etc. Post haec redit
Episcopus ad cum qui ordinatur, eumque apprehendit per manum suam dexteram and
erigit, Archidiaconus autem dicit: benedic Domine Episcopus accipit orarium
quod super ipsum positum est and traducit illud super humerum ejus dexterum a
part anteriori, dicens: Ad laudem, and honorem, and decorem, and exaltationem
Trinitatis Sanctae and consubstantialis, and ad pacem, and aedificationem
Ecclesiae Sanctae Dei. Respondent Clerici: Ad laudem, etc. Et cum pompa defert
casulam, and tunicam, and zanadas, and singulam, dicitque: Ad laudem, etc.
Deinde tradit ei thuribulum, and praecipit ut imponat adoramenta. Apprehendit
autem Episcopus manu eum qui ordinatus est, and adducit ut osculetur mensam
vitae, eaque salutata, manum Episcopi deosculatur, qui ipse pacem illi donat,
jubetque ut caeteri omnes pacem illi donent. Et statim obsignat Episcopus
consummationem corporis Sancti cum poculo, eumque communicate, and praecipit ut
ipse congregationem communicet. Cruce autem signabit, and finiet Episcopus.

Eutichians, etc.
WHen a Priest is Ordained, he stands before the Altar, under the steps
thereof, having his head uncovered, and inclined, till the Oblation is
performed; Then the Bishop cuts the hair of him, that is to be Ordained, into
the form of a Cross, and delivers him to his Tutor, and gives him a Precept
concerning the perfection of his Doctrine and Order, etc. forthwith afterward
the Bishop takes him by the right hand, and says, The Holy Ghost calls thee:
and brings him to the Altar, and places him on both his knees before the Altar,
having his hands joined before him, and a Deacons Vestment upon him, etc. The
Archdeacon speaks aloud this Prayer; The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
always make perfect our defects, according to the will of God the Father, in
the virtue of the Holy Ghost, be present with these, who are here offered, etc.
It is it who calls and offers N. from the degree of Deacon, to the degree of a
Priest, at the Holy and Divine Altar of the House of the Mother of God, Mary,
etc. Therefore let us all Pray, that Grace and the Holy Spirit may descend upon
them, etc. thrice Kyrie Eleison, etc. The Bishop puts his hands upon the
Mystery, and stretches forth his arms, and gathers and contracts them thrice
over the Body and Blood, taking out of the Chalice the Particles, whilst they
gather them together, and cover them with a Veil or Sacred Linen. After he
turns to him that is to be Ordained, and puts his hand on his head, and
measures them to him: and again lifts up his hands, stretching out his arms on
high, and lets his hands fall trembling upon his head. This the Bishop repeats
three times, his eyes looking down with fear. After this he lays his right hand
on his head, and covers the head and hands of him that is to be Ordained with a
Veil. His right hand is placed upon his head, and his left is moved to and
fro, and he turns his left hand thrice about his neck and face, etc. Invocation
of the Holy Ghost, etc. Afterward the Bishop turns to the West, toward him
that is to be Ordained, and puts his right hand on his head, and signs him with
the Cross between his eyes, saying thus: He is Ordained in the Holy Church of
God. The Archdeacon says, N. Priest, at the Holy Altar of the House of the
Mother of God. The Bishop adds, N. Priest at the Holy Altar, etc. In the Name
of the Father, etc. After he has made three signs of the Cross, the Priest
Ordained returns to the Altar Mystically saying this Prayer: We have received
thy Grace O Lord, etc. Then the Bishop returns to him, and takes him by the
right hand, and lifts him up. The Archdeacon says, Your Blessing my Lord. The
Bishop takes the Stole which was upon him, and brings it over his right
shoulder, from the forepart, saying, To the Praise, and Honor, and Beauty, and
Exaltation of the Holy, and Consubstantial Trinity, and to the Peace and
Edification of the Holy Church of God. The Clergy Answer, To the Praise, etc.
And when he with Pomp carries the Vestment, and Tunick, and Girdle, etc. and
says, To the Praise, etc. Afterward delivers to him a Censer, and commands
him to put Incense therein: Moreover the Bishop takes him by the hand, and
leads him to kiss the Table of Life, which being done, he kisseth the Bishops
hand, who gives him his Peace, and commands all the rest to do the like. And
forthwith the Bishop signs with the Cross the Consummation of the Holy Body
with the Cup, and after he has communicated, Orders, that he Communicate the
Congregation, the Bishop shall sign with the Cross, and conclude.

The Ritual of the Cophticks, or Egyptians for the Ordination of Priests.
THe disserence between the Cophticks and the Jacobites is not considerable,
only they who lived in Persia, Syria, Assyria, and the East, were called
Jacobites. But they who inhabited Egypt and Aethiopia were called Cophticks,
whose Ritual differs but little from the Jacobites, which is as follows.

Cum volunt praesentare Ordinandum in Sacerdotem, testificantur primo
Sacerdotes de operibus ejus bonis, and de scientia ejus, and quod uxor ejus
talis sit, qualem lex requirit, quod acceperit inferiores gradus, etc. Deinde
prodit for as vestitus vest Diaconi, and haltheus super humerum ejus sinistrum,
coram altari. Stet autem Episcopus cum Sacerdotibus. Et qui separatus est
incurvat genua sua ante Altar. Episcopus dicit gratiarum actionem, and accipit
simul thymiama, and orat super illud conversusque facie sua ad Altar dicit
hanc orationem: O Domine Deus qui venire nos fecisti, etc. He prays for the
Holy Ghost, and Grace to administer Priesthood right. Ecce venit ad te
Ordinandus in Sacerdotem, perfice eum in servum tuum, etc. Dicit Archidiaconus:
Gratia Domini Nostri Jesu Christi, etc as above. Ter Kyrie Eleison. Episcopus
conversus ad orientem hanc orationem dicit: Queso Domine Deus pone eum dignum
vocatione Presbyteratus, etc. ut ministret Altari tuo sancto, etc. ter Kyrie
Eleison. Conversus ad occidentem Episcopus ponit manum suam dextram super caput
ejus sic orando: O Domine Deus omnipotens, etc. Respice super hunc servum tuum,
qui tibi praesentatur ad sacerdotium, per approbationem and judicium eorum qui
tibi eum stiterunt, etc. Reple eum Spiritu Sancto and gratia, etc. The Bishop
Prays for him, that he may worthily perform the functions of Priesthood, etc.
Et conversus ad occidentem signat frontem ejus pollice suo, dicens: vocamus to
in Ecclesiam Dei Sanctam. Amen. Alta voce dicit Archidiaconus N. Sacerdos est
Altaris Sancti, quod est in Ecclesia Sancta Catholica, and Apostolica, Ecclesia
Dei, Amen. Deinde clara voce Episcopus dicit: vocamus te N. Sacerdotem Altaris
Sancti, quod vocatur Orthodoxorum, in nomine Patris, etc. Facit Episcopus super
frontem ejus tres cruces, significando Trinitatem. Deinde vestit illum Stola,
dicens: Gloria and honor Trinitati Sanctae, consubstantiali Patri, and Filio,
and Spiritui Sancto. Pax and incrementum Ecclesiae Dei Sanctae. Amen. Conversus
ad orientem Episcopus orat sic: Gratias tibi agimus, etc. A Thansgiving to God,
and a Petition, that the Ceremonies of Ordination may please him. Then follows
an Admonition to the Priest newly Ordained. Et juramento praestito, osculatur
Episcopum, Altar, and praesentes. Deinde explicat aliquid de mysteriis. Et
Episcopus ponit super eum manum tribus vicibus, and omnes dicunt alta voce:
dignus est N. ut sit Sacerdos in Ecclesia Sancta Catholica, and Apostolica. And
so it ends.

The Cophticks and Egyptians.
WHen they would present him that is to be Ordained Priest, first of all the
Priests give Testimony of his good Works, and his Learning, and that his Wife
is such as the Law requires; that he has received the Inferior Orders, etc.
Then he comes forth in his Deacons Habit, and having a Stole on his left
shoulder, he stands before the Altar. The Bishop likewise stands with his
Priests. And he that is separated kneels before the Altar. The Bishop recites a
Prayer of Thansgiving, and at the same time takes the Incense and blesses it;
and turning his face to the Altar, he recites this Prayer; O Lord God who have
ordered our coming, etc. Behold he that is to be Ordained Priest comes to thee,
make him thy true servant, etc. The Archdeacon says, The Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, etc. as above: Three times Kyrie Eleison: Then the Bishop turning
toward the East, says this Prayer, O Lord God, we beseech thee, render him
worthy of the vocation of Priesthood, etc. that he may Administer upon thy Holy
Altar, etc. Three times Kyrie Eleison. Then the Bishop turning toward the West
puts his right hand upon the Ordaineds head, Praying thus: O Lord God,
Omnipotent, etc. look upon this thy servant, who is presented to thee in order
to Priesthood, by the approbation and judgment of those that propose him, etc.
Replenish him with the Holy Ghost, and Grace, etc. The Bishop Prays for him,
that he may worthily perform the Functions of Priesthood, etc. And turning to
the West, signs his forehead with his Thumb, saying, We call thee into the Holy
Church of God. Amen. The Archdeacon with a loud voice says, N. is a Priest of
the Holy Altar, which is in the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church of God,
Amen. Then with a clear voice the Bishop says, We call thee N. a Priest of the
Holy Altar, which is called of the true Believers, In the Name of the Father,
etc. Then the Bishop makes three Crosses on his forehead, signifying the
Trinity. Then he puts the Stole about him, saying, Glory and Honor be to the
Holy Trinity consubstantial with the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
Peace and increase of the Holy Church of God, Amen. Then the Bishop turning to
the East, prays thus, We give thee Thanks, etc. A Thansgiving to God, and a
Petition that the Ceremonies of Ordination may please him. Then follows an
Admonition to the Priest newly Ordained, who having taken the usual Oath,
kisseth the Bishops hand, the Altar, and those that are present. Then he
explicates something of the Mysteries, and the Bishop puts his hand three times
upon him, and all say with a loud voice, N. is worthy to be a Priest in the
Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church. And so it ends.

These Rituals were with great trouble and industry Collected from several
parts of the World by Morinus, who saw the Originals, and Translated them out
of Greek and Syrian, into Latin, as you may see in his Treatise de Sacra
Ordinatione, part 2.

Thus I have given you a Cursary View of the Manner how the Chiefest Professors
of Christianity, dispersed all the World over, did Confer the Order of
Priesthood; which compared to the present practice of the Church of Rome, it
will be obvious how this Church has deviated, in Essentials, from the
Institution of Christ, the practice of the Apostles, and the Primitive Church,
which, by considering the particulars of the Roman Pontifical now in use, will
plainly appear.

A Draught of the Roman Pontifical for the Ordination of Priests now in use.
THe Bishop that is to give Orders, is not to do it but in Mass, and in the
several parts thereof, he exercises the several Functions of Ordination. They
that are to be Ordained Priests being by the Archdeacon presented, and
accepted. The Bishop begins by the imposition of his hands upon the head of
them successively; but says nothing. Then they return again, and the Bishop
puts his right hand upon the head of each of them, and the Priests that are
present do the like, putting their hands by the Bishops. Then the Bishop says a
Prayer, imploring Grace for them that are to be Ordained, that they may
worthily comply with the Functions of Priesthood. This done, the Ordainer takes
the Stole of each, that was before upon their left shoulder only, and brings it
round the neck, and puts it upon the right shoulder also, with these words,
Accipe jugum Domini, etc. Receive the yoke of the Lord, etc. Consequent to this
he puts on their Casula, or Priestly Vestment, the hinder part being folded up,
and fastened to the upper part, with this Form, Accipe Vestem Sacerdotalem,
etc. Receive the Priestly Vestment, etc. Next follows the Anointing of their
Heads with Holy Oil. And the Priests that assist, tie the Palms of their
hands together with a Linen Binder, lest the Holy Oil should be profaned.
Persuant to this, the Bishop, holding in his hand a Chalice with Wine and Water
in it, and upon it a Patene, with an unconsecrated Host on it, exhibits all
this successively to them that are to be Ordained; and here great care is taken
by the Ordainer, and the assisting Priests, that they at the same (...) touch
the Chalice, the Pattene, and the Host, to which end (because their hands are
bound together) the Priests place their fore-fingers upon the Pattene, so as to
touch both Pattene and Host, and the tops of their middle fingers, being a
little separated from the fore-fingers, are applied to the side of the Chalice
under the Patene; and the Priests in this posture, press their fingers upon the
Vessels altogether, and the Ordainer begins not the form till he be assured,
that they touch all, then he pronounces the form in these words, Accipe
potestatem offerendi Sacrificium pro vivis and defunctis, In nomine Patris, and
filii, and Spirituus Sancti. Receive the power of offering Sacrifice for the
Living, and the Dead. In the Name of the Father, etc. This done, they are
esteemed Priests, Quoad potestatem ordinis, for as much as concerns the power
of Consecrating, and saying Mass, and therefore they Consecrate together with
the Bishop, and say Mass all along with him, having their Missals open before
them. Then after Consummation, when they have all received the Communion, the
Bishop the third time puts his hand upon their heads with this form: Accipe
Spiritum Sanctum; quorum remiseritis peccata remittuntur eis, and quorum
retinueritis retenta sunt. Receive the Holy Ghost; whose sins ye forgive, they
are forgiven, and whose sins you retain, they are retained. Then presently he
unfolds their Vestment, and lets it down behind, saying, Stola innocentiae
induat te Dominus. The Lord put thee on the Stole of Innocence. And so it ends.

SECT. IV. Showing, That the Church of Rome places the Essence of the
Ordination of Priests in touching the Vessels, and the Form annexed to it.
TO make good this Position, I begin with the Authority of the Council of
Florence, Florent. Instructione Armenorum.
Instructione ad Armenos, where it Treats, ex professo, of the Essential matter
of Priesthood, and the Council assigns for this matter, the Tradition of the
Vessels, and makes not the least mention of the Imposition of Hands, nor any
other matter.

Gregory the 9th tells us, That if in Ordination the Imposition of Hands be
omitted, the Ordination is not to be reiterated: his words are these: Greg. 9.
C. Presbyter, de Sacramentis noniterandis.
Presbyter, and Diaconus cum ordinantur, manus impositionem tactu corporali
(ritu ab Apostolis introducto) recipient. Quod si omissum fuerit, non est
aliquatenus iterandum, sed statuto tempore, ad hujusmodi Ordines conferendos,
caute supplendum, quod per errorem extitit praetermissum. A Priest and a Deacon
when they are Ordained, receive the Imposition of Hands by a Corporal Contact
(a Rite which was Introduc't by the Apostles) which if it should be omitted, is
not forth with to be reiterated, but at the appointed time, for the conferring
such Orders, what was omitted, is to be carefully supplied. This clearly
supposes the Ordination to be valid, by the Tradition of the Vessels, and its
Form, without the Imposition of Hands, for otherwise the whole ought to be
renewed, because the former was all invalid; and yet Pope Gregory says, That
only was to be supplied, that was omitted in the former Ordination, and not
till the next time of Ordination, which is commonly three Months after, for the
Orders are given but four times in a year, which they call the quatuor tempora.
Hence I conclude, that Pope Gregory held the Imposition of Hands to be
circumstantial, and accidentary, but not at all belonging to the Substance and
Essence of Ordination.

Next St. Thomas of Aquine, Aquinas 3. Part, q. 35. ar. 3.
their greatest Divine, whose Doctrine, all the Dominicans, and Jesuits, are
bound, by their Rules, to follow, holds the same. So also Joannes della Cruz in
directoria conscientiae Part 2. de Sacramento Ordinis. Dub. 2. Conclusione 1.
Bonacina de Sacramentis, D. 8. q. unica. Puncto 3. Nu. 2. Gregorius de
Valentia, To. 4. D. 9. q. 1. Puncto 5. Gravina Treats it fusely, De 2. de
materia and forma Sacramentorum, Sect. 7. Conclusione 3. Dominic Soto in 4.
Did. 24. q. 1. Ar. 4. Didacus Nugnez Comment. in Sanctum Thomam. Sect.
Septimus Ordo. Antonius Diana Part 2. Moral. Resol. Tract. 4. de Sacram.
Resolut. 187. Chamerota Tract. 11. de Septem Sacram: c. 3.
Domitius Chamerota asserts that by the Tradition of the Vessels, the Character
is Imprinted, and the Ordained is properly a Priest. The same is Taught by
Philippus Gammachaeus, C. 8. de Ordine. Isambertus, Vasques, Sylvius, Tannerus,
Estius, Puteanus, Meratius, and the greatest part of their Divines, for to cite
them all were endless; And especially their Moral Divines, who solve all their
Cases, in this matter, by this Opinion. Hence they resolve, that if it be
certain that the Ordained did not touch the Chalice, or if he did touch the
Chalice, but not the Patene, he must be Reordained absolutely; but if it be
doubtful whether he touched them or no, then he is to be Ordained again
conditionally, etc. And if there be clear evidence, that one in his Ordination,
did not touch those Vessels, I would fain know whether any Divine in the Church
of Rome, either Moral or Scholastical, dare assert, that such a one ought not
to be Reordained?

To clear this Point, and remove all doubts of it, He gives you one Example out
of Bussenbaum.
let us hear what Busenbaum says, one of their Moral Divines, whose Works are
so famous, that the Tenth Edition was Printed at Munster, Anno Dom. 1661. His
words are these: Quando dubium occurrit an ordo sit vere collatus, v. g. quia
materia fuit dubia, iterari potest, and debet sub condition. Quando vero sunt
rations utrinque probabiles pro nullitate, and validitate, ait Diana, p. 5. t.
3. R. 47. ex Grac. posse iterari sub condition; imo debere, si sit
Episcopalis, vel Sacerdotalis; v. g. Si Sacerdos, vel Episcopus non tetigisset
vasa sacra, aut illud instrumentum in cujus porrectione imprimitur character;
Excipit tamen Sacerdotem, qui immediate tetigit Patenam, sed non hostiam. Cum
vero qui non tetigit calicem, and patenam, dum forma proferebatur, sed paulo
post, posse quidem, ad majorem animi sui quietem, sub condition iterum
ordinari, non tamen esse necessarium, docet Card de Lugo. Resp. moral. L. 1. d.
31. Recte autem notat Diana, etiamsi quis timeat, ne invalide ordinatus sit,
aut non recordetur se tetigisse vasa sacra, aut non tetigisse imaginetur, non
illico iterandum esse ordinem, cum sola oblivio, aut timor non sufficiat ad
prudens, ac rationabile dubium, vel probabilitatem: By this Discourse it
plainly appears, See Bonacina, D. S. q. 2. puncto 3. who confirms this at large.
that they place the whole Essence of the Order of Priesthood, in the touching
of those Vessels, which the Bishop tenders to them, which is their Essential
matter; and in the words which the Bishop pronounces, while the Ordained
touches those Vessels, which is their Essential Form. So that if we consult
Authority, this Position must certainly prevail.

A Second Proof is grounded in this Principle, That not only the matter and
form, which are the Essentials, but also a right intention in the Minister is
rigorously necessary for the validity of Order. So the Council of Florence:
Florent^num Instructione ad Armenos.
Haec omnia Sacramenta tribus persiciuntur, videlicet rebus tanquam materia,
verbis tanquam forma, and persona Ministri conferentis Sacramentum cum
intention faciendi quae facit Ecclesia; quorum si aliquod desit, non
perficitur Sacramentum. All these Sacraments are perfected by three things, to
wit, by Things as the Matter, by Words as the Form, and by the Person of the
Minister, conferring the Sacrament with intention to do that which the Church
does: whereof, if any be wanting, the Sacrament is not complete. This supposed,
I prove my intent; for the Minister of Priesthood ought not, cannot in prudence
have any intention to confer this Order by any other matter and form, then the
tradition of the Vessels and this form, Accipe potestatem offerendi
sacrificium pro vivis and defunctis, in nomine Patris, etc. Take power to offer
Sacrifice for the Living and the Dead, etc. for by these words he is to give
the Ordained a Power to offer Sacrifice, wherein consists the Order of
Priesthood, according to them. Wherefore, if his intention do not accompany the
plain, clear, and explicit sense of his words, it would be a mere fiction; for
he says, Take, Receive, etc. and in the mean time intends to give them
nothing: and so without this intention he would be a mere deluder. Hence I
conclude, that he must intend to confer the Order of Priesthood by that matter
and form; neither can he affix his intention to the Imposition of hands, nor
to any thing else contained in the form of Ordination, for then he would
attempt to confer the same Order to the same person twice, which is a Sacrilege
in all Sacraments that imprint a Character, as the Order of Priesthood does.

But it may be Objected, That the Ordainer directs not his intention to this
particular matter nor that, but regulates himself by the intention of the
Church, without examining particulars, as the Council of Florence directs. It Is
well that you have exempted the Ordainer from reprehension: But then I must
demand, What intention the Church had in introducing this new Matter and Form?
so explicitly, and in express terms signifying the collation of Priestly Power
to proced from hence, and consequently the Character to be hereby imprinted?
for if these are not intended as Essentials, then you have removed the siction
from the Ordainer, and attributed it to the Church; so that the one or the
other must be the Author of it, but as to this present controversy it matters
not which. And indeed, to solve all, there is but one way, which is, to grant,
that the tradition of the Vessels, and the Form of Words thereunto annexed, do
Essentially confer the Order, and imprint the Character.

The Third Proof is made out by induction, which to effect, we must make a
strict inquiry into all the parts contained in the Roman Ritual, to deprehend,
if any one of them have any proportionable capacity in order to this effect.
The first imposition of hands can have none, because there is no Form
appropriated to it, neither can a bare Matter without a Form, constitute the
adequate Essence of a Sacrament. The Second Imposition of ^ands, though there
be a Form accommodated to it, yet it is neither Indicative, or Enunciative, nor
Imperative, but only Deprecatory, which is not sufficient to satisfy the Sea
of Rome. But however, as the Roman Ritual for Priesthood is disposed, the Order
of Priesthood can never proceed from hence, except the touching of the Vessels
with its Form, be wholly left out; for in case Priesthood should be validly
conferred by this Imposition of Hands and its Form, then the tendering the
Vessels afterward to him that is already Ordained, with these words, Accipe
potestatem: Take a power to offer Sacrifice, etc. would be a Sacrilegious and
Fallacious attempt to Reordain him that was before validly Ordained, and had
the Character of Priesthood imprinted upon him, and this would be constantly
practiced through the whole extent of the Church. Besides, this Doctrine is
wholly destitute of Authority, for there are few or no Divines that insist upon
this. What then remains? only the Third Imposition of Hands, which follows a
long time after, about the end of Mass, with these words, Accipe Spiritum
Sanctum, quorum remiseritis peccata, remittuntur eis, and quorum retinueritis,
retenta sunt. Receive the Holy Ghost: they whose sins you forgive are forgiven,
and they whose sins you retain are retained. This likewise has no proportion
to confer the Order of Priesthood. First, because it supposes that Order
already conferred; for none but a Priest is sufficiently qualified to receive a
Power of Relaxing and Retaining sins. But in the Primitive Church, this power
was ever esteemed a branch of Presbytery, necessarily resulting from the
Validity of Ordination, so that all Priests had the Radical Power of Absolving,
but they were not to practice it without a Deputation from their Bishop:
neither is it above Four hundred and Fifty years since this Form was thrust
into the Ritual, and by reason of its novelty, as not being instituted by
Christ, as Essential to the Ordination of Priesthood, cannot participate of the
nature of a Sacrament, nor any way belong to the Essentials of Ordination.
Lastly, That this Matter and Form have no influence upon the Power of
Consecrating, or offering Sacrifice, is evidently evinced from hence, That all
they who receive it, had before said Mass with the Bishop, and Consecrated with
him, and to that end the Canon, and especially the words of Consecration (that
usually are pronounced with a lower voice) are by the Bishop pronounced aloud,
and distinctly, because the Ordained may accompany him, for he that first ends
the words of Consecration, does truly Consecrate, and none of the rest, except
they direct their intention to that instant in which the Bishop pronounces the
last lyllable. How then can this last imposition of Hands, or its Form, any
way conduce to the Power of Order? It therefore remains, that nothing contained
in the Roman Ritual for Priesthood, can be Essential to that Order, except the
Tradition of the Vessels with its Form; all the rest being accidentary, and
circumstantial, as I shall prove hereafter by their own Authors.

All this is confirmed by the practice prescribed in the Roman Ritual for
degrading a Priest. Ministri tradunt in manus degradandi, calicem cum vino and
aqua, ac patena, and hostia, quam Pontifex Degradator, aufert de manibus
degradandi. The Ministers deliver into the hands of him that is to be degraded,
a Chalice with Wine, and Water, and a Patene and Hoaste, which the Bishop that
is the Degrader, takes out of the hands of the degraded; because, by delivering
these Vessels to him, he was Ordained Priest: and therefore by taking them from
him again, they think him sufficiently divested of that dignity.

This Truth is so apparent, that it needs no other proof, then to observe in
their Ordination, how indifferent and unconcerned they are in all parts
thereof, except in delivering the Vessels, and pronouncing the Form that
affects them, here one Priest inspects one side, another surveys the other
side, and they keep such a pressing of the Ordaineds hands, both on the Patene
and Chalice, that no Error be committed in the application of these Vessels,
that the beholder will presently conclude, that they esteem the whole substance
of Ordination to consist in this. Discourse their Clergy, and you will find,
that no one doubts it. Read the Form, Accipe potestatem, etc. Receive the
power, etc. and you will certainly conclude, that it signifies nothing else.
And they who live amongst them and converse with them, cannot but know their
general and unanimous belief and persuasion, that the Order of Priesthood is
validly conferred by the touching of those Vessels, and the Form which
accompanys it, and the Character thereby imprinted, and Sacramental Grace
conferred.

Wherefore, as to the thing in substance I offer this Dilemma: either the Order
of Priesthood is validly conferred by touching the Vessels, and the Form
appropriated to it, and the Character thereby imprinted, or not. If the first
be granted, that is the scope of our present intention. If the second, then I
declare, that the words which the Ordainer pronounces, are Nugatory, Delusive,
and Fallacious; for the words are Imperative, whereby the Bishop bids the
Ordained receive a power of offering Sacrifice (which in effect is Priesthood)
and the Ordained, who comes full fraught with an ardent desire of receiving it,
consequently accepts it, and yet notwithstanding this offer and acceptance, he
is deluded; for that power being Spiritual, and so invisible, as is also the
Character, he conceives himself empowered to offer Sacrifice, and his Soul
consequently imbellisht, with a new, and high Prerogative, in plain and
explicit words offered him, and yet is defrauded, and disappointed of his
expectation, for that Matter and Form (as we suppose by the second part of the
Dilemma) is not capable to confer upon him such a dignity, notwithstanding the
Promise.

SECT. V. The Order of Priesthood, according to the present Institution, cannot
be validly conferred by touching the Vessels with this Form, Accipe
potestatem, etc.
THe Ordinations and Institutions of Christ, none can attempt to abrogate, or
alter, without a Sacrilegious temerity, for they carry with them an
irrefragable Authority, they are Juris Divini, of Divine Right; they are Sacred,
and therefore no Human Power upon Earth, can make any change or alteration in
them; and more especially, when by Divine Institution Supernatural effects are
produced by Natural causes; as it falls out in the Ordination of Priests; for
when it is validly conferred, there is communicated to the Receiver, a
Spiritual capacity, to exercise all the Functions of Priesthood; there is a
Power granted to him over the Real Body, and the Mystical Body of Christ; the
first by Consecration in the Eucharist; the second by Relaxing, and Retaining
sins. There is also imprinted upon the Soul of the Ordained a Character, which
is a Real Physical and Supernatural quality; neither is it Supernatural only
quoad modum, in the circumstances of producing it; but quoad entitatem, the
very Intrinsecal Nature and Essence of it, is Supernatural, because no exigence
of Nature can ever challenge it as due, in any circumstances whatsoever. From
the same cause also proceeds an increase, of Sanctifying, and inherent Grace in
the Soul of the Ordained, as also a plentiful supply of Actual, and Transient
Graces, whereby his Understanding is Illuminated, and his Will Fortified, in
all occasions conducing to the Functions of his Order, all which are, according
to their Intrinsecal Nature, Supernatural.

And yet the causes from which these strange effects proceed, are of themselves
purely Natural, having no proportion to such Supernatural products. They have
only a Radical Obediential capacity, to be assumed, and elevated above their
Nature, by the powerful hand of the Omnipotent, to produce, jointly with him,
any effect that involves not a contradiction. Thus the Natural Element of Water
is Instituted by Christ, to produce Spiritual and Supernatural Grace, and to
destroy Original Sin. And in our present case, the Imposition of Hands (though
Natural in it self) was appointed by Christ our Redeemer to produce the
forementioned effects, waving the question, whether the Causality of Sacraments
be Physical, or only Moral, which the Divines Dispute.

And as there is no power upon earth, that can abrogate, or alter Christ's
Institutions, or divest those Natural Causes of that Efficacity, which by an
Irrevocable Decree, the Author of Grace has given them, so there is no Created
Power, neither Human nor Angelical, that can validly institute, appoint,
ordain, or determine any Natural Cause whatsoever, to produce any Supernatural
effect, because all Created Power, how great soever, is limited and confined
within the bounds of Nature, and so neither formally, nor virtually, nor
eminently, contains that Supereminent Virtue, or proportion with Supernatural
Effects, which are far above its Sphere: How then can it Communicate to other
Causes, that High Virtue, which it no way contains in it self? Hence it ensues,
that as all the power of Nature, though it summon, and muster up all its
strength, can never deprive those Natural Entities Instituted by Christ, of
this Supereminent Prerogative, nor hinder their effects, when duly applied to
Subjects capable, according to Christ's Institution; so likewise, neither can it
remove, or transfer this operative quality from those causes, to which Christ
has affixt it, and place it upon others of its own invention and
determination. For no pure Creature, can alter, change, or abrogate a Divine
Law; And in this case, the word Incarnate is the Legislator, or Lawgiver, and
therefore none but himself can make any Change in his own Law. Except Man, that
is but a mere Creature, will wage War with his Creator, and Usurp to himself a
Power that never was, nor ever will be granted him, it being peculiar to God
alone.

The ground of this Doctrine is not New, but Admitted by All, and is common to
both Churches. For this is the Argument that St. Augustine used against the
Pelagians, who held a proportion in our Natural Acts to Merit Glory; and the
Semipelagians, or Massilienses, endeavoring a Moderation, attributed to our
Natural Acts, a power of Meriting Supernatural Grace; and this obtained,
rendered us capable of Meriting Glory. Which Opinions are both condemned as
Heretical, chiefly upon this Principle, That whatsoever is Natural, has no
proportion, with things Supernatural; which common Reason dictates. Thus far in
General: now we'll descend to Particulars.

The Question in agitation is, whether the touching the Vessels, that is, the
Chalice with Wine, and Water in it, and the Patene with an Host, be the
Essential Matter and Form of the Order of Priesthood? I Assert that it is not,
because it was never assumed nor appointed by the Divine Institutor for that
end. This being a thing of Fact, must be made out by the Testimony of those
that best knew. None are more competent Witnesses, nor were better acquainted
with the Transactions of Christ, then his Apostles, who were Eyewitnesses of
his proceedings, and to whom Christ communicated such things as chiefly
concerned his Church. And they have left their Testimony in Writing, to be
inviolably observed in future times, and yet have no where left the least
mention of this Matter and Form. If any such thing had been Instituted by
their Divine Master, it is most unlikely, and wholly incredible, that in a
matter of such moment, and high concern, wherein the very being of the Church
depended, they should have past it over in deep silence, and never have given
the lest intimation of it, neither in Word nor Writing, to those of the
Primitive Church, that immediately succeeded them. But so it is, the Apostles
never mention it; All Antiquity is wholly ignorant of it; search all the
Minutest Passages of Scripture, read all the Authors of the Infancy, and Growth
of the Church, Examine all the Liturgies, and Rituals of Ordination, the
Latins, Greeks, the Syrian Maronites, the Nestorians, the Eutichians, the
Jacobites, the Cophticks, the Egyptians, the Babilonians, the Aethiopians,
etc. Peruse all the Records of Councils, and you shall find nothing but a
profound Silence, and Ignorance of any such thing, till about 700 years since,
as you may see above Section II. in the Ritual of Constantinus Caetanus. In the
Ancient Rituals, as well of the Latins, as the Greeks and others, there is
frequent mention made of the Imposition of Hands in Ordination, which was ever
held Essential to the Order of Priesthood, but of Touching the Vessels not a
word. Whence we may certainly conclude, that those Vessels were never
Instituted by Christ, as the Essential Matter of Priesthood, nor the Words
annexed thereunto, as the Essential Form. Let us now Collect what has been
proved in this Section: Nothing but that which Christ Instituted is the
Essential Matter and Form of the Order of Priesthood; But Christ never
Instituted the Touching of the Vessels, and the words annexed to it; ergo, the
Touching of the Vessels, and the Words annexed to it, are not the Essential
Matter, and Form of the Order of Priesthood; the Premises have been here
clearly proved, and the Conclusion is legally inferred.

For a farther Proof of this Assertion, we must drive it a little higher, and
consider the fatal consequences that would ensue from their Doctrine were it
true. For if the Matter and Form, specifyed in the Title of this Section, be
the Essentials of the Order of Priesthood, then it inevitably follows, that the
Greeks, and all the Christians dispersed over all the East, yea, and the Latin
Church also, for a Thousand years after Christ, had never any Valid Ordination,
because they all wanted the Essentials of Priesthood, for all these never made
use of the Vessels nor the Form annexed to them, as appears by their Rituals
(And to this day none but the Latins, ever applied this Matter and Form to
him that was to be Ordained Priest) and therefore could have no True
Patriarchs, not Bishops, nor Priests among them. A very sad Illation, and of
vast consequence; for no Priest, no Church What then, Must the Church of Rome,
to keep up, and Maintain their Innovation, which is a Mere Humane Invention,
Un-Church all the Professors of Christianity in the World for a Thousand years
together, and a considerable part of them to this day, and leave them destitute
of either Bishop or Priest? Where was, all this while, the provident care, that
our great Master and Redeemer ever had of his Church, which he had Established
by the Price of his Precious Blood? Where was that tender love, that he ever
testified to his Endeared Spouse? Could heabandon his whole Church so soon
after he had Instituted, and so firmly Founded it, that the Gates of Hell
should never prevail against it? What Christian can, without a Sacred Horror,
entertain a thought, of such a general devastation, and deplorable desolation?

But this being so obvious, could not but work the Church of Rome into an
anxiety and sedulous industry, to find a remedy; wherefore, to salve this Sore,
they would never Reordain their Proselites, that had deserted the Communion of
the Greek Church, and embraced theirs; but on the contrary, in all occasions,
declared the Ordinations of the Greek Church to be valid; and consequently
granted to those Greeks, that were now Incorporated into their Church, the free
use of all their Priestly Functions (though they had been created Priests
according to the Rites of the Greek Church) and never attempted to Reordain
them. By this they endeavor to evade this last imputation, which otherwise
would lie heavy upon them.

But in plain terms, this evaasion is no better, then a mere contradiction;
for, How is it possible that the Ordination of the Greeks could be valid,
without the Essentials of Ordination? which the Roman Church places in the
Touching of the Holy Vessels, with this Form, Accipe potestatem, etc. Receive
a power to offer Sacrifice, etc. for these the Greeks never used. You were as
good tell me, That one may be truly and properly a Man, without either Body, or
Reasonable Soul, which are the Essentials of Man.

If you should Reply, That there may be Two Essences of Ordination, so that
each taken apart from the other, makes the Ordination valid. So when the Greeks
Ordain, they use for Matter, the Imposition of Hands, and for Form, these
words, Divina gratia, etc. The Divine Grace, which always heals that which is
infirm, and supplies that which is defective, promotes this most holy Deacon to
be a Priest. By this Matter and Form, the Greeks do validly confer the Order
of Priesthood: And when the Romanists Ordain, they do the like by their
peculiar Matter and Form. So that neither is rigorously necessary, but either
may suffice. This Doctrine is very Paradoxical, for in substance it asserts,
that one and the same thing may have two complete and adequate Essences,
specifically, and generically different from each other, which is impossible,
for a thing, and his adequate Essence is the same, and nothing can be
specifically, or generically different from its self.

But you will say, These are not two Essences of the same thing, but two different
causes of the same effect. To solve this, I must distinguish between the Order
it self, and the Ordination; the Order is that Spiritual Power, which is given
to the Ordained, by virtue of his Ordination, from whence results the Order,
together with its concomitant Supernatural effects, which are the Character and
Sacramental Graces, that are inseparable from it. The Ordination is made up of
those Actions and Words, which the Ordainer exercises, and applies to the
Ordained, so that the Ordination participates more of the nature of a
causality, then of a cause. And the whole Essence of this Ordination, is the
Matter and Form instituted by Christ; for whatsoever was assumed by the
Original Instituter, and by him elevated, and empowered to produce such
admirable, supernatural, and Sacramental effects, is the Essence of Ordination;
So that Order is the Effect, and Ordination the Cause: wherefore, if you
appoint new Essentials of Ordination, you not only grant two Causes of the same
effect, but two Essences of the same thing, whereby you render Ordination,
specifically, and Essentially distinct from its self. And because none but an
Omnipotent Power, can raise Natural Causes to such vigor and energy, as to
produce such extraordinary effects; therefore that Matter and Form which
Christ has Instituted to this end, is the total Essence of Ordination. And
herein the Greeks have the advantage, for they ever used the Imposition of
Hands, with the Form above mentioned; which the Primitive Church received from
the Apostles, and they from Christ; so the Greeks are sure, that their
Ordination has a legal and valid Institution: But where shall we find another
adequate Essence of Ordination, by Divine Institution? That of the Church of
Rome has no such Prerogative, for we know its Origin, and have scanned its
Pedigree, whereby we find, that there is nothing but Human Authority to
authorize it, which has no proportion to such wonderful effects which are out
of the reach of Nature, and none but an Omnipotent Power can produce. Hence we
groundedly conclude, that there is but one valid Ordination, which has but one
certain, and determinate Nature, and Essence, neither is there any power upon
Earth that can add to it, or take from it. So that in vain you assign the
Touching of the Vessels, with its Form, for a second, total, and adequate
Essence of Ordination. For all Antiquity was a stranger to this, the Apostles
never heard of it, Christ never mentioned it neither by word nor action. Who
then dares obtrude this as belonging to the Essence of Ordination, which is of
Divine Right, as all Sacraments are? Certainly none will attempt it, but such
whose ambition prompts them to entrench upon Divine Right, and God it here upon
Earth, not knowing, or not acknowledging that their power is limited, and
confined within its certain bounds.

Besides, were there two Forms of Ordination, one Instituted by Divine
Authority, the other by Human, and both valid; by the same Rule you might
institute Two hundred, yea, every Diocese might have one peculiar to it self;
there is no more difficulty for the Third, then there was for the Second, nor
for the Fourth, then the Third, and so of all the rest. Wherefore if such a
power were delegated to mere Humanes, What a confusion might they bring into
the Church? which would be the ground of Discord, and Dissension, for one
Bishop might contend with another, whose Ordination was best.

Having thus proved the Invalidity of Ordination, according to the Present
Roman Pontifical, and General Approbation of that Church; I shall now employ my
endeavors to solve the Objections which may be proposed in vindication thereof.

SECT. VI. An Answer to the Objections Proposed by the Doctors of the Church of
Rome, against the Invalidity of their Ordination.
THe Roman Divines, who earnestly endeavor to compose this difficulty, find so
much arduity in it, that they cannot agree among themselves; but what expedient
one finds out, as accommodated to this end, another disapproves, and so with
great anxiety, they cast about, by several windings, and turnings, to compose
the Difference between both Churches; but, in the execution, they impugn each
other, and, by this means, divide themselves into several Classes. Whereof I
shall here give you an account.

The most considerable Party, as well for number, as for authority and
reputation, are those who absolutely exclude all Imposition of Hands, from the
Essentials of Ordination, and place the whole Essence thereof in Touching the
Holy Vessels, with the Form accommodated thereunto. And indeed, this is
generally received in the Church of Rome, as an undoubted Truth, Some of the
Authors of this Opinion I have cited in the Fourth Section.
and practiced as such. This is conformable to the Doctrine of the Council of
Florence, and Pope Gregory the 9th, which I have cited in the beginning of the
Fourth Section. This Opinion needs no Answer, for the Authors hereof are so far
from reconciling both Churches, that they Unchurch both: and in stead of
solving the difficulty, they sink under the burden thereof. They destroy the
Greek Church, by denying the Imposition of Hands to be Essential to Ordination,
which the Greeks ever used as the only Essential Matter thereof. They destroy
the Latins, by relying wholly upon the Touching of the Vessels, and the Form
annexed, as the only Essential Matter and Form of Ordination, excluding all
other, and yet this Matter and Form are wholly incapable of giving any
validity to the Order of Priesthood, because they want the Essence, the very
life and soul of being Instrumental to Ordination, which is the Divine
Institution, as I have manifestly proved in the precedent Section.

A Second Objection: The Divine Institutor of the Order of Priesthood, did not
determine the specifical Matter and Form thereof, but only in general, that
the Church should appoint some sensible Matter, and some Form of Words,
whereby to signify the collation of Order by their application. So that here
is a latitude in Christ's Institution, and a Power left to the Church to
determine what particular Matter and Form, she should think fit, and by this
Power the Church may alter the Matter and Form of Order at her pleasure; she
may abrogate what was before in use, and Institute a new Matter and Form, and
the Order will still be valid. So Isambertus, the Kings Professor of Divinity
at Paris, Treating at large of the Sacrament of Order, Disput. 3. art. 3. his
words are these; Christus Dominus instituendo Ordines, determinavit tantum
eorum materias in genere, nimirum, ut ea esset legitima cujuslibet Ordinis
materia, quae existens sensibilis, sui Traditione debite and sufficienter
facta, tam ex part Ministri, quam intentionis, significaret tune de facto
potestatem tali Ordini propriam dari ei qui materiam istam sensibilem, seu
signum istud sensibile, acciperet in sua Ordinatione; particularem autem istius
signi determinationem, seu imponere, and veluti affigere significationem
practicam illius potestatis, huic vel illi rei sensibili in particulari
reliquit faciendum Ecclesiae, prout, and quando illa judicaret esse conveniens.
Our Lord Christ Instituting Orders, did only determine their Matter in General,
which being sensible, duly and sufficiently applied, as well in reference to
the Minister, as the Intention, might signify then in effect, the power proper
to that Order to be given to him, that in his Ordination should receive this
sensible Matter, or Sign. But to determine this Sign in particular, and to
Impose, and as it were affix to it a Practical Signification of that Power
given to this or that Sensible Thing in Particular, he has left to be done by
the Church, when, and how she should judge it convenient.

And having Proved out of the Constitutions of Clement, and the Fourth Council
of Carthage, That the Imposition of Hands by the Bishop, and the assisting
Priests used in the beginning of Ordination, was formerly the Essential Matter
of Priesthood, he adds, Igitur cum hoc nostro tempore, haec Impositio manuum
sit tantum accidentalis; and illa posterior, quae fit a solo Episcopo simul
dicente ei quem Ordinat; Accipe Spiritum Sanctum, Quorum, etc. sit nunc
Essentialis, ut supra ostendimus, aliqua mutatio est facta per Ecclesiam in
ista materia Ordinum. Therefore, since in this our time, this Imposition of
Hands is only accidental, and that last which is performed, only by the Bishop,
saying to him whom he Ordains, Receive the Holy Ghost: whose sins, etc. is
Essential, as I have shown above, some change is made by the Church in this
matter of Orders. Thus he. The same says Gammacheus de Sacramento Ordinis,
Cap. 4. Hallerius, S. Bonaventura. Prepositus Atrebas de materia and forma
Ordinationis, n. 109.

There are Three Reasons that this Objection is grounded on. Lugo D 2. de
Sacramentis in genere, S. 5. n. 85.
The first is, because the Church has changed the matter of Subdeaconship,
which was formerly conferred by the Imposition of Hands, but now by the
Ordination and Practice of the Church, that Imposition of Hands does not at all
belong to the Essence of Subdeaconship. Secondly, Clandestine Marriage was ever
valid before the Council of Trent, but now is rendered invalid by that Council.
Thirdly, The Apostles Confirmed by Imposition of Hands without Unction; but
now, if the Unction be omitted, the Confirmation is invalid.

To this Objection, my first Answer is, That it is all gratis dictum, it is
said without ground. It is mera petitio principii. They assume for proof that
which is to be proved. The thing in question is, Whether the Church has Power
to Repeal, Alter, or Change, that which Christ has Instituted in matter of
Ordination? This Objection contends, that the Church has done it, in
Ordination, Matrimony, and Confirmation. I grant, the Church has done it de
Facto, but not de Jure: That is, it has by its Ordination, and Practice,
endeavored to violate Divine Right, but neither legally nor validly, as we have
already proved. It is not that which is done at Rome, that must Regulate our
Belief, but that which is well and regularly done. So Durandus, in 4. did. 13.
q. 3. telling us, That the custom of the Priest-Cardinals, jointly Celebrating
with the Pope, was not in his time observed. Et si observarctur, non esset
necessarium credere quod been fieret, quia secundum Hieronimum, non quod fit
Romae, sed quod sieri debet, attendendum est. And if that custom should be
observed at Rome, it would not be necessary to believe, that it were well done;
for according to Hierome: not that which is done at Rome, but that which ought
to be done, must be observed, says Durand. As for Subdeaconship, Matrimony,
and Confirmation, they all contain the same difficulty with this. Certain it
is, that the Church of Rome (as much as in her lies) has made a change in the
Matter and Form of her pretended Sacraments; and as certain it is, that she
has done it illegally, and invalidly, as having No power, authority, or
commission to alter, change, or abrogate the Constitutions of Christ, which are
of Divine Right, and especially in our case, where mere Natural Creatures are
elevated to produce supernatural effects, which is peculiar to an Omnipotent
Power, as is clearly proved in the precedent Section.

My Second Answer is, That according to the Doctrine of this Objection, we must
admit in the Divine Understanding, confused and imperfect acts, such are those
which represent Universals, or Objects in General, which the Philosophers call
Universal; and by such Acts a Created Understanding: cognoscit plura non
cognita pluralitate; that is, an Act of Human Understanding, represents a
nature common to Many, but does not represent the plurality, nor the
differences between them, and so by a distinction made by the Understanding,
that Metaphysical formality which is common to many, is separated, and
distinguished from the difference that is between them, and yet they are really
identify'd; this is proper to Human Understanding, and to Angelical, in such
Objects as Angels know by foreign species, which are imperfect, but not in
those that are known by their proper species, because these species produce
perfect acts, that represent the Object as it is, which, of it self, admits no
such distinction, but is indivisible. Now, to attribute to God such confused,
abstractive, and imperfect notions of Objects, is to destroy his Omniscience,
which can admit of no imperfection, and so consequently this Doctrine would
Ungod him. Wherefore the Divine Intellect has for its Object, all those
particulars, with all their nicest differences, that are contained under those
heads that we call Generals, all which he represents, as they are in
themselves, with all their differences, by a clear intuitive, and comprehensive
act. The reason is, because God uses no species, no, nor acts distinct from
himself; his Essence is his act, and species also, which has a reference to
all things that are possible, and hence he perfectly comprehends them all in
their particulars and individuals, and therefore cannot represent a general
praedicate so as to prescind it from the differential formality, for this would
argue imperfection. Now since the Will of God is regulated by his
understanding, he can make no decree by way of Institution of a Sacrament, to
elevate such or such sensible signs in general, to produce supernatural
effects, except he fixes it upon some determinate particulars, because the
Understanding represents no such generals, without the determinate particular
differences, for nihil volitum quin praecognitum, the Will can have no Object,
but what the Understanding represents; the Understanding of God represents no
General without particulars, therefore the Will cannot decree an extraordinary
concurse to a General without determining the particulars; for otherwise God
would determine himself, by his Decree, to give an extraordinary concurse to he
knew not what, but the Church must afterward determine him; which is a conceit
very unworthy of the infinite perfection of Gods Understanding and Will. Hence
it is manifest, that the Matter and Form of Sacraments can never be
capacitated to produce such wonderful and supernatural effects, except the
Divine Decree pass upon them in particular, to enable them to it, by his
concomitant and extraordinary assistance.

But it may be alleged, that without affiixing any obscurity or imperfection
to the Divine Acts, a Power may be left to the Church to determine some one of
those matters, which the Understanding of God represents distinctly, with all
their particular differences, and Regulates his Decree by the Churches
Determination.

I Answer, That in effect this is no other then to Assert, That Christ has
Commissioned the Church to Institute Sacraments; for here are no limits
prescribed, but they are left to the whole latitude of any sensible Matter. And
I demand, Whether any Divine dare assert, That the Church has Power to change
the Essential Matter of Baptism, or Eucharist, for any other specifically
distinct from what is now in use? if not, What ground is there to assert such a
Power in the Church, in reference to one Sacrament more than another? Besides,
in this particular matter of Instituting Sacraments, such a subordination of
Gods Decrees to Human determination, derogates from the dignity of Christ as
Redeemer, for he alone, without any Human Concurrence, is the Sole Institutor
of Sacraments, who, without Man's help, has perfected the Work of our
Redemption.

My third Answer is, That according to this Doctrine, the Church of Rome would
have a power to Institute Sacraments; for the Essence of each Sacrament
consists precisely in the Matter and Form, so that the Institutor must appoint
and determine what shall be the Matter and Form of each Sacrament, which in
effect is nothing else but the Sacrament it self, which consists only of these
two Essential parts, empowered to produce such effects as are peculiar to each
Sacrament. But you will say, It is not the Church but Christ, that enables them
to produce the Sacramental effects, by the Churches determination. It is well
that the Church will admit of Christ, to be a Constituter with it; but yet the
Church still retains the rectum, which is the visible, or sensible sign, and
contains the whole Essence of the Sacrament, and leaves to Christ only the
obliquum, which is to do the work intended by it. But where was this Divinity
ever Taught, to separate the parts of Institution of Sacraments, so as that one
part should be Human, and the other Divine? which still makes the Church a
joint Institutor with Christ, and so, as that the Church has the greatest hand
in it, for the Church Orders, Appoints, and Determines all, and Christ is to be
ready at the Churches beck, to execute what she appoints; as though the
Omnipotent Power of the Divine Word were subservient to the Church: for it is
the powerful hand of Christ that elevates the sensible Signs to produce
Sacramental effects, which are out of the reach of nature. But the Church
determines what the Signs shall be, and summons the Divine Words Omnipotency,
when and where to elevate them, and so she has the greatest share in the
Institution of Sacraments. It Is strange, how such a Thought could find
admittance into any true Christians understanding, to divest Christ of this
Prerogative, and give it the Roman Church, which so much derogates from the
high Power and Wisdom of the Incarnate Word.

My Fourth Answer is grounded on Authority. And first I begin with the Council
of Trent, in these words, Trident, Sess. 7. Can. 1.
Si quis dixerit Sacramenta novae legis, non fuisse omnia, a Jesu Christo
Domino nostro Instituta, etc. Anathema sit. If any one shall say, that the
Sacraments of the New Law, were not all Instituted by Jesus Christ our Lord,
let him be Accursed. St. Thomas of Aquine, their great Divine, says, Aquinas,
3 Part. q. 60. ar. 5. corpore.
In Sacramentis novae legis quibus homines Sanctificantur, oportet uti rebus ex
Divina Institutione determinatis. In the Sacraments of the New Law, by which
Men are Sanctified, it is necessary to use things, that by Divine Institution
are determined. Consonant to this is the testimony of Bellarmine, Bellarminus,
L. 1. de Sacramentis in genere, C. 21. Ibid.
in these words, Res certae, and determinaiae ab ipso Deo, in Sacramentis esse
debent. Things certain, and determined by God himself, must be used in the
Sacraments. And again, says he, Non solum res, sed etiam verba, in Sacramentis
novae legis a Deo determinatae sunt; ut non liceat quidquam immutare. Not only
the things (says he) but also the words, in the Sacraments of the New Law, are
determined by God; so that it is not lawful to change any thing. All this is
confirmed and attested by Suarez, that great Divine, whose Authority bears such
sway in the Church of Rome; who first lays his Groundwork in these words,
Suarez 3 Part. To. 3. D. 2. S. 2. citans, D. Thomam.
Omnia Sacramenta quae consistunt in usu, constant rebus, and verbis, seu
materia, and forma, tanquam ex partibus quibus componuntur. All Sacraments
which consist in use, contain things, and words, or matter, and form, as parts
whereof they are composed. And afterward he adds these words, Ibid. S. 3.
Dico 1. materias and formas Sacramentorum, determinatas esse ex Christi Domini
Institutione, and eo modo quo definitae sunt, esse necessarias ad Sacramenta
conficienda. First, I assert (says Suarez) that the Matters and Forms of
Sacraments are determined, by the Institution of Christ our Lord; and in that
manner as they are defined, they are necessary to the validity of the
Sacraments. But this is not all, for of this very Opinion he adds these words,
Est communis Theologorum, and absolute loquendo, est de fide. This is the
common Doctrine of the Divines, and absolutely speaking, it is an Article of
Faith. I Will adds one Text more, out of Suarez, because his Authority is so
renowned. In the Fourth Section he thus declares his Opinion, Ibid. S. 4.
Si mutatio materiae aut formae, essentialis, seu substantialis sit nullum
efficitur Sacramentum. If any change be made in the Matter or Form, that is
Essential, or Substantial, it renders the Sacrament void, and ineffectual.
Hence I conclude, that the Authors and Abetters of the Doctrine contained in
the Objection, do not only impugn the common Opinion of Divines, but they also
err in matter of Faith, as Suarez observes.

And it is to be observed, that all these Autorities agree in this, That Christ
not only Instituted, but also Determined the Matter and Form of all
Sacraments, which the Authors of this Objection deny.

To this I Will annex the Judgment of Maldonatus, Maldonatus, Tom. 2. de
Sacramentis, Tract. de Ordine, q. 3. part. 2.
a Famous Divine of the Jesuits, whose words are these, Impositio manuum non
est habenda tanquam ceremonia non necessaria, scd tanquam pars Essentialis
Sacramenti; idque videtur tenendum side Catholica. Primum, quia in Scriptura
ubicunque fit montio de Ordinatione, declaratur per impositionem manuum. Et
videtur mihi esse temerarium, scripturam deserere, and consectari chymeras, id
est, rations naturales. Secundo quia veterem Ecclesiam nunquam ordinasse, sine
impositione manuum, ex omnibus autoribus antiquis perspicuum est. De traditione
autem calicis and hostiae, nulla est mentio apud illos. Tertio, quia videtur
durum nimis esse, ceremoniam quam nobis perspicue tradunt Apostoli, excludere a
natura Sacramenti, and inducere illam, de qua nulla mentio fit in Scriptura. In
English thus:

The Imposition of hands is not to be esteemed, as a Ceremony, not necessary,
but as an Essential part of the Sacrament, and this ought to be held as an
Article of Faith.

First, Because in Scripture, wheresoever mention is made of Ordination, it is
declared by the Imposition of hands; and it seems to me temerarious, to desert
the Scripture, and follow Fictions, that is, Natural Reasons.

Secondly. Because it is evident by all Ancient Writers, that the Primitive
Church never Ordained without the Imposition of hands; but they make no mention
of delivering the Chalice and the Host.

Thirdly. Because it seems too hard to exclude from the nature of a Sacrament,
a Ceremony, which is clearly delivered to us by the Apostles, and, to induce
that, of which there is no mention made in the Scripture. Thus Maldonatus.

It Is well that some of our Antagonists cannot be swayed neither by hope nor
fear, nor any way deterred from uttering Truth. He tells us, That it is an
Article of Faith, that the Imposition of hands is Essential to Ordination, and
that it is a temerity to deny it, and he proves both by solid Arguments. So
that they who adhere to the practice, and persuasion of the Church of Rome,
must, to defend this Doctrine, desert both Scripture and Tradition.

SECT. VII. The Solution of other Objections against the same Doctrine.
A Third Objection endeavors a Reconciliation, by joining the delivery of the
Instruments or Vessels, and their Form, with the last Imposition of hands, and
this Form, Accipe Spiritum Sanctum, etc. So that of these two Matters they
make one entire Matter; and of these two Forms, they frame one entire and
adequate Form. Yet so, as that by touching the Vessels with this Form, Accipe
potestatem, etc. they affirm the Ordained to receive the Order of Priesthood,
with Power to Consecrate and offer Sacrifice; and the Character to be thereby
imprinted. But by the consequent imposition of hands, the Ordained receives a
Power only to forgive or retain sins, as the Form of words expresses. So
Becanus, Part 3. Theologiae, Cap. 26. de Sacramento Ordinis, quest. 4. who uses
his utmost endeavor by this means, to maintain the Validity of Ordination
according to the present practice of the Church of Rome, yet so, as not to draw
any prejudice upon the Ordination of the Greek Church, and other Christian
Congregations, whose Ordinations the Church of Rome ever declared valid. But
the Council of Florence seems to obstruct his design, by assigning no other
Essentials of Ordination but the Tradition of the Vessels, and their Form, and
here Gamachaeus, above cited, in the precedent Section, Cap. 4. joins his
forces with Becanus, or rather Becanus with him. So also does Meratius, D 7. S.
2. who, to the Authority of the Council of Florence, Answers; Concilium non
suscepisse ex professo declarandum accurate singulorum ordinum, materiam and
formam totalem ac integram, etc. sed solum per cujus rei Traditionem potestas
ordinis conferetur. The Council (says Meratius) did not undertake of purpose,
to declare exactly, the total and adequate Matter and Form of each order, etc.
but only to declare what those things were by whose Tradition the power of
order was conferred. And this Opinion Isamberus also embraces with avidity, as
conceiving all helps little enough, in such a hard conjuncture, and therefore
joins this Opinion with his own, specified above in the Second Objection. St.
Bonaventure holds the same, in 4 d. 7. ar. 1. q. 1. and 2. and before him
Alexander, p. 4. Sum. q. 9. Memb. 1. and 2. ar. 2. where he distinguishes
between that which Christ Ordained, and that which the Church Ordained, in
these words, Quae enim ab homine Ordinata sunt, ab homine possunt mutari, quae
autem a Deo instituta sunt, non nisi dictante Deo debent mutari. These things
(says he) that are Ordained by Man, may be changed by Man, but those things
that are Instituted by God, are not to be changed, but by Gods appointment.

As to their Interpretation of the Council of Florence, I Answer, That it is is
a mere ungrounded shift, for the Council gives not the least hint of any such
sense, but undertakes to assign the Essential matter of Priesthood, and to that
purpose, specifies only the Tradition of the Vessels, as the only Essential
Matter, and mentions nothing else, which would be a mere delusion, if the
Council had judged any thing else to be Essential. But Becanus interprets it
thus, Nota, antiqua Concilia assignasse materiam a Christo Institutam;
Florentinum vero materiam assignasse quam Ecclesia introduxit. Note (says
Becanus) that the Ancient Councils assigned the matter Instituted by Christ;
but the Council of Florence specified the Matter that was introduced by the
Church. Be it so; then the Ancient Councils assigned only the Imposition of
hands, as the Essential Matter of Priesthood; but the Council of Florence, in
the time of those Fathers, signified the Tradition of the Vessels, and nothing
else, as the only Essential Matter: So that neither the Ancient, nor Modern
Councils, ever joined these two Matters together, as parts of the whole, by
their own Confession. But hence it is plain, that the Church of Rome has
introduced a New Matter and Form, which Christ never Instituted, and yet they
hold it Essential. Now to their Argument.

My first Answer is, That this is a mere evasion to save them from Shipwreck.
What ground have they, for patching up a Sacramental Matter with two such
disparate, and heterogeneal pieces? What time will they appoint to have the
Character imprinted? What will this avail them, if it should be all granted;
for none of them will admit the Imposition of Hands alone, with its Form, to
have a capacity to confer the Order of Priesthood, and Imprint the Character,
therefore they must declare the Ordination of the Greeks to be frustrate, who
never used any other Matter then the Imposition of Hands. But if this alone be
sufficient, Then what need is there of the Tradition of the Vessels? Why should
these two parts, so different from each other, be conjoined, if either of them
apart were sufficient?

My Second Answer is; That they could never have made a worse choice then to
join these two Matters and Forms together, in order to constitute the entire
Essence of Ordination; for both the one and the other are Innovations; the one
begun about Seven hundred years since; the other was introduced about Four
hundred and fifty years since; so that neither was Instituted by Christ,
neither recommended by the Apostles, neither practiced in the Church of God
before the times specified. From whence then can they derive their Validity?

My Third Answer is, That the last Imposition of Hands with this Form, Accipe
Spiritum Sanctum, etc. Receive the Holy Ghost; whose sins you forgive they are
forgiven, whose sins you retain, they are retained. This, I say, can no way
belong to the Essentials of Priesthood, because this Matter and Form are
applied to none but those that have before received the Order of Priesthood,
and have the Character Imprinted, which is manifest, because they all said
Mass, and Consecrated with the Bishop, before the application of this Matter
and Form, which is not performed till after they have all Received the
Communion, immediately before the Post-Communion is Read; wherefore this Matter
and Form comes too late, to have any influence upon the Order of Priesthood;
but I shall not need spend time in the Proof of this; because the Authors of
this Objection grant it, and only make use of this Matter and Form, to confer
the Power of Forgiving and Retaining sins. Which being supposed, they must rely
wholly upon the Tradition of the Vessels, for conferring upon the Ordained the
Spiritual Power of Priesthood, and enabling him to Consecrate the Body and
Blood of Christ, and to offer Sacrifice, and for Imprinting the Character, etc.
all which, the touching of the Vessels, with its Form, can never accomplish,
because here is nothing at all of Christ's Institution, no Imposition of Hands
does any way concur to this. So that we have here the Power of Priesthood
conferred, with the Character, and yet without any Imposition of Hands; and
hereby this Opinion agrees with the First Objection, which excludes all
Imposition of Hands; and therefore must of necessity condemn the Greek Church,
who never use any other Matter of Ordination, then the Imposition of Hands. And
yet the main drift of these Objections is, to save the Validity of the Greeks
Ordinations, so as not to destroy their own. And that the Power of Consecrating
the Body and Blood of Christ is the Principal Act of Priesthood, they all
grant, and it is so asserted by Albertus Magnus. The Act of Priests (says he)
is to Consecrate the Body and Blood of Christ: Albert. Mag. L. 6. Theology
veritatis, C. 36.
and it is the Principal Act; the other is consequent, which is, to Retain and
Absolve.

A Fourth Objection: Nothing can be more significant, nor more proportionable
to the Function and chief Ministry of a Priest, then the delivering to him, in
his Ordination, those Vessels wherein he is to Consecrate, and Consummate the
Mysteries of the Eucharist, which is the Principal and Substantial Act of his
Priestly Office; and therefore nothing so fit, to be the Essential Matter of
his Ordination. So likewise the Form, clearly, and Explicitly signifies the
Order of Priesthood to be conferred to the Ordained, by the application of this
Matter and Form, and therefore is most exactly accommodated to this present
end.

I Answer, That it argues Temerity and Presumption, for mere Men to prefer
their judgments before the judgment of the Word Incarnate, who knows and
comprehends all things whose judgment and prudence is infi, nite, and
consequently he best knew what was most significant, and most expedient for the
Matter and Form of such Mysteries, as he himself Instituted. And therefore, to
reject that which Christ appointed, and substitute in lieu thereof the products
of our own weak invention, under pretense that it is more accommodated to the
Mystery then that, is too high an attempt, for hereby we divest Christ of his
Omniscience, and consequently of his Divinity, by preferring our own Finite and
Limited capacities, before the II-limited Perfections of Christ's
Understanding, which is very preposterous and deordinate.

As to the Form of words which they have introduced, to animate their
adventitious Matter, lest their Reformation should remain incompleate: I
Answer, That this Modern Form, now in practice in the Church of Rome, to wit,
Receive a Power of offering Sacrifice as well for the Living as the Dead, etc.
is very different from the ancient Form derived from the Apostles, which is
this, The Divine Grace, which always heals that which is infirm, and supplies
that which is defective, promotes this holy Deacon to be a Priest. Compare
these two together, and you will find a substantial difference between them,
that is Imperative, this Indicative; that gives Power of offering Sacrifice;
this has no such expression: That specifies to whose benefit the Sacrifice
shall accrue; this makes no mention at all to whose benefit it should redound,
etc. These and other differences make those two Forms very heterogeneal, and
discrepating, when compared with each other.

But it may be alleag'd, That notwithstanding these seeming Differences, yet,
in effect, the two Forms are equivalent, and render the same sense, only with
this difference, that what the one contains implicitly, the other expresses
more particularly, and explicitly. The second signifies Priesthood conferred,
which implies a power of exercising all the Functions and Ministeries that
properly belong to a Priest; among which is enumerated the power of offering
Sacrifice, which peculiarly belongs to a Priest. This therefore is tacitly
contained, and involved under the signification of this Second Form; and the
first signifies more distinctly this self-same thing, and no more. For the
intention of the Sacrificator, is extrinsecal to the Sacrifice, for whether he
offer it for the Living, or the Dead, or by way of Satisfaction, Propitiation,
or Impetration for himself, or others, makes no change in the Sacrifice.

This latter part I admit: but, to the rest I Answer, That the offering of
Sacrifice in the Law of Grace, is not the only Function peculiar and proper to
a Priest, because the Administration of the Sacraments, Preaching, and
Explaining the Word of God, etc. are Ministeries belonging to the Office of
Priests: all which are contained under the Second Form, but wholly omitted in
the First, which only impowers the Ordained to offer Sacrifice, and limits his
power to this alone, because this Power is explicitly given him, and no
mention made of any other; so that the Second Form having a greater latitude,
as comprehending all that is contained under the notion of Priesthood, and the
First Form limited to one Function alone, it is manifest that this First
Form, peccat per defectum, that it is deficient, for it does not reach the
complete Power of Priesthood, and the Second Form being wholly omitted in the
Roman Pontifical, the Ordination consequently is Essentially defective.

Yet Independent of all this, they acknowledging the Original Matter and Form
to be valid: What necessity was there of Instituting this New Matter and Form?
Is it Christian-like to be diffident of Christ's Providence? as though the
Supreme Power of our Benign Redeemer wanted Ability, or his Omniscience were
defective to know our wants; or his Infinite Goodness had not the Will to
furnish us with all necessaries conducing to our Eternal Bliss. Is it possible
that any understanding, though but meanly instructed with Reason, can conceive,
that Human Providence, in these Supernatural Mysteries, can, in the least
manner, come in competition with that never failing Providence of Christ
himself? They Teach, That the Matter and Form of all Sacraments, are so
determined by Divine Institution, Bellarm. L. 1. de Sacram. in genere, C. 21.
ut non liceat quidquam immutare, that it is not lawful to change any thing,
says Bellarmine; and Suarez says, It is an Article of Faith. See the Authors,
for this, above, Sect. 6. in the Fourth Answer to the Second Objection; they
also hold Ordination to be a Sacrament: Si quis dixerit Ordinem sive Sacram
Ordinationem, Trident. Sess. 23. Can. 3.
non esse vere and proprie Sacramentum, a Christo Domino Institutum, etc.
Anathema sit. If any one shall say, That Order, or Ordination is not truly and
properly a Sacrament, Instituted by Christ our Lord, let him be Accursed, says
the Council of Trent. If therefore they stand to their own Principles, the
change which they have made, in the Matter and Form of Ordination, can be no
less then a violation of Divine Right, which renders the Order of Priesthood
Invalid.

But this is not all; for though their Modern Form should be equivalent to the
Primitive Form, yet if it be misplaced, and not applied to the Imposition of
Hands, which is the Original Matter, it cannot make one with it; and so on this
account, the Ordination will be Invalid. And in effect they have so dismembered
the parts of Christ's Institution, and so inverted the Order of them, that it
is very remote from being the same thing it was. For though they use the
Imposition of Hands (which is the Original Matter) yet they apply not to it,
the Original Form, which they entirely omit; nay, they allow it no Form at
all, as it were in Contempt; the Ordainer, with Deep Silence only putting his
hand upon the Head of him that is to be Ordained, not deeming it an Essential
Matter of Order, but only as a preparative thereunto. And the Second Imposition
of Hands (which immediately follows the First) has no Form, but a Precation,
neither can it confer the Order of Priesthood, because the Form which follows
at a distance, and affects the Tradition of the Vessels, expressly signifies the
Order then given, which would be a Sacrilegious Repetition, were it given
before. Wherefore the Ancient Form being omitted, and the new one not applied
to the Original Matter, I conclude, that here is made an Essential Mutation
destructive of the Validity of Order.

A Fifth Objection, much like the former, is proposed by his Eminence, Cardinal
Lugo, who disapproving all other ways of reconciling the Church of Rome with
the Greek Church, in matter of Ordination, proposes, as he conceives, a better
expedient, in these words, Verior ergo, and planior conciliandi modus est, quam
supra insinuavimm: Lugo. D. 2. de Sacram in genere, S. 5. n. 98.
Ecclesiam Latinam retinuisse utique, priscum illum ritum ab Apostolis
introductum, Ordinandi Sacerdotem per manus Impositionem, illam tamen materiam
magis explicitam reddidisse, adjungendo traditionem panis and vini quod Graeci
non faciunt; ita ut ex manus Impositione, and Traditione panis and vini, fiat
una integra materia magis explicita, cum forma quae nunc profertur explicante
potestatem solam ad sacrificandum. Postea vero adhibetur iterum alia manus
impositio cum altera forma explicante potestatem ad Absolvendum. Wherefore a
truer and a plainer way of Reconciliation is that which we have insinuated
above, that the Latin Church has indeed retained the Ancient Rite introduced
by the Apostles, of Ordaining a Priest by the Imposition of Hands, but has
rendered it more explicit, by adding to it the Tradition of Bread and Wine,
which the Greeks do not practice; so that of the Imposition of Hands, and
Tradition of the Bread and Wine, there is made one entire Matter more
explicit, with the Form now in use, that expresses only a power of
Sacrisicing. But afterward there follows another Imposition of Hands, with
another Form, expressing the Power of Absolving. Thus Cardinal Lugo. The same
is held by Gravina. De materia and forma Ordinis. D. 2. Sect. 3. where he
says, That the Vessels are implicitly contained in the Imposition of Hands,
wherefore the Greeks do implicitly, and virtually touch the Vessels, but the
Latins do it explicitly, and formally.

I Answer, That the so much desired Reconciliation between the Greeks and the
Latins, in reference to Ordination, will never be made, by the Doctrine of
this Objection, which is grounded upon a false Principle, that the Touching the
Vessels is equivalently the Imposition of Hands, and so virtually contained in
it, which is repugnant to common sense. For, What have the Vessels to do with
the Imposition of Hands? What analogy or similitude is there between them? The
Imposition of Hands being the Action of the Ordainer, wherein the Ordained is
but passively concerned. And the Touching the Vessels is the proper Action of
the Ordained. Now to prove the difference between them, we must have recourse
to the specificativa entium, as the Philosophers term it; that is, by
assigning the terms or correlatives, of their intrinsecal and Essential
Relations, we may evidently deduce, what their Nature and Essence is. The
Touching of the Vessels is an action, whose origin and cause, is the Person of
the Ordained. The Object or Term of the same action, is the Thing Touched,
which are the Vessels. The Imposition of Hands, has for its origin or cause,
the Person of the Bishop, who is the Ordainer; and for its object, or term,
the Person of the Ordained; so that the correlatives of the one, compared with
the correlatives of the other, are as different, as the Vessels are from the
Person of the Ordained; and from this difference we evidently gather the like
difference between the Touching the Vessels, and the Imposition of Hands, by
reason of the intrinsecal, and Essential habitude, and reference, which these
actions have to their correlatives. But the Essence of the Vessels, and the
Person of the Ordained, are not only specifically, but generically different
from each other, the one being an Animate Creature, the principle of
Vegetation, Sensation and Reason; the other only Inanimate Metals, destitute of
Life, Vegetation, Sensation and Reason; which by the first notions of
Philosophy, argues a specifical, and generical difference. And consequently the
Imposition of Hands, and touching the Vessels, are Essentially, and
Substantially different from each other. And by this Discourse, the same
difference will result, whether you insist upon the Vessels, or the Substance
of Bread and Wine, which they contain, for they are all Inanimate, and
destitute of Life. So that the Touching of the Vessels, and the Imposition of
Hands, are Essentially, and Substantially distinguished from each other, and
consequently the one can neither formally, nor virtually, nor equivalently, nor
implicitly, contain the other.

And yet that the Order of Priesthood is a Sacrament, we have their universal
consent; The Council of Trent defines it, Tred. Sess. 23. Can. 3.
to be truly and properly a Sacrament Instituted by Christ, and lays a Curse
upon those that shall deny it, as we see above. What then remains? but that in
the Essentials of an acknowledged Sacrament, Instituted by Christ, they have
made a substantial and Essential Mutation. And yet they cannot deny, that
whatsoever is Instituted by Christ himself, is Sacred, it is Juris Divini, of
Divine Right, and therefore not to be altered by the wisest of Mankind. And to
attempt a change in things of Divine Right, implies, either an imputation of
Ignorance in Christ, or else a distrust of his Prudence and Providence, as if
we were not content with what Christ has Ordained for us, but we must presume
to Reform his Ordinances, Detracting one thing, and Substituting another, to
Reform, or Complete the Work of the Omniscient.

A Sixth Objection; That the Order of Priesthood was rightly and validly
conferred in the Ancient Church, as well by the Latins, as the Greeks, no Man
doubts; but the Church of Rome retains all that was then in use, as appears
above, by the Rituals, Sect. 2. Ca. 3. and in particular, the Imposition of
Hands then used, with a Deprecatory Form, which is the Second Imposition of
Hands, contained in the Roman Ritual, with that Ancient Prayer, to which, in
the old Rituals is prefixed this Title, Consecratio Presbyteri: the Consecrating
of a Priest, whereby Priesthood was formerly conferred; wherefore the Church of
Rome, using this Matter and Form in the beginning of Ordination, wants none of
the Essentials, and therefore her Ordination is valid. So Morinus, De Sacris
Ordinationibus, Part. 3. Exercitatione 7. C. 1. and 2. which he proves, by
refelling the Opinions of other Authors, who place the Essence of Ordination in
any of the other two Impositions of Hands, or in the Tradition of the
Instruments; which in these present circumstances, is no proof at all,
especially to one, who impugnes them all. For this is no Argument; their
Opinions are false; ergo mine is true. How easily is it Answered? that they are
all false, both his and theirs, except the contrary be proved. But he endeavors
to prove his Opinion by the Authority of the Council of Trent, Sess. 14. C. 3.
where the Council Orders the Ministers of Extreme Unction to be only Bishops,
aut Sacerdotes ab ipsis rite Ordinatos per Impositionem manuum Presbyterii: or
else Priests by them Ordained by the Imposition of the Hands of the Presbytery:
which refers to none but the Second Imposition of Hands, according to the Roman
Pontifical; for, in this alone, the Bishop joins his Right Hand with the other
Priests upon the head of the Ordained.

In this Opinion Morinus is singular, for I find no Author that holds it but
himself, neither is it probable, that the Validity of Ordination in the Church
of Rome, must rely upon the Authority of one single Author, who is a better
Historian then Divine, in opposition to all other Authors.

Wherefore my First Answer is, That this Imposition of Hands, which Morinus
insists upon, cannot validly confer the Order of Priesthood, for want of an
intention in the Minister to confer it hereby; For no Bishop that Ordains can
prudently intend to Ordain by this Imposition of Hands only, neither can the
Church intend it: First, Because there is but one Author that holds it, all the
Divines being wholly against it, asserting it to be only an accidental
Ceremony, preparative to the collation of Order, but not at all belonging to
the Essence of it; For the greatest part of Divines, and common persuasion of
the Church of Rome, admit no Imposition of Hands at all, as belonging to the
substance of Ordination; but place the whole Essence thereof in the Touching
the Instruments, and their Form. Others that allow to the Imposition of Hands
a partial concurrence, together with the Tradition of the Vessels, yet none of
them make choice of this Imposition of Hands, but they all attribute this
partial virtue to the Third Imposition of Hands, after Communion, with this
Form, Accipe Spiritum Sanctum, quorum remiseritis, etc. Receive the Holy
Ghost, whose sins, etc. Secondly, Because, if the Church, or the Ordainer,
should intend Ordination of Priests to be conferred by this Imposition of
Hands, and the Prayer that accompanys it, as the total and complete Essence,
and substance thereof, they would thereby render the exhibiting of the
Instruments and their Form, wholly useless, which would reflect upon the
Churches Prudence and Discretion, in introducing them; for no other necessity
of this superinduction, contrary to the constant practice of Antiquity, can be
groundedly assigned, but to be an adequate, or a partial cause of Priesthood.

My Second Answer is, That the Form which accompanyeth the tendering of the
Instruments, does so plainly, so expressly, and so explicitly signify, the
Order of Priesthood to be thereby conferred, that no Ordainer, that is in his
right wits, can any way doubt of it, or call it in question, but that the
Church, by adding this Matter, and Form, intended thereby to confer to the
Ordained the power of offering Sacrifice (wherein they place the Essence of
Priesthood) if then this power were given the Ordained before, by that Second
Imposition of Hands, the Ordainer (if he understands what he says) must,
volens, nolens, confer that power over again, to the same Ordained; which is a
Sacrilege; neither can the Church, who introduced it, avoid this
inconvenience. For Reordination was, by a never interrupted Tradition
prohibited in the Church of God. So in the Canons of the Apostles, Canon,
Apost. 68.
Si quis Episcopus, vel Presbyter, vel Diaconus, Secundam Ordinationem ab alio
receperit, deponatur and ipse, and qui Ordinavit, etc. If any Bishop, Priest,
or Deacon, do receive from another a Second Ordination, let him be deposed, and
he that Ordained him. The same is Taught by the Council of Trent, in these
words, Trid. Sess. 7, Can. 9.
Si quis dixerit, tribus Sacramentis, Baptismo scilicet, Confirmatione and
Ordinatione, non imprimi Characterem in anima, hoc est signum quoddam
Spirituale, and indelebile, unde ea iterari non possunt, Anathema sit. If any
one shall say, That in Three Sacraments, namely Baptism, Confirmation, and
Ordination, there is not a Character imprinted in the Soul, that is, a certain
Spiritual, and indeleble sign, by means whereof they cannot be reiterated, let
him be Accursed. St. Cyprian, de ablutione pedum, cites an ancient Author
speaking thus, Nemo Sacros Ordines semel datos renovat iterum, etc. quia
contumelia esset Spiritui Sancto si evacuari posset quod ille Sanctificat, etc.
None renews again Holy Orders that are once given, because it would be a
contumely to the Holy Ghost, if that should be evacuated, which he has
Sanctified. But I need not insist upon this, because they all grant it.

Hence it insues, That though the Roman Ritual should contain all the
Essentials of Ordination, yet this would not evince the Validity of it. First,
Because they reject that which is Essential, as a mere circumstantial Ceremony
inductive to Priesthood, and consequently have no intention to confer the Order
by it. Which intention is a necessary condition, sine qua non, without which,
no Order can be Validly conferred, as they all Teach, and is defined by the
Council of Florence, as you may see above in the Fourth Section, and the Second
Proof. Secondly, Because they have introduced a new Matter and Form, never
Instituted by Christ, nor ever mentioned by the Apostles, nor the Primitive
Church, by which they intend the Collation of Priesthood; Wherefore should the
Priestly Power be conferred, by that Second Imposition of Hands, then in every
Ordination there would be a Sacrilegious attempt of Reordaining.

A Seventh Objection: Though the Church of Rome approves of the Tradition of
the Vessels, with its proper Form, yet it so allows it, as not to exclude the
Imposition of Hands, and therefore the Ordination is Valid, and no way
repugnant to Christ's Institution; for this additional Matter and Form, is but
a thing indifferent to the other parts of Ordination, and therefore cannot be
prejudicial to them; for, as Gratian observes, Vtile per inutile non vitiatur;
A useless addition cannot vitiate that which is useful. Wherefore, Tridem.
Sess. 21. C. 3.
according to the Council of Trent, Agnoscens Sancta matter Ecclesia suam in
Administratione Sacramentorum autoritatem. The Holy Mother, the Church, well
knowing the power she has in the Administration of Sacraments, she may add,
diminish, or alter, as incident occasions and circumstances shall require,
still retaining the Essentials.

To this I Reply, That this Objection is already Answered, in the Solution of
the precedent Objection. Only this lays an Aspersion upon the Church for
introducing into the Ritual a needless Addition, though in effect it is
destructive of the Validity of Ordination, by rendering the Essentials useless,
and drawing from them the intention of Ordaining, as is above declared. But if
this Addition be not Essential, Why is the power of offering Sacrifice expressed
in it? Surely the Council of Florence and Pope Gregory the Ninth, thought it
Essential, as you may see above, Sect. 4. And indeed, that which is added, is
used as Essential, and that which Christ Instituted, is rejected as
Circumstantial, which vitiates the Ordination.

An Eighth Objection: The ground of this Discourse, against the Validity of
Ordination, according to the Roman Ritual, depends upon that Opinion, which
allows to the Sacraments a Physical influence, into the supernatural effects
thereof; for, great difficulty is made, how Natural Causes can produce
Supernatural Effects, on pretense, that none but an Omnipotent Power can
elevate them, per potentiam obedientialem, to render Nature proportionable, to
that which is above Nature: wherefore admitting only a Moral Causality, which
is a probable opinion, held and maintained by many Divines, this difficulty
will cease, for then the Church may Ordain, and determine the Matters and
Forms of Sacraments, without communicating to them, that Supernatural Power of
producing Physically and really such like Sacramental effects, as are above
Nature.

My First Answer is, That many Grave and Learned Divines, maintain, That the
Sacraments do Really and Physically produce their Supernatural Effects; and
they prove it by substantial Reasons, wherefore this Opinion, both by Authority,
and Reason, claims the preference, especially as being more conformable to the
expressions of the Councils, who Teach, That the Sacraments contain Grace, that
is, virtually, which signifies a power to produce it, and also, that they
confer Grace ex opere operato, etc. that is, the Sacraments by their due
application, confer Grace to the Receiver, through the power and virtue
wherewith they are endued, by Divine Institution, which is distinct from that
Grace which is produced ex opere operantis, that corresponds to the piety and
devotion of the Receiver. So the Council of Trent, Si quis dixerit per ipsa
novae legis Sacramenta, Trid. Sess. 7. Can. 18.
ex opere operato, non conferri gratiam, etc. Anathema sit. If any one shall
say, that by the Sacraments of the New Law, there is not Grace conferred, which
proceeds from the virtue of the Sacrament, let him be Accursed.

My Second Answer is, That the Doctrine above delivered, depends not on either
of these two Opinions determinately, for admit which you please, yet it cannot
be denied, but that the Sacraments, duly applied, bring with them an exigence,
and infallible determination, for the conferring Supernatural Graces,
Imprinting the Character, etc. by virtue of Christ's Institution. Independent
whereof, Pray what power is there in Nature to indue the Matter and Form of
Sacraments with such virtue and exigence, which all the force of Nature can
never pretend to, or challenge as due? So that an Omnipotent Power is here
rigorously necessary, to institute and determine the Matter and Form of
Sacraments, (which is all their Essence) and to communicate to them this high
Prerogative, which surpasses all the strength of Nature, as well Angelical as
Humane.

A Ninth Objection. In the Collation of Priesthood, as well the Church as the
Ordainer direct their intention to the whole Liturgy, thereby to confer the
Order, not determining any one part more then another, and certainly the whole
contains all the Essentials, and consequently thereby the Order must be Validly
conferred, there being nothing wanting, neither the Essentials, nor the
intention of the Minister to the Validity thereof.

My First Answer is, That though in some cases a denomination may be
appropriated to the whole, which cannot be applied to the parts thereof, if
taken separately, as the compound of a body, and a reasonable Soul, is a Man,
and yet neither the Body nor the Soul, taken separately, and by themselves, is
a Man. So likewise, a Number is made up of several Unities, and yet never an
Unity by it self is a Number. Yet when there is a real and Physical effect to
be produced, and the parts of the whole are applied successively, so as that
when one part is existent, the other is past, and not then in being, and the
subsequent parts are not yet extant. In this case a real effect cannot proceed
from them all, neither by a Physical action, nor by a Physical determination:
but this real effect must be produced in the same moment of time, when the
cause of it is existent, whether its influence be Physical, or Moral, provided
that its determination to such an effect be Physical. Now for application.

In the same moment of time that the Order of Priesthood is conferred, there is
a Spiritual Power given to the Ordained, there are several Real and
Supernatural Graces produced, there is a Real Character Imprinted. These are
the effects. Now let us inquire into the Cause. The Essential Matter and Form
of Ordination, duly applied, are the cause of those real effects, either by a
real influence, and principiating the action which produces them, or by a real
determination, or strict exigence of having then actually produced, according
to the Divine Decree of Institution, so that the effect cannot be deferred, or
suspended, when the cause, either Physical or Moral is sufficiently applied.
And certain it is, that the Ritual contains many circumstantial, and accidental
Rites, intermixed with the Essentials, and several parts of the Mass, as they
successively occur, for they are not all Essentials, neither is the Person to
be Reordained if any one action of the whole Ritual be omitted. Whence it
ensues, that some one determinate Matter and Form in particular, is the cause
of the forementioned effects, and in that cause consists the Essence of
Ordination. And yet if we run over all the parts of the Roman Ritual, there is
no Matter that can be Essential, except it be the Tradition of the Instruments,
or the Imposition of Hands; for nothing else was ever esteemed, in the least,
as Essential. The Tradition of the Vessels cannot be Essential, as we have
clearly proved above in the Fifth Section; as for the Imposition of Hands, we
find it in three places only in the Roman Ritual, and neither of these three
Impositions of Hands, belong to the Essential Matter of Ordination, as we have
proved in the Fourth Section, by Induction, or enumeration of parts.

My Second Answer is, That notwithstanding the drift of this Objection, which
is to involve all in obscurity and confusion; yet, whether they will or no,
their Essential Matter and Form are fixed, from whence they cannot recede; for
the Tradition of the Instruments, and the Form that affects them, which they
have introduced, can have no other end then to constitute the Essentials of
Priesthood. The Form is this, Receive a power of offering Sacrifice, etc.
These words, if they have any signification, import a Power of offering
Sacrifice then conferred upon the Ordained, and nothing else. And the offering
of Sacrifice is the chief action of a Priest, because it impowers him to
Consecrate the Body and Blood of Christ; which none but a Priest can do.
Albert. Mag. L. 6. Theolog. veritatis. C. 36.
Actus Presbyterorum (says Albertus Magnus) est Consecrare corpus, and
Sanguinem Christi; and est actus principalis. Alius est consequens, scilicet
ligare, and solvere. The Act of Priests is to Consecrate the Body and Blood of
Christ, and it is the principal Act. The other is consequent, which is to
Retain, and Absolve: which they all grant, therefore they must acknowledge
Priesthood to be hereby conferred. For, To what other sense can they draw those
words, Take, Receive, Accept the Power of offering Sacrifice? and the Ordained
comes with a full intention to Receive the Power; whence there cannot be the
least shadow of any other design, then intending this Matter and Form, as the
Essentials of Priesthood.

SECT. VIII. An Illation drawn from the Premises, of the Invalidity of
Ordination in the Church of England. Solved.
THe Council of Trent seems to make no difference between Order and Ordination,
Trid. Sess. 23. Can. 3.
but confounds them together: Si quis dixerit Ordinem sive Sacram Ordinationem,
non esse vere and proprie Sacramentum a Christo Domino institutum, etc.
Anathema sit. If any one shall say, That Order, or Holy Ordination, is not
truly and properly a Sacrament, Instituted by Christ, etc. let him be Accursed.
But I shall make it appear, that there is a considerable difference between
Order, and Ordination; the one is that which they call a Sacrament, the other
not. The Order of Priesthood is a Spiritual Power, whereby the Ordained is
enabled, and Commissioned to exercise all Priestly Functions with Authority. The
Ordination consists in the Essential Matter and Form regularly and aptly
applied, by the Bishop, which is the Ordainer, to him that is Ordained; and
from this Matter and Form so applied, results in the Ordained, that Spiritual
Power, which is properly the Order of Priesthood, the Character is thereby
Imprinted, and the Graces accommodated to the Priestly Ministry are also
conferred. So that Order, with its concomitants, is the effect; but Ordination
is the cause. That is permanent in the Ordained for term of life; this is
transient, and passes away, for it lasts no longer then while that power is in
conferring. That is the principal end intended by Christ. This is the means
Instituted by Christ to attain that end. That is, as it were a Patent, or
Commission, which the Priest acts by, this the cause, either efficient or
Moral, which procured it: wherefore these being so different from each other,
the Council of Trent could not intend to have them both Sacraments, but that
alone (if any) must be a Sacrament, which confers the Order of Priesthood to
the Ordained, and also Imprints the Character, etc. all this is performed by
Ordination, not by Order; for nothing can be the cause of it self. Order is the
effect, and therefore cannot be the cause. The Character and Sacramental Graces
are not produced by the Order, but by the Ordination, so that if any be a
Sacrament it must be this, which being premised, as evident in it self.

A Tenth Objection, by way of Deduction, is drawn from the precedent Doctrine:
For if the Ordination of the Church of Rome be Invalid, it must of necessity
draw with it, the Nullity of the Church of Englands Ordination, who received
her Orders from the Church of Rome, and cannot make out her Succession of
Bishops from Christ and his Apostles, without passing through the sides of the
Roman Bishops, who must integrate the linkes of continuation; Wherefore, if the
Church of Rome have no true Bishops, it inevitably follows, that the Church of
England must lie under the same Censure; for, one that has no power of Order,
can never confer that power upon another, because none can give that which he
has not. Otherwise it would follow, that merely Men, or Civil Magistrates,
might confer Orders, which no Man will grant.

My Answer to this Objection, is grounded in a Principle, received by the
Romanists themselves, namely, that where the true Essentials are regularly, and
orderly applied, though there be a defect in the Ordainer for want of the power
of Order, yet if he Ordain, Cum titulo colorato, and bona fide, the Ordination
is valid.

Four things therefore are necessary to the Validity of Ordination conferred by
such a Bishop.

First, That none of the Essentials be wanting. Secondly, That nothing be added
in the Ordination repugnant to the Essentials, or destructive of their
Operation. Thirdly, That there be in the Ordainer Titulus coloratus, and bona
sides; that is, a general presumption, that he is a true Bishop, and that he
Ordains according to his Conscience, knowing nothing amiss. Fourthly, That he
have a right Intention of conferring the Order.
Where these Requisites do concur, the Ordination is certainly valid.

The First Proof hereof is grounded upon that provident care that Christ ever
had of his Church; for when all the Essentials and necessary Conditions are
applied, and no Moral defect to be imputed to the Ordainer, nor the Ordained,
and no Humane prudence could ever detect that secret defect in the Ordainer; it
would be too severe that the Original Instituter of Ordination, should refuse
to the Ordained the power of Order, nay, in a short time, it would prove
destructive to the whole Church; for Christ knew full well, the fragility of
Humane Nature, and considering his infinite Wisdom, and Protection of his
Church, would not oblige our imbecility to Moral Impossibilities; or if we
failed by our Natural Weakness, without either sin, or voluntary error, would
permit the utter ruin and destruction of his Church; which would certainly
ensue, if such Ordinations were not valid. For I suppose the Ordainers and
Ordained, to proceed with a candid, sincere, and good Conscience, and that
Morally speaking, have not the least suspicion of any default or want of power
in the Ordainer; nay, he himself neither knows, nor surmiseth any desiciency in
his Order. In this Case, Should the Ordination be void, and null? Whom could we
impute it to? certainly to none but those, who by their Superinductions
pretended to Correct Christ's Institutions, and thereby rendered all defective.
But must this be so prejudicial to the Church of Christ, as to involve all
Posterity into the Imputation of the same Crime, who were no way consenting to
it? nay, who in due time reformed such abuses, and wholly disclaimed from them?
No certainly, our Great Redeemer is more equitable, and knows who rejects his
Ordinances, and Institutions, and who endeavors to maintain them.

But now, since Pride, Ambition, or a vain Pretense to an Arbitrary Power,
against Divine Right, or what Motive else, I know not, induced the Prelates of
the Church of Rome to evacuate Christ's Institutions, and in their place to
substitute their own, and hereby to make Ordination void; so likewise is Human
frailty subject to many such defects, whereof some are imputable of crime to
the first Authors, but not to those that succeed them, for I suppose these to
be blinded by invincible ignorance; others proceed only from the weakness, and
limited capacity of Human nature, without any deformity or Moral defect in
their wills. Wherefore should the Church of God so rely upon our weak
capacities, that a secret and clandestine defect in an Ordainer, which no
vigilance, nor Human precaution can avoid (when all other requisites are
applied, and all have an invincible ignorance of that secret defect?) Should
this, I say, render all his Ordinations invalid, when all other requisites are
applied? then another such defect, may, on the same account, incidently fall on
another, considering our weakness, or Malice in the beginners; and so on a
third, and at length no Bishop, nor Priest, that is validly Ordained, will be
found in the Church. See how this is inductive to the Churches ruin, which
certainly had been long-since destroyed, had not the Divine Instituter thereof
maintained it by supplying such defects (which we can neither avoid nor
prevent) which he can as easily do, as he first Instituted the Sacraments, and
Ordination; for it is he alone that gives the Spiritual Order to the Ordained,
and to give it in these circumstances is but congruous, for none concerned in
such an Ordination are blameworthy, and not to give it, is absolutely, and (by
common providence) inevitably destructive of the whole Church, which certainly
the Supreme Lord thereof, will not deliver up to ruin, since with so much
difficulty, care, and tenderness, he Instituted it, and to the same it belongs
first to Institute, and then to Conserve.

But, this Doctrine seems to administer the occasion of a reply; for admitting
that Titulus coloratus, and bona fides, do supply the defect of Order in the
Ordainer; so that one who is by all esteemed, and reputed a true Bishop, yet in
effect, by reason of some secret default, is not so, when all other requisites,
and essentials, are aptly and duly applied, do validly Ordain: Why then cannot
this Doctrine be applied to the Roman Bishops? For if they should be defective
in the Power of Order, yet adhibiting all essentials, and other necessary
conditions, their Ordinations would also be valid among themselves; for we
cannot in Charity presume, that they proceed against their Conscience, or that
they want that sincerity, and right intention which we suppose in others. This
being supposed, the case is the same; for if the Roman Bishops validly Ordained
the Bishops of the Church of England, Why should not they validly Ordain their
own?

I Answer, That they Ordain their own Priests and Bishops according to the
Roman Ritual, and consequently they want the maine requisite, which is the
essential Matter and Form, for they have Innovated a Matter and Form of their
own, far different from that which Christ Instituted, and they clearly signify
by that Form, that they intend thereby to confer the Order of Priesthood, so
that they cannot intend to Ordain by the Essential Matter and Form derived
from the Apostles (if any such be contained in their Ritual) except they would
be reputed deluders, as has been proved at large in the Fifth, Sixth, and
Seventh Sections of this Disputation. Wherefore according to the disposition of
the Roman Ritual, the Essence of Ordination cannot subsist. And certainly
nothing can have a being, without its own Essence, as all must grant. For the
Church of Rome partly by adding their new reputed Essentials, to which their
intention of Ordaining must be fixed, and partly by Inverting the Order, have
made so great a confusion, that one part destroys another, and particularly
their Essentials, do absolutely destroy the Essentials Instituted by Christ (if
their Liturgy contain any such) and hinder their effect.

But when the Bishops, that were Ordained in the Church of Rome, had deserted
their Communion, and Ordained the Bishops of the Church of England, they did it
by the English Ritual, which contains the very Essential Matter and Form
Instituted by Christ, and delivered to us by the Apostles, which were so duly
and regularly applied to the Ordained, as was ever in practice in the ancient
Church, so that here nothing at all was wanting, that in the case proposed, was
necessary to the validity of Ordination. Wherefore this Ordination is far
different from that which the Roman Bishops use, when they Ordain according to
the Roman Pastoral. And consequently, the Ordination which the Romans use among
themselves is Invalid, but the Ordination of the English Bishops reteins its
Integrity.

A Second Proof hereof is grounded upon the practice of the Greek Church,
whose Ordination the Church of Rome ever approved as valid, yet they always
used the Imposition of hands, as the Essential matter of Priesthood, with this
Form, Divina Gratia, quae semper infirma sanat, and deficientia complet,
promovet hunc Deo amabilem Diaconum in Presbyterum. The Divine Grace that
always cures that which is infirm, and compleats that which is deficient,
promotes this pious Deacon to Priesthood. Consider here what precaution the
Greeks used in the Essential Form of their Ordination; for knowing, how prone
we are all to errors, and mistakes; they, in a matter of such high concern,
have recourse to the Author of Grace, to confirm, and strengthen that, which,
by Human Frailty, might be weak and unstable; as also to complete the defects,
and supply the wants of their Ordination, in case any thing else should be
necessary, not known to them; And hereby they used their best endeavors, to
prevent the nullity of their Ordinations, which might proceed from their own
weakness, or inadvertency, as not being ignorant, how many errors, and mistakes
we are subject to, notwithstanding the best of our endeavors to the contrary.
Which implies a confidence in them, that using the true Essentials, and a right
intention, Christ would supply all other secret defects; whereof the want of
the power of Order in the Ordainer is one, especially, when he is generally
reputed by all, and by himself also, a true Bishop. For as it is above
observed, in the beginning of this Section, the Power of Order in the Ordained,
is no Essential part of Ordination, but merely the effect thereof, so that the
Ordination is Essentially, and Specifically complete without it; and because
Ordination is Instituted by Christ, as a means to determine him to confer this
Spiritual Power upon the Ordained, How reasonable and congruous is it, that the
cause being complete, the effect should not be wanting? especially since it
exceeds our capacity to discover the defect. For when a cause is hindered from
producing his effect, either by contrary agents, or by the indisposition of the
Medium, or by the incapacity of the Passum, we cannot thence infer, that the
agent is incomplete, or wants virtue, quantum est ex se, for as much as belongs
to it, to produce its effect. But in this case, the power of Order, is no
Physical, but a Moral effect; and in all Ordinations it is given by Christ
alone, ad exigentiam Ordinationis, by a determination, which proceeds from the
Ordination, by virtue of Divine Institution; for it is Christ alone that
impowers the Ordained, validly to exercise the Functions of his Order, which is
but a Moral Power, whose immediate cause is not the Ordainer, but only Christ,
thereunto determined by the Ordination which does very much facilitate and
confirm the foresaid Doctrine.

A Third Proof, is drawn from an acknowledged Principle of those of Rome, who,
after a vacancy, when a new Pope is chosen, the Cardinals in the Conclave only
concur to make the Election Canonical, which being done, all the Power they
have, cannot communicate to the new elected Pope, that Universal Jurisdiction
over all the Church, which they pretend to, because they have no such
Jurisdiction in themselves, every Bishop and Cardinal being confined within the
limits of his own Diocese: and one Bishop cannot extend his Jurisdiction to the
Subjects of another Diocese. From whence then does the Pope receive his
pretended Universal Jurisdiction? Here they must of necessity have recourse to
the Supreme Lord of the Church, which is Christ himself, for the obtaining
this Jurisdiction for their new Pope, which neither they, nor their Canonical
Election can effect; for this Election is only a Condition, not the Cause of
such an illimited Jurisdiction, so that Christ alone is the only cause of this
Pretended Papal Jurisdiction. Why then in like case, when the Ordination is
completed in foro externo, and no error committed in foro interno? Why I say,
in this case, should not Christ in like manner confer to the Ordained the
Spiritual Power of Order? for though the Ordination be never so Canonical and
complete, yet still it is Christ alone that grants the power of Order, and it
is he alone that gives Jurisdiction to every Bishop in his Ordination; and even
in the Church of Rome, the Jurisdiction of Bishops comes not from the Pope, but
from Christ; and therefore Jurisdictio Episcopalis est Juris Divini; Episcopal
Jurisdiction is of Divine Right, because it proceeds immediately from Christ.
So that in any Ordination, when no essential nor necessary condition is
wanting, though the Ordainer have not the power of Order, yet being universally
reputed a true Bishop, and this defect being secret, that Morally speaking, no
Human Industry can discover it, and all concencerned in the Ordination do
proceed sincerely, and with a good Conscience; What true Christian can frame so
hard a judgment of our Great Redeemer, as to deny to the Ordained the power of
Order, and thereby permit so great a breach in his Church, which has an
immediate tendency to the utter ruin thereof, when it may be so easily
remedied, and when neither the Ordainer, nor the Ordained, can, in the least,
have any imputation of blame?

As to the Point of Succession mentioned in the Objection; I Answer, That this
succession is not to be understood in a Mathematical but a Moral Sense, and it
is the same in Ordination, as it is in all other Dogmatical points, and
Principles of Faith, contained under the Reformation. For though the Latin
Church (which is but one Branch of the Universal Church) was Guilty of many
Errors in matter of Faith, and for many years swerved from the Doctrine and
Practice of Christ, and his Apostles, yet this could impose no necessity upon
the Successors of this Branch, ever to be excluded from the hopes of Salvation.
For when the Erroneous Principles of the Church of Rome were sufficiently
detected, they might, yea they ought, to Reform such abuses, and to conform
themselves to the Original Doctrine, and Practice of the Primitive Church,
which were the immediate Successors to the Apostles, and so to redintegrate
their Faith, and for the future, to regulate their Faith and Practice, by that
never erring Rule of the Doctrine and Practice of Christ and his Apostles. And
shall then the Church of Rome Object against them, that they cannot prove their
Succession from Christ and the Apostles. Which in plain terms signifies no
more then this, That they have not persisted in the Errors of the Church of
Rome, but have embraced a new Doctrine. New indeed to them, but exactly
conformable to the old Doctrine, which Christ left to his Church, and which the
Church of Rome, long since deserted, and so Interrupted the Continuation of
Professing the True and Orthodox Principles of Christ, which we, by our
Reformation, do Reassume, and choose rather to follow Christ and his Apostles,
then to adhere to the False and Erroneous Principles of the Church of Rome; If
this be a Crime, then we are Guilty. Must we lie under the Imputation of Blame,
because we would not run headlong, to utter Ruin and Damnation, by adhering to
the Erroneous Doctrine of Rome? Must that one word of Succession startle us,
and be inductive to persuade us, to leave Heaven, and go with them to Hell for
Company's sake? They have made a long continued Breach in the Church
themselves, and interrupted their own Succession, and, Must they blame us for
returning to the Truth, because we will not succeed them in their Errors? So
then our Succession in Dogmatical Points, in Practice and Ordination, consists
in this, that after a Breach made by the Latin Church, we having clearly
Detected the Error, have reunited our selves again, to the Ancient and True
Professors of Christianity, and detested the opposite and Erroneous Doctrine of
those that had Apostated from the True Church.

The last Clause contained in the close of the Objection, that pursuant to this
Doctrine, a mere Secular Layman may confer Orders, is easily solved, because
this no way follows; for in this case, he could neither Ordain with a
colorable Title, nor with a good Conscience, which are both necessary for the
validity of Ordination; he wants the first, because he never was esteemed to
have the power of Order, and he himself knows certainly that he never was in
Orders, nor ever attempted to receive them; so that in presuming to Ordain, he
commits a heinous Sacrilege, by a gross contempt of the Holy Ghost; which is
inconsistent with a candid, sincere, and conscientious proceeding, so that he
wants the second also, and besides, in so doing, he can never have a right
intention to confer Orders, because he is conscious, that he cannot have
several requisites, without which he cannot Ordain.

I only add this General Rule; That according to the present Constitution, and
Institution of Christ, practiced by the Primitive Church, it is impossible to
confer Priesthood validly, except the Imposition of Hands be applied as the
Essential Matter, and accompanied by the words of the Bishop, signifying
Priesthood to be thereby conferred, as the Essential Form, which the Church of
England Religiously observes in their Ordination; for while the Bishop with
other Priests, puts his Hands upon the Head of him that is to be Ordained, he
pronounces this Form;

Receive the Holy Ghost, for the Office and Work of a Priest, in the Church of
God, now committed unto thee, by the Imposition of our Hands. Whose sins thou
do forgive, they are forgiven; and whose sins thou do retain, they are
retained. And be thou a faithful dispenser of the Word of God, and of his Holy
Sacraments, in the Name of the Father, etc.

Here are both the Essentials duly applied, and punctually observed. Whereas
the Church of Rome applies neither as an Essential part, and therefore their
Ordination of Priests, according to their own Doctrine, can in no way be Valid.

SECT. IX. Consectaries drawn from the Proofs of the precedent Assertion.
HOw many false Aspertions, and querulous Cavillations, have been raised by the
Jesuits, and other Romanists, against the Bishops of the Church of England,
under that frivolous pretense of their being Consecrated at the Naggs head
Tavern, in Cheapside, by one single Bishop, or at most by two, and they not
Canonically Elected, and Consecrated, in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign. All which were false and Malicious Calumnies, invented for no other end,
then to depress the Authority of the Bishops of England, thereby to facilitate
their access, to draw Proselites from the Church of England, and seduce them to
their Communion. Which scandalous, and ungrounded Comments have been fully
Answered, and the Canonical Ordination, and Consecration of the Bishops of
England, clearly vindicated from the false Imputation of all such Detracters,
by that Worthy, and Learned Prelate John Bramhall, D. D. and late Lord Primate
of Ireland.

But, What judgment shall we frame, of the Ordination of Bishops, and Priests
in the Church of Rome? there being at present neither Pope, nor Cardinal, nor
Bishop, nor Priest, but such as have been Ordained according to their new Model
of Ordination; we shall not need here to have recourse to frivolous, and
feigned Stories, where such grounded Truths strike at the very Essentials of
their Ordination, and evince the invalidity thereof. Neither can they raise a
Battery of Arguments against us, without destroying themselves; for the Proofs
of the nullity of their Ordination, are grounded on their own Doctrine. They
all Teach, That Ordination is a Sacrament Instituted by Christ. The Council of
Trent has defined it so to be, as we see above, Sect. 7. They all assert the
Matter and Form of all Sacraments, to be determined, by Divine Authority, which
Suarez says is de fide. See their words, Sect. 6. They hold moreover, that any
substantial change, either in Matter or Form, renders the Sacrament invalid. 3
Part. Tom. 3. D. 2. S. 4.
Si mutatio materiae aut formae Essentialis, seu substantialis sit, nullum
essicitur Sacramentum, says Suarez, which is the current opinion of their
other Divines. It is likewise certain, that the matter which they use in the
Collation of Priesthood is essentially, and more then Specifically different,
from the matter which Christ Instituted, and which was constantly used in
Ordinations many Centuries after Christ, before Ordination was new molded. It
is also certain, that the Form of Ordination determined by Christ, and a long
time in use in the Church, is now utterly rejected, and cast out.

All this being duly pondered, we must of necessity conclude, that their
Ordination is invalid, except some other grounded expedient can be found out,
and proved, to uphold the validity of their Ordination, which hitherto I cannot
discover, but wish I could. But no quibbles, nor quirkes, nor nice
distinctions, can any way avail them; for the matter of Fact is uncontroleable,
and the Doctrinal part is evidenced by their own Words, and Writings, which it
is now too late to retract. It is time therefore for them, seriously to
consider what expedient may be found out, to reinvalidate their Ordination, and
to qualify themselves so, as they may be in a capacity to prevent this grand
inconvenience for the future; for this shakes the very foundation, and renders
the whole Hierarchy of their Church ruinous. If there are no Priests, there can
be no Bishops, since Episcopacy is no new Order superadded, but only a farther
extension of the Order and Character of Priesthood, as they teach; well then
may the Bishops exercise their potestatem jurisdictionis, but can no way
exercise, nor communicate to others their potestatem Ordinis, for none can
exercise nor confer upon another, a power which he neither formally, nor
virtually, nor radically contains in himself jure communi; but their
Jurisdiction they distinguish from the Order of Presbitery, since diverse
Bishops, and Cardinals in the Church of Rome are only Deacons, or Subdeacons,
and yet their Jurisdiction is as ample, and has as great an extension, as if
they were Priests, who commonly make use of other Suffraganean Bishops, to
Officiate, Confirm, and confer Orders in their Diocese.

Hence it ensues, that those putative Bishops, which are presumed to be
Canonically endued with Presbytery and Episcopacy (yet in reality are not so)
when they personally exercise the Functions of Episcopacy, their Confirmation
is void, yea, their very Consecration of Chrisme, and other Holy Oils, is of
no effect: but after Consecration, they retain nothing but the Natural Elements
of Oil and Balsome, as they were before, and so are incapable of rendering any
Spiritual Emolument, to those to whom they are applied; their Imposition of
Hands, and Benedictions, are no way available to the Confirmed, no more than if
they were performed by a Lay-person; for where the radical power of Order is
wanting, none of these Spiritual and Supernatural effects can ensue.

And when they Officiate in Mass, and attempt to Consecrate the Body and Blood
of Christ, and having Consecrated the Hoaste, they kneel down to adore it, and
then elevate it, and show it to the People, that they also may adore it; both
they themselves, and many Thousands of the People do daily commit, at least a
Material Idolatry, though it may be, that Invincible Ignorance may excuse them
from a Formal one: for they exhibit a worship of Latria to a supposed Deity,
under the species of Bread, when, in reality, no such Deity is there, so as
they give to the mere substance of Bread, a Worship due to God alone. And this
is daily repeated thorough the whole extent of the Roman Jurisdiction. And the
same happens, when any other inferior Priest Officiates; for the Order of
Priesthood is equally defective in them all: and where there is no power of
Order, to qualify them for Consecration, this must of necessity be void.

So when they administer the Communion to the People, who present themselves,
in hopes to receive the Body and Blood of Christ, and consequently those
Graces, which from thence accrue to the worthy Receivers; Poor Souls! How are
they deluded, and their hopes frustrated? for, whereas they came full fraught
withthe expectation of Spiritual and Supernatural Graces, they are dismissed with
a bare piece of Bread, and not the least access made to their inherent and
sanctifying, nor to their actual and transient Graces. Neither is it for once
or twice, that they are so treated, but constantly, and toties quoties, which
certainly is an unworthy abuse, and a Spiritual Cheat, did not the Authors
thereof proceed bona fide, as not hgving detected the Error.

Their Power of Relaxing and Retaining sins, participates much of the nature of
Episcopacy, in this respect, that neither the one nor the other is a distinct
Order from Priesthood, but both of them necessarily and essentially presuppose
Priesthood already Conferred, as the groundwork and foundation on which they
depend; so that the Power of Absolving, is a superinduction to Priesthood, or
rather a consequent faculty that issues from it; and if this Order be wanting,
that power can never be validly conferred; wherefore the Penitents presuming
upon the validity of this Power, and their easy access to Absolution, hence
take occasion to be less circumspect, and to let the reins loose to such sins
as their sensual appetite prompts them to; but when they come to make their
Confession, and receive Absolution, though they have discovered their Sore, and
the nature of the Spiritual Distemper of their Souls, yet no Sovereign Medicine
can be applied, in order to their Cure, for want of Ability in their Spiritual
Physician; for where the Radical Power is wanting, the Desired Effect cannot be
produced: so they return with the clogg of their sins, as burdensome to them
as before they came.

And not to insist upon any more particulars, I shall conclude with this
General Maxim; that the Invalidity of all other Functions, peculiar to
Priesthood alone, is an inseparable companion to the Invalidity of their
Ordination.

But it may be pretended, that Consocration, Communion, Absolution, etc. may be
validly performed by one that has titulum coloratum, and bonam fidem, a
colorable title, a good Conscience, etc. though he should want the power of
Order; according to the rule above given, in the Eighth Section.

First, I Answer, That it is not likely, nor probable, that the Incarnate Word,
would employ his Omnipotency, to grant such extraordinary favors to the Church
of Rome, because he can have no valuable motive to do it. For, Why should
Christ bestow such singular Graces on his Enemies? who have deserted his
Doctrine, changed his Ordinances and Institutions, robbed him (as much as in
them lies) of his Prerogatives, and usurped to themselves a Power, which is
peculiar to himself alone; and these favors to be constantly conferred upon
them, and to be continued without intermission, till the World's end, for there
is little hope of their Retractation. And I dare aver, that if any indifferent
judgment, should seriously ponder their manifold Errors, whereof some are
proposed and proved in this Treatise (which I am ready to maintain against any
legal opposition) it would plainly appear, that the Church of Rome is but a
corrupted branch of the Universal Church of Christ, and consequently
sequestered from the True Church. And though I cannot deny, but that our benign
Lord, grants to all (out of the Treasure of his Merits) Grace sufficient for
their Salvation; yet, I fear, they will scarce render this Grace efficacious,
by their cooperation with it; for it must be an extraordinary, a potent Grace,
that must incline them to a Recantation.

Secondly, I Answer, that this Case proposed in the Objection, is far
different, from the Rule given above in the Eighth Section; for there the
Question was, of the preservation, or utter ruin of a True Church of Christ,
which cannot subsist without true Ordination; but here the case only concerns
particular persons, and they likewise, by the pravity of their own wills, long
since, cut off from the True Church of Christ; neither would these favors (if
granted) revive their Church, so as to render its Doctrine Orthodox, or any way
to reduce the Members, or Heads thereof to a better sense.

Wherefore, in this Case, there is no ground, nor motive to induce Christ to
grant such an extraordinary concurse; but in the former case it was strictly
necessary for the preservation of a considerable part of the True Church of
Christ.

Besides, in the Case here proposed, our Omnipotent Redeemer must have recourse
to his Illimited Power, daily to make so many Thousands of Miracles, and this
constantly to be continued without interruption; but in the former case, we
only Assert, that upon just and congruous grounds, our Gracious Redeemer, only
for once, supplied the defect of Order, when no Essential, nor Necessary
condition, or Requisite was wanting.

SECT. X. Of Clandestine Marriage.
THe Church of Rome, that Sancta matter Ecclesia, pretends to so much Power and
Authority, in ordering and disposing of all things belonging to Sacraments, that
it not only prescribes the Manner and Method of their Administration, but also
penetrates into the very Essence, and Substance of them, Subtracting, Adding,
and Changing what she pleases; and indeed, in five of them, there might be
some seeming pretense for it, they having received the honor of being called
Sacraments, from that Churches Institution, without sufficient ground in
Scripture for it; whereof this of Matrimony is one; of which we shall here
Treat.

Marriage is a Contract between Man and Woman, containing a Mutual Tradition to
each other, by proper words, de presenti; the last words de presenti,
distinguish Marriage from Sponsalia, or Betrothing, which is no Marriage, nor
Actual Tradition: but a Promise of Marriage for the future. The Council of
Trent has defined Matrimony to be a Sacrament, and Anathematized those that
shall deny it. Si quis dixerit Matrimonium, Tril. Sess. 24. Can. 1.
non esse proprie and vere unum exseptem legis Evangelicae Sacramentis, a
Christo Domino Institutum; sed ab hominibus in Ecclesiam invectum; neque
gratiam confer; Anathema sit.

By the Constitutions of the Church of Rome, there are several Impediments of
Marriage, which are distinguished into two Classis. The First are such as render
Matrimony Invalid, which they call impedimenta dirimentia; They of the Second
Classis are only impedientia, which render the persons inhabiles, to Contract
lawfully, yet having Contracted, the Marriage is valid. To Contract
clandestinely, without such Witnesses as can give sufficient proof and
evidence of the Contract, in foro externo, has been always prohibited, and
therefore held unlawful, but yet valid; though now, since the Council of Trent,
it is rendered invalid. The words of the Council are these, Trid Sess. 24. C. 1.
Reforan. Matrim.
Qui aliter quam praesenti Parocho vel alio Sacerdote de ipsius Parochi, seu
Ordinarii licentia, and duobus, vel tribus testibus, Matrimonium contrahere
attentabunt; eos Sancta Synodus ad sic contrahendum omnino inhabiles reddit;
and hujusmodi contractus irritos and nullos esse decernit; prout eos praesenti
decreto irritos facit and annullat. By which Decree, Clandestine Marriage which
was before valid, though unlawful, is now made void, and of no effect.

Were Matrimony only a Civil Contract, and not defined by the Church of Rome to
be elevated to the dignity of a Sacrament, and to produce Grace, here would be
little ground of altercation; for it is not my intent, in this Discourse, to
call in question the power of Ecclesiastical, or Secular Lawgivers, in matters
of this nature. But they acknowledge Marriage to be a Sacrament; and the Matter
and Form thereof (wherein consists the whole Essence of it) to be instituted,
and determined by Divine Authority, whence it becomes Juris Divini. Hence
arises the difficulty, How the Church of Rome can make any alteration or
change; or how they can declare, that to be ineffectual, and void, which Jure
Divino, is determinately settled, and established as valid.

Clandestine Marriage, before the Council of Trent, was ever held an Essential
and a valid Matrimony, though unlawful, factum valet, sed fieri non licet: yea,
and notwithstanding the Councils Decree, they still hold it valid in England,
and Saxony, where the Council of Trent was never received, nor promulged; for
they Teach, That no Human Law can induce an Obligation to the observance of it,
but in such places where it has been sufficiently intimated, and accepted.
Here I suppose with them, that the whole Essence and Substance of each
Sacrament, consists purely in the two Essential parts, the Matter, and the
Form. The Matter of this Contract is the Internal Consent of the Persons
Contracting, expressed by some External and sensible sign: The Form is the
words, de praesenti; I take thee, etc. which signify a Mutual Tradition of
themselves to each other, for term of life. Hence I Argue against them, ad
hominem, supposing the Institution as the Origin and Cause of all Sacraments.

The whole Essence of Matrimony necessarily Constitutes a valid Marriage; but
the Matter and Form are the whole Essence of Matrimony; ergo, the Matter and
Form necessarily constitute a valid Marriage. The Major is universally true in
all things; for the whole Essence of a thing, and the thing it self are
convertible: the Minor is their own Dectrine, as appears by their own words
above cited. Whence I subsume, The Matter and Form necessarily constitute a
valid Marriage; but Clandestine Matrimony contains the Matter and Form, ergo,
Clandestine Matrimony contains a valid Marriage. The Major is the conclusion of
the last sillogisme. The Minor I prove First; because Clandestine Matrimony was
valid before the Council of Trent, and yet it contains now the same Matter and
Form it did then. Secondly, I prove it, because Clandestine Marriage is still
valid where the Council of Trent was never received, ergo, it has the whole
Matter and Form of Marriage, which was Instituted, and determined by Christ,
as the whole Essence of it: for they that Contract Clandestine, have the same
Internal consent made sensible, which is the Matter; and use the same words by
way of Form, as they that Contract in facie Ecclesiae; wherefore if the one
has the same Matter and Form with the other (wherein consists the whole
Essence of Marriage) if the one be valid, the other must be valid also.

And this Argument proceeds in like manner against all other impedimenta
dirimentia, such impediments, as Jure Ecclesiastico, are introduced to render
Matrimony void, and of no effect: but if there be any impediment jure naturae,
destructive of the validity of Matrimony, In this case it is most like, that
the Original Instituter excepted it. As many of the Roman Divines conceive
Consanguinity in the First Degree, to invalidate Matrimony, jure naturae, by
reason of the horror and aversion that Nature has against a Fathers Marrying
his own Daughter, or a Mothers taking her own Son for a Husband, or for a
Brother to Marry his own Sister. And therefore Marriage, in the first degree of
Consanguinity, was ever held invalid, in the Evangelical Law.

But this administers matter for an instance against what has been said: for
Marriage contracted in the first degree, has all the Essentials of Matrimony,
and only the proximity of Blood hinders the validity of it, therefore it is not
enough to have all the Essentials, as Matter and Form, to make Matrimony
valid. I Answer, that all Sacraments do necessarily suppose the Original
Institution, upon which they Essentially depend; for the Essential parts of all
Sacraments are in themselves natural things, but by the Omnipotent Power of the
Divine Instituter, the Complex which results of these parts is elevated per
potentiam obedientialem, to produce Grace in the Receiver; in that quality and
degree, as Christ has settled and established, without which they are no
Sacraments. And who can deny but that it was in the free power and election of
the Divine Instituter, to affix his Supernatural Graces, where, and when, and
to what Instruments he pleased, for Sacraments are, by Institution, but
instruments to convey the Graces Merited by Christ, to our Souls; wherefore, it
being incongruous, that a Contract made in the first degree of Consanguinity,
from which Nature has so great a horror, should be an instrument of conveying
Grace to the Souls of the contracters; grounded Reason dictates, that this was
excepted, and never Instituted for a Sacrament, which the constant practice of
the Church from Christ's time sufficiently confirms.

But it may bereply'd, That if Christ, in the Original Institution, Ordained,
that all complexes resulting from such a determinate Matter and Form, should
be Sacraments, and yet an exception may be made in one case, Why not in
another? I Answer, That this Reply is grounded on a false Principle, for it
supposes Christ to have confused acts, such as are proper to Men, when they
determine things in general, and make an universal without distinguishing, or
distinctly knowing the particulars contained under that universal, which argues
the imperfection of Human understanding, and therefore such obscure and
imperfect acts have no place in Christ; for the understanding of the Divine
Word is infinite, and consequently exempt from the least imperfection.

And the understanding of his Sacred Humanity was endued with an infused
knowledge, whereby he saw, and knew clearly, and distinctly, all that
concerned, at least himself, as Redeemer of Mankind: so that when he Instituted
the Sacraments, he did it not by a general notion, but reflected upon every
particular individual, clearly, and distinctly.

Wherefore, in the Case proposed, he Ordained such, and such particular
Contracts to be instruments of conveying Grace, and no others; so as those only
which Christ has so determined, are valid Contracts, by Divine Institution,
and no others; and, by this means, the cleerness and perspicuity of Christ's
understanding, has partioularly determined every individual Contract of
Marriage, that ever has been, or ever will be, and decreed its validity, or
non validity in his Original Institution, so as all Declarations and Decrees,
as are merely Human, have no power at all to alter, or change any thing, or to
make this valid, and that invalid: these things being already immutably
determined by Christ himself in his Original Institution, which consequently is
Juris Divine.

Note, that though there be no warrant in Holy Writ, to conclude Matrimony a
Sacrament; yet, because I Dispute ad hominem, I have hitherto supposed it to be
a Sacrament, and shall so do for the future, the better to detect their Error,
and the inconsequence of their Principles, for the Church of Rome will needs
have it a Sacrament, producing Grace, and has defined it so to be; and
argumentandi gratia, I suppose it so with them.

And so I proceed to Answer their Arguments for the Nullity of Clandestine
Marriage.

SECT. XI. The Arguments to vindicate the Nullity of Clandestine Marriage,
Answered.
THe First, and Principal Objection, is, That though the Church of Rome
pretends no Right, directly to alter or change any thing appointed by Christ,
yet it may have an indirect power, by subtracting the validity of that contract
which is the groundwork and foundation of Christ's Institution; for none but a
civil contract was elevated by Christ to be a Sacrament; so that the validity
of the contract, and the mutual obligation which it induced, was presupposed to
Divine Institution; and such a contract Christ elevated to the dignity of a
Sacrament, and enabled it to produce Grace. Wherefore the Church of Rome having
ample power to declare that, and other such contracts, to be valid, or invalid,
The Council of Trent, in persuance to this power, has declared Clandestine
Marriage to be no Civil Contract, by taking away the mutual obligation, and
consequently the validity of it. And in all this the Council never touches the
Ordination of the Primitive Instituter, but precisely alters the contract,
which is only, Juris Humani, and therefore intrencheth not in the least upon
Divine Institution. This is the full strength of this Objection.

The First Answer, This is a subtle and a plausible speculation, to vindicate
their trespassing upon Divine Right, by pretending nothing but an indirect
Power, whereby they wholly evacuate Christ's Institution, as much as if they
had a direct power to do it. It Is not unlike the indirect power which his
Holiness pretends to have, over the Territories and Dominions of Kings, and
Secular Princes. For it cannot be denied (as they pretend) but that he has a
direct power to exercise his Jurisdiction, to suppress heresy, and propagate
his Church, therefore he must necessarily have a power, to use such means as
are requisite to this end, and to remove all obstacles; that may impede the
attaining of it. Now suppose that a King, or Secular Prince, connives at
Heretics, and permits Heresy within his Dominions; the Legate first
admonishes him of the danger of it, but in vain; then he informs his Master,
the Pope, whereupon a gentle Brief comes to the Prince, from his Holiness,
minding him of his duty, and endeavoring to stir up his zeal to promote the
Holy Church, and suppress its enemies. If this will not do; then comes a
Comminatory and Menacing Brief, capable to seize him with a Pannick Fear, and
dread of what will ensue. If no effect follows, then an Excommunication is
thundered out against him, reserved to the Pope himself, and, it may be, is
backed by an Interdict. Then the Legate or Nuncius again exhorts him to withdraw
himself out of that deplorable condition, and pretends Power from the Pope to
absolve him from those execrable Censures, notwithstanding the reservation, and
to withdraw the Interdict, if he will at last acquiesce, and comply with his
Holiness reasonable intentions. And if he will not yet yield, but perseveres in
his first resolution, then the Legate is called home, and then follows
Deposition; he is divested of his Right to the Kingdom, his Subjects are
Absolved from their Allegiance to him, and he declared Criminal, Laesae
Majestatis Divinae, so that to Assassinate him in this State, should not be
deemed a Crime. And yet all this argues but an indirect Power on the Temporal
Estates of Secular Princes.

So it is in our present case, they pretend only an indirect power to change
the nature of the Contract, and whereas it was before mutually obligatory, they
declare, that this obligation cease, and that for the future it shall not be
held a Civil Contract, without any reflection made upon the Sacramental
Institution, and yet the Council, without any distinction, renders all persons
incapable of contracting Clandestinely, and declares all such Contracts to be
void: Prout eos praesenti decreto, irritos facit, and annullat, which, in
effect, devests them of their Sacramental Virtue, to which they were, by the
Original Institution, deputed, and by this means destroys both Contract and
Sacrament, and hinders its production of Grace, which argues a Supreme Power,
to annihilate a Sacrament at pleasure, under pretense of an indirect power, and
therefore,

Secondly, I Answer, That this power which they pretend to, is nothing but a
groundless usurpation, which I prove evidently: for the original Instituter of
Marriage, did not ordain it, by a general and confused notion, leaving the
determination of particulars to the Church, to declare some to be void, and
others to be valid, as they should deem expedient. But he foresaw plainly, and
distinctly, every particular individual, and numerical contract, that in
process of time should be made, between such particular and individual persons,
with the particular circumstances of time and place, etc. and these very
particular Contracts he Instituted so Sacraments, and empowered them to produce
Grace, not conditionally, but absolutely, without having a regard to what the
Council of Trent should do, so as that they did not hang in suspense, to expect
till the Council of Trent should approve or disapprove of them; for such an
imperfect Institution, were unworthy of Christ's Infinite Perfections, and
would make his will subordinate to the will of the Council, and his Institution
would be subservient to the Councils determination, for by this means Christ
would stand obliged to give, or refuse his Sacramental Graces, where, and when,
and to whom the Council should determine him: which in effect is no other then
to make the Omnipotent subject, and obedient to the Council of mere Men, liable
to Ignorance and Error.

Now supposing Christ's Institution to be of this nature (which none in his
right wits can deny) here is an absolute and irrevocable decree, established by
Divine Authority, that every particular contract, so Instituted, shall be
elevated to a Sacrament, and produce Grace, which no subsequent Council can
alter, or frustrate Christ's Decree: and that for Two Reasons;

First, For want of Power. Secondly, For want of due Order.
The Power is wanting, because all Human power is finite and limited, and
therefore cannot be in competition with the power of the Omnipotent; due Order
is also wanting, because Christ's Decree was firmly settled, and established
above Sixteen hundred years since; so this modern Decree of the Council comes
too late to make any change or alteration in it, or any way to repeal or
abrogate it. So they may talk of an indirect power of degrading the contract,
and depriving it of its wonted obligation, and making it no civil contract, but
all in vain, for Christ's Institution must stand.

Yet it may be Replied, That those clandestine contracts, which were to be
after the Decree of the Council, are no civil contracts, and therefore not
comprehended under the number of those that Christ Instituted as Sacraments.

I Answer, That the Supreme Legislator, in the Institution of Sacraments, did
not regulate himself by any subsequent and human Law made in prejudice of his
Institution, but well knowing those Clandestine Contracts to be of their own
nature obligatory, he confirmed that mutual obligation in them, by erecting
them to the dignity of Sacraments; which no human Decree can change; for
otherwise the Councils might prescribe him what Rules they pleased, to regulate
his proceeding.

The Second Objection: Since we are destitute of any certain knowledge what
those Contracts were, that Christ Instituted as Sacraments, we ought, in this,
to take the testimony of the Church, for the Rule of our Belief; who, by reason
of her Infallibility, is best able to inform us, and secure us from Error:
Wherefore, since the Church declares all succeeding Clandestine Contracts, to
be no Sacraments, nor Civil Contracts, we have no reason, by our own fallible
discourse, to call in question the verity of the Churches Declaration.

I Answer, That the Church of Rome, not only declares those subsequent
contracts to be void, but, as much as in her lies, makes them so. Prout eos
presenti decreto irritos facit, and annullat; which, notwithstanding, before
this Decree were valid, and obligatory. As for the Church of Romes
Infallibility, we have in the precedent Disputation, examined it, and found it
defective, and shall hereafter prove it erroneous; and therefore have no
grounds to confide in it. But, in this case, we have made it appear, that the
determination of those Contracts, which, of their own nature, were Obligatory,
was made, by Divine Institution, and that such Contracts were deputed to be
Sacraments, long before this Decree of the Council; yea, and are still reputed
Sacraments, inducing a mutual obligation, here in England, and other places,
where the Council of Trent was never received, which the Church of Rome
acknowledges: How then could this subsequent Decree of the Council, have any
influence upon those contracts, which were established as valid, and endued with
a Sacramental virtue, by a Divine Decree, that was precedent to this human
Decree of the Council? This being but a fruitless attempt, to render that
invalid, which was constituted as valid, Jure Divino.

The Third Objection: Clandestine Marriage was ever hold unlawful; and
therefore they who contract so, commit a sin in doing it, because they
transgress against a precept of their lawful Superiors; and it is not likely
that Christ would affix his Supernatural Graces to a sinful action; nay, it is
impossible, that a Mortal sin, and Grace, can stand together in the same
subject. And therefore the Church might prudently presume, that such sinful
contracts were not Instituted by Christ as Sacraments.

First, I Answer, That the Romanists themselves must solve this Objection; for,
they all grant, that clandestine Marriages were Sacraments, and valid
contracts, ever before the Council of Trent, and are so still in England, and
Saxony; and yet they ever were, and still are unlawful; which circumstance they
must reconcile with Christ's Institution; for notwithstanding the sin, they
acknowledge them to have been Instituted by Christ as Sacraments.

But Secondly, I Answer, That the circumstance of contracting clandestinely, is
wholly extrinsecal to the contract, and therefore can never alter the nature,
nor essence of it, for circumstances make no change in the substance; and this
is common to all Sacraments; for whoever receives any Sacrament, may, out of
the pravity of his own will, add some unlawful circumstance to it, or receive
it when his Soul is contaminated with sin; but we must not hence conclude, that
this deordinate proceeding of the Receiver, lays any infection upon the
Sacrament, whose complete substance and essence is wholly independent of the
circumstances, which are extrinsecal to it. True it is, that all Sacraments
produce Grace, as also, that Grace and deadly sin are wholly inconsistent, and
therefore, whosoever receives a Sacrament when he is actually in sin, puts an
Obstacle to the effect of the Sacrament, and cannot then receive any Grace by
it; because sin makes him liable to the pains of Hell; and Grace gives him,
whose Soul it informs, a right to Glory; and because these two are
incompatible, therefore Grace, and Sin, that are the necessary causes of them,
mutually exclude each other from the same Soul. Yet they generally Teach in the
Church of Rome, That when the obstacle is removed, and the Soul purged from
sin, that then the Sacrament revives, and produces that Grace, which by the
original Institution was annexed to it; and this Doctrine they also apply to
Moral actions, in reference to Inherent and Sanctifying Grace, which they
Merit; for when one falls into sin, he loses all that habitual Grace which
he possessed before his fall, it being inconsistent with sin; but when he is
again restored to the state of Grace, then his Merits revive to render him the
same quantity of Sanctifying Grace, which he before had lost by sin. So is it
in those that contract clandestine Marriage, if invincible ignorance does not
excuse them; they sin, and receive no Inherent and Sanctifying Grace, till sin,
which is the obstacle be removed; and, in the same moment that this is done,
the Sacrament revives, and produces in their Souls its due proportion of
habitual, and inherent Grace. See Suarez Opuscul. 5. D. 2. S. 2. and 3.

And thus have I vindicated the Validity of Clandestine Marriage against the
Church of Rome, by the Principles of their own Doctors; and consequently, that
Decree of the Council of Trent, is but a vain attempt, to render that void,
which, by Divine Authority, is established as valid; which proceeding is
originally drawn from a presumption of their pretended Infallibility; And
therefore whatsoever they decree, though against Divine Right, is held as
Sacred, and not liable to error, as in this case it happens.

But this is certain, that these private Matrimonial Contracts were by Christ
appointed as Sacraments, or they were not; if not, then the Church of Rome
erred by ever acknowledging them as such; if they were, then the Council of
Trent errs, by endeavoring to repeal them

You Will say, That those Contracts that proceeded the Council, were Instituted by
Christ, because they were civil contracts, but they which succeeded were not,
because they were no Civil contracts. Yes, because the Council will have it so.
But, Who sees not, that according to this Doctrine, it is the Council, and not
Christ, that is the proper Instituter of this Sacrament? for the Council
determines what contracts shall be Sacraments, and what shall not; the Council
determines to what contracts Grace shall be affixt, and to what not, which is
all that Institution imports, for they would have Christ to take his measures
from them, and would impose a Law upon the Will of God, to accommodate himself
to their will; they order all, and the Word Incarnate must regulate himself
accordingly, which makes them the principal Instituters, and Christ only the
Instrumental. Which is too great an indignity, and detracts very much from the
perfection of Christ's Institution. For I demand, What reason can be alleag'd,
Why Christ could not, or would not determine all this himself? He had a perfect
comprehension of all that concerned his Church, which the Council had not;
neither can they deny, but that Christ was the Principal, nay the only
Instituter of Sacraments.

Who then can deny, but that Christ, by an Irrevocable Decree, determined all
things relating to the Sacraments, independent of the Council of Trent, many
Ages before this Instituting Decree was framed? But, an Error once committed,
per fas and nefas, must be maintained.

I might here annex an Account of the proceedings of the Church of Rome in some
others of their pretended Sacraments; for whereas the Order of Subdeaconship
was ever conferred in the Primitive Church, by the Imposition of Hands, this is
now wholly omitted; and in lieu thereof they have Instituted the Tradition of
an empty Chalice, and an empty Pattene to the Ordained, which argues a total
change: So likewise in Consirmation, the Apostles and their Successors ever
Confirmed by the Imposition of Hands, without any Unction; but now without the
application of Chrisme, they deem Confirmation invalid, and the Form would be
false, which is this, Signo te signo crucis, and Confirmo te Chrismate salutis.
In nomine, etc. I Sign thee with the Sign of the Cross, and Confirm thee with
the Chrisme of health; In the Name, etc. But this I leave to others
consideration, for enough has been already said to my designed end.

Dispute III. Of Communion in One Kind.
The Preface.
ALL Humane Laws, though never so well Constituted, are liable to be subverted,
either by the change of circumstances, or by the capricious humors of
Governors. How happy were the Lacedaemonians, as long as they were governed by
those wholesome Laws which Lycurgus had established amongst them? but when those
Laws were gradually repealed, or per non usum, antiquated, then their
Commonwealth began to be ruinous, and tended to destruction. But Divine Laws
ought to be Sacred, as being framed by an irrefragable Authority, whose
Legislator is omniscient; neither has his wisdom and prudence any bounds, who
knows, and foresees, all future changes and circumstances, as perfectly, as if
they were present, and whose infinite providence is best skilled in fencing
against all adverse accidents that may happen; and yet these Laws also must
undergo the Test of Human Policy, and suffer change and Reformation: Our Great
Redeemer furnished his Church with such Laws as he thought most convenient,
obliging all Christians to receive those Sacred Rites of his Body and Blood in
both Kinds, yet, in process of time, the Church of Rome, upon some pretended
inconveniences, has altered that Law, and denies the Laytie the use of the
Chalice; but whether groundedly or illegally, is the drift of this Disputation
to Examine.

SECT. I. The Grounds of the Church of Rome for denying the Chalice to the
Laity.
THat Pure and Sovereign Doctrine, which was Taught and Practiced by Christ
himself, attained its Original Purity for the space of many Centuries after
Christ and his Apostles; during which time, the Sacrament of the Eucharist was
Administered to the faithful Receivers, under both Kinds; but the continuance of
it, drew it insensibly more remote from its Origin, and so exposed it to the
danger of being Adulterated; for the Romanists pretend, that it was observed,
that when the Communicants lips were separated from the Chalice, some small
particles of the Consecrated Species, fell from the Chalice, which it was not
possible to prevent, or to collect the Particles so dispersed; wherefore
another expedient was instituted, that they who presented themselves to
participate of those Sacred Mysteries, should suck the Consecrated Species out
of the Chalice by a Silver Quil, fitly adapted, and prepared for that purpose:
yet all in vain, for this also was found liable to the same inconvenience;
wherefore finding no remedy, for so great a difficulty, it was at last
resolved, That none of the Seculars, nor the Clergy, except such as were
Priests, should receive the Blood, under the Species of Wine. So the Council of
Trent, Trid. Sess. 21. C. 2.
Quare agnoscens Sancta matter Ecclesia, hanc suam in Administratione
Sacramentorum Auctoritatem, licet ab initio Christianae Religionis, non
infrequens utriusque speciei usus fuisset; tamen progressu temporis, latissime
jam mutata illa consuetudine; gravibus, and justis causis adducta, hanc
consuetudinem, sub altera specie communicandi approbavit, and pro lege habendam
decrevit; quam reprobare, aut fine ipsius Ecclesiae Auctoritate, pro libito
mutare, non licet.

And then lays a Curse upon those that should not submit to this Doctrine, in
these words, Si quis dixerit Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam, non justis causis,
and rationibus adductam fuisse, ut Laicos, atque etiam Clericos non
conficientes, sub panis tantummodo specie communicaret, aut in eo errasse,
Sess. 22. Can. 2.
Anathema sit.

The First Reason: Because it was a great irreverence, and a high Contempt of
the Sacred Blood of Christ, which was the price of our Redemption, to see it
fall to the ground, and trampled under foot, by those who receive so great a
benefit by it, and whereunto they stand indebted, for the Graces they receive
here, and the hope of Glory hereafter; wherefore the high Veneration and
Adoration which we owe to the Incarnate Word, present in this Sacrament, ought
to preponderate all other Considerations, which certainly our Redeemer expects
from us.

The Second Reason: Because whosoever receives the Holy Eucharist, under the
Species of Bread only, receives all Christ, as well the Blood as the Body,
together with the Divine Word, and all the Sacred Trinity: for though ex vi
verborum, by the words of Consecration, only the Body of Christ be
Sacramentally Constituted under the Species of Bread; yet, per concomitantiam,
by a necessary Connection of the parts of Christ with each other, the Blood of
Christ, the Soul, etc. are all rendered present, under the Species of Bread; so
that if this Sacrament be once Administered under the Species of Bread, it were
a needless repetition to administer the same under the Species of Wine; for
this were no other then to Administer to the same person, one and the selfsame
thing twice, without addition or diminution, which would not be available to
the Receiver.

The Third Reason: Because by the words of Christ, our Redeemer, Eternal Life
is annexed to the Receiving of his Body, under the Species of Bread only; If
any Man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever: John 6. v. 51.
and again, He that eats of this Bread shall live for ever. Verse. 58.
Where no mention is made of Receiving, under the Species of Wine, and yet
Eternal life is promised to him that eats of this Bread; therefore, to
Receive Christ, under the Species of Wine, is not necessary to Salvation; not
necessitate medii; because the Bread alone is sufficient, as appears by the
words of Christ: Nor Necessitate praecepti; because no such Precept is extant;
and if there were, then the eating of the Bread alone would not be sufficient
to Salvation, which Christ himself affirms to be sufficient.

The Fourth Reason: Because it has ever been the practice of the Church, since
the Apostles time, to Administer the Communion under the Species of Bread only,
to those that were infirm, and reduced to imminent danger of death, for to
these the Sacrament was usually carried under one Species only; so likewise in
Armies, before a Battle was to be fought, the Sacrament was commonly
Administered to them only in one kind; neither is it to be presumed, that the
Church, in its greatest purity, would, not only countenance men to transgress
against Christ's Precept, but be Instrumental also themselves, to the violating
of his Commands: whence it follows, That Christ laid no such Precept upon his
Church, nor the Members thereof.

The Fifth Reason: Because in the Apostles time, one Species was in use,
according to the opinion of diverse of the Fathers, who hold, that Christ gave
the Communion in one kind, to the two Disciples that were with him at Emaus. So
Augustine, Hierom, Chrysostom, and Theophylact.

Others say, That the meaning of that place, And they continued steadfastly in
the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in
Prayers, is of this Sacrament, Acts 2. v. 42. As also that, And upon the first
day of the week, when the Disciples came together to break Bread, etc. Acts 20.
v. 7. Where, by breaking of Bread, they understand the Receiving of the
Sacrament.

These Texts, and the Reasons above mentioned, we shall examine, when we come
to the Solution of their Objections.

SECT. II. The Decision of this Controversy.
IN order to the Resolution of this Question, a threefold Precept is here to be
distinguished. There is a Positive, a Negative, and a Mixed Precept; The first
is a Command of Practice, for some positive action is to be exercised for the
fulfilling of a Positive Precept. As by the Fifth Precept of the Decalogue, we
are obliged to render that honor and respect which is due to our Parents, which
we cannot fulfill merely by abstaining from actions of disrespect and contempt,
but by Positive actions of Honor and Duty, though there is no obligation
incumbent upon us, to be always in exercise of these actions, but only when
occasion requires. A Negative Precept commands us to abstain from doing some
positive thing, which is prohibited, and if the action forbidden be
intrinsecally ill, then the doing of it is prohibitum quia malum; if the action
of it self be indifferent, then to do it, is malum, quia prohibitum. This
Negative Precept, lays a never interrupted obligation upon us, to observe it;
as in the Sixth Commandment, by which we are obliged to do no Murder; the
meaning is, that an act of Murder is not to be permitted, neither this time,
nor that time, nor any other time whatsoever, neither upon this person, nor
that person, nor any other person whatsoever; which is to be understood
universally, and by a complete distribution. And herein a Negative Precept
differs from a Positive. A Mixed Precept includes both the former, of two
different objects; as the first Precept obliges us to acknowledge God, and not
to acknowledge any thing else for God. And in this is grounded that division of
sins, into sins of Omission, and Commission. This being supposed,

The First Assertion is, That the Ordinance of the Church of Rome, never to
Administer the Communion to the Laity, in both Kinds, is manifestly against
Christ's Precept. For Proof hereof I shall insist upon that saying of our
Savior, Amen, Amen, I say unto you, except you eat the flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink his Blood, you shall have no life in you, John 6. v. 53. where
those words, Amen, Amen, express the greatest asseveration, that our Great
Redeemer ever used, and this adds more force and energie to the subsequent
Precept. The words cited contain a severe Commination, of depriving us of
eternal Salvation, except we eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood; which by the
confession of our Opponents, includes a Precept, though they deny that it
extends to Communion under both Kinds.

Let us now examine what falls immediately under this Precept.

None but a Creature, endued with liberty, and reason, is capable of a Precept;
for i^ it be positive, it injoyns the exercise of some free action, regulated
by Reason; since necessaries cannot fall under any Precept. If it be Negative,
it commands the avoiding of some positive action, which is in the power of
Free Will to exercise, or not to exercise: we have here a positive Precept,
which injoyns all Christians, to eat the Flesh, and drink the Blood of the Son
of Man; which affects immediately the free actions of Man, of eating and
drinking, and, in obliquo, it determines the matter about which these free
actions are to be exercised, namely, the Flesh and the Blood of the Son of Man.
This matter, is not in the power of the Laity, to procure, at their pleasure,
but is to be tendered to them by the Priest, which done, then it is in their
free election to eat and drink, or not to eat and drink; wherefore these
actions are that exercise, which the Precept immediately obliges them to.

Neither is it left to their choice, how they are to receive this matter; for
as the Legislator determines the matter, so likewise does he determine the
manner of receiving it; he does not say indesinitely, or indeterminately,
except you take or receive this matter; but explicitly, plainly, and
distinctly, Except you Eat the Flesh, and Drink the Blood, etc. So that by
this Precept, they are tied up, and determined to the very particular manner of
doing it; neither does the Lawgiver say, Except you eat the flesh, or drink
the blood, etc. but, Except you eat the Flesh, and drink the Blood, etc. by a
Copulative, not a Disjunctive. So that he who eats the Flesh, under the
Species of Bread only, though he fulfill the first part of the Precept, yet he
complyes not with the second part; for though by eating the Flesh, under the
Species of Bread, he receives the Blood also, and all Christ; yet he does not
drink the Blood, which notwithstanding, is as rigorously commanded as the
first, and in as express terms.

To confirm this, I shall, in the next Assertion, make it appear, that in
drinking the Chalice, there is a different signification, and a peculiar
benefit; which accrues to the Receiver, very distinct from all that which
issues from the receiving under the Species of Bread. Which much commends the
great love of our dear Redeemer to Mankind, in Commanding us to Receive under
both Species, that so he might give us an entire, and complete repast, and
refresh us with all those Graces, which correspond to each part thereof: he
does not invite us to this Banquet of all Delicious Rarities, with intention to
feed our Souls by piecemeale, and by halves; but abundantly pours forth the
Treasures of his Merit, and Satisfaction, so to replenish our Souls with a full
and complete refection.

And to make us the more sensible hereof, he chose to suffer that Ignominious
Death upon a Cross, and to permit the effusion of his most Sacred Blood, though
he could have wrought our Redemption without either; for though, as purely God,
he was not capable of Satisfaction, nor Merit; yet that Divine Word, having by
the Hypostatical Union, assumed Humane Nature, all his actions became
Theandrical, the least whereof was of an infinite value, capable (without Death
or Passion) to Redeem a Thousand Worlds; for though he assumed the Nature of
Man, yet he took not upon him the Personality of Man; there was but one
Suppositum which was the Divine Hypostasis of the Word of God; and this gave
the poyse and value to all his actions, which proceeded from one Person that
was both God and Man; as they proceeded from Man they were capable of Merit,
and Satisfaction; and as they proceeded from God, they were infinite in both
kinds, and so never to be exhausted. So that by one act of love, or any other
Moral Virtue, he might efficaciously have Redeemed us; and yet he chose to do
it, by a bitter Death, and Passion, the better to accommodate himself to the
weakness and imbecility of our capacity; for this more efficaciously strikes
our fancy, and imprints upon our Souls a more sensible feeling of his infinite
Love toward us. And for a more ample testimony hereof, he has left us his
Sacred Body and Blood, to participate thereof; and to taste of the fullness of
his Graces and Mercies, thereby still renewing the Memory of his Passion.

Who then shall abridge us of these Favors, by prescinding the one half, and
mincing the benefits bestowed upon us, by so liberal and munificent a Hand? How
great is the presumption of some Men? who call all Christ's Actions in
question, and submit them to the scrutiny of their weak indagation. They usurp
his Infallibility, they alter and change his Sacraments, they Repeal his Laws,
they dispense in his Precepts, and Impose upon him what he never Ordained:
Christ says, Except ye drink the Blood of the Son of Man, ye shall have no
life in you. The Church of Rome says, Though ye drink not the Blood of the Son
of Man, so you eat his Body, ye shall have life in you. Whom shall we believe,
Christ, or the Church of Rome? Shall we desert a certain Infallibility, to
adhere to an uncertain and presumptive one? Could not the All-knowing Word of
God (whose Prudence and Wisdom has no bounds) foresee all the Inconveniences,
that could, or would come to pass? And, Could not his Infinite Providence order
and dispose all for the best? Is it to be presumed that Christ left his Work
imperfect, or not duly ordered, to be completed, or reformed by the weak
industry of Man? Wherefore, by what has been said, I conclude, That the
practice of the Roman Church, in denying the Chalice to the Laity, is an
express violation of Christ's Precept.

The Second Assertion: This kind of half-Communion, Prohibiting the Sacrament
under both Kinds, is a high Injustice, and very prejudicial and injurious to
the Receiver. This Assertion I prove first, because all the Laity, yea and the
Clergy also, that are not Priests, are rendered incapable of fulfilling Christ's
Precept, at least as long as they shall remain in their Communion; and though
the Authors of this Prohibition are highly culpable, and very unjust, in
denying the Faithful what Christ has left them, yet the Receivers also are
transgressers for not fulfilling Christ's Precept. But you will say, How can
they help themselves, if the Priest refuses to exhibit the Sacrament to them
in both Kinds? which is not in their power to procure; neither can they be
obliged to impossibilities. I Answer, That they who seriously endeavor to
fulfill Christ's Precepts, are bound in Conscience to forsake the Communion of
that Church, and to Embrace the Communion of the Protestant Church, where these
Sacred Mysteries will be completely Administered to them, for by this means they
are capable of complying with Christ's Command, which they are strictly obliged
to do.

The Second Proof: They who never receive those Holy Rites but in one Kind,
not only transgress against Christ's Command, but also incur the penalty that
is annexed to it, which is no less than the privation of eternal happiness,
Except you eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, you shall
have no life in you. And what is consequent hereto, they are liable to the
everlasting torments of Hell. How enormous therefore must the Injustice be of
those that are Instrumental: What do I say, instrumental, that are the
principle cause of reducing men to that extremity, that unavoidably they must
violate Christ's Command; and thereby incur eternal damnation; and all this by
denying them that, which by Christ's Institution, they have right to? Can any
Injustice be compared to this? Can any damage be more prejudicial and injurious
to the Receiver?

The Third Proof: The Sacramental products of Communion, under the Species of
Wine, are very different and heterogeneal from all the Graces and Favors
conferred upon him, that participates the Sacrament, in the other kind only;
for this Spiritual refection has a great analogy, and proportionable
similitude, with the natural repast of the Body, and their respective
operations, are reciprocal correlatives (by way of similitude) with each other;
and therefore the Original Instituter, adapting these Mysteries, to the
procedure of Nature, congruously Instituted them under the Symboles of Bread
and Wine; the Bread we esteem to be the Staff of Man's Life, because it
Administers such vital and animal Spirits, as are the substantial support of
Man's Life: and thereby it gives aliment, vigor, and growth to the body, which
is the principal part of nutrition. The Wine makes the heart glad, and enlivens
it, to exercise the functions incident to human employ, with more life and
expedition; it also supplies the radical heat and moisture with seasonable
accesses of its innate qualities, it delibutes the vessels and organs, which
are the vehicles of the Spirits, and furnishes them with such proportionable
qualities, as are most accommodated to expediate the exercise of their
nutritive Functions, by completing the disposition, which the economy of
Nature intends for nutrition, by their attractive, dispositive, conversive, and
expulsive faculties; and so conduces in a high degree, to nutrition,
augmentation, and sensation. So the Bread administreth the substantial matter,
that is to be wrought upon, but the qualities of Wine give their immediate
assistance, in all the elaboratories which it passes through, to dispose it,
and bring it to its intended end.

In like manner, by the primary Institution of this Sacrament, those Graces
that are drawn from the Mass of Christ's Merits, are not inconsiderately
distributed, but in pondere and mensura, with a due regard to the exigency of
circumstances; for though increase of Inherent and Sanctifying Grace, be common
to both parts of this Sacrament, yet the Actual Graces, which are annexed to
the one part, are far different from those that correspond to the other; for
Communion under the Species of Bread, Communicates to the Receiver such Actual
Graces, as tend to the substance of the Spiritual, and Supernatural Life of the
Soul; they incline the understanding to a firm adhesion to the Principles of
Faith, they move the Will to the practice of Moral Virtues, Piety, and
Religion, both toward God and Man. But Communion under the Species of Wine,
gives proportionable Graces, which though they are versed about the same
matter, yet their tendency toward those virtues, is in a different manner, for
they excite the faculties of the Soul, to the exercise of Christianity, with
cheerfulness and alacrity; they give perseverance and longanimity; they induce
the Will to practice Virtue, and Religion, out of the highest Motive, of the
Love of God above all things. These are the Graces, which put the last
accomplishment to our Spiritual Actions, without which, the former, though they
come full fraught with the substantial and consistent Element of a Spiritual
Life, yet in the execution thereof, they are dull and flaccide, and for want of
a more vigorous excitation, are the sooner defeated by adverse Temptations, and
Suggestions of the Sensual Appetite.

Hence we may gather, how much more a whole and adequate Communion, conduces
to the accomplishment of a Spiritual Life, then an inadequate, and half one;
for what emolument is it to one to receive a strong, and substantial food, if
his vital faculties are not duly qualified to digest it, and converte it into
his proper substance? And I would have it observed, that this Doctrine of the
different Graces corresponding to the receiving this Sacrament, under the two
different Species, is no product of my weak invention, but is the constant
Position of diverse Learned and Approved Divines of the Church of Rome; and
without which, their Principles of the Sacrisice of the Mass cannot be well
managed, as I shall show anon.

And in this is grounded the substance of this Third Proof: For if we duly
ponder, of how great a consideration, and value, these special Graces are in
themselves, which correspond to the Chalice, and how conducing they are to the
perfection of a Spiritual Life, and sencing the Soul, against the subtle
attempts of its Enemies, it will be the manifest ground of a clear illation,
that to deprive so many thousands of such unspeakable benefits, is a great
Injustice, and a considerable prejudice to those, in whose favor, the
Meritorious cause of them, had with so much bounty and liberality, left them as
a Legacy, to all such as should worthily receive his most Sacred Blood, under
the Species of Wine. The Pope in his Economy, and the Administration of his
Jurisdiction seems wholly unmindful of Distributive Justice; for to some, by
his Jubilies, Pardons, and Indulgences, he very liberally disposes of Christ's
Satisfaction, upon consideration of their compliance with the Orders of His
Holiness; though he be sparing enough to others. But in arrogating to himself a
Power of dispensing Christ's Merits, and the fruits of his Passion; yea, and to
alter Christ's own Institution, by refusing them to such, as the Author
himself, had ordered to receive them, is too high a presumption: Must we, by
Human Authority, be deprived of what, by the Divine Giver has been consigned to
us? this stands in high opposition with all equity, and is besides, an illegal
usurpation of Divine Right. But we now come to solve their Objections and
Allegations, specified in the precedent Section, in defense of this partial
refusal.

SECT. III. The Objections Solved.
THe first Objection is grounded on the Irreverence, of permitting some
Particles of the Chalice to fall to the ground, as is specified in the first
reason of the contrary opinion.

First, I Answer, That this Prohibition removes not that inconvenience, except
they forbid Communion under the Species of Bread also, and so utterly exclude
the Laity from any part of this Sacrament; for there are more Particles lost
from off the Bread, then from the Wine; it being not Morally possible to handle
the Bread, without separating from it several Minute Particles, which did
adhere to the Mass, and yet were not continued, but only contiguous to it,
which, on the least motion, fall off, whereof many are so small, that sugiunt
visum, and especially, when a Priest in Mass, divides the Host, in order to
Consummation; then by reason of the Elastick Virtue of the Air, and the
resisting quality of the Wafer, these Minute Parts must of necessity be carried
beyond the extent of the corporal, and so lost, which no human care, nor
diligence, can prevent.

Secondly, I Answer, That this, and all other circumstances, which occur in
practice, were clearly and certainly foreseen by Christ himself, who,
notwithstanding, deemed it expedient, if not necessary, to issue forth his
Command, of receiving this Sacrament in both Kinds, who knew full well how far
the weak industry of Man could reach, to prevent such inconveniences: and for
ought we know, may send his Angels from Heaven, to collect and take care of
such Particles; as some of the adverse Party affirm. And this may serve for an
Answer to the first Reason.

The Second Objection: He that complies with a Precept, quoad substantiam,
though he should not be so circumspect as to be punctual in all things, quoad
circumstantias, yet he may truly be deemed to have complied with the command,
and is no transgressor; but he who receives in one Kind only, receives all
Christ, as well the Body as the Blood, which is the whole substance of the
Precept; therefore he is no Transgressor.

I Answer, by distinguishing the Major; He that complyes with the Precept,
quoad substantiam, although he observe not the Circumstances, fulfils the
Precept, if the Circumstances be the Object of the Precept: I deny the Major:
If the Circumstances fall not under the Precept; I grant it: but in the present
case, the eating and drinking compared to the Precept, are the very substance
thereof; though in reference to the Body and Blood of Christ, they are but
Circumstances; for the Body and Blood of Christ, in relation to this Precept,
are, materia circa quam, the eating and drinking are materia quae: this is the
very thing that is commanded, for they are the Human actions, which are
immediately under Precept: the Body and Blood of Christ are the Matter about
which these actions are verst, for to fulfill this command, it is not sufficient
to eat and drink any thing, but it is necessary to eat the Body, and drink
the Blood of Christ: it is not in the power of the Seculars, to procure or
Consecrate the Body and Blood of Christ, but when it is exhibited to them, it
is in their free election, to eat the Flesh, and drink the Blood; which by
this Precept they are obliged to. As by the Fourth Command of the Decalogue we
are enjoined to keep holy the Sabbath day, that is, to abstain from servile
labor, and to exercise acts of devotion, but the Precept does not determine
what acts of devotion we shall in particular exercise, for this is left to our
free election, either to hear Divine Service, or hear the Word of God
explained, or to employ our time in Spiritual Reading, or in Prayer and
Meditation, etc. here the alteration of the Circumstances, hinders not the
fulfilling of the Precept; and therefore in this case the Argument proceeds
rightly.

But our Case is far different, wherein the Legislator determines us to
particular actions, and leaves it not in our election to change them, or to
omit either of them. So he that takes the Body and Blood of Christ, and does
not eat the one, and drink the other, fulfils not the Precept. And this
answers the Second Reason.

The Third Objection: He that receives under the Species of Bread, receives all
Christ, and may be truly said to eat the Flesh, and drink the Blood of Christ,
and so satisfies the Precept; according to that of Cyprian, Sermon de Coena
Domini.
Potus and esus ad eandem pertinent rationem.

I Answer, That he who receives only under the Species of Bread, though he
receive the Blood as well as the Body, yet cannot be said to drink the Blood,
under that Kind; for that which is eaten, is commonly solid and consistent; but
nothing can be taken by way of drinking, except it be a sluid and a liquid
matter; wherefore, to receive under the Species of Bread, is not to drink the
Blood of Christ; except you grant, that one may drink dry bread.

To the Authority of Cyprian I Answer, That in the same Sermon he endeavors to
prove the Evangelical Precept of eating the Flesh, and drinking the Blood of
Christ, by the same Text; Except you eat the Flesh and drink the Blood, etc.
where he has these words, Lex esum sanguinis prohibet, Ibid.
Evangelium praecipit ut bibatur: whereby he expressly declares his sentiments,
to be coherent with ours. In the words above cited, he rather confirms then
impugnes this Doctrine; for he declares, that eating and drinking belong both
to this Sacrament, which is the Spiritual refreshment of the Soul, in the
nature of one complete Banquet, which without Drinking would be imperfect, and
incomplete.

The Fourth Objection: Admit the Hypothesis of a Precept to receive in both
kinds; yet to avoid the inconveniences beforementioned, the Superiors of the
Church, according to the prudential dictates of a right Government, may, and
ought to frame an Epikeia, by a grounded interpretation of the Will of the
Lawgiver, that if he were present to be consulted herein; he would declare his
intention, not to have his Law executed on such hard circumstances; which
excuses the Governors, in denying the promiscuous use of the Chalice, and
exempts the Subjects from being transgressors.

First I Answer, That upon the same ground, they may also prohibit Communion
under the species of Bread, for the same difficulties are militant for this, as
well as for that, as has been proved.

Secondly, I Answer, That Divine Laws admit of no Epikeia, nor interpretation
of the Divine Will, but when God commands, Man must obey. The reason is,
because we cannot suppose any defect in the Omniscience of the Divine
understanding, who perfectly penetrates all future events, and circumstantial
emergencies, before they come to pass, with as much infallible certainty, as if
they were then present; so that here is no ground at all for the prudential
dictates of humane Reason. But humane Laws upon extraordinary accidents, may
admit of an Epikeia; because the wisest Legislator among Men, is supposed to be
ignorant of future contingencies, and yet such may happen, wherein a rational
Judgment, not biased by sinister Motives, may deem it imprudence, hic and nunc
to have the Law put in execution, and therefore may rationally interpret the
Will of the Lawgiver, to suspend the execution of the Law, under such arduity.

But however such casualties may occur, yet humane Laws suffer no detriment
thereby; for upon removal of such hard circumstances, the Law revives, and
obliges to its observance as much as before. How then can it be consonant to
Reason, that mere Men should not only suspend the execution of a Divine Law,
upon an incident occasion, but prohibit the observance of it to all, but
Priests, constantly, and for perpetuity; so that all but Priests are debarred
from the observance of this Law for ever? This is an attempt of a higher
nature, for hereby they endeavor to abrogate and repeal this Law, as much as
in them lies, for ever, which argues a bold and daring presumption, very
injurious to the Divine Conditor Legis.

The Fifth Objection is grounded in those sayings of Christ, where he only
mentions the Bread, and promises Eternal Life to them that eat it, John 6.
as the Third Reason proposes. I Answer, That in the same Chapter, our Lord
having distinctly explained his meaning more then once, of eating his Flesh and
drinking his Blood, thought it needless to repeat all the particulars, as often
as he mentioned this Sacrament: so that the meaning of those Texts is, he that
eats this Bread worthily, and in the manner as I shall prescribe, or as I
have prescribed, shall live eternally; otherwise, if the mere eating of that
Bread were sufficient to Salvation, then an unworthy Receiver might be sure of
Eternal Life, which illation all must reject. And this answers the Third Reason.

The Sixth Objection is drawn from the practice of the Churh, in its primitive
and purest times, which was to administer this Sacrament to those that were to
fight a battle, and to such as were in danger of death by infirmity, in one
kind only, whence it ensues, that both kinds are not necessary, nor under
precept, which is the Fourth Reason.

I Answer, That the precept which we insist upon being positive, it does not
oblige to receive under both kinds, toties quoties, neither does it determine
how often we are to receive under both kinds, but leaves this to the
determination of the Church, and the Piety and Devotion of the Receiver; so
that by Receiving some times in our Life, or so often every year, under both
kinds, we fulfill the precept, and that being done, the receiving afterward
under one kind, can be no violation of the precept, it being an act of Devotion
not prohibited; but he that never receives under both kinds, all his life time,
is a manifest transgressor. And so the Fourth Reason is answered.

The Seventh Objection is in substance the same with the former, only this
induces the authority of the Fathers, upon the Texts cited in the Fifth
Reason; where by breaking Bread, they understand this Sacrament. I Answer, That
the Disciples in those times lived in common, and gave up their Temporals into
the common stock, and took their refection in common, so that their coming
together to break Bread, means, their Meeting together to take their Corporal
repast. However the Receiving under one Kind, upon particular occasions, proves
just nothing, in order to this question, because the Precept may, at other
times be fulfilled, by receiving under both Kinds, which the Fathers no way
impugn.

But if you consult the Fathers, you shall find many of them abetters of this
Opinion. Chrisostom speaking of the practice of the Old Law, wherein it was not
lawful for the people, to participate of that part that was reserved for the
Priest, adds these words, Sed nunc non sic: verum omnibus unum corpus
proponitur, and unum poculum. Chrisost. Hom. 18. in poster Corinth. Gelasius
apud Gratian Cap. Comperimus de Consecrat. did. 2.
Gelatius Papa speaking of the Manachaeans, says thus, Comperimus quod quidam,
sumpta tantummodo corporis Sacri portione, a calice Sacri cruoris abstineant,
qui proculdubio, quoniam nescio qua superstitione docentur, obstringi, aut
Sacramenta integra percipiant, aut ab integris arceantur, quia divisio unius
and ejusdem mysterii, sine grandi Sacrilegio non potest provenire.

And of the same Opinion is Leo Papa, Leo. Sermon. ^^de Quadrages.
with others.

And this proves the Fifth Reason In^^^eient.

SECT. IV. Corallaries drawn from the Romanists Doctrine of their pretended
Sacrifice of the Mass.
IT is the usual practice of our Antagonists, when they apprehend any
Dogmatical Point conducing to their intended design, they cast about them, and
summon all the strength of Arguments they can muster up, to establish that
Principle. But if the same Position, in another occasion, stand in their way,
and obstruct the evincing of some other Thesis, then they, with all sedulous
industry, apply themselves to depress, and cry down the same Point, which they
had before, so elaborately strived to make good. As in this subject, to make
out the legality of their half Communion, How do they endevor to divest the
drinking of the Blood, of all its Prerogatives, and particular Graces, peculiar
to that kind alone, as though it were superfluous; and after receiving under
the Species of Bread, it were but actum agere, to Administer the Chalice? Yet
when they treat of their Sacrifice of the Mass, then the consummating of the
Chalice is held in great veneration, and esteemed to necessary, that rather
then omit it, they must lay hold of any hard shift, and have recourse to
extremities; for which no reason can be alleged, except they grant the Chalice
its due, and allow its efficacy and operation, as proper to it self, which in
this Discourse we shall make plainly appear.

The approved notion of a Sacrifice is this, Immutatio facta circa rem aliquam
creatam in agnitionem Supremi Dominii. It is a change made about some created
thing, in acknowledgment of the Supreme Dominion; and according to this
definition they infer the Mass to contain verum, Council. Trid. in profession.
s^^^i.
proprium, and propitiatorium Sacrificium, as the Council of Trent declares, A
true, proper, and Propitiatory Sacrifice; for in the Consecrating of the Bread
and Wine, there is a proper Conversion, or Transmutation, of the same, into the
Body and Blood of Christ, and these are also consummated by the Sacrificater;
all which is performed, by way of a Commemoration of that bloody Sacrifice,
whereby the Author of Life offered himself upon the Cross, to his eternal
Father, as a Propitiation, for the sins of Mankind.

Yet to complete this unbloody Sacrifice, it is not sufficient, that the Priest
do consummate the Host, under the Species of Bread, but it is also rigorously,
and indispensably necessary, that he also consummate the Chalice, under the
Species of Wine, and therefore, in case a Priest, after having Consecrated the
Bread and Wine, and Consummated the Host, should by any sudden accident, or
indisposition of Body, fall down at the Altar, and be rendered wholly unable of
Consummating the Chalice, under the Species of Wine, in this case they are to
use all possible means, suddenly to procure another Priest, and if none could
be found that are fasting, yet rather then fail, they must appoint one that is
not fasting, to Consummate the Chalice (and yet without such an immergent
necessity, it is esteemed a heinous crime, for any one to presume, to receive
this Sacrament, except he be fasting) the reason hereof is, because the
Sacrifice should not remain imperfect; for the Offering up an incomplete
Sacrifice to the Author of all Being, is held a great abomination, and a
disrespect to God, and therefore a less inconvenience must yield to a greater;
for, ex duobus malis, minus est eligendum.

This being so, I now come to examine the ground of this indispensable
necessity. Why is the Consummating the Chalice so rigorously required? They
Answer, To complete the Sacrifice. I again demand, What is wanting, to the
completing the Sacrifice? They Answer, The Receiving under the Species of
Wine, which, in this Sacrifice has been Consecrated. Here I must allege their
own Arguments, which they so industriously urge, to excuse their denying the
Chalice to the Laity For, say they, he who receives under the Species of Bread,
receives all Christ; not only the Body, but the Blood of Christ, the Natural
Union, the Divine Word, the Hypostatical Union, and the whole Trinity;
therefore to receive again under the Species of Wine is superfluous; it is
actum agere, he had all before, and more he cannot have; so that the second
reception, is but a bare repetition of the former, without addition, or
diminution.

This Doctrine (which is their own) I apply to their Sacrifice. When the Priest
has Consecrated in both Kinds, and Consummated the Host, I still press to
know, What is wanting to complete their Sacrifice? Nothing can be assigned, but
the Consummating the Chalice. But I Reply, The Sacrificater has already
Received all Christ, nothing excepted, What would he have more? for, to
Consummate the Chalice, is but to receive the very same again; it is but an
unnecessary Repetition; it is actum agere, whereby nothing is received, but
what was received before; and therefore if any thing be wanting to Complete the
Sacrifice, it must be some Spiritual Benefit, or Emolument that the Chalice
brings with it. In fair Arguing, some reality should be assigned, for bare
words are not satisfactory; and if they pretend, that there are any, peculiar
Graces, or Spiritual Favors, which accrue to the Receiver, under the Species of
Wine, distinct from those that are received by Communion, under the Species of
Bread (as many of their great Divines affirm) then they give a Legal Reason of
Christ's so much inculcating the receiving of this Sacrament under both Kinds.
Amen, Amen, dico vobis, Johannis 6 v. 53. Mat. 26. v. 27. Luc. 22. v. 17.
nisi ma^ducaveritis carnem fi^^^ fortinis and biberit * ejus sanguinem, non
habelitis vitam in vnhis. Bibite ex hoc omnes. Accipite hoc and dividite inter
vos etc. And by this, they may give a rational account, why they so strictly
exact the consummating of the Chalice, in their Mass.

But if they grant this, How then can they excuse their Injustice of denying
the Cup to the Laity? for these Graces are of a high value, and of right belong
to them, as is more largely declared above, Sect. 2.
in this Disputation. So that they are here reduced to this perplexity: If they
grant these Spiritual Graces to the Chalice, they cannot excuse their Injustice
to the Laity. If they deny them, they cannot make out their practice and
Doctrine of their Sacrifice of the Mass. These are hard shifts to defend a bad
Cause; but certainly they have most reason, who heartily acknowledge, the
Graces conferred upon us, by receiving the Blood of Christ, under the Species
of Wine, which so much conduce to the right Institution of a Christian Life,
and perseverance in it.

Let us therefore cast a glance of compassion, on the deplorable condition of
those, that live in the Communion of the Church of Rome, who not only are
deprived of such Spiritual Graces and Favors, but by a constant Rebellion
against Christ's Commands, are become refractory and incorrigeable in their
disobedience, and which is worst of all, hereby incur the penalty threatened to
the disobedient, by Christ himself; which is no less then eternal Damnation;
neither is it possible (as long as they remain in those circumstances) to make
their Peace or Atonement with All mighty God; which can never be effected but
by a valid Absolution, or a true Repentance; but if they resolve to continue in
that Communion, they are neither capable of a valid Absolution, nor a true
Repentance; for two essential impediments that cannot be removed; obstruct and
render inefficacious all their endeavors. The one is an incapacity of
retractation, the other an impossibility of a purpose of amendment: for, How is
it possible for any one to retract his sin, or purpose to amend, as long as he
is deliberately, and firmly resolved, to continue in the same sin? for such a
resolution, is wholly inconsistent with a retractation, and with a purpose to
amend, and yet these two are both necessary to a valid Absolution, and to a
true Repentance, which is allowed by all.

I shall therefore conclude this Disputation with this ensuing Sillogisme: They
who are transgressors, and incapable of a valid Absolution, and true
Repentance, cannot be saved: but they who are resolved to continue in the
Church of Rome, are Transgressors, and incapable of a valid Absolution, and
true Repentance; ergo, They who are resolved to continue in the Church of Rome
cannot be saved. The Major none can deny, it being consonant to the Doctrine of
both Churches, and evident in it self. The Minor has been sufficiently proved
in this Disputation. But, How dismal, and fatal is the consequence, to those
whom it concerns? They have no remedy but one, which is, to separate from that
Church, which reduces them to such extremities, and then they may be in a
Capacity to Repent, and exercise Acts of Attrition, and Contrition, so to
reduce their Souls to a better state.

Dispute IV. Of Transubstantiation.
The Preface.
AMong all the Dogmatical Points wherein the Roman and Protestant Churches
differ, none is Controverted with more Fervor, and Animosity, then this of
Transubstantiation; the Romanists earnestly defending it, and the Protestants
as vigorously denying it. Besides the Method and Manner, which the Church of
Rome uses in the Explication and Proof of this Mystery, leads them into such
a labyrinth of insuperable Difficulties, yea, and Impossibilities (as shall be
here proved) that all their Pretended Infallibility, will not be able to
protect them from Error; for they make so great a Breach, in the Laws of
Nature, and so impose upon Human Reason, as if rightly understood, the most
credulous could never stretch their Belief to an Assent. For they move Heaven
and Earth, to accomplish their Design; they bring in the Divine Omnipotence, to
their support, and yet still need more help to make out their Undertakings; the
particulars whereof the following Sections will declare.

SECT. I. The Romanists Doctrine relating to Transubstantiation.
WHoever intends to make a strict Inquiry, into all the Parts of this strange
Mystery, must of necessity Consult the Grounds of Natural Philosophy, on which
it depends; where, in the first place, they adhere to Aristotle, whose
Principles are more accommodated to their Design, then any other; for they
absolutely except against the Doctrine of Cartesius, and reject his Principies,
who composeth this sublunary World or one simple Complete substantial Body,
admitting of no substantial Composition, either of Matter, or Form, or any
other equivalent parts, but divides this Body into integral parts, which he
reduces to Three Classes;

The One he calls, Globulos Caelestes,

Another, Materiam Subtilem;

And the Third, Particulas Striatas.

All which, though according to their own Entities, are Homogeneal, yet by
reason of their different Figures, Motions, and other Modifications, produce
all that variety, and those Hetorogeneal effects, which this World proposes to
our Corporal Senses. And though he often mentions Local Motion, Moodes, and
Modisications, yet he would never admit any accident, either absolute or modal,
no first or second qualities, entitatively, and really distinct from the
substance; as his Writings sufficiently declare; and also, as I have been
several times informed, by Doctor Gutscouen, a Doctor of the University of
Lovaine; and Canon of the Cathedral of Liege, who was Des Carts his bosom
Friend, with whom he Communicated all his Principles, before he Printed them.
Who assured me, that Des Carts was an irreconcilable Enemy to all Accidents,
Moods, and Qualities, really distinct from the Substance.

This therefore being waved, they stick close to the Peripateticks, who admit
Moods, Qualities, and Accidents, really distinct from the Substances which they
affect.

Secondly, In all Complete Bodies, in this Sublunary World, they admit a
Substantial Composition, of Matter and Form, so as that the first Matter,
being produced by a creatain Action, is indifferent to all Forms, but depends
on no one in particular; and therefore since the first Creation of the World
(if we Consult Nature) no Matter has been produced, none destroyed. But on the
contrary, the substantial Forms have a strict dependence on the first Matter,
as their proper Subject, and on several qualities and accidents, as their
Natural disposition, so that if their Matter should be Annihilated, or their
disposition destroyed; by the Law of Nature, they could not subsist, though
many of them Teach, that the Heavens, Planets, and Fixed Stars, admit of no such
Composition, but are Complete, yea simple substantial Bodies, which cannot be
dissolved but only into Integral, and Homogeneal parts.

Thirdly, They Assert, That though according to Nature, the same Individual
Body, cannot be in more then one place, at the same time; yet that by Divine
Power, one and the same Body, may be collocated in several and distinct places,
the same moment of time, how distant, and remote soever these places are, the
one from the other. Which is far different from the Manner, how the Soul of Man
exists in the Body, for though the same Soul be at the same time in the head,
and in the foot, and because it is a Spirit, and has no substantial, nor
integral parts, it must of necessity be all in the head, and all in the foot,
and other parts of the Body, the same instant, because it is indivisible; yet,
in this Case, the whole Body is but one adequate place of the Soul; for if the
head should be severed from the Body, the Soul could not in that state of
Separation, be both in the head and the Body, no not for one moment of time.

Fourthly, They agree in the notion of Substantial Conversion, that it is a
Transmutation of one Substance into another, which they distinguish into two
Members; the one is a partial, or inadequate Conversion; the other a total or
adequate Commutation. The first is common, and proper to the present order of
Nature; for in all the Changes that we observe, of several Substances
destroyed, and others produced, there never happens but a partial Conversion:
for example, We see Wood, or other Combustible Matter, Converted into Fire, the
Form of Wood is destroyed, but the Matter, as being susceptible of any Form,
remains under the Form of Fire, that was before under that of Wood: So that
you see, in all these Conversions, one part is destroyed, but the other
persists in being; so in that which succeeds, one part is newly produced, but
the other was extant before. But in a total Conversion, the precedent substance
is wholly destroyed, the Matter is Annihilated, and the Form Corrupted, and
the subsequent substance, which succeeds in place of that which is destroyed,
both Matter and Form, is all Collocated under the same Collection of
Accidents, either by a new production, or else by an adduction; for if this
substance, into which the former was Converted, were before extant, then there
needs only a new Ubication in the place, where the Conversion is made, without
relinquishing its former Vbi, or place where it was existent; and so is now in
two distinct places at once; and this total Conversion can never be made,
without infringing the Laws of Nature: for nothing in Nature can ever lay a
disposition, determining to the destruction of the first Matter, which depends
upon no dispositions, but is produced by a Creative action, independent of all
things else. And therefore its destruction exceeds the power of all Natural
Causes. Then the Constituting of a Body, in two distinct and adequate places at
once, is not in the power of Nature, as all grant.

Fifthly, They grant, That Quantity, Qualities, Dispositions, and all other
Accidents, cannot naturally subsist without a Subject, or Receptacle to support
them, and keep them in being; for, as Aristotle says, Accidens est ens in
alio, or entis ens; it is ordained by Nature to be subservient to substance,
and so is not intended for it self, but to dispose the substance to several
Changes and Mutations, upon which it has consequently a strict dependence;
neither can it have any use in Nature, without the Substance. So that Accidents
cannot remain without a Substance, but by the Miraculous assistance of a
Supernatural Power, and where this intervenes, they maintain, that all
Accidents, except Moodes, may be conserved, in being without a Subject.

These several Points of Doctrine being premised, they conclude, That in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, by the words of Consecration, which are these, Hoc
est corpus meum, This is my Body; which are pronounced by the Priest, assuming
Christ's Person, there is wrought a total, substantial Conversion, which they
call Transubstantiation; so that the whole substance of Bread, both Matter and
Form, is totally destroyed: and the whole substance of Christ's Body is really
placed there, in lieu of the Bread, which is really Converted into the Body of
Christ, yet so, as that the Species of Bread (which is the collection of
Accidents, that were before in the Bread) keep their state of being (though the
Bread be destroyed) and are Miraculously preserved without a Subject; though
they are Sacramentally united to the Body of Christ: And though, ex vi
verborum, only the Body of Christ be rendered present, nothing else being
signified by the words of Consecration, nor requisite to verify Concomitance,
and Connection, whereby all the parts of Christ are united with each other,
there is also put, under the Species of Bread, the Blood of Christ, the Soul of
Christ, with the Natural Union between his Body and Soul, the Divine Word, the
Hypostatical Union, which Connects the Divine Word to the Humanity, and
consequently all the Sacred Trinity, are all there really Existent, under the
Species of Bread; which Species or Complex of Accidents, were produced and
conserved before the Bread was destroyed, by an Action called Eduction; that
is, a production dependant on another, to wit, the Substance of Bread, to which
they were the natural disposition; but that substance being destroyed, they are
now conserved by another action, which they term Creation; that is, a
production independent of all others. By the Species of Bread they understand,
the Heat, the Cold, the Dries, the Moisture, the Quantity, the Rarity, the
Density, the Color, the Odor, the Taste, etc. which were all appropriated to
the Bread.

They also Affirm, That these strange Wonders are wrought by the words of
Consecration, which are Instituted by Christ, to this purpose, and by their
Obediential Power, are elevated to effect, what of themselves they are
incapable of, the Divine Power Cooperating with them, to accomplish this
design; so that these few words, pronounced by a Priest, who assumes Christ's
Person, and Officiates in his Name, are not only representative, but also
practical; they effect what they signify, and so reduce themselves to a
Conformity with their Object, which makes them true.

But it may be demanded, In what Critical Moment of time this great Change is
made? For the words, though few, yet are pronounced by the Priest successively,
whence the doubt arises, Whether this strange Conversision, be made in the
beginning, the middle, or the end of the words of Consecration? To this they
Answer, That during the time that the Priest is pronouncing those words,
nothing is done, till he pronounces the last Syllable of the last word meum,
and in that moment the whole business is effected, and the Priest no sooner
has spoken that last syllable, but he kneels to Adore Christ then present, and
Elevates the Host, to show it to the People, that they also may adore it.

Another Query may be proposed, How long the Body of Christ remains in the
Host, under the Species of Bread? Their Answer is, That as long as the
dispositions of Bread remain there, so long is Christ present; but when by
contrary Causes, these Qualities, and Accidents are so far Changed, that the
Form of Bread could not Naturally there subsist, then the Body of Christ is
withdrawn.

This is a short, but true Account of their Tenets: whence they Conclude, That
by such a Transubstantiation, as is above explicated, the substance of Bread is
truly and really Converted into the Body of Christ; and this they propose to
all to be Believed, as an Article of Faith.

The Grounds of this Paradoxical Doctrine we shall propose in the Objections,
against those Assertions which we are going to establish in the next Section.

SECT. II. The Orthodox Doctrine against Transubstantiation proposed and proved.
THe First Assertion: The Doctrine of Transubstantiation, as it is Taught by
the Church of Rome, is de facto, false, and Erroneous. I add those words de
facto, because in this Conclusion, I only design to prove, That no such
Transubstantiation is actually to be admitted, waving the possibility of it;
but I shall afterward prove that it is wholly Chymerical, and Impossible, and
the Proofs of that Assertion, will confirm this.

The First Proof: Christ came not into the World to destroy, but to edify,
and therefore was so zealous to fulfill the Old Law; and certainly he stood not
in opposition with his Eternal Father, who was the great Framer, and Conserver
of the Universe, who constituted it in its due order, by providing for the
proper Nature, propensions, and inclinations of each part thereof, by ordaining
the Natural Causes, Effects, Proprieties, and Passions of all things, and by
that provident subordination of one thing to another, in relation to the good
and conservation of the whole. But this Doctrine of Transubstantiation cannot
be defended, but by violating those Laws of Nature (established by God himself)
in a high degree, for in every Consecration, there are as many Miracles, which
infringe the Laws of Nature, as there are Minute Accidents, and Qualities
existing without their Subject; it is a Miracle that the Form of Bread should
be destroyed, and its disposition entire, contrary to the exigence of Nature;
it is a Miracle, and against Nature, that the first Matter should be
annihilated, nothing in the Universe determining to it; it is a Miracle that
the Body of Christ should be in so many places the same time; it is a Miracle,
that the Words of Consecration (a mere Sound from a Man's Organ) should be
elevated to effect such Prodigies. And in most places subject to the Sea of
Rome, there is a never interrupted continuation of all these Miraculous
products, by keeping the Consecrated Host in a Cyborium, within the
Tabernacle, which is never intermitted. Nay, What a Prodigious Number of
Miracles are daily and hourly multiplied, by so many Millions of Hoasts as are
continually Consecrated, in the whole extent of the Universe? Who can be so
impious, as to impute so horrid a Fraction in Nature, to Christ himself? as
though he waged War with his Eternal Father, by endeavoring to subvert the
Order, and Nature of this Universe, contrary to its first Institution; all
which being duly considered, who can be so great a Contemner of his own
Reason, as blindly to inslave it to such incredible Doctrine?

The Second Proof: If the Substance of Bread were really Transubstantiated into
the Body of Christ, and the Species of Bread should remain without a Subject,
that Collection of Species would be wholly incorruptible; and consequently
Christ's Body would never be separated from that Hoaste, where it is once
present. The Illation I prove evidently, for if that Collection of Accidents
exist independent of any Subject, and are preserved by a Creative Action, then
no Natural Cause, nor Agent, could have any influence upon them, for no Natural
Agent can operate, but in order to some Subject, which must receive and support
the effect produced: wherefore admit that a Consecrated Hoaste were applied to
the fire, the Species of Bread extant in the Hoaste, would suffer some Change,
or Alteration, by the influence of the fire; suppose then one degree of heat
to be produced in the Hoaste, then one degree of cold must be expelled from
thence, which is the contrary to heat; if so, then that degree of Heat which
the fire produced, must be Created, and not Educted, because there is no
subject at all to receive it, and so it must exist as the rest of that Complex
does, independent of a Subject: and that degree of cold that is destroyed, must
be annihilated, not corrupted, for it is destroyed independent of any Subject.
What then, to maintain this Doctrine, Must we admit that a mere Creature, and a
Natural cause, as the Fire, has a power to create, and annihilate? you were as
good say, that a Creature may be Omnipotent, for hitherto I never heard but of
one Creator, God himself, who alone has power to Create, and Annihilate: What
is this but to rob God of his Prime Attributes, and communicate them to his
Creatures? But, What remedy? for manifest experience shows, that a
consecrated Hoaste is as liable to alteration, change, and corruption, as
another that is not consecrated; so there is no way but one, to salve all these
inconveniences, which is, by denying Transubstantiation, out of which those
gross errors inevitably follow.

But it may be Objected, That the proper Subject of the Species of Bread, is
the quantity, and not the substance it self, for the quantity is the subject of
other qualities, and common accidents, and that alone is Miraculously conserved
in the Eucharist, without a subject.

First, I Answer, That the proper function of quantity is to communicate
impenetrability to the Bodies that it affects, for two Bodies meeting together,
resist each other, and cannot be both penetrated in the same place, as our Soul
is with our Body. This proceeds from quantity, which is the root of
impenetrability. Besides, that is the subject of the common accidents, which is
by them disposed for several Forms; but it is only the substance that is so
disposed (for quantity is of it self but an accident) therefore the common
accidents are received in the substance, and not in the quantity.

Secondly, I Answer, That all the School of the Thomists, all the School of the
Scotists, and a great part of the Jesuits, and other Authors, of the Church of
Rome, do absolutely assert, that the substance, and not the quantity, is the
proper subject of the common accidents, and consequently the Argument proceeds
in its full strength against all these.

The Third Proof: Insisting upon the Principles of Transubstantiation, an
irreconcilable difficulty will occur; when that complex of first, and second
qualities, and other accidents is so altered, and changed, that it becomes an
apt disposition to a new specifical Form. As for example: A Communicant
receives a consecrated Hoaste, which is log'd in the Stomach of the Receiver,
and by the natural activity of the Stomach is fitly disposed to receive the
Form of Chyle, then there is a strict exigence in nature, that the Form of
Chyle be introduced; What is to be done in this case? Nature may spend it self
in clamoring to have this Form introduced, but alas, here is no subject, nor
receptacle to receive it. Some expedient must here be found, you will say, that
in this case the Author of Nature must create new Matter, to receive this
Form, and to relieve the Accidents from that violent state wherein they have
been detained.

Most excellent Philosophy! How absurd would this seem to any of the Ancients,
but meanly verst in this Science? Aristotle never dreamt of such anxieties and
distresses of Nature. And the Divinity is yet worse; which makes God subject to
submit to the extravagant exigences of his creatures, no way grounded in his
own Providence, and Disposition; for the great Author of Nature, Created the
whole Mass of first Matter, independent of any thing else, and since that
original creation, no Matter has been destroyed, none produced, but the same
succeeds indifferently, to all the variety of Forms that are produced and
destroyed. But now here comes a strict exigence of a substantial Form, to be
produced dependant on the Matter, and yet there is no matter to receive it, but
the Supreme Creator must be summoned by his creatures to supply this defect, by
Creating new Matter, as though he had been ignorant in the Beginning, what
quantity of Matter was sufficient, who created all things by his Infinite
Wisdom, and Providence, in pondere, and mensura, out of his own Free Will,
without any exigence, or determination of his creatures.

Must then the Order of this Systeme be inverted? and God, (as it were)
necessitated, to exercise his Omnipotence in a New creation, not grounded in
his former Instituon?

But here it may be Alleged, That the drift of all these Proofs, is no other
then to make it appear, that the whole business of Transubstantiation is
Supernatural and Miraculous, which the Church of Rome freely acknowledges, and
are induced to this belief, by the Authority of Christ himself, who, holding
Bread in his hand, in the Last Supper, plainly told his Apostles, Hoc est
corpus meum, This is my Body: If Christ affirms it, Who dares gainsay it? We
all know, that the Substance of Bread cannot, by Natural Means, be converted
into the Body of Christ, but by the illimited power of God, it may be done; and
Christ tells us, That it is done, Why therefore should we not believe it?

First, I Answer, That what is possible, though Miraculous, and Supernatural,
may be believed, yet not slightly, and without sufficient reason; but if by an
urgent and indispensable necessity, or an irrefragable authority, which brings
with it a perfect assurance, of the true sense, and meaning thereof, we are
pressed to an assent, this is a sufficient Motive to induce us to believe

But, in the next Proof, I shall make it appear, that here is no such
inductive, no necessity of yielding our assent to such a prodigious number of
Miracles, not once only, but daily and hourly repeated, and constantly
continued, and so to last till the Worlds end.

Secondly, I Answer, That in the Second Proof of this Assertion, it appears,
that from this Doctrine of Transubstantiation, it unavoidably follows, That all
Natural Causes, both can and do actually create, and annihilate, who
promiscuously have their insluences, when duly applied, upon a consecrated
Hoaste, as much as they have upon one that is not consecrated; which plain
experience makes manifest; and to have such a power to create and annihilate,
or to produce something out of nothing, is so peculiar to God alone, as wholly
depending on an Omnipotent Power, that it is absolutely impossible, that it
should be communicated to any pure creature.

The Fourth Proof: There is no necessity, neither from Scripture, nor Reason,
nor from any other Revelation, to admit Transubstantiation. The greatest
necessity that has been hitherto alleged, is drawn from those words of
Christ, Hoc est corpus meum: but from hence no necessity can be derived; for,
they that hold Consubstantiation, and assert, That Christ's Body exists in the
Sacrament, together with the Substance of Bread, these, I say, as rigorously
stand to the literal sense of Christ's words, and as properly verify them, as
they who hold Transubstantiation; for the words of themselves imply no
conversion, or change of one substance into another; but, if taken in a literal
sense, they only signify Christ's Body there present: wherefore there is no
necessity, from these words, to multiply so many Miracles, yea, and
Impossibilities, as are inferred from Transubstantiation, because the literal
sense of the words may be saved without them.

But in reality there is no more necessity of understanding those words of
Christ in a literal sense, then when he says, I am a Door, I am a Vine, etc.

For, since the Scripture is capable of so many Senses and Interpretations,
there is no Reason, nor Necessity, of wresting it to that sense alone, which
brings with it the greatest difficulties of any, especially when by
congruities, and other places of Scripture, it may be connaturally understood
in another sense; and since it was usual with our Great Redeemer, to speak by
Allegories, Parables, by Tropes and Figures, it is most likely he spoke so
here; which is sufficiently intimated by Christ himself, telling his Disciples,
John. 6. verse. 63. that, It is the Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh profits
nothing; the words that I speak unto you, are Spirit and Life; and yet the
words that he then spoke were concerning his Body.

Hence I Conclude. That the words of Christ above rehearsed, can ground no
necessary inference of Transubstantiation.

SECT. III. Of the Possibility of Transubstantiation, as held by the Church of
Rome.
IN order to the determination of this difficulty, I must first premise, That
according to the Rules of Logic, no affirmative proposition, or enunciation,
can be true, except it have a conformity with its Object, that is, the Object
must be in its self, as the act represents it.

All Enunciations consist of two parts, the subject, and the predicate; the
subject is that of which it enunciates; the predicate is that which it
enunciates of the subject: if the proposition be negative, it separates the
predicate from the subject; but if it be affirmative, it intentionally
identisies the one with the other, as in this Proposition: Angelus est
Spiritus; Angelus is the subject, and Spiritus is the predicate; the act being
affirmative, represents these two as identified; and because in the Object they
are identified, therefore the Proposition is true: But if the two extremes were
not identified, yet possibly might be, then the act were in materia
contingenti, that is, contingently false; but if they were not identified, nor
by any power could be identified, then the Proposition were in materia remota,
that is, necessarily false. This being supposed,

The Second Assertion is, That Transubstantiation, as grounded on the literal
sense of this Proposition, Hoc est corpus meum, is impossible, and Chymerical.

That I may be rightly understood in the Proof of this Assertion, I desire it
may be observed, that in the progress of this discourse, I shall always take
the Proposition in question, in a literal sense, according to the natural and
plain signification and meaning of the words, as understood by the Romanists
themselves, who take it literally; wherein I shall first prove the true
signification of the Subject, and then of the Predicate, whence I shall clearly
deduce the truth of this Assertion.

The Subject of this Proposition, Hoc est corpus meum, is that which is
signified by the word Hoc, which I thus prove to be the substance of Bread:
That which was actually present when the word hoc was pronounced, is the Object
or thing signified thereby; But the substance of Bread was the only thing
present, when the word hoc was pronounced; ergo, the substance of Bread is the
Object, or thing signified thereby. The first Proposition, or Major, cannot be
reasonably doubted, for that particle hoc being demonstrative, it indicates and
shows its Object as present; for that which is absent or not existent, cannot,
in any propriety of Speech, be signified by the word hoc, or this: as if the
Author of a Book should hold one of the Copies in his hand, and show it to
those that were present, saying, This is my Composition: Could any one in his
right wits doubt, but that by the word this, he signified the Book which he
held in his hand? wherefore, that which Christ held in his hand, and showed to
his Apostles, when he said, Hoc est corpus meum, must necessarily be the thing
signified by the word hoc.

The Minor, or Second Proposition I prove thus: That which was present when
Christ pronounced the Word hoc, was that which he held in his hand, and showed
to his Apostles, which was only Bread, under its proper Species, for in that
moment, the Body of Christ was not there, under the Species of Bread, as our
Antagonists themselves confess, who constantly affirm, That the Body of Christ
is not rendered present under the Species of Bread, till that instant wherein
the Proposition is completely ended, and the reason is, because till that
instant, there is nothing that signifies the Body of Christ, which is made
present by the force and energia of the signification of that Proposition,
which they say, is elevated to be iustrumental in producing its object, and by
that means concurs to its own verity. Therefore Christ's Body not being present
under the Species of Bread in that instant, it remains, that only the substance
of Bread was then present in Christ's hand, and consequently that alone was the
Subject of that Proposition, whose Predicate was affirmed, or enunciated of it.

The Predicate of the forementioned Proposition, which is, Corpus meum, my
Body, plainly and explicitly signifies the Body of Christ, who pronounces the
Proposition, and says of that Bread, which he then held in his hand, that it
was his Body, and therefore I shall not detain you in proving the Body of
Christ to be the thing signified by the Predicate, especially since our
Opponents grant it, to make good their Tenet.

Having proved the true meaning and signification of the Subject of the
forenamed Proposition to be Bread, and our Adversaries granting the thing
rerepresented by the Predicate to be the Body of Christ, let us now examine the
sense and meaning of the whole act: Christ holding Bread in his hand, says,
This is my Body: that is, this Bread is my Body, as has been proved; and the
Proposition being Affirmative, intentionally affirms Christ's Body to be really
identified with that Bread, signified by the word this, because no Affirmative
Proposition can be true, except the Subject and Predicate thereof be
identified, ex part objecti, for without this identity, the act can never be
conformable to its object, wherein consists the truth of it; whence it comes to
pass, that the Proposition in Question, taken in a literal sense, according to
the true and genuine signification of the words, without Tropes and Figures,
cannot possibly be true; which I prove thus,

An identity between Bread, and the Body of Christ, is impossible and
Chymerical; but the Proposition in Question affirms an identity between Bread
and the Body of Christ; ergo, the Proposition in Question affirms that which is
impossible, and chymerical. The Minor, or Second Proposition, is plain and
evident, by what has been already proved, and granted. The Major or First
Proposition, I shall here prove; all identity between two Substances
specifically and individually distinct, is as impossible, as a hyrco-cervus, or
hypocentaurus, as they call them, that is, a downright Chymera: the reason is,
because it involves a contradiction, whereof one Member formally destroys the
other; for the notion of identity between two objects, consists in this, That
the one has omnia and sola illa quae aliud habet, all the perfections and
predicates of the other, and nothing more; but the substance of Bread has not
all the perfections and predicates of the Body of Christ, for it wants
Organizations, Life, etc. and has a specifical form, which Christ has not;
therefore if these two were identified, the one would have all that the other
has, (which idenity implies) and the one would not have all that the other
has, by reason of their specifical distinction, which is a plain
contradiction, wherein the Affirmative formally destroys the Negative; and,
econtra, the Negative destroys the Affirmative. Again, that Bread, and the Body
of Christ, are individually distinct, and an individuum is that which is
indivisum in se, and divisum a quolibet alio; indistinct in it self, and
distinct from all others; but if those two individuals were identified, each of
them would be distinct from all other, and would not be distinct from all
other, which is a formal contradiction, and therefore all such identities
between two, are impossible, and chymerical, and so I have proved the Major of
the last Syllogism; whence I conclude, that this Proposition, Hoc est corpus
meum, taken literally, affirms that which is impossible, and chymerical; and
therefore cannot ground a real change, or conversion; and so
Transubstantiation, as grounded on this Proposition, is wholly impossible, and
a mere Chymera.

This Proof I efficaciously confirm thus: Either that Particle Hoc signifies
the substance of Bread, or it does not; if the former, then it affirms an
identity between Bread, and the Body of Christ, which is a Chymera, and all the
foregoing discourse stands firm and immovable; If the latter, then with
assured confidence I declare, that there is not the least ground or appearance
of Transubstantiation to be drawn from that so often reiterated Proposition,
Hoc est corpus meum, which I prove evidently.

All Conversions, and Transmutations, whether partial or total, whether
Transubstantiations, or Transaccidentations, essentially import two extremes,
the one is terminus a quo, the other, terminus ad quem, and a Medium that
passes from one to the other, as in our present case the Bread is terminus a
quo, the Body of Christ is terminus ad quem, because the Bread is said to be
Converted, or Transubstantiated into the Body of Christ, so that the Bread is
destroyed, and the Body of Christ succeeds in heu thereof; the Medium is that
collection of Accidents which are proper to Bread, and under which the
substance of Bread existed before it was destroyed, and after, the Body of
Christ, exists under the same collection of Accidents.

Now, if the foresaid Particle Hoc do not signify the substance of Bread, then
it is most manifest, that in the whole proposition, there is not the least
mention made of Bread, but only of the Body of Christ, which the Predicate
expresses; and the Copula, or Union, represents nothing, but only
intentionally unites, or identifies the two extremes; and there is nothing else
in the whole proposition but the Subject, which is the Particle Hoc; therefore
if this do not signify Bread, then there is nothing that signifies it in the
whole proposition.

Whence I infer, That the aforesaid proposition, does no way signify, import,
or make the least mention of Transubstantiation, no, nor does it afford the
least ground to infer it from thence, because it mentions no extremes really
distinct, no terminum a quo, no terminum ad quem, no Change, nor Transmutation,
but only signifies the Body of Christ there, not as terminum ad quem, for this
is correlative to another extreme, which is terminus a quo; but this it not at
all signifies. How then can it administer any the least ground to assert
Transubstantiation? Here I appeal to the Judgment of any indifferent, or
impartial Reader, though but meanly capacitated, how a Proposition can be
capable to administer such an assured belief of Transubstantiation, which
notwithstanding it does not in the least signify.

It ensues therefore, That as the Rabbis in those times did usually speak in
Parables, Tropes and Figures, etc. So our Great Master (who in most things
accommodated himself to the present times) did frequently express himself by
Parables, Emblems, Tropes, and Figures, and particularly in this passage,
whereof the words, as you see, can in no ways bear a literal sense, especially,
because we find so much congruity for it, in other passages of Scripture, where
our Savior calls it Bread, John 6. v. 51. I am the living bread, if any Man
eat of this bread. The bread that I will give you is my flesh: And, How can it
be understood in a litteral sense, that Bread should be the flesh of Christ? v.
58. This is that bread which came down from Heaven, etc. These, and diverse
other sayings of our Redeemer, can in no ways be understood in the rigor of
the Letter, but are to be expounded according to the congruity of the Subject;
for the Bread was a fit Emblem of the Body of Christ, and equivalently the
same, because it was by Christ himself, elevated to be a Sacrament; and, as
Bread feeds the Body of Man, so the Sacramental effect thereof feeds the Soul,
by such Spiritual Graces as incline to Virtue and Piety, and by fencing the
Understanding and the Will against all Suggestions of Vice and Iniquity.

Again, the Body of Christ, by Offering it self in that Bloody Sacrifice upon
the Cross, was the Meritorious Cause of those Graces, and Spiritual Food of our
Souls, and so it was congruously Figured by Bread, which feeds the Body; and
for this reason it was fitly Instituted in this Sacrament, as a Commemoration
of Christ's Passion; and therefore our Lord himself tells us, v. 63. That it is
the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing: And again, The words
that I speak unto you, are spirit and life; and so ought to be understood, in a
Mystical sense, and not according to the sound of the Letter; for by
participating of this Sacrament, we become Members of the Mystical Body of
Christ, and are, as it were, made one with him; so that the Bread being
Instituted as a Sacrament, and thereby adapted to produce all these effects, it
is equivalently the Body of Christ.

SECT. IV. Objections for Transubstantiation Solved.
THe First Objection: In this Proposition, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my
Body: the Subject, which is the word Hoc, has no determinate signification;
for when it is pronounced, it neither represents the Bread, nor the Body of
Christ, but its true meaning is suspended, till the Proposition be completed,
and then whatsoever is the object of the Predicate, must also be the object of
the Subject; so that the Predicate signifying explicitly the Body of Christ,
the Subject, or the Particle Hoc signifies the same implicitly; and so the
Predicate being identify'd with the Subject, the Proposition is true. And in
this manner all definitions are predicated of the things defined; for that
which the definitum signifies implicitly, and obscurely, the definition
declares explicitly and distinctly.

This is a strange kind of new Logic, which will not bear the Test of the
weakest Sophister, nor ever get admittance into any Academy: wherefore my First
Answer is, That in all vocal Propositions, the subject has its certain and
determinate object then, when it is pronounced, whether it expresses the same
clearly, or absolutely, which is not material; for if the predicate could
determine the subject to have the same object with it self, no affirmative
proposition could be false, because the subject, and predicate would be always
identified. But, in case of equivocation, as in this proposition, Canis est
animal latrabile; where the subject canis equally signifies more things then
one; for it indifferently signifies an Animal called a Dog, it signifies the
Dog Star, and it signifies a Dog-Fish: In this case, I say, the indifference of
the word canis must be determined, either by the present circumstances, or by
the predicate; as if one with his finger should show an Animal called a Dog,
and say, hic canis, then the indifference would be determined to that Species
only, and the Equivocation would be taken off. So likewise by the predicate,
Animal latrabile, the indifference of the word canis would be determined to one
kind only; but note, that the predicate can never draw the subject to signify
any thing beyond the extent of its proper signification, for the word canis
must of necessity signify one of the three kinds above specified, and nothing
else. So in the Proposition in Question, Hoc est corpus meum, the word Hoc is
determined of its own nature to signify that which it then indicates as
present, be it what it will; but can never signify a thing absent, or not then
in being; much less can its signification be suspended, when it is once
pronounced, for here is no equivocation; but this has no place in the Mental
Proposition of the Understanding, which regulates the Vocal, because in mente
nulla datur aequivocatio, there can be no equivocation in the understanding, to
whose act the Vocal must correspond. And if we could see the internal Act of
him that speaks (as the Angels do) all equivocation would cease. What is added
of a definition, in relation to the definitum, or thing defined, is of no
force, for the definitum has its determinate signification, before the
definition is enunciated of it; but the definition declares distinctly the
genus and disserentiam of the thing defined, which the definitum involves in
obscurity.

Secondly, I Answer, That insisting upon the Doctrine of this Objection, no
Conversion, nor Transmutation can be any way grounded in that Proposition; for
if the Subject, when pronounced, signify nothing, and when the Proposition is
completely ended, it should signify the same with the Predicate, Where then
could they find the extremes of Conversion? when there is but one and the same
thing signified by both; no Medium expressed, not the least intimation of a
transitus, or passing from one extreme to another. This would ruin their main
design, of Asserting Transubst antiation as a legal inference out of that
Proposition.

But it may be Replied, That by the aforesaid Proposition, the Body of Christ
is asserted as present, which was not so before, for it passes a non esse ad
esse, from not being, to being.

I Answer, That all Conversions require two positive terms, the one a quo, the
other ad quem*but all things that are ceated, or produced, which imply no
Conversion, yet the first instant of their production, is primum quod sic, and
the instant immediately before, is the ultimum quod non, as the Philosophers
term them, which denotes, a passing from not Being, to a state of Being; yet
this imports no Conversion of one thing into another, and is therefore
impertinent to ground Transubstantiation.

The Second Objection proceeds against the notion of identity, as it is
explicated above, Sect. 3. where it is said, That they are identified, whereof
one has all the predicates and perfections of the other, and nothing else.
Whence it would follow, that no affirmative Proposition would be true, but only
definitions, as this, homo est animal cationale. Man is a reasonable sensible
Creature; which is the whole Essence of Man. But the other four predicables, as
genus, differentia, proprium and accidens could have no place, because they
produced but part of the Essence, and so the one has not all the perfections
that the other has; as, Homo est Animal, Homo est Rationalis, Verbum sactum
est caro, etc.

First, I Answer, That this Controversy depends not upon that notion of
identity; for any other proper explication of identity, would be as subservient
to it, as this, and the Arguments would retain their full force; for the
substance of Bread, can in no proper sense, be said to be identified with the
Body of Christ.

Secondly, I Answer, directly to the Objection: And deny, that any prejudice
would hence acrew to the Predicables: for this Proposition, Homo est Animal,
contains two Metaphysical concreats, videlicet, Homo, and Animal; and it must
be thus resolved, Habens Humanitatem est habens Animalitatem, where the rectum
of the praedicate, is identified with the rectum of the subject, for it is the
same habens in both cases. As in Physical concrets; Album est frigidum; which
is thus resolved, Habens albedinem est habens frigiditatem. Where the habens,
which is the rectum of the subject, has omnia and sola illa, which are
contained in the rectum of the Predicate; and so of all others of the like
nature. That Proposition, Verbum factum est caro, is much of the same nature;
for the Subject Verbum, and the Predicate factum caro, both signify in recto,
the Divine Hypostasis, whose perfect identity renders the Proposition true. But
such Propositions, as enunciate a Physical Abstract of its concrete; as this,
Album est frigiditas, etc. such acts, are all false, for want of identity. But
this Discourse is purely Logical, and therefore I leave it.

The Third Objection: If one should present another, with a Box of Jewels,
saying, This I give you: the word this, signifies that which is in the Box, but
expresses it not; so that the Proposition renders this sense, That which is in
this Box I give you: So when our Redeemer said, This is my Body, the word this
only signifies that which was present under that Collection of Species, but
expresses it not: as if he should have said, That which is contained under
these Species is my Body. Where no mention is made of Bread.

I Answer: This is the same that has been already Solved, though Proposed in a
New Dress: which notwithstanding a great Divine of the Society of the Jesuits,
much insists upon, Edw. Worsley in Manuscript.
and renders Christ's Proposition thus, Contentum sub his speciebus est corpus
meum. My Answer is, That whatsoever was contained under the Species of Bread
then present, when the word Hoc was pronounced, was the true Object thereof;
but nothing but the substance of Bread, was then contained under the Species of
Bread, then present; ergo, nothing but the substance of Bread was the true
Object thereof. For in order to the assigning the true Object to that Particle
Hoc, it is not pertinent to examine, whether that Object be explicitly and
distinctly, or only implicitly and obscurely signified.

The Fourth Objection: There are other concurring testimonies of our Savior in
Scripture, besides that already mentioned, which sufficiently prove
Transubstantiation; as, The Bread that I will give you is my flesh; Except you
cate the flesh of the Son of Man, etc. all which signify the Flesh of Christ
to be given in the Sacrament, the Bread being destroyed.

I Answer. The first Text signifies, in a literal sense, that Bread is the
Flesh of Christ, which is already proved impossible; the second makes no
mention of the Bread, but only of the Flesh of Christ, which concerns the Real
Presence, but not Transubstantiation; which is the only question now in hand.

And to avoid unnecessary Repetitions, I Aver, That no one Text of Scripture
does declare any Conversision, or Commutation of the Bread into the Body of
Christ; which is the main thing to be proved, in order to Transubstantiation,
for this cannot subsist without such a Conversion.

The Fifth Objection: The Divine Power of Christ has converted Water into
Wine; has fed Five Thousand with five Loaves and two Fishes: where he either
Converted the Air into Bread and Fish, or else replicated the Loaves and
Fishes, and so put them in several places at once.

And by the Power of God's Omnipotence, Aaron's Rod was turned into a Serpent:
Why then should we refuse our Assent to his turning Bread into his Body?

The Answer: We do not at all Question the Power of the Omnipotent, who can
work greater Wonders then these; nay, the Creation of this Globe of the
Universe, which he produced out of nothing, was a greater Proof of God's
Omnipotence; but, we deny the thing of Fact; that Christ has actually changed
Bread into his Body; which we have no ground to Believe; and as our Opponents
defend it, we conceive it impossible.

Another Objection may be taken from the Authority of the Fathers; whereof some
seem to affirm, others to deny. But their Opinions make no Articles of Faith;
and though we reverence their Authority, yet we deem it not expedient, in this
place, to scan the drift of their respective sayings.

Only this in General: Their usual expressions of this Sacrament, are, That it
contains the Symbol, the Figure, the Type, the Antitype, the Resemblance, the
Sign, the Image of the Body and Blood of Christ; which certainly must stand in
opposition with the Real Presence of the thing it self.

Dispute V. Of the Real Presence.
The Preface.
HAving Treated of Transubstantiation, which imports a real Conversion of the
substance of Bread and Wine, into the Body and Blood of Christ, I now come to
Institute a Discourse of the Real Presence. For though a Conversion of that
nature, by force of the words of Consecration, which should verify the same
words, in a literal sense, be wholly impossible, as has been proved; yet I do
not deny, but that in the Treasury of Gods Omnipotency, there is contained a
Power to Constitute the Body of Christ Really Present in the Sacrament,
praescinding from the manner how it is done; which if it be by a Conversion, it
would invert the Order of Nature in a high degree, and multiply a prodigious
number of Miracles, without necessity. But in this Discourse I shall only
inquire into the Matter of Fact; whether the Body of Christ be Really Present
in the Eucharist, or not, and not at all examine the manner, how it is there,
and so proceed equally againct. Transubstantiation, Consubstantiation, and
Impanation. For I take Companation to be the same with Consubstantiation. And
by the Real Presence, I understand, a Real, Actual, and Local Existence,
whereby the Body of Christ is locally present, not only in Heaven, but also in
the Eucharist, the same time, as the Church of Rome Teaches; waving any other
peculiar presence besides this, that the Body of Christ may have in this
Sacrament: for my present design, is only to examine the truth of that
Assertion, which affirms the Body of Christ, to be Properly, Really,
Physically, and Locally Present in the Eucharist, by a Homogeneal ubi with the
Consecrated Host, whether this ubi be Circumscriptive, or Definitive.

SECT. I. The Church of Rome's Definitions concerning the Real Presence.
IN these later Centuries from Christ, various Questions, and Difficulties have
been agitated, concerning the Eucharist, wherein both contending parts might
prudently have spared themselves the trouble, of raising such contests, no way
beneficial to a Christian Life, nor necessary to Salvation.

As First, Whether the same Body of Christ, which is in Heaven, be Truly and
Really, or only Virtually, and Figuratively, present in the Sacrament? What
need so Hot a Debate of this Question, to perplex the Minds of the Well-meaning
Vulgar? who might as soon obtain Heaven, by their Implicit Faith, as after so
long a protracted Contention, with such Heat and Animosity, on both sides, in
order to the decision of this Question; which notwithstanding, neither is, nor
ever will be determined, so as both Parties will Acquiesce.

For, supposing the Body of Christ, to be only Virtually, and Figuratively
present; yet, by its being there in Virtute, there are as many degrees of
Grace, both Habitual, and Actual, produced in the Soul of the Faithful, and
Worthy Receiver, as if it were Really, and Corporally present: there are the
same Spiritual Benefits, and Emoluments, to advance its progress in Virtue, and
its tendency toward Eternity, in both cases.

For, as in Baptism, the Lotion, which is duly applied by the Baptizer,
according to Christ's Institution, Sanctifies the Soul of the Baptized, expels
Original Sin, and gives him a Right to the Inheritance of Glory; and yet the
remote Matter still remains a mere Natural Element of Water, as it was before:
and the Immediate Matter, which is the Application of that Water to the
Baptized, is of it self a pure Natural Action: though by Virtue of Christ's
Institution, these Natural things acquire a Power, to produce such Supernatural
effects, as pure Nature cannot pretend to. So likewise in the Eucharist, the
Natural substances of Bread and Wine, have the same capacity, of being elevated
to a Sacrament, by Christ's Ordination, and consequently of being instrumental,
to produce those Spiritual effects, which, by Divine Institution, are annexed
to the due receiving of this Sacrament, as well as the Natural Element of
Water; for whether the Body of Christ be really present or not, yet certain it
is, that he is there by his Virtue, by his Divinity, and by his Omnipotency,
and will as assuredly confer upon the worthy Receiver, those Spiritual Gifts,
which he has promised, as if he were in verity, and reality present by his
Body.

Notwithstanding, the Church of Rome tenaciously asserts the Real Presence of
Christ's Body in this Sacrament, and has raised it to an Article of Divine
Faith, Fulminating an Anathema against all those who shall deny it. So the
Council of Trent; Si quis negaverit, Trident. Sess. 1.3. Can. 1.
in Sanctissimae Eucharistiae Sacramento, contineri vere, realiter, and
substantialiter, corpus and sanguinem, una cum anima, and Divinitate Domini
Nostri Jesu Christi, ac proinde totum Christum; sed dixerit tantummodo esse in
co, ut in signo, vel sigura, aut virtute; Anathema sit. This definition is
consonant to the Canons and Decrees of other Councils, and diverse Texts of the
canon Law. As Council Constant. 2. Lateran. Con. etc. C. Panis. de consecrat. D.
2. C. Cum Marthae de celebrat. Miss. etc. So that they have made it an Article
of Faith, and thrown their Curse upon all that shall deny it; and yet many
Thousands there are, among the ignorant Vulgar, of both Sexes, who, after this
definition, cannot give an account of the difference, between the Real,
Virtual, and Figurative being of Christ's Body in this Sacrament, and so must
still have recourse to their Implicit Faith, as much as if there were no such
definition. And how much this Belief of the Real Presence, conduces to
Salvation, I leave to the judgment of the impartial Reader; supposing what has
been already said.

But this is not all; for out of this decision of their Councils, there issues
another Quaery; for supposing the Real Presence of Christ's Body in the
Eucharist, a Natural doubt arises. What is become of the substance of Bread
that was there before? Here Authors are divided, into three different Classes;
some place the Body of Christ here by Transubstantiation, others by
Consubstantiation, others by Impanation. The first Teach, that the substancee
of Bread, as well Matter as Form, is destroyed, by a Natural Exigence of
Christ's Body being placed there, because two complete Corporeal Substances,
cannot be naturally, in the same place, the same time. The two last Opinions
Teach, That the substance of Bread remains together with Christ's Body, and
differ only in this, That they who hold Consubstantiation, assert the Body of
Christ to be with the substance of the Bread; whereas the Authors of Impanation
Teach, The Body of Christ to be contained in this Sacrament invisibly, because
the substance of bread, with its proper accidents, as it were, covers and
veiles it so, as to render it incapable of being perceived by any Corporeal
Sense. So that the body of Christ being Miraculously Superinduc't, is imbibed
within the substance of the bread, and penetrated with it, and therefore not
pervious to Sensation.

In this variety of Opinions, Who shall be the Umpire? Certainly none more
accommodated for this Function, then the great Oracle of the Universe. The
Church of Rome, whose grand Prerogative of Infallibility, will take off all
ambiguity of the truth of her decisions. Thus then speaks the Council of Trent.
Quoniam autem Christus Redemptor noster, corpus suum, id quod sub specie panis
offerebat, vere esse dixit; ideo persuasum semper in Ecclesia Dei fuit, idque
nunc denuo sancta haec Synodus declarat, per consecrationem panis and vini,
conversionem fieri totius substantiae panis, in substantiam corporis Christi
Domini nostri, and totius substantiae vini in substantiam sanguinis ejus quae
conversio convenienter and proprie (...) Sancta Catholica Ecclesia,
Transubstantiatio est appellata. The same is contained in other Councils and
Texts of the Common Law, as Council Romans 6. Council Lateran. 2. In cap. Qui
manducant de consecrat. did. 2. cap. Iteratur. Cap. semel Christus. cap.
singulis, with other Texts above cited for the Real Presence.

And this definition of the Council, is backed by a severe Canon, able to strike
terror into the disbelievers. The Canon runs thus, Si quis dixerit in
Sacrosancto Eucharistiae Sacramento remanere substantiam panis and vim una cum
corpore and sanguine Domini Nostri Jesu Christi, negaveritque mirabilem illam,
and singularem conversionem totius substantiae panis in corpus, and totius
substantiae vini, in sanguinem, manentibus duntaxit speciebus panis and vini;
quam quidem conversionem Catholica Ecclesia optissime Transubstantiationem
appellat; Anathema sit: Here is a heavy Curse fulminated against all those that
shall deny any part of this Canon, which not only condemns the two former
Opinions, but is likewise extended to all these that deny the Real Presence.
And to make it the more plausible, the ^ens of their best Divines are
industriously employed, to work their Adherents, and Proselites, into the
Belief of it. So Valerius Reginaldus in part fori p^^ni. L. 29. n. 36. Vasque
3 Part. To. 3. D. 180 nu. 108. and alibi. Ledasn. tra^^. de Euch. C. 6. Council.
2.3. and passim alii. For is it hereby made an Article of Divine Faith, and all
are enjoined to believe it as such, under the most rigorous Commination of
being Condemned to the Eternal Flames of Hell Fire, if they call in question
this Decree, and Canon of the Council, or any part thereof.

SECT. II. Other Subtilties arising from the former Decisions not fully
determined.
OTher Difficulties of like nature are frequently discussed by their Divines,
but not yet determined by the Church; as First, By what means the Body of
Christ is made Corporeally present in the Eucharist? Whether by a new
production, really distinct from that which conserves his Sacred Body in
Heaven; or else by a new ubication, which they call adduction? if the first,
then the Body and Soul of Christ must be created anew, and the Natural and
Hypostatical Unions must terminate new eductive actions, really distinct from
those whereby they exist in Heaven. I remember to have Read a Book Written by
one Tho. Barton, alias Anderton, an English Jesuit, wherein he earnestly
contends to establish this Opinion; but I also heard others of the same Order,
to object against him, That according to his Opinion, the Divine Word, would be
as often Incarnate again, as there should be Hosts Consecrated; for every
Consecration argues a new Incarnation because, though the Hypostatical Union be
still the same, yet the action which produces it, is wholly new. So that the
common Opinion of their Divines, is, That all the parts of Christ in the
Eucharist acquire only new ubies, or ubications, whereby the Body, the Soul,
etc. together with their respective actions (the very same that are in Heaven)
are rendered present in the Sacrament, and without leaving their Station in
Heaven, they do by every Consecration acquire a new place, and whereas they
existed but in one place before, they now exist in two places at the same time.

Hence arises a Second Difficulty relating to the nature of this ubi, whereby
the Body of Christ is existent under the Species of bread; and the Question is,
Whether it be ubi circumscriptivum, or ubi definitivum? that is, Whether the
body of Christ exist in the Eucharist, as it does in Heaven, having all its
parts duly ordered and collocated in their distinct stations, with their
natural distances, conjunctions, and contiguities to each other, as human
bodies are here framed, so as that the Hand imployes one part of the space, the
Foot another part, the Head another, etc. or else whether the whole body be in
the whole space of the Host, and the same whole body in every distinct part and
particle of the Host, as a reasonable Soul is wholly in every part of a Human
body: if so, then the Body of Christ, in the Sacrament, has a definitive
ubication, whereby all its parts are penetrated, and so involved and implicated
within each other, that an Angel cannot cull out a particle of the Host, how
small soever it be, and that no sense can perceive it, but it contains all
Christ. And this Opinion they incline to.

A Third Question occurreth: How long the Body of Christ, together with the
Soul, the Divinity, etc. remain in the Consecrated Host? There are various
Answers to this Question; but the common gives this Rule, That as long as the
natural Species of bread remains in the Host, so long, and no longer the Body
of Christ is there present; so that what alteration soever is made in the Host,
by natural causes, if the disposition suffer not so much change, as would
render it incapable to sustain the substantial form of bread, so long the Body
of Christ remains there; but when by contrary Agents, the last disposition of
the form of bread is expelled, then the Body of Christ withdraws, and
relinquisheth its ubi, not by a local motion, but by a mere destruction of that
ubication, without acquiring any new one, but is reduced to his former
ubication, without passing from Earth to Heaven. And though before the
destruction of the accidents of bread, the Body of Christ was existent in
Heaven, and here on Earth, the same time, yet after that destruction, it exists
only in Heaven, and yet never tended, by a local and successive motion, from
Earth toward Heaven; nor ever penetrated, the Air, nor the Heavens, to obtain
his place in the Emperial Heaven, because it had that place before. This is the
sum of their Doctrine.

These Three Difficulties, though much agitated by their Divines, yet are not
fully determined by their Church. Only the Council of Trent touches upon the
Second, and Third, but leaves the First to the litigation of the Schoolmen. Of
the Second, Trid. Con. Sess. 23. Can. 3.
it says, Si quis negaverit in venerabili Sacramento Eucharistiae sub
unaquaque specie and sub singulis cujusque speciei partibus, separatione facta,
totum Christum contineri, Anathema sit. If any one shall deny in the venerable
Sacrament of the Eucharist, all Christ to be contained under each Kind, and
under every part of each Kind, after Separation, let him be Accursed. The same
is declared, Sess. 23. Cap. 3. and Sess. 21. Cap. 3. which is conformable to
the Council of Florence, In Decreto Eugenti ad Armenios; yet none of these
places define the manner how Christ's Body exists in this Sacrament, whether
definitively, or Circumspectively, but only assert all Christ to be in each
part.

As to the Third, The Council of Trent decrees the Body of Christ to be
present, immediately after Consecration, but resolves nothing, how long it
continues there; for thus says the Council, Trid. Sess. 33. Can. 4.
Si quis dixerit peracta consecratione in admirabili Eucharistiae Sacramento,
non esse corpus, and sanguinem Domini Nostri Jesus Christi; sed tantum in usu,
dum sumitur, non autem ante, vel post, and in hostiis, seu particulis
consecratis, quae post Communionem reservantur, vel supersunt, non remanere
verum corpus Domini, Anathema sit. If any one shall say, That after
Consecration, in the Admirable Sacrament of the Eucharist, the Body and Blood
of our Lord Jesus Christ is not there, but only in practice, when it is
received, yet not before, nor after; and that in the Hosts, or Particles, that
are Consecrated, which after Communion are reserved, or left, the true Body of
Christ does not remain, let him be Accursed. This declares when the Body of
Christ begins to be present in the Sacrament, but determines nothing, how long
it remains there. But since there is no more necessity of defining the Real
Presence, Transubstantiation, etc. then of determining those difficulties here
proposed; we may groundedly expect in the next general Council a full decision
of these nice Questions, by new Canons, and Decrees, and new Articles of Faith,
to be framed for the resolution of these and the like doubts.

SECT. III. The Inutility of Multiplying Definitions of this nature.
ANd now, if some impartial, and unbyassed Judge, were to deliver his Opinion
of these, and the like proceedings, of the Church of Rome, I would propose to
his Consideration,

First, What Grounds, or Footsteps can be found in Scripture; in the Practice,
or Doctrine of Christ, or his Apostles, or in all the Transactions of
Antiquity, or the Primitive Church, for so Rigorous, and Comminatorious
decision of such subtle and nice Points, under so great a Penalty? and I am
sure none can be found.

Secondly, Cast a glance upon the effects of these new-framed Articles of
Faith. What Benefit, or Emolument, does accrue to Christianity by them? Do the
Graces of Christ, flow from the Sacraments, more plentifully, by virtue of
those Definitions then they did before? This cannot be alleged; for the measure
of Grace, was taxed and determined by Christ, in his Original Institution, with
reference to the disposition of the receiver. Do they conduce to the better
institution of a Christian Life? Do the Faithful the more adhere to the due
observance of Gods Law? Do they promote Virtue and Good Life? Do they check the
illegal progress of the Licentious? Do they cry down Vice, and Wickedness? Do
they add any new Motives to abandon the Old Man, and shun Sensuality? Do they
excite to the regulating our Actions, by the Conduct of a just Synderesis,
instructed with true Reason, and to reject the suggestion of sense? not the
least of these products do issue from them.

Nay, on the contrary, Do they not add more load to the Consciences of the
Faithful? who are bound to Believe what they comprehend not. Do they not
enthrall and enslave their Souls to be liable to the Belief of such a long
Catalogue of nicities, or else be damned? What a dreadful thing it is, to
implicate Men's Minds, and Consciences into such an unextricable labyrinth of
solicitude, anxiety, and confusion, when they shall consider, that of so many
definitions, if they disbelieve but one, though they believe all the rest;
nothing remains for them, but the eternal slames of Hell Fire? And yet they are
wholly ignorant what it is they ought to believe, for you were as good endeavor
to wash a Blackamore white, as to go about to make the common vulgar of both
Sexes capable of the true meaning of those points, which are so remote from
sense.

And, How can they exercise themselves in Virtue, while such anxious scruples,
and confusion, clouds their understanding, and casts a damp upon all their
vital faculties? Nay, this has an immediate tendency to despair, for when they
consider themselves incapable of complying with such a Mass of Implex Articles
of Faith, and considering their own imbecility, they will be apt to conceive,
that they are lost, and that Eternity of Bliss is out of their reach; for, qui
erraverit in uno factus est omnium reus: he that errs in one, is made guilty of
all; and hence they connaturally fall into desperation.

Besides, What more hinders the Propagation of the Gospel, then such a
multiplicity of Tenets, pretended necessary to Salvation, and yet so full of
arduity, and so repugnant to the common course of Nature, which are apt to
startle the most credulous? Who would embrace Christianity, if such a bundle of
incredible Mysteries were heartily proposed to them, as all necessary to
Salvation? which are so destructive of the Laws of Nature; and no Proofs of
any of them, but only because the Church of Rome has defined them. Few or none
would deny their Reason, and yield a blind conformity to such, and so many
irregular Pardons, as they ought to believe.

These, and many other such inconveniences, are the products of multiplying so
many new Articles of Faith, these are the fatal consequences that thence ensue.
And if you consult your Reason, to suggest to you, what benefit is hence
expected, or what Motives might induce them, to impose so hard a task upon the
Believers: I know none, but a strong propension in the Authors, to carry all
things on, with a strong hand, to make their Empire known, and to Lord it over
the Flock of Christ.

But it may be Objected, That the Illiterate shall not need to perplex
themselves, for they have a sure refuge to their Implicit Faith, by believing
what the Church believes.

First, I Answer, That this is a very deordinate and irregular point of
Doctrine, to Teach them to regulate their Implicit Faith by the Belief of the
Church of Rome; as if this were a surer Rule to walk by, then the Doctrine, the
Practice, the Ordination, and Institution of Christ himself. How hot does this
smell of Blasphemy? to put ignorant Souls upon such a preposterous way of
Faith, as to prefer the Belief of the Church of Rome, before the Institution of
Christ, whereby the Faith of the Church ought to be originally regulated.

Secondly, I Answer, If any Implicit Faith be sufficient after the definition,
then the explicit declaration of so many Articles avails nothing; for the
very same Implicit Faith, that was sufficient before the definition, is
sufficient after; then the Councils labor in vain, or rather not in vain; for
though their numerous definitions, produce no good effect, yet they have an
ample power in producing bad effects, as has been declared. And thus far I go
with them, that in matters of Divine Faith, an implicit in most cases, is
sufficient to Salvation, provided it have a reference to that never erring Rule
of Christ's Doctrine and Institution; and, What Romanist dares deny this? For,
I considently assert, That an Implicit Faith, regulated by the belief of the
Church of Rome, is not sufficient to Salvation; for this Church has erred, and
may err again, as is in this Treatise sufficiently declared, and proved.

But to show yet more groundedly, That the multiplying of so many Articles of
Faith, are wholly useless, and pernicious; let any rational person consider,
what strange wonders the Supreme Creator of all things has wrought, to bring
about this great Work of Man's Redemption. The Divine Word took Humane Nature
upon him, God became Man, and, a^ Man, suffered great indignities, and
opposition, and at last suffered death upon a Cross. What was all this for but
in order to the Redemption o^ Mankind. And after all this, he settled his
Church, Instituted Sacraments and Ordained what he deemed necessary, to
accomplish his final end. I^ it then credible, that having accomplished all
other means necessary to this end, he should at last be deficient in the
application of those means which would render them all useless Had he no care
of his Church, no^ Providence for it, in future Ages?

What need is there then of so many new Articles of Faith? Christ had (...)
perfect prospect, and a full comprehension of his Church, and all circumstances
belonging to it, for all particular times, and ages; and wanted n^ power to
provide for it in the bes^ manner; How then is it possible, tha^ any person,
endued with Reason, can conceive, that this Omniscient, Omnipotent, and
Infinitely Wise, and Provident God, should be deficient, in a work of this
Nature? that he should leave this great work of our Redemption imperfect, that
he should fail in the complete accomplishment of his Masterpiece? especially
considering, that he could with ease provide tunc pro nunc, he could then have
provided for all future events, whenever they should happen.

And it is as impossible, that he should leave any defects in a design of so
high a nature, to be corrected, or supplied by mere Men, that carry their human
frailty and imperfections about them; for by this means, such Men would be
concauses in the work of our Redemption; and yet Christianity never yet
acknowledged any Redeemer but one.

Wherefore, it is a high presumption to attempt to complete, or perfect
Christ's work, or to supply the defects, which we falsely suppose he has left
in it. Nothing is more repugnant to Reason, and nothing more derogates from the
infinite Attributes, and high Prerogatives of our Great Redeemer.

Whence I conclude with this Dilemma: Either Christ Instituted all things
necessary to Salvation, or he did not. If not, What then became of all the
Primitive Christians, for Eight Hundred years together after Christ? for, in
their time, none of those new Doctrines, which are now defined, were yet
started.

Would Christ permit so many Millions, that were all Members of his Church, to
perish, for want of necessary means to Salvation? This would reflect upon the
Author of Life, and make him a Deluder.

They must therefore acknowledge, That Christ did Institute in his Church all
things necessary to Salvation. If so, Then what necessity is there of so many
new definitions? which only serve to pester and incumber Men's Minds; because,
forsooth, Eternal Damnation must be the reward of them, that deny any one of
them, yea, or so much as doubt of the Truth of any them.

SECT. IV. The Objections Solved.
THe First Objection: According to the Principles of this Discourse, all
Councils would be useless, or rather pernicious; for, the main design of
Councils is, to decide such doubts, as are promiscuously discussed among the
multitude, of whom (without the Authority of a Council) none have power to give
a final determination; and therefore Councils have been always in use: there
was a Council in the Apostles time; there were several Councils in the
Primitive Church. So that this Doctrine wholly swerves from Reason and
Antiquity.

The First Answer: I am no Enemy of Councils, but on the contrary, conceive
them of great use, and sometimes necessary for the right Administration of the
Church; for certainly many great and good effects depend upon them, when they
take their measures right, and truly conceive how far the limits of their power
and authority extend. But if Councils transgress their bounds, and submit
Christ's Actions to their scrutiny, and therein presume to add or diminish, to
alter or change, to correct or amend, any of Christ's Ordinances or
Institutions, and so entrench upon jus Divinum, which is above their sphere;
and in effect to cry out, in coelum conscendam, similis ero Altissimo: this is
a pernicious abuse of their authority; wherefore,

The Second Answer is; That when Virtue begins to decline, and Vice to abound;
when the Clergy grows dissolute, and the Laity stubborn and refractory against
their Spiritual Leaders, and Pastors; when the Doctrine and Practice of Christ,
and the Primitive Christians, is not fully upheld in its Original Purity, but
begins to be offuscated, and to lose its efficacy, by Innovations, and in many
other cases of like nature, then are Councils both profitable and necessary, as
a Physician is to a sick Patient; then ought they, by their opportune Remedies,
to salve the Sores, to make up the breaches, to reform the abuses, and to
redintegrate the whole body of the Church, and purge the Wheat, from the
Cockle, and Darnel, which by the depraved will of Man, and the suggestion of
Satan, began to take root.

But if Councils should spend their endeavors, in debating certain abstruse,
and hidden Mysteries, and frame Articles of Divine Faith upon them, without any
warrant in Scripture, or Antiquity; nay, against the Original Belief of the
Church; and by their annexed Anathema's drive Men to confusion, and
desperation, and yet reap no benefit thereby; (for it neither promotes Virtue,
nor curbs Vice, nor any way conduces to the institution of a Moral and
Christian Life; but on the contrary it puts Men's Consciences upon the Rack, it
disturbs the peace and quiet of their Minds, it hinders their due application
to Virtue and Morality, it perplexes their Souls with Scruples, and disposes
them to despair. In this case, I appeal to the Judgment of the whole World,
Whether the multiplying of such decisions, be not fruitless and pernicious?

To what is added in the Objection, I grant, that Councils have been always in
use, not to decide such speculative points of Divinity, and reduce them to
Articles of Faith, but to solve practical doubts, which may arise among the
vulgar, concerning their practice, and manners, etc. which may be instrumental
to facilitate their progress toward Heaven; but as for Divine Faith, it ought
to be said to them as St. Paul said to the Galatians, That if an Angel should
come from Heaven, and Teach them otherwise then they had been Taught, by Christ
and his Apostles, they ought not to believe him, but let him be Accursed, says
the Apostle, Gal. 1.8, 9.

The Second Objection: We are Taught by experience, that several Heresiarchs
have often attempted to make a breach in the Church, by their new Heterodox
Doctrine; and the most efficacious remedy in the Church to prevent such
inconveniences, is to Anathematize the Authors, and condemn their Errors, as
Heretical, which has been always practiced in the Church with good success,
for the extirpating of Heresy, and establishing Orthodox Doctrine.

To this Objection I Answer, First, That when the Definitions of Councils are
grounded in Scripture, in the Doctrine and Practice of Christ, and his
Apostles, or otherwise by true Revelations made manifest, to be of Divine
Authority, such definitions are warrantable, and useful to extinguish Heresy;
but nothing of all this will quadrate with the forecited definitions, of the
Church of Rome; which are no way proved by Authority, nor Reason; nay, rather
they are repugnant to both, yet are obtruded to the Credulous Believers, under
a Curse, to be by them received, by a blind assent, without examining the truth
of them.

Secondly, I Answer, That the most apposite and efficacious way to suppress
Heresy, is to evince the Error of it, by solid and convincing Arguments, drawn
from Divine Authority, or evident Principles of Reason.

These are the Arms with which the Ancient Fathers waged War against the
respective Heresies of their times: So St. Ambrose with his Preaching, and
solid Principles, drew the great St. Augustine from his Heresy, to embrace the
Orthodox Doctrine of Christianity; and the same Augustine being fully convinced
thereof, with no less industry and zeal, then learning, efficaciously refelled
the Errors of the Manichaeans, the Pellagians, the Massilienses, the Donatists,
etc. he alleged not the Authority of Councils, but convinced the Broachers, and
Abetters of those Errors, with solid Arguments, whereby he detected the Fallacy
of their irregular Tenets: And so by Divine Authority, and strength of Reason,
refelled their illegal Assertions.

The Reason of this proceeding is manifest; for the first Authors of such
Erroneous Doctrines, and they who greedily give their assent to them, make it
their business to maintain them against all opposition, and glory in their
undertakings, hugging their Errors, as the happy products of their own
understanding, whence they so tenaciously adhere to them, that no Curse, nor
Censure, can make any impression upon them.

If you cite the Definitions of Councils against them, they allege their
Reasons against you, and Challenge you to Solve them.

How earnestly did Nestorius insist, upon the Force of his Argument, to prove
two Persons in Christ? And the whole stress of his Proof he reduced to this
one Sillogisme:

Omnis Natura Rationalis Completa est Persona; sed in Christo sunt duae
Rationales Naturae completae; ergo duae Personae.

In English thus:

All Complete Rational Natures are Persons; but, in Christ, there are two
complete Rational Natures; ergo, in Christ there are two Persons.

With this Argument Nestorius perplexed the Fathers, whereof none durst deny
either of the Premises, and yet the Conclusion was Erroneous. And certainly
Nestorius would have slighted any definition of a Council, against his
Assertion, without solving his Argument.

Wherefore, the most efficacious way to Refute an Heretic, is to Instruct his
Reason, and Convince his Judgment, that his Principles are Erroneous; to this
end Arguments are to be drawn from Scripture and Divine Authority, seconded by
clear and evident Reason, and from these two Premises you may infer a
conclusion contradictory to the Error.

And hereby you increase the Authors Adhesion to his Error: for there are none
so obstinate as to deny that which is established by known Divine Authority, and
Evident Reason.

SECT. V. When, and from whom this Doctrine of the Real Presence took its first
rise?
ALl Dogmatical Assertions, which are pretended to be matters of Divine Faith,
if they be so, its rigorously necessary that they be backed by Divine Authority,
and therefore must be traced immediately from Christ himself; or else attested
by those Hagyographers, the old Prophets, Apostles, etc. who were immediately
inspired by the Holy Ghost, and so could not err; by whose Mediation it must
ultimate be resolved into Divine Authority.

The reason hereof is, because all acts of Divine Faith consist essentially of
two parts; the Material and the Formal Object; the Material Object is the thing
believed: the Formal Object, is dictio Dei, Gods saying it, which is the only
motive that induces us to believe it, as Divine Faith. And herein Faith
differs from Science, and Opinion, because Science, though invested with
certainty, yet derives it from the evidence of Human Reason, which is inductive
to the assent. Opinion has neither certainty, nor evidence, but a mere
probability, grounded on a weak foundation of Reason, cum formidine partis
oppositae; it is always accompanied with an ambiguity, either formal, or
virtual, that the contrary may be true: But Faith, if it be Divine, relyes upon
Divine Authority; if Human, on Human Authority. For instance; we believe that
the Divine Word is Incarnate, because God has assured it; this is an act of
Divine Faith, whose material Object, is the Incarnation of the Divine Word. The
formal Object, is Gods asserting of it.

Whence it ensues, that though Faith have a greater certainty then Science, yet
it is destitute of Evidence, as well in attestato, as in attestante, that is,
can neither demonstrate by Human Reason, the Revelation it self, nor the
Mystery revealed.

We all agree, that those words, Hoc est corpus menm, were spoken by Christ
himself: But we differ in giving the true sense and meaning of them. The surest
Rule that may guide us herein, is to consult the Belief of the Primitive
Church, they certainly received from the Apostles the true Interpretation of
them. For it would derogate from Christ's goodness, and providence, to imprint
an erroneous belief, upon the first Professors of Christianity. What then
remains? but that we consult Antiquity, and inquire what their belief was of
this Mystery. And when this appears, it would be a vain attempt of any one,
after a long continued series of Centuries, to start a new Interpretation of
those words, for that must needs be an Erroneous Innovation, and Adulterated
Doctrine, as repugnant to the general belief of all Christians from Christ's
time.

I should swerve from my intended brevity, should I here cite the several Texts
of the ancient Fathers, and Doctors of the Church, in opposition to the Real
Presence; for, speaking of the Eucharist, they frequently call it the Sacrement
of the Body and Blood of Christ; and St. Augustine tells us, Aug. de Civit. Dei
L. 10. C. 5.
That a Sacrament signifies a Sacred Sign, which cannot be the thing signified.
They also call it the Resemblance, the Similitude, the Type, the Antitype; the
Symbol, the Sign, the Image, the Figure of the Body and Blood of Christ, and
consequently not the Body it self.

Consonant to these expressions of the Fathers, was the Universal Belief of the
Church, none positively affirming for above 800 years after Christ, that the
Body of our Savior was really contained in the Sacrament; Though in the year
637, A Monk of Mount Sinai, one Anastasius, among other Contemplations which he
had in his Cell, would needs disapprove of the former way of speaking, which
had been ever used till his time, and so rejected the expression of Figure, and
Antitype; but used no attempt to settle any point of Doctrine, repugnant to the
belief of Antiquity.

Yet, what Anastasius began, by way of altering the Terms, another Monk of
Corbie in France, one Paschasius Ratbert, completing by his Doctrine, Taught,
That the Body and Blood of Christ, were truly and really present in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, which he declares in his Treatise of the Body and
Blood of our Savior, which he Composed in the Ninth Century after Christ, in
the year 818. And for this we have Bellarmines own Testimony, Bellarm. de
Script. Eccles.
who acknowledges, that Paschasius was the first Author that ever Wrote a
serious Treatise of the Truth of the Body and Blood of our Savior in the
Eucharist.

This Doctrine being then new, (never any before attempting to assert it by any
set Treatise) it found great opposition; so that most of the Learnedest Men in
those times, employed their endeavors, severally, to oppose it, and cry it
down; which Paschasius himself acknowledges; for being moved by his intimate
Friend Frudegard, Paschasias Epist ad Frudegard. Page 623.
about this Doctrine; he Answers him; You question me about a difficulty,
whereof many People do doubt (to wit, of the Real Presence) so in his Letter to
Frudegard. And in his Commentary upon the 26th of St. Mark, Idem. in 26 Matthew.
L. 12. page 1094.
he says, I have Treated of these Mysteries more amply and expressly, because I
have been informed that I have been Censured by many; as if in the Book which I
Wrote of the Sacrament, and Published, I had attributed to the words of Christ,
more then the truth of the words would permit.

This being a thing so well known in History, I shall not here enlarge upon it;
but only reflect upon the Doctrine of one of our own Nation, which is venerable Bede, Bid in Luc. C. 22. Idem in Ps. 3. Idem hom. de Sanc. in Epiph. Idem. in
Ps. 133. To. 8. Idem de Tahern. L. 2. C. 2. and asibi.
who, in several places of his Works, declares his Opinion against the Real
Presence; for he tells us, That our Savior has given us the Sacrament of his
Body and Blood in the Figure of Bread and Wine. And that our Savior gave to
his Disciples, in the Last Supper, the Figure of his Body and Blood. That the
Creatures of Bread and Wine pass into the Sacrament of his Body and Blood, by
the ineffable Sactification of the Holy Ghost. That our Savior changed the
Sacrifices of the Legalia into the Sacrifice of Bread and Wine. And that in
lieu of celebrating the Passion of our Savior in the Flesh and the Blood of
Victims, as the Ancients did, we celebrate it in the Oblation of Bread and Wine.

These, and the like expressions, (which are frequent in the Works of this
Author) do manifestly declare, that in those times, none held the Real
Presence, but all believed the Eucharist to be a Figure, or a Sacrament, (that
is, a Sign) of the Body and Blood of Christ.

Hence there arose in the Church a high debate about this new Doctrine;
Paschasius got some Abetters of his Opinion; but the greatest number, and the
most considerable, vehemently opposed it, as a Novelty; others stood
indifferent, expecting the issue; others again held a third Opinion, which, in
substance, was Consubstantiation; for they Asserted, The Body of Christ in the
Eucharist, to be united to the substance of Bread. The contest about these
several Opinions grew fervent, some adhering to the one part, others to the
other: and this mutual Contest lasted all the Ninth Century. Whereupon that
Great Emperor Charles, Surnamed the Balde, who was then Emperor of Germany, and
King of France, finding his Subjects dissected into opposite Parties, and
contending against each other, with so much rancor and animosity, resolved to
Consult the Learned Men he had in his Dominions, upon the Question, which was
the ground of the debate. Pursuant to this Resolution, he calls to him one John
Scot, whose right Name was Erigene, by Nation an Irishman, or a Scotchman, I
am not certain which; This was a person of profound Learning, and eminent
Virtue, and therefore highly esteemed by the Emperor, and was vulgarly called,
The Holy Philosopher. Another, which the Emperor designed for his intended
purpose, was one Bertram, but, by the Writers of his time, was called Retram,
which was his true Name. He was a Monk and Priest of the Church of Rome, of the
Monastery of Corbie; and afterward, for his Fame, and rare Parts, was created
Abbot of Orbais, who Wrote several Books; and among others, one of
Predestination, against Paschasius, whom he Learnedly impugnes, and censures
him of Heresy. He was of the most eminent repute of his time. He was a great
Opponent of all Novelty, and Innovation, and, for his Merits, very dear to the
Emperor.

These then were the Persons which the Emperor consulted, and required them, to
give him in Writing, the True Sense of the Church, concerning the Body of
Christ in the Eucharist, Whether it were contained in the Sacrament, in Verity
and Reality, or only in Virtue and Figure? as also, whether it were the same
Body of Christ that was born of the Virgin Mary, Suffered upon the Cross, Rose
from the Dead, etc. that we receive in the Sacrament; for, to both Questions,
Paschasius Answers, That it was the same Body present in the Eucharist in
Verity, and Reality, and not only in Virtue and Figure.

To these two Questions, the forenamed Doctors gave in their Answer in Latin to
the Emperor in Writing, and their Resolutions were contrary to the Doctrine of
Paschasius, as to both Questions. For, to the First, Whether that which we
receive in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, be truly and really the Body of
Christ, or only a Figure and Type thereof? They both Answer, That the Body and
Blood of Christ are contained in this Sacrament only in Figure and Virtue, and
not in Reality. As to the Second Question, Whether it be the same Body that was
Born of the Virgin Mary, that suffered on the Cross, that was Buried, and Rose
again, that Ascended into Heaven? they Answer, That we Receive the Figure and
Verture of that same Body.

And not wholly to omit the Transactions of these two Doctors. I shall here
briefly relate some passages of each of them.

SECT. VI. A brief account of some passages of the life and death of John
Erigene.
THis Learned Doctor, how dear soever he was to that Great Emperor Charles; yet
he was sharply censured, and severely handled, by several Authors, and great
Prelates, and especially by the Council of Valentia, for some Dogmatical
Points, which he delivered in a Treatise that he Wrote, of Predestination, and
the state of the future Life, as deviating from the Orthodox Principles of the
Church; yet none reprehended him for his Doctrine of the Eucharist. And
certainly he meritted eternal renown for Translating the Hierarchy of Dionysius
of Areopagyta, from Greek into Latin, by Command of the Emperor Charles, which
Work added no small access to the Opinion formerly conceived of his zeal, and
eloquence, for hence he was esteemed a Saint, and that his Doctrine and
knowledge was infused from Heaven.

His Fame daily increasing, he was at last called into England by Alfrede, then
King, where he was Barbarously Murdered by his own Disciples, in the Monastery
of Malmesbury, in the year 883, or thereabouts, and was decently buried in that
Church; but his Body was afterward, with great Pomp, and Magnificence,
translated to the Cathedral, and there placed before the Altar, with this
Epitaph, Here lies John the Holy Philosopher, Gulielm. Malmesb. L. 2. C. 5.
who in his life time was enriched with wonderful Doctrine, and in the end had
the honor to ascend by Martyrdom to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, where the
Saints reign eternally: as William of Malmesbury relates. And after his
decease, by the Authority of the Sea of Rome, he was put into the Catalogue of
Martyrs. His Treatise of the Eucharist remained extant about 200 years after he
Wrote it, by the Emperors Command; but about the year 1050, it was read in the
Council of Verceils, where Pope Leo the Ninth presided, and there condemned to
be Burnt, as being repugnant to the Orthodox Doctrine of the Eucharist, which
was accordingly put in execution; and so this Treatise perished. And
consequently it was often moved to have him expunged from the Catalogue of
Saints, but without effect, till the time of Baronius, who, alleging, That he
had Written against the Real Presence, upon this account, got him excluded from
that rank wherein he had been formerly placed by Gregory the 13th, and other
Popes, Histor. Ecclesiast. Angliae, L. 2. P. 119.
as Fuller relates.

SECT. VII. Some Passages of the Life and Doctrine of Retram.
THis Doctor was one of the Learned, and of the fairest repute of his time;
and, upon this account, was chosen among the rest, by Charles the Emperor,
together with John Scot, or Erigene, to give him an account, what was the true
meaning of Christ's Word's, and the true Doctrine of the Church, in relation to
the Body and Blood of Christ, in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. By this means,
to allay the heat of that turbulent Contention, and Animosity, which had reached
the utmost confines of his Dominions, and dissected his Subjects into violent
Factions, occasioned by the Writings of Paschasius, wherein he Asserted the
Real Presence.

These two great Men, in Compliance to the Emperors Command, gave their Answer
in two distinct Treatises, in Latin, upon this Subject, wherein they both
agreed, that the true Orthodox Doctrine, never admitted of any Real Presence of
the Body and Blood of Christ, in the Sacrament, but that it was there contained
Virtually, and Figuratively, by means of Christ's Institution, which they
proved out of the Scripture, and Fathers, alleging several parallel examples
out of Holy Writ: concluding, that the adverse Opinion was a Heterodox novelty,
contrary to Scripture, Fathers, and the Universal Belief of the Church, till
that time.

Retram, when he Wrote this Treatise, was a Priest of the Church of Rome, and
Monck of the Monastery of Corby: soon after, there arose great difficulties,
between Nicholas the First, then Pope, and Photius Patriarch of Constantinople;
whereupon, Pope Nicholas implores the Assistance of the Bishops of France, to
defend the Latin Church against the Greeks. The Clergy of the Gallican Church
knew not where to find a more able, and expert Champion, to carry on this great
design, then Bertram, or Retram, and so unanimously chose him to defend the
Pope, and the Latin Church, against their Antagonists. Retram undertakes it,
and discharges his trust with a great deal of honor, and applause, and was
afterward created Abbot of Orbais.

But to come to his Doctrine, his Treatise of the Body and Blood of Christ, was
providently preserved, and at length Translated into English, and Printed here
in England, about a Hundred Thirty and two years since, in the year of our Lord
1549, whereof there have been several Editions since, and it was lately Printed
in France, both in Latin and French. But now come we to give you a Specimen of
the Tenets which by this Treatise he endeavors to establish.

First, Then, he tells us, That the Bread, which by the Mystery of the Priest,
is made the Body of Christ, does show one thing to the External Senses, and
another thing sounds inwardly to the Mind of Faith. Outwardly the Bread
remains as it was before, etc. and then he adds of the Wine; The Wine also,
which by the Consecration of the Priest, is made the Sacrament of the Blood of
Christ, etc. What other thing is superficially looked upon but the substance of
Wine? Where he affirms the substance of Bread and Wine to remain in the
Sacrament after Consesecration. To this he subjoyns: For notwithstanding that
after the Mystical Consecration, Bread is not called Bread, nor the Wine, Wine,
but the Body and Blood of Christ; yet after that which is seen, neither is any
kind of Flesh known in the Bread, nor in the Wine any drop of Blood. Before, he
told us, that the Bread and Wine remained in the Sacrament after Consecration,
as they were before; now he tells us, That after Consecration, there is not any
kind of Flesh, nor one drop of Blood, though the Bread be not called Bread, nor
the Wine, Wine, but the Body and Blood of Christ; where he grants the
denomination of the Body and Blood of Christ, but denies the verity and
substance thereof; for he acknowledges nothing but the Bread and Wine, though
they be not called so. This in substance he often repeateth, for after the
verity (says he) the kind of creature which was before, is known still to
remain. What more conspicuous?

Then addressing his Discourse to his Adversaries, he tells them, That under
the veil of Corporeal Bread and Wine, is the Spiritual Body and Blood of
Christ. So that the Bread and Wine remain Corporeally, but the Body and Blood
of Christ, Spiritually, by their virtue of Sanctification. And then presently,
compares this Sacrament to Holy Baptism, wherein the natural Element of
Water, which of it self has only power to wash and cleanse the Body, yet by
Christ's Institution is empowered to cleanse and sanctify the Soul, and yet
still remains the Natural Element of Water, subject to corruption; and then
applies the Water in Baptism to the Bread and Wine in the Holy Sacrament of
the Eucharist. Hence he proceeds to another similitude, telling them, That the
Fathers of the Old Testament were Baptized in the Cloud, and in the Sea, which
produced a Spiritual effect, and yet suffered no Mutation: This again he
parallelleth to the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Then
he tells them, Likewise Manna given to the People from Heaven, and the Water
flowing out of the Rock, were Corporeal, and Corporeally they fed the People,
and gave them drink; yet the Apostle names that Manna, and that Water,
Spiritual Meat, and Spiritual Drink; and then he applies it to the Bread, and
Wine, as before, which takes off all ambiguity of his meaning, for he drives at
this, that the Bread and Wine, which remain in the Sacrament, though Natural,
and Corporeal things, yet by the powerful operation of Christ, they are
enabled, to produce in the Souls of the worthy Receivers, the same Spiritual
Grace, and Sanctification, as if the Body and Blood of Christ were there really
present; and therefore the Bread and Wine are called the Body and Blood of
Christ.

He proceeds farther, saying, Here also we ought to consider what is meant by
these words, except you shall eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and Drink his
Blood, you shall have no life in you. He said not, That his Flesh which hanged
on the Cross, should be eaten in pieces, and eaten of the Apostles; nor that
his Blood which he shed for the Redemption of the World should be given his
Disciples to drink; for it were a wicked thing, if his Flesh should be eaten,
and his Blood drunk, as the Infidels took it. And to confirm this, he cites St.
Augustine, upon the same Text of Scripture, Aug. de Dodr. Christ. L. 3.
of Christ's commands, in these words. He seems to command a wicked thing;
therefore it is a Figure, etc. Thus St. Augustine affirms the Mystery of the
Body and Blood of Christ, to be celebrated of the Faithful, under a Figure; for
he says, It is no point of Religion, but rather of Iniquity, to take his
Flesh, and his Blood, as they did, which understood not Christ 's words
Spiritually, but Carnally, and went back. Then he gives many examples in other
like cases, to show, Why the Bread and Wine are called the Body and Blood of
Christ, because of the Similitude they have with the things Signified, and so
concludes: Wherefore the Mysteries be named, the Body and Blood of Christ,
because they take the appellation of things, whereof they be Sacraments.

Then he cites several passages out of St. Isidore, to confirm the same
Opinion; of whom he says, Afterward he declares, what Sacraments are to be
Celebrated among the Faithful; that is, the Sacrament of Baptism, and of the
Body and Blood of Christ. And here I desire the Reader to take notice, by the
way, that for above Eight hundred years after Christ, there were but these Two
Sacraments acknowledged in the Church of Christ, and consequently no more were
Instituted by Christ himself. Yet the Church of Rome has introduced Five more,
which Antiquity never heard of, under the notion of Sacraments. Is it credible,
that Christ should Institute for his Church Seven Sacraments, and yet
communicate to the first Professors of Christianity, and their Successors, for
Eight Centuries, the knowledge only of Two of them? This cannot be. The other
Five were therefore Instituted by the Church of Rome; for the Council of Trent
names Seven, and makes it an Article of Faith to believe them all Sacraments,
and lays its Curse upon the Disbelievers. Si quis dixerit Sacramenta novae
legis, Trident. Sess. 7. Can. 1.
non fuisse omnia a Jesu Christo Domino Nostro Instituta, aut esse plura vel
paucior a quam septem, videlicet, Baptismum, Consirmationem, Eucharistiam,
Poenitentiam, extremam, Vnctionem, Ordinem, and Matrimonium; aut etiam aliquod
horum septem, non esse vere, and proprie Sacramentum; Anathema sit. Which was
formerly defined by the Council of Florence, Florent. Decr. Eugenii a Arm.
under the same circumstances. What judgment can we here frame? Examine
Antiquity for Eight or Nine hundred years after Christ, that can give us no
Intelligence of any more then Two Sacraments, and yet the Church of Rome
strictly commands the belief of Seven. Certainly the Subjects of that Church
must have recourse to their blind obedience, to submit to such Canons and
Decrees as these. For if Christ did not Institute those Five pretended
Sacraments, (as it is plain he did not) then the Church of Rome must have
attempted to institute them, not by appointing the matter, but by giving them
the virtue of Sacraments, which is highly presumptive, and a manifest violation
of Divine Right; for none but Christ can ordain the means, and the vehicles,
whereby he intended to convey his Spiritual Graces (which were the fruits of
his Passion) to the Souls of the Faithful; this is his peculiar Prerogative.
But this being a digression from the matter in hand, I desist, and leave it to
the consideration of the Judicious Reader.

Bertram now draws to the close of his First Question, Whether the Body and
Blood of Christ be contained in the Holy Sacrament in Verity, or in Figure? and
concludes with these words, Hitherto have we declared, that the Body and Blood
of Christ, which are received in the Church, by the mouths of the Faithful, be
Figures. And so terminates this First Question.

SECT. VIII. An Account of the Doctrine of Retram, in reference to the Second
Question.
THe Second Question that was to be resolved by Retram, or Bertram, was this,
as he himself declares, Whether the same Body that was Born of Mary, that
Suffered, Dyed, was Buried, and sits on the Right hand of the Father, be
that Body which is daily received in the Church, by the mouths of the Faithful,
in the Mystery of the Sacrament, or no? Ambr. L. 1 de Sacram.
And first he discourses out of St. Ambrose, That the substance of the
Creatures suffer no Mutation, in these words, For after the substance of the
Creatures, they be even the same things after the Consecration, that they were
before. For before the Consecration, they were Bread, and Wine, and after they
appear to remain in the same kind still. Where his Position is, That the
substance of the Creatures are the same after Consecration, that they were
before; which he proves thus; Before Consecration, they were Bread and Wine,
and after Consecration, they not only appear to remain, but really do remain,
in the same kind, still of Bread and Wine; this must be the drift of his
Argument, for else it would not prove his intent.

Then having said, That the Body and Blood of Christ, are not present in form,
but in virtue; he applauds a distinction of St. Ambrose: How diligently, and
how wisely has he made a distinction, where be says, touching the flesh which
was Crucisied, and Buried: this is the true Flesh of Christ; but touching that
which is received in the Sacrament, he says, This is the Sacrament of the true
Flesh; so dividing the Sacrament of the Flesh, from the very Flesh, etc. But he
affirms the Mystery which is done in the Church, to be the Sacrament of the
very Flesh, in which Christ Suffered, instructing the Faithful, that the Flesh
in which Christ Suffered, and was Crucified and Buried, is not a Mystery, but
the very Natural Flesh; but this Flesh which now contains the Similitude of
the very Flesh in Mystery, is not Flesh in Kind, nor in Form, but in
Sacrament. For, in Kind, it is Bread, etc.

Hence he proceeds to the Authority of St. Hierome. Hieron. in Epistolam Pauli
ad Ephesians.
The Flesh and the Blood of Christ (says he, St. Hierom) are understood two
manner of ways; which he explicates, the one Corporeally, and the other
Spiritually. Therefore (says Bertram) the Spiritual Flesh, and the Spiritual
Blood, which are daily received of the Faithful, do differ undoubtedly from the
Flesh Crucified, and the Blood shed, as the Authority of this Doctor does
witness. Much to this purpose he discourses upon the Authority of St.
Augustine, Aug. in Evangelium Sancti Joan.
distinguishing between the Spiritual Food and the Corporeal Food of the
Fathers of the Old Law, comparing them with us. Where he affirms, out of St.
Augustine, that their Spiritual Food was the same with ours, the Body of
Christ, but the Corporeal Food was very different, as much as the Manna, the
Cloud, and the Sea differ from Bread and Wine: Which he confirms by the
Authority of St. Paul, speaking of the Ancient Fathers that were Baptized in
Moses, in the Cloud, and in the Sea, and they all did eat the same Spiritual
Meat, and drank the same Spiritual Drink, which he concludes to be Christ in a
Figure, as it is with us in the Sacrament, where he says Christ is, in a
certain manner, and this manner is in Figure and Image. Hence he draws this
Illation; Wherefore the Body and Blood, that we now celebrate in the Church, do
differ from the Body, and the Blood, which are now known to be glorified by the
Resurrection; This Body is the Pledge, and the Figure, the other is the very
Natural Body. And presently he adds, And as the Figure differs from the
verity, thus it is plain, that the Mystery of the Body and Blood of Christ,
which is received of the Faithful, in the Church, differs from the said Body,
that was Born of Mary the Virgin, etc.

Then he cites St. Austin's words, Preaching to the People of the Body and
Blood of Christ. The thing which you see in the Altar of God (says St. Austin)
was seen of you the last night; Aug. Sermon. ad Populum.
but what it is, or what it means, or of how great a thing it contains the
Sacrament, ye have not yet heard. The thing which you see is Bread and Wine. He
then tells them, That by Faith they ought to believe, the Bread to be the Body,
and the Wine to be the Blood of Christ. And then he makes them object, that the
Body of Christ that was Born of the Virgin, etc. with his Blood, Ascended
entirely into Heaven, where he now is; How then can this Bread be his Body, and
this Wine his Blood? St. Austin Answers, These, good Brethren, be called
Sacraments, because that one thing is seen in them, and another thing
understood; that which is seen, has a Corporeal form, and that which is not
seen has a Spiritual Fruit. Whereupon Bertram adds, In these words, this
worshipful Author instructing us, what we ought to think of the proper Body of
the Lord, that was Born of Mary, etc. Also what we ought to think of the Body
set on the Altar, whereof the People be partakers. The very Body is whole, and
not divided with any Section, neither covered with any Figures; but this Body
set on the Table of the Lord, is a Figure, because it is a Sacrament. And
again, Therefore St. Austin has Taught us, that as the Body of Christ is
signified in the Bread, which is on the Altar, so is the Body of the People
that receive it.

Then Addressing his Discoure to the Emperor, he says, Your Wisdom (most
excellent Prince) may perceive, that I have proved, by the Testimonies of Holy
Scripture, and of the Holy Fathers, that the Bread which is called the Body of
Christ, and the Cup called his Blood, is a Figure, because it is a Mystery. And
that there is no small difference between the Mystical Body, and the Body that
Suffered, was Buried, and Rose again; for this which suffered, is the proper
Body of our Savior; neither in it is any Figure, or Signification, but the
manifest action of the thing it self, etc.

And thus he concludes his Answer to the Emperor, insisting all along upon this
Truth, That in this Holy Sacrament is contained the same Bread, and Wine, that
was before, which are called the Body and Blood of Christ, because they
Mystically, and Figuratively, signify the same, and are Received by the
Faithful, by way of Commemoration of Christ's Passion, and by virtue of
Christ's Institution, they Sanctify the Receiver; but still denies, that the
True Body and Blood of Christ, which was Born of the Virgin Mary, Suffered,
etc. is in Verity, or Reality, present in this Sacrament, but only
Figuratively, and Mystically.

SECT. IX. Animadversions on the Premises.
WE have seen the Opinion of those Two Champions of the Church of Christ, which
were Consulted by Charles the Emperor. To whom I might add many more Abbots,
Bishops, and Archbishops, and the most eminent Persons of those times, for
Learning and Virtue, but this would be too prolix, and contrary to my Design.

But, in the First place let us reflect, that after Retram had Written his
Treatise of the Body and Blood of Christ, How all the Bishops and Prelates of
France, could precedently elect him, in a matter of so great consequence, to
defend the Latin Church against the Pretensions of the Greeks, and rely chiefly
upon his management of it? Especially since Pope Nicholas the First (who had
excited them to this Debate) approved of their Choice; for, had they found any
flaw in his Doctrine, as not conformable to the Ancient Belief of the Church,
they might with Reason have suspected, that he might have vented some other
error in his Disputes with the Greeck Church, which would utterly have ruined
their Cause. But no such thing was surmis'd of him, nor objected against him:
whence we may certainly infer, That all the Bishops and Prelates of the
Gallican Church, yea, and the Pope also, were of his Opinion in the Doctrine of
the Eucharist. To this we may add, That Pope Adrian the Second (who also
Governed the Church, during this Debate) never opposed himself against the
Doctrine of Retram, nor never Reprehended him for it, which, notwithstanding,
he ought to have done, had he deemed it any way Heterodox. Gratian. in in
Decret. did. 82. C. Error.
For, as Gratian tells us, He approves an Error, which he does not oppose:
especially if by his Office he ought to do it. And because during this Ninth
Century, there were so few that adhered to the Doctrine of Paschasius, it
seemed very inconsiderable, and like to dye of it self, for want of support,
and therefore was prudently not reflected upon. Whence we may safely conclude,
that the General Belief of the Church, till almost Nine Hundred years after
Christ, was conformable to the Doctrine of Retram, and of John Erigene, who
denied the Existence of Christ's Body and Blood, in the Holy Sacrament, in
Verity and Reality; and admitted it Virtually, Figuratively, and by way of a
Sacrament. Which belief maugre all the Anathemaes of the Church of Rome, is
lineally descended from Christ, and his Apostles, to these our times, and is
the general persuasion of the Protestant Church of England, and conformable to
the Nine and Thirty Articles.

Seconly, Consider, which of these two Dogmatical Assertions is most like to be
the genuine and legitimate offspring of Christ, either that which drew his
Origin immediately from Christ and his Apostles, and has kept possession ever
since; or the other, that was not started till Eight Hundred years after, and
knows no other Progenitor but Paschasius? The first certainly will appear to
the unbiassed judgment of all, to be Legitimate; and the second Spurious, and
Adulterate.

But Thirdly, Here is yet a higher Point, which presents it self to our
consideration. We all believe that the Divine Word, pursuant to his efficacious
Decree, became Incarnate chiefly for this end, That, in Human Nature, he might
Redeem Mankind; he accomplished this end, by a cruel Death, and other
Indignities, which he suffered, and thereby fatisfied for our Transgressions,
and Merited for us an infinite Treasure of Graces; and to the end that Mankind
might participate of this ineffable benefit, for all future ages, he instituted
a Church, ordained Sacraments, to convey those Graces to our Souls. He
Instructed those, that were to initiate his Church, in his Divine Doctrine; he
gave them his Heavenly Precepts, etc.

Whence I appeal to the impartial and unbyassed judgments, both of Men and
Angels, whether it be probable, or credible, that this Supreme Artificer
instructed with all his infinite Attributes of an illimited Knowledge, Power,
Wisdom, Providence, etc. should leave this great Work of our Redemption (which
was his Masterpiece) imperfect, and incomplete; yea, contaminated with gross
Errors, and Heresies, in its first Foundation, in a matter of such high moment,
which concerned his most Sacred Body, and Blood, and was destructive of the
Essentials, of one of those two Sacraments, which he had ordained, and the
Principal for Dignity, and permit its progress in this erroneous Doctrine, for
Eight Hundred years together, which would have had a direct tendency to
confusion, and finally, to the utter ruin and dissolution of his Church, and
so frustrate the final end of his Incarnation? And that after so many
Centuries, one Paschasius Rathert, a Monk, should start up from his Cell, and
pretend to Correct this Error, and hereby to perfect and amend the work of the
Omnipotent, as if Christ would not, or could not have done it of himself. Is
this, I say, credible? or, Would it not highly derogate from the Dignity of the
Divine Person, and the infinite Attributes of our great. Lord and Master? What
then must we conclude? But that this belief of the Body, and Blood of Christ,
which took its Origin from the Primitive Institution of Christianity, was
True, Orthodox, and Catholic Doctrine; so that Christ accomplished the design
which he had undertaken, perfectly and completely, and so remitted it to
Posterity, without either spot or blemish.

And if you desire Presidents, do but cast a compendious glance, upon all the
former products of the Omnipotent hand of God. The Frame of this Universe was
Projected and Created by God himself, who having produced it, he saw that it
was very good; that is, perfect, and complete. He Created the Angels, with all
the Natural Perfections due to the excellency of their Nature; no
accomplishment was wanting: and moreover, in their first Creation, imbued them
with Supernatural Grace, and gave them a Title to Glory, Simul in eis condens
naturam, Aug. l. 12. de Civit. C. 9.
and largiens gratiam, says St. Austin. The same says St. Gregory, in his
Morals, and others. Man was likewise produced in his full perfection, and his
Soul, in its first Creation, was imbellisht with Sactifying Grace, and Original
Justice. The Superior Orbs were Created, and placed in their respective
Spears, with all the Accomplishment of Perfection proper to their Nature, with
due Subordination, conducing to the good and perservation of the Universe;
their Natural Motion was imprinted into them in their first Creation, which
still remains immutable, though probably their rapt motion be regulated by the
Ministry of Angels. And in this sublunary World, there is not one Species, but
in its first being, received all the Perfections, which were appropriated to
its kind. So that all the Works of God were perfect and complete; though some
of the Angels, and the First Man Adam, which were Created free, fell from the
happy State they were Created in, by the perverse use of their Free-wills.

Who then shall dare presume, to asperse the Last Work of the Incarnate Word,
with any Pretended Imperfection, and render it Heterogeneal from the rest? For
he is the same Omnipotent God, that Created all those things mentioned, and his
Power is not Abridg'd, nor his Will Changed; for he is Essentially incapable of
any Error, Mutation, or Imperfection. It remains therefore, that the Opinion of
Paschasius, Teaching, the Real Existence of Christ's Body and Blood in the
Eucharist, was a New, Heterodox, and Erroneous Doctrine, discrepating from the
constant Belief of the Church, from the beginning till that time.

And hence is evinced the falsity of that Erroneous Doctrine, that asserts the
Literal, and Oral Manducation of Christ's Glorisied Body in the Communion; for
if that Glorified Body be not Actually, Really, Physically, and Locally present
in the Eucharist, then the Receiver cannot exercise any such Oral Manducation
of it. Wherefore this Position is repugnant to Authority of Scripture, and
Fathers; it is against Antiquity, and Reason.

The Church of Rome was once Immaculate, and retained its Original Innocence
for many years. But, as the Angels, though perfect in their Creation, yet by
their Swelling Thoughts, Aspired to Sublimer Prerogatives, not allowed to their
Limited Perfections, fell from that happy State of their Primitive Creation; so
the Church of Rome, when many high and Soaring Spirits met together in
Councils, Relying upon their Pretended Infallibility, Usurpt a Power of Swaying
all things belonging to the Church, and Religion, according to their own fancy;
then they began to Abrogate some things of Christ's Institution, and
Superinduce others of their own; they made several Commutations, and
Reformations, exceeding the limits of their Power, as has been proved in this
Treatise: So that now their Church is like a confused Chaos, retaining some
things of Christ's Institution, commixt with others of their own Human
Invention, and so have lost that Purity and Perfection, which once they
enjoyed; And which the Protestant Church of England still retains in its
Primitive and Original Purity and Integrity.

And here I close up this Discourse of Religion, wherein, whatsoever I have
delivered, I humbly submit to the Censure, and Correction of those, upon whom
it is incumbent, to Regulate the Belief and Practice of the Protestant Church
of England.

AN INDEX OF THE Disputations and Sections.
Dispute I. Of the Pretended Infallibility of the Church of Rome.
SEct. I. Wherein consists the true Notion of Infallibility. Sect. II. The
Grounds of the Pretended Infallibility of the Church of Rome are proposed.
Sect. III. The Decision of the Present Controversy. Sect. IV. An Answer to the
Objections proposed against the Nullity of the Church of Rome's Infallibility.
Dispute II. Of the Intrenchments of the Church of Rome upon Divine Right, by
Changing the Essentials of their Pretended Sacraments.
SEct. I. The Doctrine of the Church of Rome relating to this present
Controversy. Sect. II. The Practice of Antiquity in the Collation of
Priesthood. Sect. III. A brief account of the Rituals of the Greeks, Maronites,
etc. Sect. IV. Showing, that the Church of Rome places the Essence of the
Ordination of Priests in touching the Vessels, and the Form annexed to it.
Sect. V. The Order of Priesthood, according to the present Institution, cannot
be validly conferred, by touching the Vessels, with this Form, Accipe
potestatem, etc. Sect. VI. An Answer to the Objections proposed by the Divines
of the Church of Rome, against the Invalidity of their Ordination. Sect. VII.
The Solution of other Objections against the same Doctrine. Sect. VIII. An
Illation drawn from the Premises, of the Invalidity of Ordination in the Church
of England, solved. Sect. IX. Consectaries drawn from the Proofs of the
precedent assertion. Sect. X. Of Clandestine Marriage. Sect. II. The Arguments
to vindicate the Nullity of Clandestine Marriage Answered.
Dispute III. Of Communion in one Kind.
SEct. I. The Grounds of the Church of Rome for denying the Chalice to the
Laity. Sect. II. The Decision of this Controversy. Sect. III. The Objections
Solved. Sect. IV. Corallaries drawn from the Romanists Doctrine, of their
pretended Sacrifice of the Mass.
Dispute IV. Of Transubstantiation.
SEct. I. The Romanists Doctrine relating to Transubstantiation. Sect. II. The
Orthodox Doctrine against Transubstantiation, proposed and proved. Sect. III.
Of the possibility of Transubstantiation, as held by the Church of Rome. Sect.
IV. Objections for Transubstantiation solved.
Dispute V. Of the Real Presence.
SEct. I. The Church of Romes Definitions concerning the Real Presence. Sect.
II. Other Subtilties arising from the former Decisions, not fully determined.
Sect. III. The Inutility of multiplying Definitions of this Nature. Sect. IV.
The Objections Solved. Sect. V. When, and from whom, this Doctrine of the Real
Presence took its first rise. Sect. VI. A Brief Account of some passages of
the Life and Death of John Erigene. Sect. VII. Some Passages of the Life and
Doctrine of Retram. Sect. VIII. An Account of the Doctrine of Retram, in
reference to the Second Question. Sect. IX. Animadversions on the Premises.
FINIS.

