A TRUE RELATION OF THE Engagement OF HIS MAJESTY'S FLEET UNDER The Command of
His Royal Highness, WITH THE Dutch Fleet, May 28. 1672.

In a LETTER from Hen: Savile Esquire on Board His Royal Highness, to the Earl of
Arlington, Principal Secretary of State.

Published by Authority.

In the SAVOY: Printed by Tho. Newcomb. 1672.

A True RELATION OF THE Engagement Of His Majesty's Fleet, under the Command of
His Royal Highness, with the Dutch Fleet, May 28. 1672.
My Lord,
THe frequent commands I have received from your Lordship for an Account of our
late Engagement, exact enough to be made public, do at last end in this
following Narration, which had been sent you sooner, if the Weather, and many
other Accidents that Seamen are liable to, had not hindered us from having such
Accounts from every Flag, as were necessary to make up one fit for your
Lordship, and those you intend to impart it to; whom I will suppose to be
Landmen, for my own excuse: For, if I were to give such a Relation as would
fully satisfy Seamen, the terms themselves concerning Tacking and Wind, etc.
without any thing material relating to the Matter, would be too voluminous, to
expect it should find a Reader out of Wapping or Rothorith. All that I pretend
to, is Brevity and Truth; for the first, I must make it good as I can; for the
other, I have such Witnesses as are unquestionable.

Our whole Fleet being at Anchor in Southwold-Bay, taking in Water, on Tuesday
the 28th of May, betwixt Two and three a Clock in the Morning, the Wind E. by
N. a small Gale, one of our Scouts came in, giving the usual Signals of seeing
the Enemy; upon which, His Royal Highness immediately gave those of weighing
Anchor, and getting under Sail, which was performed with all the speed
possible, considering the short warning; for before Seven the whole Blew
Squadron were a Head of the Red, and the White a Stern; in which order, and at
which time, the Battle began, the Enemy having the Wind of us. The Squadron
under Bankaert being the Van of their Fleet, attacked the French, which made
the Rear of ours, they both separated themselves from both their Fleets, and so
continued engaged out of our sight almost the whole day, Sailing to the
Southward: At first Bankaert came briskly down upon Monsieur d' Estrees, but
afterward finding it too hot, kept at a greater distance.

The Earl of Sandwich with the Blew Squadron in the Van of our Fleet, was
attacked by Van Ghent, in the Rear of theirs, and endeavoring to get the Wind
of the Enemy, found so great opposition, that after having sunk a Man of War
which laid him on Board, having above half his men killed, his Ship wholly
disabled, and having put off two Fireships, was no longer in a condition to put
off the third, which burnt her; the only Ship we lost the whole day: His
Lordship, and all the Officers, except Capt. Haddock, being lost with her; of
which some few ordinary Men that were saved by Swimming to our Ships and Boats,
give us no farther Account.

The Henry, that was one of her Seconds, commanded by Capt. Digby, Son to the
Earl of Bristol, having put off several Fireships; most of her Men, her
Captain, and almost all her Inferior Officers slain, fell into the hands of the
(...) little time retaken, and sent safe into (...) Capt. Strickland in the
Plymouth.

Sir Joseph Jordan, Vice Admiral of the Blew, pursued the design his Admiral
did not live to finish, and succeeded in it, getting the Wind of the Enemy,
which he and his Division kept the rest of the day.

The Body of their Fleet commanded by Monsieur de Ruyter, attacked the Body of
ours, commanded by His Royal Highness; De Ruyter was accompanied by Van Esse,
another Admiral, and their Seconds, which all at a convenient distance fired
upon the Prince, who being to Windward of her own Division, could receive
little or no assistance from them; the Capt. Sir John Cox killed, the
Main-Top-Mast, Flagstaff, and Standard, being shot down, and the Ship entirely
disabled in three hours time, His Royal Highness thought it convenient to
change his Ship; so that about Ten a Clock being attended by Monsieur
Blanckfort, my self, Mr. Ashton, Monsieur du Puys, and John Thompson his best
Pilot, he went on Board the St. Michael, Sir Robert Holmes Commander, and there
put up a new Standard, which because of the great smoke, could not be seen well
enough to be attended by his Division. About this time, the Royal Katherine
newly come from the River with fresh Men, and wanting many of the Conveniences
necessary for her defense, was boarded and taken by the Enemy, her Capt. Sir
John Chichely being carried prisoner on Board their Ships; but the Enemy
leaving no great number of Men in her, they were afterward overpowred by ours,
who carried the Dutch that had taken her, prisoners, and the Ship safe into
Harbor. His Royal Highness continued on his way, attended by the Phoenix, Capt.
Le Ne^^ Commander, on Head of him, and the Fairfax Capt. Leg Commander, and the
Victory the Earl of Ossory Commander close a Stern, till afterward Capt. Berry
in the Resolution, and Sir Fretchevile Holles in the Cambridge, came also on
Head of us, but were both very soon disabled, the latter having also lost her
Commander; the Earl of Ossory in the Victory took their places; the Engagement
being very hot all this time. Toward Five in the Evening His Royal Highness
observing his Ship to Sail heavily, the London, and many of the Vice-Admirals
Division having overtaken the St. Michael, found upon enquiry that she had six
foot Water in the Hold; so that with the same Company he brought thither,
except his Pilot, who was killed there, he carried his Standard on Board the
London, Sir Edward Spragg Commander; where after fighting an hour or two with
the Ships to Windward, they were forced to bear down, and gave opportunity to
the Duke and Sir Joseph Jordan to join; at which time de Ruyter put out a
Signal, upon which all his Fleet bore down to join the Zealanders, who with
others had engaged the French all day; who being to Leeward, did as well as it
was possible for them to do with the distance, the Dutch being to Windward,
kept from them. Thus ended the Battle, and the Day; The Duke with about Thirty
Sail kept to Windward of the Dutch all night, standing to the S. E. and found
himself still so the next morning, and so continued till about Six a Clock;
when seeing some Ships a Stern, upon supposition, they were the Remainders of
our Fleet, His Royal Highness tacked and stood with them, and found them to be
as he guest, and the whole French Squadron with them; about Seven he returned
to his own Ship, as well refitted as was possible by the care of Captain
Narbrough.

About Ten the whole Fleet were together, and about Twelve we saw the Dutch
standing after us, upon which we Tacked, having the Weather-Gage, and stood to
them, in hopes of Engaging them presently: But, when the Van of our Fleet was
come up to the Body of theirs, they Tacked, and stood back toward their own
Coasts; Notwithstanding which we had certainly engaged them, had we not been
prevented about Three a Clock by a sudden Fogg, which lasted till Six; and
though it then cleared up, it blew so fresh, and was so late, and so near their
Bancks, that we did not think it safe to Attacke them, but continued Sailing by
them almost within Canon shot till Nine at Night; when, being within a League
of the Oyster-Banck, off the Coast of Zealand, we Tacked, and stood till Three
in the Morning to the North-west, at which time we stood back till Six, to see
if we could perceive the Enemy, which not discovering, we Anchored till the
Afternoon, that we got under Sail, and stood back to our own Coast, being very
stormy weather.

As for our Losses, Besides the Royal James, there is not one Ship lost, though
several Commanders slain; The Earl of Sandwich, Mr. Digby Captain of the Henry,
Sir Fretcheville Holles Captain of the Cambridge, Sir Io. Cox Captain of the
Prince, Captain Pearce of the St. George, Captain Waterworth of the Anne,
Captain Hannam of the Triumph, Captain Yennes of the Alice and Francis
Fireship, and Monsieur de la Rabiniere Rear-Admiral of the French, Captain
Elliot of the York, Captain Ludman of the Monck; and two of the French
Captains, Monsieur des Ardans, and Monsieur du Mesnou are wounded; several
Lieutenants and inferior Officers are killed, whose Names it were too tedious a
business to set down. Of the Volonteers of Note, My Lord Maidstone, Mr.
Montague, Mr. Richard Nicholls, and Mr. Roger Vaughan, both of his Royal
Highnesses Bedchamber, Mr. Trevanian His Gentleman Usher, Sir Philip
Cartwright, Sir Charles Harbord, Captain Bromley, Captain Bennett, Mr.
Cotterel, Captain Burgh, Captain Barry, Mr. Napier, Brother to a Scotch Lord of
that Name, Mr. Bowls, le Chevalier de Serand, and le Chevalier de Bezy are
killed; and, if there are any others, their Names are not yet come to our
Knowledge: Mr. Tufton, Monsieur le Comte de Canaples, le Chevalier de
Chasteaumourant, Monsieur Escorbiac, Mr. Wren, Mr. Hamilton, Mr. Howard, Mr.
Skeleton, and Mr. Hall are all Wounded, Mr. May has lost his Arm.

The Advantage we have over the Enemy consists in a Man of War taken of 48
Guns, called the Steveren, Commanded by one Elzevir; Another taken, but
afterward sunck (being Leaky) of 52 Guns, called the Joshua, Commanded by John
Dyche; A Third Sunck by the Earl of Sandwich; A Fourth by Sir Edward Spragg,
both betwixt 60 and 70 Guns; a Fireship taken, and we forced them to Spend most
of the rest, without doing us any damage: We have very good grounds to believe
we have sunck more, and amongst the rest a Flagship; but, thinking it better to
err on the modest side, I only write Matter of Fact; and, least I should
break my Word in the other Article, (I mean of Brevity) I Humbly kiss your
Hands, and am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful, and most Obedient Servant H. Savile.
From on Board the Prince, near the Middle Ground, June 6. 1672.
THe Writer of this Letter could not think fit to mingle in his Relation, any
Expressions of His Royal Highness's Personal Behavior, because it was prepared
for his own sight: But it is most certain, That never any Prince, or it may be
as truly said, any Private person, was in an Action of War, exposed to more
danger from the beginning to the end of it; His Conduct and Presence of Mind,
equalling his Fearless Courage, and carrying him to change his Ship three
times, setting up the Royal Standard in each of them, to animate his own Men,
and to brave the Enemy.

SInce the writing of this Letter, is brought in an Account of the Killed and
Wounded.

The number Killed, amounting at the most to, between Seven and eight hundred;

And the Wounded to about as many: Besides those that were lost in the Royal
James.

The Losses on the part of the Enemy, are in this particular, as in all others,
kept very secret; only they do own from all hands, That they have had as many
Men Killed and Wounded in this Engagement, as in any two Battles before.

FINIS.

