AN ACCOUNT OF THE LATE ACTION OF THE New-Englanders, Under the Command of Sir
WILLIAM PHIPS, Against the FRENCH AT CANADA.

Sent in a Letter from Major Thomas Savage of Boston in New England, (who was
present at the Action) to his Brother Mr. Perez Savage in London.

Together with the Articles of War composed and agreed upon for that purpose.

Licensed April 13. 1691.

London, Printed for Thomas Jones at the White Horse without Temple Bar, 1691.

Boston, Feb. 2. 1690/1. Loving Brother,
AS for News, here is very little, only about our Defeatment at Canada; and
least some ill Tongues should abuse any with you, this will give you a brief
Narrative of it. We went from Boston Thirty two Ships, and other Vessels, with
about 2000 Men, with four Months Provision, and Ammunition, little enough, but
had not One Man for a Pilot. When we came to the River, (which we had a hundred
Leagues to go up, before we came into the River, which was the occasion of our
having a long Passage, but at length we got up to it;) a Council was called, to
think what was best to be done. It was agreed, That the Soldiers should be put
ashore upon a Beach about two Miles from the Town, and to get as near the Town
as we could, and to Encamp that night, for there was a River between us and the
Town, that was Knee deep at low Water, which we were to go over to the Town:
and in the night they were to send in some small Vessels that had Guns, with
Ammunition and Provision for us, and to bring our Fieldpieces ashore with
them, to secure our Passage over the River; and when we were over the River,
then the four great Ships should fall upon the Town to Batter it. Accordingly
we landed, I being the first Field-Officer ashore. We landed about 1200 Men,
and as soon as we came ashore, at the side of the Beach, was a A Bog overgrown
with Wood.
Swamp, where lay an Ambuscade of about 600 French, who galled us at our
landing, but our Men running very briskly on them, beat up their Ambuscade, and
followed them a great way; all our Men in their landing, waded some up to their
middle, none less than to their Knees. By that we had Rallied the Sun was near
set; so we marched about half a Mile from the River, and so encamped. Our Men
had spent the greatest part of our Ammunition in this Skirmish, having taken
ashore with them; about three quarters of a Pound of Powder a Man, and about
fifteen or eighteen Shot, and but two Biskets a Man; and the reason why they
carried no more was, because the small Vessels were to carry it into the River
that night. We had in this Skirmish about five Men killed outright, and about
twenty Men wounded. About midnight they sent us ashore six Fieldpieces, about
800 Pound apiece, which we could not tell what to do with, it being a Marshy
place, and several small Gullies to go over. We sent aboard for Ammunition and
Provision, but they sent us half a Barrel of Powder, which what that was you
may judge, amongst near 1200 Men, and sent no Provision. We were no sooner
engaged at our coming ashore, but contrary to Orders, those four Ships of War,
as they called them, wayed their Anchors, and fell to Battering the Town At
Random.
, and there spent the greatest part of their Ammunition by that time they got
back: the Admiral being, as they say, forced to leave their best Cable and
Anchor behind him and get back again. We met with several Skirmishes from the
Enemy while we were ashore, but we received little Hurt. We had some that we
took informed us, that if we had come but four days sooner, they had not above
600 Men in Town, but being so long in the River before we got up, they had
notice of us, and had sent for all their Strength thither, so that there was
now in the Town 3000 Men, and eight hundred that were near us in Swamps and
Woods, to keep us continually alarmed. But sending aboard often to see to get
some Victuals, for we could meet with little ashore, the Enemy having drove
their Cattle into the Woods, they at length sent us word that they had no more
Ammunition to spare, but sent us about a Biscuit Cake a Man, and ordered that we
should come aboard again, (for they understood that was not a good place to set
upon the Town, being a very strong place, Walled all round, and a Battery of
Guns at our coming over the River,) and did send fifty Seamen to look after the
six Fieldpieces. At night we began to go on board, and I with my Regiment was
to go aboard first, by the Lieutenant General's Order, because we were ashore
first. We did so, and got well aboard, and by twelve of the Clock were all
aboard. But how it came to pass I know not, but some say it was the Lieutenant
General's Fault, but I rather think the Seamens, that was to look after the
Guns; but there was five of the Fieldpieces left on shore. And then when all
was on board, because Provisions was Scarce, we thought good to make the best
of our way back again. So that we are all well arrived, only two Vessels cast
away, nine of the Men lost, one Ship burnt, but saved all the Men, and four
Vessels not yet come in, who we believe are beat off the Coast Not arrived in 5
or 6 Weeks after the Fleet came to Boston.
. You will without doubt hear many Reflections upon Lieutenant General Walley:
but he is not guilty of what they charge him with; but there are some, who to
make themselves Faultless, lay the Fault upon him, which might be easily
evinced to a Rational Man. We killed of the French at our coming ashore above
Thirty, as some who have made a Computation of what they saw in several places
lay dead, say. We lay not far from the shore, and the General sent his Boat
ashore With an Old French Woman.
to Treat about Change of Prisoners, which we did, and changed 17 we had taken
Amongst whom was Mr. Petit a^ Old Experienced Officer, lately turned Priest,
and has been formerly in Boston. and well acquainted with the St^ (...)
New-E^gl^.
, for 17 English Prisoners that had been with them a pretty while. Our
Prisoners informed us of the Truth of the Quantity of Men in the Town, as is
above; and that if we had gone over the River, we had certainly been destroyed;
So that I look there was a Providence of God in it; yet if they had sent
Ammunition and Provision we had certainly been with them.

Thomas Savage.

At a Council of War held on Board their Majesty's Ship Their Majesty's have no
such Ship in New England, but this Ship belongs to Merchants of Barbados.
Six-Friends, Riding at Anchor in Canada-River, September 23d. 1690.
Ordered,

1. THAT the Laws and Ordinances of War passed by the General Court of the
Massachusetts, for the better Regulating their Forces; Together with all such
additional Laws and Orders as shall now be made and ordained by this Council at
their present Session; be forthwith Read and Published at the Head of each
Regiment or Company of Soldiers, and on Board each and every Ship and Vessel
in their Majesty's Service for this present Expedition to Canada, etc. And that
the same be put in Execution according to the true intent and meaning thereof.

2. That each and every of the aforesaid Laws and Ordinances of War, and all
such other as shall from time to time be made and ordained by the Council of
War, shall be Declared and Published by beat of Drum or sound of Trumpet, or
otherwise at Discretion, at the Head of each Regiment or Company of Soldiers,
and on Board each and every Ship and Vessel in their Majesty's Fleet; and that
they be so Read and Published once a Fortnight, or oftener, that so none may
pretend to be ignorant thereof.

3. That whatsoever Person that is Engaged in this present Service, shall by
Words or otherwise, Reproach, Slight, or show Disrespect to any of his
Superior Officers, shall be Punished as the Council of War shall see cause;
respect being had unto the Circumstances of Place, Office, Person Injuring, and
Injured; as also the Evil tendency thereof.

4. That no Commander or other Person, presume to send or suffer any Boat
whatsoever to be sent to the Shore, or any Ship or Vessel to Land any Men after
the first Anchoring of the Fleet, otherwise than as they shall receive Orders
from die General or Council of War.

5 That whenever any men shall be sent on Shore, suitable Officers shall be
sent with them, to Command and Order them, which Officers are to be accountable
for their Actions and Behaviors; and also are required, to attend the Commands
and Directions of their Superior Officers.

6. That it shall and may be lawful for any Officer, to shoot any Person, that
shall first run away from under his Command in time of actual Service, if he
cannot be otherwise brought to attend his Duty.

7. That if any Regiment, Company of Soldiers, or other Person under Command,
shall refuse to Advance forward to charge the Enemy, or such other Service as
shall be orderly and reasonably required of him or them, especially if through
Fear or Cowardice, they shall refuse or stay behind, he or they shall loose
their Pay, and whole share of Plunder, and be otherwise disgraced, and the
Principal Punished according as a Council of War shall Determine.

8. That no Person whatsoever shall give Intelligence, or hold any
Correspondence with the Enemy on pain of Death.

9. That whosoever shall causelessly make an Alarm, or needlessly, or wilfully
Fire a Gun in the Night, shall be put to Death, or suffer such grievous
punishment as a Council of War shall inflict.

10. That no man force himself upon a Sentinel, being called unto three times
to stand, upon the peril of his Life.

11. That if any Soldier or other Person, be found Drunk on Duty, or in time
of actual Service, he shall suffer Death, or such other grievous punishment as
the Council of War shall determine; Consideration being had unto the ill
Consequences that has or might have been by reason thereof.

12. That all Officers of what degree soever, take special Care, that no
Soldier or other Person under his Command, drink any Brandy, Wine, or other
Strong-Liquor, at any time to Excess, especially in time of Service, and whilst
we are in Danger from the Enemy: They are also duly to seize and secure m order
to Try all such as shall offend.

13. That present Quarter be given to those of the Enemy that shall ask it,
according to the Laws of Arms and Nations, if it can be done without hazard.

14. That all Persons whatsoever, carry themselves as Men and Christians
toward all Prisoners, especially such as have been men of Place, Aged Persons,
Women, and Children; and that they presume not to offer any Rudeness or
Uncivility to any Woman or other Person, on pain of such punishment as the
Council of War shall order, according to the Circumstances thereof.

15. That whatsoever Soldier or others, that shall Fight or Quarrel one with
the other in time of Service, shall loose a Months pay, and be otherwise
punished at the Discretion of the Council of War; and whosoever shall so Fight
or Quarrel at other times, shall be punished at the Discretion of the
Commission-Officers of that Company.

16. That no man shall Pawn or Exchange his Arms, either in Field or elsewhere,
without leave of his Captain, or dispose of any Arms of others, or any
Ammunition, Hatchets, Spades, Shovels, or other Stores or Instruments of War,
on such Penalties and Punishments as a Council of War shall order.

17. That whosoever without Consent as aforesaid, shall Buy, Receive, Exchange,
or take to Pawn, any Arms, Ammunition, or Instruments of War, shall return such
Arms, Ammunition, and Instruments without Satisfaction, or forfeit twice the
value thereof, and suffer such other punishment as a Council of War shall
appoint.

18. That no man without Consent as aforesaid, being under Command, presume to
Fire his Gun without Order, on pain of such punishment as the Captain or
Commission-Officers of that Company shall appoint; and that no man presume at
any time needlessly to Fire his Gun without Order, on penalty of Two-Shillings
Sixpence, to be deducted out of his Wages or Plunder.

19. That whosoever shall at any time Seize or take any Plunder, of what kind
or Nature soever from the Enemy, shall forthwith give notice thereof to the
General, Lieutenant General, or Chief-Officer present, with an account thereof,
that the same may be disposed and secured according to further Order. And
whosoever shall refuse or neglect so to do, shall forfeit his share of Plunder,
and make Restitution of what they shall so Conceal, Withhold, or Imbezil, and
also suffer such further punishment as a Council of War shall determine.

20. That no Person whatsoever presume to Rifle any Ship, Boat, or any other
Vessel, or to break Open, Unlock, Unty, or otherwise Undo, or make Loose any
Chest, Trunk, Box, Bale, Bundle, or any other Vessel wherein Plunder of the
Enemy may be, whether on Board, or on Shore, in any House or otherwise, but
shall secure the same whole and undivided, as the same shall be found, and
bring the same to the Chief-Officer then and there present. who is to take such
further Order therein, as shall be necessary upon pain of forfeiting his whole
share of Plunder, and suffering such further punishment as a Council of War
shall Inflict.

21. That no Person whatsoever presume to set Fire unto, Burn, Waste, Deface,
or otherwise spoil any Fort, Church, College, House, Barn, Ship, Vessel, or
any other Goods, Provisions, Wares, Merchandises, or Estates whatsoever, or
kill or destroy any Hogs, Cattle, or any other tame Creature belonging to the
Enemy, without Order from their Captain. Which Captains are required not to
give Order for so doing without Necessity require, (which Necessity is to
appear such to the Council of War if questioned,) But as they shall from time
to time receive Directions from the General, Lieutenant Gnneral, Major of the
Regiment, or Council of War.

22. That no Soldier, Seaman, or other Person under Command in this present
Expedition, presume to Plunder the Enemy in time of Fight, nor whilst we are in
any danger from the Enemy; nor whilst they chase or pursue the Enemy, nor
before they have secured themselves from the Enemy, nor until they have Orders
from the Chief-Officers in that present Expedition, or at any other time or
place then Ordered, or contrary to Articles made with the Enemy, and declared
on pain of Death, or such other Penalties and Punishment as a Council of War
shall Inflict.

23. That the Commission-Officers of each Company, do punish all Persons within
their several Companies respectively, which after Publication hereof, shall be
found Guilty of Drunkenness, Swearing, Curseing, and neglect of the Worship of
God, Petty-Thefts, Quarrelling when not in Service, unnecessary Firing when
under Command without Order, not doing Duty, doing Duty Negligently.

Vera Copia Examined. Nath. Barnes Sec. Con. Bell.

By other Letters from New England are these farther Particulars, That the
Fleet, for want of Pilots, was nine Weeks getting to Quebeck, and that they
Landed about 1200 Men, many aboard being Sick of the Small Pox and Fever: That
at the time they Landed, the French had not above five or six Hundred Men in
the Town; but when they beat up their Ambush, and forced the French to retreat
toward the Town, had our Men pursued them, they might have entered the Town
with them, and made themselves Masters thereof; which Miscarriage is attributed
to the Unskilfulness, if not Cowardice, of their Officers: The Men that were
Landed endured great Hardships ashore, it being very Cold Weather, and they had
nothing but the Ground for their Lodging, without any Shelter or Covering. Sir
William kept Firing against the Town, or, as some write, the Rocks of Quebeck,
till he had spent almost all his Ammunition, and then slipped his Cable and fell
down, and the other Vessels followed; they Anchored below the Island Orleans,
and were by Stress of Weather forced out of the River to Sea and dispersed.
Some Vessels by Sickness were very much disabled, and those that arrived lost
some half, and others more, of their Men: In their return one of their
Fireships was burnt by Accident, and Twelve Men lost; two other Vessels cast
away, but the Men saved; and the last Vessels that sailed in February past from
New England say, that four of the Fleet was not then Arrived, nor any News of
them, in which were about three hundred Men, supposed to be cast away, having
been about three Months missing. After the Return of the Vessels, many Men died
of the Distemper, which has Infected the Inhabitants, Spreads and proves very
Mortal amongst them.

This Expedition has brought the Colony of the Massachusetts Bay above 50000 l.
in Debt, for Payment whereof the General Court has laid Grievous Taxes upon
the Inhabitants, which they force from those who refuse to pay. And for the
satisfying the Clamours of the Soldiers and Sailers, of whom most were Pressed
and sent in this Service. They, upon the return of their Ships from Canada,
made a Law, Dated at Boston the Tenth of December 1690. ordering a Committee of
five Persons, three whereof should be empowered for granting forth Printed
Bills (none to be under 5 s. nor exceeding the Sum of 5 l. in one Bill) by
which some of the Soldiers and Seamen are paid, and the Colony is thereby
engaged to satisfy the Value of the said Bills, as the Treasury shall be
enabled. But they will not pass in Trade between Man and Man, nor can these
poor Soldiers and Seamen get any thing for them to above half their value, they
being only used to pay Rates with. The Form of which Bills are as herein
decyphered.

No (2161) 10 s
THIS Indented Bill of Ten shillings, due from the Massachusetts Colony to the
Possessor, shall be in value equal to Money, and shall be accordingly accepted
by the Treasurer and Receivers, subordinate to him in all Public Payments, and
for any Stock at any time in the Treasury Boston in New England, December the
10th. 1690. By Order of the General Court.

seal of the massachusetts bay colony
SIGILLVM:GVB:ET:SOCIET:DE:MATTACHVSETS:BAY:IN:NOVA:ANGLIA
COME:OVER:AND:HELP:US



COMtee.
Penn Townsend Adam Winthrop Tim. Thornton


A Catalogue of Books Printed for and are to be Sold by Thomas Jones, at the
White Horse without Temple Bar.
TAvernier's Travels into Persia, with 40 Copper Cuts, Folio, Price 1 l. 5 s.

Sir John Charden's Travels through the Black Seas, Folio, 1 l. 2 s. 6 d.

The Holy Bible in Welsh, Folio.

Quarto's.
A Sermon Preached before the Queen at White Hall, January the 30th. being the
day of the Martyrdom of King Charles the First, by the Right Reverend Father in
God the Bishop of St. Asaph, Lord Almoner to their Majesty's. Published by her
Majesty's Command. 6 d.

A Choice Collection of Lessons for two and three Treble Flutes. Composed by
the best Masters of Music, and all Engraved upon Copper Plates. 2 s. 6 d.

A Dalogue between two Oxford Scholars. 3 d.

A Letter to Dr. Sherlock in Vindication of that part of Josephus's History,
which gives an account of Judas the Highpriests submitting to Alexander the
Great, while Darius was living, against the Answer to the Peace, Entitled,
Obedience and Submission to the Present Government. The Second Edition. 6 d.

The Souls Desire after Happiness, with the Means to attain it, in a plain and
familiar Style. In Three Parts. 1 s.

A Congratulatory Poem on His Majesty's Happy Return from Holland. By Mr. Brown.

A Dialogue between the Confederate Princes concerning the Affairs of Europe.

Dr. Sherlock's Practical Discourse of Death, in Welsh.

A Moral Essay upon the Soul of Man. In Three Parts. I. The Preference due to
the Soul above the Body, from the Reason of its Spiritual Immortal Nature. II.
Of our Duties of Religion and Morality, whether toward God, whether toward
our Selves, whether toward Man, and of our Duty of all Gospel Self-denial;
which result from the manner how our Souls Are and Operate in our Bodies under
the Visible Empire of God. III. Concerning our Duties of Time and Eternity, of
the present Life, and of the Life to come; of the present World, and of the
World to come; which result from the manner how our Souls ought to be out of
our Bodies first of all; and then in our Spiritualized Bodies, after the
Universal Resurrection. 2 s. 6 d.


The Lively Oracles given to us: Or, the Christian's Birthright and Duty, in
the Custody and Use of the Holy Scripture. The Third Edition. 2 s.

A Weeks Exercise, Preparatory toward a Worthy Reception of the Lord's Supper
in Meditations, Prayers and Ejaculations, before (at) and after the Holy
Communion. Also Rules and Exercises how to live well after it. The Second
Edition. 1 s.

FINIS.

