Concio ad Clerum.

A SERMON Preached to the CLERGY AT THE Arch-Deacon's Visitation, Held at
Huntington, May 19. 1696.

Published at their Request.

To which is added a PREFACE to the CLERGY.

By SAM. SAYWELL, B. D. and Rector of Bluntsham in Huntingtonshire, and
sometime Fellow of St. John's College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's- Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1696.

To his Reverend Brethren of the Clergy, and more especially to those who are
under the Jurisdiction of the Archdeacon of Huntington, and were Auditors of
the following Discourse.
THE Christian Church began, and was established, in all its Essentials, by
that Authority which Christ himself gave to his Apostles, his first
Commission-Officers: and 'twas by the care and faithfulness of them and their
Successors (together with the special presence of Christ with them, and his
undoubted blessing upon their honest Endeavors) that it shall last to the end
of the World. Though therefore we are sure the Church shall never utterly fail
or be destroyed, so long as the Heavens and the Earth, which are now, shall
endure; yet it may ebb and flow, decay and flourish, loose its strength and
comeliness, and recover them again; and under go innumerable changes and
alterations in the several parts and branches of it: But, I think, it may truly
be said, that no particular Church, so well constituted as ours is, can turn to
decay (much less can it die and be extinguished) where the Clergy are Learned
and Prudent, Sincere and Diligent, Unanimous and Zealous, in the discharge of
their several Offices. And this Consideration gives us great reason to hope,
that the days of the prosperity of this Church may not be so short, as too many
do wish they may; and many others are ready to Prophecy, they, certainly, will
be: For no Church, of the same extent, can show so many Learned, Wise, and
Industrious Clergymen, as ours can do, at this day. Now, if all these were
also truly unanimous in their Counsels, and firmly united, and unfeignedly
zealous in their Endeavors, for the promoting the common Cause of Christianity
amongst us, they might so far influence, animate, and direct the whole Body of
the Clergy, as to make them the Instruments of Curing the most dangerous
distempers of this Church: and of bringing of it likewise to great beauty and
perfection. And that all sorts and degrees of the Clergy, whether they be high
or low, may be truly serviceable to the Church, and instrumental toward the
healing her breaches, and making up of her defects; they should take great heed
unto themselves, that they may have right and clear spirits within them, i. e.
Neither distorted with Vice, nor polluted or sowred with any kind of peccant
humor: They should not be envious, peevish, or malignant against any; and much
less should they be so against one another. They should not be of lofty,
morose, covetous, or selfish Spirits; but of minds really generous, loving,
humble, meek, tractable, and charitable toward all; ever rejoicing in truth,
and in that which is good, what ever condition themselves are in. And, in a
word, they should, above all men, look, not every man on his own things, but
every man (amongst them especially) also on the things of others, Phil. 2.4.
and as it follows in the next Verse, to let this mind be in them, which was
also in Christ Jesus, etc. and let me add, That was in his most noble,
heroical, and most faithful Servant St. Paul, as it is partly set forth in the
following discourse. And then they must needs be blessings to the Church, let
their own stations in it be what they will. For if we observe matters narrowly,
and will judge according to righteous judgment, 'twill appear, that it is men's
seeking their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ, that makes them they are
not always serviceable to the affairs of the Church: For if men were of right
Spirits, they would ever be of pure minds, and also peaceable, modest, and
humble in all their behavior: and if they could not serve the cause of true
Religion in one kind, they would not fail to do it in another; and it is the
doing what we can in our Capacities that makes our services acceptable to God
and Men.

And if any see it necessary to advertise or reprove their Brethren, for some
dangerous slips they may have made, or for some pernicious Errors they may,
unawares, have fallen into: they should, undoubtedly, do it in the most
friendly manner; and they ought not to exceed the bounds of Charity, nor the
Laws of the spirit of Meekness in a work of so nice and difficult a nature. And
if all the sacred Tribe had duly regarded the great Apostles advice, Gal. 6.1.
we should not have heard of such snarlings, and bitings, and opening of Mouths,
amongst them, as if they would devour one another. For it is not to be told in
Gath, nor published in the streets of Askalon, what bitter Satyrs and
invectives some Clergymen have, of late, published against their Brethren. But
if they who should teach all Mankind, and be Exemplary to them in every grace
of the Spirit, shall give themselves the liberty to chasten one another, at
such a rate; we may easily guess what sort of Persons they will make sport for,
and what the consequences of such kind of doing will be.

And that we may not help to destroy our selves (when we have so many Enemies
that are seeking our ruin) we should deeply consider, that the Spirit which
dwells in us lusts to Envy, and that the best, and wisest of all, are but
Men, subject to many passions, failings, and infirmities: and we should often
remember, what the Scriptures of truth do witness concerning those who would be
accounted the wisest, when their Wit and Wisdom proceeds not from the Spirit of
Wisdom, or descends not from above, 1 Cor. 3.19, 20, 21. and Jam. 3.13, 14,
15, 16. And knowing the manifold distempers of the late times, and under what
different prejudices Persons have been bred up, it is great injustice for men
to be over-severe in censuring and judging one another; and if we can but agree
in all the parts of our present Constitution, according to our Oaths and
Subscriptions, that should be enough to make us all Friends; and should be
accounted the only sure bond of Unity, that is fit and able to hold us
together: and if all can be brought, by gentle methods, to be conformable to
the Rules of the Church, and to submit their Doctrines to the Judgment of their
Superiors (as every sound Member of a true Church ought to do) all Names of
distinction, amongst our selves, should be wholly laid aside. And seeing the
Sentiments of Men are (and ever will be) various, according to the several
prejudices they have imbibed, in a distracted time; and finding the nature of
Mankind is so frail and touchy, it is greatly to be hoped, that the Reverend
Fathers of the Church will show themselves to be Persons of so much Wisdom and
Goodness, as to treat their Children, of all sorts, with extraordinary
tenderness and discretion: and that they will, by the properest means,
endeavor to let them see, they really aim to do them all good: though in a
divided state of things, it is impossible every body can have his own humor.
And they that are Superiors in the Church, in any kind, and in a flourishing
Condition, should ever have a feeling Compassion for their Brethren, who are on
the suffering side, or in a lower station, and are toiling under meaner
circumstances; and this would be a right means to encourage them under their
difficulties, to make them diligent and useful in their stations, and truly
observant of all their fair and Canonical Injunctions; and whatsoever
discontents and sufferings some of our worthy Brethren may be under, at
present, yet it is to be hoped, they will be so just and wise, as not to break
out into any further divisions: but that they will rather set their hands to
help, as fast as they can, to heal those wounds, and make up those breaches,
that have already caused so much pain and grief, and that have let in so many
mischiefs upon us. And it is infinitely to be desired, that all sorts of
Persons, who have any love for God and true Religion left in their hearts,
would lay aside all kind of bitterness, animosity, and factiousness of Spirit;
and that they would seriously, and heartily, apply their minds to think upon,
and actually to pursue, such things as make for Peace, and for the real
edifying of the Church, bettering themselves, and mending of the whole World.
And for our Dissenters of every denomination, though we extend our Charity
never so much; yet we can look on them as none other, than the broken Remains
and Offsprings of the most manifest Schism that ever happened in any Church;
and if we view them as they stand divided into their different Sects, and with
their oppositions one against another, 'twill evidently appear, they are as
mere a Babel, as ever the Christian World beheld. But nevertheless, when we
seriously call to our minds, how and in what times they began, and increased,
in what manner they have been managed, what Scandals have been given them, and
how hard a thing it is for the best and wisest of men to put off the inveterate
projudices of their Education, etc. We must needs grant many of them to be
persons of very honest and good meaning; and therefore real objects of great
pity and Compassion.

And I am verily persuaded, that were so learned, formed, and every way so
considerable a body, as the Clergy of the Church of England are, but so well
united as they might be; and could be brought to act together, in some measure,
in their several trusts, according to the design of the foling Discourse; not
only the Papists would be greatly discouraged, from making farther attempts
upon us; but also by this means (together with such gentle and prudent Methods
as our Governors should think fit to make use of) the Eyes of the best and
wisest of our Dissenters might be opened, and many of them would be reduced to
the unity of the Church.

I am yet more particularly to address my self to you, my Reverend Neighbors!
before I put an end to this Preface, but I shall not do it, either in bestowing
formal Complements upon you, or in making long Apologies for my self; and that
for reasons which we all know. But what I shall freely say to you in short, is
this, viz. That if what I here publish to the World (chiefly at your request,
and upon your Encouragement) shall be thought a needless troubling of my
Brethren with what they all knew already, or if it shall happen to meet with
spiteful Enemies, who shall load it, and the Author too, with Calumnies and
reproaches for his good will (as it is seldom that Discourses tending to Peace
and Reformation, do meet with better Fortune) then, you (as Accessaries) will
in Conscience and Honor stand obliged to bear part of the blame, and will be
ready, I hope, to ward off some of the strokes, that they fall not too heavily
on the principal Actors head.

But on the contrary, if it should chance, that this Discourse should be read
by many of my Worthy Brethren, with the same Candor with which you were pleased
to hear it, and judge of it; and so might, by God's blessing, prove never so
little serviceable to the good ends, the Author sincerely aimed at in its
composure and delivery; then will you have a just Claim to your share in so
blessed a Work. And whatsoever a divided, selfish, and Censorious Generation
may now think, yet the time is shortly coming, when five words spoken in, and
for the Peace and Unity of the Church, and with a truly charitable Spirit, for
the reformation of what is amiss in all sorts of men, shall stand us in more
stead, than ten thousand words delivered in a contentious manner, and for the
upholding any kind of faction, looseness, or disorder.

Finally, I do beg, that your Prayers may go along with what you send forth,
and that you would seriously say, The Lord prosper it, and we wish it good luck
in the Name of the Lord. Wherein you will also join with

Your Loving Brother, and humble Servant, Sam. Saywell.

Concio ad Clerum.
A SERMON Preached to the CLERGY, etc.
Phil. II. 21. For all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's.


IT appears from the two Verses immediately foregoing, and from that which
follows just after these words, that the Great Apostle utters this Complaint of
some of the Clergy of his time; and chiefly of those, who were his own
Fellow Laborers in the work of the Gospel. For it is with the respect unto the
special faithfulness, and likemindedness of Timothy with himself, and by way of
reproving and censuring the rest, who were then about him; that St. Paul
delivers these words which I have chosen for my Text. But it must not be
imagined, that he wrote them rashly, or uncharitably; either not well
considering what he said, or with a design to vilify, or unjustly to accuse
any of his Brethren (and God forbid, that the least uncharitable thought
toward any of his Brethren, should harbor in the mind of him who is now about
to handle them.) For the right taking of the Apostle therefore in this place,
it must be considered, that Men who are extremely zealous themselves in a Cause
of great Consequence, are ready to look on others (whom they observe to be less
affected in the same concern) to be little better than Neutralists, or
Lukewarm Persons: And thus it appears, that St. Paul was himself carried on
with such a constant burning zeal for the glory of his Master Christ Jesus,
that he looked on the generality of his Fellow Laborers, in the work of the
Ministry, to be but a Worldly and carnal sort of Gospellers. For though their
business lay chiefly about spiritual and Heavenly matters, yet, he found, their
thoughts were too much employed about Earthly, Worldly, and transitory
concerns: and when their Prosession led and obliged them to mind, especially,
the things whereby the glory of Christ's Kingdom might be promoted, and the
Souls of Men Eternally saved; he saw they aimed more than they should have
done, at such things as, they thought, might advance their own security, ease,
and present advantage in this World. So that it is not by way of accusing them
of Crimes, or Condemning their Persons, but only to the diminishing the zeal of
some of his Brethren, that St. Paul utters the words of the Text saying, For
all seek their own, not the things of Jesus Christ. I shall not spend my time
in showing, what is here meant by our own things, and what by the things of
Jesus Christ, it being sufficiently obvious, that by the former are meant such
matters, as relate only to our natural and temporal good: and by the latter,
such things as are of a spiritual nature, and which relate unto Christ's
Eternal Kingdom: But from the words I shall observe these three general matters.

First, The exceeding great zeal of St. Paul above that of the rest of his
Brethren; for he was, I say, so wholly swallowed up with the Love of his
Master, and his mind was so constantly fixed to do him honor and service, that
the generality of his Fellow Laborers appeared, to his apprehension, little
better than carnal Worldlings and Self-seekers; for he here says of them, all
seek their own.

Secondly, We may hence observe, That even in the Primitive Times of all, there
was much want of Zeal, and great defects and infirmities amongst the Clergy
themselves; or else the Apostle could not have said of them as he does in the
Text.

Thirdly and lastly, That it is, certainly, the special business of the Clergy,
to seek the things of Jesus Christ in the first place, and above all other
matters that may be called their own; otherwise, the Apostle could not have
blamed his Brethren for not doing so. Of these three General heads I intend to
speak at this time. And First of St. Paul's exceeding great Zeal above the rest
of his Brethren.

And this, I know, is a subject large enough of it self to take up all my time,
if I should aim to prosecute it in its full extent; but I shall speak of it
chiefly with respect to the matter in hand; and only so far as may be agreeable
with my present purpose: and I take it for a gross mistake, and an Error of
manifold ill Consequence (which yet prevails amongst all sorts of our Modern
Dissenters) that St. Paul is not Eminently distinguished from almost all other
Ministers of Christ whatsoever; not only for his Extraordinary gifts and
endowments, but also for his singular Zeal, for the glory of Christ and high
degrees of perfection in all manner of self-denial, Christian charity, and
holiness of life. And I question, whether any mere Man in the World ever
arrived to such heights of Christian perfection, in every respect, as he did:
Neither are others obliged, by any precept of the Gospel, to imitate his
Example in several cases.

As in his Preaching the Gospel gratis to the Corinthians (for he did not do it
in all other places) and his laboring with his own hands, that he might not be
chargable to any of them; which was a peculiar piece of self-denial in him, and
a voluntary offering, which he humbly gloryed in, and expected in a special
manner to be rewarded for it. I might add to this, his living a Virgin all his
days, as it is commonly believed he did, but was not bound to do. And also, That
when he was one of the freest men in the World, he made himself servant unto
all: and these things he did out of an overplus of Zeal for his Masters
service; and that he might not give the least offense, or suspicion of offense,
to any in the discharge of his Ministry, as may appear to him that reads the
9th Chapt. of his first Epist. to the Corinthians; and if we consider his life
and behavior a little more particularly, and with respect to what he says
here in the Text; we shall find, that he sought not his own things, but those
of Jesus Christ, in every instance that can be named.

For it is plain, he sought not his own Worldly interest, being perfectly
Crucified unto the World; and he counted all things in it but as dung, when
they stood in Competition with his duty to God, or might be the least
hinderance to him in the winning of Christ.

He sought not his own ease, for he was in continual travels, watchings, and
labors of many kinds; he labored more abundantly than they all, i. e. more
than any one of the most Zealous of Christ's Apostles; he sought not his own
honor or greatness, for he perfectly knew how to be abased, and did actually
humble and debase himself to the meanest dispensations, of traveling up and
down on foot, and working for a lively hood sometimes with his own hands; and
he was so far from domineering over any, that he voluntarily made himself a
Servant unto all, that he might win the more unto Christ; and he was so free
from revenge, and retaliating injuries, that he tells us, he would very gladly
spend, and be spent for those that dealt most ungratefully by him; and though
the more abundantly he loved them, the less he were loved of them, 2 Cor.
12.15. and it is most manifest, that he sought not his own temporal security;
for he most readily exposed himself to all manner of dangers and hardships for
Christ's sake; witness, his own long Catalogue of perils and sufferings, 2 Cor
11. Nay, he was so far from refusing any sort of difficulties and hardships for
the promoting of Christ's Kingdom; that he says he took pleasure in
infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for
Christ's sake, 2 Cor. 12.10. and when he was sure, that bonds and afflictions
waited for him in every place, he tells the Elders of Ephesus, Act. 20.24. that
none of those things moved him; neither, says he, count I my life dear unto my
self, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the Ministry which I have
received of the Lord Jesus to testify the Gospel. of the grace of God.

His Mind was perfectly bent on pleasing his Heavenly Master, and profiting of
his Church on Earth, and he never seemed easy, when the work of his Ministry
met with any lets or impediments, till he himself had used his best endeavors
to remove them out of the way. And he was so absolutely free from seeking to
please himself, and from minding his own things, that he spent himself wholly
in laboring to please God, and the members of his Church; as he says, 1 Cor.
10.33. Even as I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but
the profit of many, that they may be saved. So that, if ever any one perfectly
fullfilled that most heroical Exhortation, which he gives to all Christians,
Romans 15.2. 'twas he himself, viz. That every one should please his Neighbor
for his good to Edification.

And he not only continually acted and suffered himself for the honor of God,
and the good of his Church; but he seemed likewise perfectly to sympathize with
all the members of it, in their joys and sufferings, for he rejoiced with them
that did rejoice, as may be seen in several places of his Epistles, and he did
as constantly suffer with those that suffered; and therefore could truly say,
as he does 2 Cor. 11.29. who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I
burn not? I shall only add that which goes just before, his daily care of all
the Churches. Now on these accounts, I look on St. Paul to have been the most
absolute pattern of all kind of spiritual Wisdom, Piety, and Holiness, both to
Pastor and People, that ever lived in the World; and he did as far exceed the
generality of others, in all heights of Christian perfection, and spiritual
stature, as Saul did the rest of the People, in the eminent stature and height
of his Body.

And from this excessive Zeal, and all kind of matchless perfection that was in
St. Paul, I shall only observe these two things, briefly:

1. The great presumption, and unjudicious, and injurious rashness of our
Dissenters; in that they are ready for every trifle, to compare their Teachers
with St. Paul, and to think them, and themselves also, to be like unto, and
equal with him; and in their blaming and censuring the Regular Clergy of the
Church, if they come not up, in their Opinion, to all his heights in every
instance; and by this gross mistake, and their not distinguishing exactly
between Persons and Persons; times, places, and other different circumstances
of men and things, their Teachers constantly make great advantage to
themselves, amongst weak and unwary people.

2. It should ever be remembered, that St. Paul is set forth in God's word, and
especially by his own Writings, as a most Complete Exemplar, under Christ
himself, to all orders and degrees of Christians; showing them, not what they
are all bound to be, on peril of losing their Salvation, but what they should
aim to be, if they would endeavor to be consummate in all manner of Holiness
and Christian Perfection, as he was.

And though, it may be exceedingly advantegeous to us all, on many accounts, to
be often looking at so Excellent a Copy, as St. Paul appears to have been, in
every respect, yet it is much to be questioned, whether ever any one, since his
time, has been able to equal so exact an Original: But, it is certain, that the
generality both of Pastors and People, have in all times, come extremely short
of doing this; which brings me to the second general drawn from the Text, viz.
That even in the primitive times of all, there was much want of true Zeal, and
great defects and infirmities amongst the Clergy themselves, or else the
Apostle could not have said, as in the words before us, for all seek their own,
not the things of Jesus Christ.

I know, that all good men have ever been apt to think their own times the
worst, and that there had never been so great corruption of doctrines, and
manners, as in their days. But the wise man has taught us, long since, not to
say, what is the cause that the former days were better than these, for says
he, thou do not wifely enquire concerning this. Therefore we must assure our
selves, that though some times have, doubtless, been better than others, for
the flourishing of true Religion and Virtue; yet that all times have had their
several evils and disadvantages; some in one kind, and some in another, as
might easily be shown were we to take a particular view of every Age. But I
shall confine my self chiefly to the times of the Apostles: And it is manifest
enough from their own Writings, that they had not only to do with Heretics and
Schismatics, who labored to undermine and overthrow their fundamontal
Doctrines, and to break that exact order and holy discipline, which they
established in the Church; but even in those first times of all, there were
Carnal-minded, proud, and self-seeking persons admitted into the Ministry, as
well as into the Church: For if Simon Magus could deceive St. Peter by his
Hypocritical pretenses, to the gaining admmittance into the Church by Baptism;
well might others do the like, even to the getting into the sacred Ministry it
self: and some of these proved turbulent Heretics and Schismatics, according
to St. Paul's Prediction to the Bishops met together at Miletus, Act. 20.30,
where he says, also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse
things to draw away Disciples after them. These were such as chiefly sought
their own glory, and other worldly and bye-ends, which they had upon the
persons whom they taught, and not the things of Jesus Christ.

Others were only lukewarm and cowardly Professors, who brought little profit
or credit to the cause of Christ, they were so nearly concerned in: for it is
very evident, there were great defects and failings among those that held the
Fundamentals, and abode in the unity of the Church, thus it appears, that some
of them built only wood, hay, and stubble upon the foundation of Christ Jesus,
as the Apostle intimates, I Cor. 3.12. i. e. very slight, fantastical, and
unedifying doctrines, such as would not endure the fiery trial of Gods severe
judgment, that shall pass on doctrines as well as manners at the last day: and
some there were which preached Christ of envy and strife, and not with that
true sincerity of heart, as is required in every faithful Minister of the
Gospel Phil. 1.15, 16. These, I believe, were neither Herericks, nor
Schismatics, for then St. Paul could not have rejoiced in their preaching, as
he tells us he did, v. 18. but, I take it, that they were Carnal and
vainglorious persons, and such who envyed the gifts and same of St. Paul, and
thought to take advantage of his Imprisonment, to make themselves the more
considerable in the Church; and some of the miraculously gifted teachers at
Corinth seemed to aim more at their own glory than at the good of the Church,
and edisying of their hearers; as may be conjectured from their delighting to
speak in an unknown tongue, 1 Cor. 14. And I am apt to think that Apollos
himself (though he were a good Man) was almost tired out with the factious and
untoward behavior of the Corinthians; for we find, he was not at all willing
to come at them, when St. Paul greatly desired him so to do, 1 Cor. 16.12. and
St. Paul was so offended with John Mark for leaving of them (I suppose in a
time of need and danger) that he did not care to make him his Companion, in the
work of the Ministry any more, which occasioned that sharp contention and
division, which happened betwixt St. Barnabas and him that we read of, Act.
15.39. and Demas quite forsook his Ministry, for the love of this present
World, 2 Timothy 4.10. we read also, that there were some defects in most of the
seven Angels, i. e. the seven Bishops of the seven Churches in Asia, Rev. Chap.
2.3. and very gross failings in those two of Sardis, and Laodicea. But that
which is most strange of all is, That this very Timothy, whom St. Paul makes
his special exception in this place, is generally supposed to be the person
whom Christ himself writes to, and reproves by St. John, for having forsaken
his first love, Rev. 2.1. for the Historians do mostly agree, and it is highly
probable, that he was Bishop of Ephesus at that time; and when he is censured
for forsaking his first love, the meaning is not, that he had quite lost his
Charity and love to Christ; but that he had abated of his first Zeal for his
honor, through the manifold temptations, great difficulties, and dangers he
met with in the discharge of his office: which is not a thing unlikely to
happen to a person of so great virtue and holiness as he was.

But now if this were so (as we have great reason to believe) it should be a
matter of special consideration, and admonition, to all the Bishops and
Pastors of Christ's Church throughout all Generations; for then it will follow,
that this very holy Timothy himself (whom St. Paul here so highly commends, and
distinguishes) did afterward, in some measure, fall under the same censure
with the rest; and that he did, more than was fitting, seek his own, not the
things of Jesus Christ.

And if together with the subtlety of our spiritual Enemies, we consider the
strange moveableness, deceitfulness and inconstancy of Man's nature; and the
many unexpected difficulties, surprising, accidents, and temptations, he is
continually subject to, while he is in this World; and that our most natural
inclinations, are Enemies to us when we are in the greatest danger; It will not
be thought extremely mavelous, if the best and holiest of men should
degenerate by degrees, or fall suddenly, from a state of some eminency and
perfection in holiness. But then it must be remembered, that such as these, are
in a greater likelihood than others, to repent and recover themselves again,
upon some special admonition or other: and therefore we have no reason to
question, but that Bishop Timothy did return to his former love and zeal for
Christ, upon the reproof that was given him.

'Twould be too tedious to mention the many Complaints that are made by God
himself, and the great failings that are recorded in his word, of the Priests
under the law, and 'twould be endless and nauseous, to reckon up the defects
and miscarriages of the Bishops and Governors of the Church that are to be
found in the Ecclesiastical Historians. Grievous likewise are the complaints
that are made of the Clergy of their own times by such holy men as St.
Chrysostom, S. Salvian, Gregory the Great, St. Bernard, Petrarch, and many
others.

And there is nothing more remarkable of this kind, than what we meet with in
the little work of our own Countryman Gildas; for it is a most dismal account
that he gives of the Corruption of the British Clergy, a little before this
Island was over run and destroyed by the Saxons.

But I shall wave all these, and such like ungrateful matters, and proceed to
make but two Observations from what has been already said on this second
general.

1. We may hence observe, how very apt Man's Nature is to degenerate and swerve
from the ways of God, and how difficult a matter it is for us constantly and
duly to attend to spiritual things, i. e. to the things of Jesus Christ.

And if there were no other Arguments to prove the corruption of humane nature,
yet the very observing, how constantly all Orders and Societies of Men, are apt
to fall away from the wise and pious Laws, and strict Rules given them by their
first Formers and Founders, is enough to convince us of it: and the Bodies of
Men are scarce more apt to corrupt and turn noy some, after their Souls are
departed from them, than their minds are to alter and be corrupted, if they are
not carefully watched and continually seasoned with God's grace. But the grace
of God is not to be obtained, but by the use of such means as are proper to
cultivate our Souls, and to preserve and renew the spirit of God in them. Hence
appears the necessity of reading, hearing, meditating, and taking an account of
our own actions, inward as well as outward; the frequent and serious confession
of our Sins, constant Prayers, and the often renewing of our Covenant with God
in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. For by the frequent and due use of such
holy Exercises as these, the Souls of Men are seasoned with God's Spirit, as
all the Sacrifices were to be seasoned with Salt under the Law, Lev. 2.13. and
by the due use of these means we shall always have spiritual Salt in our
selves, as Christ admonishes us of the Clergy especially to have, Mar. 9.50.
and we shall be able to present our Souls and Bodies as sound and living
Sacrifices, which are the reasonable services which God now requires of us
under the Gospel, Romans 12.1. and all our actions and speeches will become sound
and savoury, according to the Apostles advice, Col. 4.6. and Tit. 2.8.

But if these Exercises be performed after a dead, careless, and lifeless
manner, they will be but like dead salt neither, that has lost its saltness;
and they will not afford Virtue enough to season our selves and our own
services, much less will they fit us to season others.

Therefore it should ever be remembered, that we are, every way, and on all
accounts, so liable to degenerate, and to be corrupted, without a continual and
strict watch over our selves; that, even those which should be our best and
choicest services, may be so far from being acceptable to God, that they may
become offensive and loathsome to him.

And we must ever take it for an undoubted truth, that the graces of God's holy
Spirit, such as Faith, Hope, and Charity, do not naturally breed in, or grow up
out of the hearts of men; but that the seeds of them must first be sown by
God's Husbandry, and that they must be continually cherished and watered by
Man's Care and Industry, together with the continued influence of God's Spirit,
which he is always ready to give to such as rightly use the means, that he has
appointed; and made proper to those purposes. Nay, the mind of Man is not only
born a stranger to all spiritual objects, and divine Revelations, but there is
also in us, by nature, a great averseness to all such holy dispositions, from
whence the habits of Christian Graces are to arise; and by which Christ is to
be formed in us, as the Apostle speaks.

And therefore it is no wonder, if the work of a Christian be represented in
holy Scripture, as a hard and difficult work; and that we are therein commanded
and exhorted, to watch, to run, to fight, to strive, to give all diligence, to
contend earnestly, to use violence, to take diligent heed, to walk
circumspectly, to do all that in us lies, to take to our selves the whole
Armor of God, that we may stand to, and acquit our selves like Men, in the
great work we took upon us at our Baptism.

And Men have ever found, That the slipping into any sinful or evil habit, is
easy and natural to them; it is like sliding down the Hill, and swimming with
the stream: But the attaining any new degree of Grace, and the increasing in
any habit of Piety, does require our special care, pains, and watchfullness.

Now, hence we may all be sensible of the difficulty, of duly and constantly
minding the things of Jesus Christ: and that it is no strange thing to see good
men to fail, and to come short of their best purposes and resolutions: Because
it is hard for them to attend steadfastly, at all times, to such things as are
irksom and opposite to their strongest natural inclinations. For Men must have
something or other to please and delight themselves in, or else they cannot be
easy or happy in any measure. Therefore till persons can arrive to such a pitch
of Religion and Piety, as to take delight and pleasure in the Exercises of it,
it must needs be difficult to them; and they will so long be in immediate
danger of degenerating from their holy Calling and Profession. Nay, of falling
into grievous Sins, and carelessness of living.

Therefore till our hearts be loosened, and pretty well weaned from all the
things that can be enjoyed in this life; and until we have escaped the
corruption that is in the World, through the lust after worldly things, as St.
Peter has it; and till we are delivered from the inordinate love of whatsoever
is in the World, as St. John expresses it; and till, with St. Paul, we can
count all things here, as dung, that we may win Christ, we shall not be able so
duly and steadfastly to mind and seek the things of Jesus Christ as we ought to
do.

2. Considering this exceeding great difficulty of always preserving so exact
an innocence, so fervent a zeal, and so prudent a deportment in all respects,
as could be wished for in every Minister of Christ; and remembering, that there
were great failings and defects amongst the Clergy, even in the Primitive Times
of all; The World should learn to make allowances unto them, and to overlook
their failings as they do those of other men. For they are made up of the same
flesh and blood, and are Men of like Passions with others. They have the same
lusts and corruptions to fight against, that other Men have, and therefore it
must not be thought strange, if they are Conquered sometimes, though their
business be to lead and teach others how to fight. For, you know, the
Commanders and Captains are often Conquered and slain, as well as the Soldiers
of common rank. The Priesthood was never exempted from the fatal disasters that
befall men in the spiritual Warfare, nor was it ever able to preserve those that
bore it from every moral blemish: Though no one of the Seed of Aaron, who had
any obvious defect or blemish in his body, was capable of the exercise of it
under the Law, Lev. 21. We all know, what that Law aimed at, and what it was to
signify to us: But however, in the event, it was but like the rest of God's
most perfect Laws, rather showing men what they ought to be, than what they
really are, or ever have generally been.

And seeing by the experience of all Ages, it cannot be hoped, that any order,
or small Society of Men will continue long in this World, without their
remarkable defects and failings; it is therefore great injustice, to bespatter
and deride whole Orders and Bodies of Men, on the account of the personal
miscarriages of some particular Members; and from the faults of some Ministers
and Instruments of Religion, to argue against and condemn Religion it self. But
they are commonly bad Logicians, and worse Moralists, that make use of this,
and such like Arguments, against our holy Profession.

And it should especially be remembered, that the circumstances of the Clergy in
our days, are vastly different from theirs in the Primitive Times. For they
were to travel from place to place; and we are fixed to our stations. They had
their maintenance provided for them quietly, by the Charitable Care and Piety
of the Church: whereas we have to do with many untoward and unreasonable Men
for the procuring of ours. The very first Preachers had not Families about them
to burden and distract them, as they, more generally, have had, who have lived
in the settled times of the Church. They had to do with those that dreaded their
spiritual Authority, and highly reverenced and valued their sacred Functions;
we have to deal with many such as little regard the holiness of our Office, or
the infinite benefits that may accrue unto them by our Ministry, or the
dreadful Censures which Christ has empowred his Deputies on Earth, on good
occasion to denounce against them. They had their Divine Wisdom and Knowledge
in the Mysteries of the Gospel, immediately taught them, by the inspiration of
the Holy Ghost: and we gain ours only by the ordinary blessing of God upon our
hard studies, Prayers, and tedious Meditations. In their days the zeal of the
Church was fresh, fervent, and burning: whereas we live in the latter and
perilous times, wherein the love of many is waxen lukewarm, and cold; and
when Men are become lovers of themselves more than lovers of God. In those days
both Pastors and People did generally profess the Christian Religion out of
Choice, love to God, and Principles of Conscience; but, now, it is to be feared,
too many may do it out of Custom, and Interest, and merely in compliance with
the fashions of the World. Then the Pastors and Ministers of the Church were
chosen for their extraordinary gifts and zeal above others: Now, (through the
Corruptions that creep into the Church by little and little) they are too
frequently put in, not for their worth, but according to the Interest and
Friends they can make amongst the great Men of the World, be they better or
worse.

They were to deal with a select Company of Persons, who were nearly and deeply
concerned for the honor of their Lord, and the success of his Ministers
labors: But now, we (since the World is come into the Church, especially in
the loose state of affairs that we are at present in) have to deal with a
multitude of formal Professors of the Christian Faith, whereof few have a
sincere Zeal for the thriving of it, and many are secret Enemies to the
Establishing of it in its greatest perfection. And they who do not consider
these and such differences between the circumstances of the Clergy in the
Apostles times, and ours, in these days; can never pass an equal judgment
either of them or us. For we are not bound to undergo many of their
difficulties and hardships: Neither were they liable to several of our
temptations and inconveniences. We are not tied to do diverse Things, which
they did; nor were they bound to some things, which are expected from us. And
to conclude this point, if they who had so great advantages to keep up their
Zeal, were yet too apt to mind their own things, before the things of Jesus
Christ; it must not be thought strange if too many of us are ready to do the
like; though it must ever be acknowledged, that they then, and all we now, who
have taken the sacred fountain upon us, are bound to seek the things of Jesus
Christ, in the first place, and before all other matters, which may be called
our own. which was the third thing I have undertaken to speak unto from the
Text.

And, indeed, nothing should raise our thoughts more from Earth to Heaven, and
fix them upon the business we have in hand; than the serious and frequent
consideration of the admirable ends of our office, and the eternal excellency
of the things we are employed about. For we are entrusted to carry on that work
for which this whole Universe was made, and that has exercised the infinite
wisdom of God to contrive. All other Sciences, Arts, and Professions respect
only the good of this life, whereas ours immediately concerns that Life, which
is to last to Eternal Ages. All the effects and fruits of other men's labors, I
mean, as they are merely the products of their humane skill and industry, shall
perish with this World; whereas the fruits of our labors and administrations,
shall continue when time shall be no more. We are instruments to put in
Execution the resolutions of the Eternal Counsels of Heaven; and are set to
keep up a lively sense of such truths, and to promote such manners amongst men,
as the Son of God himself came down from Heaven to teach them. And the things
of Jesus Christ, which we are to seek after, and set forward all we can, do
immediately relate to the Honor of the King of Heaven, and, to the true and
only happiness of Mankind.

And it is impossible, that Man's Care, Wit, or Faithfulness, can be employed,
in this life, about matters of a higher nature, or of greater worth than these.
For as Christ Jesus is deputed by the Father, to execute in due time, the
Eternal Counsels of his Will; concerning the Life or Death, Happyness or Misery
of Mankind, so are the Bishops and Pastors of his Church his
Commission-officers, for the carrying on of that work. And therefore in the
prospering or miscarrying of it, the eternal fates of men's immortal Souls are
involved. And the Apostle tells us, they are to be accounted, as Ambassadors
for Christ, and that to them is committed the word of reconciliation; and
therefore according as men receive or reject those offers of mercy and favor
with himself, which God tendereth to them by their Ministry; so are they like
to find peace with him in his Heavenly Kingdom, or to be rejected from it.

Now, I say, the consideration of the nearness of our relation unto Christ, and
the infinite concernment of the work we are employed about, should quicken and
exalt our Zeal far above that of Ordinary Christians. For, who should be so
much concerned for the honor of the King of Heaven, as they whom he has sent
forth to be his Ambassadors to his People on Earth? And if the Shepherds, who
are set on purpose to watch for the good and security of the Flock, be
negligent of their Charge, it will not be thought strange, if it fare ill with
the Sheep; or if many of them should go astray, or be lost.

And if the Stewards of the Household give themselves over to rioting,
carelessness, or any disorderly behavior, it cannot be hoped, that the Family
should be found according to their Masters liking, at his return. The Ministers
of Christ are termed likewise Watchmen, Seers, Overseers, Bishops, Angels, etc.
because of the careful Eye they are always to bear over his Church, and for
that they should be, as it were, his Guardian Angels on Earth, to watch for the
good of his People. And all the Names which are given them in God's word, do
bespeak them, not only to be Persons of honor, but also Men of business and
cares, and such, as have a great charge upon their hands, and so heavy an Onus
upon their shoulders, as is, (according to the known saying of St. Jerome) even,
humeris Angelorum formidandum. Though therefore they are not debarred from any
innocent recreations, yet they ought not to wrap themselves up in ease and
idleness, nor to lead careless and useless lives; much less are they to give
themselves over to the extravagant pleasures, or loose divertisements of this
World. For they should remember, that their business and duty is, not only to
teach Men the will of God, and open to them the mind of Christ, and the
Mysteries of his Gospel, but also, and especially, to be Patterns to their
Flocks in every good work; and to lead and encourage them, by their Examples,
to all holy Conversation and Godliness. They should be burning, shining, and
steady Lights, to guide others securely, through the dark passage of this Life;
that their Eyes be not dazzled by the many ignes fatui, or false Lights, which
the Devil is ever trimming up, and setting forth, to the distracting and
confounding the weaker Members of the Church. And because God's People are
commanded to hear, to imitate, mark, obey, and follow them; therefore they
ought to be so wise and prudent in all their Commands and Injunctions; and so
unblameable, charitable, and holy in all their behavior, that their Flocks may
readily be followers of them, as they are of Christ and his Apostles. And in
order to the performing aright the charge they have taken upon them, it is
highly requisite, they should have a real concern, and genuine care, for the
good of all those they are to teach and watch over. For, though it may not be
necessary, that every Clergyman should be a constant Preacher, yet, I think,
it is required of all, who have entered into holy Orders, that they should some
way or other be serviceable in the work they have taken in hand; and that they
should have a true zeal and earnest desire for the good of the Church, and for
the Salvation of Men's Souls. And this is the special Commendation that St. Paul
gives unto Timothy, above the rest of his Fellow Laborers, in the Verse before
the Text; That he was (...), i. e. That he was one like unto, and suitable to
his own Soul, and who was genuinely sollicitous for the Philippians spiritual
concerns, and all who have taken Curam Animarum upon them, are bound to see,
that their charges want not means of instruction in all necessary matters; and
that all convenient opportunity may be offered, and all suitable means of
serving God acceptably, may be provided for them. Therefore all that are
committed to their Care, should be frequently called upon, and put in
remembrance of the fundamental points of their Christian Duty; Every Article of
the Faith, every one of the Ten Commandments, all the Petitions of the Lord's
Prayer, together with the Doctrine of the Holy Sacraments, are to be
sufficiently opened and explained. No material rule of our own Church should be
wholly unregarded; every Error immediately dangerous should be refuted. No
gross neglect of God's Ordinances, or reigning Vice, should pass unreproved;
and I wish I could say no scandalous Offender should escape without being made
to undergo the public Censures of the Church. And when we have thus sincerely
done all that, in reason, can be required of us, for the discharging of our
duty; to the benefiting of our Church, and to the Salvation of their Souls in
particular, which are committed to our own care; we may safely say, we have
given the Sinner warning, and with St. Paul, That we are clear from the blood
of all Men; and we may then comfortably commit the success and event of our
labors and endeavors to the blessing of God: And, as it is said of Christ
himself by the Prophet, so I doubt not, but it may be truly affirmed of his
faithful Ministers, according to their measure, viz. That, though Jacob be not
brought again, and Israel be not gathered, yet they shall be glorious in the
Eyes of the Lord, and their God shall be their strength, Isai. 49.5. For though
it can never be hoped, that all the outward Members of the Church should be
brought, in any measure, to live according to that exact order and holiness,
which the Scripture aims at, and their duty obliges them to; yet, it is not to
be questioned, but Almighty God will be a shield, and exceeding great reward to
them, who constantly pray, and sincerely endeavor that they may be so. If
therefore our work may appear extremely difficult, and our discouragements
many, great, and unsupportable; let us remember also, that the greatness and
goodness of the Master, whom we serve, is beyond all comparison; and the reward
we may expect from him, in another life, is above all that can be expressed.
And if we are not resolved in the first place, to seek the Kingdom of God and
his righteousness, to lay up our treasure in another World, and to expect the
reward of our labors in Heaven, we shall not be fit to be God's Ministers here
on Earth; nor shall we ever be able to seek the things of Jesus Christ, as we
ought to do.

And now, I beseech you to bear with me a little, and accept a word of
admonition from the meanest of your Brethren, and he has done. You all know,
we live in a loose, distracted, divided, and miserably distempered World; and
we see also the state of the Church to be sadly confounded, broken, and
polluted; and that our own Church and Nation in particular, have their share in
all those evils and calamities, which Christendom at present groaneth under. We
have Enemies many, subtle, malicious, and powerful, threatening of us on every
side; and these are considerations enough, I hope, to make us all extremely
circumspect, watchful, and diligent in our several stations and capacities; and
not to meddle with the state. I think the preservation of the best constituted
Church in the Christian World depends, at this time, on the unanimous Zeal,
steadyness, and wisdom of her Clergy. I do not speak this, or any thing I have
said, or am about to say, as though I doubted, whether the Clergy of the Church
of England, were not (generally speaking) some of the most learned, best, and
wisest that are this day upon the Earth; but only that I think, 'twas never
more necessary that they should be such; and because I am extremely desirous,
that whatsoever is a miss, amongst them, might be amended; and that they might
abound more and more (as the Apostle often exhorts) in whatsoever is good and
commendable. The constitution of our Church has been abundantly defended
against all her adversaries, and every cavil, that has been raised against it,
has been fully answered by one worthy hand or other; I think, beyond all
possibility of a material reply. Our Doctrine has been proved to be truly
found and Catholic, our Government undoubtedly Primitive and Apostolical, our
Worship the purest, the most agreeable to the best ancient Liturgies, and
therefore the most inoffensive of any now used, or that has been used in any
Age, or in any part of the Christian Church. Our Discipline (though at present
sadly fallen to the ground) is likewise, in the frame of it, the most agreeable
to Scripture rules, and ancient usage, the most moderate, and upon all
accounts, the most justifiable of any that can be named.

So that the whole Fabric of our Church is made up of the soundest and most
tried Materials, and is as well put together as any particular Church in the
Christian World. And all this has been made to appear if not to the Conviction,
yet, in a manner, to the silencing of our Adversaries, on every side. And they
now, all choose rather to attack us by wily tricks and politic entriegues,
than by open force or dint of Argument. And the greatest advantage they have
against us, and the main hopes that any of them have left, of gaining their
ends upon us, lie chiefly in the looseness of our own Members, and in that
flood of Irreligion and profaneness, which has broken in upon us, through the
cracks and rents which themselves have made; and do still help to keep open.
For the divisions, which have been caused among us have made the goodly Fabric
of our Church to shake and shatter; and that want of Discipline, and
profaneness which have entered in at the clefts do now moulder away the
strength, utterly deface the outward beauty of it. For if a House be never so
well built if it be not also well protected and carefully desended from the
injuries of the weather and other annoyances it may quickly come to ruin. And
if any thing can long preserve this Church from further decays, and heal the
present wounds and breaches of it, in some measure it must be, the Unanimity,
the true Christian Zeal, and the prudence of the Clergy. For to say the truth,
this Church has never been rightly of a piece since the Reformation: and they
were the different Sentiments among the Clergy, that drew on, and occasioned,
by degrees, the grievous divisions, that we, at this time, lament and groan
under. But, God be thanked, those differences are pretty well worn off; and the
Clergy are now generally well satisfied with the Constitution, and very much
disposed to be of one mind (bating the most unhappy breach, which has lately
happened amongst us, and we should do all we can to make it up again.) But it is
their acting together unanimously in all respects, their teaching the same
things, and their keeping strictly to the same rules, which the Church has
given them to walk by, and which they are all equally bound to observe, that
can make them strong and impregnable, against all the assaults of their
Enemies. For as the greater differences amongst the Clergy drew after them
those most pernicious Schisms and Heresies, that are now so flagrant amongst
us; so the smaller differences in modes and manners of Administration, and
almost any swerving from our common rules, do give some kind of secret wound
unto the Church; and it is the perfect Unanimity and Uniformity of the Clergy,
that must help to cure those evils which have grown, I say, from the
differences that first began among themselves. For all men know, that what is
done by common consent, and by a unanimous agreement, carries strength and
authority with it; whereas any thing done of private motion, or by following
irregular Examples, is ever liable to be censured and carpt at; and it is a sad
thing, when the very observing of the rules of the Church must be looked upon as
a singularity, and almost most an occasion of offense, and that merely for want
of that uniform acting, which our common duties oblige us unto. And it should
be especially taken notice of, that we are to do all we can to make men
sensible, what the Doctrine, Worship, Government, and Discipline of our Church
really are (for not one in a hundred, either of our Dissenters, or of our own
Members, rightly understand our constitution) but this can never be done
effectually, but by a constant and uniform repetition, and exercise of them:
for, it is remarkable to observe, how suddenly Papists, and the Members of all
other Parties among us, shall learn to know and give an account of the main
points of Doctrine, manner of Worship, Government, and Discipline, as they are
held and practiced in their several ways; and yet very few of our common people
rightly understand these things, as they are better taught and used in our
Church. I have not time to tell all the reasons of this difference, but it is
certainly the reducing the main points of Religion to a narrow compass, and the
frequent repetition and uniform practice of them, that must make common people
understand so much of it as it is necessary for them to know. Unless therefore
the Reverend Bishops are Unanimous in directing the rest of the Clergy in
matters already established (and watchful in guiding of them likewise in all
Emergencies of moment) and they in teaching and directing of the people, this
Church can never rightly thrive and prosper.

But the greatest Unity and Uniformity, without a true Christian Zeal in the
Clergy also, can never make us a happy Church and People neither. For the holy
fire must be always kept alive upon the Altar, and be ready to be fetched from
thence, or else the Sacrifices of God's People will be crudely and coldly
offered; and they which are to season others must have salt in themselves, or
else the Body of the Church will quickly prove unsavory, and be ready to turn
to Corruption. And the truth is, a Clergyman without Zeal for carrying on the
work he has taken on him, is really one of the greatest hinderers of it; and
if they who are Ministers and Officers in the Church, look more at the
advantages and benefits that are annexed to their places, than to the good work
that is expected from them, it makes the loose World to think, their Calling is
but a Trade to live by, like those of others; and not a sacred Function
appointed by Christ himself, and necessary for the keeping up of true Religion
and Virtue among Men, and for the winning of Souls to God. We should remember,
what Pastors they are that love the Great Shepherd of the Sheep, even those
only that are careful to feed every part of his flock, as may be gathered from
his own words, Joh. 21.15, 16, 17. We are set to profit many to all Eternity,
and 'twill be the worst kind of Robbery in us, if we seek only to benefit our
selves for a little time in this World. We are in the places of those that
should be public Benefactors and Blessings to Gods Church and People, and if
we are not such, we are injurious to God, to his Church, and perhaps, to those
that would be so; and it must not be thought strange, if the People go about to
rob God, and us too, of those dues, which God himself, and our pious
Ancestors, gave for our Maintenance; if we rob them of that necessary
instruction, those constant Prayers, and good Examples which we owe unto them;
and if we are not Careful and truly Zealous for the Salvation of their Souls,
that are committed to our care, 'twill not be wondered at, if they run away
from us, and harken to those, who take them chiefly by their Zeal; and which
is, indeed, the most commendable quality that is in them; and we find, by sad
experience, that all we can do is little enough, and too little, to keep the
Sheep within the fold. I do not aim, God knows, by any thing of this to lay a
heavyer burden on my brethrens shoulders than is there already; nor to deprive
them of any liberty, that it is fit for Persons of their Profession to enjoy;
much less, to debar them from taking a moderate care of their temporal
concerns, and for the providing things honest and convenient for themselves and
Families; for I know, it highly behooves them to have an Eye unto these things;
but it infinitely behooves them also, to manage their Worldly matters so, that
they may be as small a hinderance as it is possible, to their greater Spiritual
Concerns. And when all is done, we should consider, that honesty is the best
policy, in all professions, and the faithful discharge of our Offices, as we
are the Ministers of Christ, is the readyest way to win the favor of God and
Man, and to bring temporal, as well as eternal blessings upon us, and ours:
'twas the singular Piety and Devotion of the Clergy, that first won so much
Wealth unto the Church; and 'twas the Pride, Tyranny, Looseness, and other
defaults and neglects of some of their Successors, that occasioned the loss of
it again, and there is nothing but a true and unfeigned Christian Zeal, that
God thoroughly blesses in all times and Ages; and if any thing do generally
mend the temporal condition of the Clergy in this Land, it must be their
Spiritual, and more universal Zeal for the benefit fit of those that are
committed to their care. And it is this also that must redeem us from that
contempt that has too visibly fallen upon us of late years. I fear, 'tas been
the want of this divine Spirit of Zeal for God's honor and the Salvation of
his Peoples Souls, in too many of our Profession, that has occasioned our
reputation to sink, and our calling to be meanly thought of, especially by the
viler sort of Men. For we should remember, that Christ our Elder Brother dyed,
and is gone to Heaven, and that he has left the care of his Spouse the Church
unto us his Ministers, and he expects that we should be zealous in raising up
Children unto him, and to preserve his name and honor in the World; Now, if we
refuse to do this, any of us, 'twill be but just, if she, whom we should have
espoused, do spit in our face, and our shoe be loosed, and we be marked with
disgrace, as Moses has mystically taught us in the Law, Deuteronomy. 25. and you
know, Christ himself has told us in the Gospel, what that Salt is fit for that
has lost its savor. So that our Interest, our Honor, and, I may say, all
that should be most near and dear unto us, and that concerns either this life
or another, are bound up, in the sincere and conscientious discharge of the
seral Offices we have taken upon us. And I believe, our good Examples, in all
kind of Christian Practice, are every whit as much, if not more necessary, than
our good instructions; especially in the Age we live in, wherein knowledge
abounds, and good Books are every where to be met with; but truly good and
pious Examples are very rare. We are bound by our places, Men think, to speak
and teach the best things; and if we do not put in practice whatsoever we
teach, and press upon others, all are looked upon but as words of course: And
indeed, if they come but from the tip of our own Tongues, we must never expect,
they should sink deep down into other Men's Hearts: and with what face can we
press every Christian duty upon other men, and endavour to plant in them every
spiritual grace, if these are not first exemplified in our own lives, and
deeply rooted in the bottom of our own Hearts? And how can we intercede with
God for others, if we are not well reconciled to him, and do not constantly
live in some good Friendship with him our selves? And in a word, we can perform
no office with full acceptance to God, true comfort to our selves, or any great
benefit to the Church, if we are not heartily Zealous for our Lord's honor and
service. And now, though I owe much Apology for what I have said already, yet I
can scarce forbear saying many things more on this Subject; but I must remember
my time, who I am, and to whom I speak, I shall therefore proceed to say but a
very few words more, touching the Prudence, which is likewise highly requisite
in Persons of our Profession; I shall thankfully release you, and perfectly
relieve your injured Patience.

We are all sensible, that Zeal without Knowledge is blind and dangerous, that
it is like Fire out of its place, and we have seen enough of the mischiefs of
it, of late years, and what havoc it has made in the World; and Zeal even in
the best cause, if it be not mixed with Prudence and Discretion, is of little
or no use neither, and it may be questioned, whether it does not do more harm
than good. And because misinformed Zeal has done so much harm, and indiscreet
Zeal does so little good, it has come to pass, that all kind of Zeal, though
never so wise and Christian, is counted, by too many, as a ridiculous thing and
is almost every where, quite laughed out of Coun tenance; and not only a
Zealot, in any cause (but almost any one that is Zealous in Religious matters)
signifies, now a days little better than either a dangerous, or a foolish
Person. But it should be marked, that this has happened, to the exceeding
great damage of true Religion, and to the no less encouragement of all kind of
Schism and Profaneness, and by this means the Devil has gotten an incredible
advantage over the Souls of Men. But this distemper, which endangers the very
life of Christianity amongst us, can no otherwise be cured, than by a more
unanimous, truly Christian, and prudent Zeal of the Clergy. For Prudence is
that universal and supereminent Virtue, that makes all other Virtues and Graces
effectual for the obtaining their ends; and it gives reputation and honor to
whatsoever is truly good and commendable in our whole behavior, it is this
Cardinal Virtue of Prudence, that enable us to judge of things according to
their own natures and tendences; whether they be like to be good or evil,
hurtful or prositable to the common cause of true Religion, and of their
several degrees and measures either way; it teaches us, to judge of Persons
according to their various prejudices, tempers, distempers, inclinations,
interests, and abilities, that we may make the best and wisest use of them we
can, to the profiting themselves and to the doing the Church of God the
greatest service. For all men have their several gifts and abilities, and there
are searce any, now adays, without their prejudices, defects, and failings, in
one kind or other, which must be considered, and also be allowed for, by every
prudent person, that knows how to treat with, and use all men to the best
advantage: Prudence likewise teaches us to guess aright at the most likely
events and consequences of things, whereby we may avoid many evils and
inconveniences, which foolish, conceited, heedless, and obstinate Persons
commonly fall into. Lastly, Prudence teaches us, to discern the fittest and
properest times and seasons for the doing of the best things: For that which
may be easily accomplished at one time, cannot be brought to pass without the
greatest difficulties and hazards imaginable, at another. However, your
over-wary and prudential Men, too often omit all opportunities of mending any
thing, under the notion, or pretense rather, of its being a very improper time
to do it now: but this is only when their spiritual Zeal is not equally matched
with their Worldly wisdom. Hence it is very manifest, that both these, I mean,
Zeal and Prudence, must meet together, where any notable and greatly profitable
good works can be expected. And as Prudence is to direct in all practical
matters whatsoever, to the making of them successful; so, more particularly, it
should teach us to understand, the feveral genius's and prejudices of all the
Adverfaries of our Church; that we may be sure to give them as little offense,
as possible may be; and that we may be better able to stop their mouths, abate
their Calumnies, and wear off their false Notions of us, and to win them over,
by degrees, if it may be to the Peace and Unity of the Church; and if that
cannot be done, however, our behavior should be such, that whosoever is of the
contrary part may have no evil thing to say of us. And to this purpose, we
should remember the blind Watchmen, the dumb Dogs, the greedy Dogs, Isa. 56.
the Idol Shepherds, Zech. 11.17. and we should consider, that all the severest
rebukes given by the Prophets to the wretchedly sensual, ignorant, proud,
covetous, and careless Priests in the Old Testament, which are very many; and
all the sharpest reproofs of the Scribes and Pharisees, and Jewish Priests,
that were delivered by Christ himself, and recorded in the New, are constantly
thrown upon, and applied unto us, by some or other of our Dissenters; as though
we had been the very Persons they were at first levelled against. But every
Eye, that is not bloodshed with Envy and Malice, or some other like distemper,
must needs see the gross injustice of such dealing as this. Howbeit, we should
know, and well weigh these things (and also who they be that represent us as
Carnal Gospellers, formal Guides, unedifying Teachers, Hirelings, etc.) not
that we might retaliate these injuries upon any of our Adversaries, but that we
might behave our selves so unblameablely, in all respects, that we may not give
the least cause for such kind of Censures; and that, with St. Paul, we may cut
off occasion from all those that seek, and desire occasion against us: and,
indeed, that according to St. Peter's advice, they may be made ashamed, who
falsely accuse our good Conversation in Christ, 1 Pet. 3.16.

We should not aim to vye with great ones in outward Pomp, or secular Glory;
but our Honor and Ambition should be, to excel in those Graces, which truly
adorn a Christian of the highest rank; and that may bring the most immediate
glory to God, and benefit to his Church: and in a word (for I must not run out
into any more particulars) we should study to approve our-selves unto God, and,
according to the Pattern of our Great Master, to do the will of him that sent
us, to let our Conversation be, in all points, as becomes the Gospel of
Christ, and the faithful Ministers of it; and not to seek our own, but the
things of Jesus Christ in the first place, and then all men would quickly see,
that we were the Ministers of Christ, indeed, the Watchmen of God, and the
Remembrancers of the Lord of Host, set upon the Walls of Jerusalem, to cry day
and night, for the guiding of his People into the paths of truth and peace.
Isai. 62.6.

And if the Clergy would thus unanimously, Zealously, and Prudently, seek to
promote the honor of God, and the things of Jesus Christ, it is not to be
doubted, but God would wonderfully bless them, and all their endeavors of that
kind; and it might yet be hoped, he might heal our breaches, and make all our
Enemies to be at peace with us: that this Church as it is the best in its frame
and constitution, so it it might become the happyest in all the World.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. of the Preface, line 17. read in the truth, In the Sermon, p. 7. l.
26. r. advantageous, p. 11. l. 12. r. surprising accidents without a Comma, p.
18. l. 28. r. function for fountain, p. 22. l. 7, 8. r. (...) and (...), also
l. 32. for our r. the.

Books Printed for Walter Kettilby.
THE Christian Life, Part I. from it beginning to its Consummation in Glory;
together with the several Means and Instruments of Christianity conducing
thereunto: with directions for Private Devotion, and Forms of Prayer fitted to
the several States of Christians. Octavo.

The Christian Life, Part II. Wherein the Fundamental Principles of Christian
Duty are Assigned, Explained and Proved. Vol. 1.

The Christian Life, Part II. Wherein the Fundamental Principle of Christian
Duty, the Doctrine of our Savior's Meditation is Explained and Proved. Vol. 2.

The Christian Life, Part III. Wherein the Great Duties of Justice, Mercy, and
Mortification are fully Explained and Enforced. Vol. 4. All four by John Scott,
D. D. late Rector of St. Gile's in the Fields.

Of Trust in God, or a Discourse concerning the Duty of casting our Care upon
God in all our difficulties; together with an Exhortation to patient suffering
for Righteousness, in a Sermon on 1 Pet. iii. 14, 15. By Nathanael Spinks, M.
A. a Presbyter of the Church of England.

A Discourse concerning Lent, in two Parts. The first an Historical account of
its Observation. The second, an Essay concerning its Original; this subdivided
into two Repartitions; whereof the first is Preparatory, and shows that most of
our Christian Ordinances are derived from the second Conjectures that Lent is
of the same Original. By Geo. Hooper, D. D. Dean of Canterbury.

Mysteries in Religion Vindicated, or the Filiation, Deity and Satisfaction of
our Savior, asserted against Socinians and others, with Occasional Reflections
on several late Pamphlets. By Luke Milbourn, a Presbyter of the Church of
England.

An Enquiry into New Opinions (chiefly) propagated by the Presbyterians of
Scotland; together also with some Animadversions on a late Book Entitled a
Defense of the Vindication of the Kirk, in a Letter to a Friend at Edinburgh.
By Alexander Monro, D. D.

The Principles of the Cyprianic Age, with regard to Episcopal Power and
Jurisdiction, asserted and recommended from the Genuine Writings of St. Cyprian
himself, and his Contemporaries, by which it is made Evident, that the
Vindicator of the Kirk of Scotland is obliged, by his own Concessions, to
acknowledge that he and his Associates are Schismatics. In a Letter to a
Friend. By J. S.

Bishop Overal's Convocation Book, 4to.

The Faith and Practice of a Church of England Man. 12.

Mr. Halywell's Defense of Revealed Religion in Six Sermons. 8vo.

Dr. Gregory's Doctrine of the Trinity not Explained but asserted. 8vo.

Dr. Templer's Treatise relating to the Worship of God, divided into Six
Sections. 1. The Nature of Worship. 2. The Peculiar Object of Worship. 3. The
True Worshippers. 4. Assistance Requisite to Worship. 5. The Place of Worship.
6. The Solemn Time of Worship.

An Impartial Account of Mr. John Mason of Water-stratford, and his Sentiments.
By H. Maurice, Rector of Tyringham, Bucks.

A Letter to a Gentleman upon occasion of some new Opinions in Religion.


