TOLERATION WITH ITS Principal Objections Fully confuted. OR AN ANSWER To a
Book entitled, Sions groans for her distressed, etc. offered to the Kings
Majesty, Parliament, and people. Wherein is pretended to be proved by
Scripture, Reason, and Authority of fifteen Ancients, That equal protection
under different persuasions, is the undoubted right of Christian Liberty. BUT
Hereby confuted, wherein the power and proceedings of the Kings Majesty and the
Church are vindicated.

By H. S. D. D. Chapl. to his Majesty in Ordinary.

2 Pet. 1. 1, 2, 3. But there were false Prophets among the people, as there
shall be false Teachers among you -- -- -- by reason of whom the way of truth
shall be evil spoken of.

Jude 8. These filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak
evil of dignities.

Jude 16. These are murmurers, complainers.

Jude 19. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit.

LONDON, Printed for H. R. and are to be sold at the Sign of the Three Pigeons
in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1663.

Imprimatur.

Geo. Stradling S. T. P. Rev. in Christo Pat. D. Gilb. Episc. Land. a Sac.
domest.
Ex Aed. Sab. 12, Feb. 1662.
FOR Colonel R. ATKINS, One of the Deputy Lieutenants of the County of
GLOUCESTER.
SIR,
I Have perused the Pamphlet you left at my Lodging, and [according to your
desire grounded upon the consideration of the advantages, which seditious
persons suck, in things of this nature, from the silence of the Orthodox] given
you my sense of it.

Which task [if it prove satisfactory to any, and particularly to render that
Friend of yours, and of your most accomplished Lady's, steady, who is yet
balancing in her resolutions] I shall put upon the account of favors done to,

SIR, Your humble Servant H. S.

THE CONTENTS.
Sect. 1.
THe events of these times the same with those after the passion of Christ:
only those were merely eventual, these consequential. Three Churches in three
persons of one house. The Golden Rule of our Savior wrested by our
Adversaries. Fears and jealousies, like those that caused the war, couseless.

Sect. 2.
Their Epistle dated the eighth day of the third month. The vanity of such
date evidenced in answer to three queries. 1. What the months in Scripture
were? 2. By what names they were called. 3. When they began? And herein 1. What
was the first month? 2. When was the first day of that month? What the
Rabbis amongst these men understand by the first month? Their affectation of
singularity.

Sect. 3.
How cheap the shedding of men's blood was to them, which now they would have
prevented toward themselves. They would have none but arbitrary government. Of
all, they dislike Kingly most. What is meant by the Harlot in the Apocalypse,
which they would have understood of the Pope only. Simon Magus the Deceiver.
Those that work in his virtue and power, Antichrists. The Harlot like a Bird of
prey. The men of this generation compared to the Cast of Sacres, that made the
Eagle their quarry. The Pope and they meet in the Antipodes. The History of
Stork, Stubner, and Muntzer, Ringleaders of the Fanatics. Their practices to
deceive. That they are Antichristian. Their sacrilege, and their pretext for
it.

Sect. 4.
The use of Music in Churches. Commanded in Scriture in every thing that tends
to edification. Musical Instruments, whether wind or stringed, and Chromatick
Music allowable, not typical. Those that are against the use of it under the
New Testament, would have it to be they know not what themselves. And if any
thing, it is what we hold it to be.

Sect. 5.
Vestments, distinctions of persons serving and of services under the Gospel
allowed by the Law of Moses, and of Nature. No Vestments but Vices reprehended
in the Heathen in the New Testament. The Druides sacrificed not only in white,
but under Oaks, which by them were had in veneration, and which the men of this
generation seem to allow of, in as much as upon all their Crowns and Scepters,
which they wore and bore, they placed the Acorn instead of the Cross, a figure
which the Devil cannot abide. Of happy presage to us. They confute themselves
by condemning of us. And in justifying themselves they justify us a fortiori.
Nothing but order and decency in our Ceremonies.

Sect. 6.
Bishops. Timothy and Titus were Bishops, so were the Angels of the seven
Churches in the Apocalypse, in the judgment of old Doctor Reynolds, Doctor
Usher, and Grotius. How the Bishops resemble the high Priests? And the whole
frame of Church Government answers to the like order and distinction under the
Old Testament. A Scheme thereof drawn by Bishop Andrews. The Ministers of the
New Testament do succeed to Priests and Levites, as the Lords day does to the
Sahbath. The Lords Prayer contains not only ancient forms in use among the
Jews, but also the very design of the Sacrifices under the Law. The comparison
made. The Lords Prayer the first Liturgy. The Jurisdiction of the Bishops
proved. 1. as to their power, 2. as to the distribution of their power: and
both out of the New Testament. Their right of sitting in Parliament asserted.

Sect. 7.
Of Churches. The lawfulness of them proved from the example of primitive
christians in the New Testament. 2. Their convenience proved, 1. In respect of
their capacity for the Diocese and Parishes. 2. In respect of their situation
in relation to the Diocese and Parishes. 3. In respect of their situation of
East and West. Christians anciently adored toward the East. Of the Church at
Richlieu in France, whose Altar stands at the West End. Of Covent Garden Church
in London. 4. Convenient for the situation of parts within themselves. They
are Naves inversae. (...) in them, what? some built with a single Cross, some
with a double, and why? The mark in Ezekiel 9. 4. was the Cross, and that
proved not only from the figure of the Letter Tau, which was anciently a
Cross, but also that in all probability it must be so, though it be, set a
mark, or mark a mark, and no more in our Translation. The necessity of Churches
proved. No stumbling block to the Jews or Gentiles.

Sect. 8.
How they slander the good Laws of the Kindome. The same thing they impute to
us, is applicable to themselves. The Harlot in the Apocalypse why so called?
The integral parts of Antichrist. Their fury and hypocrisy parallel d by those
in France. English Scottizing, etc. Rebellion under pretense of Religion
unwarrantable.

Sect. 9.
Of Magistrates. Their power is of God, and how? Religion the foundation of all
Government, proved by several arguments. Answer, to their arguments of
receiving the Alcoran, and becoming Papists in some cases. A threefold book put
into Magistrates Hands. An error in Government, which is accidental makes not
void his power. Their second argument answered, their third argument answered,
their fourth answered, their fifth answered. What power the Church has to
decree Rites and Ceremonies. Their argument taken from the ceasing of the Cross
of Christ answered. Their argument from the example of Gallio answered.

Sect. 10.
The second part of their proposition answered, viz. That the Magist^^e has no
power in Gods worship as he is a Christian. The Magistrates called Gods
Anointed ones. Aphorism of K. James against too much severity. Force to be
used. Of the Apostles delivering over unto Satan. Of dividing the inheritance
and ridding the Temple.

Sect. 11.
2 Cor. 1. 24. expounded. Mat. 20. 25. expounded. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. exponnded.
Distinction of powers. Episcopus puerorum, what Pragmatica Sanctio, Imperium
supra Imperium, and Imperium ab Imperio avulsum, what? The greatest domineering
power is in the men of this Generation. The execrable fact of Schucker the
disciple of Melchior Rinchius, who cut off his brothers head by inspiration.

Sect. 12.
That place of Mat. 13. Let both grow together till the Harvest, expounded and
justified both as it notes the event of Gods providence, and as it notes the
duty of the Civil Magistrate.

Sect. 13.
Their argument taken from the fallibility of Magistrates answered. Their
argument from the no such need of Magistrates now as under the Old Testam^^^
answered. A threefold judgment of the Church. Their argument taken from
mistakes in Holland, and from fallibility of Councils answered.

Sect. 14.
Their argument taken from the Royal Law of whatsoever ye would that men should
do unto you, etc. answered. Persecution in Scripture-sense what? Most
convenient that all things be determined by Laws. Lex Talionis necessary in
every good body of Laws. The Temple of the Graces how set? something of
necessity must be left to the bosom of the Judge. Private men know not what
they would be, should they come to govern.

Sect. 15.
Christian prudence in a Magistrate a supposition of theirs answered. In what
cases the civil sword may capitally punish, proved out of the Law. And that it
hinders not the conversion of a sinner. That Magistrates have the same power
under the New Testament, as they under the Old had, proved out of Scripture.
The question why Idolatry and blasphemy are punished with death, and not
cursing of father or mother, man-stealing, adultery, and Sabbath-breaking?
answered. Their argument taken from the advantages that the Jews had in judging
of causes, answered. The argument taken from the different dispensations of the
Law and the Gospel answered. That of 1 Cor. 4. 5. expounded. Judaei and
Caelicolae Law made against them. Their argument taken from toleration in other
places answered. Pragmatica Sanctio, what? The Censure of the Sorbon against
the temporal power of the Pope. The committing of reformation to Pope or people
an error. Liberty makes not for the security of princes. The carriage of
Jeroboam paralleled in our days, they urge it against us, but it makes against
themselves.

Sect. 16.
Liberty granted by the Kings Declaration from Bredah answered. Argument taken
from Dr. Tailor, now Lord Bishop of Down and Conner answered. Our adversaries
abuse him in making their Authors separatists from themselves, etc. The 10.
persecutions in the first 300. years. Persecution otherwise taken in the
Scripture then in the Law. How, imposing, and lording, etc. came in with the
train and retinue of Antichrist, and how not? Humane Laws bind the conscience
in themselves, not for themselves. Severe Laws made against Heretics, and what
they were. King James his Embassy to the States of Holland touching Vorstius.
Moderation of the Church of England touching things disputable of Toleration in
Germany, Savoy, Polonia, Roan. Who the first Preachers of force and violence?
Of begging Friars, etc. Of the Lollarots. Spiritual drunkenness worse then
corporal. The greatest drunkards where greatest liberty of Opinion.
Disputations seldom produce good effects, and why?

THE Dew of Hermon Which fell upon the Hill of SION.
Sect. 1.
IN the Epistle to the Reader, they compare these times to that of our Saviors
passion, wherein the same things, they say, are fallen out, which our Savior
foretold should come to pass after his passion, viz. That the father has been
divided against the son, and the son against the father, three against two, and
two against three, even a man's soes have been they of his own household: And it
is very true that they say herein, namely, that the same things have fallen out
now, as then, but with this difference, viz. That those divisions which were
predicted by our Savior to come to pass after his death were merely eventual
as receiving, no causality or real influx from the passion of our Savior,
whose Legacy to his Church was peace and unity, given by his Testament, and
sealed with his blood: whereas these divisions are not ^^erly eventual, but
consequential too, necessarily following, as an effect does its caus^, (...)
the r^moval of the impediment. For it has been long ago cleared up to the
world, that these things had been brewing above threescore years before they
came to pass, but never ripe for execution till the passion, or the captivity
of the King: whereupon the foundations were cast down, and the sinews of
Government broken (...) once removed out of the way, then did that show it self
openly, (...) in his (...) an^m^rum observes to have been practiced privately
before, viz. the sons excommunicating the father, and the father the sons:
lastly, one son excommunicating the other, till three Churches were found in
three persons of one house, if it be not a solaecismeso to speak. And truly, to
^se their own words, He is a stronger in this our Israel, that has not seen
th^se things. And whereas for their pretense, they allege the golden Rule of
our Savior, viz. All things whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you,
the same do ye also unto them: Our Savior never intended hereby to loosen the
reins of Government, and to let them lie upon the necks of those that are like
horse or mule that have no understanding, whose mouths must be held with the
bit and bridle of the Law; but this he would have to be understood of a well
governed will, subjected to right reason: otherwise a criminal at the bar might
say to the Judge, my Lord [nay he must call him Sir too] you pass sentence
of condemnation upon me, and therefore I suppose you willing, according to our
Saviors Rule, that I pass the same upon you: let us therefore change places
for a while, and so we shall both, in three days, take our turns at Tiburn,
or else pardon one the other for what is past, and give mutual liberty to do
what we please for the time to come, and so not only become the sons of the
free woman, but be freed from that bondage, which those of the bondwoman would
bring us into [it is the very Metapho^ which they here pursue] which if the
Judge refuses [and he is mad if he does not] then does he [in the sense of the
Authors] offer violence to the conscience of the offenders, as hereafter will
appear. And least this violence and oppression should terminate in the blood of
those, which are dear to God, they have, as they say, committed this to the
view of all men, etc. These are the fears and Jealousies, which have occasioned
the spilling of so much innocent blood as has b^^n of late shed, which cries so
loud against the men of their generation [as they call themselves] that I do
not wonder they are afraid of their own [though they fear where no fear is]
till Cain became the shedder of his brother blood, he never cried that the next
man which met him should slay him. This fear and jealousy was then and is now a
mere slander of the good Laws and practice of the King, as I shall have
occasion hereafter to show.

Sect. 2.
THis Epistle ended, they date it the eighth day of the third month; which of
it self notes their inclination to thwart all the world though it be for
nothing but their minds sake. And albeit they come with a seeming resolution
of admitting of no proofs but what are taken out of the New Testament, yet have
no pattern at all for this their manner of dating, but what they are beholden
to the Old Testament for [for in the New they have no footstep of it at all]
wherein they become guilty of a threefold vanity: which I shall discover upon
the resolution of three Queries. 1. What the months in Scripture were? 2. By
what names they were called? 3. When they began? For answer to the first, I
say. That the Hebrews seemd at first to measure their months according to the
course of the Sun, calling them MENSES SOLARES, every month consisting of
thirty days: for the Scripture ^aies, that the waters prevailed from the
seventeenth day of the second month, Genesis 7. 11. unto the seventeenth day of
the seventh month, Genesis 8. 4. that is, full five months, and if we will
number the days, they were one hundred and fifty, Genesis 7. 24. whereby it is
evident that every month contained full thirty days. After the Israelites
departure out of Egypt, they measured their months by the course of the Moon:
and because the year of the Synodical or consequential months of the Moon
[which are the longest of LUNAR moneths] comes short of the year of the Sun by
eleven days, and a fourth part, hence the Jews and Greeks too, every eight
years made an Embolisme, (...) an intercalation or interjection of three
months, as the Centurists have noted out of Affricanus, Cen. 1. l. ^. c. 10.
And albeit St. Aug. de Civ. Drei. l. 15. c. 14. and with him others do hold
that they reckoned by M^^ses LUNARES, as well before as after the giving of the
Law: yet the same father in the same place gives to every month thirty days,
whereas the full Synodical month of the Moon is but twenty nine days, twelve
hours, and forty four minutes, as Lud. Vives has observed upon him: whereunto
Gareaus adds three seconds and twelve thirds, Tract* de Temp. Can. 17. These
things being ^o, they must tell us what months they mean, whether the months
of the Sun, or the months of the Moon? and if of the Moon, then whether the
periodical or Synodical month from the beginning whereof they reckon their
eighth day? otherwise they might have left out their date to this Epistle, in
as much as dates are to be certain.

For answer to the second. Before the Captivity in Babylon the months in
Scripture are almost all reckoned [without name] according to the order of
their Calender, by first, second, and third month, etc. After their return
from Captivity they counted them all by names according to the example of the
Ass^rians and Ch^ldeans, amongst whom they lived, and with whom the study of
the Mathematics flourished, some of those they borrowed from the Chaldeans,
whereof mention is made in Zachary, Esther, N^hemiah, etc. neither do I find
that under or after the Captivity, they expressed their months at all by
numeral words. It Is true that Luc. 1. 26, 36. mention is made of the sixth
month: but it is not to be (...) of the general account of the whole year, but
of that particular thing viz. the sixth m^neth from the conception of John
Baptist in the womb of his mother Elizabeth, which compute might begin any day
of any stated month, as well as the first of the first month, viz. any day of
Jiar, Sivan, Thomus, Cisleu, etc. as well as the first of Nis^^ or Tisri and
indeed the Ecclesiastical tradition is that this compute began ^ix months
before the twenty fifth of March, though those that are against the celebration
of Christmas [which depends hereon] contend against it: but their arguments
are merely destructive, and brought to puzzle the truth, not to prove any thing
at all* Now to apply all this. If the people of God did not ^cruple to call
their months by the same name as the Chaldeans did, among whom they lived, and
never after by the first, second, and third, etc. as they had done before; why
do these men now begin to make it a matter of conscience to do otherwise, and
that without example in all the New Testament, or in the Old Testament after
the return from the Captivity; or lastly, of any reformed Church in
Christendom, which use the same name; of months, and the same order of their
Calender, as the State wherein they live does.

The third Querie is, when the months mentioned in Scripture began their
account of first, second, and third, etc? for resolution whereof it will be
requisite to answer to two Queries, 1. What was the first month? 2. When was
the first day of that month?

To the first I answer, That Buxtorse will tell you, in his Jewish Synagogue,
out of the Talmud, that the Jews had four seasons of the year; which they
called the first months in several respects. But certain it is, out of the
Scripture it self, that before their coming out of Egypt, the month Tisri was
their first month, which began about the Autumnal Equinox [for it is called
the feast of Ingathering, which is perfected in the end of the year Levit. 23.
39. [and to the end of the old year, immediately succeeds the beginning of the
New] the same continued for civil affairs. After their coming out of Egypt,
their year began in the month NIS AN, or ABIB, which was about the Vernal
Equinox, Exodus 12. 2. Then it was that God first said, This month shall be to
thee the beginning of months, viz. in order to sacred solemnities, h. e. all
the Ceremonies of the Law.

To the second I answer, That of these months of the Hebrews no certain time
of beginning can be shown, by reason of the anticipation of Equinoxes, and the
new Moons not recurring in the same moments of time. The modern Jews, and
others that follow them, refer the first month NIS AN to our March; and it is
manifest, that this month was called, the month of new fruits or ears of
corn, because then did the corn put forth full ears, Exodus ^. 31. the Barley
was in the ear, and the Flax was bolled before they came out of Egypt: and this
month is called, Josh. 3. 15. the time of Harvest, because then did Harvest
begin: whence it is probable, that this first month was a little later then
the time of our March: which is yet more evident from the time of the Vernal
Equinox, which in the time of Julius Caesar fell the twenty fifth of March, not
the tenth or eleventh, as now it does: the sacred year therefore of the Jews
beginning about the Vernal Equinox, it follows, that most of, or all the first
month thereof, must fall in April. The like may be said of the first month of
the civil year, which may begin in the middle or end of September, or beginning
of October with us. Now then, these Authors dating their Epistle the eighth day
of the third month who can tell whether they mean the third from the Vernal,
or the third from the Autumnal Equinox, h. e. from the beginning of the
ceremonial or civil year? All Ceremonies they set themselves against, unless
of their own devising; and no civil constitutions will their conscience be
bound by: wherefore in what month of the year, or in what day of the month,
to find such men, that do not know where to find themselves, is more then I can
do. Some of them [and one of the greatest Rabbis amongst them] have dated
things in the first month, commonly called March; whom therefore the
Ceremonial year seems to pleasebest; though the vanity thereof appears from
hence, viz. That this sacred year, and the several periods thereof, was no more
to the dating of any thing with the Jews, then Advent, and the weeks or months
following it, are with us; in as much as it was not by the sacred, but the
civil year that they reckoned the payments of Tithes, the payment of Debts, the
discharge of Contracts, their Jubilees, their Sabbatical year, and what not? I
should think then, that if they dislike our account, which is reckoned from the
time of the conception of our Savior, announced by the Angel to the blessed
Virgin, they then should reckon from the first month following the Nativity of
Christ, h. e. January, the beginning whereof is the Christian and Julian
Epoch. But such direction is the ready way to teach them to do the quite
contrary, the design of Heretics having ever been to gain glory by a
singularity of knowledge; and of these in particular to speak something which
they understand not themselves, rather then be understood by others.

Sect. 3.
THe Epistle to the Reader thus dated and subscribed by six men, all as yet in
communion together, they begin their Tractare with a specious title, which they
call Sober endeavors to prevent innocent blood, and to stablish the Nation in
the best of settlements. But when their party ruled, woeful experience tells
us, how cheap other men's blood was to them, and how far they desired the best
of settlements, when they strove against all government but an arbitrary one:
And among all Governments which they dislike, that of Kings seems chiefly io
stick upon their stomachs, because The Nations of the world with their KINGS
[not with their PROTECTORS and RVMPERS] are said to drink the wine of the
fornication of that abominable HARLOT; where, by HARLOT they would have only
the Pope understood, whereas its Dominatio Romana, the Government or Rule of
[not the Pope, but the Emperours] of Rome, as Hugo Grotius, and Dr. Hammond
have observed: and indeed the Emperors at that time, whereunto this relates,
did rerum potiri. If they will not trust Hugo Grotius, let them believe
Johannes Grossius of Geneva, upon the Apocalypse: the Anagram of whose name is
(as himself makes it) Sis organon Jesu: who speaks, though not the same thing,
yet enough to prove what I pretend to: for expounding the thirteenth, c. says,
that two things are signified by the seven heads: 1. The mountains whereon the
Woman is set. 2. So many heads and sorts of Governments successively. The five
first of those Governments, viz. the Kings, the Consuls, the Dictators, the
Decemvirs, and the Tribunes, were abolisht in the time of St. John; the sixth,
viz. the Emperors, was then in vigor, and the seventh, viz. the Popes, was
not as yet, being not made Sovereign at Rome: for St. John says, chap. 17. v.
10. That the one was, and the other was not yet come. The ten horns, says he,
are ten Provinces depending on the Empire of Rome, that is to say, the more
principal, viz. 1. Italy, 2. Spain, 3. The Gauls. 4. Almain, 5. Hungary and
Bulgaria, 6. Greece, 7. Asia minor, called at this day Natolia, 8. Syria and
Assyria. 9. Egypt, 10. Africa: and chap. 13. v. 18. The number of the beast is
the number of a man: That is, says he, a number wherewith men serve themselves
ordinarily. Now St. John writes to the Greek Churches, and in the Greek
Language: But the Greeks (as also the Hebrews) are wont in numeration to serve
themselves of Letters of the Alphabet.

This number then stands thus, ^

Hereunto it is objected, that (Latinos) is not written with (ei) but with a
single (i) whereunto he answers, that this is a childish Objection, in as much
as it is notoriously known, that the Greeks do often write the (i) Latin, by
(ei) and that the Latins themselves pronounced (i) by (ei) the which
pronunciation (says he, and that truly) is common and ordinary among the
English at this day. It is true, that some among us do affect to pronounce (t)
everywhere, as Foreigners do, without any regard whether it be long or short,
Ut supra communem hominum sortem sapere videantur: but for mine own part,
inforreign places, and among Foreigners, I have pronounced it as they do; not
that it is better in it self, but that I might be the better understood by
them; as Generation, in France, I would pronounce Jeneration, in Germany
^eneratio; Regem, in France, Re^em, in Germany Re^em, and so of a number of
other words. But to return from my digression, this being enough to prove the
Harlot to be a Latin and of Rome, but not to be the ^ope only.

To take it in their own sense, they would have our King to be one of those
Kings; but they confute themselves by their own words following, wherein they
say, that this Harlot sits upon peoples, and mult^^udes, and nations, and
tongues, and by her sorcerses deceives all (...) etc. for how does this Harlot
sit upon our King and people, when we abjure all preheminences upon earth above
the King, and the King acknowledges no Superior but God? The Dece^ver
mentioned 2 These. 2. they seem to make all one with this Harlot: But Dr.
Hommond will have thereby Simon Magus to be understood. This Simon Magus was
the Ringleader of the Gnostics, he sat in the Temple of God, called God by
the Emperor Claudius, who caused a Statue to be erected by Tiber, between the
two Bridges, with this Inscription, Simoni Deo sancto, to Simon the holy God;
and he had all rites of divine worship performed to him by the Samaritans. Yea,
those that hold the Popes only to be Antichrist, are driven to say, That they
are so, as far only as they work by signs and lying wonders in the virtue and
power of Simon Magus: and if they will have a dominion and rule joined to it,
then it must be so far forth as they in their actings resemble that Dominatio
Romana, or Roman Rule and Domination. And this is called Harlot, a female, for
Dominatio, virtus and potentia are Feminines: And it is observable, that the
Caliphs or Saracenical Popes [who vested themselves in all power spiritual and
temporal] are of the Feminine Gender. Whose power, (as are and were most of the
Eastern Governments) was Tyrannical, set up by Mahomet, who compiled his
divellish doctrine, beginning his Empire about the same time that Boniface the
third assumed his Antichristian Title beginning his Empire, there being but
eleven years between them. Tyrannical Government and Governors are as Birds of
prey; amongst which sort of Birds the female is ever the largest, boldest, and
most morose: Insomuch that a cast of Sacres once set upon an Eagle, and having
buffetted and wearied him a good, made him descend to the earth by the force of
their blows: The Fa^lconer proud hereof, bragged of it before Him of the
Ottomans, who took Constantinople, who caused their necks to be wrung off, for
enterprizing upon their King: Which may very fitly be applied to the men of
this Generation, who may justly be called Sacres [Quasi quodvis Sacrum
aucupantes, imo Sacram Majestatem debellantes.] who not contented to prey upon
the persons and estates of other of their fellow Subjects, seize upon Majesty
it self, accounting themselves the only (Sacri) Saints which ought to possess
the Earth upon the account of Grace, as the Pope and his party does in ordine
ad spiritualia; both of them fitly resembling the madness of Thrasilaus (or, as
some say, Thrasimene) the Athenian, who made account that all the ships which
came into the Haven were his own, and would be very angry with those that went
about to reclaim him from so sweet an error: These are like Mariners that sail
from the same Port contrary ways in the world to make Proselytes, but meet
together in the Antipodes. The Popes pretend to Sanctitas when in many things
it is mera fatuitas, as his Holiness was sometimes styled by the Emperor in
Goldastus: so the men of this generation pretend to Holiness, when as the
Devil sends them strong delusions to believe a lie: and 'twere happy for some
of them, did they all but believe it, who are as like their fathers, Stork,
Stubner, and Muntzer, as one egg is like another. This Nicholas Stork, and Mark
Stubner born in Germany, did like Simon Magus, endeavor by diverse artifices to
gain upon the unwary multitude. This, by learning and a certain acumen in
expounding of Scriptures, the other ignorant of letters, by popular eloquence,
Enthusiasms, and same of secret conference with God. Both these, with their
great pomp and cunning no man knows what became of. Nevertheless the third of
them, viz. Muntzer, failed not to make the highest improvement of the fruit of
this new Gospel, imprinted in the minds of the people by Stubner and Stork. The
Fanatics took occasion of dividing themselves into parts, and of renting the
Church from Luther's book of Christian Liberty, first set forth in 1520.
Wherein they reading that a Christian man was Lord of all things, and subject
to no man, these words were wrested to a wrong sense by men impatient of their
own and others quiet: and thereupon first in private and obscure Cottages, next
in open and eminent places, the cruel government of Kings, their pillaging of
their Subjects was objected in the presence of the People. Liberty acquired to
all under the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, was boasted of: complaints were made not
only of the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, but of smaller matters tolerated by
the first reformers of the Church* And by this means the two pillars of public
order were weakened, viz. the dignity of the Magistracy, and the reverence and
respect of the ministry, and the authority of both. Hereupon thoughts were had,
and endeavors used for the setting up of a New and more perfect Church,
governed by a new kind of Policy, and of initiating it is Disciples by a new
Baptism. And least that the respect had to their former Baptism should hinder
it, they declaimed against Infant. Baptism as vain and unlawful, as being given
to such as were not capable, pretending that this Sacrament was not to be
administered to any but men of full age, and such as were at their own disposal.
And that this upstart Church might take the deeper root, these new Doctors
pretended a practice of godliness in themselves, and endeavored to inculcate
the same into others. Hence the ordinary themes of their private and public
meetings were, that sin was to be had in detestation, the flesh to be kept
under, and the Spirit stirred up duties of charity to be practiced, the Cross
of our Lord to be born, fastings were often to be held, mean garments and
moderate diet to be used, the dress of the whole body to be composed rather
unto neglect then elegancy, and that few words were to be used. It is a wonder
to see how far by this juggling the common enemy of mankind transforming
himself into an angel of light, promoted his own kingdom, and how obnoxious
these new Gospellers rendered even good men by this feigned scheme and form of
godliness.

These new Doctors, viz. Muntzer and his companions, little moved by the
exhortations or invectives of Luther, or the threatenings of the civil
Magistrate, tumult the more for them, complaining that Luther and others (...)
savoured of naught but carnal things, saying, that they had only broken off
some boughs of Antichristianism, leaving the tree and root entire; which, as it
ought, they would have to be cut up. And when they found no shelter for their
errors in the word of God, they fly to new arts of defending themselves and
their errors, they brag of Enthusiasms and secret inspirations, inculcating
into the people, that man was to live by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God, and that therefore we are not to search after wisdom in books
only, and writings, but that we should give diligence according to the
prescript of the Apostle, that all prophecy. Hence every Fishmonger almost
bragged of the spirit, feigned revelations, invented Enthusiasms, after the
example of Stork and Muntzer, opened the pulpits to Cobblers and Cummin sellers,
and whatsoever the spirit of error dictated to any of them, they obtruded upon
others for the word of God, though besides or against the written Word. A wide
gap being thus opened to Enthusiasms, any opinions were obtruded upon the
ignorant and itching-ear'd people, as namely that no Oaths were obligatory
under the Gospel, they every where preached sedition, and the seditious became
armed against their Princes, insomuch that the most flourishing Provinces were
hereby destroyed, and died in blood. Muntzer he must be their Gideon, who bore
this inscription in his Banners, namely, Thomas Muntzer and the sword of
Gideon. These things and many more may be read in Spanhemius de Origin
progressu, sectis, nominibus, and dogmatibus Anabaptistarum, and in the
Commentaries of Sleiden. It does almost superare Annalium fidem, for a man
would scarce believe what outrages have been committed in Westphalia, by John
of Leyden, Matthew, and Knipperdoling: whereof this last was so hardened in his
wickedness, that he endured three pinches of a red hot pair of tongs, before
he implored the mercy of God; which amongst other things [whereof some are
formerly related] are recorded by the said Sleiden in the fifth and tenth book
of his Commentaries, from whence this Story was of purpose translated into
English, anno 1642. as a warning piece to England, especially for London,
against those things, which, by woeful experience, we have found to have come to
pass, and whether they would have proceeded [had not God in mercy turned the
stream] might easily be foreseen. If this be not the spirit of Antichrist;
[that pretends to be so much for Christ, and yet so much against him, as the
very word (...) implies] I know not what is. If this be the very poison, in a
cup of gold [where of these men speak] what is? If this be not to make men
drunk with the wine of Abomination [which they talk of] what is? If they will
have it to be understood without a figure of a material cup of gold, even this
is as truly verified of the men of this generation as of any, inasmuch as this
is called a cup of Abomination, in reference to some Abomination committed in,
with, or upon some cups of gold, and particularly that of Belshazzar's impious
feast, Dan. 5. when the golden vessels which were taken out of the Temple of
the house of God, which was at Jerusalem, were brought, and the King and his
Princes, his wives and his concubines drank in them. And have not the men of
this generation done as much in spoiling Churches of their ornaments, of their
Chalices, of their Treasures, and they, their wives and concubines have drunk
in them to their own Gods, viz. their covetousness, their ambition and carnal
pleasures, deriding their consecration as superstitious, and consequently
accounting that God a Devil to whom they were set apart? The only pretense
they have for this their sacrilege is, That Music, Vestments, Bishops,
Ceremonies and Church and have not any footst^p in the New Testament; whereby
they discover themselves to be the most rigid sort of the Anabaptists: As do
these men, so did the Severians and Cerdonians, as St. Austin de Haeresibus ad
quod vult Deum, testifies. I must therefore encounter them within Lists of
their own setting, I mean the new Testament, or not at all.

Sect. 4.
FIrst then for Music: Where do they find it forbidden in the new Testament?
Nay, are we not exhorted to sing in the new Testament? viz. James 5. 13. Did
not the Disciples of Christ sing an Hymn or Psalm after the receiving of the
Sacrament? Mat. 26. 30 and Mark 14. 26. Does not St. Paul exhort his Ephesians
to speak unto themselves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing and
making melody in their hearts unto God? Ephesians. 5. 19. And does not the same
Apostle advise his Colossions to teach and admonish one another in Psalms, and
Hymns? etc. Colos. 3. 16. And whether these Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
Songs be different, as Grotius notes, or the same things, as others contend,
they cannot be sung without music; and this speaking, teaching, and
admonition, which are the subjects of these Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
Songs, are an evidence that we may, nay [if the Apostles exhortation be of any
force with us] we must sing out all things that tend to edification at times
convenient. The whole Book of the Psalms is a confutation of the Adversaries to
this truth, in as much as it being the very pith and marrow of the whole Bible,
contains doctrine, admonition, blessing, cursing, prophesying, history, prayer,
holy enquiries, always of edification and consolation: yet these were not
only appointed to be sung, but were adapted to Organs, Virginals, Viols, and
other sorts of Artificial Instruments, both ((...) and (...)) stringed and
wind, Psalm. 4. and Psalm. 5. in titulis.

But to improve their Objection for them, Where do we find Organs and
Chromatick Music to be any morethen types and shadows of things to come?

Whereunto I answer, That it cannot be proved by any man that Organs and
Chromatick Music are any more types and shadows of things to come under the
Gospel, then other vocal Music is; or give, not grant, that they had been
ceremonial, they may nevertheless now be used in another acceptance, viz. as
helps of lifting up of our hearts unto God, the better fitting them for hearing
and divine meditation: Neither did God, says Calvin upon the 150. Psalm,
without cause heretofore under the Law, require the multiplicity of Music,
that he might draw the minds of his people from vain and wicked delights
[whereunto men are too much addicted] to a holy and advantageous gladness; and
yet all this was too little, which gave occasion to the Prophet, Amos 6. 5. to
say, Wo^ be unto those that sing to the sound of the viol, and invent
instruments of music like David. Not that David was the first inventor of
those Instruments [for it was Jubal the son of Lamech, Genesis 4.] but that they
studied all incitements to luxury, defending their fault by the example of
David; as if David had used Musical Instruments as provocations to luxury, and
not as incitements to piety. Who then can deny, that it is lawful for us to use
the same sorts of Music, since the use thereof is directed to the same ends,
and those not typical but moral? Under the Law there was a double use of
killing of Beasts, the one as a sacrifice, the other as a sustenance: the
taking of it away as a sacrifice, does not abolish the use thereof as
asustenance. The like may be said of any Music [giving* not granting it to
have been ceremonial and typical] that though it might be then typical of
things to come, yet the use of it at present is tropical, h. e. for the
rectifying of disorders, and for the raising up of our hearts to a holy and
heavenly exultation, and drawing our minds from profane and idle songs, in use
at meretricious meetings.

Those that deny the use of musical Instruments under the New Testament, will
have them nevertheless to be types of praises: by which nice distinction they
are driven to confess, that they are something that is not ceremonial. Their
deceit they would have lie under the ambiguity of the word Type: For 1. it is
taken for a material print or impression, made by nails or otherwise, as John
20. 21. and such types they cannot be. 2. For the sum of an Epistle, or the
like, as Acts 23. 25. and such they cannot be. 3. For a shadow or adumbration
of a thing or person to come; and this by their own confession, or rather
affirmation, they are not: for this were to make them ceremonies, which they
will have to be contradistinguished from types. 4. For a form of doctrine, Romans
6. but Organs, etc. and Voices are not forms of doctrine. 5. For an Image or
Statue, Acts 7. 43* and this they cannot be neither, these being the work of
Painters and Engravers. 6. For examples to be feared, 1 Cor. 10. 6. but these
they cannot be there being no judgment in all the Scripture inflicted upon any
that used singing or musical Instruments, no, nor threatened against them,
unless such as abused them to luxury. 7. For a samplar to be followed, Phil. 3.
17. and as it were a copy given to be taken out by others. And such Types they
are, (being proposed to us to be imitated under the Gospel) and no other, as
has been proved by us, and confessed by themselves.

Sect. 5.
AS for Vestments, the same may be said of these as of Music That though under
the Law they were typical of things to come under the Gospel, yet under the New
Testament they are not so, but mere distinctions of persons serving, and of
services to be performed; which we learn not from the Law of Moses alone, but
from that of Nature too. The Sacrificers among the Heathen had their Infulaes,
h. e. Sacerdotates vittas. The Druides performed no facred services without the
leaves of Oak: and not only the Germans, but the Greeks, adorned their Altars
with green leaves of Oak. In the Rites performed to ^eres, they were crowned
with Oak; in those to Apollo with Bays; in those to Hercules with Poplar; in
those to Bac^hus with Myrtle. The Victims and Vessels were likewise crowned:
Sched. de Dis Germ. c. 1. In all which was a decency intended, agreeable to the
work they were about. It is very obvious how full the New Testament is of
declamations against the abominable practices of the Heathen* yet let these men
tell me where in all the Epistles of the Apostles these, or the like Ceremonies
were reprehended? I know some would have me say, as Pliny does, namely, that
the Druides sacrificed in white garments, that they might thence infer our
Surplices to be a Ceremony derived from Heathens, and abused to superstition:
And was not the Oak abused by the Druides to superstition, being had in so
great veneration among them? And yet our late Reformers gave order [which was
universally observed accordingly] for the Acorn, the fruit of the Oak, to be
set upon the top of their Maces and Crowns, and that instead of the Cross,
which had never been abused by the Heathen, who had it in detestation, as a
figure most unlike that which is best pleasing to him they worshipped, h. ^.
the Devil. Which thing so done by them was nevertheless of happy presage to us,
viz. That the tree which bore such fruit should [like that, in the Plains of
Mamre] serve for the shelter of our earthly Angel, King Charles, from the heat
and fury of Rebellion, which was then in the very Noon; until the Cross
reassumed its place again upon the top of his Crown. So unlucky are contentious
spirits many times, that they confute themselves by going about to condemn
others? Oh but these men accounting themselves the only Saints and Servants of
the most high God, any thing they wear or do must be sanctified to them: For to
the pure all things are ture, but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is
nothing pure. And if so, then they must prove, that our Church consists of
unbelievers; that it teaches and practices the uncleanness and other
abominati^ns of the Heathen, so often noted by the Apostles; yea our very
worship of God to be unclean and abominable, before they can conclude our
Ceremonies to be unclean and unlawful. But whilst we maintain the worship of
the true God, and give up our selves to be ordered by his Laws, we are pure,
and consequently to us all things are pure, Tit. 1. 15. a thing which cannot be
said of them, whilst they would have any error in doctrine or worship, yea
blasphemy it self to pass unpunished, which is the whole drift of this their
Sions groans. Wherefore definant maledicere, malefacta ne noscant sua. Let them
look into themselves, and their own practices, and they will find little reason
to think themselves in Heaven, much less to pull up the ladder after them, as
if none were worthy to follow. St. Paul pleads not for this decency only, but
for order two, 1 Cor. 14. which doubtless was used also among these
Sacrificers. And therefore, as well for the expediency of the thing in it self,
as the avoiding of the imputation of rudeness and confusion, wherewith the
Grecians here were apt to load them: the Apostle concludes the Chapter with
this Canon, Let all things be done decently, and in order; since therefore they
can prove nothing but decency, order, and usefulness in such ceremonies as we
use, what they say against them must go for nothing, and prevail as little with
us, as a Rationale would with them. Which should I produce whereby to give an
account of particularities, it would not make me justly liable to the dicterium
of Beza [in his Epistle to the Prince of Conde, put before his Translation of
the New Testament] cast upon those, who as he says, collabentibus aedium
fundamentis de instaurando fastigio laborarunt.

Sect. 6.
AS for Bishops, there are some we read of in the Scripture, who had the
appellation to be called Bishops, but were not distinguished into a superior
order above others. Others were both called so, and distinguished into an order
superior unto others; and these are the Bishops here meant by us. Such were
Timothy and Titus, as we learn from the several Epistles written unto them by
St. Paul. Such were the seven Angels of the seven Churches of Asia in the
Revelation, in the judgment of Dr. Reynolds in his conference with Heart, in
the end of the third, and the beginning of the fifth Division: and in the
judgment of the Archbishop of Armagh, of the Original of Bishops and
Metropolitans, both printed together. Those who by these Angels would have the
Churches to be meant, do manifestly contradict the Scripture. For, says Christ
there, the Candlesticks are the Churches, and the stars are the seven Angels of
the Churches. I wonder therefore, says Grotins, what spirit of contradiction
carries men away, that they dare confound things which the Spirit of God so
manifestly distinguishes. de Imp. sum. not. circa sacra, c. 11. And I more
wonder that these men should say that there is not one word for them in the New
Testament, or that they should be set up by us as Antitypes of the high Priests
under the Law. No, Christ is only that. Nevertheless in regard of the
distinction, which was an Ecclesiastical thing among the Jews; I say that the
Bishops do resemble the High Priests, and the inferior Clergy the other
Priests. For there were in this respect many High Priests at once, of whom we
read many to have been assembled together, Mark 14. 1. every one of which was
summus sacerdos istius Classis, the High, or chief Priest of that Rank. These
ranks had their several courses: and Zachary was of one of these courses, viz.
of that of Abia, Luc. 1. 5. not all these, but one only was typical, shadowing
forth Jesus Christ unto them. And even in this High Priest there was something
besides the representation, as is plain by St. Paul, who yielded his obedience
to the High Priest as governor of the people, Acts 23. 5. and that after the
Type was expired, which had been unlawful, had there not been somewhat
remaining in him besides the figure. Eleazar in Aaron's lifetime was Princeps
Princip^m; or Pralatus Pralatorum, Number. 3. 32. and yet not reputed a Type of
Christ; and 2 Chronicles. 35. 8. we read of three at once, one only whereof was the
High Priest which was the Type of Christ, the rest were not so; yet by reason
of their dignity paramount to others, might resemble Archbishops themselves.
And the other forementioned High Priests in regard of the place they held above
the rest of their Class, are in a sort resembled by our Bishops. And that this
may not seem strange to any, it is a matter obvious to our observation that
scarcely any Ordinance or Order under the New Testament, can be named, which is
not derived from others under the Old, by some kind of resemblance intended
between them. Imposition of hands by the Apostles was taken up in imitation of
that practiced under the Old Testament for the designation of successors; as
Moses used it toward Josuah, Number. 27. 18, 20. That the whole frame of Church
Government answers to the like order and distinction of persons and offices in
the Old Testament is evidenced by the learned Bishop of Winton in a scheme to
that purpose thus drawn, viz.

Aaron should be resembled by Christ. Eleazar Archbishops. Princes of Priests
Bishops. Priests Presbyters. Princes of Levites Archdeacons. Levites Deacons.
Nethinims Clerks and Sextons.

And hereunto he is led by the opinion of the ancient fathers, who seem to be
of the same mind, viz. that the same form should serve both: so is St. Cyprian,
so St. Hierome, St. Lee and Rabanus de vita clericor. The Government of the
Church of the Old Testament, says the Archbishop of Armagh, was committed to
Priests and Levites, unto whom the ministers of the New Testament do now
succeed in like sort as our Lords day has done unto their Sabbath. So he, in
his Original of Episcopacy: and if it were reasonable for Christians to take
the Jews for their pattern in drawing their scheme of Church government; much
more is it for modern Christians to follow the ancient, a thing which our
Church has done in her reformation, which has retained all things of ancient
usage in the Church of Rome, lest men should be scandalized at us, whilst we
seemed to set up a new Religion, instead of reforming the Old. The very Lords
Prayer has much of conformity, not only to the forms used by the Jews, as
others have observed; but also as it seems to me, to the very design of the
sacrifices of the Law, which are all reducible to three kinds. The first was
the whole burnt-offering to God, as absolute Lord of Heaven and Earth, and as
one to whom belongs honor from us, should he never bestow any special favor
upon us. The second was the peace offering, whereby to obtain at his gracious
hands all those blessings and the degrees thereof, whereof men stand in need,
whether public or private, as also to express a thankfulness for all
blessings, and for all those gracious returns he makes to the prayers of his
people from time to time, or at any time. The third was the sin offering for
the expiation of all or any transgressions of his holy and divine commandments,
and for health of soul. In conformity whereunto our Savior has in that
perfect and absolute form taught us to offer, by him, a spiritual holocaust to
the honor of his name, who inhabits eternity, in these words, Our Father which
art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Secondly a spiritual peace offering for
the advancement of his Kingdom in us, and the adimpletion of his will by us, as
also for a supply of all outward necessaries in these words, Thy Kingdom come,
thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven, Give us this day our daily bread.
Thirdly, a spiritual sin offering for the forgiveness of sins past, and for
prevention of sin for the time to come, in these words. And forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us; and lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil. And these not without a doxology, as a
spiritual Libamen or meat offering, [without which no burnt-offering was to be
made under the Law] in these words; For thine is the Kingdom, the power, and
the glory, for ever and ever. Amen. And so having not only proved the order and
distinctions of Ecclesi^sticks under the New Testament, but also the first
Liturgy [so the Lords Prayer is proved to be by Cassander in Liturgic^s ex
Dionysio, and stands undeniably true] to be instituted in resemblance of the
like under the Old Testament, I come now to prove the jurisdiction that they
have one over another, and over the rest of the Church: wherein two things are
to be considered in relation to o^r Bishops, viz. 1. Their power. 2. The
distribution of this power. As for the first. Their power is so connatural,
that the chief Judge in Areopagus was a Priest, hence Cohen in Hebrew was a
common name to Magistrates and to Priests, Genesis 41. 45. Potipherah was Priest.
h. e. Prince of On. The Druides among the Galls were of the noblest stock of
kindred: they were so in Epirus and Cappadocio, it was usual as well among the
Grecians as Romans for Kings to be Priests, and as Schedus de Dis Germ notes
out of Fenestella, the Priest was never made a distinct person from the civil
Magistrate till the expulsion of Kings out of Rome: and that this power so
challenged by the voice of Nature in the Heathen themselves, is warranted by
the Scriptures of the New Testament, I shall have occasion to show anon, in
answer to their objections against it. Mean while I shall prove the second
thing considerable, viz. The distribution of their power. And this is
distributed according to the distribution of the civil power, the Bishop
residing in the City or chief place, all the Clergy of inferior places within
his Diocese are subjest to him as he is to the Archbishop: which is answerable
to what the Apostles at first did practice in the very beginning of
Christianity, and was followed by after times, as is observed by Dr. Hammond
out of Acts 14. and 15. c. and made good against the Animadversions on the
Dissertations touching Ignatius's Epistles, c. 7. sect. 6. His words are these.
According to the image of the civil government among the Jews, and the like
again in their Temple [forementioned] the Apostles appeared to have disposed of
Churches every where, and in a^^ their plantations to have constituted a
subordination and dependence of the Churches in the inferior cities, to those
in the chief or metropoles. An example of this we have in the story of the
Acts, concerning Syria and Cilicia, and the several Cities thereof, in relation
to Antioch the Metropolis. For when the Question, Acts 15. 2. was referred and
brought to Jerusalem from the Church peculiarly of Antioch, c. 14. 26. and 15.
3. and the Decree of the Council returned to them by whom the Question was
proposed, h. e. to the Church at Antioch, ver. 22. yet in the Epistle wherein
the Decree was contained, we find the Brethren through Syria and Cilicia, i. e.
all the Christians of that Province to be expressed and joined with those of
Antioch, ver. 23. And after when that Decretal Epistle was delivered to the
Church of Antioch, ver. 30. Paul and Silas went over Syria and Cilicia, ver.
41. and 42. and as they went, they delivered to every City the Decrees of the
Council, c. 16. v. 4. which is an evidence that the churches of those cities
related either immediately to Antioch, or, as Antioch it self did, to
Jerusalem, and were in subordination to it as to the principal Metropolis of so
wide a Province, according to that of Philo, that Jerusalem was in his time,
the Metropolis, not of Jud^a alone, but of many other regions, in respect of
the Colonies, which it sent out of the Jews that dwelt in them, naming Syria
and Cilicia and diverse others, thus for the learned Doctor.

The same is proved out of Rev. 1. 14. John to the seven Churches in Asia,
where St. John directing his letters unto them thus indefinitely without any
mention of their particular names, he cannot by common intendment be conceived
to have understood any other thereby, but such as by some degree of eminency
were distinguish^ble from all the rest of the churches that were in Asia, and
in some sort did comprehend all the rest under them: for taking Asia here in
the most strict sense, for the Lydian, or [as the Imperial constitutions call
it] the Proconsular Asia: it is not to be imagined that after so long pains
taken by the Apostles and their disciples therein there should be found no more
then seven churches, especially since St. Luke, Acts 19. 10, 20. testifies that
all they which dwelt in Asia, heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and
Greeks, so mightily grew the word of the Lord and prevailed. And in particular
among the Epistles of Ignatius, there is one directed to the church in Trallis,
another to the church in Magnesia: and both these were subject to the
Metropolitan of Ephesus. See the Archbishop of Armagh, as above quoted. And
for these reasons, as also for their eminence in learning and wisdom, have all
Christian Kings of this Realm ever consulted with them, in the establishment of
Laws. We read in Lambert's (...), and Mr. Selden's Titles of honor, That the
Laws of Ina King of the West Saxons, were made by the persuasion and
appointment of his father Cenredus, and of Hedda and Erkenwald, Bishops, with
Senators, Elders and wise men of the people, in a frequent assembly of the
servants of God; which was between the years 712. and 727. The Laws of Alured
the first founder of this Monarchy, were made by his authority, as those of Ina
had been by his; but ex consulto sapientum by the advice of the wise, which
must include the Bishops. 1. Because his Laws were grounded on Moses his Laws.
2. Because nor these, nor those of Ina did reach to life, except in case of
Treason against King or Master. 3. Because he hereby allotted much of the
Kingdom to Guthurn, on condition of Guthuru's becoming Christian. All which are
things well beseeming the judgment of Bishops, and are (especially the first)
arguments sufficient to convince some of Error that contend our Laws to have
had their Original out of the twelve Tables. This was anno 871. about 820.
years since. The Laws of Ethelstan, anno 924. were made by the prudent counsel
of Vlfhelme Archbishop, and the rest of the Bishops, etc. wherein an estimate
was made of all orders of men that then were, or rather a declaration of the
Common Law in that point. As first, The King was esteemed at 30000. Thrymsa's,
i. e. so many times three shillings; an Archbishop at 15000. Thrymsa's; a
Bishop or Senator at 8000. Thrymfa's; a General of an army at 4000. one
initiated in holy orders, or a Them i. e. a Noble man at 2000. whereby it
appears that an Archbishop was double to any subject of the Kingdom besides;
and a Bishop equil to the greatest Lord in the Land; and every Priest as good
as the best Noble man under the degree of a Senator, so far are any of these
orders from arrogating, that they have lost much of that ancient honor, which
belonged unto them by the Common Law of this Nation. King Edmund called
together a frequent assembly of Ecclesiastics and Laics; where Oda and
Woolstan Archbishop were present, with very many other Bishops, for the
sanction of Laws. So did King Eldred anno 948. as Ingulphus testifies. So Edgar
and Canutus established Laws by the advice of the wise. So did William the
Conqueror with the concurrence of his Princes, whereof the Archbishops must be
a part: since which time no Acts of Parliament are made without the Lords
Spiritual.

And that these things were allowed to the Priests under the Old Testament no
man will deny, the proofs therein being so frequent and pregnant. But our
adversaries here call for proofs out of the New, whereunto I have and shall
answer hereafter in its due time and place, contenting my self at present with
the Exposition of that one text of Mat. 19. 28. Ye which have followed me, in
the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit upon the Throne of his Glory, ye
also shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. This
was spoken to the twelve Apostles which were Clergy men, and the Predecessors
of all Bishops; where note that the comma should be put immediately after Me;
and in the regeneration referred to the Son of man sitting on the Throne of his
glory, which was immediately after the descent of the holy Ghost, a time (...),
and by way of eminence called the Regeneration, because then were the gifts of
ministration and sanctification more abundantly poured forth then ever they had
been before; the immediate end whereof was Regeneration or Renovation: Then did
every Apostle besides his general commission, take upon him his particular
Episcopacy; where he sat and judged that is, governed the Church, signified
here by the twelve Tribes of Israel, under which notion the Jewish Church had
been comprehended. And if it were understood of their being assessors to Christ
in the last judgment, surely then I might use the argument of St. Paul, which
concludes a fortiori, 1 Cor. 6. 3. Know ye not that we shall judge the Angels?
how much more things that pertain to this life? where, under the pronoun We, he
includes himself and all the Apostles; In whose absence he would have them
rather end all differences (which at any time might happen) by compromise, then
appeal to Heathenish tribunals, from whence they were like to reap nothing but
scandal to Religion, and injustice to themselves, by reason of the corruption
of the Courts, according to that of the Epigrammatist ad Sextum.

Et Judex petit, and petit Patronus;
Solvas, censeo, Sexte, Creditori.
The Judge does ask a bribe, thy Advocate a fee:
Pay then thy Creditour, better pay one then three.
And so having done with Bishops, come we now to Churches.

Sect. 7.
IT is very true, that where two or three are gathered together in the name of
Christ, there is he in the midst of them: which was a singular consolation to
the Disciples of Christ, that though they were driven to corners and deserts,
and were fain to wander in desolate places, being hated by all men for Christ's
sake, yet how does this forbid public meetings, and at public places, when
time and opportunity presents it self? The people of God may pray in [Cryptis]
caves, in time of persecution, therefore they must do so in time of freedom,
when all the world is become Christians, is there any Logic in this? no, no
more then would be in this kind of argument. For the present necessity it is
not good for a man to touch a woman. Therefore when the necessity is over no
man may marry. This follows not, but the clear contrary rather. And to make
further proof hereof by Scripture of the New Testament, it is obvious to our
observation that the people of God had not only their Synedria's and National
Conventions, but other houses of prayer erected, and called Synagogues, who
being converted to the falth by the preaching of the Apostles, the Synagogues
were made particular Churches: for Gal. 1. 13. Saint Paul testifies of himself,
that he persecuted the Church of God. Now where was this Church of God? it was
in Synagogues, Act. 22. 19. I imprisoned, says he, and beat in every Synagogue
them that believed on thee: from whence I observe two things, 1. That the
example of Christians here, does teach us that its lawful to serve God in
Temples made with hands, though he be not, nor ever was confined to them. 2.
That it is as lawful that this be done, though in places abused to false
doctrine and superstition, as these Synagogues, yea their places of National
convention were, and that by Pharisees, Sadduces, and other Sects, yea
generally by all the Jews before their conversion to the faith. And what is
testified here, of Jewish Synedria's and Synagogues, is true of Heathen
temples, namely, that it is lawful to dedicate them to Gods worship. Act. 17.
when St. Paul sound at Athens, an altar dedicated to the unknown God, he went
not about to preach down their altar, but to preach up Jesus and the
resurrection upon it, least he should seem to be a setter forth of strange
Gods, as indeed he did to some nevertheless. Nay, a third thing may be hence
observed, namely, that as these Synagogues were subordinate to the Synedria's
or National Assemblies; it follows that diverse parochials may be subordinate to
the Synedrium of the Cathedral, and the Cathedral to a Provincial or National
Convention. And thus much for the lawfulness of Churches. Now for the
convenience of them. They are convenient, 1. for their capacity; the Cathedrals
being large enough to contain the Bishop with the Dean and Chapter, the
standing Synede of the Diocese, besides the confluence of the whole City and
Diocese upon all occasions. The parochial Churches are lesser, yet of capacity
enough to contain a parish. 2. they are convenient for their situation, 1. in
respect of the Diocese [if Cathedrals] they being in some eminent place
thereof, 2. in respect of the parish [if parochials] they being as near as may
be to the middle thereof, 3. in respect of the whole world, in as much as they
look toward the East, which the ancient Christians turned to in their
adoration, as is testified by Tertullian in Apologet. c. 16. and by Dionysius
the Areop. in coelest. Hi^rarchia, c. 11. quite contrary to the Temple of
Jerusalem, whose Holy of Holies or upper end was Westward. Indeed the Church
built by Cardinal Richelieu, at Richelieu, a town of his own building too, has
its Choir Westward, and its entrance in at the East end thereof, which was so
appointed by him, I suppose, least otherwise it might spoil the fashion of his
town, a respect being had unto the model according to which it was to be built,
and not out of an opinion of the indifferency of situation; for albeit he were
contented to turn his face sometimes Westward in his adoration when living; yet
being dead he looks Eastward in the Chapel of his own building in the College
of Sorbon where he lies buried. What was done by the said Church at Richelieu,
was intended by that in Covent Garden, but it was not permitted to be
consecrated till the said design was altered, which was done Bonis avibus too;
for Covent Garden continnes a flourishing part of London suburbs, whereas
Richelieu has nothing in it of the aim of the said Founder, [which was to make
it a University for the study and teaching of Philosophy in the French tongue]
but is like a proud woman, that hangs all upon her back at once; for so is this
empty of Students and riches, having nothing left to commend it besides the
superb^ name, set out with gay and uniform buildings, as if every house there
were as a Rejection of the Cardin^ls magnifick Palace that stands by and would
in time grow emulous of their mother tree, out of whose root they sprang. But
to return, 4 Our Churches are convenient for situation in respect of their
parts within themselves, having an upper end and a lower; this for the font to
initiate and give first entrance into the Church by Baptism; that, for the holy
Table which is for a spiritual repast to [adulte] persons of years, the middle
for the Catechumeni to stand between, 5. in respect of the fabric of the
whole, they being like naves inversae, ships whose Keel is toward heaven. They
have also ales or wings in many places, which are nothing else but
continuations of Vestries; built in resemblance to Cabins in Ships, and were
therefore called (...), h. e. not as a pyxis to keep the Host in, as the
Pontificians contend for, but because they were as Cabins for the Masters of
the ships to lodge in, derived from (...), or (...) thalamus, and (...) to
bear, as Bishop Morton learnedly observes against them. Some Cathedrals are
built with a single Cross, representing that whereon our Savior was crucified
[for since Constantine's IN HOC VINCES, Churches have not only been so built in
some places, but the sails of ships have ever been furled up in manner of a
Crucifix] some are built with a double Cross, the uppermost representing that
whereon the title was written, viz. INRI They had no way more suitable of
enlarging such fabrics, where beauty or necessity required it. I might
justify the building of Churches in such figures as are most proper from that
place of Ezekiel 9. 4. Go through the midst of the City, through the midst of
Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of them that sigh, etc. and verse.
6. it is said, slay utterly old and young, both maid and little children and
women; but come not near any man upon whom is the mark, and begin at my
Sanctuary. This mark in the original is Tau, and so translated in the Interl.
Bibles, and the vulgar Latin by those that were no boys (as Viz. Dr. Owen in
(...) (...) l. 4. digres.
some would make them) or something less for skill in Hebrew Grammar. Now this
letter Tau, the last in the Hebrew Alphabet was written in the old Samaritan
character, like a cross, as is witnessed by St. Hierome upon the place, and
that it was so upon the ancient coins they do not deny; and it is so both in
the Alphabet of coins, and in the Alphabet of Azarius exhibited by Vilalpandus
upon Ezekiel: all that they can say is, that those coins are mala mex, and a
kind of counterfeit things; it is true, that 1000. counterfeits of Jewish
coins, and of Romans together, etc. too have been made, which many do buy and
furnish their closets withal; all which may be called mala merx: But what is
this to the genuine pieces, from whence these counterfeits were taken: I must
therefore send them to find better arguments to prove their precensions, then
yet they have brought to light, mean while rest in this opinion, viz. that in
case we build any consecrated Temple, or make any holy sign, as that in Baptism
is, the fittest figure is that of the Cross: This letter Tau is the first
letter of Torab, b. e. the Law whereby God would save the observers of his Laws
from the common destruction, which is a figure of those that shall be freed
from the condemnation of the world, being first marked by Christ our high
Priest, signified thereby a man clothed in linen with a Writers Inkhorn by his
side, v. 2. it is true, that in our translation it is only [set a mark] or as it
is in the margin, mark a mark: but why may not this mark be a cross rather
then any other, having these significations in it? neither can any other, I am
sure, no better be given to it; nor yet more natural: For, 1. It is a figure
that is primo cognitum of all other, as consisting of the concourse of lines at
right angles, which are the common measure of themselves and all other angles
whatsoever; and let the Cross be made never so irregularly, yet if the lines
be straight, it will have four angles equal to four right ones* Secondly,
contumous quantity being divisibilis in semper divisibili^ra, this cannot be
done but in parts equales, and these equal parts cannot be set out so well as
by a Cross, whether it be in plana or in ^ubo, sc. in a plain superficies, or
a cubical body, unto the first of which all superficies, unto the latter, all
solids are to be reduced in measuration; as for example, in oblong superficies
between the unequal sides.

I find a mean proportional, this is the side of a square equal to the
superficies given again in a triangular, between the pe^pendicular, and the
half base: I find a mean proportional, this is the side of a square equal to
the triangle given: The same rule serves for a rhomboides: Thirdly, it is no
marvel that Tau should be originally a Cross, when so many letters in the
Hebrew Alphabet [I speak not of those that follow the caprice of Scribes, or
founders of lies] have their genesis from the pa^ts of a Cross, viz. (...)
other letters there be as (...) which seems to be as so many chips cut off it
by the glance of the tool that hewed them; and of these letters all others seem
to be compounded, as is obvious to our observation; other reasons might be
given for the natural apprehension of the Cross, but these shall suffice here
to infer the probability of that mark to be the sign of the Cross, and the
fitness of building of Churches after the manner of a Cross; Which if they
would have demolished because built after the manner of a Cross, they must
pull down many Towns in England, which seem of design to be built after the
manner of a Cross, especially Gloucester, whose figure stands thus, a The Ailes
gate, b the North gate, c the South gate, d the West gate, e the College and
St. Mary's parish Church, f the Castle, g the middle row. The East West and
South streets make up a complete Cross; the middle row g the Crucifix upon it,
the College, etc. e our Saviors mother and other Saints lamenting his
condition, or rather their own, the Castle f the soldiers that brought to
execution and derided him. And that these were the glory of this Nation, has
been in effect confessed in the Pulpit by one of the eminentest Independents in
the Nation, when he prayed God to preserve the Universities, the only remaining
glory, as he said, of our Nation, the Cathedrals being then taken away: But
what figure soever the Churches had been built in, they would have found matter
of exception against them. Had they been round as those of the Huguenots are,
then they had been circles to conjure by, a figure best pleasing to the Devil,
as being most contrary to a Cross: A Cross then would have pleased them,
which now they abhor as a matter of high superstition, but as the case stands*
they seem to be pleased with Churches of the same figure as their Religion
resembles. h. ^. a mere Parabola. I come now from the convenience to the
necessity of these Churches in some regards; for albeit before their
consecration they were in the power of those that gave them, to give or not to
give them to those uses; yet since that they are thereby given to God, and such
things God accepts for his own, it follows that Quicunque alienaverit
sacrilegus erit. He will rob not only a society of men that live by and in
them, but God also, as Ananias and Saphira did in another thing, but in the
like case. But I have hinted from whence these exceptions sprang at first, viz.
from Stork, Stubner, and Muntzer: And from the same beginning it is that their
exceptions against learned men issues forth, when Cobblers and Furriers are set
up to preach in hog-houses, and nasty places. And those things before mentioned
would never become a stumbling block to the Gentiles, as they pretend, as is
evident by their crying up of their Goddess Diana, the magnificence of whose
Temple allured the world to worship her; and had they had Temples dedicated to
the true God of more magnificence then Diana's was of, they would have cried as
loud as they did of Diana, that Great is the God of Heaven; whereby it is
evident that such things may be outward motives of bringing men to the Church,
and so of seeing and learning what is there taught and practiced, which they
would not have been allured to, by an assembly of men met together in a pigs
coat; nay it seems by the very argument of these men themselves, that had the
Jews beheld as magnifick Temples under Christianity as they had in judaisme,
they would have become Christians. But I shall believe neither the one, nor the
other touching the Jews, till God takes away the vail drawn over their hearts.
The wrath of God is not come on them for that, but for crucifying the Lord of
Glory, and for imprecating his blood upon themselves and theirs.

Sect. 8.
BUt, say they, The bare rejection of truth, and embracing of error is not all
the evil that the Nations generally are engaged in by the Church of Rome, but
for to complete and fill up the measure of their iniquities, like
Nebuchadnezzar, nothing less must be inflicted on the servants of the most high
God, that cannot bow down to the golden image of their inventions, then the
fiery surnace of persecution, many times unto death it self. Whereunto I
answer, first, That this is as clear as the Sun shines to be a scandal upon the
good Laws of the Land, as if they were like those of Draco the Athenian, of
which it was said that they were written in blood, in as much as they punished
every offense alike, without suiting the penalty to the quality of the crime.
Indeed this would quickly leave no criminals or no men in the Commonwealth, in
case all offenders were subject to the same punishment how various soever their
offenses were, and that punishment were death. But I shall take the pains to
show that this very thing which they here impute to us, is applicable to
themselves. Thus then the Harlot in the Revelation is so called, because it is a
counterfeit of the woman, in the twelfth chapter thereof, that is the Church
which is there described to have the Moon under her feet. She is not then the
true woman, but a counterfeit, an image only. Now an image may consist of
different parts and matters as Nebuchadnezzar did, Dan. 2. and yet the same
image still: so does this Harlot consist of several men of several Sects, of
several principles, in several ages, and yet the same Harlot, the same
Antichrist still, as long as the Devil works generally alike in them all,
whereof the Pope makes one part, the Anabaptist another, other Sects [if this
be not comprehensive of all] others, and all this is done by dreams, as
Nebuchadnezzar's image was. And because men will not fall down and worship
their dreams for truths, notwithstanding they comprehend not Heterodoxisms
only, but horrid blasphemies against God and his Son Christ, and be destructive
of the Ordinances of God, and witnesses of the Revelation, they are mad, they
send forth excommunications, they preach and practice rebellion, they say they
fight for God, when they fight against the King Gods Vicegerent, that they are
the servants of the most high God, when it is plain that the Devil carries them
captive at his will, that they would have Christ reign over them, when the
Devil reigns in them, that they defend our liberties when they carry us
captive, that they maintain our proprieties when they plunder us, that it is
done in faith, when it is without charity, that it is to vindicate the liberty
of Religion and freedom of the Gospel, when they make their own passion and
interest the measure of it. Hereupon the beautiful feet of those that should be
the messengers of peace, become swift to shed blood, the hands that have been
accustomed to handle the holy Sacraments appear like Bellona's hands embrued in
gore, the cloven tongues of the Spirit are turned into serpents tongues,
Trifidasque linguas. (Sen. in Medea) and dividing themselves into three parts,
their mouths that should dictate the oracles of God, are like the mouth of a
Leviathan, Job 41. 19. whose breath kindles coals, and a flame goes out of it;
that hair that should be like that of the ancient of days, white as wool, to
note the incorruption of truth, is speckled like snakes, ravel'd into philtres,
and rolled into tresses like serpents. And could their seduced proselytes but
see all this, they would want no Rherorick to undeceive them: but this they
have added to the very (...) of their imposture, sc. that the Devil appears in
the mantle of Samuel, and I know not by what Gygs ring they walk invisible, or
else God has suffered the eyes of the people to be blinded that they cannot
see, or by the same just judgment, hardened their hearts, that they cannot
perceive. But if these men be in the right, then let the Epistle of Jude, and
the 2 of Pet. c. 2. be for ever, as some of them would have them, not
canonical; for would they lay aside abstruse and obscure prophecies impoysoned
with their presumptious glosses upon them, which are written rather to exercise
their humility, then cherish their presumption, and seriously apply those
evident truths to their own practices, they would find every verse, like
Prometheus his Eagle, feeding upon their inward parts, animated by that lying
spirit as by fire stolen from heaven. And since these authors mention France
and other places, what civil commotions have been caused there, in order to
worship: I say that they arose from men of their generation. For I must
remember them out of Mr. Camden's Eliz. That it is about seventy years since
that Kingdom of France labored of such a monster as this, which as an image
consisted of several parties as of several materials, one affecting
Aristocracy, another Olygarchy, another Democracy, another Anarchy, all
disliking the present form Monarchy. Mean while the preachers easily snatching
the people about by this common motion, became the trumpeters of sedition, till
after the assasinate of their King, they began to disagree as much about their
new Governors, as before they had done about their government. These men in
Munster or Amsterdam might have passed for Anabaptists, and had they kept
company with Knipperdoling, John of Leyden, Munizer, Stork, or any of that
Rabble, they had proved so indeed, and what they would have been here, we all
know, the Devil working alike in them all, though of different Religions. And
about this time it was, that the calamities which have befallen this Kingdom
were a brewing [as you may read in the English Scottizing, and Scots Genevating
for Discipline, set forth by Archbishop Bancroft] which these Authors here
falsely ascribe to the sending the Scottish Liturgy into Scotland. Suppose that;
that had been the cause, I deny it to have been a just one; for let them tell
me what warrant they have out of Scripture, or Orthodox Writer, of rebelling
against their Sovereign under pretense of Religion, be it true or false. If so,
where is their subject of passive obedience, they so much boast of? And if
nothing can be a good ground of rebelling against the King, much less can it
justify that which had no end but in the death of the King, and slavery of the
people, whose liberty was pretended to be vindicated. And thus far they have
but declaimed, which we having answered, as you have heard, let us examine
their proofs, or Logical part which all depends upon this one Syllogism.

Sect. 9.
IF any Magistrate under heaven, in the days of the Gospel has power to
impose any thing in the worship and service of God, it is given him as he is a
Magistrate only, or as a Christian so considered, But that no such power is
given by God to any Magistrate appears.

For answer to the first part hereof, I say that he has power as he is a
Magistrate only: and this power is given him of God, in as much as Magistracy
is an Ordinance of God. All powers of the world whatsoever are from him, even
those of Tyrants themselves, though permissively only: Lawful powers are from
him, as ordained by him. And as these are ordained by God, so has he given
them power in the worship and service of God. For I. The very Heathens have
given the first place to Religion, as knowing by Natures instinct that without
Religion no policy of a Commonwealth can be happily instituted or administered.
It is an axiom drawn out of the fourth book of Plato de rep. that Religio est
fundamentum reipublicae, and potissima pars publici Magistratus, and vere arx
atque propugnaculum constituendae reipublicae, without which all the parts of a
Commonwealth, like the strings of an instrument, will be out of tune, (...),
and therefore another axiom follows thereupon, that non potest immutari status
religionis sine maximarum legum immutatione, and propterea non est temere
importanda in rempublic am nova religionis forma: because it does dismember and
disjoynt the Commonwealth. St. Paul disputing daily at Athens touching
Religion, was brought unto Areopagus to be judged by that Court, Act. 17. 19.
as upon whom the business of Religion was principally incumbent. Ezra received
the power and jurisdiction from Artaxerxes speedily to execute judgment upon
all contumacious persons in the business of Religion, Ez. 7. 14. whether unto
death or banishment, or confiscation of goods, or imprisonment, Ez. 7. 25, 26.
So did Cyrus and Darius give permission to the Jews to reedify the Temple; and
to to sacrifice therein, adding money to defray the charges, 2 Chapter 29. 15, and
30. 12. Nebuchad^ezzar, Dan. 3. 29. commanded him to be hewed in pieces that
should blaspheme the God of the Hebrews. Secondly, the Lawyers refer Religion
to those things which belong to the Law of Nations, in as much as by the
guidance of Nature we know that there is a God, which is to be reverenced, and
who knows not that to a Magistrate belongs, not only the administration of
positive Laws, but of those also that belong to the Laws of Nature. Thirdly, if
it be the duty of a father of a family to instruct his children in the true
Religion, and to reduce them from their deviations from in: how much more does
it appertain to the Magistrate, who is the father of his Country, to take care
of the religion of his subjects. Fourthly, This is required of a Magistrate in
Scripture, Ps. 2. Kiss the Son, and serve the Lord in fear, which consists
not only in the adoration of the Son of God [for that is common with him to
every true Christian] but also in the outward administration of his Kingdom.
This therefore was the injunction laid upon the Kings of Israel to be observed
when God should bring them into the Land he promised them, viz. when they sit
upon the throne that they write them a copy of the Law in a book out of that
which is before the Priests and Levites, Deu 17. 18. And at the inauguration of
J^ash. the book of the Law of God was given into his hands, 2 Chapter 23. 18. And
fifthly, The examples of holy Princes do teach us that Magistrates have the
care of Religion committed to them, such were Moses, Joshuab, David, Solomon,
Asa, Jehoshaphat, Josiah, Ez^kia^, etc. And albeit these men will (what never
any, but persons sprung from Anabaptists did) reject all examples and
testimonies out of the Old Testament [unless it be to serve their own turn, [as
I have formerly showed them to have done in the date of their Epistle, the
eighth day of the third moneth] yet this, I suppose, they will hardly deny,
namely, that a father under the Gospel has and ought to have a care of his
children, in matters of Religion, their own practice witnesses as much, in that
they instruct their children in their own principles, and keep them from
Baptism and Steeple Houses [as they call the Churches] which they hold to be
unlawful, etc. Now if these things are given to a father of a family whose
power cannot reach as far as a Kings, much more to a King or other Magistrate,
whose jurisdiction is of a larger extent, and where of a family is but an
integral part. And the same comparison holds between a Master and a Magistrate,
which is not only a father of his Country, but a master too: for in Rome, he
who was Dictatour and bare the power fupream, was called the Master of the
people: whence it is that Cicero calls Caesar Master, and Livie witnesses that
the Dictatour was so added to the Consuls, that he might be their Moderatour
and Master. If therefore it be lawful for a Master of a family, school, or
society, to be defensive and offensive in Cause of Religion under the Gospel,
toward their children, scholars, and servants, how much more is it given to a
Magistrate toward his subjects, who bears the same relation to a Master of a
family, school, or society, as the whole does to a part.

But, say they, if Magistrates as such have such an authority, then all
Magistrates in all Nations, have the same power, Then if we lived in Turkey, we
must receive the Alcoran and be worshippers of Mahomet; if in Spain, be
Papists, as in Hen. 8. his days, sometimes Protestants, as in Edw. 6. his
days, etc.

Ans. This is the very argument of the Papists in Calvino. Turcismo, l. 4. c.
10. and improved by Champnaeus. But its answered by Mason de Ministerio
Anglicano, l. 3. c. 5. And hereunto I further say, That as all Magistrates in
all Nations have power in matters of Religion, so they have the same power, but
not the same skill to govern, nor the same Rule to go by in governing; as for
instance ones Rule is his will, another's is the Law: and of those that are
limited by Laws, some rule by some Laws; others, by other Laws different from
them. So 1. in matters of Religion, Magistrates do rule according to the book
delivered unto them: some have only the book of Nature put into their hands,
and these have a faculty thereby given them to rule and order Religion
according to that, such has the Turk, and all unconverted Magistrates. Some
have the Book of the Old Testament delivered into their hands; and those were
sometimes to rule according to that. So Dent. 17. 18. it is said, that when the
King sits upon the throne of his kingdom, he shall write him a copy of the
Law in a book, out of that which is before the Priests and Levites, and it
shall be with him, and ^e shall read therein all the days of his life. And in
2 Chronicles. 23. 11. it is said that they brought out the Kings son, and put upon
him the crown, and gave him the Testimony, and made him King, etc. Some have
the book of the New Testament put into their hands; and these are to order
matters of Religion according to this: such are all Christian Kings, Princes,
and Governors. Now whereas they would infer that therefore we must receive the
ALCORAN, be Papists and I know not what, according to the sole will of our
Governors whatever persuasion they be of; This is not so: for albeit
whatsoever they enjoin according or not contrariant to these Books be firm and
inviolable, yet whatsoever they determine without or against these Books is
void; so that the Turk has not a stable and inviolable power given him to
impose the ALCORAN and to enjoin worship to Mahomet, in as much as no such rule
is given by the book of Nature delivered unto him: Nature dictates no such
thing, and therefore such a thing must be given by God himself, who is above
Nature, or else it must be acknowledged to be, as it is indeed, a mere
Imposture. The Kings of Israel had power given them to Rule by the Book of the
Law in matters of Religion: But they that did set up Idolatry, contrary to the
contents of that Book, did abuse their power, and in that regard their
Injunctions were of no force. The King of Spain has the book of the New
Testament put into his hands, and consequently the moral part of the Old
Testament, but he permitting Idolatry, and giving up his power into the Popes
hands, whose Vassal he becomes, [as all Popish Princes do] he abuses this
power. If any other Prince does the like, he is not to be followed therein: He
is nevertheless passively to be obeyed; that is, a Christian-Subject is not to
resist him, but he is to submit to such punishment as he shall inflict upon
him, in as much as an error in the understanding, upon which proceeds the
abuse of his power, which is accidental, does not make void his power, which is
essential to him, and whereunto every soul is subject, in foro externo: The
Spirit of God says in the same breath, Fear God, honor the King. He who does
any thing by command from the King contrary to the command of God, does not
fear God; and he that rebelleth or resists [for it is all one] the King, upon
any pretense whatsoever, does not honor the King, but despise him, yea and
resist the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves
damnation, Romans 13. The same may be said of the Turks forbidding a man to
believe in Christ, or any thing of absolute necessity to salvation, wherein he
is not to be obeyed, in as much as it is not a thing contrary to the Law of
Nature* but of the Institution of the God of Nature, that we believe in God,
and in him whom he has sent, Jesus Christ his Son.

2. Secondly, they say, that since our Savior tells us, that all power is
given him in heaven and in earth, if the Magistrates have any such power, it is
committed to them from the Lord Jesus Christ, and written in the New Testament.

I answer, That no power could be given to Christ, which he had not before,
being God eternal, and therefore we must say, that all power was in Christ
naturally and essentially. But there is a power given him [which he had not but
by gift] dispensatorily, as he is the Mediator, which is nothing else but a
Rule which he observes in the salvation of men, as a thing added, to his
essential power. Now infidel Kings receive their power from Christ's natural and
essential power only, being not bound to believe in Christ, nor to observe the
Rules he gives till revealed unto them, but to observe the Law of Nature given
in Paradise according to which they and their subjects (infidels) shall be
judged. Wherefore I hope they will not send us to find this in the New
Testament. Though they should, I have a text for them there too, Romans 1. 19,
20, 21. Because that which may be known of God, is manifest in them, for God
has showed it unto them. Kings that believe, receive their power, not from
Christ's natural and essential power only, but from his dispensatorie power, as
he is Mediator and great Lawgiver to his Church: by which power he does not
take away the former, but establish it rather. Let them show me where he takes
it away? If they do, they must show me a contradiction to the words of the
Apostle, who says, Romans 13. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. Oh
but these were heathen Magistrates, say they. Whereunto I answer, that if every
soul must be subject to Heathen Magistrates, much more then, to those that
believe in Christ, who came not to destroy, but to rectify and perfect the Law
of Nature.

3. The third thing that they say, will fall to the ground upon what has been
already spoken, viz. That the Apostles themselves refused to be obedient to
their Rulers, Act. 4. 19, 20. When they were commanded to forbear that which
they judged to be a part of the worship of God.

Ans. That their Rulers enjoined them not to preach Christ, and therein they
did well to disobey, for otherwise they had not feared God, in as much as,
though their Rulers were above them, God was above them both. Yet had they not
obeyed passively as contented to suffer reproach for the name of Christ, they
had erred against the fifth commandment of Honor thy father and mother, which
is equivalent to that in the New Testament, sc. Honor the King, which is clean
contrary to rebelling or resisting him. These things are so plain, that I
wonder any should stumble at them, but that they are so blinded with passion
and self-interest, that they cannot apprehend them.

4. They say in the fourth place, That all Emperors before Constantine, were
Heathens, and that therefore those texts of Scripture that call f^r obedience
to Magistrates, cannot intend obedience in matters of faith.

Ans. Do they think that the New Testament, whereof these texts of Scripture
are a part, belonged only to those that then lived, and not to us also? if not,
then this text of Scripture, viz. ye believe in God, believe in me also,
belonged not unto us, but to them only that lived then. As we have opportunity
let us do good unto all men, especially to them that are of the household of
faith, Gal. 6. 10. with all the rest of the New Testament belonged not to us,
but to them only. They would have the Old Testament cashiered: and if they
reject the New, what Canon shall be left to walk by? no faith, no hope, no
charity would be then necessary; this would be a liberty indeed, here would be
room enough for an Enthusiast to wander in. But stay a little, Those texts of
Scripture belonged not to them alone, who lived in those days, but to us also
[as does all the rest of the New Testament, who live under Christian
Magistrates, and therefore they must intend obedience in matters of faith, and
that because they are words indefinitely spoken, which we are not to restrain
to our own sense, but rather to enlarge them into an universal proposition: Let
every soul be subject to the higher power, wherein? In all things: for it is in
materia necessaria, and consequently equivalent to an universal.

2. I answer, that albeit all Magistrates were now Heathens, yet it would
comprehensively intend obedience to them in matters of faith [either active or
passive] as to competent judges of them. Felix was a Heathen, Act. 24. yet he
being the Deputy of the Roman Emperor, St. Paul is accused before him by
Tertullus: whereupon, says St. Paul, I am judged concerning the Resurrection
from the dead, h. e. concerning a principal Article of faith. The same
controversy came shortly after before Festus, wherein St. Paul himself
acknowledged his right of judging: Here, says he, I ought to be judged. Again,
fearing the injustice of the Judge, He appealed unto Caesar, who of right was
the supreme Judge, and a Heathen too. Other examples might be alleged out of
primitive Authors, but in vain, against men who will deny the Sun shines,
unless proved by express words of the New Testament. But this being the very
Argument of Champnaeus the Sorbonist, page 580. I leave it further to be
answered, if need be, by Francis Mason de Minist. Angl. l. 3. c. 4.

5. Fifthly, They say, That if Magistrates a^ such have power from God, in the
days of the Gospel, to command in spiritual matters, and to punish them that
obey not, then must Christians surely be actually obedient, not only for wrath,
but for conscience sake.

Answ. I deny this Argument, for in commanding any thing contrary to the Word
and Will of God, they abuse their power, either through ignorance or
wilfulness, and in that case merely passive obedience is to be yielded; for
all things of practice are either absolutely unlawful, and in such the
Magistrate is not to be obeyed, and that for conscience sake; because God, or
Nature, which is the voice of God, is to be obeyed before men; or else
absolutely necessary, and in such no man can make a question, whether
Magistrates be to be obeyed or not; or indifferent, which stand in Equilibrio
between good and evil; the grains of the Magistrates authority gives weight to
that side it is put into, which must therefore incline us to obedience for
conscience sake; not that humane Laws can be properly said to bind the
conscience by the sole authority of the Lawgivers, but they do it partly by
the equity of the Laws, every man being obliged to promote that which conduces
to a public good; and especially by Divine Authority, which commands every
soul to be subject to the higher powers, for his conscience sake, and not
prudentially only. The Question, says the now Lord Primate of Ireland Bramhall
against Militiere, is soon decided. Just Laws of lawful Superiors, either
Civil or Ecclesiastical, have authority to bind the conscience in themselves,
not for themselves.

But it is answered, say they, that all Magistrates, suppose whatever they
impose. But the Questian is, who is to determine, for if the Magistrate, or any
other man or men have power from God to judge and determine, what is lawful for
men to obey, then no room is left to them to dispute any of his commands, and
so the cross of Christ ceases, etc.

Answ. The twentieth Article of our Church tells us, who is to determine how,
and what? The CHURCH has power to decree Rites or Ceremonies, and authority in
controversies of faith, and yet it is not lawful for the Church to ordain any
thing that is contrary to Gods word, neither may it so expound one place of
Scripture that it be repugnant to another: wherefore although the Church be a
witness and keeper of holy Writ, yet as it ought not to decree any thing
against the same, so besides the same ought it not to enforce any thing to be
believed for necessity of salvation.

All things contained in this Article are either indifferent, such are Rites or
Ceremonies, or necessary, such are matters of faith: In the first it has the
power of ordaining, and yet it is not lawful to ordain any thing contrary to
Gods Word. In the second, it has the power of explanation, and therefore it is
a witness and keeper of holy Writ; yet it ought not so to expound one place of
Scripture that it be repugnant to another, nor enforce any thing besides the
same to be believed as necessary to salvation. Now in case they should decree
any Ceremonies contrary to the Word of God, or impose any thing to be believed
besides the same, and so stir up the Magistrate to punish the contempt hereof,
and the contemners be punished accordingly; How is the Cross of Christ made
void in this case? Truly not at all, no more then Peter and John did make void
the Cross of Christ, in refusing to obey the Rulers of the Jews, forbidding
them to speak any more in the name of Jesus, Acts 4. On the other side, what if
no Rites or Ceremonies were decreed against the Word of God, and nothing
imposed upon them as necessary to salvation, but liberty were granted them to
embrace nothing but what they could easily so allow, what sword of the
Magistrate would be drawn against them? And would not the Cross of Christ cease
in their own sense? So then, there were no better way of answering their
Argument drawn from the ceasing of the Cross of Christ, then by granting them
their desire.

In the last place, they urge the example of Gallio the Roman Deputy of Achaia,
Acts 18. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Which worthy example, say they, if Magistrates
would be persuaded to follow, by judging and punishing only civil injuries and
wrongs, and leaving spiritual differences to be decided, and judged, and
punished by Jesus Christ according to the Gospel, they would then find
themselves quickly free from many inconveniences, etc.

Answ. These men either speak merrily, or else they wanted examples to prove
their Assertion, who had none to cite, but that of the most corrupt Magistrate
that ever sat at the helm of Government. And behold the worthy example which
he gives, He judged and punished civil injuries, say they: But no such matter*
for the Infurrection against Paul was a civil injury; they cried for justice,
or rather for injustice, in a tumultuous way against an innocent person; and
this Gallio never relieved, or as much as heard him speak; which had he done,
that innocent person, St. Paul* would happily have proved there as formerly he
had done at Athens, that that God whom they ignorantly worshipped did he declare
unto them. And it seems that he gave the Greeks so good satisfaction in the
matter, that they took Sosthenes the Ruler of the Synagogue, and probably the
Ringleader of that Riot, and beat him before his face, as he sat in judgment,
he not as much as rebuked them for it. As for the differences concerning
Worship, it is said of them, as well as of the civil ones, that Gallio cared
for none of those things; who probably might have the same design upon some of
them in this kind of deportment of his, that Faelix had, Acts 24. 26. who hoped
for a bribe to be given him by Paul: for this controversy in all likelihood
did not end here, though the event be omitted as impertinent to this sacred
story. Mean while who can justify this to be a worthy example, which was so
unworthily done, viz. that he would not heed things that concern the worship of
God, which all the company judged of right to have appertained unto him?
Neither did he himself deny that he had, but that he would have any thing to do
with such matters: For why, had not he as much authority as Areopagus, Acts 17.
which was the highest Court in Athens, and the exactest in the world in their
proceedings, as we learn from Aristotle, 1 Rhet. 1. who took upon them to be
Judges of such matters, which the Philosophers themselves knew right well to
appertain unto them, when they brought St. Paul to be tried before them for his
Doctrine: neither did the Apostle demurre to their Bill of information, as if
it had not been within their Instructions for their Jurisdiction.

Sect. 10.
ANd now having answered all their objections against a Magistrates power of
imposing any thing in worship and service of God, as he is a Magistrate only: I
come to answer their second part of the proposition; and their reasons to
confirm it; viz. That No Magistrate has any such power, as he is a Christian.
For answer whereunto, the contrary is evident. For as every member of the
Church consists of an outward, as well as of an inward man, so the Government
of the Church regards the outward, as well as the inward man, which
consists in defending it, and delivering it from its enemies, as also in
ordering and adorning it. As then, says Grotius, the universal providence of
God, which watches over all things though it be of it self sufficient to
dispose and execute every thing: yet for the demonstration of its manifold
wisdom, it uses (potestatibus vicariis) the substitution of worldly powers,
for the conservation of the common society of men, whence it is that they are
called Gods. So also the special providence of God watching over his Church
adopteth the same powers to himself as his Vicars and Patrons of the true faith
kissing Christ, on whom also he confers his name, that is to say Anointed.
These are Kings and Princes that govern together with Christ, not in equal
share of power, but by delegation and Vicarship only. Wherefore since things
subordinate do not cross one the other, neither does it misbecome the Majesty
of Christ to govern the principalls of his Kingdom immediately by himself, the
other partly by himself and partly by others, [as it is also most certain that
he uses the help of Angels] it follows that an earthly Kingdom even as if it
respects holy things nothing hinders the heavenly and divine Empire of Christ.
Adversaries to this Doctrine on the one side are Papists and Presbyterians,
both acknowledging a temporal power in order to spirituals, but one of them
putting this power into the hands of the Pope, the other into the hands of the
Presbytery, those constituting Imperium supra imperium, these Imperium in
imperio at least. And they prove it by this argument; viz. The Magistrate is
not of the essence of the Church, Therefore he is not necessary to the
Government thereof. Answer, So neither is the Magistrate of the essence of a
Physician, or a Merchant, or of a Mason; yet he equally governs them all. They
both object, that Kings are enjoined to adore the Church. Answer, That is to
say, to adore Christ in the Church, says Hugo Grotius, there is a Trope in
that part of the prophecy, neither can the (...), says he, be rigidly urged,
unless we will transfer that Majesty to the Church, which is due to Christ
who is prince of the Earth, Apoc. 1. 5. It cannot be denied, but that as the
Churchmen have a distinct charge from and above others; yea even Kings
themselves, so there is a proportionable honor, and a submission due to them,
Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves, for
they watch for your souls, as they that must give account, etc. But I answer,
that that is enjoined to Prince and people, viz. that they submit themselves to
their Pastors, (quatenus) as they speak unto them the word of God, as the holy
Ghost himself expounds it, v. 7. of the same Chapter. The King as he is a sheep
of the fold of Christ, is fed by the Bishop or Pastor. The Bishop as a sheep
and a subject is fed by the King. The Bishop as he teaches the King, and
administers holy things unto him, is above the King; that is, in the actual
execution of his functions. But the King, as he establishes these things by
wholesome Laws and commands, the Execution of these functions, is above the
Bishop: as the Sun is above the Moon, so the Moon may be above the Sun in a
several respect. In respect of the distance from the Center of the World, the
Sun is ever above the Moon; but in respect of Elevation above the Horizon, the
Moon may be and is many times above the Sun: 2. Adversaries to the foresaid
truth on the other side are those with whom we have here to do, who will not
have the Church in any wise to be subject to any temporal power, in as much as
they receive no such from Christ. And to prove this, they urge here in the
first place, That the Lord Jesus Christ would never by any outward force
compel men to receive him or his doctrine; for when his Disciples, supposing
he might use violence, [as under the Law] would have had him command fire to
come down from heaven [as Elias did] to consume them that would not receive
him, Christ turned and rebuked them, saying, Ye know not what Spirit ye are of,
the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, etc. Luc. 9. 54, 55, 56.

Ans. The fact of Elias was extraordinary, and not justifiable by the Law, as
they pretend; and so had this been in our Savior, had he done it at their
request.

But what had this been to the reciving of, or rejecting his Doctrine? The
question was touching the reception of his person, and the reason why those
Samaritans did not that act of civility to him as to entertain him, was because
either they supposed he would not have come upon their invitation, or else they
would not invite him by reason of the animosity that was between the Jews and
Samaritans, as supposing that a friend of Jerusalem or an inhabitant thereof
neither deserved, nor would accept of entertainment from them. And all this is
clear by that conference of the woman of Samaria with our Savior, John 4. 9.
How is it, says she, that thou being a Jew ask drink of me that am a woman
of Samaria? for the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans.

They further urge, John 12. 47, 48. If any man hear my words, and believe not,
I judge him not, for I came not to judge the world, etc.

Ans. There are two comings of Christ, one secretly and in humility that he
might be judged and delivered up; the other manifestly and majestickly that he
might judge and remunerate. Now if Christ had come at first manifestly, he had
never been crucified, for had they known it they would not have crucified the
Lord of glory, and had he come majestickly with a great retinue of men or
angels, which he might have commanded, the whole Roman Empire would have
trembled at his presence, so far would Pilate the R^man Procuratour have been
from calling him before his tribunal. Nevertheless he did sometimes use outward
force in things appertaining to the worship of God, giving us thereby not only
an adumbration of his spiritual Kingdom; but also a copy for Magistrates his
Vicegerents to write after: for finding in the Temple those that sold oxen,
sheep, and doves (John 2. 14.) and the changers of money sitting, he made a
scourge of small cords, and drove them all out of the Temple, and the sheep and
the oxen, and poured out the changers money. The like did he at another time,
Mat. 21. 12, 13.

For the distance of time and other circumstances do prove that these were
different acts of our Savior as all Expositours agree in this chapter from the
second to the thirteenth verse, we read how he sent two of his disciples to
press an ass and a colt to carry him as it were to his Coronation, the which
was obeyed, as all good subjects will their Sovereign: upon this ass they put
foot-clothes, and mounted him, the multitudes that met him spread their
garments in the way, and strewed it with branches of trees, crying on either
side, Hosanna to the Son of David, which is as much as to say, God save the
King.

The first thing he did after his coming to his Royal City was the reformation
of things amiss in the worship of God, went into the Temple, cast out them that
bought and sold there: and there he cured the Kings evil too, h. e. such
diseases as could not be cured but by this King of the Jews, v. 14. to teach
all Kings which claim under him to employ their first and chiefest endeavors,
after their enthronization toward matters appertaining to the worship of God,
and in works of charity toward such as are in extreme necessity. But should
our Savior have used such authority as often as occasion presented it self, he
would have been dreaded by all men, and crucified by none, and so prophecies
would not have been fulfilled. Nevertheless he cease not to govern the
Church, and in that sense to judge the world by the Magistrates and Ministers
of the Word: for as Grotius says, some actions of Christ in the Administration
of his Kingdom are [as he calls them] Terminal, viz. such as concern the
beginning and ending of his administration. Such as concern the beginning of
his administration are the giving of Laws to his Church, under hope of eternal
reward, or under pain of everlasting damnation. That which concerns the end is
a definitive jurisdiction at the last day, whereof as he has done the one, so
will he do the other himself alone, wherein he has neither companion nor
Vicegerent. Other actions of Christ are middle actions which come between these
two terms, which partly concern the inward, partly the outward man. He acts
in the inward man by his Spirit several ways, viz. by enlightening, by
converting, by strengthening against temptations, by remitting or retaining
sins: yet he uses herein the outward ministry of men, viz. of Pastou^^,
private men, Kings, every one in his several capacity, not as his Vicars or
Vicegerents; these being not able to produce actions congenial to those of
Christ; but as his ministers only, being apt to the production of such actions
as may subserve to the principal cause in matters aforesaid. The actions of
Christ that concern the outward man, consist in defending and delivering the
Church, and in ordering and adorning the same, as I said before, and herein he
uses the Vicarship of his Magistrates, as being apt to produce actions, in this
respect congenial to his own, whom he therefore calls his Christ's, h. e. his
ANOINTED ones. And now whereas they say, that the Apostles were far from
propagating the Gospel by outward force. It is evident that the ordinary power
of the Apostles and of the Magistrates are different things: and who talks of
propagating the Gospel by outward force in either? Our King is the Defender of
the faith by the sword that he holds: He goes not about to propagate it [if by
propagation you mean plantation too] by force and violence. His Majesty is
furnished with an Aphorism of his learned and judicious Grandfather against
that, viz. That it is never good to use too much severity or bloodshed in
matters of Religion: God never loves to plant his Church by violence and blood.
King James Aphorism 124. This his Majesty leaves to the Spanish cruelties in
the Indies, and to their Inquisition at home. And as for the Apostles, it is
true they did not propagate the Gospel by force, [though mischief enough befell
those at whom they shook off the dust of their feet] but yet they did govern
established Churches by force, which was a delivery over unto Satan, 1 Cor. 5.
5. for the punishment of the flesh. And no other manner of punishment could be
inflicted on offenders by them, while there was no temporal Magistrate to
empower them, or at most, none but such as was like their beloved Gallio, who
cared for none of those things: yet this, TAKE HIM DEVIL, a man would think
were more terrible then TAKE HIM JAILER, which they have printed in capital
letters. Hence says St. Paul, Gal. 5. 12. I would that those were cut off that
trouble you, which had it been unlawful to do, had been unlawful in him to
wish. As to the dividing of the inheritance which our Savior refused [which
they have put in the margin as a Buttress to hold up the arch and concameration
of their argument] I say, that our Savior would not always be vacant to
satisfy the Avarice of a fellow, (who followed him for such ends) to the
neglect of a business which he had but a short time to dispatch in the world,
though such was his zeal of Gods house, that he could not forbear the ridding
of the Temple of sacrilegious persons. And thus their first argument falls to
the ground with the improvement thereof, to make the ruin of it the greater.

Sect. 11.
FOr the further improvement of their foregoing argument, they allege that
place of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1. 24. Not for that we have dominion over your
faith, but are helpers of your joy: for by faith ye stand.

Ans. For exposition whereof we say, that one thing amongst others, that gave
the Apostle occasion of writing this Epistle, was the command given by him of
delivering the incestuous person to Satan for the punishment of the flesh. The
Apostle having founded a Church at Corinth, false Doctors building on this
foundation persuaded them [as these Authors would persuade others in the like
cases] that St. Paul played the part of a proud domineering fellow, and of one
who took more upon him then belonged unto him. Hereupon the Apostle excuses
himself and says, that though necessity urged to a just severity against the
sin, yet he assumed to himself no dominion over their faith: no, for that were
to pull up that foundation on which they stood, for by faith ye stand, and it
were to destroy that which he had first laid.

But then some may say, That though the Apostle had power in matters belonging
to religious practice, yet it seems hereby that he had none in matters of says.

Whereunto I answer, that it is one thing to have power in matters of faith, and
another to have power over matters of faith. To have power over matters of
faith is the prerogative of Christ alone, he being the only Lawgiver to his
Church: to give Laws to the Church is actio terminalis, a terminal action of
Christ, and herein he admits of no Vicarship or Vicegerency, as I have already
said, which is such as the Popes pretend to in making new articles of faith:
and that this is the meaning of this place, is the opinion of some that are no
enemies to our present adversaries. Nevertheless to have power in matters of
faith appertains to the Church, as I have said before, out of the twentieth
Article of our Church. And that the Apostle had such a power is evident in the
case of Hymenaus and Philetus, whom St. Paul delivered unto Satan for making
shipwreck concerning faith, 1 Timothy 1. 20. The same Apostle also says,
Whosoever loves not the Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema Maranatha, 1 Corinthians,
16. 22. which some call an Excommunication unto death, others interpret it, The
Lord comes: they are both the same in effect, at least they imply a greater
degree of punishment then the former; The delivery unto Satan being only for
the punishment of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the
Lord Jesus. But the Lord coming once in vengeance, it is a fearful thing to
fall into his hands, as says the Apostle, Heb. 10. 31.

The second place they urge is, Matthew. 20. 25. sc. The Princes of the Gentiles
exercise dominon over them but it shall not be so among you.

Answ. That if it be so, that in the perpetual office of Pastors the use of the
Keys has a kind of jurisdiction, as I have proved as well by positive places
of Scripture, as by the real effects that accompany it in the Apostles, we must
search out some other meaning by this place, then the denial thereof to them.
And then it must be either this, viz. you look after easy seats, like those of
the Kings of the Gentiles, who rule in ease and pleasure; but it shall not be
so among you: so Doctor Hammond. Or else it must be this, viz. That the
Apostles were not to strive for Dominion one over another, but to content
themselves with what they had over the Churches. Or lastly, it must be that
which I find in the Treatise of the power of the Pope touching the book of
Saternelly the Jesuit, written Anno 1626. The Princes of the Gentiles exercise
dominion over them: but it shall not be so among you; that is, you shall not
exercise dominion over the Nations by atemporal sword; whereunto you your
selves are subject, as is learnt from the example of Paul, who declined not the
jurisdiction of Caesar, Acts 25. But which exposition soever of these three
obtains, how does this prove what these men have in design, viz. that no
Christian Magistrate is to be a Defender of the Faith? If they will grant him
to be a Magistrate, they must allow him a superiority, and vest him in a power,
else they will but mock him: and this power extends to matters appertaining to
the worship of God, as has been likewise proved.

The hird place, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. Feed the flock of God -- neither as being
Lords over Gods heritage, but being ensamples to the flock.

Answ. By what has been said it is evident, that they had a power over the
flock of Christ, and that not only a power accompanying the Word preached, but
a power of oversight; for so much is cleat out of the very place they here
quote, viz. v. 2. Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the
oversight thereof: and Acts* 20. 28. they are called Overseers (the very name
Bishop is an Overseer.) This power was exercised then not in doctrine only, but
in discipline too: This discipline reached to the punishing of the body.
Therefore we must distinguish of power: As 1. That there is a power instituted
by Christ, or exercised by his Apostles, as has been evidenced: That such a
power may be exercised no man can well deny, for whosoever does, is a Heretic.
2. There is a power of confederation or consent: the which confederation or
consent was either instituted in Primitive times, and derived down from thence
to these our days, such as is jurisdiction merely ecclesiastical; and who
disobeys or separates from this power, is a Schifmatick at the least: or else
it has been taken up by particular Congregations or Conventicles of men, and
this is the power that these men would have, which is a mere mock power, under
which they will play fast and loose at their pleasure, not unlike that of your
Episcopus puerorum, serving only for a Christmasse season, condemned by the
Council of Basil in Pragmatica Sanctione, fol. 173.

3. There is a power neither of Gods donation, nor of Apostolical prescription,
nor of Ecclesiastical Institution, nor of congregational confederation [which I
said before to be no proper power at all, in as much as it is not any way
obligatory to him who is under it] but of men's own assumption, which is either
Imperium supra Imperium; such is the Popes: or Imperium in Imperio and ab
Imperio ovulsum; such is the Presbyterians, as it has been practiced in
Scotland. Or which is Tyrannical in the execution of it, by imposing new
Articles of faith or Doctrine, contrary to the form of sound words, as the Pope
does do, or cutting off men's heads by inspiration, as some of the other limb of
Antichrist, the Fanatics have done: and so they are not to lord it over Gods
heritage.

The fact of Thomas Schucker, the Disciple of Mel^hi^r Rinchius, is not
[unlesse it be for the horridness of it] to be omitted. This Schucker in the
midst of a numerous Assembly of his own gang, pretending he was inspired from
Heaven, cried, Woe, woe, woe, commanded a Sword to be brought him, and withal
he called to his Brother John to kneel down upon his knees; his Parents with
others asking him what he meant by this preparation, he bade them be of good
cheer, he being about to do nothing but what should be revealed unto him from
the heavenly Father. The eyes and minds of all being intent upon this new
spectacle, this mad Prophet drew (...) word, and therewith divided his said
Brothers head from his shoulders, which struck his Parents with great grief of
heart, and the rest with terror. Being apprehended by the Magistrate, who
would allow him no more liberty of conscience [for if he had, his own head
might have gone after] He suffered condign punishment for this his cruel
fratricide, never all this while repenting of the crime, but constantly
affirming, that this will of God was revealed unto him from Heaven. This
Tragedy happened in Fano Galli. Anno 1527. And whether some men of this
Generation have not dyed much like him, I leave it to those that beheld them.

It Is true, as these men further allege, that the Apostles were Ambassadors
for the Prince of Peace, and in his stead did pray the unbelievers to be
reconciled to God. And what if they would not embrace the Gospel, but remain
without the pale of the Church? what had they to do to judge those that were
without? 1 Cor. 5. 12. What could be expected from such, less then revilings,
persecutions, defamations? And what less is expected by God from them, then
blessing, sufferings, intreatings, patience, long-suffering, love unfeigned,
etc.?

Sect. 12.
THe next place alleged by them is, Matthew. 13. The Parable of the Tares;
whereof it is said, Let both grow together till the Harvest.

Answ. I agree with them, that this place does not only respect the second, but
the first Table, the subject whereof is the worship of God. But withal I
answer first, with that Expositor they mention, that it seems not to note the
duty of the civil Magistrate, but the event of Gods Providence, namely, that
God would permit the cohabitation of the wicked in the world with the just; not
that the M^gistrates or Ministers should permit them, and not by civil
punishment or ecclesiastical remove them out of the Church or world, if the
quality of the offense so required it.

But say they, If men did not fight against the truth, they would not so
eminently contradict their own sayings, for who can believe that it should be
the mind of God to permit the cohabitation of the wicked in the world with the
just, as aforesaid, and yet the Magistrate should not permit them, but remove
them by civil punishment out of the world? Has the Magistrate power to remove
those out of the world, that God would have permitted to live? How soon may a
Magistrate, if guided by such a doctrine; bring the blood of the innocent upon
himself and Nation?

Answ. Here is no contradiction at all: neither does a Magistrate bring
innocent blood upon himself by going about to put those to death [if they
deserve it] whom the event of Gods providence keeps alive. When a Traitor or
Murderer makes an escape, the event of Gods Providence keeps him alive, whom
the Magistrate would have put to death, and this without bringing innocent
blood upon himself. Abroham did well in going about to sacrifice his Son
Isaac, having a command from God to do it, Yet the event of Gods Providence
kept him alive, Genes. 22. The Gibeonites were of the Hivites, whom God
commanded the Israelites to destroy, yet the event of Gods providence kept them
alive, Joshua 9. The Israelites had Commission from God to fight against the
Benjamites the first and second time, yet the event of Gods providence gave
them the better till the third Encounter, Judges 20. How these particulars came
to pass, may be read in their several stories.

And how such events may happen frequently under a Magistate using his power,
is thus made good. The wise Creator of all the World having afforded to every
creature, a means most suitable to its nature, for the accomplishment of its
end and perefection, and for the removal of impediments which lie in its way
thereunto, has done no less to man in as much as for the encouragement of his
obedience, and the removal of sin out of the way to happiness; [both which are
moral things] he plies him with exhortations, comminations, blessings, curses,
examples, precepts, which are moral too; and all this may be done by the
Ministers of the word, or of others in their capacities. And because, if he
stayed here, the major part, which have less of Natures first institution in
them, would be never the better for all these; he has ordained the Magistracy,
so to be a terror to evil works to execute wrath on them that do evil, Romans
13. without which no man would be able to maintain his proprieties in goods and
lands, preserve his life and liberty, and consequently all civil society [which
not men only, but even beasts, birds, fishes, and in sects themselves seem to
affect] would fall to the ground. Yet let the Magistrate do what he can [and
let him do but Justice] the wicked will have a cohabitation among the Just, and
that for these reasons; viz, because he is not omniscient and sees not all
wickedness: 2. although he sees it, yet he may not by testimonies be able to
convince all men of their wicked deeds: 3. because that though he may convince,
yet all wickedness is not capital whereof persons may be convinced, without
which a man cannot be taken out of the world: and this is the event of Gods
providence. If they say that he might have used natural means to obstruct so
great an evil as sin is, and to advance the happiness of man; I say then,
either the means must be made connatural to man, or man to the means: If the
first, this is done already, in as much as moral and civil means are most
connatural to man, a free agent and animal politicum. If the second, its
impossible to be done in as much as it were to make him an animate thing, or at
the least a Brute, which work, this without choice and that without proper
appetition; and consequently he must not have made him at all: for it is well
said of Lactantius de falsa sapientia, which is of his works, l. 3. c. 18. Who
considering the devotion of Plato, who gave thanks to Nature for three things.
1. That he was born a man, and not a beast. 2. That he was a man rather then a
woman, a Grecian and not a Barbarian. 3. That he was an Athenian, and lived in
the time of Socrates. Then which, says he, what can be said more like a
Dotard, as though, if he had been a Barbarian, a Woman, or an Ass, he had been
the same Plato that he was, and not that very thing which had been so born.? If
they say that God then may use supernatural means by working transcendently
above the wills of men without destroying their Nature or abridging their
freedom. Whereunto it is answered that as, had God done the other, he would
have destroyed his providence touching the creation of man; so, should he do
this, he would destroy his providence preparatory to ^he last Judgment,
wherein every man shall receive according to that he has done in the body
whether good or evil. But though this Exposition be pious and not to be
rejected, yet this Parable, methinks more naturally admits of another, which I
shall lay before the Reader, and which may import the duty of the Magistrate
and Minister of Gods word, as well as the event of Gods providence. It is thus,
There are two sorts of evils which may grow up with the good seed of the Law of
Nature implanted in man in his first creation, or of the Gospel given for man's
renovation. The one sort may be compared to tares (as here) whereof there is a
sort which the Greeks, say to be (...) such as grows up of it self among the
wheat in an over-moist and corrupt earth, without any seed sown at all. Such
are those evils either in manners or opinion which though they seem to us, that
cannot see all things, to grow of themselves, yet they owe their beginning to
the enemy the Devil, who first corrupted and endeavors daily more and more to
corrupt our Nature. The other sort of evils are compared to thorns and b^iars,
Heb. 6. 8. whose end is to be burned, such as are desperate and incorrigible
sinners, as may be clearly seen by the scope of the Apostle in that place. The
first sort are evils of infirmity for the most part, which are entwisted with
our Nature, as tares are with corn, and therefore cannot be cut down, unless
the good grain goes down with them, all men even the best being subject unto
them. Should the Magistrate cut down all these, he must cut himself down for
company: and should S. Paul have delivered men to Satan for these, he must have
given himself into his hands: for though he knew nothing by himself, yet was he
not hereby justified. Never the less he used a severity toward himself by
keeping down his body and bringing it into subjetion, as a Magistrate may do
toward his Subjet's for reforming of lesser evils and preventing of greater;
nay S. Paul had the messenger of Satan, a thorn in his flesh, sent to him,
least he should be puffed up with the abundance of Revelations, 2 Cor. 12. 7.
The second sort are evils of presumption which like brayars and thorns are not
necessarily entwisted with our Nature, but yet growing up amongst the good
grain, will choke it, and therefore calls for present cursing, and lastly for
burning, least in the end of the world, it being all become briars and thorns,
there would remain no harvest to the great Husbandman to be brought into his
barnes by his reapers: and so this world destroys Gods providence preparatory
to the last Judgment on the right hand, as the forementioned supposition would
destroy it on the left.

Sect. 13.
THeir next Argument is taken from the fallibility of Magistrates, which
renders them, they say, incapable of judging.

Answ. It is true that no man is infallible: if he were, he were no man; they
needed not to have produced the authority of S. Peter to prove it. And now
brethren I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your Rulers. The
which place proves it but weakly neither, in as much as there appeared much of
malice in the condemnation of our Savior, in denying and delivering him to be
crucisied, whom Pilate himself was determined to let go. They did it ignorantly
only in this respect, namely, that they knew him not to be the Lord of Glory.
S. Peter makes no mention of their malice, though great, least thereby they
might have thought the door of mercy to have been shut against them, and so
they might have come to the same end as their ringleader Judas did. Here was a
double defect which occasioned a wrong judegment, one was of knowledge and a
well informed understanding, the other was of an honest purpose of mind;
neither of these does destroy the power of a Magistrate, the Rulers remained
Rulers still, notwithstanding their ignorance or malice in this action. Indeed
Plato says, Beatas civitates fore si out Philosophi regnarent, out reges
philosopharentur: It Is true, that happy is that City where Princes are
qualified with gifts suitable to their high calling. But if he want, it as if
Philosophy did give a right to another Kingdom, or were necessarily required
to the establishment of his own. I say, that then it was a saying becoming one
that held a commodity of goods and prices, whereby he would take from some,
that which was their own, and give to others that which belonged to them, Lact.
l. 3. ^0.

This consideration therefore serves only, and that very well too, as a motive
to care and conscience in the exercise of power, 2 Chr. 19. 7. Jehoshaphat
speaking of this very matter, gave to his Judges, whom he constituted, this
charge, Take heed and do it, or take heed the doing of it. Moses, Exodus 3. 11.
said to God, Who am I, that I should go to Pharaoh, and that I should bring
forth the children of Israel out of Egypt? yet God would have him go and do it,
Exo. 3. 10. 11.

If then the fallibility of a Magistrate as being a man, or the conscience of
his own weakness as such a person, was no argument in those days, against the
power of the Magistrate or the exercise of it, how much less is it now under
the Gospel, when the light is ordinarily greater then in those times theirs
was? Hereunto they will answer two things. 1. That Magistrates under the Old
Testament had advantages which ours have not. Whereunto I shall reply anon in
its due place, 2. That there is no such need of Magistrates now: for in those
days [the times of the Gospel] all shall know the Lord.

Hereunto I answer, that if all, then the Magistrates especially, who have a
special promise for it, as is evident from what has been alleged. If arguments
drawn from the Law of Moses prevail not with them, what will they say to the
Law of Nature? Thus then I argue.

A Magistrates care ought to be about that whereupon principally depends the
establishment of a Commonwealth, and the suppression of opinions and men that
would ruin it. But upon Religion principally depends the establishment of a
Commonwealth, as is made good from the judgment of the very Heathen
themselves, as histories, and what before has been showed, do witness;
therefore a Magistrate ought to have a principal care of Religion, even by the
Law of Nature. This care of Religion consists gener^lly in two things, 1. in
setting up of Religion it self, without which can be expected no blessing from
God upon, nor obedience from the people to the Magistrate under the notion of
Gods Vicegerent. 2. In avoiding of differences in opinions: for from
diversities of opinions men usually fall into diversity of affection and
interest, which tends to the ruin of a Commonwealth. It Is true that as in a
State, provided that all the Citizens hold the same fundamental Maxims
necessary to the undergoing of duties essential to its conservation, the
Magistrate may tolerate amongst them a difference in many other matters of
less importance. So it is in the Church as long as every man upholds those
opinions which make for the honor of God, and peace and unity of the Church,
in the communion whereof he lives, lesser things may be born with. But shall
every man be his own Judge herein? No, for there is a threefold judgment, a
judgment of discretion, a judgment of direction, and a judgment of
jurisdiction: Every Christian has a judgment of discretion, prove all things,
hold fast that which is good, 1 These. 5. 21. by applying the rule of the holy
Scripture to his own private consolation and edification, The Pastors of the
Church [who are the watchmen placed over the Israel, h. e. the Church and House
of God] have a judgment of direction to expound the holy Scriptures to others.
The chief Pastors to whose care the regiment of the Church is committed in a
more special manner, have not this only, but a higher degree of judgment,
which is of jurisdiction, to enjoin, to reform, to censure, to condemn, to
bind, to loose judicially and authoritatively in their respective charges. If
their key shall err, whether it be that of knowledge or jurisdiction, they are
accountable to their respective Superiors from thence to a National, and last
of of all to a general council. And that such councils be called, such persons
be settled, such charges be by the said persons daily executed, is the
Magistrates duty to see to, and his prerogative to command or allow.

But on what mistakes, say they, by Magistrates, are continued in Holland (...)
Religion, etc?

Ans. If such mistakes are continued in Magistrates, how would these be
multiplied, if every one of the people were left to himself? Surely for one
that is now, there would be ten thousand in that case. And whereas they urge
Popes, Councils, Ecumenical and National that they have erred.

It is answered, that when we yield obedience to the Pope, or be concluded by
the Councils and Synods which they allege, they will be found to say something
to the purpose. But since they cannot prove these things, they might have
spared as great a many of lines, as I mean to spare in their confutation: yet
the 21. Article of our Church yields more then they have proved, viz. That
General Councils may not be gathered together without the commandment and will
of Princes: And when they be gathered together [for as much as they be an
assembly of men, whereof all be not governed with the Spirit and word of God]
they may err, and sometimes have erred, even in things pertaining unto God:
wherefore things ordained by them, as necessary unto salvation, have neither
strength nor authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken out of the
holy Scripture. Now what use will our adversaries here make of this our
gratification? Even this, viz. What security then can a Magistrate have that he
does well?

Answ. As much security as a Judge that condemns a Prisoner at the Bar, in as
much as the Notitia Juris is clear. The probation of the fact depends upon
witnesses, whereupon if a guiltless person be condemned, the Judge has done
his duty by ordering the formality of the trial, and so has delivered his own
soul.

Sect. 14.
NExt they argue from the Royal Law of Liberty, viz. Whatsoever ye would that
men should do unto you, even so do ye unto them, for this is the Law and the
Prophets. And those that are forward to persecute, would not be very zealous in
their proceedings, if they were sure that those they persecute should have the
power on their sides to meet the same measure unto them.

Answ. That when a man is punished for the committing of any thing unlawful to
be done, or omitting that which is unlawful to be left undone, this only is a
persecution in Scripture sense. But when a man is condemned for omitting that
which ought, or committing that which ought not to be done [such are things
which are either absolutely evil or good in themselves, or being indifferent
are made so by the intervention of humane authority] this is no persecution,
but justice: And whosoever shall do such justice upon any man, and be willing
that the prisoner should do so to him, the prisoner would either do it
according to the Law as his Rule, and would proceed to sentence, secundum
allegata and probata as to matter of fact, and so he would do well: for in
reason [from whence a well ordered will has its denomination] he could not
refuse it: Or else the Prisoner coming to judge, would do it in an arbitrary
way, without or against Law, and not secundum allegata and probata for matter
of fact, but on his own head, or some underhand information of some whom the
party accused shall never see nor know [as has been practiced under the late
Tyranny] He were mad if he should. Who would be contented that another man's
Bowl should have a bias, and his own have none at all? Therefore Arist. Rhet.
1. 1. says That it is most convenient that all things be determined by Laws,
and that as few things as may be be left to the power of the Judges: And that
1. Because it is easier to find one and a few, then many that are prudent
enough to give Laws, or determine Causes. 2. Because Laws are made upon mature
deliberation going before their Sanction, but Sentences are given on a sudden,
which renders it difficult for the Judges to do right to every man. 3. Because
[which is the weightiest of all reasons] the judgment of a Lawgiver is not of
singularities and present matters, but of things future and universal: but a
concional Auditor and Judge are to determine of present and definite things,
where oftentimes either love, or hatred, or private commodity comes in; in so
much that they cannot sufficiently look into the merit of the cause, but either
private interest or trouble will darken their judgment. But there is no good
Body of Laws, wherein there is not a Lex Talionis, h. e. a provision made, that
any man, whatsoever he be, may have his remedy against him that has done him
wrong, though it were his own Master that did it, for otherwise a tyranny would
be introduced. And on the other side, that a man may make or expect a
retribu^ion for a favor done, otherwise ingratitude would take place. Both
which are grounded upon this, namely, Whatsoever ye would that men should do
unto you, the same do ye also unto them: And the same measure ye meet shall be
measured to you again, Matthew. 7. 20* So sacred a thing was gratitude, that the
Heathen (as Aristotle testifies, Eth. 5. 5. (...)) put the Temple of the Graces
in the way, that a man cannot walk the street, but he must stumble upon the
duty. And the Civil Law puts it in the sole power of the Parent to disinherit
his Son for the contrary; whose examination is to be rescinded, and he deprived
of his undeserved liberty, Cod. 8. c. 50. And though our Laws punish not
unthankfulness to the Fathers of our flesh, the Fathers of our spirits, the
Fathers of our fortunes [for indeed it being comprehensive of all wickedness,
no one punishment is enough for it] yet nevertheless the Temple of the Graces
is not shut against these, the Law is open to these with us: and therefore that
Royal Law is so far observed.

But yet in as much as the Law is an universal precept, as one calls it, in the
universality whereof all particular Cases cannot be comprehended, therefore
something of necessity must be left to the prudence of the Judge to determine
as he thinks meet, provided it be not against the Law, which is immutable. In
which case why should any man prejudge his Judge, who is sworn to observe this
Royal Law? Indeed should he do so, then what they seem to threaten by the
Objection here made, they might have just cause of fear: for they do as good as
say, Let them look to it, for trump may turn up on our side again, which if it
does, the same rigor which they use to us, shall we use toward them; a
Resolution, not only contrary to this Royal Law, but to Christ's commandment
under the Gospel, Matthew. 5. 39. Resist not evil, but whosoever shall smite thee
on the right cheek, turn to him the other also.

But to answer for them as much as possibly can be said in favor of them: They
may say, that they give this as a Rule, which in common prudence a man would
observe, not but that they would make demonstration of meekness and lenity,
should the disposal of affairs fall into their hands.

But I answer, that this is more then they can promise; for so said Parmenio to
Alexander [when Darius offered him ten thousand talents for the redemption of
Prisoners, with all the Land he had on this side Euphrates, and one of his
Daughters for a wife to boot] I would take it if I were Alexander; and so would
I, said Alexander, if I were Parmenio, Plut. in vita Alex. Private persons know
not what themselves would be, should they come to sit at the Helm of
Government. Then things that make for the interest of themselves, or their
Partisans, may seem convenient, which were before abominable in their eyes. One
did not know that he should account the Universities the only remaining glory
of the Nation, till he came to be head of one of the fairest Colleges in the
Enigmatical pillars were then no longer Mysteries of iniquity. Another would
have Christ. Church pass for a Collegiate Dean and Prebends, till he found
Leases to be invalid without the profane Title of Cathedral. A third, and he
guilty of the Magnum latro^inium of all, was at first for a popular Government,
till he had gotten upon the back of the populasse, which he persuaded that it
could not manage its liberty without a Rider. And then -- -- what then? As a
reward of their ingratitudes to the King, the Father of his Country, Non
equitem dorso, nec fraenam depulit ^re.

Sect. 15.
ANother-Argument is, That as it is not any ways lawful from the Word of God,
for Christian Magistrates in the days of the Gospel, to destroy and root out
the contrary minded in religious matters [though Idolaters] so such proceedings
may sometimes prove inconsistent with the very being of Nations: for suppose
any Nation were wholly heathenish Idolaters, and the Word of God coming in
aamongst them, should convert the chief Magistrate, and one twentieth part of
the Nation more; must he then with that twentieth part destroy all the other
nineteen if they will not be converted, but continue in their heathenish
Idolatry? It cannot possibly be supposed to be warrantable: And this Reason
holds good against the rooting up and destroying of Heretics out of the world,
because an excommunicated person is as a Heathen or Infidel, Matthew. 18. 17.
Besides, the Lord calls some at the third, some at the sixth, some at the ninth
hour, others at the eleventh: He therefore that destroys any one, though an
Idolater, etc. or hinders his conversion, and so brings eternal loss to him.

Answ. That a Magistrate providing for the establishment of a Commonwealth,
ought to temper his severity with Christian prudence. Now it were no prudence
at all for him and his twentieth part to wage war with the other nineteen [for
a war this were like to beget] in as much as instead of establishing, this
would ruin himsulf and his Commonwealth, with Religion and all. Suppose then
that he had nineteen parts on his side, and only the twentieth part remained
Idolaters, were he to destroy that twentieth part? no surely, we neither think
so, nor ever said so: The reason is, because they were never yet converted
[they have not as yet Cognitionem Juris, the ignorance whereof excuses them]
and who knows but that they may be in due time converted? The Question is,
Whether in case of revolt, (after conversion) to Idolatry, or the like, and in
case they remain, obstinate, going on to blaspheme the, Church Censures may not
reach them, and the civil Sword over take them, and cut them off, that the
infection spread no farther?

We answer, that they may; and this is Law. in Cod. Justin. l. 2. Tit. 11. de
Paginis, and sacrificiis and Templis. Qui post sanctum baptisma in errore
pagan^r. mament, ultimo supplicio plectunt. Let those that ask baptism remain
in the error of the Pagans, be put to death; but for th^se that are not yet
baptized, let them without delay take care that their children be baptized: but
let the elder first be taught the Scriptures, according to the Canons; and
hereunto there is no such penalty annexed; mean while all men are fobridded to
assay any thing of Pagan superstition, under pain of corporal torment, and
condemnation to the stanneries or perpetual banishment. Lege Qui, ub. supra.
There is a difference then betwixt a Heathen, and one that is As a Heathen. A
Heathen ought not to be excommunicated [for it is impossible] nor punished with
death for his Idolatry, though some one that is As a Heathen, that is, one that
has been a Christian and becomes Heathen again, may; and hereby his conversion
is not hindered: for the Apostle to the Hebrews says, That its impossible for
such to be renewed by repentance, Heb* 6. 6.

In the next place they deny that the Kings Majesty has the same power in
causes Ecelesiastical, that the Godly Kings had amongst the Jews; for say they,
albeit the Kings of the Jews bad power to punish-Idolaters and Blasphemers, and
some other transgressors of the then Law of God; yet who tells them that the
Magistrates under the Gospeldispensation have such power; has the Lord Jesus
said any such thing, or if he has, where is it written, nay where is it written
from the beginning of Genesis to the end of the Revelation, that Magistrates
under the Gospel should have the same power in religious causes, as those
under the Law? If the Judicial Law be a Rule for Magistrates under the Gospel
to walk by, then why must it be mangled in pieces by some sort of sinners with
death, and not cursers of parents, man-stealers, adulterers, Sabbath Breakers
which were so punishable by the Judicial Law?

I Answer, That that place of the Prophet Esai. 43. 23. is between the
beginninh of Genesis and the end of the Revelation, wherein it is said that
Kings shall be [h. e. under the Gospel] Thy [that is the Churches] nursing
fathers, and Queens thy nursing mothers. The Original is, giving suck or
nourishers. Now she that gives milk and nourishment to a child will not suffer
the least mote to be in it, that may do the child hurt, much less such things
as may poison it. So it is with a Christian Magistrate. It is not enough to see
that the milk of the word be duly distributed, to the people, but also that
blasphemers and idolaters to the poison of Religion, be rooted out. To what
purpose is it for him to defend her from rapine and violence from abroad [as it
is v. 26] if he leaves perdition and ruin at home? And now whereas they say
Why does the Magistrate punish Idolatry and Blasphemy with death, and not
cursing of father or mother, man-stealing, adultery, Sabbath breaking?

Answ. Because Idolatry and Blasphemy are so punishable by the Law of Nature,
as well as by the Judicial Law of Moses. Job 2. 9. Says Job's Wife to him,
Do thou yet retain thine integrity? curse God and die. Whereby it seems that
present death was the sure reward of blaspheming God. And Job 31. 26. If says
he, I beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in brightnesses and my
heart has been secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand: this also
were an iniquity to be punished by the Judge, for I should have denied the God
that is above. From whence it is evident, that heathenish Idolatry is
punishable by the Magistrate; but how? surely not with less then what is due
to blasphemy, which see here made a consequent of Idolatry. The other sins
mentioned in their objection are made capital by the Judicial Law alone [which
indeed is in most things practicable under the Gospel too, if it seems
necessary or expedient to the Magistrate, and not otherwise] only as for
Sabbath breaking, there can be none where there is no Sabbath binding, nor has
been since the abrogation of the Law. Wherefore this their argument taken from
things of different Natures thus jumbled together, is as very a fallacy of many
Interrogations, as this is, viz. Nonne Socrates, Plato, Aristoteles, Petrus,
Bucephalus, Leviathan, sunt animalia rationalia? For as some of these are
animalia rationalia, some not; so some of those appertain to the Judicial Law,
some not: some may be the subject of a positive Law under the Gospel if it
seems good to the Lawgiver; some, as namely Sabbath breaking, cannot, because
the Jewish day, and the Jewish observation of it is abrogated.

Hereunto they add, That the Kings of the Jews had advantages [which we want]
to direct them in judgment, as the standing Oracle, the Vrim and Thummim,
extraordinary Prophets. Therefore Aliab and others leaving these ran into
various errors, persecuted orthodox Prophets, as Jeremy, Michaia, and Elijah.

Answ. That our Adversaries even now confessed, that the punishment of
Idolaters, Blasphemers, and some other transgressors, was written in plain
precepts of the Mosaical Law, for in answer to an Objection, page 21. they have
these words, viz. But in answer we deny not, but the Kings of the Jews had
power to punish Idolaters, and Blasphemers, and some other transgressors of the
then Law of God: which power was given them of God, and written in plain
precepts in the Mosaical Law. If they had power to punish these things, then
what these things were, was notoriously known; otherwise the punishment had
been unjustly inflicted. Why then do they [and that almost in the same breath]
allege the Urim and Thummim, Oracle and Prophets to direct Judg^ in matter of
Law and Jus universale, which every man is bound to take notice of? And for
matter of fact, Urim, Thummim, Oracle and Prophets were extraordinary ways of
discovery of this or of any thing else, never to be made use of but when the
thing could not otherwise be known, and that in a matter of great moment too.
The ordinary way of discovering matter of fact was by witnesses, or the
confession of the party. In case the party would not acknowledge the fault,
then in the month of two or three witnesses every word shall be established,
Deuteronomy. 19. 15. And is not the same rule given in the Gospel, Mat. 18. 16? The
want therefore of Urim and Thummim, Oracle and extraordinary Prophets, did not
abolish the right use of the Magistrate; for then after the Captivity the Jews
had never had the right use of the Magistrate. Now then, if excellent
Magistrates under the Law [such as were Zorobabel and Nehemiab] had no other
advantages to Magistracy then we have under the Gospel, their Arguments, drawn
from advantages which the Jews had above the Christians, falls to the ground,
and nothing hinders, but that we may have as good a Magistracy under the Gospel
as they had under the Law, and altogether as infallible too, or rather [I might
have said] as little fallible, for that they were actually fallible is evident,
Neb. 7. 64, 65. where we read, that some of the Priests offspring sought for
the Register of their Genealogy, but it could not be found. What then? The
Tirshatha or Governor could not resolve it how it stood, as formerly such
things were done: and therefore they were not to eat of the holy things till
there stood up a Priest with Urim and Thummim, which never came to pass: And
now, I pray you, where was their greater infallibility from this time to the
coming of Christ [which was the space of five hundred and thirty years] then
Magistrates have ever since had? As for Ahab, whom they urge to have erred, I
say, that he erred, not for want of advantages which others had, but for want
of an honest purpose of mind, which hindered the right use of those advantages,
he being a man that had sold himself to do iniquity, mean while he ceased not
to be a Magistrate.

Another Argument they draw from the different dispensatious of the Gospel from
those of the Law. These dispensations are now adays more talked of then
explained or understood and least of all in this present affair. The
dispensations are differen^^ ^ay they, and why? Because, forsooth, under the
Gospel transgressors are not to be proceeded against, as under Moses, by
external force and power: God inpatience and long-suffering waiting on men.

Answ. If transgressors are not to be proceeded against, under the Gospel, by
external power, how is it then said, that the power bears not the sword in
vain, and that it is the Minister of God to execute wrath on them that do evil,
Romans 13. 4? By evil is understood. all evil, it being in materia necessarta,
according to that of Pro 208. A King that sits on the throne of judgment
scatters away all evil. If all, then it is evil committed as well in
spiritual as secular things: And then for patience and long-suffering toward
sinners, expecting their repentance: as God is the same God, so has his
patience and long-suffering been heretofore as much as-now under the Gospel.
Was he not one hundred and twenty years before he brought the Flood upon the
world of the ungodly? And was he not grieved forty years with his people,
before he swear that they should not enter into his rest, Psalm 95. and Heb. 3.
Whereas now God expects a present embracing of grace offered (...) Cor. 6. 2.
Now is the accepted time, future repentance (...) to be presumed upon.

But, say they, when any continues in disubedience to the Gospel, his
punishment is eternal in the world to come; therefore as the Apostl^ says, 1
Cor. 4. 5. Judge nothing before the time until the Lord come, who will bring to
light-hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the
hearts, and then shall every man have praise of God.

Answ. And so when any one continues in disobedience to the Law, his punishment
is eternal too. But what is this place to a man's continuance in disobedience to
the Gospel? Is it not alleged by St. Paul himself a Preacher of the Gospel? He
would not be judged before the time; for what? for his not continuance in
obedience to the Gospel? Nothing less; for he ever continued in obedience to
it, and ever preached it. The Question was, whether he were faithful in this
his stewardship or no? whereof they were not to be judges, but God alone the
searcher of the heart. St. Paul himself knew nothing by himself, yet was he not
thereby justified. The heart of man is deceitful above all things: and if a man
may be deceived in his own heart, it were a rash thing to judge another man's,
and that before the time that the hidden things of darkness shall be brought to
light, and the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed to the view of all men,
as now they are to God. It is therefore rash and bottomless judgment that the
Apostle here forbids, not that which is passed upon good grounds and serious
deliberation. 2. It is ^aucy censure that is here forbidden, to wit, that they
being private men should go about to censure their Apostle and Preacher, when
they were rather to be judged by him. 3. It is impertinent judgment that is
here forbidden, in going about to judge the heart, when man looks on the
outward appearance only, and judges in matter of fact [not in matter of
thought] and this is all the Magistrate himself pretends to, wherein it is
lawful for him to judge, which is confirmed by the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 6.
Are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters? and v. 4. he takes it for
granted; that they have judgment in things pertaining to this life.

But, say they, St. Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 13. says, that he was a blasphemen and a
persecuter, and if the mind of God had been that he should have suffered death
in that condition, how should he have had repentance (...), and been such a
glorious instrument in the Church as (...) was?

Answ. That it was neither the mind of God, nor the duty of the Magistrate, to
cut off St. Paul for blasphemy before his conversion, as this was* and in the
time of ignorance, when nor he, nor the Magistrates, under whom he lived, knew
it to be blasphemy to speak against Christ or Christians. Hence it was that he
said, that he obtained mercy. The Jews knew not Christ to be the Lord of glory
for had they known it they would not have crucified him. Wherefore St. Peter
shows them, that a door of mercy was yet opened unto them. The fame may be said
of the Jews, alleged by our Adversaries here. The Jews were never yet
converted to Christianity, which may be the reason why they are not punished
nor condemned for blasphemy against Christ. But in that they say, that the Jews
are the greatest blasphemers of Christ that are on the earth, this is true only
implicitly; for should they explicitly blaspheme they were worthy of
punishment, yea and were punished by the Imperial Laws, as may be seen in Cod.
Justiniani l. 1. c. 9. de Judaeis and Celicolis, where it is decreed, That if
any of those Judaei or Cael^^olae did attempt any mischief against them that
refused to entertain their Sect, they and their confederates should be
committed to the fire. And again, If any Jew did presume but to ^traduce any
one to his religion, he was to be condemned to a proscription of his goods, and
punished after a miserable manner. And a third Law says, That if a Jew
presumed to draw a Christian to his religion, he was to be proscribed, and
sustein the punishment of blood. They have been heretofore permitted to live
here, as they are now elsewhere amongst Christians, but how little it has
wrought upon them all the world knows: it is not Gods time yet, it seems, to
take away the vail that is drawn over their eyes. Mean while you must
understand, that the Jews remaining Jews, do not acknowledge themselves the
natural subjects of any Prince in the world. They will admit themselves to be
the local subjects of those under whom they are, and will not be received to
that neither, but upon conditions of freedom; wherefore it was a Law Imperial,
Cod. Justin. l. 1. Tit. 9. de Judaeis and Caelicolis, (...) s^os citra
c^ntemp^um Christianae religionis retineant; that they might retain their Rites
without contempt of the Christian Religion.

Neither will it be for the purpose of our adversaries to urge the Toleration
of more then one Religion in other parts of the world, as in France and several
parts of Germany: for first, In tolerating of them, they tolerate not blasphemy
or heathenish idolatry: for in France it self their civil courts take
cognizance, Des (...) de leze-Majest^ divine and human, b. e. of crimes of
Treason against God and the King. 2. in France the King permits but two
Religions, not all, as these men would have done here. So in Germany Popery and
the Augustane confession have been permitted together, but not all Religions:
and how comes even these things to pass, but because Princes give away that
power over the Church, wherein God has vested them, to the Pope, or people,
That the King of France has so done is clear from the Rragmatica Sanctio:
wherein its acknowledged that the Kings of France own originally, no Superior,
but God, and that without the said pragmatical sanction, the Acts of the
Council of Basil were of no validity, which was done at Bourges by an Assembly
of the Estates, and confirmed by the King, shortly after the celebration of the
said Council of Basil, which was anno Domini, 1436. And that this has ever
since obtained in France appears by the following censure of the contrary
doctrine.

Censure de la sacree faculte de Theology de Paris, contre la puissance
temporelle du Pape.
LE premier jour d' Auril mil six cents vingt six, apres la Mess du St.
Esprit, l' assemblee s estant faite a l accoustumee en la salle du College de
Sorbonne, touchant le lieure impre de Saternelly Jesuit, any le rapport de
doctenrs que la faculte avoit deputez, lesquels ont expose qu es deux
chapistres qui leur avoiint estez Marquez, estoyent contenues les propositions
suivantes: Que le Pape pent punir les Roys and les Princes de peines
temporelles, les deposer and priver de leur Royaume and estats pour crime d'
Heresy and deliurer leurs sujects de leur obeissance: and que tell a
tousjours este ta coustume de l' Eglise. Et non sculement pour l' heresy mais
encore pour d' autres causes, ascavoir pour leur pechez s' il est ainsi
expedient: si les Prences sont negligens: s' ils sont incapables and inutiles.
De plus que le Pape a la puissance sur les chooses spirituelles, and sur toutes
les temporelles, and qu'il a cette puissance de droit divin. qu'il faut croire
que le pouvoir a este done, a l'. Eglise and a son Souverain Paesteur de punir
de peines temporelles les Princes qui pechent, contre les Loix divines and
humaines: particulierement si leur crime est une heresy. Ils ont aussi dit que
Saternelly affirm que les Apostres estoient bien sujects an Princes seculiers,
mais non de droit, and mesme qu' aussi tossed que la majesty du Souverain
Pontife a este establie, tous les Princes luy ont este sujects bref ils ont
rapporte que cet Autheur explique ces paroles de Jesus Christ, Mat. 16. Tout ce
que vous liez sur la terre and non seulement de la puissance spirituelle, mais
aussi de la temporelle, and qu il corrompt le text de St. Paul 2 ad Cor. 10.
Potestatem deditinobis Dominus in aedificationem and non in destructionem, en
retranchant une negation, and fait dire a plusieurs autheurs, qu'il cite de
chooses a quoy ils n'ont jamais pense: concluans que tant, ces chooses que plusie
autres qu'ils ont rapportees meritoient tres-justement la correction and la
censure de la faculte: Monsieur le Doyen ayant mis la chose en deliberation
apres que les opinions de tous les Docteurs ont este, ouyes and leurs voix
recuillies la faculte a improuve and condamne la Doctrine contenue en ces
propositions, and aux conclusions desdites chapitres comme estant nouvelles,
fausses, erronees, and contraire a la parole de Dieu, qui rend la dignite du
Souverain Pontife odieux, and ouvre la chemin au scisme, qui deroge, a l'
authorite Souverain de Roys, qui ne depend que de Dieu seul, and empeche la
conversion de Princes infidels and heretics: qui trouble la paix universelle
and renverse les Royaumes, les estats, and les Republiques, Bref qui detaurne
les sujets de l' obeissance qu'ils doivent a leur Souverains, and les induit a
des factions, rebellions and seditions, and a attenter de la vie de leur
Princes, fait en Sorbonne, les jour and an que dessus, and receu le 14. Auril.
1626. Par le commandment de messieurs les Doyens and Docteurs de la sacree
faculte de Theology de Paris.

Sign Ph. Bouvot.


The French deriving themselves from the confines of Germany. The like may be
said of the German Powers: and the powers that are are of God, Romans 13. and
depend immediately upon him. But these powers, I say, are for the most part
given away to the Pope by the true owners of them; whereas did they reform
Religion by their own authority, as the Kings of England have done, all men
might quickly be brought to subscribe and submit to that Religion and
Government, which they should authorize according to the word of God, and the
consent of antiquity, which would never have been brought to pass in England,
had the Kings referred themselves herein to Pope or people.

And whereas they urge that it makes for the security of Princes to give
libehty to all.

I answer, That then this security must be either from God or man: from God it
cannot be, in as much as he that gives liberty to all religions evidently shows
that he has no regard of any, but merely as to the notion of it: in which case,
what security can he expect from God? neither let our present adversaries think
they please God in pleading for a liberty of blasphemy, though they pretend
that their very soul abhor it: from man it will not be, for thereby he will
create as many interests as Religions, which will unite against the lawfullest
of all [which they know will aim at an uniformity] though they shall no sooner
have beaten down this then they will fall a squabbling among themselves. In
which regard it may be said of them as Pl^tarch speaks of Casar and Pompey,
namely, that it was not their dissension which was the cause of the civil war,
as was commonly supposed, but their union rather, in as much as they first went
about to ruin the authority of the Senate and of the Nobility, and then they
quarrelled among themselves, a thing, says he, which Cato many times foretold
and prophesied. Those that aim at usurpation catch most fish in these troubled
waters. Thus did Jeroboam, whom our adversaries instance in, as if it made for
them, when indeed they could not have found an example in all the Bible, or in
all the world, that makes more against them. They say that Jeroboam wanting
faith to believe that his new kingdom could any ways be fecure'd to him, or
kept from going back to the lineage of David, unless he devised some new way of
worship to keep the people in their own land, and for his so doing he thought
he had much reason of state: whereupon he took counsel and made two calves of
gold, 1 Kin. 12. 16, 17, 18. and said unto them, it is too much for you to go
up to Jerusalem; behold thy God, O Israel, which brought thee out of the land
of Egypt, which policy of his procured this event which God denounced against
him, saying, I will bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam, and will cut off
from Jeroboam him that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut up and
left in Israel, and will take away the remnant of the house of Jeroboam, as a
mantaketh away dung till it be all gone. And 1 Kin. 14. 10, 11. for the sin
wherein he made Israel to sin is he branded to all postericy, etc. whereunto
they add by way of application, be wise now therefore O ye Kings, Ps. 2.

Answ. They should have said, Be wise now therefore O ye Rebels, such Jeroboam
was. This Jeroboam an obscure fellow, and servant to Solomon, 1 Kin. 11. 26.
rebelled against his King, and by his artifices drew away ten tribes after him
from Reh^boam, and the house of David under which the true worship of God
remained and flourished. Now Jeroboam considering that he was but a rod sent to
scourge Gods people, and to be thrown into the fire at last, used all means to
cross providence, and to perpetuate the Kingdom to himself and his posterity,
which he knew to rest chiefly in the business of Religion. Then well weighing
that if he suffered the people to use their old way of worship, it would prove
a means to reduce them to obedience to their lawful Sovereign. He therefore
persuades them that they need not go to Jerusalem, saying that the C^lves which
be had set up, the one in Bethel, and the other in Dan, were the Gods which
brought them out of the Land of Egypt: for which the curse of God lighted on
his family, as our adversaries have noted, and he was branded with a note of
perpetual infamy so often repeated in the history of the Kings of Israel, viz.
Jeroboam the son of Nebat who made Israel to sin.

Just so was it here: we had a Jeroboam who rebelled against his King, after
whose death [which he contrived too] he carried away the proportion of ten
tribes after him: and the better to assure them to himself, told them they need
not look after Churches and Steeple Houses, nor the Religion which was there
taught and practiced by those that frequented them; that they might set up the
golden calves of their own spirits, and adore them where they pleased, made
priests of the lowest of the people, which were not of the Tribe of Levi. That
is, sent those to preach and pray that had neither Ordination nor learning. Now
he is gone, and how much more of this dunghill is swept away, I cannot
precisely tell, but this note of infamy will rest upon him, namely, that he
made England, Scotland, and Ireland to sin. And thus we see how their own
argument ^b exemplo, in every particular makes against themselves, and against
that liberty they contend for, so unlucky they have been in it.

Sect. 16.
IN the next place they press the liberty granted to tender consciences by the
Kings Majesty's Declaration from BREDAH.

Ans. And so they had it, till that fell out which might be foreseen, viz. A
making use of it to an insurrection in London, which might have put all the
Kingdom into a flame, had they not been as fanatic in their undertake as in
their opinions, persuading themselves that one of them should chase a thousand.
And why this Liberty was restrained, is set forth in the Kings Majesty's
Proclamation to that purpose, by whom it was never intended to grant a Liberty
to others which might put a restraint upon his Majesty's own self at last.

As for what they urge out of Dr. Tailor, Lord Bishop of Down and Conner in his
Liberty of prophesying, and his Epistle Dedicatory to it, I say that he might
think it high time, even for the Orthodox to cry up a liberty of opinions
amongst the rest, when the cry of others had prevailed for the liberty of all
Religions but the true: and our Adversaries, to render their present cry the
greater, produce the testimony of the ancients in the margin.

But to make up the number 15. which they promised in their Title Page, they
have made some of them separatists from themselves, by dividing Minutius from
Faelix, Sulpitius from Severus, Socrates from Scolasticus; for otherwise they
had had but a petty Jury: this they never took from that learned Bishop since
then, male describendo, yea, and male vertendo too, these have made them their
own; my task will be to answer them only: The thing insisted on this, that for
the first 300. years there was no sign of persecuting of any man for his
opinion, though at that time there were many horrid opinions commenced.

Answ. That this is either generally to be understood: h. e. of Christianity in
general persecuted; or else of any man or men's being persecuted by other
Christian or Christians for matter of opinion. If generally understood, I
oppose thereunto the 10 Persecutions, which happened in the first 300. years,
The 1. was under Nero, anno 67. whose decree was that to confess a man's self
to be a Christian, should be capital. The 2. under Domitian, ann. 90. The 3.
under Trajan, ann. 100. whereof Plini to Trajan, l. 10. Epist. 111. The 4.
under Adrian, and Antoninus Pi^y, ann. 126. The 5. under Antoninus Philosophus,
and Antoninus Verus, ann. 168. The 6 under Severus, ann. 203. The 7. under
Maximinus, ann 236. The 8. under Decius, an. ^51. The 9. under Valerianus, ann.
258. The tenth under Diocletian, ann. 303. If this would be understood
restrictively of any man or men's being persecuted by other Christians: I
answer, 1. That I hope they will recall their word persecuting. Horrid opinion^
may be prosecuted and punished, not pe^secuted; I mean in the Scripture
acception of the Word, though in the Law it be so accounted. Cod. l. 1. t. 5. l
g. Manichaeos seu Manichaeas vel Donatista meritissima severitate persequimur.
2. If horrid opinions were only commenced, they were but begun; but sin when it
is perfected (and not before) brings forth death by the Laws of God, and if
horrid sin, by man 100. 3. For prosecuting, or (as they call it) persecuting
for opinions, either commenced or perfected, what power had they to do it
withal, when all the Emperors were Heathen, and there was no eminent
Magistrate to take cognizance of differences among Christians themselves,
otherwise then to foment them, that thereby they might become the ruin one of
another? 2. Of the Authors alleged, the Historians (whom only I look upon for
matter of fact) say nothing in the business, and therefore prove nothing at
all. As for instance, Sulpitius Severus says nothing of one Christians
persecuting another. Ergo, one Christian did not persecute another: this is a
non sequitur, it being an argument from humane authority, and therefore holds
not negatively, especially from the authority of one that has written but an
Epi^ome, a very manual of history, which cannot be comprehensive of all things,
neither does he mention any thing but the ten persecutions, and what relates to
them in all that three hundred years, which he does too in less then one
hundred and fifty lines in Octavo, of a St. Augustine print, which could not
have been much had it been so many lines in a Minion or Nonparil. And as
Sulpitius Seve^u^ did not, so Socrates Scholasticus could not speak any thing
of this matter, in as much as his history begins with Constantine, which was
after the expiration of the said three hundred years.

Thirdly, did any of those Authors speak against persecution for matter of
opinion? then this is an argument that there was such a persecution (so our
adversaries are pleased to call it) or else they fought with a shadow.

Their dislike hereof consisted in two things, 1. That any should be put to
death merely for his opinion, and this was St. Austin's dislike, who was first
of opinion that it was not honest to use any violence to misperswaded persons,
but afterward he retracted it, Retract. l. 2. c. 5. quoted by the Dr. himself
lib. of proph. sect. 14. We agree with St. Austin, as we have signified all
along, that no man is to be put to death for simple heresy, h, e, qua heresy,
unless it has joined with it Blasphemy, Heathenish Idolatry, Sedition, or the
like.

The Doctor himself allows punishing Romish priests with death, not as for
Religion, but as enemies to the state, Sermon. at St. Mary's on Gunpow. Treason,
neither does the said Dr. disallow of Laws for punishing of Heretics in
general with corporal punishment; only he would have the execution of those
Laws upon emergencies committed to the discretion of the Governors of the
Church, ib. sect. 17. The second thing those forementioned Authors or any of
them disliked was, that any man should be compelled to a Religion, not that he
should be corrected for his wanderings from it: and so much is learned from
Tertullian ad Scap. Nec religionis est cogere religionem, quae sponte suscipi
debet, non vi; and this has been our tenet all along.

But, say they, This restraining of liberty, imposing upon men's consciences,
and lording over their faith, came in with the train and retinue of Antichrist,
that is, they came as other abuses and corruptions of the Church did, by reason
of the iniquity of the times, and the cooling of the first heats of
Christianity, and the increase of interest, and the abatement of Christian
simplicity.

Ans. That if this restraining, and imposing, and lording be meant of the Popes
infallibility, and resolving every thing into that Chimera, then I agree, that
it came in with the train and retinue of Antichrist.

And its an argument the men of this generation are the train and retinue of
Antichrist, whose opiniatrete or self-conceitedness is such, that every one
thinks himself a Pope in that regard. Therefore the granting of liberty to them
is to acknowledge their infallibility, and consequently, were there a thousand
Religions amongst them, every one must be acknowledged to be the true; and then
what would become of ONE LORD, ONE FAITH, ONE BAPTISM? Ephesians. 4. 5. but if
this restraining be meant of any other restraint by the Civil Magistrate;
Liberty was restrained before Pho^as his time [who was called the Midwife of
Antichrist] as may be seen in Cod. Justiniani l. 1. t. 5. and t. 9. which Code
was composed, [Anno 529. and 530. above seventy years before Phocas] not of
Laws then newly enacted, but of such as had been made by his Predecessors long
before, amongst which those that touch the present business were those of
Arcadius, Honorius, Valentinianus, Theodosius, etc. all promoters of the
orthodox faith, and therefore ushered not in the train and retinue of
Antichrist, which never did so lordly and imperiously appear as in Pope
Hildebrand, called Gregory the seventh, who sat at Rome between four hundred
and five hundred years after Phocas, and above five hundred and forty years
after the last composure of the Code. He first of all the Popes excommunicated
the Emperor, and arrogated to himself the power of instituting an Emperor.

I agree likewise, that the King of France his giving permission to the
Huguenots has proved prosporous to that Nation, though most prosperous to the
Huguenots themselves, who have found more happiness in peace and obedience,
then ever they did in rebellion, and holding out against the power and
authority of their King. But had he given the same liberty to all Religions, it
must have been the confusion of it, and as displeasant to the Huguenots, as the
denial of liberty to themselves had been before. In every assembly of the
Huguenots the King has a Commissary, to see that nothing be decreed amongst
them against the interest of the Crown: But how can such a thing be among men
of all Religions, and no Principles?

I agree likewise, That liberty of conscience should be preserved in all things
where God has not made a limit: For the Article of our Church, before
mentioned, says, That she has not power to impose any thing contrary to the
Word of God, yea or besides it, as necessary to salvation.

I agree, That the soul of man should be free, and acknowledge no Mast^r but
Jesus Christ: And yet may it be subject to humane Laws, which do bind the
conscience in themselves, not for themselves, but for and on the behalf of God
and Jesus Christ, who commands every soul to be subject to the higher power,
Romans 13. and in this regard matters spiritual may be restrained by punishments
^orporal, as we have already said.

I agree too, that meekness, and charity, and longanimity should be exercised
toward those in error: and lastly, That the infirmity of man, and difficulty
of things, should be both put in the balance to make abatement in the
definitive sentences against men's persons.

But what is all this to idolatry, sedition, and blasphemy, which our
Adversaries have herein endeavored to maintain as not punishable by the
Magistrate? And what is this to those steams of opinions breathed out of the
bottomless pit, against which they would not have the Magistrate as much as
hold his nose?

Therefore they go on and say, That the best of men, and most glorious Princes,
were always ready to give toleration, but never to make execution for matters
disputable, as Eusebius in his second book of the life of Constantine reports.

Ans. All this we grant: But what is all this to horrid opinions, or practices,
against which severe Laws were made by glorious Princes? These were not of
things disputable, and de quibusdam v^culis, as they are termed in the title of
the Chapter of the said second Book of Eusebius, concerning which there was no
Law made, nor like to be made, against which any toleration or whereupon any
sentence might be given, upon which any execution might be suspended. But they
were of matters of higher concern, as will appear by the Laws themselves. The
first was that of Constantine the Great, who after the Nicen^ Council commanded
the books of Arius to be burnt, and that he who neglected it should be put to
death, as is observed by Alphonsus a Castro. de justa Hereticorum punitione l.
2. c. 15. So Theodosius commanded the Donatests to be put to death, as Minus
Celsus Senensis himself witnesses. But the Cod. of Justinian. l. 1, Tit. 5.
testifies more in this matter then I need now to write, wherein we find that
there is a Law made by the Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius, for
the perpetual silencing of heresies and Heretics, ut Haereses perpetuo
quiescant. Another for interdicting all Conventicles of them to be held either
night or day, made by Arcadius and Honor^us. Another against the Manichees in
particular, That they be. Outlaws, suffer a publication of their goods, barred
of all liberality of, or succession to others, that all power of giving, or
selling, or contracting be taken away from them, and much more. Another made by
Theodosius and Valentinian, against the Artans, Macedonians, P^^umatomachi,
Apollinarians; Novatians, or Sebatians, Eunomians, Tetradites or
Tessarescaedecadites, Valentinians, Paulians, Papianists, Montanists, or
Pricillianists, the Ph^yges or Prapusites, Marcionites, Borborites, Messalians,
Euchites, or Enthusiasts, Donatists, Audians, Hydroparastats, Tascod^ogites,
Batrachites, He^mogenians, Photinians, Paulianians, Marcellians, Ophites,
Encratists, Carpocratites, Saccophorites, (and qui ad imam usque scelerum
nequitiam pervenerunt) the Manichees, that they have no place either of abode
or convening, in Romanum locum. As for the Manichees, they were not only to be
banished the Cities; but they were to be (tradendi ultimo supplicio) delivered
to death, least the Elements should be infected with them, or injured by them.
Another Law was made by them, That they that adhered to the opinion of
Nestorius should not be called Christians, but Nestorians, from their Author
Nestorius, whose impious books, written against the Decrees of the Council of
Ephesus, every man was forbidden to have, to read, or to write out, but were
diligently to be searched for and burned. All places of meeting were thereby
forbidden these Nestorians; and whosoever offended against this Law, was to suffer
publication of his goods. Another Law was made by Valen, and Marcian, against
the followers of Eutyches, whose opinions were condemned by the Council of
Nice, consisting of three hundred and eighteen Fathers, and in the
Constantinopolitan Council, consisting of one hundred and fifty other Bishops.
These were called also Apollinarists, and were to ordain no Presbyters under
pain of confiscation; they were to have no Monasteries, nor meetings by day or
by night, under pain of forfeiture of the house, if the owner were aware of it,
or else ten pound in gold: they were to have no room in the Militia, etc.
Diverse other Laws are there to be seen, whereby the Manichees are punishable
with death, other Heretics with confiscation, or the like. Now albeit the
capital punishments here mentioned were seldom inflicted, yet others doubtless
were, even those of banishment and confiscation. [Nay, as we have noted before,
that severe Laws were made against the misbehaviour of the Jews. So Soc.
Scholast. tells us, Hist. 7. 16. that condign punishment was undergone by some
of them, upon the command of the Emperor, for scoffing at Christ and
Christianity in their Crucifixion of a Christian Boy.] To these Laws, it is
probable that King James had an eye in his Declaration against Vorstius, sent
by an Ambassador to the States of Holland, wherein he manifests his
detestation of Vorstius's horrid opinions, as deserving the banishment of the
Author, rather then the honor of his being a public Professor in that famous
University of Leyden. And this learned King of happy memory I mention, the
rather, because our Adversaries allege him wrtting to the United Provinces,
and advising them to maintain peace, by bearing one with another in (such)
differences of opinions and judgment.

Answ. This is true, if by such differences be meant disputable things, and
such perhaps as were meant by Constantine in the foresaid 55. c. of the second
book of Eusebius, though not the same, wherein he would have men persuaded to a
pious Syncretisme rather then a Schism, which might occasion the Magistrate to
make use of his Sword: which wholesome counsel it were to be wished men would
take amongst us: where one party decryes the other for Arminian, which is it
self as fast decryed for Calvinist, on the other side, both, though they differ
in their Doctrines, agree in their Uses and Applications, and take all the
Articles of our Church to be for them, as is observed by the Kings Majesty of
blessed memory, in his Declaration set before the book of Articles. But that
they might as well agree in Doctrines as Uses, they should do well to take up
that excellent moderation prescribed by our Church in the close of the
seventeenth Article, which is, That Gods promises are to be received [not to
curious disputes, but] as they are generally set forth in the Scripture, and in
our doings that will of God is to be followed, which we have expressly declared
unto us in the Word of God.

And as for the Emperors, and Duke of Savoy 's tolerations, together with that
of Polonia and Rome it self, alleged here for their defense: I say, it is one
thing what they did upon State policy, and another thing what they would have
done, had they not been under a necessity of doing it. The King of Spain has
made a peace with the Hollander, notwithstanding his claim he makes to the Low
Countries; why? because he has irons enough in the fire elsewhere. The case was
so with Ferdinand of Germany, Emanuel of Savoy, the State of Poland, the
Emperors of Rome, a necessity lying upon them to do as they did: but by the
way I must tell you, that there were Laws made against the Novatians before
Justinian's time, witness that before quoted out of the Code, which was enacted
by Theodosius and Valentinian against that rabble of Heretics, whereof the
Novatians were a part; and even that Law refers to others formerly made
particularly against their Conventicles, which they falsely called Churches.
Neither did the others want Laws against a liberty of Religion, though they
thought it necessary to tolerate it. Which necessity ceasing, the Popes [as
their following words would have it] were the first preachers of force and
violence in matters of Religion, and yet it came not so far as death, but the
first that preached that Doctrine was Dominick the founder of the Order of
begging Friars.

Answ. That (as I conceive) neither were the Popes the first preachers of force
and violence, neither was Dominick the first founder of begging Friars; for I
have already proved, that force in this case has been practiced before, taught
by St. Austin, and approved by God himself, in giving men into the hands of
Satan for the punishment of the flesh. Nay did not the whole Christian world
agree together upon the same principle in the holy war against Insidels [which
is more then we have undertaken to justify] though the same power which was
raised against them, was turned against Christians upon the instigation of
Dominick? This Dominick was not the founder of begging Friars [for these owe
their beginning to S. Francis of Assize] but of a new order of working Friars,
who being unable to maintain themselves by working, were forced to piece out
their maintenance by begging. The new Order I call them: for here even in this
Island about six hundred years before Dominick, the Monks of Bangor were about
two thousand and one hundred that lived upon the work of their hands, as Bede
witnesses. Hist. Eccles. Gent. Ang. l. 2. c. 2.

In the next place, to the pretended injustice of the executions that are urged
to have been done in the reign of Henry the fou^th for m^tter of opinion, I say
that what was done, was occasioned not so much for opinions, as for the hostile
manner that the assertors of those opinions assembled themselves in, which was
pernicious in it self, and dangerous to the State. These were called by several
names, one whereof was Lollards, not as owing their beginning to Lollardus a
German [if I may have the liberty of conjecture] but as being so called, quasi
Lowlords, h. e. Levellers: for in Acts and Monuments they are also written
Lolleards, the termination whereof comes near to the Scottish word Lord for
Lord.

In the last place it is objected, Why are we so zealous against th^se we call
Heretics, and yet great friends with drunkards, and fornicatours, and
swearers, and intemperate, and idle persons, etc.

Answ. This Argument holds for those that are only called Heretics, but are
not certainly known to be so: whereas that which is Heresy indeed is a
spiritual drunkenness, and a spiritual fornication, and which usually carries
along with it an interest destructive to the King and Church, which Heretics
will fight for as eagerly, as a corporal fornicatour will do for his Paramour;
and therefore more severely to be punished then corporal drunkenness in those
that are guilty of it: for it may be said of corporal drunkards, as Caesar did
of Dolabella, whom he was advised to beware of, I am not afraid, said he, of
such fat perewig'd fellows as he; they are the pale and the lean men that I
stand in fear of, meaning Cassius and Brutus; so Plut. in vita Caesaris. Yet
this I add namely, that he who is a friend to an unbounded liberty of opinions
[such as these men contend for] is a friend to drunkenness too, inasmuch as he
that has liberty to think what he pleases in any thing [for hither these men
would extend liberty] will judge it lawful to take a cup too much a^
sometimes. And where have you greater drinking then amongst the Low Country
men, where liberty of opinion is allowed? In so much, that a very famous man
[and he a public Professor too] failing his Auditors of a Lecture one day,
made an Apology for himself the next, and said, The reason was that he had been
drunk over night. This I had from one of the greatest friends they have in
England, and therefore not very likely to raise a false report of them. And to
let you know that this Nation observes no just measure in any thing
appertaining to God or Caesar; another has expressed this their moral Scazon,
by a metrical one, in these words, Utrinque clauda Gens Batava jampridem est:
Sed cur, and unde nosse vis? id in promptu.
Deo rebellis, and rebellis est Regi.
Hi nonne summo ^ure (...) cloud^
Per omne (...), and omne per latus p^ssunt,
Quibus est sides luxata, valga, distorta,
Fide litasque facta loripes tata?
The Ba^avan on both feer goes awry:
Would know the cause* (...) thee by and by.
He Is Rebel both against God, and against his Prince.
And he whose cheverel conscience can dispense
With faith to the one, and fealty to the other,
His legs, and sides, and all will halt together.


As for Disputations so much desired; they are good in themselves, but, for the
most part, so partially reported, that I have seldom known any good come of
them: for when men cannot confute what others say, they will make them say what
they can confute.

FINIS.
Errata Majora.
In the Contents. Sect. 7. read Situation. Sect 16. for (...) read Romn. read
Lell^^ page 8. lin. 2. read 200. l. 23. read Ienerati^. p. 11. l. 5. read
stirred up. p. 12. l. 1* read it this be not the very. p. 15. l. 21. read
Sacordotales, p. 15. l. 27. read Dis (...) ^. 21. p. 17. l. 27. read de Imper.
sum. pot. p. 22. l. ^^. read Schedius and Dis. p. 25. l. ^^ read Synod. p. 26.
l. 20. read Re^etin. l. 29. read Ailes. p. 27. l. 6. dele are. l. 19. (...)
Azarias and Villalpandus. l. 22. read Roman and d^le together. p. 28. l. 6.
read contin^ous. l. 8. read plane. l. 11. read an ablong. l. 14. read given. l.
15. dele colon: l. 22. rea^ seem. l' 20. read letters. p. 29. l. 3. read North.
and l. 29. read exception. p. 30. l. ^^ read Nebuchadnezzar's. p. 31. l. 33.
read Gyges. p. 35. l. 24. dele 1. p. 40. l. 31. (...) Swallow. p. 41. l. 22.
read (...). p. 40. l. 29. dele if. p. 43. l. 24. read Laws. p. 4^. l. ult. read
(...) p. 48. l. 5. read to the same effect. l. 18. for by read of. p. 52. l.
(...) dele of. l. 13. dele so. l. 32. read iniminate. p. 53. l. 7. read (...).
p. 54. l. 10. read would destroy l. ult. for want it, read meant it. p. 55. l.
^. read take heed in. p. 57. l. (...) for unlawful read lawful. p. 58. l.
ult. for examination read (...). p. 59. l. ^^ fore. 50. read tit. 50. l. 15.
for if read to. p. 61. l. 11. for lib. ^. read lib. 1. l. 12. re^^ Paganis. l.
13. read (...). 14. for ask read after. l. ult. read by punishing so ^^ sort.
l. 15. read without delay bring themselves and theirs to the holy assemblies,
and. 20. for Logo Qui, read Logo (...) ^^. p. 66. l. 21. for e. 9. read ^. 9.
p. 67. l. 22. rea^ 1438. l. 29. read (...). l. 30. read (...). l. 30. read
expose. and read chapitres. ^. 68. l. ^14. ead sujets. l. 5. read ob^issancel.
16. read 6. ion faith sujets. l. 19. read (...). read etc. l. 27. read pense.
l. 28. read plusiors. l. 31. dele, p. 69. l. 9. read (...) l. 14. read (...).
p. 72. l. 25. read in. (...) ^^ is this*


