palmistry hard

PALMISTRY, The SECRETS thereof DISCLOSED, Or a Familiar, Easy and New Method,
whereby to judge of the most General Accidents of man's Life from the Lines of
the hand, withal its Dimentions and Significations.

As also that Most Useful Piece of Astrology (long since promised) concerning
ELECTIONS for every particular Occasion, now plainly manifested from Rational
Principles of ART, not Published till now.

By RICHARD SAUNDERS, Author of the former Book of Chyromancy and Phisiognomy.

Cuique sua est Tempestas, et tempus cuique voluntati sub Caelis,

Eccle. Cap. 3. verse 1. to 12. Tempus est potentius Legibus.

LONDON, Printed by H. B. for G. Sawbridge, at the Sign of the Bible upon
Lud-Gate Hill. 1663.

TO THE READER.
Negotia humana Astris indigent. Nihil tam humanum est, tamque jucundum quam ea
cognoscere et scire, quae natura inter arcana sua condidit, nihil tam praestans
ac magnificum, quam dei maximum opus intelligere ac contemplari.
THerefore rejecting all execrable vanities of Magic, which are neither Divine
or Natural, but Diabolical, rejecting all Heathen Superstitious conceits, as
also the opinions of them that affirm all future events to proceed from the
Stars by a fatal necessity, on which ground they peremptorily and proudly run
into excess, as also refragating and exploding, on the contrary, their opinion
that deny any future events can be predicted by Humane and Natural Science,
viz. Astrology Chyromancy and Phisiognomy, whiles they affix this only, and
alone to the Divine will, they infinitely derogate from his immense liberallity
and bounty; for certainly if God in his superlative Munificence has granted to
the Celestial bodies, and Elementary virtues, a continued faculty and power of
Production, daily generating a new, as appears in Minerals, Vegetables,
Animals, and Man himself, and has given to the Fowls of Heaven, and to the
Beasts on Earth, such a Sagacity by the instinct of Nature, that they can by a
certain motion of their bodies praenuntiate of the Changes, Perturbations,
Serenity, and various temperaments of the Air; what then? Shall the Almighty
deny to man which only bears his own Image, whom alone he has inspired and
endued with a divine Soul, to know so much of future things, as mear Animals?
Shall not He more superlatively Elargiate to man this Divine property of
Foreknowledge, then to Fowls, and Animals? Far be it from us to think the
contrary, there is no man so meanly read in Scripture, and History, but may see
eminent Tracts of this Learning, amongst the Patriarchs, Noah foretold the
Flood, (God inspiring him) from the Conjunction of the grand Superiors in
Cancer, some years praeceding the same, and in all Ages have famous
Philosophers And Divines Flourished, that have Highly Honored and Advanced
Astronomy, Astrology, Chyromancy and Physiognomy, all in Effect but the same,
even the productions of the Heavenly Influences, for as says Cajetan, Sup.
Psalm. 104. Caelum est vehiculum Divinae Virtutis, quo mediante motu and lumine,
etc. Heaven is a vehicle, of Divine Power and Virtue, by the motion and
influence of which stellified bodies, as second causes, Deus cuncta haec
inferiora, and elementaria corpora, ordinat atque disponit, The Almighty
orders and disposes all sublunary Elementary bodies, as Divinity and
Astrology, groundedly aver, and as he has Expanded the most glorious piece
of Nature, the Firmament, and decorated it with such Variety of Beauty, and
different influences, so he has exposed it to our eye (and given us erected
countenances above all the Creation) to be Viewed, Studied, and Contemplated,
which being known, viz. the disposition of the Heavens, there will be no
difficulty, but that we may with facility Prenote and Predict the Future
contingencies of the World, for in this voluminous Universal Book of Nature, he
has miraculously Described, and Engraven as it were, all Future accidents that
are within the compass of Natures bounds, Unde Caeli enarrant gloriam Dei, and
opera ejus annuntia Firmanentum, and as they proclaim the glory of the Creator,
so they are to us for signs of suture contingencies, not absolutely
Necessitating cur Natures to this or that, but strongly inclining, and so
consequently Disposing our Wills, the Active productions of which are the
subjects of foreknowledge, being future in time, the which future events are
considerable under three notions: The first of them which have a certain
determinate and infallible Cause, as the motion of the Heavens, the rising and
setting of the Signs, the Conjunction of the Planets, the Eclipses of the
Luminares, and the like; of these may be had a certain infallible
Praecognition, which being had, the Effects clearly discover themselves in the
general Accidents of the World, as War, Famine, Pestilence, Peace, Plenty,
and Barronness, the mutations of Sects and Kingdoms, the great Perturbations of
the Air, the Commotions of Elements, Earthquakes and the like, all which from
age to age, are daily acted by a Syderial motive power, which because they
equally depend upon an invariable uniform, motion of the Heaven, the Expert
Astrologer cannot easily deviate from the Truth, unless the second causes be
miraculously impeded by the prime cause, which is God himself, but those
Actions which the Almighty does absolutely by his imediate power, besides, or
against the order of second causes, are very Rare, and never acted in the
World, but upon some superlative occasion, not usual, as the Eclipse of the
Sun, at our Saviors death, which made Dionysius Areopagita break forth into
this Ecstasy, (not knowing any thing of the Stupendous death of Christ) Aut
tota Mundi machina resolvitur, vel Deus Naturae patitur, because this Eclipse
was near a Full Moon, besides the course of second causes, as also in Joshuahs
time, the retrogradation of the Sun, against Nature, etc.

Secondly, other future contingencies are in the world which have an
indeterminate and fallible cause, such are the operations and actions of men,
merely, purely and simply voluntary; these are said to have neither a
determinate verity, nor a dererminate falsity, the will of man being
indeterminate, as says the Philosopher, and therefore vertible to either,
because to him that purposes this or that, there may occur many impediments,
wherefore seeing the Soul of man is more Noble then the visible Heavens, nor
can any corporeal created substance act upon the same necessarily which is
Spiritual; therefore it follows that the Caelestial Influences, cannot change
the Soul nor work thereupon, unless indirectly and contingently by inclining
the same, from whence we may conclude that Arts, or any Humane Science in
respect of the Voluntary Actions of the Mind, are in their Foreknowledge, only
Conjectural.

In a Third Series we may consider things that have a Cause determinated, and
most part certain, yet therewith is somewhat fallible, as namely, those Actions
which partly depend on our Wills, and partly on the Caelestial Influx, and this
because man has a twofold Nature in him, One Caelestial and Aetherial, that
is to say, an Intellectual Soul, but the Other compact of the Substance of the
Elements, which is a frail and mortal Body, from hence it follows that Man is
Necessarily acted by two principles, the Caelestial Influx, and the humane
Will, and so man's Operations and Actions are found mixed and various, the
footsteps of which our following Subject of Chiroscopia, alias Palmistry, does
not obscurely trace out, as Aristotle avers, Deus and Natura nihil efficiant
frustra, it follows then, that not lightly at all-adventure, in vain, and
without Reason are the Lines impressed in the hands of Men and Women, but
principally they depend upon the Caelestial Influx, and the Formate Principles
of the Microcosme, Therefore, according to the Number of the Seven Planets, in
the hollow and inside of the hand, are the seven mounts Efficted which produce
the grounds of Chyroscopia, and from the Lines posited in the same compass, the
Artist foreknoweth of the Complexions, Manners and Ingenuities of persons,
their Fortunes likewise, and Infortunes.

This Natural, Laudable and harmless Science wants not its Patrons and Praises
in all ages, Quid Utilius esse potest quam scire futura? Quid Jucundius? quam
divinitatis alicujus hac in part participem esse? Quidnam Astrologus bonus
aliud est, quam conciliorum quae in Coelo fiunt participes? says Cardanus, and
Sophocles, ceterum cum hoc nectar sit haec Deorum Ambrosia, cur non merito
etiam faelicissimi erunt, qui vel hoc poculi genus aut sibi gustaverint?
Quamobrem necesse est Astrologian omni alia disciplina, and Jucundiorem, and
Diviniorem esse, at vero etiam vtiliorem fore, quis dubitet? cum et futura si
prospera sunt sequi doceat, si adversa, vel vitare, vel Aequius far: namquae
diu quisque ante praeviderit, levius feret.

And Divine writ gives it its suffrage, Job. 37. Cap. ver. 7. Manum cujusque
hominis obsignat, ut recognoscat omnes operarios suos, according to Tremelius,
and according to Jerome and the septuagist, signat in manu omnium hominum, ut
singuli noverint opera sua. Although the Sense of this has been variously
explicated by Ancient and Modern Divines, yet observable it is, that from the
very Contemners of Palmistry, respecting the Original, the holy tongue, and
consulting the most learned Doctors of the Hebrews, they all conclude, this can
no otherwise, but ought to be understood of the signification and use of this
Science of Palmistry.

The knowledge of the Chiromantick principles is chiefly attained by rightly
understanding the qualities of the four Elements from the commixtion of which,
diverse kinds in generation are produced, yet so as one Element, always
Predominates, and one is most Subservient, and the other have their
Co-operations.

Amongst the which, as the most Noble Qualities, Heat and Moisture are the
active formatives in Nature, Calidity and Humidity equally proportionately
joined, compose the most superlative constitution, fully protending and
dilating the parts, but if Heat much exceed moisture in composition, so that it
pass into a siccity, it much protends the body, but little dilates it, causing
a long slender meager form, even as frigidity mixed with Humidity products a
Body spread broad, but short, but heat and moisture predominating, confer to
the body a due longitude and latitude of parts.

Frigidity with Humidity predominating inpedes the natural heat and vigor, from
whence bodies are formed fat and gross, but not long but siccity and frigidity
prevailing, cause long, but not dilated bodies, by reason of the want of
moisture, and the impediments of natural heat; therefore Aristotle affirms the
soetum much to increase in Longitude, and extend, by reason of the
superabounding heat predominating in the Embrio, because it much extends the
Materia, which self same thing, is conspicuously discernable in vegetables, for
Herbs that are hot and moist, extend their leaves much in longitude and
latitude, the more hot, the longer the stalks which bring forth the leaves, by
how much the more any thing has of heat, by so much it is the more contracted
and extended in length, and by how much the more it has of moisture, by so
much the more it is shorter and broader, as is observable in Plants, the hotter
they are, the more narrower and longer leaves they bear, the more Humid and
Moist, the shorter and broader.

These things being thoroughly pensitated from the lines found in the hands of
Men and Women, the Complexion and the Properties of nature is inquired, as
lines long and broad, show a callid and hot complexion, lines long and small,
indicate a hot and dry complexion, lines gross and short, intimate a
super-abounding of evil, noxious humors in the Body, and a cold constitution;
Lines slender, small and disjoined, plainly demonstrate a cold and dry
temperament. By this small hint I hope the Reader will see the Usefulness of
this Science, in respect of all People, and especially Physicians, whose
studies ought principally to be conversant about the Temperaments and
Complexions, and as to particulars, the utillity of praescience is very great,
for, Incognitum malum non evitatur, cognitum tamen potest evitari si
praesciatur maxim a remotis, Against unknown Dangers is no prevention, but
Evils foreseen beforehand, may easily be avoided, as if a man (as Jacol)
apprehend a Dearth to ensue, a War in his Country, Pestilence or any Evil at
hand, he may make Provision before hand by a Removal or otherwise, and avert so
great evils from Himself and His, insinite might I be, both from Scripture and
Hystory to show Examples herein, of Prudent Persons in all Ages; but as my
Scope commands Brevity, so the Ingenious cannot but Indulge me a Cessation from
that labor.

Having thus far asserted the laudable utillity of Christian Prudent Science,
let me warn my Reader of those Sycophants, and Delusive Ignorants, through
whose Sides this precious Science is daily wounded, such spawn of shame, that
impudently make Profession of Art, not only in several Countries, but lurk in
Obscure corners, in and about this Famous City, many Illitterate pieces of
Nonsense and Impudence, of the Female kind, whose Ignorance transcends the
Vulgar Gypsies, and Impudence sufficient to out face a whippingpost, Ptolomy in
his time complained of such, and Cardan found a Generation Quicum says he non
sint, videri volunt, lucrique cupiditate Artem profitentur, quam vix a limine
salutarunt, such though they were not, yet would seem to be Artists, and for
Lucres sake profess it, though they had not saluted the thresholds thereof;
Haly mentions One before His time, that Affirmed when Cor. Leonis in such a
Year, came to the fifteenth Degree of Leo, it would set the World on Flame
through excess of Heat, the consequence of which was, it was the most cruel
cold and sharpest Winter known before, and Petrus Aretinus mentions such an
Ignoramus in his time, that predicted a great Flood, or rather a deluge in the
Month of February, 1524. Which so frighted the people (notwithstanding the evil
season of the year) that they left their dwellings, and fled with their Goods
to the Mountains, which when the time came, there was not any Month in the Year
so fair nor more Serene Weather, no Rain, nor clouds threatening the least of
Rain, which in many Ages was not known before, there has not wanted such
Idiots in our times, frighting the People, and Prognosticating in their
Illiterate Hare-brain'd Predictions, the End of the World, which I have not
omitted to take notice of in my Apollo Anglicanus, especially for the Year,
1656. etc. But for the time to come, that our Country may be undeceived, I will
premise such Quallifications as every able Artist ought to be endued with,
according to the approbation of the best Learned and Judicious, which will
serve as a Touch stone to examine every Professor, and to discern the Prudent
from the Unworthy.

1. The First Qualification requisite to constitute an Artist is, that he be
highly Ingenious. 2. Is required, a good and strong memory. 3. That he be
Prudent, Discreet, Honest, and of a Good and sound Judgment. 4. That he
chiefly value and esteem the Truth in and above all things. 5. That he be a
good Linguist and Scholar. 6. That he be a good Philosopher, skilled in all
parts of Philosophy, viz. Logic, Physics, Ethics, and Metaphisiques. 7. That
he be well verst in the Stars; their Natures, Motions and Accidents, viz. be a
good Astronomer. 8. That he be a Good and Able Arithmetition. 9. That he be a
Diligent Hearer and Observer of the most Eminent men in his time, which hold
forth the most Excellent and Admirable Conclusions, drawn down to us by their
own Experience, and that he give much Diligence to Reading those Books which
have been written by the most Worthy, Judicious and Famous Authors upon that
Subject. 10. That he be Assiduously Diligent in Studies and Labors, wholly
intent upon the Art. 11. That he be sedulously diligent in Collecting,
Recording and Observing all practical Experiments. 12. It Is very requisite that
he be furnished with a meet knowledge of Agriculture, with knowledge Nautical,
Millitary and Physical, as also the Geometrical and Geographical Position, and
description of places, the Habitual Dispositions and Manners of Men, of
Regions, of their Laws, Religious Customs, and generally of all things.
These Qualifications premised, will sufficiently inform such of the forfeit of
their Judgments, Reason and Discretions, that heed Babbling Women and Obscure
Persons, Seducers, the very Shame and bane of Science.

Courteous Reader, this Treatise of Palmistry, that is offered here to thy
view, is in all things different from my former Book of Chyromancy; the Method
being new, and very compendious, and the matter for the most part, being later
Observations, (which I might have kept in my own breast, but that the Common
Utillity is my end, and virtue overruling self ends, as the Philosopher in his
Ethics, Optimus est, qui non solum utitur virtute ad se, sed ad alios,) That
treating Copiously and plainly of all grounds, universally relating to the
whole Art, which are wondrous necessary to be known, this, being composed for a
Pocket Companion does in a brief and new method, very facile and delightful,
discourse, though not so largely, yet all the most principal subjects, wherein
the curiosity of nature requires satisfaction, as long life, short life death
natural, and violent, Riches, Poverty, and all things of most useful
concernment in the whole Life of man, being such Choice Conclusions, and
grounded on so good Authority and comprobated Experience, that it need not
crave any Patronage beyond the Merit of it is own desert, supposing it needs no
Encomium, I will submit it to thy candid ingenuity (Courteous Reader) to speak
for it self, and Divert thy thoughts to the consideration of the second part of
this Subject, viz. the Science of Elections, which in effect, is a prudent
forecast whereby we prevent the inconveniences of an after-wit, (for a great
part of our lives, is uncomfortably spent, about a post inquiry, viz. how to
rectify our mistakes, ignorantly in our Actions Precommitted, instructing us
how we may prevent uncomfortable disasters, fortunate all honest designs, and
consequently producing a comfortable end, in all our undertakings; Therefore
may this part of Astrology, claim to its self the superlative place, amongst
all humane Sciences, being Justified, Asserted and honored by all Worthy
Authors, both Ancient and Modern,, it being the Science, by which our present
safty, and future tranquillity is acquired.

What Elections are, wherein they consist, and their Useful ends, will appear
in the second part of this Treatise, which I suppose, needs no Apology, it is
own Utillity, will best bespeak it is Worth, and excellency, which, the
ingenious Reader will Perspicuously apprehend, if he eye, the Subject, and
overlook the weakness of the composer. I had intended above ten years since he
Publication of this Subject, and it was much expected in the World, but
interrupted through prevailing reasons, I then found to the contrary, but at
last, from more mature experience, consulting the best and profoundest Authors,
you are presented with this, most useful and profitable Subject more briefly
handled, I consess, then formerly intended, this being as an Epitomy of a
largier Copy, yet so full, as I question not but the ingenious will say it is
sufficient.

It Is possible my Reader may expect the Introductive part to be here added,
which teaches the way of composing a Schaeme of Heaven, to each opportunity,
and informing of the Natures, Qualifications and positions of the Planets,
which is so necessary, that it is of absolute necessity to be known, as without
the which information, no laudable use can be made of this subject; But this
being in many Books, yet most largely, fully and incomparably performed by my
Honored Friend Mr. Lilly in the first part of his never sufficiently praised
Introduction; and Domifying Tables Annually performed by the same Author, which
here to insert were but actum agere, and considering it is inconsistence with
this small Volume, as appearing to be too injurious to the portabillity of this
Pocket Companion, I have omitted it, referring my Reader to the aforesaid
Author, in perusing of whom he will not lose his labor, and as it here
presents it self, I only leave it to the candid censure of my Ingenious
Readers, till more opertune time shall make further Discovery, to whom is
wished, all Useful, Beneficial and delightful satisfaction in the perusal
thereof,

By Richard Saunders. Vale and fruimini.
From my House, the three Cranes in Chancery Lane, May the 27. 16^3.
FOR HIS HONORED FRIEND,
Mr. Richard Saunders.
THE Author of this Treatise, having some Years since Published a large Volumn
of Chyromancy and Metaposcopy, a Work very acceptable with the Learned; has
now thought it convenient after some years Study, and further Labor in this
Science, to Publish in a Pocket Volumne, his more Secret Experiences, and
Private Animadversions, in a narrow compass, to comprise (in a manner) the
whole Art of Palmistry, producing New and Experienced Aphorisms, not formerly
published, the better to facillitate those, who are desirous to spend time in
these so pleasing Studies; In a Word, He has vindicated the Art from
Superstition, and judiciously by the portracture of a few hands discovered
Chyromancy, in it is entire, natural and Pristine verity, more faithfully and
more easy to be apprehended, then either Taisner, or any other Author.

As for his Book of Elections, he has therein followed the Tract of the
Ancients, clearing many doubts and Ambiguities in their Writings, making all
things more plain and easy, then they did, for which the Ingenious, are obliged
unto him, and will doubtless own his industry for such his discovery, and
explaining those Knotty pieces he met with in their Labors.

I do Heartily approve of both his Labors, and as the meanest in the Number of
Astrologers, give him my Suffrage, and thanks for his pains, and am his
Assured Friend

William Lilly.

THE FIRST PART Treating of PALMISTRY.
WHEREIN I first present to my Reader various, Pleasant and profitable
conclusions of Chiromancy (alias) Palmistry, drawn from the Theorick and
Practick parts thereof.
Not before Imprinted.
AMongst the several species of Physical Divinations, Chyroscopia merrits not
the least, or last place, it being a most Noble and Ancient Science, as ancient
as Man himself; Chiroscopia, I say, that is the consideration by inspection of
the inward part, or Palm of the hand, as it is distinctly differenced by
Characters and Lines, from which if we Divine, or Judge it is called
Chiromantia, that is, Divination from, and by the lines of the hands, even as
Metopomantia from the lines of the Forehead.

This Science informs us to know and discern by the hand, the Complexions,
and Constitutions of Bodies, the Sufferings and Sorrows of Humane life, the
felicity and infelicity thereof, and in fine, all things good or bad, that may
befall or betide man or woman, Naturally in the course of this their Pilgrimage:
The Subject of this Science is that part of the humane body as I said before,
the hands, in the which are contained the foresaid Lineaments, which are called
lines for the similitude and participation they have with a Line, which is
defined by Euclid to be a Longitude, without Latitude or profundity, the
extreme parts of which are indivisible points per se, or as Philosophy has it,
i. e. Linea est Magnitudo longa, non lata, cujus parts puncto copulantus, A
Line is a magnitude having only length, composed only of punctos, or points by
addition, and this is the subject of our ensuing Discourse, from which lines in
the hand of man, most excellent and singular Speculations, and conclusions are
drawn, that is to say from their Longitude, Latitude, Profundity, Rectitude,
Obliquity, Intercision, Application, Opposition, Conjunction, Separation,
continuity, discontinuity, Proportion, Disproportion, Lucidity, Apparency,
Pallidity, Rubedity, Fuscedtiy, which is a Cloudy darkness of color,
nigredity, Asperity, Mollicity, Feminine Tenderness, from their Position,
Colligation and Form, as of a Triangle, Quadrangle, circumscription of Circle,
and Semicircle; there is also observable in the hands Crosses, Stars, Rays,
Branches, Letters, Ascensions, and Descensions, Right and torted, as we shall
show more clearly in their due places, but amongst all this diversity of lines,
which are found in the hand, some only are principal, as namely, the Vital
line, the Natural the Hepatick, and the Mensal, which Lines have a most
beautiful, and profitable speculation, and are most dilligently to be heeded,
in men of sound Bodies, and well composed Temperaments, the good Position and
constitution of the line of Life, show the heart is good, the life long and
comfortable, and the like, by the natural line is seen the good disposition of
the head and brain, and those accidents thereto relating; from the Hepatick
Line is judged the constitution of the Liver, and its consequent Accidents;
from the Mensal line, the state and disposition of the whole body is clearly
perceived, and by the Harmonical correspondency of the lines whether to Health,
Infirmity or Sickness; and from these all the condition and state of Fortune,
good or bad, as to Riches or Poverty, for Riches are merely the consequents of
careful and fortunate ingenuity, and Poverty the Products of supine careless,
selfish stupidity: To proceed there are many other Lines then these four, to be
seen and found in the han is, (as the Learned Cardinal Morbeth observes) either
from nature therein inserted, or from the Celestial Influences, altering and
changing in the hand, according to the mutable configuration of the Planets in
their Revolutions, as they are annually or otherwise changed and suffer
mutations, as by experience is suffently comprobated, of which colligation of
the Planets, and of this most renownedly honored Science, the famous Hermes
wrote a most ellegant Treatise, which Aristotle afterward found in a Temple
upon an Altar, Dedicated to Hermes, written in Golden Letters, as witnesses
the same Aristotle, which Book he presented to his Disciple the Great
Allexander, with infinite joy and exultation, as a Present of most inestimable
worth and value, more worth in his learned esteem, then all his Conquests.
Tully in his Book, De Divinatione, mentions many ways of Prognosticating
things to come, but amongst all, he gives the precedent Honor to Astrology,
and Chyromancy, by which the courses, fluxes, and refluxes of the Celestial
bodies are known, and the Philosopher in the first of his Meteors, says, Motus
Coeli est perpetuus, est principium, and causa omnium motuum inferiorum, i. e.
The motion of the Heavens is perpetual, is the beginning, Original and cause of
all inferior, sublunary motions; and in his second Book, of De Generatione and
Corruptione, the motion of the heavens and of all the other Planets, in an
Oblike Circle are the proper Physical causes of Generation and Corruption; and
in his Book, De secretis secretorum, in that Chapter where he shows how the
King ought to govern by Astrology: He says, Oh Rex clementissime, fi fieri
potest non surgas nec sedeas nec comedas, neque bibas, nec penitus, aliquid
facias sine consilio periti in Astrorum Art, Oh most Grations King, as much as
in you lies, neither rise nor rest, neither eat nor drink, nor do any other
action without the Counsel of those expert in the gubernation, and power of
the Stats; and in the 12. Chapter, writing to Alexander the Great, Scias certe,
quod nil vacui and otiosi facit Deus gloriosus, sed omnia fact a sunt ex causa
probabili and certissima ratione, Know for certain, (says the Philosopher)
that the Glorious God has made nothing in vain, but all things are concluded
within the limits of most sure Reason, and are produced from certain causes; to
which opinion the greatest Philosophers agree, as well Modern as Ancient, as
Instance the unparraleld learned Sir Kenelm Digbey in his Observations on
Religio Medici, Page 28. I believe (says he) that all Causes are so
immediately chained to their effects, as if a perfect knowing Nature get hold
but of one link, it will drive the entire series or Pedigree of the whole to
each utmost end, so that in truth there is no fortuirness or contingency of
Things in resect of themselves, but only in respect of us, that are ignorant of
their certain and necessary causes; from hence Aristotle proceeds in his
exhortation, Ideoque nil magni tents praeter concilium alicujus in scientia
Astrorum periti, nec insipientium dictis fidem adhibeas, qui dicunt scientiam
Astrorum it a difficilem, quod nemo ad ipsius cognitionem pervenire possit;
This scruple many quaking judgments make at this day, but he proceeds,
Nesciunt quid dicunt quia apud potentiam intellectus nihil est difficile, and
cuncta sunt scibilia secundam viam rationis, and proceeds sunt alij non minus
stulti, There is another Generation no less foolishly sottish then the former,
meaning the Fatalists Dicentes Deum cuncta praevidisse and praeordinasse ab
aeterno, and cuncta futura de necessitate evenire, unde dicunt quod nil prodest
futura praecognos^ere, ex quo debeant necessario evenire: Quid ergo valet,
scientia stellarum, Astrologiae, chiromantiae, quib us futura praecognoscuntur?
he answers, Errant similiter and terpitur falluntur, quia quamvis quaedam sunt
necessario futura, tamensi praesciantur levius tolerantur: prudentius
declinantur, and sic quodammodo evitantur, quia eo ipso quoque futura sunt in
nostra sunt notitia, and pervide and discrete transeunt sine molestia and
maxima lesione, verbi gratia, quando homines futurans AE is hyemalis
tempestatem, nimis frigidam praecognoscentes: remedia tempori provident and si
pest is intali loco futura sit, and sic de aliis. And the Famous Petrus
Apponensis, otherwise called Consiliator, who flourished in the Year of Christ
819. wrote a most pithy and elegant learned Tract of Chiromancy, alias
Palmistry I might instance Job, and many places in the sacred Scriptures, as
also produce multitudes of famous Authors, and honourers of this Science, of
all Ages, and of all Countries, both Divines and Philosophers; but I am here
forced to brevity, and this already is indifferent well performed in my Subject
of Chiromancy, Printed in 1652. for Nath. Brooks in Cornhil London, and if any
thing be wanting, shall (God sparing life) be supplied in the next Edition at
large: But to proceed, great is the consent, ad identitatem between this
Science of Chiromancy and Astronomy, by reason of the inseparable connection and
cognation of the superior bodies with the inferior, the Macrocosme with the
Microsme, all the great Masters in Chiromancy have unanimously in judging
observed this Herauldry to blazen the hand and Lines by the Planets and Signs,
always observing the same as to method and signification, and good reason, for
all agree that the Impression of the Lines are caused by the superior bodies,
at the formation and birth, and so answerably in the actions of humane life
illustrate each other, and confirm each others significations, yet if to our
apprehension either is more certain in its predictions: It may be said of
Chiromancy, as having its principles and grounds not so remote from our
apprehensions as Astronomy: Much to be lamented is it, to see such cheating,
Deluding Impostors, silly Women, ignorant Quacks who swarm in every place City
and Country, to undertake and be daily conversant in this so Sublime and Noble
a science; from whose ignorant and false delusive Oracles and misgrounded
judgments, much Infamy and Reproach has adhered to this so Sublime a Subject,
and no wonder, for the persons pretending the profession of it, as Gypsies, and
other fordid Quacks, men and women, through whose imposturisme this Noble
Science has been much wounded, and the credit thereof much impaired, which
has been the long and serious Study and Contemplation of the greatest Sages,
and Masters in Philosophy, as not to be attained otherwise, for it comprehends
the sum of all Physical Notions, as the Nature of Elements Simple, their
infinite differences in reference to composition, the qualification and
composure of the body both internal and external, and all Anatomical
conclusions, and simetrical proportions as shall in due place be observed; and
is not here matter for the most learned capacities, the most laborious and
serious studies, and the longest measure of life to comprehend this so Sublime
a Subject? From hence then be excluded all those cursed Imposturisms, which the
Devil acts. In the persons of ignorant Impostures Men and Women, to obscure
the works of God and to deceive poor miserable easy believing creatures; from
hence be excluded all those Deceivers and deceptious persons, who willingly or
maliciously, through Superstitious Exercises, Spells or enchantments, (of which
Monsters there are many at this day) attempt and endeavor to presage to the
ignorant of future things; all which impious and superstitious presages and
Prophesies, I seriously abhor and detest, there being not the least of my
Chiroscopia common with them: It being only conversant within the Limits of
Nature, and bounded with Physical limitations, wanting all things of
Imposturism and Superstition, and taken from Physical causes and effects, and
from Natural and ordinary Signs, not at least bordering upon ignorance and
Nonsense.

All men know that man is composed of a twofold Nature, that is to say a
Celestial and Aetherial, as the Rational soul, and a corpus, carducum mortale,
a mortal, frail body composed of the Elements; therefore being agitated, and
acted from these two different principals, to wit, the Celestial infiux, and
the humane will, it comes to pass that his operations are rendered, mixed and
various.

The Tract, Signs, and footsteps of which operations our Chiroscopia does not
obscurely demonstrate to every judicious eye, cum igitur (test Philosopho
primo de coelo and mundo) Deus and Natura nihil efficiant frustra, seeing that
God and Nature have made nothing in vain, id est, Natura Naturans and natura
naturata, Haec que propositio universalis, non solum a Philosophis verum and a
Theologis approbatur, this being a received maxim, both with Philosophers and
Divines, Sequitur non temere and frustra lineas in manibus hominum esse impress
a presertim quia ex influxu celesti, and ipsius microcosmi principiis dependet:
It follows then, that not inconsiderately and in vain are such various Lines
impressed in the hands of men and women, principally seeing that they depend on
the celestial influence, and the principals of the Microcosm.

But farther to remove that detracting and vulgar opinion of them which say,
that the lines of the hand are caused by the constriction and plication thereof.

The falcity of which opinion, every one may more clear then the Sun discern by
his own hands, for can one and the same plication or folding of the hand
constitute Stars, Triangles, Quadrangles, Crosses and marks of several
different forms in the hand? neither is their two men in ten thousand that in
all respects have the lines in their hards alike, although they use one and the
same exercise with their hands: Further for refutation of this error, we see
Nature has impressed lines in the forehead, which is not capable of
restriction or plication; therefore this cannot hold that the constriction of
the hands should cause the formation or appearance of the Lines in the hands,
for in the Condils, between the joints of the fingers, many have many Lines,
and of different forms, others very sew or none at all, and here is no
flexation, constriction or plication, and oft-times are lines transverse,
circular, and cemicircular between the joints of the fingers, where no
constriction is of the hand. Which is sufficient to silence any Antagonist:
Furthermore this truth is confirmed by Astrology, for Chiromancy and Astrology
prove the verity each of other, for let the Astrologer considering the Nativity
of any one, observe the nature of good fortune to come to that person thereby,
to the same end and sense will it appear to the Chiromancer by observing and
judging the hand, which has been much delightful to me in my Observations;
therefore where I can have the Nativity of any one under examination, I will if
possible, subjoyn my Chiromantick observations, for I have very often
experienced, that what the Nativity shall signify, the Chiromantick
observation of the hand shall confirm, and ratify, as thus, if the Astrologer
by the Scheam of heaven radically considered, find the Native subjected to ill
fortune, the same will appear in the hand, by considering the proper
significations of the proper parts thereof; beside shall Astrology in the
Nativity find any Planet more then ordinarily savourable to the Native, or more
favorable then another, let the Chiromantist consider the proper place of that
Planet in the hand, and he shall find it beautified and adorned with
significant Lines to that purpose, and so on the contrary.

Another vulgar error fit to be removed, is, that it is by some affirmed that
the right hand, others the left ought to be inspected.

To which I answer, Noste etiam natis sinistra magis favet, die vero and in
aurora natis dextra, quamvis utraque manus probe inspicienda and examinanda est.

To those persons born in the night the left hand is of most signification, to
those born in the day, or by daylight, the right hand is most observable, yet
both are seriously to be impected and examined.

Thus it is apparent that, Chiromancy, est ars recte divinandi ex lineis
manuum, that Chiromancy or Palmistry is an Art which rightly draws its
conclusions from the lines of the hand, rightly I say, that is not
preposterously lightly, and rashly, as ignorant Rogues do, but Learnedly with
Judgment and Reason, observing the causes and ground from whence every line
deduceth its Original.

The Subject of our judgment is the hand impressed with Lines, for you shall
never see the hand of any one living void of lines.

Next, its requisite to subjoyn certain necessary notions, fit and convenient
to be observed before giving of judgment.

1. As First, that you may pronounce a right judgment, let Indulgent affection
overweaning in Love, and hatred, or ill will be absent from the party judging,
for these are hindrances to true judgment, and Byas the spirits, for the
powers of the soil cannot rightly conceive of things being impedited by these
passions. 2. Next let the hands be decently washed and clean, and a little rest
after taken to compose the parts, and with an empty stomach, that is not
overcharged with Gluttony and Drunkenness; in the Summer time in a place not
over hot, in Wintertime in a place not too extreme cold, nor in a place where
the Sunbeams are violent, because the natural heat is extracted thereby, and
the inward powers debillitated, the skin grows red, and the visive Organs and
Spirits are resolved by the Suns Rays, let not the hand or body be over
wearied with labor, because heat draws out the blood and the spirits from
the Center, to the circumference, and in a clear and inoffensive light. 3. In
the next place is necessarily considerable, the Sex, Age, State, Condition, and
Exercise, for all these are observable, and do not a little help or hinder the
signification; of the Lines. 4. Consider the hands in which the lines are most
obvious and conspicuous, for usually the right hand is most apparent of them
which are born in the day, and by daylight, and the left of them which are
born in the night; observation of the hands is to be made from the four
principal lines, and others visible in either hand contained. 5. Next are to be
noted the colors of the lines, for paleness commonly denotes an evil
temperament of body, in those lines which look otherwise colored, for redness
in some lines signifies evil, and paleness good. 6. Its very considerable that
the usual temper of women's hands is expressed by imperfect lines by reason of the
exility of heat, but if the contrary happen, that they have strong lines well
and clearly expressed, that woman is to be judged a Virago, if not worse, for its
proper for a woman to have imperfect lines; But on the contrary, if a man have
soft hands, flaccid, faint or withered, smooth and shattered lines scarce
appearing he is effeminate, timidus, and too much inclining to the nature of
women, but it is to be noted that we speak of a hand render and Effeminate,
besides the condition of the person, otherwise to some tenderly bred, a tender
small near hand is a grace, and comely. 7. The quantity of the hand is to be
noted whether it bears an apt proportion to the body, in like manner is to be
understood of the lines, bearing a fit proportion they denote holdness, and a
good temperament, but if the hands be shorter, longer, or smaller then the due
proportion, its an argument of Cavillers, Contentious, Crafty, and Malignant
spirits, the fingers over short denote Theft, and a Man full of Malignity, a
long Palm with gross fingers, denotes one dull, heavy, and fatuous: a woman
having a short hand, notes to her pain and difficulty in childbearing; long
slender hands, denote Tyranny, by reason of the excess of choler, hair in a
mediocrity on the back of the hands denote a good temperament and ingenuity,
but if they over much abound, the person in condition is flashy, light, and of
much instability. 8. Next is observable whether the line or lines be continued,
or abrupt, for if it be contrarily effected to what is requisite, it lessens
the signification, for so it comes to pass that continuity diminishes the
signification in adverse things.
Lastly, it remains to note, that the lineaments of the hand cannot be so
exquisitely taken that they may exactly be graven, its possible they may a
little evariate in position or figure, and the signification abide, neither can
it for a light or small dissimillitude or disconguity be diminished in efficacy.

In the next place we arrive to the Practical part of Chiromancy, and by these
two next ensuing figures, give you to understand the parts, the lines, and the
divisions of the hands, requisite to be understood of all, who will reap the
pleasure and profit of this ingenious study.

The Names of the Lines and parts of the hand follow in the two next Figures,
by their proper Letters, as they offer themselves to be understood.
A The line of Life. B The Sister of the line of life, or line of Mars. C
Rascetta, restricta, carpus, the wrist. D The natural line, or line of the
Head. E Epatica, or Liver line. F The line of Saturn. G The Table line. H The
Table of the hand. I The Sister of the Liver line, and the via lactea. K The
Mount of Jupiter. L The Mount of Saturn. M The Mount of Sun. N The Mount of
Mercury. O The Mount of The Moon. P The Mount of Venus. Q The Mount of Mars. R
The Solar line or line of the Sun. S The Girdle of Venus. T Stethos the
forepart of the handwrist. V Thenar, that part between the Thumb and the
forefinger. X Hypothenar, the Percussion of the hand. 1 The first, second, and
third joints of the Fingers. 2 The first, second, and third joints of the
Fingers. 3 The first, second, and third joints of the Fingers.

palmistry hand palmistry hand

IN the next place is Considerable the proportion of the hand, for this holds
a due proportion of parts, as to it self, and likewise to the whole body; and
when we find a due Proportion in the hand as to the parts thereof, it
signifies, a just Symetrical proportion of the body, and so consequently good
fortune, courage, equality of temperaments, and a healthful constitution, which
due proportion of the hand is thus demonstrated, the palm of the hand
transversly under the roots of the fingers, ought to be divided into four equal
parts, beginning at outside of the root of the auricular finger, as you see in
the following figure, to which proportion, the middle finger is to answer in
length, setting your compass in the root thereof at the figure five, and to
the foresaid parts, the palm of the hand from the root of the middle finger to
the root of the thumb is to answer in just proportion as you may discern in
that line, from the figure 1. to 5. and from the root of the middle finger to
the Racetta, the wrist is contained just 5. of those equal parts, so that the
length of the hand exceeds the breadth in just proportion, one equal part, as
may be seen in the following figure, to which proportion of 5. parts the
altitude of the forefinger or Index just answers, from the end of the finger to
the root of the thumb, as appears likewise by the following figure; Further
observe, that the thickness or grosnesse of each finger (measured, as laying
your hand upon the back, the palm open and fingers extended) answers to almost
the fourth part of the longitude of the finger, as suppose, the finger divided
into four equal parts, and one of those parts s^bdived into eight equal parts,
the crassitude of the finger, does answer to, and contain just seven of those
parts, the pollex or thumb is thicker and stronger then any of the other
fingers, this being complicated, and bowed toward the judex, the end thereof
ought to touch the root of the forefinger, and to exceed one half part of four
of the length thereof, beyond the root of the index or forefinger, the index
or forefinger is to contain in length three parts, and one fourth part of the
middle finger, the annularis or ring-finger is to contain in longitude three
parts and one half part of the middle finger, and the Auricularis or little
finger is to contain two parts and one half part of the middle finger, the said
middle finger being equaly divided into four parts as before said, and as the
following figure aptly demonstrates: Thus have you the whole proportion of the
hand, which as it is pleasant and useful for all, so especially for Painters,
Statuaries and Architectures to take notice of, this being the true and just
Symetrical proportion, from which if any one differ more or less, he swerves
from the true proportionate quantity, and likewise from the right medium in
temperament, and quallifications as well as in quantity: Lastly in this figure,
behold the true mensuration of the Liverline which keeps no due proportion in
the hand, but is sometimes longer, and sometimes shorter; therefore set the
foot of your compass in the utmost end of the line of life on the Rascetta,
and extend the other end of the Compass to the middle of the line of life, and
turn the same to the Liver-line, keeping the foot of the Compass on the line
of Life fixed, and divide that proportion into two equal parts, counting to the
first twenty five years, beginning at the time of life, and twenty five years
for the second proportion and what exceeds, (as in some hands this line is
long) count it according to the same proportion beyond fifty years, which will
clear to you the several times, and years in which accidents shall happen,
answerable to the significations of the Liver-line, behold the figure
following, will in all things aptly inform you.

palmistry hand

TRicassus, Coohlitis, Corvus and others have proposed certain mensurations of
the line of Lise, and as they dister one from the other, so have they all
deviated from the Truth, therefore have we here added a more perfect
Geometrical mensuration, Arithmetically supputated wherein the perfect Symetry
of the hand appears, by which the Life and Death, Sickness and other Accidents
of life may be discerned to the true time, and this division is such as (is
manifect) in the ensuing figure, that a mean capacity may with much facility
comprehend it, as also the mensal and natural lines are Symetrically
considered, by the mensuration of which, the times of all accidents of fortune
may be beforehand understood.

1. And first of the vital line or line of life, prepare a neat, handsome pair
of compass, and set one foot thereof in the middle of the root of the judex or
forefinger, extend the other foot thereof to the middle of the root of the
annular or Ring-finger, (as in the figure following) and remove the point of
the Compass from the root of the Ring finger, to the contaction of the vital
line, and that space from the beginning of the Angle to the figure 10. shall
point out the first ten years of life, and look what lines are in that
division, the effects will show themselves in the first ten years according to
that time of proportion: Then,

2. Secondly open the compass (letting the end upon the root of the index stand
still fixed) and extend the point to the parting of the ringfinger, and little
finger, and draw another line Quadrantwise, and where that touches upon, the
vital line, there observe the twentieth year of age, after that.

3. Thirdly, Place the point of the Compass next in the midest of the root of
the little finger, as in the preceding examples, and where that touches the
vital line, is the demention of thirty years, which according to the greatest
Masters in this Science falls in the midst of the vital line, so that there
will appear a perfect Geometrical proportion from this point to the wrist, and
from this point to the supreme angle the beginning of the vital line.

4. Fourthly Fix the foot of your Compass in the midst of the root of the
forefinger, as is before said, and extend the other point to the outside of
the little finger, and draw a line to the line of life, over the percussion of
the hand, and this shall demonstrate the fortieth year of age.

5. Fifthly, Which is chiefly to be Noted, (because some differ in opinion) but
our resolve is, the Compass being fixed as before, extend the other part to the
end of the Mensal or Table-line, and draw a line over the Percussion of the
hand, to contact, or touch the line of Life, and this point in mensuration,
shall constitute the fiftiteh year of age.

6. Sixthly, The foot of the Compass fixed as before, consider upon the outside
of the percussion of the hand, just the same amplitude of space that was
betwixt the years fifty and forty before, and from that part draw a line to the
line of life, and where that point does touch, there let be noted the sixtieth
year of life, which method will make unequal proportions in the line of life,
which must be allowed, and not otherwise expected, yet constitute distinctly
the years as you see in the following figure.

7. Seventhly, In the next place, if a third part of the amplitude be taken
away upon the line of life, i. e. if by removing your compass from the point
sixty years, the space of two thirds (of the last demention) further upon the
line of life, there you shall observe the 70. year, and by removing two thirds
from that further, shall note the 80. year of age, and by removing the foot of
the compass two thirds more of the last demention, shall make the bound of the
90. year, and in like manner to the hundredth, and beyond, if such age be in
the hand, by this method most easily may be observed the exact times of man's
age, upon the vital line, which hitherto under correction, no man has found
out, nor attempted without the shipwreck, and loss of their l^bours.

palmistry hand

THe true mensuration of the vital line thus demonstated, (behold the figure,)
next are observable the Geometrical proportions of the mensal and natural
lines; These two as they differ in method and operation from the vital line,
so they hold a uniformity, (as to mensuration) between themselves, being both
to be equally divided (as to their longitude) into three equal proportion are
parts, which parts respect the three principal ages of man, the first part
proportionating the first twenty five years of man's life, the next, the second
twenty five years which brings our life to fifty years; the last
proportionating the last twenty five years, which brings our age to seventy
five years, or the utmost term of Life; But here is chiefly and warily to be
noted, that these lines are not in measure always to be considered, as they
are found in the hands, but to be considered in measure, according to their
proper natural and certain proportion that they should bear in the hand (as
thus) the middle natural line ought to begin at the Supreme Angle, or the Thenar
part of the hand between the root of the pollex and the Index finger, upon the
middle of the mount of the Index, and to extend it quite cross the hand,
over against the middle of the mount of the Auricular or little finger, and just
there to terminate, which if it be found longer or shorter, it implies the
extremes of fortune; The mensal or Table-line, ought to ascend beyond the mount
of the middle finger, if it be longer or shotter, of greater or lesser quantity,
it then answers not to the right proportionate rules of mensuration, for the
proportionate measure of the middle natural line, for the first age or term of
years, viz. twenty five, it is to be measured from the beginning of the line to
the opposite place just against the middle of the mount, to the middle finger for
the first twenty five years, and for the next twenty five years, measure from
the foresaid place of the middle finger, over against the midst of the mount of
the Ring-finger, what remains of the line, is to be considered for the
remaining term of Life, the Mensal or Table-line, for the first twenty five
years of age is to be measured from the beginning thereof, (which is on the
outside of the hand) unto that part of the line, which is just against the
middle of the Auricular, or little finger, for the second age, or space of life,
the next twenty five years is to be measured from the last point over against
the mount of the little finger, to the point of the line just against the midst
of the mount of the Annular or Ring-finger (as appears in the foregoing
figure, the remainder of this Table-line is to be considered for the remaining
part of life, according to the former proportion; so that here you may see
plainly that this proportionate mensuration is rational, and may give apt
conjectures of the times of Life, and length thereof, as also by help of this
mensuration, predictions are made, judgments given of Dignities, Offices,
Honor, Riches and good Fortune, when and in what times of a man's age, such, or
such a thing shall come to pass, as also if marks in the hand appear,
signifying Death, Sickness, Imprisonment Poverty, or any other mischance, it is
discerned according to the position of the several marks in the hand
commensurately proportionated, according to the fore said dimention, their
places and significations being considered as to good or bad, As for example,
in the next following hand I have observed the most principal marks, that in
any hand signify a violent death, either by Hanging, Drowning, Heading by
Wound, or other mischance; Now any of these being found in the hand of any
person, let them be considered in reference to the part of the hand and place
they are found in and by this former measure of the Lines, you will see plainly
at what years of age, such, and such a mischance shall happ, and the occasions
thereunto conducing, that thereby by prayer, and watchful diligence it may be
prevented; Behold the following Hand, and the variety of Characters therein
posited.

palmistry hand

IN the next place Courteous Reader I shall present you by way of Demonstation,
all those principal Marks or Characters which in the hand of any person signify
Riches, and according to the time of age, in obtaining and enjoying of them,
you must consider the former mensuration, yet let me premise this, that finding
any of these Characters in your hands signifying Riches, you presume not to
suppose such a necessity in nature as will miraculously accomplish this end,
no, there is required the use of your Reason, industry and pains (for so says
Divine Writ it is the Almighties injunction, Genesis, 3. Cap. 9.) In sudore
vultus tui, vescitor cibo, donec revertaris in humum,) Honest policy, and
prudent industry must be carried on by us for the idle person says Solomon,
Esuriet shall suffer hunger, yet where these following Characters are found,
they either have an inclination to this frugallity, or else the old Proverb is
verified, fortuna favet fatuos, fools have fortune, though this be sometimes,
yet so rare, that it ought not to incline us or any to a Supine segnitions
palmistry hand stupidity, behold the figures following.

palmistry hand

All the Principal Observations in the hand that signify Riches, or good
Fortune, by play, or otherwise, I shall deliver in sixty nine Aphorisms, most
of which you may see visibly Demonstrated in the two foregoing hands, as also
Honor or Magistracy.
1 THe Letter A. in the root of the Index or forefinger, promises much Riches
to him that is poor. 2. G. In the mount of the hand notes the man to be made
Rich by means, of Princes, Nobles, Great Persons, or Women. 3. A certain line
passing the Rasetta from the root of the arm, touching the line of life, or
the natural line, denotes multiplication of Riches. 4. The Vital line putting
forth Branches toward the Supreme Angle, signifies Riches with Honor. 5. The
Mensal or Table-line straight, and subtle in the end toward the index or
forefinger, signifies Rule, and abundance of Substance. 6. The Mensal
casting forth straight and right lines toward the supreme angle, and not
impedited, promises Honors with Riches. 7. The Sister of the line of life
continued in the mount of the thumb,, with a triangle toward the palm of the
hand, well colored and proportioned, extended to the wrist, signifies Riches
in the whole course of life, and where this line fails, according to the rules
of the former demensions, there also Riches and prosperity fails, at those
proportionate times. 8. Small lines well colored proceeding from the root of
the forefinger, pointing toward the Supreme angle, promise increase of
Substance, and Honor, from Persons of much excellency. 9. Two lines touching
in the nature of an Acute-Angle, on the mount of the middle finger or the fore
finger, promises Riches, and good to come for the future. 10. Lines right, and
straight stretching themselves from the Radix, or outside of the hand in the
mount and brawn of the hand of good form and color, these denuntiate, a
continued good fortune. 11. A Character like a Star upon the Thenar or outfide
of the Index, or forefinger, shows a man to be Luxurious, yet to come to
riches and some degree of Honor by womens-means. 12. A Line in the wrist
continued straight and well colored going cross between the arm and the hand,
signifies to him that has Riches, the perpetuity and continuance of them, and
to him that is in poverty that has such a line the may expect better fortune,
especially if this line and its Branches be continued right and straight, and
not abrupted or broken. 13. A Character like a Shield, triangle or of a
sperical form, on the mount of the Sun, denotes an honest life, and promises
perpetual, and durable Riches. 14. The Letter B. in the mount of Jupiter
promises much Riches, and great fortune. 15. A Character like a Cross, or Star
in or near the vital line toward the wrist, promises riches in old age. 16. A
Star, or Stars appearing in the beginning of the line of Life, or cutting the
Vital Line especially if two stars appear, they demonstrate the person
glorious, rich and wealthy. 17. Many lines from the root of the thumb between
the thumb and the line of Life, pointing toward the Ring-finger, promises
great Riches. 18. A Cross under the Natural Line, signifies the acquisition of
riches, but with great labor and industry of the hand. 19. Eminent rising like
Caruncles, or warts of the line of life, signifies Riches. 20. A Line pointing
from the Mensal, between the index and the middle finger, shows the person to be
favored by fortune, yet certifies withal, that the person through
dissimulation and flattery, uses one only Friend, as the rise to his fortunes.
21. The Mensal or Table-line, ending between the Index and the middle finger,
promises a sufficiency of all necessaries, respecting humane Life. 22. A Line
falling between the middle finger and Ring-finger, touching the roots, and
joined to another on the mount of the middle finger, pointing to the middle
finger, it indicates much future good, the same if it point to the mount of
Jupiter. 23. A Line well disposed, well colored, and thick, beginning between
the root of the little finger and Ring-finger, and from thence descending and
pointing toward the Mensal, declares an excellent State of fortune, Good,
Large, and full of Riches. 24. Lines from the out-fide of the Percussion of the
hand, Right, Straight, and extended on the brawn of the hand, if they be well
colored, they promise good fortune to him or her that have been long vexed
with bad. 25. The Line of the Sun, or magestry, of Ingenuity, of Regallity, of
Fame, of Honor and Riches, extending with a trine proportion to the root of
the Annular or Ring-finger, consignifies Riches, especially if the mount of the
finger be well formed. 26. A Triangle Aequilateral, and a semicircle in the
supreme angle, annexed to the Vital, whose points, or horns respect the Vital
line, Denuntiate, a gradual augmentation of good fortune. 27. Lines like
Crosses in the first joint of the thumb, certainly signify Riches. 28. Little
lines well colored passing from the root of the index, over the mount of the
middle finger, signify good fortune; by how much the nearer they are, so much
the more good is prenoted with increase, and that he should receive the same
from some Excellent and Honorable Person, and these often times signify
Ecclesiastical Honor, and preferment. 29. A Line or lines under the root of
the middle finger, transverse without incission, or being cut by any other
lines, note much good, and the superlative of fortune. 30. The Line of Saturn,
running from the wrist, and continued, not intersected, and of good color,
argues prosperity, and faelicity even unto death. 31. The Letter D. in the
Field of Mars, signifies good fortune to him that has it. 32. The
Saturnine-Line making a trine proportion from the wrist, extending it self
straight to the root of the Ring-finger, by the side of the Auricular, or
little finger designeth prosperity. 33. Lines going from the natural Line to
the Table-line, making a triangle with the Table-line, Goods and Riches to be
given him. 34. A Star in the quadrangle, or table near the natural line,
promises Riches and Substance in its defined time, if he have been poor, he
shall be made Rich, and want nothing, because he shall enjoy the wealth of
others. 35. A Red Star in the middle of the Quadrangle and broad in the
extremities, this intimates a man infinite solicitous about such Riches, which
he shall never attain. 36 A Cross in the Quadrangle, notes poverty in the
first age, in the second not over rich, but in the third age Want. 37. The
Natural line extending it self over the mount, or percussion of the hand
circular, denotes indifferent Riches in young years, but in the last age,
(without great providence,) want. 38. A right line and of good color from the
beginning of the natural line, and ending at the root of the index, promises
Riches, although fortune her self should be opposite, yet chiefly in the first
age. 39. The former line, extended to the root of the middle finger, signifies
Riches in the second age of Life. 40. If the same line extend to the
Ring-finger or the little finger, then Riches will come in the last age. 41.
Four lines equally distant in the side of the mount of the thumb, toward the
Arm or Wrist, ettending themselves toward the most eminent parts of that
mount, it is a sign of Honor and Riches in the first age, a Star there, Idem.
42. If the foresaid lines are near the juncture of the thumb, the former good
fortune will come in the second age. 43. If the foresaid lines are near the
nail of the thumb, then the said Honor and Riches come in old age. 44. Several
lines in the wrist, cutting themselves in a due proportionate distance, like
dice, or chequerwork promise Goods and Riches in old age. 45. A Star, or
Triangle in the wrist, well formed and disposed, denotes Riches in old age. 46.
Four lines in the wrist cross the arm, the two superior next the hand being
larger then the other inferior, the inferior next the arm being subtle and
small, they promise Substance, and Copious Riches, to middle age, but after
middle age expect a Diminution of Riches, and debility of strength. 47. The two
inferior lines, if they are large and well formed, and the two superior be
small and slender, they denote eighty years of age, and that in the first and
second age the person shall experience poverty, after that Augmentation of
estate. 48. If the first line be gross, and the second slender, the third
again, gross and full, and the fourth subtle and small, In the first age is
promised Fortitude and Riches, and in the second age a deminution of both, and
so likewise of the other be they, full, or small always observing that the
gross and full lines, signify good and increase, and the small, Diminution
and decrease of good fortune, and every line in the wrist represents the time
of twenty years. 49. If the first line in the wrist be discontinued and
crooked, and the rest strait and right, debillity, and egenity is fignified in
the first age, and the remainder prosperous and happy. 50. If Characters like
angles be found in the wrist, or between the lines, they denote debillity of
Life and Goods, and that the person shall be laborious without honor, of mean
wit and full of vice. 51. A Shield, Triangle, or sperical form in the mount of
the Index, well formed and conditioned, if his Condition was never so poor from
Infancy to the end of youth, yet he shall be opulent and Rich. 52. A. B. C. or
D. In the mount of the little finger evil colored, they denounce poverty to
middle age, and afterward riches, to the end of life. 53. The Mensal line much
branchy, and the branches tending toward the superior part of the hand, they
attest an affluence of all things, and the more the branches are extended, the
more in old age Riches shall abound, but if they cease their extention, the
abundance of Riches shall cease. 54 Slender branches in the end of the
Mensall-line, verging toward the superior part of the hand being well
colored they signify a restoration of goods in the second age of life. 55.
The Mensal-line sorked in the ends, intimates the person to sustain a laborious
life, even until twenty years of age, afterward his sorrrows ceasing, he
shall exprieence, much increase of good fortune. 56. The triangle flexed, and
higher then the angle of life, it denotes poverty and debillity of life, yet in
old age, he shall be delivered from his penury. 57. Branches passing from the
line of life, transiting the triangle, also cutting the natural line, after
adversity, prosperity shall succeed. 58. Crosses or stars in the mount of the
hand denote the acquisition of riches with great labor, but in old age with
honor. 59. All marks upon the mount of Jupiter, which is the root of the
forefinger, (except like ladders or grid-irons) signify Ecclesiastical
preferment and benefit by Ecclesiastical persons. 60. Two lines cross the
mount of Mercury, the person is fortunate. 61. Two Stars, or Crosses, or little
lines like minnum's at the root of the Ring-finger on the mount, promise wealth
by women's means. 62. Two lines deep, and straight, Crossing the first joint of
the Ring-finger plainly and certainly discovers much riches by wives. 63. The
Letter B. in the triangle promises Riches, and familiarity with Princes. 64. A
Star upon the mount of Jupiter, or the Sun promises Dignity, Princely Regency,
or a Crown. 65. A Line from the root of the little finger, to the second or
third joint, of good and equal proportion and the mount well proportionated,
and not afflicted, promises preferment, and Magistracy, to the person. 66.
Many short, and even, cutting transverse, the middle Natural line, or the
Hepatika, that person is put upon much business, and designed to places of
Magistracy and Honor. 67. Many small and clear lines in the finger of Mercury,
the person is addicted to Music, and if he practice it, he grows rich thereby,
especially if he have other good marks in his hand; these lines also signify
one of a close mind, and secret Spirit. 68. The mount of the thumb being full
of little rimularies or clests, signifies Faelicity and good Fortune in Cattle.
69. In the figure before going, observe the mount of the thumb, and those many
gross, short and little lines within the Circle; This is the Character of an
ungrateful person, and one that will borrow, or take all you will give him, but
never give you thanks, or pay.
The following Aphorisms, and Hands shall demonstrate poverty, loss and
universal misfortune, by Imprisonment, and many other ways.
1 All Mark like a ladder depainted in the mount of the forefinger, signifies
a man poor, suffering loss and damage. 2. The vital line short, sending
branches below notes poverty with ill fortune, and to be deceived by his own
Servants and Strangers. 3. The Mensal line sending hairy branches toward the
table, denotes loss, misery, and ill fortune. 4. The Natural line touching in
circular manner the mensal demonstrateth great losses, and sad misfortunes. 5.
The mensal line naked without branches, and touching the root of the index,
prognosticateth poverty, losses, shipwreck of fortune, and calamities. 6. A
Semicircle gross in the bottom of the Annular finger, discovers an unhappy
man, and of evil mind, and resolution. 7. The fingers, standing at a distance,
and much dispersed, notes poverty, misery, and confident loquacity, as is
manifest in the generality of beggars. 8. Many little lines on the mount of the
middle finger, and more then any other place, especially the line of Saturn
descending from the wrist to them, denotes the man always conversant in
continual labors, sorrows and troubles, and oppressed with poverty, if it hap
to Princes it has the same fignification for many Princes having the mount of
Saturn conglomecated with many lines, have been expulsed their principallities,
and possessions, and this is chiefly to be understood of Saturnine unfortunate
persons. 9. The Mensal closing and making an angle with the natural line,
denotes a deminution of the goods of Fortune, as often has been experienced. 10.
Many little lines intersecated in the mount of the thumb, being not straight,
nor perpendicular, indicates a man suffering many things for riches. 11. Four
marks or Fossulaes, like puncts in the palm of the hand, being blackish,
prenote tribulations, and poverty. 12. Certain crooked uneven lines in the
mount of the hand, near the natural line, and a certain line seperating from
those lines toward the wrist, signify a man always a borrower, never
intending to pay, but ever remain a misserable debtor. 13 A certain oblique
crooked line in the middle finger, declares a perdition and loss of all the
donations of fortune, as also of honor and riches. 14. A triangle in the first
joint of the middle finger threatens detriment, and the highest of misfortune.
15. A line semicircle, and gross extending from the root of the ring-finger to
the middle of the same, notes the person to abound in debts, of evil
quallities, and unhappy, and of most malignant Spirit, and if such a line be
found under the root upon the mount of the same finger, and the mount be raised
and well conditioned, it shows a man able to shun the aforesaid evils, by his
own diligence and industry, the same may be said of any the other fingers, if
the like Characters be there found. 16. A line in the beginning of the vital
line extending toward the concavity of the hand, threatens poverty and much
ill fortune. 17. The Rascett a oblique discontinued, and intersected, attesteth
a miserable vagabond. 18. Lines intersected like a gridiron, in the mount of
the index, denotes misery. 19. The fingers gross and short with great joints
promise misery, and ill fortune, and he that has the last joints thick and
everst turning backwards, such a one though he were rich, yet in succession of
time, he shall become poor and needy. 20. The table-line directed to, and
ending in the root of the middle singer, it signifies want, ignomy and shame.
21. The Mensal line divided by certain little lines, signifies the loss of
goods, by reason of enemies, but if those little lines transit the mensal, and
pass over it, then this prejudice by enemies is now in acting, or has lately
been; (Note) that this table-line ought to be profound of good appearance, free
from crosses, and well colored, being so, it signifies good, but being
otherwise, the contrary; We are to note that the ancient Fathers, as also the
Modern Writers fully agree that the table line has the signification of
enemies, and so the Mensal line and the quadrangle, are the ostensive marks of
enmity. 22. The Natural line passing the concavity of the hand, denotes some
hardship; and a careful laborious life. 23. The nails plain and pale, testify
misfortune. 24 The letter E. in the triangle of Mars, notes adversityes, and
experience of many evils. 25. A cross in the quadrangle, being of evil
disposition and color, crooked, winding, wrinkled, and unequal in form, is a
very bad sign. 26, Branches in the end of the vital line verging toward the
wrist, threatens poverty and misfortune, especially in old age. 27. Fleshy
nodes, or risings in the skin, suffused on the root of the index finger unto
the second joint, or about the middle of the finger, signify inordinate labor,
continued painfulness and adversity of body, every one of these joints being
unfortunately marked, signify misfortune, according to the signification of
the Planets, to whom these mounts are appropriated. 28. The line of the Sun,
oblique and ill posited by reason of the essentiality of place, and that it be
contexed, and obsessed with other lines, it denotes misfortune with Princes;
and therefore they want the presence, and conversation of Princes, who have
such a line, they are not good for Courtiers. 29. Such a line crossing the
Mensal, and stretching over the mount of the Annuler unto the root thereof,
denotes the infortune of enemies, as also defamation and misfortune with
Princes. 30. The line of the Sun is of greater vigor and efficacy than the
other lines cutting it, therefore it being most conspicuous, denotes
deliverance from misfortunes, but observe how many lines cross the Solar line
so many bitter enemies they are, greater or less portended, according to the
present magnitude, and parvity of the lines; some are of opinion that when this
line is cut or broak off and discontinued, and no branches cut or intersecate
the same, that such a one will shun the presence of his Prince, as apprehending
his Life in danger, and the more he fears and is in danger, the more pale the
lines are in color. 31. A Scale, or steps like a ladder in the mount of the
index, if there be hollows and Scissures annexed, with many transverse lines,
this argues Damages, Persecutions and snares of great Princes. 32. Four or
five lines cutting the table line against the mount of the middle finger, denote
labors, anxietyes, and troubles by Princes or Great Men, and loss of
Substance. 33. More lines in the mount of Saturn then else where, threatens
Losses, Labors, and Inconveniences. 34. Fingers thick at the joints and small
elsewhere, denote a lascivious person, and one that uses all means to get in
debt, but never cares to come out of it. 35. The via lectea, or a line
extending from the wrist to the root of the little finger, marked and cut with
cross lines, prognosticateth, Hurt, Loss, Damage and Misfortune by women, and
their means. 36. The mount of Venus, eminent and swelling, soft and tender,
beset or crossed with many lines, chequer-like, argues much evil to a man, by
reason of women in reference to his House and Family. 37. A semicircle line in
the triangle, near the supreme angle, whose horns verge toward the fingers,
note troubles, and disturbance about House and Family. 38. Many lines extended
from the mensal line, to the root of the middle finger, shows Troubles, Sorrows,
and Afflictions, he which has such lines often sustains Captivity, Imprisonment
and Wounds; so many lines as pass through from the line of life to the root of
the finger, so many times the person shall be put in prison, but if they go not
quite through, the party may be arrested, and in danger of Prison, yet not be
put in Prison. 39. Lines from the hollow of the hand cutting the Table-line,
and extending beyond the juncture of the middle finger, were he General, Prince
or Emperor of the whole World he would dye in bonds. 41. The mount of Saturn
depressed, pale, shows the party so unfortunate, that he hardly scapes a prison
underground, a Dungeon. 40. The line of Saturn from the wrist, transiting the
mount of Saturn, touching the root of the middle finger, threatens Imprisonment,
and usually in a Tower, or Ruin; Stars, Crosses or ill marks upon this mount
of Saturn, signify the same. 41. Certain little lines by rows, ascending from
the wrist over the mount of Venue to the root of the thumb, signify the Party
to be spoiled, Robbed, Taken or Banished by his Kindred, Neighbors or near
Acquaintance. 42. An oblique line, discontinued, and cutting the triangle,
denote a person of a blockish Condition, obtuce wit, and obnoxious to
Imprisonment. 43. Two lines extending from the wrist to the root of the little
finger, bespeak a man, a Vagabond, Servil, and subject to great Captivity. 44.
Observe how many lines cut and cross the table-line, over against the mount of
the middle finger, so many times will he be injured, Stopped or Robbed by
Hy-waymen, or Murderers. 45. A line, gross in the middle like a hole or holes,
pitted, from the first joint of the little finger to the second, denotes a
thief, and that shall suffer punishment by the same. 46. A hole or dent in the
middle of the natural line, describes a thief. 47. A certain crooked obscure
line in the root of the little finger, declares a vicious person if it extend
far toward the middle of the hand, it denotes a thief, or one that shall suffer
cause of suspicion of theft. 48. Right lines between the first and second joint
of the fore finger, look how many lines are there, so many wounds on the head
the person receives. 49. Two lines transversing upon the mount of the thumb,
that party will be unfortunate, having great strong and powerful enemies. 50.
Crooked lines in the second joint of the Ring-finger, signifies a wound, or
bite by a horse. 51. The table line joined to the middle natural line, near the
supreme angle, making an angle therewith, threatens so great misfortune that
the person shall be weary of his life, and wish he had never been born. 52. Two
lines betwixt the first and second joint of the thumb, signifies the person to
be given to play, and shall incur great danger, damage and peril thereby. 53.
More lines in the finger of Saturn then elsewhere signifies poverty, wrath and
lasting anger. 54. The finger of Saturn fuller of lines then others, denots a
great passion and imperfection of the nervs, inclination to the palsy.
palmistry hand Figures, In all their Characters, denote Poverty, Want, and ill
fortune.
palmistry hand

ALL Persons by a certain Natural inclination, greatly desire to know the
length, and period of their lives; therefore shall this in the next place be
the subject of our discourse, for if the life of a person appear by the hand to
be short; Its in vain for the Chyromancer, farther to examine as concerning his
State, future Condition, Ingenuity, Manners, Preferment or the like, or of any
thing tending to a long life, that cannot be accomplished in a short, and
indeed this ought to be the first observation we make in the Method of
judgment.

But before we come to the particular demonstration of the signs of long or
short life, its necessary to propose these eight following general rules.

First, When it haps that the vital line, or line of life, be disjoined or
discontinued, and that discontinuation of the branches, extend toward the
mount of the thumb, and there desist or end, it shows the period or term of
life there to end, according to the dimensions of the hand, in the measure of
time before treated of, although the Saturnine line be continued, and many
other good marks appear in the hand. Secondly, When the line of Saturn suffers
a fraction, and is broken off in the hollow of the hand, before it touch the
natural line, and there appear branches in or near the Natural line, its
always a fignification of eminent peril of death, by reason of some infirmity,
or Acronick distemper, and it is a received opinion that circular figures in
the Natural Line, intimate murder, yet there be very few, that well, or any
whit understand this position. Thirdly, Its to be noted that the Saturnine line
most commonly supplies the place of the vital line, principally when it is
bowed and reflexed toward the superior part of the wrist, above the mount of
the thumb; and the Natural line appears in or against the place of that
fraction, inclining toward the Saturnine line, and when the Saturnine line by
circumflexion which it makes about the mount, inclines toward the inferior
part of the wrist, it signifies the longer life. Fourthly, It is to be noted
that about the roots of the fingers, are those lines and Characters that denote
hurts and wounds in the whole body, as those in the root of the Index or
forefinger, show hurts or wounds on the head, on the Middle finger, on the
breast, on the Ring-finger, wounds and hurts about the reins, on the Auricular
or little-finger those wounds that may hap to the Arms, Hands, Legs and Feet,
the parts of the body are to be observed, according to the position of the
Characters before named, as they incline to one part more then another, as
those marks about the forefinger, if they appear about the middle of the root,
of the finger, then they show wounds on the head, toward the hinder part, the
Occiput; If they appear on the lower part of the mount toward the middle
finger, then they denote wounds toward the forehead, or neck, and by so much
as they incline nearer the middle finger, by so much they show wounds nearer the
shoulder, that have been, or will be, those Characters as show wounds on the
breast, are the lines on the root of the middle finger, and if they incline too,
the anterior part next the forefinger, then they denote wounds on the breast,
if on the middle of the mount, then on the back, or back-part, or sides between
the back and breast, as their position is from the midst of the root toward
the ring-finger in like manner are we to judge of those that appear on the
ring-finger, and from the middle of the root to the out side toward the
Auricular or little finger, these denote usually infirmities or hurt in the
Genitalls, and those which are near the root of the little finger, signify
wounds on the thighs or hipps, and those on the middle of the little finger
signify wounds, or hurts on the feet, and the nearer to the lower part of the
root, or outside of the hand, the more near to the lower part of the Foot, or
Toes, Knees, or Ancles which are the lower part of the thighs, and legs.
Fifthly, Those lines figurated in the vital line, as they constitute diverse
forms, so they have different significations, when they make a long form, and
are not like trenches, but appear as a formal line so far as they go, these
signify wounds by Iron, if circular or semicircular, then wounds are generally
signified, if like trenches in the vital line, they signify blows or hurts by
some other means, but less perilous, as to the matter of life, but if they
appear, not square or long, but like pits, or holes, and look withal red, then
they signify blows, or wounds in the head or death. Sixthly, Many are mistaken
in the terms of Tumida, or swelling, and Grossa, or broad belonging to the
lines, supposing these terms to signify one and the same thing, when as they
much differ in their signification, a line is said to be gross when it is
deep, and when it keeps the same latitude in the superficies, as it has in its
profundity, but a line is said to be tumid or swelling, which has somewhat of
depth, and spreads in the superficies, and is dilated toward the palm, the
natural line possibly may be found tumid in the beginning and end, and has in
either, in a manner the same signification, but if it be tumid in the
beginning, it has the more malevolent signification, it signifies blood, and
that the party shall desperately wound others, but when in this tumiddity there
appear little trenches, somewhat circular and of evil appearance, this
signifies murder, and the more of these marks, the more murders are
fignified; The same evil is signified when the supreme angle is somewhat
disjoined or separate, and that space seems to be Caellous with certain little
Fossulaes, or trenches, of which let every one beware, Seventhly, We are to
understand, that as often, and wheresoever we find the principal lines
Bifurcated, they commonly show duplicity of heart and mind, and chiefly
according to the signification and nature of those lines yet this has not
always its signification, for whenever the vital line is forked in the
beginning, it signifies Honesty, Justice, and Fidelity, the reason is, because
it shows a man Callid Astute, and secret in his carriage; but when the vital
line is forked in the end, it is not much commended by the Masters of this
Science, the Reason is because, in the beginning of the vital line, the first
and second age of man are demonstrated, in which times the power and virtue of
natural heat abounds, by which means, they are strong, and will not permit
themselves to be occupied in sordid and vile actions, because the vigor and
virtue of natural heat predominates, humidity, and frigidity which are the
causes of infirm, weak actions, and instability in youth, which vigor is not
retained in age, from whence it comes, that they that have the vital line
forked in the end; in youth, are rendered unfaithful, unstable, and not to be
trusted as serious friends, for this Bifurcation at the end, denotes much
frigidity, which is only proper for age, therefore in age this betokens good,
because it denotes a refrenation from rash actions, and the temper most proper
for age. Eighthly, The Liver line in any manner forked at the ends, signifies
always evil, because it denotes, an evil Complexion, and an impotency of
Natural heat, from whence proceeds malignity, and double deceptious dealing.
Ninthly, The Natural line forked toward the percussion of the hand, fignifies
always evil, and if it be not by little branches united to the vital line in
the supreme angle, it implies a laborious, and a troublesome life. Tenthly, And
lastly, we are to remember and heed, that whensover we observe any line that
indicates long or short life, we are to have recourse to the vital line,
according to which proportion, comparatively the line is to be judged, as we
have taught in the rules of mensuration, thus for in general.
In the next place, as all men have a desire, and propensity, (by Natural
inclination) to know the period of their lives, whether long or short life, for
if short life appear, in vain is it for the Artist to make any proceed in the
State, Condition, Manners, and particulars of the person, therefore we shall
insist on these particulars and first of long life.
1. THe Line of Life extending to the wrist, continued, and of Equal Latitude
decently Broad, Deep, and Equal, and well colored, notes a long life. 2. If
the line of the brain, of Sense, of the Head, and middle natural Line (which are
all one) as are declared in my first Vollumn of Palmistry be of good and equal
latitude; profundity, well articulated, extended to the top of the mount of the
Moon, or Percussion of the hand and not beyond, this promises long life, and
gives strength, and audacity, if this natural line, in the superior part
constitute a right angle, or near unto a right angle, it shows long life, but
if it make an acute angle with the line of life, the person shall be of a
crafty, fearful, and wavering unconstant Nature. 3. The Line of the Liver
sufficiently long that is to say, extending to the middle of the natural line,
deep, large, continued and well colored, it denotes a goodness of the liver,
and of Digestion, and so consequently long life, if the basis of the triangle
(which this line makes, be right and large and in the middle a little divided
with certain small Rimulaes, and of good color it attesteth a good disposition
and long life. 4. The Right Angle straight, well appearing and of good color
denotes goodness of the heart and blood, strong, vigor, and vitals, and so by
on sequence long life. 5. The left angle right, or near thereunto, shows a good
constitution together with long life. 6. The hands big and well proportioned in
every part, according to quantity and quallity, argue a good Complexion of
humors, and so consequently length of life. 7. The hands fleshly, and
contracted with a good solidity, demonstrate long life. 8. If in the middle
space, between the lines of the triangle there be a plain and smooth place, and
well colored, it manifests a good, and sound complexion, and consequently
length of life. 9. The Line of Saturn straight, not intersected, and joined to
the middle natural line against the finger of Saturn, or extending it self near
thereunto, the triangle it makes, keeping its due proportion, dictats a long
life. 10. The Table of the hand constituted with equal space, indicates a good
complexion, and so consequently a long life. 11. A certain line passing from
the wrist through the concave of the hand, toward the mount of Mercury, (called
by some Via Lactea) continued, and converse with the Natural line, witnesses a
good constitution, with agility of mind, and so length of days. 12. The Mensal
line continued sufficiently long, Deep, Broad and Strait, signifies a nature
sound, of good digestion, a right proportion of the Radicals, and vitals, and
consequently long life; It is to be observed that the term or end of this table
line is perfected two ways, some say if it end against the middle of the mount
of the middle finger, diametrically, its of the best signification, others, that
if it extend or touch the beginning of the mount of the Index, especially if it
incline toward the root thereof, its of special signification, but either of
these opinions are true, and the termination or ending good, so the line be of
equal form, and well colored. 13. The space of the wrist clear, and well
colored, signifies a good complexion, and by consequence, length of life. 14.
The Tubercle, or mount of the thumb, decently round, fair and well colored,
with a good complexion, confirm a long life, the same when all the mounts of
the hand and fingers are of a decent eminency, and well proportioned, they
indicate long life. 15. The triangle Aequilaterally and well proportioned, if
it be of clear, fair lines and well proportionated, it is a sign of equality
of humors good temperament, and so consequently long life. 16. The Sister of
the line of life, arising from the supreme angle, passing by the mount of the
thumb, and extending near so far as the wrist of the hand or there abouts, it
is a sign of long life and luxury. 17. Corvus is of opinion that when the
natural line passes the mount of the hand, it argues long life with want,
poverty and evil complexion of humors, for nature is signified to be
superfluous herein. 18. Few lines in the mount of Venus, or the thumb, show a
rarity of infirmities health of parts, and consequently long life. 19. The
Table line casting two or more branches to the middle of the index and line of
life, argues long life. 20. Teeth big, thick, or long argues long life, no
principal cause impediating, for amongst the Phisiognomists there is not a
sign of such excellency and valor, as that which concludes simply without
any other additional Significations, because it shows the specifical and occult
virtue to be well fixed, and also representing the vivacity and strength of the
radical moisture, and the vitallity of the Natural Spirits; as also the
strength of spermatical Spirits from the first of Generation. It oft-times is
the practice of ignorant illiterate people to judge of the length of life,
without the concordency of causes, and comparing one to another, as likewise it
is an error in them that pretend to know the period of life by any other way
or means, then by those grounds and rules of mensuration before in this work
proposed the common way that Tricassus, Cocles, and others have used refer to
the common ages of man seventy years, beyond which they give no grounds or
rules of judging, when as we see by experience that many persons live to
eighty, ninety or a hundred years, which by our Rules of Mensuration may be
observed upon the line of Life, many who might happily protract their days to
a great age by intemperancy, anticipate the same, and through indiscretion,
abreviate and shorten that sweet time which otherwise they might comfortably
enjoy, would they with reason resist their natural inclinations, therefore we
ought not rashly, and unadvisedly judge the time of life, because the Almighty
has determined the period, beyond which a man cannot pass, as he has
likewise delineated in the hand as may plainly be read, but it is no where
said, that a man may not abreviate by anticipation, the time of his life if he
resist not the exorbitant inclinations of Nature, wherefore in judging of Life
or Death, let our reason, carefully discern, between a man of a temperate and
intemperate life. 21. Fair Lines in the root of the Index or forefinger,
arising from the root of the finger over the mount, Ecclesiastical preferments.
or stretching toward the root of the finger, from the supreme angle, declares
long life, Ecclesiastical or Law-Preferments. 22. Two or three little lines
from the root of the forefinger, or lines parallel, or a perfect cross, or a
Star, or a round sperical figure, all argue long life and Ecclesiastical
preferments, to prelacy or the like. 23. A Star without-side the index-finger
discovers a man to be luxurious, Fortune by women.
yet shall have good fortune by women, and come to great Honor and Riches by
them, and long life. 24. The Letter C. or a semicircle on the mount of Jupiter
promises long life and good fortune, and riches by women. 25. Certain little
lines parralel to each other on the mount of the Annular, or Ring-finger, or
little lines like Crosses, or Stars, promise Riches and good Fortune by women.
26. Two lines deep and straight on the first joint of the Ring-finger does most
certainly promise much wealth by wives. 27. Four lines going over the wrist
transverse and straight, Of such that shall receive Inheritances by the death
of others,
signify Honor, Riches, and Inheritance by the death of others. 28. If there
appear on the hand near the wrist a triangle, or two, with Stars or lines, and
make an accute angle, these signify long life, and great Inheritance from or
by the dead, and promise in age, Honor, Riches, and a Quiet life, and the more
good, the more Angles, Lines, and Stars are found therein. 29. Two lines from
the first joint of the thumb, toward the line of life, these promise great
Inheritance by succession from the dead, but if there be but one line, then
small Inheritance is signified, but the more in number they are, and of good
appearance the more, the more greater good they signify, yet not without
contentions, law-suites, and controversies. 30. A star in any part of the
triangle promises the party to gain inheritance of the dead, and the more
Stars the oftener, as in the figure following. 31. The Sister of the Natural
Line (as in the figure following) clear, and well appeasing, signifies
inheritance to come, how much the better the line appears, so much the greater
the inheritance. 32. Various lines, chequer-wise appearing in the wrist, at a
formal distance, prenuntiate Inheritance to come. 32. A Star or triangle in
the wrist of the hand, presages future Inheritance but not till old age, or
there abouts. 33. Lines extending themselves from the root of the thumb, Of the
quantity of Wives or Husbands.
over the mount thereof, so many as there are in the hand of a man, so many
Wives, or Women, as Wives; he shall have; the same in a woman, so many
husbands, or lovers-like husbands she shall have, if these lines be right
extended and fair, so many Wives, or Husbands, the person shall be married
unto; but if one line be greater then the rest, then the Man shall have one
Wife, or the Woman one Husband, greater in Riches and Dignity then the rest.
34. As many lines as cut the first joint of the Ring-finger, (as appears in the
following figure) so many Husbands or Wives shall the party have. 35. Friends.
Lines on the mount of the hand at the end of the Natural line, (as in the
following figure) so many lines as there are, so many friends it promises, of
Strangers. 36. But the like lines inclining toward the wrist, declares so many
Friends of the same Nation and Country. 37. Son^.
Certain little lines cutting the line of life, being well colored, so many as
there be, so many sons they promise, both in the hand of man or woman. 38. A
certain line, Right, Chastity.
Subtle, and well Colored, tending from the mensal line to the root of the
little finger, notes in a woman virginity, or chastity. 39. A n^^t equal line
transiting the mensal line from the natural, toward the auricular finger (as
in the following hand,) denotes Virginity, and Chastity, and the grosser, and
more equal the line is, the better signification it has. 40. That Woman who
has the principal lines strong, Easy Dilivery.
keeping a due proportion, and proper terms, all the lines being straight and
fair, these presage Safe, Quick, and Easy deliverance in childbed. 41. The
palm of the hand, long and broad, shows facillity in Childbearing. 42. The
triangle, straight and well disposed in the hand of a woman, indicates to her,
ease and speed in delivery. 43. A Round sperical mark, Fidelity.
or a triangle in the mount of Jupiter denotes Wisdom and fidelity. 44 The
letter C. on the mount of Venus denotes a person faithful and true. 45. The
vital line straight, subtle and well colored especially toward the supreme
Angle, notes a man of sound Council, of a subtle intellect and faithful. 46.
The Right Angle straight and well appearing, argues a good complexion, good
manners, and consequently fidelity. 47. Lines branching like palm branches in
the beginning of the natural line, verging upwards, indicate fidelity. 48. The
table line continued sufficiently long, deep, broad, and straight, denotes a
good complexion, good nature, and by consequence fidelity. 49. The Quadrangle
right, and well colored, promises rectitude and fidelity. 50. Two lines,
straight, and equidistant in every juncture of the fingers, except the thumb,
signifies the person, man or woman, faithful, and of much truth.
palmistry hand This Hand Contains all the Significations Of the foregoing
Aphorisms.


Characters and Marks in the hand that signify short Life, Lust, Concupiscence
whoredom, and many other Quallifications, behold the Figure following.
1. THe Natural line not passing the Diameter or middle of the mount of the
middle finger, signifies the party to dye in youth. 2. The middle Natural line,
pale of color, subtle and small, argues debillity and weakness of the brain,
and complexion, and so consequently, short life. 3. A certain little Cross in
the end of the middle natural line, opposite to the middle of the middle finger,
or the Ring-finger, signifies death within a year, or there abouts. 4. A
sperical figure like a round (O) or a figure like a Y. near the vital line,
discovers many weaknesses and infirmities if it be in the superior part, i.
e. In the beginning of the line, it shows them past, if in the inferior
part, it notes infirmities to come, and death nearly approaching, if in the
middle of the vital line, it discovers the party to be afflicted with present
debillities, and infirmities. 5. The middle Natural line transiting the mount of
the hand, implies brevity of life, and the party to be much afflicted with
Rhume in the Head, and the more it descends to the inferior part of the
hand, i. e. the outside of the hand, the more speedy death it signifies, but
from a wound, 6. The Mensal line making an angle with the Natural line,
indicates a short Life. 7. The shortness of the Vital Line indicates a short
Life, unless there be a good appearance of the Sister of the Line of Life, or
any other significant Line. 8. An imperfect triangle in the hand not appearing
alike in any part, affirms shortness of life, especially if the lines be small,
fracted, or hairy. 9. The Table, Line bearing an unequal distance from the
Natural Line, discovers an evil, and bad complexion in the party, and
consequently short life. 10. If in the middle space between the triangle Lines,
there be not a comely plaineness but of evil aspect and color, it demoteth a
defect of heat, and so consequently brevity of life. 11. The mensal line not
keeping a trine proportion, being evil proportioned and evil colored, fracted,
or hairy, is a sign of short Life. 12. The Hepatick or Liverline, not
observing a trine proportion, and being intersected with many little, small
lines is a sign of short life. 13. The teeth rare and small, denote brevity of
life. 14. The Line of life continued, broad, deep, and well colored to the
middle, or more, or less, shows health to that time, according to the usual
proportionate time in the foregoing mensuration. 15. Let what signs of Death
will be in the hand, if the triangle be found equilateral and well
proportioned, there is less danger. 16. The Sister of any line being directly
against the fraction of any line, much abateth the malice, and the evil
signified thereby. 17. Two Sisters of the line of life, on both sides a
fraction in the line of life, do consolidate the line, and signify the less
prejudice. 18. It is not to be forgotten that the position of the mensal or
table line, in its continuation, discontinuation, obliquity, punctation and
fraction is the Radix, and signal of sicknesses and imperfections. 19. A figure
like a ring-worm in the mount of the thumb, indicates much sickness if not
death. 20. A gross line coming from under the thumb, from the outside of the
hand, cutting the Vital and Natural line in the manner of a semicircle,
threatens untimely and sudden death, by intoxication, poison or the like. 21
The Vital Line, interrupted, and reflexed toward the mount of Venus, notes a
mortal palmistry hand infirmity, but if it have branches, it is the better,
behold the figure.
These following Aphorisms, and answerable Characters in the figure fore going
in the hands of women, denote Lust, and commonly whoredom.
22. A Line gross, and crooked from the root of the little finger to the
Mensal, Denotes a person of light behavior, and most commonly a Whore. 23.
Lines Chequer-wise in the mount near the wrist of the right or left hand,
denotes women superlatively lustful, with infinite appetency and desire to love
the company of men, and so lustful as to delight in nothing more then variety;
and not satisfied in Stuprating, and prostituting themselves, but chiefly if
these be of various form and color. 24. Little red puncts or points in the
root of the little finger, clearly denote Whoredom and Baudery, and the more
they are, the more unsatiableness is signified. 25. A Cross in the mount of
the hand, near the wrist, and the Vital Line, whose branches being intersected
by an other line, declare the most of wickedness in a woman, she is superlative
in Whoredom. 26. A thick, dark redness of the skin in the face, not clear
implies great Luxury, and argues a woman to be given to Gluttony and drink,
and the more it is of this nature, the more she is Luxurious. 27. The Via
Lactea, or cingulum veneris in the hand of a woman, denotes her venerial. 28.
The table line forked at the end toward the fore finger in a woman, such is,
or will be a Cuckquean or Lemmon. 29. The Natural line forked in the end
toward the Liver-line, denotes a light person. 30. The Vital Line, in the
superior part red and crooked, signify Luxury. 31. The Sister of the Vital
Line, upon the mount of the thumb, long and reddish, is the signal, of one that
is Whorish. 32. The mount of Venus high and elevated with a multitude of Cross
irregular lines, is a sign of Lightness. 33. The table line Small, and Forked,
and the mount of Jupiter, eminently rising, in the root of which are little
marks like pricks, differenced apart, usually signify a man to have more then
one wife, and a Woman to have more then one husband. 34. A Little cross
between the first and second joint of the forefinger, denotes great strength
and desire to Luxury, and the man to be a Mastuprator. 35. Two or three Stars
or more, upon the mount of the thumb near the arm, denote defamations, and
accusations, by reason of women, let such be the more wary of their company.
36. The line called Via Lactea, in both hands, conspicuous and plain, is a very
great sign of effeminacy. 37. The tubercle, or mount of the thumb,
craticulated like a gridiron, or chequer-work signifies, that person shall
bring himself to poverty and want, the same if the like figures be upon the
mount of the little finger. 38. A line extended from the wrist over the palm of
the hand, toward the little finger, called by the Arabians Via Lactea crossed,
or cut with many lines, or with one as a cross, apertly shows, great damages,
losses, ruins, in commodities and ill fortune by means of Women, and
imprisonment, as has been too often experienced. Inprisonment.
39. Black spots in the nails oftentimes denote Imprisonment, as also declare
great Cares, Vexations, Affronts and Disdain. 40. A star, or grid-iron on the
root of the finger of Saturn, threatens servitude, and Captivity. 41. The Line
of Saturn, passing from the wrist quite over the hand, to the root of the
finger of Saturn, and be crossed by other lines, it threatens Auxieties,
Flights, Persecution, Imprisonment, and Accusaetions, and finally whatever can
conduce to a wretched, miserable life. 42. Theft.
A Sperical figure in the end of the thumb near the nail, (as in the former
figure,) denotes the person to be a Thief and threatens Hanging. 43.
Difficulty in Childbearing.
The table line ending between the middle finger and the forefinger in the hand
of a Woman, signifies death in Childbed, or grievous, dangerous Accidents. 44.
A gross line or lines between the little finger, and ring-finger, indicates
great pains, and Difficulty in Childbed, but if there be any fraction in the
Vital line, or that the Natural line have fractions in it, or be evil disposed,
She certainly dies in Childbearing. 45. A Line gross, and red, between the
Index and middle finger, as in the foregoing figure presageth death in
Childbed. 46. The palm of the hand narrow and straight, threatens much danger
in Childbed. 47. The table line small, hairy, and intersected with lines,
shows great danger in Childbed. 48. The triangle evil formed in the hand of a
woman, with intersected lines, prenuntiateth perril of death in Childbed. 49.
Ungrateful persons are above all to be avoided, Ungratefulness.
seeing ingratitude is the greatest crime, and such persons are known by their
hands if they have a semicircle, like a C. on the mount of the Sun, besides,
this notes him to be guilty of most bad qualities. 50. Many Lines small,
Persidiousness.
scattering, or conglomorated together in the mount of the thumb, declare
infidelity. 51. Two Lines, circling the thumb, in the last joint, without
incission, argue a perfidious person, the same if they mutually cut each other.
52. The table line crooked, and bearing an unequal distance from the Natural
line, declares infidelity. 53. The Supreme Angle Reticulated net wise, acute,
or separate, prenuntiateth infidelity. 54. Lines like scales, or a gridiron
much duplicated on the mount of Jupiter threatens Imprisonments, and
Persecutions, and most commonly by means of Clergymen, or Church Affairs. 55.
Many Lines gross, and inordinate, and disorderly scattered up and down the
mount of the thumb, demonstrate an ungrateful person, and one that will never
be true to his Friend.
This being the worst of qualities shall conclude this ill Subject.

As my great Affectation, and desire is the common utillity, and Public good,
so my Study shall be principally conversant about those things which may
principally conduce to the benefit of every one in their most helples condition.
ANd whereas the Inclination of the body to sickness, being not timely
observed, often times brings violent sickness, and accellerates Death, especially
in the Country, where the poor helpless people (for so in this sense I may call
all) by their remotenes from, or the want of able means, are supprised with
inevitable distempers, therefore I will promise some plain Rules how every
capacity may perceive, an approaching sickness, and so in time consult the
remedy, before the distemper too strongly and violently invade and assault
Languishing Nature.

And in the second place, whereas much detriment oten times befall, both the
Sick and their Friends, by reason of the Ignorance of their present condition,
to the Sick, when having the Symptoms of Death upon them, being not known by
their Friends, are often flattered into a careless, hopeless expectation of
longer Life, and so frustrated of a due preparation for death; Many evil
consequences likewise accrue to the Friends by not observing the mortal
symptoms appearing, as that they address themselves not rightly to the sick,
and that very often, they too long defer the setlement of the Worldly Estate, to
their great prejudice, and discontent of the departting creature, wherefore for
prevention of these great inconsiderate, yet necessitated inconveniences, I
shall here propound the most, and most usual Symptoms of approaching death,
proper to any distemper afflicting Nature,

And first, Note these Signs which follow, which being discovered in the
Phisiognomy, argue an inclination to diseases, fit to be known of all,
especially Physicians.

ALl Physicalphisiognomists hold, that the Rheumatick distillation of the eyes,
being inflamed with redness, argue much super-abounding humidity of the Brain
and Phlegm, and that the ample grosness of the Nostrills, argues Dullness,
Stolidity, and debillity of Sense and Reason, but when the Nose is Bluish,
Wan, or of a leadish Color, having little red specks, or veins like Fibers,
interwoven as it were, this argues a great Heat, and dryness of the Liver, so
the face Red, discovers a Hot complexion, Blue, Pale, or dark in color,
indicates the depth of Melancholy, but if white, and a clear palish hue,
denotes a cold and phlegmatic Constitution.

The Body inclined to sickness and distempers, is quickly, and timely
discerned, by observing these following Rules.

As first.
The color of the Face, and body Yellowish, the Amplitude and distention of
the veins, a weary, heavy, irksomeness in the sight, a dullness and
unwillingness to motion and action, show a plenitude and fullness of the
vessels, repleat with gross humors.

Rule. 2.
The Sense and Animal Spirits oppressed with Melancholy, Heavy, and
discontented, the Face looking dull, and ghastly of color, swollen, and puffed
up, a painful wringing grief in the body, after the reception of food, these
Symptoms indicate obstructions.

Rule. 3.
The involuntary falling of tears from the eyes, the quaking of the lips and
other members, the oblivion of things past, the ignorant fenselesness of
present, much heat, vehement cold, difficulty in breathing, pain of the head,
if these symptoms appear in any critical time, they presage a future conflict
of Nature, a sickness at hand.

Rule. 4.
The dussines and Rhume of the eyes, the redness of the Nostrils the stretching
and extention of the Midrife and short Ribs without pain, difficulty of
aspiration, an inflaming, and smiting pain of the head, the Nose and Face,
iching pain of the Temples, presage a future, accute sickness, with efflux of
blood from the Nose.

Rule. 5.
The sadness of the face, and darkness of the countenance, straightnes of
breath, headache, the trembling of the lower lip, the spittle much, and thin,
the extention of the Navel, in acute diseases, and about a critical day, argues
a necessity of vomit.

Rule. 6.
If in a critical day the hair stand up roughly after evacuation, it denotes a
good Crisis.

There are many other physiognomical signs, which not only show the nature and
progression of the Crisis, but also the reason of future disseases, and the
disposition of the present, which are worth the study of every Artist, but too
long here to insert.

Next in these Cannons which follow are explicated, the pregnant signs of
approaching Death.
Cannon. 1.
IN this is found an approved verity amongst the most excellent Philosophers,
and by the most judicious Physicians comprobated, that if the sight or image in
the ball of the eye of the sick party, appear not as formerly, or wontedly it
did, it is a certain Argument of an instant speedy death.

Cannon. 2.
If the eyes sink into the head, hiding themselves in the concavity of the
holes deeper than ordinary, it is a presage of Death, unless the Pulse testify
the contary. For a noxious fume from the Cerebellum, or hinder part of the
brain, penetrating the branches of the optics, renders a Chrystaline
contracted hardness, from when it is, that the eyes in a Convulsive manner are
drawn inwards.

Can. 3.
If the eyes (in the sickness) be turned into a bluish azure, or reddish
color, it is an index of death quickly to ensue.

Can. 4.
When the Nose grows suddenly sharp, and is pale withal in the time of his
painful fits, it denotes the danger of instant death; the writhing or
depression of the Nose, signifies the same, as also the distillation of a pale,
yellowish water from the Nose.

Can. 5.
If the mouth be observed to open for Air, as if the membranes, or Ligaments
of the jaws were loosed, the disease being violent, prognosticates Death
shortly to ensue.

Can. 6.
If the teeth seem smaller and longer then usual, as also being rough, its a
sign of a speedy end.

Can. 7.
If the skin of the face, and other parts, be converted into a pale, yellowish,
or ashy color, it is a bad omen to the sick.

Can. 8.
If the sick party languishing, suddenly grow worse, and after a long pale
wandness, his face and cheeks come to be ruddy, it shows the patients Case to
be desperate.

Can. 9.
If in the Height of his sickness, his breath stink, changing from what it was
before, it is an Argument of approaching Death.

Can. 10.
If the sick party, in his extremity begins to Stammer and Faulter in his
Speech, and cannot pronounce his words without imperfection; experience shows
it to be a sign of death, in like manner if the voice change small or very
hollow.

Can. 11.
If the spiration and breath seem to be fetched up from the Lungs, with much
difficulty and pain, being fumously gross it is an ill omen.

Can. 12.
If in the extremity of sickness the roots of the hair, and nails, and teats,
and the bottom of the feet change color into a wan blackness, it is an evil
sign.

Can. 13.
If the intestines come forth at the Fundament, by reason of acide and sharp
humor, death is to be feared.

Can. 14.
If the face and lips suddenly change into a pale earthy color, it is a sign
of Death, especially if the body be very weak.

Can. 15.
The Darkness of the white of the eyes or the ablation of the fight, the
writhing of the eyebrows; In like manner the crooked, and wry sqinting with
the eyes, in acute disseases, signifies evil.

Can. 16.
The smalness of one eye water flowing from the eyes, and chiefly one eye, a
dry bleardness of the eyes, the sight fixed, A vehement, eager opening of the
eyes, white pussels appearing under the eyes, all these are Mortal signs.

Can. 17.
In Accute disseases, the face shining, smooth, a flux of the belly, not
hungry, and inclining to sleep, are bad signs.

Can. 18.
Sleeping with the eyelids open, and the eyelids dry, is a mortal sign.

Can. 19.
The Exication, Inversion, and contraction of the ears, and the loss of hearing
in accute disseases, is deadly.

Can. 20.
The grating of the Teeth, their color being dark, pale and clammy, and the
often cleansing them without cause in accute disseases, are Arguments of death.

Can. 21.
After sweating, to tremble, quake, or have the hair stare, in accute
disseases, a cold sweat, chiefly about the neck and head, is an evil sign.

Can. 22.
The Blackness of the tongue, stench of the mouth, crooked writhing of the lip;
the mouth opening, without yawning, like a grain, or small pea upon the
tongue, with the desire of hot things, are Arguments of death.

Can. 23.
The Contraction of the testicles, and yard, Arguments of Death.

Can. 24.
A hot vapor from the skin, with a cold breath, and the coldness of the
extreme parts, are Arguments of Death.

Can. 25.
The singultus with a yelking, following vomiting, or a flux of the belly, in
like manner the flux of the belly much, with debility of parts; the jaundies
before the seventh day, with leanness, are Arguments of approaching death.

For the benefit of my Countrymen, I will here subjoyn certain proper
qualifications whereby every man may rightly judge his own temperament, and
thereby much benefit himself in the preserving his health, and help himself by
the means of Physic.
The Signs of the Choleric Temperament are ten.
1. THe Habit of the body hot in touch, dry, lean, hard and hairy. 2. The
color of the face yellow. 3. A Natural siccity of the mouth and tongue. 4. The
Natural thrist great and frequent. 5. The Mobility, Activity and inquietude of
the body. 6. The Pulse hard, swift and beating often. 7. The spittle bitter. 8.
The dreams are most of yellow things, of brawles, fightings, and quarrels. 9.
The Urine, Subtle, thin, and yellow. 10. The Nutriment converting most to
yellow Choler.
The properties of a Phlegmatic Constitution, are chiefly ten.
1. THe Habit of the body, cold and moist, in touch soft, fat, gross, and not
hairy. 2. A Constant natural whiteness or wanness in the face. 3. The
superfluity of mois excrements, as spittle and snot. 4. The Urine white and
gross. 5. The pulse weak, slow, and rare. 6. The Appetite of thirst little,
seldom desiring drink. 7. The dreams most usually of white things, floods,
inundations and all actions or accidents belonging to water. 8. Sleep much, and
frequent. 9. A slow unapt dullness of the body to exercise. 10. The Chyle most
converted into phlegm.
The Signs of a Sanguine constitution in eleven particulars.
1 THe Habit of the body hot and moist in touch, fleshy, soft, and hairy. 2.
The color of the body fresh, sanguine and lively. 3. A natural and constant
blush in the face. 4. A Plenitude, and natural swelling of the veins. 5. The
Pulse moist, soft and full. 6. The urine red and gross. 7. The Spittle sweet.
8. Dreams most commonly of Red things, of Beauty, of Feasting, Dancing,
Music, and all jovial Recreations. 9. A Continued habit of pleasantness and
Affabilliy. 10. Often affecting Jests, Mirth, and Laughter. 11. The food
converting most into blood.
The Signs and Symptoms of a Melancholy temperament.
1. THe Body in Touch, Cold, Dry, Hard, Lean and Smooth. 2. The Body of a
Dark, Dull, Gloomy, Leaden-Colour. 3. The spittle little in quantity and sour.
4. The urine subtle, bluish and pale. 5. Pulse little, rare, and hard. 6. The
dreams often of black and terrible things, as of Spirits, Ghosts, of Infernal
Apprehensions, of Choking, Heading, or Hanging. 7. Much sorrowful, and subject
to greeving. 8. Much and often oppressed with fear. 9. A Stability in
Cogitations, and constancy in performance of the thing intended. 10. The Diet
increasing Melancholy.
The Brain and Heart are the two Regal and Principal parts of man of which
Nature renders diverse Physiognomical Symptoms, which be observed as follows.
Signs of a hot brain are,
1. A Natural Heat, and redness in the face. 2. The sudden growth of hair. 3.
The Hairs hard, crisping, or very black, and quickly growing bald.
Signs of a cold brain are,
1. A Natural wan paleness in the face. 2. The slow growth of hair. 3. The hair
straight, flag, thin, and oftimes yellowish.
Signs of a dry brain are,
1. A Paucity of the Excrements, in the eyes, nose, ears and pallat. 2. Hair
hard, and quickly bald. 3. A quick sharpness of the outward senses, and the
sleep, seldom, and little.
Signs of a moist brain are,
1. The superfluity of Excrements at the Eyes, Nose, ears, and pallat. 2. The
Hair Soft, and long continuing. 3. A Lazy, Dull Stupidity of the outward
Senses.
The Symptoms of the Heart, being hot, exceeding the temperament, are,
1. A Great and frequent respiration, 2. A strong, swift, and frequent pulse.
3. A large and hairy rough breast. 4. Alacrity to action. 5. Hasty and rash
anger.
Signs of a frigid and cold temper of the Head, Are,
1. The respiration small and rare. 2. The pulse, small, slow and rare. 3. The
breast narrow and smooth, or at least covered with small and faint hairs. 4. A
dullness to action. 5. Anger slow, and moderate.
The Symptoms of a dry heart, Are
1. The pulse sharp and hard. 2. Anger long continuing, and implacable.
The moist heart has these Symtomes of discovery.
1. The Pulse sharp, and hard. 2. Anger quickly passing and transient.
Pleasant Physiognomical Observations, from the quantity of the body.
THe Body very small, signifies a man partly Ingenious, partly fit for Action,
and partly Loquacious; the reason is because the Vital Spirits in a small body,
are the more contracted, and therefore the more strong, and in a little Body so
small is the space between the heart and the brain, that the Vital Spirit does
with much Celerity ascend, from whence it comes to pass that Nature oft-times
supplies in wit, what is wanting in Body, and from hence it is that Creatures
of small body are so ingenious, as the Ant, the Be, the Spider, and the like;
And Hystory informs us that many Wise, Prudent, Stout and Courageous men were
of small sttature, in ancient time, as Ulisses, Alexander the Great, Horace,
Aristotle, and many others, and on the other side, (for the most part) a Big
and Large Stature is a sign of a Dull, Slow, and timorous person, the cause
hereof appears because the Vital Spirits in a great Body, are dilated, and
dispersed, and great is the distance between the heart and the brain, so that
the spirits cannot easily, or without prejudice make their ascent, as for
example, the Crane, being a foul of big body, and long neck, is of a
Heartless, Fearful, Foolish Condition, and Ajax is reported to have been large
of body, and furious, and foolishly disposed in his mind, and lastly, a body of
middle Stature, that is neither over-tall, nor over-short, is a sign of mean
Nature, and best composed manners.

The Application of this Doctrine is rightly made, when the Physiognomical
Rules, and Signs, are rightly applied to the Inclinations, and Natural habits
of men, concerning which observe this caution when you see a man suspected of
any vice, or supposed to be naturally endued with any virtue, have recourse to
these rules, and behold Him, and you shall see All, or Most part of those
signs of Virtue, or Vice, shall herewith concur.

Observe these following Rules, and you may judge of any man, according to his
Intellectual, Moral, and Artificial Habits.
THe Intellectual Habits, are wisdom and pudence, with their opposites.

The Moral Habits are Virtues and Vices.

The Artificial Habits, are Arts, Liberal, and Mechanical.

And first of the Animal faculties, and Intellectual-Habits, amongst which I
praemise Ingenuity, or Wit, understanding thereby (in this place) an Aptitude
to apprehend any thing the fancy, moves to, which is either Theorical,
Practical or Poetical, according to, and after the various Disciplines unto
each appertaining.

A Good ingenuity or wit is considerable in General or Special.

THe Physiognomical Signs of a Good Genius, Signs of a good genious.
(in general) are,
1. A straight erect body, rightly proportioned, neither over tall, nor short.
2. The Habit of the body mean, betwixt Fat and Lean. 3. The Flesh Naturally
soft. 4. The Skin subtle; being a medium betwixt, soft, smooth, and rough. 5.
The Color and Complexion of the body White, verging to a little blush of
Redness. 6. The Hairs between Hard and Soft, Crisping and Straight or smooth as
also between brown and yellow, and often with us blackish. 7. The Head of a
mean bigness. 8. The Face mean, between fat and lean. 9. The Forehead raised
indifferent high, and not to plain. 10. The Eyes meanly big, round and clear,
and of an azure, yellow shining hazel color. 11. The Aspect mild, and humane.
12. The Ears handsomely (as it were) graven and hollow. 13. The teeth so mixed,
that some are broad, some narrow, some thin, some thick, and more gross. 14. A
subtle tongue. 15. A mean Voice, betwixt intense, and remiss. 16. The Neck
comely, mean, and smooth. 17. Thannel bone of the throat, appearing and moving.
18. The Back, and the Ribs, not over fleshy. 19. The Shoulders plain, slender,
and mean. 20. The Ligaments, and Arteries, well composed, and knit togethe. 21.
The Hands indifferent long, comely and smooth. 22. The Fingers mean in length,
and breadth, equally distant in all places. 23. The Feet comely, tender and not
fleshy. 24. The Nails plain, white, thin, somewhat mixed with Red, and shining.
25. The Carriage of the Body upright in walking.
Rule. 2.
The Signs of a dull, Signs of an evil genious.
and evil Genious, are contrary to the former signs.

1. THe Stature of the body overbig and long. 2. The Habitual form of the body
over Fleshy and Fat. 3. The Flesh hard. 4. The complexion of the Body
over-black. 5. The Head, over-big, or little, as also over hairy, hard and
sharp. 6. The fore part of the head, Concave, and the hinder part of the head
much Unequal. 7. The Face exceeding big and fleshy. 8. The Forehead great,
fleshy and round. 9. The Ears very round, plain, and not sculptated, or
little, and stand flaring up. 10. The Eyes obscure, and moving slowly or sixed
and immovable. 11. The Cheeks large and fleshy. 12. The Neck, hard, short,
fleshy, and fat. 13. The Channel bone of the throat ill placed, or deformed in
place 14. The Shoulder-blades, standing or appearing upwards. 15. The Loins
much fleshy. 16. The Breasts, big and fleshy. 17. The Belly standing forth. 18.
The Arms very carnosus. 19. The Thighs short, and about the huckel bones
gross, fleshy, and round. 20. The Toes of the feet, short, small, and crooked in
part, or in whole
Rule. 3.
The sensitive part and Memory, Signs of a good memory.
are discovered to be good by these signs.

1. THe upper parts of the body, not to big comparatively, but mean, well
formed, fleshy, yet not fat. 2. The Brain dry. 3. The hinder part of the head
extended forth, which is the seat of Memory. 4. The Ears meanly big.
Rule 4.
On the other part a weak Treacherous memory is known by these contrary signs.

1. AS if the upper parts of the body be small, and ill formed and fat. 2. The
Brain moist. 3. The hinder part of the head depressed. 4. The Ears small,
Mouce like.
Rule 5.
Signs of a good Judgment are the same with the signs of a good Genious,
only by way of Addition take these few.

1. THe eyes are meanly moveable. 2. The temperament more dry then otherwise.
3. The voice slow, discreet, and advised, yet unwearied.
These do sufficiently demonstrate the clarity, and firmness of the Animal
spirits, and what is requisite to the acquiring, and completing sound
judgment; from hence by the contrary is easy to judge the Symptoms, of a
weak, and infirm Judgment.

Rule. 6.
The Symptoms of Wisdom, and Prudence (they being considered as intellectual
Habits) are thus Notified.

1. THe Stature of the body, mean or little. 2. The head mean in the fore part,
and somewhat in larged in the hinder part. 3. The Face of mean bigness, and
somewhat fleshy. 4. The Fore head some what square and long extending to the
Temples. 5. The Eyes, full, lofty, clear, and moving. 6. The tongue subtle and
smooth. 7. The Nose handsomely, and fitly proportionated to the face. 8. The
Voice mean, between small and great. 9. The Neck inclining somewhat to the
right side. 10. The knot of the throat, swelling forth. 11. The Channel bone
well and decently ligated. 12. The Breast large. 13. The shoulders large, and
even. 14. The hands long, as also the fingers, naturally acting, and moving as
he speaks.
Rule. 7. Signs of imprudency.

The symptoms of a simple foolish imprudent person, Are.

1. THe Stature very big, and the body inclining to the lest side. 2. The head
the forepart and hinder part hollow, and globous. 3. The hair exceeding red, or
growing down in the neck. 4. The face very large and fleshy. 5. The Eyes small,
reddish, and obscure, clowdy, little moving verging upwards and swelling out of
the head. 6. The Ears, big, long, and staring upwards. 7. The Nose,
disproportionable, and undecent on the face. 8. The Forehead very small, round
and high. 9. The Cheek contracted and as it were lowering. 10. The Mouth pouting
out, slit as it were. 11. The Lips big, and swelling. 12. The Voice small,
sharp, and Canorous. 13. The Discourse babbling, dull and weak. 14. The Laughter
much, and frequent. 15. The Neck overmuch erected upwards. 16. The Shoulders
hairy. 17. The Loins fleshy. 18. The hands very short, having the joints,
long, thick and sharp. 19. The Finger short and fleshy. 20. Walking in a
careless stooping posture, and the countenance lifted up and wandering.
In the next place are observable (according to our proposed Method) Moral
habits, viz. Virtues and vices.

Rule 8.
The Signs and Symptoms of a man Pious, Plain, and Honest.

1. THe Face, Serene, fair and amiable. 2. The Forehead mean between serene and
cloudy. 3. The Eyes decently big, inclining to four square. 4. The Eyes, Moist,
Lucid, usualally open and intentively fixed upon the object it beholds. 5. The
aspect mildly humane. 6. The Voice mean, between great and small. 7. The
Laughter mean, and not to excess.
The Contrary Quallification has these Signs.

Rule 9.
1. THe Face deformed. 2. The Ears long and narrow. 3. The Eyes dry, pale,
swelling out, and shining, 4. The Eyebrows hairy, and joined, beetle brow. 5.
The Mouth little, yet swelling outward. 6. The Teeth long, standing out and
firm. 7. The nether lip slender, the teeth Hanging over it. 8. The Voice small,
quick, and pronounced thorough the Nose. 9. The Neck awry. 10. The back
crooked. 11. The legs very slender, and small.
The signs of Moral Prudence are the same with intellectual prudence, which
you have in the sixth Rule foregoing to which I refer you.

Rule 10.
The Characters of a just man.

1. THe Body commensurately proportioned. 2. The Fore head long, and the
temples both ways extended. 3. The Hair dark or darkish, brown or obscure, and
the hair of the beard of the same color. 4. The Eyes somewhat big, sublime,
bearing forth and shining. 5. The Voice grave. 6. The Countenance grave and
laudable.
Rule 11.
The Signs of injustice, Are, 1. THe Eyes blue, dry, and somewhat red, and
little moving, but roling, staring open, and fixed. 2. The Aspect sour,
glouting, and threatening.


Rule. 12.
The Symptoms of Fortitude.

1. THe Body erect and upright. 2. The Head somewhat big. 3. The Hairs mean
betwixt straight and curling. 4. The Forehead square, of a proportionable
Magnitude. 5. The Eyes bluish, yellow and reddish, of a mean magnitude and
open. 6. The Eye brows crooked. 7. The Nose from the forehead crooked or
round, and obtuse at the end. 8. The Mouth large. 9. The Chin four square, and
hairy. 10. The Lips thin, the mouth big. 11. The Voice big, and sounding. 12.
Respiration strong, and constant. 13. The Neck big and straight. 14. The Breast
full and large. 15. The Back parts big, and strong. 16. The Shoulders broad,
big and large. 17. The Joints big, and well knit together. 18. In Walking he
makes some motion with his shoulders, and takes large steps, the same also are
the signs of a Magnanimous person.
Rule. 13.
The Signs of a fearful, timorous, pusillanimous nature, Are.

1. THe Body bowing, or inclining. 2. The Habit of the body lean, and without
hair. 3. The Hair of the body thin and soft. 4. The Motion of the body,
discovering a languishing posture. 5. The Complexion of the body a wan white,
black, or of a wan leaden color. 6. The Head in the forepart, and hinder
part, depressed and hollow. 7. The Hairs white, or very black. 8. The Face pale
and sorrowful. 9. The Forehead big, fleshy or bony. 10. The Mouth little with
spare lips. 11. The Respiration, little, rare, and weak. 12. The Voice accure,
and smooth or remiss with a little trembling, sounding in the Nose. 13. His
Discourse accute, weak, and short. 14. The Neck long and slender. 15. The Breast
narrow, smoath and imbecile. 16. The Joints and Arteries sost, inarticulate and
weak. 17. The Arms short. 18. The thighs small and slender. 19. The Hands long
and small.
Rule 14.
The Symptoms of Audaciousnesse, which is the extremity of Fortitude.

1. A Cloudy lowering forehead. 2. Long Eye brows. 3. Dry Eyes, bloody, open,
darting and shining. 4. An Austere, and crabbed sour countenance. 5. The Nose
long, extending near the mouth. 6. The Mouth big, bearing out. 7. The teeth
long, standing at a distance, sharp and strong. 8. The Neck short, and some
imperfection. 9. The Breast large. 10. The Shoulders very big. 11. The Arms
long, and large. 12. The Fingers sharp and thick.
Rule 15.
The Symptoms and Characters of a temperate man.

1. THe Hair mean, betwixt thick and thin. 2. The Forehead mean, between light,
and cloudy. 3. The Eyes big, and shining, having the balls mean. 4. An equal
proportion, of the parts of the body. 5. An equal distance between the Navil
and the bottom of the breast, as between the bottom of the breast and the throat.
Rule 16.
The Figures of an intemperate person, are these, 1. THe Face of Saffron
color. 2. The Eyes big, somewhat moist, swollen, somewhat red, pierceing and
obscure. 3. The Mouth hollow, and much deformed. 4. The Speech big, and weak.
5. The Respiration quick and full. 6. The Neck fat, and the gullet of the
throat, much bearing out. 7. The belly big, soft, and pending downwards. 8. The
Duggs hanging amply upon the breast, yet lean. 9. The Hands slender. 10. The
Space from the Navil to the lower part, or bottom of the breast larger, than the
space from the bottom of the breast to the throat.


Rule 17.
The Characters, a Venerious, and Libidinous person are, 1. THe Head hairy,
rough, and rugged. 2. The Hair straight thick, harsh, and black. 3. The Eyes
hollow, clear and lacivious. 4. The Often and frequent motion of the eye lids.
5. A Low forehead, or the hair growing much down toward the eye brows. 6. The
Ears exceeding small. 7. The Contraction of the Cheeks in laughter. 8. The
hollownes of the nose. 9. The Chin much hairy. 10. The Neck inclining toward
the left side. 11. The Breast hairy, large and lean. 12. The Paps hanging
downwards. 13. The thighs subtle, rough and harsh. 14. The Belly fat, and
hairy. 15. The Arms strong and Nervous. 16. The toes of the feet not much
parted, but (as it were) joined together. 17. A flow pace when he walks with
standing and looking about him.


Rule 18.
Signs of Stupidity.

1. THe Eyes pale, gazing, and staring about.
Rule. 19.
Signs of Fidelity.

1. THe Forehead Austere, and declining. 2. The Eye brows compressed. 3. The
Eyes mean, inclining to an azure, or dark color, wishly looking and shining.
Rule 20.
The Characters of a Perfidious person.

1. THe Head very small, of a rude and undecent proportion, and debillity in
the back part thereof. 2. The Forehead sharp, like little mountains and full of
holes. 3. The Eyes small, hollow, dry, obscure, moveable, and of a piercing
quality. 4. The Shoulders elevated upwards. 5. The hands small and slender.
Rule 21.
The Characters of a Bashful modest person, composed with a gentle confidence.

1. THe Stature of the body somewhat inclining, or loueing to stoop. 2. The
motion of the body slow and mean. 3. The Eyes somewhat obscure, cloudy, not
much opening, nor quite shut, but pinking (as it were) half winking. 4. The
motions of the Eyebrows moderate. 5. The Blush of the cheeks quickly arising,
and soon vanishing. 6. The Voice, and discourse grave, meditated, lingering and
slow. 7. The Ears having a ruddy blush, and complexion.
Rule 22.
On the contrary, The Signs of bold, immodest persons are, 1. THe body
straight and piercing. 2. The complexion of the body reddish. 3. The Head
accute in the Crown, and extended in length. 4. The Hair very red. 5. The Face
very round, or very long. 6. The Eyes much open, and shining. 7. The Eyelids
hairy, and ruddy. 8. The Eyebrows very long. 9. The Discourse and Speech,
shameless, malapert, and reproachful. 10. The Nose gross and blunt, crooked
or writhed, near the forehead. 11. The breast smooth, and elevated. 12. The
toes, and nails crooked. 13. He Walks rashly and hastily.


Rule 23.
The Characters of Meek and Courteous persons are, 1. THe Head of what fashion
soever yet is somewhat big. 2. The Figure of the body, is somewhat inclining.
3. The Habitual constitution of the body, is moist, soft, smooth, and somewhat
hairy. 4. The Hair is plain, smooth, bright, or somewhat yellow. 5. The Eyes
black. 6. The Eye brows standing straight out. 7. The Voice heavy, slow, soft,
and effeminate. 8. The discourse negligent, slack, and mild. 9. He walks
slowly and carelessly.


Rule 24.
Contrary to meekness, are the Signs of Wrathful and Cruel persons.

1. THe body erect straight, and meager. 2. The Color and complexion of the
body reddish and yellow. 3. The Face round. 4. The forehead round, or Goatlike
wrinkled. 5. The Eyebrows converse, crooked and extended. 6. The Eyes big,
heavy, bloody, shining, and sparkling. 7. The temples raised, (as it were
swollen) and the Veins much appearing. 8. The extreme of the nose sharp. 9.
The Nostrils large spread, and hollow. 10. The Mouth as it were trembling. 11.
The teeth straight and sharp. 12. The tongue quick, and stammering. 13. The
Voice big, and entangled, or sharp and vehement, or beginning low, or big, and
ending a Sentence, sharp, or squeaking. 14. The Speech hasty, hare-braind,
rash, and hardy, and such a person usually reiterates, or triplicates his words
to little purpose, many amongst us, may thus be observed. 15. The Countenance
doggedly sour and cruel. 16. The Neck long, thick, fat, and the veins much
appearing. 17. The throat rough, and swelling forth, under the throat bone. 18.
The breast large, meager, and of a flamy complexion, and color. 19. The
Shoulders large. 20. The shoulder blades broad. 21. The joints big and strong.
22. Using motion with the fingers in speaking. 23. A Grinning, or gnashing with
the teeth.
Rule. 25.
The Qualifications of a Careless, Negligent Nature, being opposed to
Discretion, Meekness and Gentleness, of which the notes are, 1. THe Hair
smooth. 2. The Face big and large. 3. The forehead little and small. 4. The
Eyebrows verging toward the Nose. 5. The ears exceeding small. 6. The eyes of
the color of Goats. 7. The mouth deformed, as being awry, or the Lips cut with
Shares. 8. The lips excessive thick. 9. The teeth close and even. 10. The voice
rough, or sharp, clamorons or depraved. 11. The Speech hasty and even, or low
and weak. 12. The neck, thick and fat. 13. The belly fleshy, soft, and hanging
down, Cow-bellied.


Rule. 26.
Characters of fincerity, Are, 1. THe Mediocrity of the face, and the
proportional composure of the cheeks and temples, somewhat a little inclining to
fatness. 2. The Voice mean betwixt big and small.


Rule 27.
The Physiognomical Signs of a Liar, Are, 1. THe Body crooked, and deformed,
2. The Face fleshy. 3. The Nose high and elevated in the middle. 4. The Eyes
merry, jocund, being surrounded with azure circles. 5. The Eye brows inclining
downwards. 6. The Lower eyelids, as Arched, or rendering, a rain-bow-like
color. 7. The Speech quick, and fawning pronounced something thorough the
Nose. 8. Laughter, even to derision.


Rule. 28.
Next unto the Liar, the dissembler claims his place, and his Physiognomical
Signs are these, 1. THe Face fat, with a supine sleepy countenance. 2. The
Forehead, wrinkled and rough. 3. The Eye brows inflexing, and knitting toward
the temples. 4. The Eyes little, roundish and shining. 5. The Voice dull, his
speech seemingly negligent, and dark. 6. He has a Frisking bumour in his
walking or travels, soon here and soon there.


Rule 29.
To the Dissembler, is next of kin a flatterer, whose Characters are these, 1.
MOst esually a little Weesel-face. 2. A Serene clear forehead. 3. Little
wandering eyes. 4. His Countenance and voice pleasant and affected. 5. His Pace,
and acting, is with many, and often, Circumtorsions, turnings and windings, and
whiskins to and fro.


Rule 30.
The Character of a Liberal and Benevolent person.

1. THe Hair naturally descending toward the Nose. 2. The Hinder part of the
neck, erect Goat-like. 3. The Shoulders well compacted. 4. The Fingers
something bending backwards, the Arms long.
Rule 31.
The Signs of a Covetous sordid person.

1. THe eyes every small. 2. The Face exceeding little. 3. The Eye brows
incurvating toward the Nose. 4. The Back deformed by crookedness, or the like.
5. The Shoulders ill compacted, too much verging, and inclining to the breast.
6. The Fingers contracted stif, and bending forwards, emblems, of hold fast. 7.
Speedy in going, and treads thick and quick.
Rule. 32.
The Physiognomical Characters of a person Courteous, Civil, Elegant,
Facetious, are these, 1. THe Forehead large, fleshy, plain and smooth. 2. The
Eyes moist and shining. 3. The Countenance expressing Joy, Content, and Mirth.
4. The Voice pleasant and pleasing. 5. The Motion of the body flow, etc.


Rule 33.
On the contrary, the Signs of a Churlish, Discourteous, Rough-hew'd Nature
are, 1. THe Form of the body Meager, and lean. 2. The Forehead, cloudy, sullen,
and wrinkled. 3. The Eyes cast down-ward, or down-look'r. 4. A Nimble tongue.
5. Walking a short and quick pace. 6. A secret Murmuring to himself as he
walks, etc.


Rule 34.
Declares the Signs of a laborious person.

1. THe Head little, or not over bid. 2. The Habitual constitution of the body
dry and hard. 3. The Face lean, and bony. 4. The Eyes quick, and moving. 5. The
tongue quick. 6. He takes long steps, and walks fast.
Rule. 35.
On the contrary, the Notes of a Lazy, Idle person, are, 1. A Great blockhead.
2. The Constitution of the body humid and tender. 3. The Face fleshy, inclining
to a honey complexion. 4. The Fore head large. 5. The Eyes moving slow. 6. The
lower part of the nose thick. 7. Blub cheek't. 8. Slow tongue. 9. Short in
discourse. 10. He Walks a slow, short and lazy pace.


Rule 36.
The marks of a Sleepy, Dull, Drowsy disposition, are, 1. THe Members of the
upper part of the body, are disproportionably greater then the members of the
lower parts. 2. The Habitual constitution of the body is phlegmatic. 3. The
Head over much swelling. 4. The Eyes swelling or gogling. 5. The Countenance,
dull, dead and drowsy. 6. The Veins small, hardly perceptable.


Rule 37.
The Signs of humillity, are, 1. THe Stature not altogether erect, but
somewhat incurvating. 2. The Eyes narrow and quiet. 3. The Voice mild and
moderate. 4. Seldom Laughter. 5. A Slow, equal and gentle pace in walking.


Rule 38.
Contrary, the Signs and Symptoms of Pride, are.

1. THe Figure of the body erect. 2. The Eye brows elated, and Arch-like. 3.
The Eyes great, shining, dancing in the head, and verging upwards. 4. The Voice
sharp and sounding. 5. Ridiculous in laughter. 6. The Neck thick and long. 7.
The throat sharp, and extended. 8. The Fingers long and small. 9. A proud
deportment in the face. 10. A stiff advanced Neck. 11. A slow Spanish pace.
12. Circumspection and looking about. 13. And often staying, or standing still
in walking.
Rule 39.
In the next place, we will observe the Symptoms of secresy, which are
necessary to observe.

1. THe Face fair, inclining to a whitish complexion. 2. The Forehead long,
looking somewhat downwards, mournful and somewhat sharp. 3. The Eyes fat, and
smiling, but frequently subject to tears.
Rule 40.
On the Contrary, the Signs of a babbler, are, 1. THe upper parts of the body
bigger then the inferior. 2. The Complexion of the face, a dark, yellow, or
honey color. 3. The Ears big, standing up. 4. The Nose straight. 5. The Cheeks
very long. 6. The mouth stretched forth in length. 7. The Chin very long. 8.
The upper Lip hanging over the lower. 9. The tongue nimble, and voluble. 10.
The throat sharp, and rough. 11. The Ribs bunching out before. 12. The Fingers
long and slender.


Rule. 41.
Discovers the Signs, of a Benevolent merciful person.

1. THe Face fair, inclining to a whitish Feature. 2. The Forehead long,
looking somewhat downwards, mournful and somewhat sharp. 3. The Eyes fat, and
smiling, but frequently subject to tears.
Rule 42.
On the Contrary, the Signs of a Malevolent person are, 1. THe temples concave
and hollow. 2. Beetle brows, or the temples conjoined and hairy. 3. The Eyes
little and pale. 4. The Dissection, and deformity of the mouth. 5. The teeth,
tuskish-like, long. 6. The Arms Short.


Rule 43.
To Malevolency may fitly be adjoined, Envy, the Characters of which are, 1.
THe Body Meager, and lean. 2. The face plain, and in aspect, black and blew. 3.
The Ears long, and narrow. 4. The Eyes little and pale. 5. The Voice sweet, and
pleasing. 6. The Speech and discourse, sharp and accute. 7. Sparing in
langhter, yet sometimes seemingly merry.


Rule 44.
The Notes of a hasty person.

1. THe Voice low, and grave in the beginning of his discourse, but in the end
Elevated, Acute and Sharp: 2. The teeth mixed, viz. some broad and close
united, some small, and standing at a distance.
Rule 45.
The Characters of a Gentile, Heroic, Noble Nature.

1. THe stature straight, elect, and well proportioned. 2. The Complexion of
the bo White, with a Bluss of redness, throughout defused. 3. The Head of a
moderate magnitude and roundness, both ways swelling forth. 4. The Hair fair,
inclining to yellow. 5. The face fair, and comely. 6. The forehead square, and
of a mean magnitude and mean, betwixt calm and cloudy. 7. The Eyes big and
sublime. 8. A Splendor of Admirable Dignity in the forehead. 9. The Ears
neatly insculpted, of mean bigness, somewhat square, and quick of hearing. 10.
The Mouth large, and lovely. 11. The Sqeech sober and grave. 12. The Mirth
moderate. 13. The Breast and shoulders large. 14. The Hands ample and open. 15.
The finger indisterent long, small, comely, and retorting backwards from the
first joint. 16. A slow pace, grave and Magnificent.
Rule 46.
On the Contrary, Signs of a Salvage, Ignoble Nature, Are, 1. THe figure of
the head, incurvated. 2. The Head hard, edged or pointed. 3. The Hair thick,
hard and rugged. 4. The faee wan, undeformed. 5. The forehead hard, and rough.
6. The Ears over big, flagging, as much as to say, Bang eared. 7. The Eyes
little, dry, hollow, obscure, of gray, and saffron color. 8. The Eye brows
joined together with hair. 9. The sight sharp and peircing. 10. The Countenance
dreadful and threatening. 11. The Cheeks long and hairy. 12. The Mouth long,
wide, affecting babbling. 13. The Voice and speech fierce. 14. The Back parts of
the body hairy. 15. The shoulders gross, and rising. 16. The Belly big. 17.
The feet short, and fleshly. 18. The Nails crooked, narrow and long. 19. The
fingers short and thick.


Rule 47.
The Characters of a complete Artist are comprehended under these Heads.

1. THe stature of the body Moderate in proportion. 2. The eyes clear and
bright. 3. The Complexion of the body, verging to sanguine. 4. The Habit of the
body in a mean between fat and lean. 5. The skin and the flesh subtle. 6. The
face mean, between fleshy and lean. 7. The Aspect of the countenance mild and
humane. 8. The tongue subtle. 9. The joints well compacted. 10. And the Hands
neatly proportionated.
Rule 48.
The Phisiognomical Signs of an iegenious Mechanrick, Are, 1. THe Stature of
the body, well commensurated. 2. The hands slender, and long. 3. The Nails
white and shining. 4. The Complexion of the body white, inclining somewhat to
redness. 5. The Head of mean magnitude. 6. A Spruce and upright carriage of the
body in walking.


THus Courteous Reader, (my limits Commanding brevity) I shall here put an end
to this Discourse, which how useful, the Knowledge, of these Praeceding
Purticulars are, and how beneficial, I leave to all Ingenious Souls to judge,
besides they want not their pleasure and delight likewise, as will easily be
found in their Observation; But who well receive fuller pleasure and profit,
let him Consult, my larger Treatise of Phisiognomy, Printed for Nathaniel
Brooks, to which if he apply a Sympathetical genius, he may both be delighted;
and satisfied, to which I refer him.

A Brief Table OF THE Principal Matters Contained in this First Book.
A. ACtions of men various, why? Fol. p. 13. Answers to Nice Questions. Fol. p.
8, 9. Andaciousness the Sigues. Fol. p. 136. Authors Eminent in Palmistry. Fol.
p. 5. Artist good, the Signs. Fol. p. 156.

B. Bashfulness the Signs. Fol. p. 140. Bloodshedding. Fol. p. 76. Brain, the
Signs. Fol. p. 119. Brain cold and dry. Fol. p. ibid. Brain Moist the Signs.
Fol. p. 120. Benevolent Person the Signs. Fol. p. 146. Babbler the Signs. Fol.
p. 151.

C. Carelessness the Signs. Fol. p. 140. Chassiry the Signs. Fol. p. 89.
Childbed danger the Signs. Fol. p. 102. Chyromancy and Astrology the same in
Effect. Fol. p. 15. Chiro^copia, what? Fol. p. 1, 2. Conciliator when
flourished. Fol. p. 9. Chollerick temperament the signs. Fol. p. 81. 91.
Complexion good. Fol. p. 115. Considerations of much weight before judgment,
from Fol. p. 18. to 24. Covetousness the signs. Fol. p. 147. Courteous and
Civil person the signs Fol. p. 147. Churlish Conditions, the signs. Fol. p.
12. 148.

D. Death by violence the signs. Fol. p. 39. 40. Death By poison the signs.
Fol. p. 96. Death, the signs thereof from page Fol. 109. 114. Deliverance in
Childbed good. Fol. p. 90. Debt signs of one suffering thereby. Fol. p. 65.
Difference of lines, whence? Fol. p. 14, 15. Dissembler the signs. Fol. p.
145. Dull disposition. Fol. p. 149.

E. Ecclesiastical preferments the signs. Fol. p. 86. Effeminate, when? Fol.
p. 19. Envy the signs. Fol. p. 153.

F. Fearfulness the signs. Fol. p. 134. Fidelity the signs. Fol. p. 90, 91.
139. Fingers measured. Fol. p. 28. Fegmatick Constitution. Fol. p. 116. Folly
the signs. Fol. p. 129. Fortitude. Fol. p. 133. Flatterer the signs. Fol. p.
146.

G. Genius good the signs. Fol. p. 124. Genius Dull. Fol. p. 126. Generation,
and corruption the causes. Fol. p. 6.

H. Hands measured by compass. Fol. p. 30. Hand which to be judged Fol. p. 16.
Hands due praportion. Fol. p. 20. 26. to ^0. Heavens motion what. Fol. p. 6.
Hearts temperament, hot Fol. p. 120. cold. ibid. dry, ibid. Hurts in secret
parts. Fol. p. 74. Husbands how many. Fol. p. 88, 89. Humility the signs. Fol.
p. 150. Hasty person. Fol. p. 153.

I. Impostures censured. Fol. p. 10, 11, 12. Inheritance. Fol. p. 88. Ingenuity
good the-signes. Fol. p. 123. Immodesty signs. Fol. p. 140. Judgment sound,
signs thereof. Fol. p. 128. Justice, signs thereof. Fol. p. 132. Ignoble
natures the signs. Fol. p. 155.

K. Kings Honored by Astrology. Fol. p. 6. Sr. Kenelmne Digby, on causes. Fol.
p. 7.

L. A Line what. Fol. p. 3. Lines of the hand their different names and
quallifications. Fol. p. 3. 22. 23. Laborious person the signs. Fol. p. 148.
Lazy person the signs. Fol. p. 149. Nature of the Lines. Fol. p. 4. Lines in
the hand caused by the planets. Fol. p. 10. Lines in the hand, whence? Fol. p.
13, 14. Liver- line measured. Fol. p. 28, 29, 30. Line of life measured from
Fol. p. 31 to 35. Life long, from Fol. p. 70. to 91. Life short from Fol. p.
93. to 97. Life troublesome. Fol. p. 78. Life may be several ways abridged.
Fol. p. 85. Law Preferments. Fol. p. 86. Lust vide Whoredom. Luxury signs
thereof. Fol. p. 83. Liar the signs thereof. Fol. p. 145.

M. Meekness the signs. Fol. p. 141. Melancholy Constitution. Fol. p. 118.
Memory good. Fol. p. 127. Memory bad the signs. Fol. p. 128. Murder the
signs. Fol. p. 67. Merciful person the signs. Fol. p. 152. Mechanic
ingenious the signs Fol. p. 156.

N. Names of all the lines. Fol. p. 22, 23. Natural line measured from Fol. p.
35. to 38. Noble Nature the signs. Fol. p. 153.

O. Observations to be noted before judgment from Fol. p. 17. to p. 21.

P. Palmistry its Antiquity. Fol. p. 9. 11. Palmistry more certain then other
Arts. Fol. p. 10. Palmistry owned by all the Learned and Highly Honored. Fol.
p. 13. Palmistry what it is? Fol. p. 17. Palsy the signs. Fol. p. 68. Plain
honesty the signs. Fol. p. 131. Play, fortune thereby, signs thereof. Fol. p.
68. Perfideousness signs thereof. Fol. p. 103, 104. 139. Poverty in all its
kinds and causes, signs thereof from Fol. p. 57. to 71. Practical part of
Chiromancy. Fol. p. 17. Imprisonment, signs thereof. Fol. p. 101. Pride the
signs. Fol. p. 150.

Q. Quietness of life, the signs. Fol. p. 187.
R. Riches, signs thereof. Fol. p. 41, 42, 43, to 57. caution therein. 41. how
many ways obtained, ibid. Riches by women. Fol. p. 56. Riches by Cattle. Fol.
p. 57. Riches by Music. Fol. p. 57. And many other ways, ibid. Robberies
prejudice thereby: signet. Fol. p. 67.

S. Sanguine Constitution signs thereof. Fol. p. 117. Sickness, how to know
beforehand. Fol. p. from 105. to 108. Sincerity the signs. Fol. p. 144.
Stupidity the signs. Fol. p. 139. Suits and Controversies by Law. Fol. p. 87.
Secrecy, the Symptoms. Fol. p. 151.

T. Table-line measured from Fol. p. 36. to 39. Temperance, signs thereof.
Fol. p. 136. Theory of Palmistry from Fol. p. 1. to 23. Intemperance, signs
thereof. Fol. p. 137. Teeth big, what? Fol. p. 84. Thief, who? Fol. p. 67.

V. Vagabond, signs thereof. Fol. p. 67. Venerious the signs. Fol. p. 138.
Violent Death, signs thereof. Fol. p. 39, 40. Vitals strong, signs thereof.
Fol. p. 80. Virginity and Chastity signs. Fol. p. 84. Union between Astrnomy
and Palmistry. Fol. p. 10. Unstable in Conditions signs thereof. Fol. p. 77.
Ungrateful, signs thereof. Fol. p. 57. 103. Unjust sign thereof. Fol. p. 323.

W. Wives how many and what. Fol. p. 88, 89. Wisdom and Prudente the signs
Fol. p. 128. Woman a Virago. Fol. p. 19. Riches by Women. Whoredom. Fol. p.
98, 99. VVounds on the head. Fol. p. 68. VVounds on the body. Fol. p. 73, 74.
VVounds in the secret parts. Fol. p. 74. VVrathfulnesse signs thereof. Fol. p.
142.

Y. Youth, dye in youth. Fol. p. 93.
ERRATA SIC CORRIGE.
PAge 7. line 27. read respect. p. 8. l. 26. r. turpiter. p. 13. l. 2. r.
cadducum p. 14. l. 10. r. falfity. p. 21. l. 5. r. affected p. 104. l. last r.
premise. p. 108. l. 10. observe the Comma between the words, touching, and
pain. p. 120. l. 19. r. heart. p. 125. l. 9. r. the Channel.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS TREATISE, Treating of that most Useful, and
Profitable Subject, viz.

THE DOCTRINE OF ELECTIONS, OR The Right way to prevent the evil Consequence of
after Wit, or Had-I-Wist.

Vidi sapientem ipsum ut cui sunt oculi in capite

Ecle. 2.14. (...)

Pro. 13 c. 16. English, Every Prudent Man deals with knowledge.

Nam cuique voluntati est tempus et ratio: tempus enim ac rationem novit animus
sapientis,

Prove. 8.5, 6. Astutus praevidens malum, abscondit se, fatui autem transeuntes,
mulctantur,

Pro. 22.3. v. and 27. c. 12. v. Fatuus credit omnibus rebus, prudens autem
advertit ad gressum suum,

Prove. 14, 15. Qui vero Auscultat mihi, habitabit secure, ut tranquillus a
pavore mali,

Prove. 1. ult. By RICHARD SAUNDERS Author of Chiromancy and Phisiognomy.

LONDON, Printed by H. B. for G. Sawbridge, at the Sign of the Bible upon
Lud-Gate Hill. 1663.

Of Astrological Elections. Discovering those things about which the Doctrine
of Elections is conversant, and within what limits the truth thereof is bounded.
THe Doctrine of Elections consists in the finding out fit, apt, and congruent
times, for the shunning and avoiding of Evil signified to any Person in his
Nativity, or feared, and the accomplishment and obtaining of that Good, which
is promised, or desired, as also for the right directing of all Actions (in the
Humane life of Man) to a good awished and desired end,) therefore Elections
differ from Horary questions, which rest and determine in the knowledge of the
thing Sought, but Elections in reference to their dispo sing ends, referr unto
future Actions.

Elections in their constitution, offers themselves to us under a double
consideration: The first has its ground from the Radical Nativity of the
Person, for whom the Election is made, is grounded thereupon and consimulates
therewith, and this is the most Legitimate and true ground, of forming
Elections, as being certain and sure; from whence may be discerned the great
Utility, the knowledge of a man's Nativity conduces to him, in his disposal of
Humane Actions.

The second ground is, the Nativity of the person being not known, to form your
Election on general grounds, or build them on a Horary question: This ground is
much more weak, and invalid then the former, and admits of much uncertainty:
the Learned much controvert this point, but the sum is, that in a figure of
Election of time, though it be in signification aparently most happy, yet
notwithstanding, if it be contrary to the Radical figure of the Nativity, not
known, it will produce little or nothing of Good, but rather the Election will
prove unfortunate; for perhaps the Horoscope of the time Elected, may be the
Sign of the eight, or twelfth Houses in the Radical Position of Heaven: I'ts
possible a Man may Elect to himself, a most fortunate and happy hour to begin a
Journey, or Voyage, in respect of the present General state and Position of the
Heavens, yet may he begin his Journey in a most unhappy time in reference to
his Life, goods and Estate; whilst another making choice apparently of an
unfortunate and unlucky time, may every way experience good Fortune and
Felicity, the reason is because to many in their Nativitys the Malevolent, and
unfortunate Planets (as we call them) are significators of Life, Dignity, and
Riches, and well affected, etc. and the Benevolent and fortunate Planets are
Significators of Evils to them and Evil affected, and so to others the
contrary; therefore Haly Exhorts that no Election be made for him, of whose
Nativity thou art Ignorant, unless (says he) thou have a ground from the
ascendant of his question, Haly seems to persuade that the time of a Horary
question is Equivalent to the Nativity; as to the Election of time for any
Action, but by his leave we hold not this so Legitimate a ground for a good
Election.

CHAP. II. Of many things Generally to be Noted about Elections.
COncerning the Elections of times, generally these things offer themselves to
our consideration.

First Elections of time profit, not only for the obtaining of good in our
daily actions, and the useful, profitable, and happy management of good
received and obtained, but also is profitable as to the shunning, and avoiding
of any Eminent Evils feared, for he that would concilliate to himself the
favor of his Prince, contract a happy designed Marriage, or would build a
House, Castle, or City, it Superlatively profits him to make choice of such
fit and congruent times, that are only proper to such particular affairs, in
which the Caelestial Influences may favor, and fortunate him in those
undertakings; for the Celestial Influences only affect the person by himself
principally about those things which are said to be affected or moved by
accident for the fortune of Building a House, ^^^eth not in the State and
Po^^^on of Heaven considered in it self (...) the hour in which the House beg^^
to be built (which should be assumed, if the Caelestial Influence did
principally, and by it self affect the Subject, made and Operated) but
considered in respect of the Artichect and him that causes that House to be
built, for so it is possible the Position of Heaven to be Fortunate in the first
sense, and Unfortunate in the second acceptance. From whence that House may be
rendered Unhappy to him that owes or enjoys it, and the same Reason we may
conceive in all other things.

In like manner he that would prevent an Eminent Disease presignified by the
Stars to him, Having found the time thereof by Directions, and the Revolutions
of Sun and Moon, may choose a fit time by this Art before the Disease invade
Nature in which he may let Blood if necessary, or safely Purge those Noxious
Humors afflicting.

As also a King fearing War from another Prince, may hereby before the
beginning of the War, take up those grounds and resolutions, by consulting a
fit and proper time of acting, and by consulting with, and acting by those men
that are fortunately affected and disposed, consilliate a laudable Peace, or
prosper in a fortunate and honorable War; the same reason is of any eminent
controversy in which life or goods are concerned, and the event feared.

Secondly, any Man may as for himself, so for any other Person Elect a
Congruent and fit time as well to Good, as to an Evil end, to Good; as if one
would procure Dignity for his Son, or the like. To Evil, as if one should study
and design the Ruin of another, in Life or in Goods (as often times it comes
to pass by evil men, over much abusing their Authority to the prejudice of
others,) as he that contrives Evil, will Sagaciously consult the Nativity of
his Adversary, and the time when Evil Directions, Revolutions, or Transits,
accomplish their effects, then will he take his time to Ruin him by Play,
Quarrels, Contentions, Lawsuits, Wars, or by Implicating him in Dangerous, and
pernicious Designs; and will Oppose and Encounter him in Combat, War, or the
like, at such a time when himself is Fortunated by the Stars; and the other
Unfortunate: The same Reason is there of one King undertakeing, or waging War
against another King, the Event Depends not upon the justness of the Cause, so
much as the time undertaking the same; neither does he wisely undertake a War,
that does it upon the Ground, of some slight Directions Signif^ing Good, when
as the Revolutions are strongly unfortunate, and as he fortifies himself, so he
must deal in the contrary with his Enemy, he must Elect a time, when the
Position of the Heavens do Unfortunate the Enemy and Fortunate himself:
therefore it comes to pass that it is of great concernment, to know the
genitures of the Generals, and chief Officers that lead an Army, and Command in
chief; by the knowledge of which, through a good Election of time, a desired
end may be obtained, and these things not heeded, and understood, are often
times the causes of most Unfortunate Accidents, and the ruin of Good
undertakings.

Thirdly for the making an apt and fit Election of time for the more happy
Contracting of Matrimony. These two things are required. First, that the
Nativity have good Signification of Marriage. Secondly, That the time of the
Contract, or Marriage be backed with congruent Directions, Revolutions, and
Transits of the Radical Significators: either of these failing. Election
profits not much, although it seemingly promise never so much good Fortune;
for Elections are not able to avert, the Radical Significations, nor truly the
Radical Directions, and Revolutions.

The Radical Significations may be considered in a Supreans, an Infime, and a
Mediate Degree, as also the Significations of Elections ad agendum, respecting
Action; as if those grounds taken form the Nativity agree with the Rules of
Election; in the supreme and highest degree, great, and quick shall the effects
following be, conformable to either signification; if in the Infime and lowest
degree, it shall be the meaner, or as it were Fortunate in appearance only: if
in the Mediate degree the effects shall be answerable proportionably; the
Superlative degree of the one, with the inferior degree of the other, shall
produce something more then the capacity of the Lowest degree will admit, and
with the mediate degree above the Medium, chiefly if the Supreme degree be
taken from the Natal Signification.

The fourth principal of this Doctrine referring to Practice; consists in this:
that those things which we intend to do, and act in, are to be begun in that
moment of time, signified by the Caelestial, Elective constitution of the
Heavens; for the whole virtue of an Election, consists in that very proper
Position of the Heavens, which is made choice of, conformable and congruent to
the end of the thing intended; otherwise the virtue is dissolved, by a
continued motion of the Heavens, and your desired, and wished success is lost
and perished. As for Example, to Elect a time to make a Fortunate Journey or
Voyage, The ninth house is to be Fortified, by the Position of fortunate
Planets therein, which by a little delay of time and the swift motion of the
Heavens; all those Significators are devolved into the Eight House, where Death
and Danger of life is portended: and in like manner those fortunate Positions
of the Planets, which are Located in the first House for the health and Sanity
of body and mind, are quickly by the swift foot of time revolved into the
Twelfth House, which has the signification of Mischiefs and Diseases; and
therefore seeing the whole consists in that nicity of proper time Elected, all
things relating to the business in hand, ought to be made ready, and prepared
that nothing be to be done; but to observe the exact Moment of time, which is
not to be taken by common vulgar Clocks and Dials, which ofttimes vary half an
hour or more from the true time; but by the Sun or Stars, or some exact Clock
or Watch rectified thereby: so having all things prepared ready to that Moment
intended, rightly shall he be called Master of Time, which knows how thus to
use it to his own liking and benefit: Thus is the use of a Figure of Election,
which is a particular Figure.

CHAP. III. Of the great Profit and Utility of the Doctrine of Elections
THe Doctrine of Elections is of so great Utility, if rightly apprehended, that
the practick good and benifit of all Astrology, is found comprehended the rein;
for to no other end is the Science of the Stars given to Men, by the most Great
and wise God, then this, that the Evil impending Men, signified in their
Nativityes, they might foresee and shun, and the Good the Heavens promise, they
might readily with deligence embrace. Thus men have within there own capacitys,
a Natural rule and direction, for all their Human undertakings, adoring the
dispensation of Divine Providence by the Stars, in all Sublunaries, and
admiting the power of free will, above the influence of the Stars: Thus
certainly so large as is the field of Human Actions, so caparious is the
Utility and Profit of Elections.

Of what great worth and concernment is Astrology, and principally that part
thereof, viz. The Doctrine of Elections, as to the undertaking and management
of the greatest and weightiest affairs, may evidently be gathered from
multitude of instances in all ages, and in particular, from the constant and
sure practice of the most potent Prince, the King of China; the management of
whose great and weighty affairs, are wholly performed by Himself, and a Privy
Counsel consisting of twelve men, which are chosen out of the ablest and wisest
in all His Kingdom; nothing but Wisdom gives them admittance to this so great a
dignity, and not one of these is admitted, which is not a most excellent and
singular Astrologer; for in reference to all humane affairs, he in his Counsel
consults the Stars, as well of the thing to be done, of the persons to act, as
of fit congruent and choice times to act all things in: Which thing, such
knowing men, such Excellent and Superlative expert Politicians, would not with
an unanimous consent, constantly-practice, but that they have multitude of ages
fully and certainly experienced, that it does infinitely and chiefly conduce,
to the assured establishment of themselves, and the best Regiment of their
affairs, and people; nothing was more usual and customary in the first Ages,
and Monarchies of the World, then for Princes, and Eminent persons, who
always, In rebus Arduis suos consulebant Magos; In their affairs of most
concernment, and greatest difficulty, to consult their Magi; no otherwise, so
called, than from their sublime Skill and Knowledge in Astrology, which they
accounted a Divine Science.

I cannot, but consent to, and much honor the opinion of the Learned Morinus,
who says, he really believes, and certainly knows, that nothing could be more
profitable, and of greater utility to the King, or chief Magistrate in any
Country, than to have of his private Counsel, three at least of the most
expert skilful and experienced Astrologers, who might consider and consult the
true Nativities, not only of the King, Prince, or chief Magistrate, but also
of those nearest to him, of his Neighbor Princes, of all the great men and
conspicuous persons belonging to the Court, and aspiring after Dignities; from
hence should be known, from what King or State, and when, to shun War, against
what Prince, and when, to undertake War: And who would be fittest (amongst his
Nobles) to make a fortunate General, to be chosen to lead his Armies, and who
to be refused; infinite good and benefit must needs accrue to any State by this
means, is Rationally evident. When on the contrary side very often it falls out
that War is undertaken by an unfortunate Prince, and in the consequence tends
more to the Dissipation, rather than the Augmentation of His State and Kingdom;
as also it may be undertaken in an unfortunate year of the King; it may also be
managed by Commanders unfortunate in the Success; and it be waged also against
a fortunate Prince, who will be victorious and fortunate in that year, and
time: All which things (through improvidence) concurring, Quid nisi magna
clades venit expectanda? What can be expected but absolute ru^^e; what is said
of War may in like manner be understood of the health, welfare, and Marriage of
the King, of sending Ambassadors, and of receiving Ambassages, and of all other
principal affairs of State, of what nature soever; Tres autem Astrologos saltem
suaderem; (says Morinus,) three Astrologers at the least I would advise to;
for one alone, would be unfit for so great a Work, and two might jar, and fall
at variance; therefore it is necessary a third should be admitted, seeing that
in Controversies and Matters of far less moment, many Judges are often times
required; Nec quisquam mei causa hoc dictum fuisse putet: Let no one interpret
my words to any self-end, I wish my Sovereign the greatest happiness in the
world, and the means thereunto conducing, Cordially wishing I were able to add
the least Mite to his Renown, and wishing him those, whose abilities may add a
full and Requisite assistance in all difficulties. What Advantage would this
give to a Prince, amongst his Friends, over his Enemies, at all times, in all
places, and on all occasions? Sed dictum sit duntaxat in gratiam veritatis and
Astrologiae Dignitatis, quibuscunque me Defuncto ipsius Astrologiae excellentia
ex hoc opere innotescet.

If so be it (as has been said) Astrology be thus necessary and useful to
Kings and Princes in their most great and weightiest affairs, and principally
this part of Astrology, viz. the Doctrine of Elections; no man then can doubt
but it is useful and profitable to others of meaner Rank, to all sorts of
persons whatsoever it conduces inestimable benefit, in the happy managing, and
fortunate undertaking of all their particular Affairs, whether as to
Agriculture to the procreation and generation of Rational, and Domestic
Animals, to Physic and Medicine, or to all things, times, and seasons that
appertain to humane commerce; as also for the shunning and avoiding those
unfortunate Positions of Heaven, under whose Influences the greatest Evils
usually hap and befall us; especially in those years when there are evil
Directions and Revolutions, as might abundantly be proved, and in particular in
that Moment of Time, when Gustavus Adolphus the late famous K. of Sweden, began
that fatal Battle in which he was unfortunately slain with many others of
great quality, consider the figure and judgment, as it was taken and rendered
by a Learned and Judicious hand, who was an Eyewitness in the Battle.

Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden began his Battle against the Imperials the
16th day of November 1632. New Style, and the fixed according to the Julian
account with us, at 9 of the Clock in the Morning, in the Latitude of 50
degrees North, at which time being slain, thus were the Heavens disposed,
horoscope chart 1632. Novembris D. Hor. M. 16. 9: 0 Lat. 50. New Style.


It is most worthy observation, that the Position of the Heavens, at the time
of this sad Accident (his Death) did much Sympathize with his Radical Geniture,
being in most points the same, and came very near the Revolutional Position,
being almost the same with the Revolution of the Sun, which was October 24:
Hor. 0. min. 4. P M. 1632. and very near the Moons Revolution likewise, but that
it were tedious to insert the Radical and Revolutional figures, it would appear
that all things did declare a most Illustrious Battle, but mortal. But to pass
this, it being our purpose to show how the Position of the Heavens at that
pun^t of time the Battle did begin, did demonstrate plainly the following
event; for Venus Lady of the medium Coeli significatrix in this mortal
Direction, was in the Horoscope the primary Significator of Life, with Antares
of the second Magnitude, and other violent fixed Stars in the constellation of
the Scorpion, and near the Ecliptic, besieged by and, who were Anarrettaes in
that direction, which 3 Planets, and did arise, and possess the Ascendant, the
hour he began his Battle, and was slain: Mars also at that instant of time
applying to the Radical place of the Lord of the 8th, existing partilly in the
radical place of, and Radical of in the 12 house, opposed to Lord of the
Horoscope, and Dispositor of and, the also Lady of the 8th, exiled peregrine,
and weak, in partill of, and opposite to the 8th, House; therefore was this
hour most unfortunate. As it did portend Action, so it did chiefly intimate
Susceptum bellicum lethale; a mortal encounter, and moreover, there were mortal
Transits made that Day.

To return from whence we Digressed; But because it often time falls out that
neither the King, his chief Officers nor Ministers, nor indeed the generality
of persons, take any care of obtaining the Nativities of those persons, with
whom they are most concerned in businesses; therefore it comes to pass,
notwithstanding fit and congruent Elections, be properly made from the Geniture
of the King, his chief Ministers and Officers: yet sometimes it so falls out,
that they are disappointed of the hoped for, and expected good success desired;
for the Kings Minister has upon himself, the fortune, or unfortune of his
Prince whom he serves, and the King and his Vicegerent have between themselves
the fortune, and the unfortune of those persons, whom actively they employ to
manage their affairs, and execute their commands, wherefore the proper fortune,
or infortune of the Prince, in the common concourse of affairs depends upon
them employed therein: Therefore all these Considerations, (according to art)
are to be inspected, and rightly balanced in judgment, for advancing the more
certain prediction of the event, no otherwise than are mixed together the
influences of many Planets concurring to one, and the same effect: But if the
Geniture of subordinate persons, serving in any design cannot be known, then
let only be observed, what the Stars, (in reference to their Nativities) of
the Prince or chief Commander do presage, in that year by Directions, or
Revolutions, and also by the Transits that Day, and the Hour of a fit Election,
if nothing more can with convenience be done, or known, its better to know so
far, then to be ignorant of all: This knowledge as it tends to the creating
confidence, and boldness in the hearts and spirits of the Actors, so it
profits much more, than injoyning and prescribing cautions from more ignote
causes, and grounds.

The same is Applicable to the chief General of any Army, and to all his
inferior Officers; as also to all which serve and submit themselves to the will
of another, or commit their own affairs to the hands of another; for in all
matters of great and considerable moment, its better for a man to know the
Heavens favor his designs, than, not to know it, or to know the contrary, it
will increase Valor and Courage; for suppose two Generals, or Princes engaged
in Battle one against the other, now if either of these, knew that in the time
of Battle the Heavens would propitiously favor him, although he know nothing
to the contrary but that the influences may equally favor the Adversary, yet
he will fight more audaciously and boldly; but most safe it is to have the
knowledge of the enemies Nativity, and from a judicial inspection of both, he
might choose a time propitious to himself, and Adverse to his enemy; then might
that King whom the Caelestial influences most favor, certainly expect the
Victory; yet so understood, that he add his own endeavor, and Cooperate with
that fortunate Caelestial influence.

Farthermore we are to know, that amongst those acts which the Caelestial
bodies particularly signify to any one; to the effecting of which, a man may
be said to contribute nothing of his own, but is merely passive in the act, as
when a man unawares falls from a High and dangerous place, or falls among
Theives, or receives some benefit or Dignity from the King, of which he had no
thoughts, nor expectation; these things as to good and bad, are only brought to
pass to man, by the Malevolent, or benevolent Influence of his Stars.

Other Actions there are to which the Stars excite, stir up, and invite the
mind of man, but yet not produce a perfection of the thing, but require a
Cooperative power of the person to be joined therewiith, in reference to the
accomplishment and end, of which sort are controversies, Wars, Negotiations,
and all things in Nature that concern a man as to Action: for as the Heaven is
in it self, the most perfect Image of God, in suo agendi modo; as Philosophy
does abundantly Dilucidate, and as their Natural Influence is most like to the
Supernatural Influence of God which is called Grace: For as God by his Grace
and spirit exciteth the will to Act, not compelling it, nor subjecting it to
himself, or finishing the Action himself, but a free Cooperation of man is
required herunto, which God leaves to the free will of man: even so the Heavens
by a particular Influence, stirs up, and exciteth a man ad Agendum as to
Action, not forcing, or compelling him, nor perfecting the work of it self, but
the Cooperation of man's will, and power is requisite hereunto, which whilst
this Cooperation of man is congruent, and conformable to the Caelestial
Influence, the effect falls out either good, or bad, according to the quality
of the Influence, but if the Cooperation of man be contrary to the Caelestial
Influence, or work not therewith, no Influence toward him shall have its
effect, as by it self.

From hence is manifest the great Deception of them, who so far presume upon
Astrology, that they confidently believe, that faelicity and good success
promised to them by the Stars, must needs Crown all their undertakings, though
they do nothing at all, or Incongruently Act, supposing it enough, if the
Heavens signify good, and that the success must needs be prosperous; i^ it
fall out otherways, then they think Astrology to be false and unsufficient, or
themselves to be deceived by the Astrologer, when as the Astrologer by
predicting good success to the Native in his Actions and Liberal undertakings,
presupposes a Congruent compliance, and endeavor to the utmost, in the
Native, for the accomplishment of that end, who by Prudence may Avert and shun
that Evil premonitated by the Stars, as also by his Negligence, and Imprudence
may obstruct that good, and bereave himself, of that felicity promised him by
the Heavens, for the Astrologer is not held in every point to the Nicety of the
success of his Prediction, it suffices that he predict according to Art, and
the Active Influence of the Stars: for in truth the Stars by their Influences
incline men to this, or that, and to what they incline, may be truly predicted,
but then what depends on man's will, as to Liberal and free Actings (by reason
he may in some measure hinder, or farther their opperations being a free Agent
in Human things) can be predicted conjecturally, in reference to the future.

Seeing that Astrology conversant about these things, is at least to a Human
Genus, but only a conjectural Science, as also for the indifferency of free
will, to this, or that, or either, as also for the concourse, and concurrence
of other Causes oftime free, and tied to no necessity, which how they are
affected by the Caelestial Influences, is unknown, although the greatest part
of mankind, in their Actings follow their innate propensions, (which much
conduces to a right and safe Prediction) yet there are many, who out of
Prudence, Religion, Coaction, Captivity, or several other conditions elude the
Influence of the Stars, and of these more Caution is to be used in Predicting,
consideration being seriously had, as to their estate and condition: these
things I thought good, here to appose that it may appear how great care, and
Sagacity is requisite in an Astrologer in predicting future Events, seeing that
in Liberal Actions, by reason of man's free will, nothing can certainly,
infallibly, and definitively be resolved, but only conjecturally, yet
notwithstanding with the more certainty and probability as the ability of the
Astrologer is the greater and the Influence of the Heavens of more vallid
Signification.

But to return let all men avidus of Predictions be so far admonisht, as to
know that the Heavens do certainly presage the Events of things, and in this,
the Science of the Astrologer is certain, but the Event, and effect (as to man)
chiefly depends on man's Cooperation and Acting, either as to Good or Evil,
these things before propounded, being well and duly weighed, it will appear of
how great force and concernment to the right ordering and well constituting of
Human Affairs, the proper Election of fit and Congruent times are, and is not
in the least to be doubted, but very great Utility and profit frequently
accrues from thence to every deligent observator: for the farther Dilucidating
and clearing this Truth to the Reader, that nothing may be left that may
disrelish his Palate, its necessary to carry it through the mouths of its
greatest Enemies, and so clear it from their aspersion, for as a Learned Author
has, Insur rexerunt mihi plures fatui atque Idiote tunicati dicentes,
Electiones nihil valere attque penitus nihil esse, and this shall in the first
place engage us against Alexander de Angelis where as in this.

CHAP IV. We shall show how vain and frivolous his Arguments are against
Elections.
THis Alexander De Angelis in his 4th. Book and 15th. Chap. that he wrote
against Astrologers has many Fictions, vain, fond, and foolish Arguments
against Elections in which he much prides himself, but none of them are worth
any Answer, only two of them (conceiting them as maine Engines) he places
against this part and thinks thereby to b^tter down and overturn the
Universal Foundation of Astrology.

The first begins thus, Either (says he) in the business thou undertakest
(speaking to the Astrologer) thy Natal Stars (meaning the Radical Position of
the Heavens at thy Birth) promise thee happy success, and a desired end, or an
unhappy, and unfortunate end; either they promise good or bad, or else just
nothing; if in the first sense good, which Star shall undertake to bring about
prosperous success? if they signify evil Radically, then no Star at any time
can prosper thy designs, against this first and general Infortune: But if
neither of these, that thy Human affairs pertain not to thy Radical Horoscope,
then all thy genethiacal Discipline, and Doctrine of Nativities falls to the
ground, which deduseth all things from the Stars chiefly Predominate, and
ruling in the Conception and Birth.

The two last parts of this Argument granted, I begin and Answer to the first.

Here Alexander de Angelis, most evidently certifies his sottish Ignorance in
Astrology, for he knows not that the Ruling Stars in the Nativity, promise
not good felicity, or good success, in every time, but at certain Definitive
times, which time is measured by directions, and confirmed by Congruent
Revolutions; As in the Birth, the Heavenly Position being Congruent to the
Constitution of the Infant, miraculously educeth it from the Womb, upon this
Worldly Stage, where the Ruling Stars imprint their Jurisdiction thereon, and
subject it Influentially to themselves, and so the good signified in the
Nativity being maturated, by direction and Congruent Revolution, the Caelestial
figure being answerable. By the Position of the Heavens, and the proper apt
Transits of the Planets, traduceth, de potentia, in Actum, from a Potential
possibility into Act, which is the most true and genuine Foundation of
Elections.

And farther he knows not that in every Nativity both good and bad, and bad
as well as good are signified, (Nulla enim est omni ex part beata,
velinfausta) no Fortune but is Chequered, (as it were) with good and bad; Its
absurd to think that all mischeifs and evils should come together, or all good
together, or all good, and all evil together, or at one time, to the Native,
when could such a time be that a thing thus should hap? Or if at one time, what
should be the business of the remaining time of Life? or why should good rather
then evil, or evil rather then good at certain times happen? Therefore must
needs be granted, that good and evil have their Vicissitudes, and proper times,
as is proved by directions, from whence the falseness of his Assertion appears
who says what time soever, or under what Position soever you undertake your
business, you may bring bring it to a happy, and prosperous end.

The second is like unto this, where he says, Let us Elect a time for a long
Journey, by the Position of the Heavens, for any person, and so order all
things in Art that the Journey may be as succesful as can be desired nothing
desired more happy: shall this Constitution of Heaven endure the whole time of
a long Journey, or no? here it behooves the Heavens to stand still, whiles men
are moved; who possible (says he) can bear this madness? and shall not this
Position glide away time, where then shall be the safety of this so long
Journey, of Days, or Months? Or whether shall it be said a man is thus Planet
favored from the stars when he first takes Horse? and if so, shall the Stars
continue this Luckie safety, and sucess the whole time of the Journey? Do you
think so, does not he that takes a long Journey, every day ascend his Horse
Affresh? Why how comes it then that he is diarily affected with variety of
chances according to the various Domination of secondary Causes? What profits
then a Lucky, or an unlucky beginning of a Journey? Neither can Astrologers
make good to him that takes this Journey, when the Stars shall make good his
way, nor clear the way from Theives, nor by dispersing the Clouds temperate the
heat of the Sun, and give him a pleasant Air, nor support his Horse from
stumbling, and him from falling, nor the way by equalling the Hills and Vallys,
all which things the Heavens and the Stars must perform if they, ^ill perform
a Lucky Journey.

These things equally deserve Laughter and are rediculous with the former, and
altogether unbecoming a Learned man; as I shall make plainly appear, That
Alexander de Angelis knew not wherein the prosperity of a Journey does consist,
I demand of him whether the Journey that the Virgin Mary made to visit
Elizabeth, was prosperous and happy? And that was made over the Mountains of
Judea, Luke 1.
which were not Levelled nor made plain, as neither the Mountains Sepher,
Gadgad, Hoc and Abacim in which the Children of Israel pitched their Tents in
their Peregrination from Egypt to the Land of Promise, Numb. 33. Now I pray,
must all those Journeys made over Hills and Mountains be unlucky, and those
only Lucky and fortunate, that are Traveled in the Plains, which is the Ground
usually chosen for Battles, in which place (notwithstanding there be no
Mountains,) is not one side in the Battle worsted, and suffers misfortune? Why
does not this Antagonist as well urge, that the Stars ought to divide the
Rivers from the Sea, as they were divided in the Peregrination of the Children
of Israel? Now in these whimsies and the like sottish Querys, consists not the
good Fortune and success of a Journey, but in this that the person undertaking
a Journey, do it with health and prosperous success, without any preternatural
or extarordinary Obstacles, which he is not able to overcome, and without the
loss of Goods or damage by the way, or company, and that he come opportunly to
his desired place, this is the scope of Travel.

But again to that which our Antagonist Quesits whether that Elected
constitution of the Heavens, shall continue the whole time of a long Journey?
Which (says he) it cannot be unless the Heaven stand still; whilst men are
moved.

I Answer, The same absurdity may be demanded concerning the Figure of Heaven
under which any one is said to be happily Born, which truly continues not in
the World, by a quiescent stationary Constitution of the Heavens, so long as
the Native lives, but is infixed on the Native, by its first Impression, and
indures in the Heaven by its Determination; To that which Johannes de Angelis
Quesits, whether a man be Fortunated by a Lucky Influence the time he takes
Horse, and whether that Astreal Fortunate Influence, shall continue and
preserve him Fortunate all his Life long?

In Answer, Considering rationally the Subject matter of this Discourse, the
same absurdity is here as in the former; here De Angelis urges mere Nugacious
trifles, and foolish Suppositions, where as the truth is the contrary to his
Suggestion: for in the Sympathy of man the Caelestial Bodies powerfully
operating, the present Constitution of the Heavens, at the time of Birth, is
the only Rule of all the concernments of man during his Natural Life, for as
man generally at his production into the World is subjected to a certain
Determinate Influence of the Stars, for his whole Life, not that he puts
himself Diaryly under a New Subjection or changes, with the unutterrable
Mutations changes of the Heavens, as is apparent from experience in the Natural
Genius, Inclination, Wit and manner of Action, in every one; from hence it
comes to pass, that a man entering or beginning any Action, or business,
Congruent to the Radical Position of the Heavens at the Birth, and conformable
to the Radical direction, and Annual Revolution, by a Figure of Election, aptly
and properly made for the moment of time in which he begins his affairs
receives from the Heavens, an Actual particular Astreal Influence, to the
perfecting and finishing this work begun, in like manner as the Astreal Influx
signates, Potentially in the Radix, which powerful Influence by consequence,
continues in effect so long time, as is requisite to the perfecting and
finishing this Enterprise so begun, not changing every day, for so there would
be no Caelestial power to finish and perfect a Business, but only to begin if
so be, every day, and hour, the various Influences should be variously operated
upon the Action, or business begun certainly, because the Caelestial Radij, as
well by the constant motion of the Sphere, as the proper motion of the Planets,
is so variable, that nothing could be brought to any Fortunate effect, or at
leastwise make discongruous and disorderly progression; so also in all things
the Radical Figure in the Nativity should be false, as also in long Journeys
Fortunated, by a good Election, which shall after appear to be most false, the
same validity in other Arguments.

But one Objection remains, that carrys more seeming force, and validity as
thus, be Heavens not only presignify future Accidents to each Person Born, but
also the particular time of the Accidents, by their Revolutions, and
directions, which is a truth fully in Art evinced; Therefore the Heavenly
Influences shall in those particular desired times, effect and accomplish what
they have Signified, or not accomplish it, if so, then whatsoever is said of
Election of Days or Hours is superfluous, vain and of no effect.

But to this I Answer, the Decrees of Heaven are not of Fatal necessity,
especially in free Actions, but in their effects depend upon the Cooperation of
man's will which they incline, and excite in apt and certain time but not
Determine and Limit, for this time has a cerraine Latitude, in the Compass of
which a man may Determine and resolve of himself, ad agendum, as to Action. Now
seeing that during this succession of time, the places of the Planets have
their vicisitudes and are continually changing, and the Face of Heaven admits
of much variation every hour; It cannot be denied but that in the undertaking
every Action, as a long Journey, or the like, that shall always be the most
happy, and chiefly prosperous, which is accomodated and favored by the
Heavens, and to which the Astreal Influence, does most conveniently concur, and
this only is accomplished by Elections: therefore Elections are greatly
profitable, nay rather necessary to the obtaining the more happy, and desired
event, of every considerable Action.

Many other frivilous Objections urged by the Ignorant Enemies of Art I might
here trouble the Reader with, but being so weak not worth the Answering, I
shall forbear to spend Paper and pains, on so useless a matter, altogether
disliking Fictitious Tautalogies.

CHAP. VI. Treating upon certain General Rules necessaryly relating to
Elections, showing in the General how Elections of apt time are to be made for
Things.
THose Things being premised that we hitherto Discourst of, its covenient that
we subjoyn certain General Rules necessary to be understood, for the apt
forming of Elections, wherein is showed how in the General a fit and Fortunate
Election of time, for every occasion is to be made, these following Rules we
have selegated, and chosen out of various Authors, especially the Arabians,
which we have sound mixed with many vain and frivolus Positions, and here render
them in order for the greater facillity of Learning, and working, principally
applying those which are valid to our purpose, and neglecting those pertinent.

But here we are to take Notice, that these Rules are not simply, and
absolutely sufficient to ground Elections upon, as the Arabians, and those that
closely follow them affirm, but always we are to have an eye, with due regard
to the Nativity of the Person, and considering those things which depend upon
that, with the time of Election; as also respect is to be had to the Radical
Directions the Revolutions of the and and their directions, as so the diary
Transits of the Planets.

Let therefore this be the first Observation.
That every able and sufficient Election be made by inspecting the Genesis, or
Nativity,

Secondly, Seriously it is to be considered to what House of the figure the
thing belongs, for which you would make an Election (which you may find in the
Introductive, part) if it be Dignity or Honor it belongs to the 10th. House,
if a Wife to the 7th. if a long Journey to the 9th. if a short Journey to the
3d. etc. And if an Election of time were made for the obtaining of Dignity and
Preferment, Schonerus and others make choice of that time when the Progressions
of the Horoscope, Medium Coeli, and the and Radically shall be in the 10th.
House of the Radix, but this observation of Profections and Progression we
find invalid; therefore choose that time in which the Directions of the
Horoscope, Med Coeli, and, and all the Lords in the Revolutions of the and
shall come to the 10th. of the Radix, or his Fortunate Aspect, or to a
Benevolent Planet therein, or to the Lord of the 10th. House, or to the place,
or good Aspects of the and in the Radix, or the Lords thereof, or to the happy
and Fortunate Rays of any of these, and what day these shall happen, account
it the more happy: then choose an apt and fit hour to Act in, in that day, that
is Erect your Figure, take the Position of the Heavens, Congruent to the scope
and purport of your business: the same reason, and operation is in the
undertaking a Journey, Contracting Matrimony or the like.

Thirdly, in the Figure of Election, respect is chiefly to be had, to the
Horoscope, the Significator of the Person for whom the Election is made, of the
Mid Heaven likewise which has the Signification of the Actions and
undertakings of the Person, as also to that House of the Figure, to which the
matter belongs, for which the Election is made, to the Moon likewise who
claims rightly, much in our consideration in Every Election, that she be well
posited, well affected, and Aspected from and by the other Planets, and not
afflicted, for special care is to be had least the Radical places beforesaid,
viz. The Horoscope, Medium Coeli, and the Moon should be evil affected, or the
same should be the Cusps of evil Houses Radically, but the Cusps of apt, good
and Congruent Houses.

Fourthly, 10th. of the Nativity, or present Revolution culminate in the Figure
of Election or that Sign in which the Lord of the 10th. was in in either of
them, the Election is much the better, and the more efficacious, and so of all
others but chiefly you shall take care that no Planet, Evil by Nature or by
Radical Position, and contrary in nature to the scope of your Election, be in
the House of Election (i.e.) the House fignifying your business, but carefully
endeavor that a Benevolent Planet be admitted or posited therein, or that the
Lord of that House Fortunately, by Dominion or Aspect be united, or joined with
the Horoscope or the Medium Coeli or their, or either of their Lords or
Governing Planets.

Fifthly, in a man's own proper business, that is, 11th. or 5th. Houses in his
Radical Geniture, the Horoscope of his Election, but Scover makes the Question
why in all common Actions, in whose performance there is required the help of
friends, the Radical Cusp of the 11th. House should be the Horoscope of the
Election, rather then the Horoscope of the Radix? Because if the Horoscope of
the Radx should always be put for the Horoscope of the Election, it would
foolow that the Horoscope of every Election, should be the same as in the
Nativity, and none other, because all Actions performed are either proper or
common, but this is not in Art required: and furthermore because the Ascendant
of the Election always has the Signification of the person for whom the
Election is made, we conceive it requisite that at least the Horoscope be
Radiated with the Lord of that House in the Geniture, to the which pertains the
thing for which the Election is made, or with the Planet existing in that
House, thus for particular and proper operations; so in the like manner the
Horoscope is strengthened by the Radical Lord of the 11th. House or the Planet
therein existing, if your business requires the help of friends, or your
Election be for the obtaining or Conciliating of Friendship, the same reason
and proceed is in all other opperations.

Sixly, in choosing the Horoscope of your Figure of Election, consideration is
to be had to the Nature of the thing for which it is made, that the Horoscope
may properly, and conveniently thereunto agree, therefore for a business in the
which you deserve quick dispatch as in a Journey or they like, choose to ascend
to a moveable Sign, and not a fixed Sign, but for a business in the which you
desire firmity, and duration, as Marriage, the building of an House, City,
Church or the like, take you here a fixed Sign, and avoid a moveable Sign, and
take heed that the Lord of the Ascendant be not slow in motion, Retrograde, or
afflicted by the Malevolents, or any wise applying to them.

Sevethly. In the day time cause to ascend a Diurnal Sign, in the Night a
Nocturnal, and let the Sun be by day in a Diurnal Sign, and the by Night in a
Nocturnal Sign, and let the Lord of the Ascendant be rightly posited, Aspecting
the or, and it shall much meliorate the Election, and render it more
efficatious, if the Diurnal Planets shall be above the Earth in the day in
Masculine Signs, and Oriental of the, and Nocturnal Planets above the Earth in
the Night in Feminine Signs, and occidental from the.

Eighthly, If the Lord of the Ascendant of the Election, shall be the Lord of
the Horoscope in the Radical Geniture, and shall be Benevolent in Nature, and
every way in both Fortunate, it shall render the Election most happy.

Ninthly, If you are to desire any thing by Petition from the King, Queen,
Prince, or other Great Person, Great in Birth or Dignity, or to treat about any
businesses, with such Eminent Persons, Coapt the Horoscope and Lord thereof,
with the Lord of the Medium Coeli of the Radix, and present Revolution, and the
Planets proper to your business, as the for the King, the for the Queen, for
Chancellor President, or Bishop, for the General, and Chief Commanders of an
Army, or Eminent in Millitary Discipline; and so in like manner of all other
Significations, and if this proper and Significant Planet shall be Lord of the
Med. Coeli, it is the more Significant, and efficatious, but take heed that in
the Radix or Revolution, that Radically or Revolutionally it be not afflicted,
or evilly Significant; the like reason is of all things and Persons relating to
all other Houses, as the 3.4.5.7 9. etc.

Tenthly, All the Ancient Astrologers grant so great efficacy to the in
Elections, that if not the chiefest, yet the second place of power at the
least, they ascribe to her, notwithstanding I cannot see they have any reason
of such Determination in the Radical Figure, yet this Judgment seems to me in
Election of time very necessary, for although the Moon in the Geniture be the
Significat^ix of Death, in the Elections she may be taken for the Significa^^ix
of Life either ways (...) ^^^tion, neither is this only observable in the Moon,
but in every other Planet, of the Moon the Ancients deliver these following
considerations.

11th. The Native is admonished to begin no business anew, when the Moon shall
be in the Radical place of or, or in any Malignant Aspect with either of them,
or in any Sign, which was evil affected in the Nativity, or in the 6, 8th. or
12th. House of the Radix, and in like manner in a figure of Election see the be
not afflicted, and unfortunate by or by body or Aspect neither in the 6.8. or
12 houses nor yet in the first House, as the most part would have it, for they
say the is Injurious to the Horoscope by reason of her frigidity, which reason
I take for vain and frivolous, unless in refference to Physic, and
Agriculture, which may sometimes in these be verified.

12. In Elections these Applications are to be abhorred (viz.) The Moon
applying to from the House of, to, from the Houses of, and to the from the
Houses of, be very careful to shun all these in your Elections. 13. Moon, and
conjoynd, incrensing in number and light, are good as to all Significations,
but diminished, or decreasing, evil in all things the direct contrary is to be
understood when and shall be so conjoined. 14. Have dilligent respect to the
place of the Moon in your Figure of Election, if she shall be in or of any
Planet Radically, it shall be good, safe and fortunate to have to do with those
Persons which that Planet by Nature, or Radical Determination shall Signify,
but if the Aspect be or, understand the contrary, as for Example, if the shall
be in Radically to (or to the Radical place of) which shall have Dominion in,
or be Lord of the 7th. House well affected, this shall signify victory and
conquest in War, Controversies and Law Suits, the favor and respect of the
Soldiers, Horse and Foot, and the chief Commanders in the Army, as also of the
Judges Advocates, and principal Lawyers, in a Law Suit and Controversy, but if
it be by or, judge the contrary: the same reason and method observed in all
other things. 15. That the Moon be placed in the House Signifying the thing for
which the Election is made, as for Example, that the be posited in the 9th. if
the Election be for Travel, so that the place be Fortunate Radically, and
having also the Signification of the same, the shall have the Signification of
the same thing, and moreover if the Aspect the Horoscope Fortunately, or have
chief Dominion therein, nothing more happy can be desired. 16. Beware that the
Moon be not joined to a Retrogade Planet, or apply to him, for this destroys
the success of your undertakings. 17. If you cannot posibly Fortunate the Moon
and the Horoscope, together, by day rather Fortunate the Horoscope, by night
the and if the shall be by day under, and by night above the Earth, it ads to
the Fortification of the Horoscope. 18. Consideration is to be had of the and
of the Luminarys, preceding the Election, that the places wherein they make
these Aspects, be Fortunate in the Figure of Election, and Congruent to the
matter in hand. 19. Cave, bewar of beginning any thing in that moment of time
when the Moon seperates from the or with the, and applies to an Infortune
especially if that Planet have of evil and Unfortunate Signification in the
Nativity for that time is exceeding evil, and unlucky, and the Signification is
the worse if the Application be by or. Twenty, From the good or evil state of
the place and Position of the or of the Lumanarys preceding the Election, and
from the Benevolent, or Malevolent Planet to whom the immediately applys, may
be conjectured the Event of the thing for which the Election is made, as thus,
if the state of the place shall be good, and the Planet Benevolent, the
business shall happily and prosperiously succeed from the beginning to the end,
but if the position of the place be evil, and the Planet unfortunate, the
business from the beginning to the end, shall unfortunately proceed, or never
be accomplished: if the state of the place shall be good, and the Planet Evil,
the thing shall begin well, but end ill; if lastly the state of the place shall
be evil, and the Planet good, the business shall begin unluckily, and end
happily. 21. Sometimes time, (in reference to sudden business) may be so
urgent, that we may not delay till a convenient time to aptate and fortify all
the proper significators: But then if no more can be done, be sure to Aptate
the Horoscope, and take care that a fortune be in an angle, beholding the Lord
of the Ascendant with a benevolent aspect. 22. In every Election of time which
requires speed and have, if you cannot Fortunate the, put or in the Horoscope,
or Med. Coeli, and the in a Cadent House, but bewar least an Infortune Aspect
the Horoscope, especially with a Malignant Ray; or the Planet which Naturally,
or by Radical Determination signifies the thing for which the Election is made,
or their Lords, or the Lord of the House, to which the matter of your Election
appertains. 23. In case of urgent necessity, when delay cannot be had, and
time cannot be staid for, wherein you might fitly and Congruently aptate all
proper Significators, then aply your self to the Ascendant, and Medium Coeli
that they may be well, and auspiciously aptated, and let the fortunes be in
Angles, happily Aspecting the Horoscope or Medium Coeli, or their Lords; but by
the way note, that in Elections it very seldom so falls out, that you posibly
can, fitly aptate all the proper Significators, as you would or should;
Therefore always be prudently attentive to observe, what may best and most
Congruently be done in reference to your intended scope, and that do, and what
remains, let thy Prudence supply, always being mindful of man's endeavor and
prudent Cooperation with the Stars, which by how mdch the more, Dull, Slothful,
Lazy, and imprudent, his Endeavors is, by so much the less is good success to
be hoped from the Stars; and by how much the more Dilligent, Resolute, Strong,
and Sagatious man's will is, by so much the more, is good success to be hoped
and expected. 24. In every Election take heed least the Malevolents be Angular,
and chiefly in the Horoscope or Medium Coeli unless by Caelestial Position, and
Determination they have been Benevolent in the Radix; then make use of them to
the utmost in good, it is specialy worth noting, and our Consideration, that
the Malevolent Planets, in things of their own Signification perform the
greatest good, as Mars relating to War, Victory, Hunting, and Law
Controversies, and the like, and Saturn, as to the rasing of Structures, and
Building, Husbandry, and the like; and chiefly, and especially if the Radical
Determination, do Significantly intend these things. 25. The Consideration of
the fixed Stars in Elections, are not to be ommitted, especially the most
eminent, for being in Angles, and with the Significators, are very Potent, and
produce remarkable effects, principally, if in the Radix they intend that thing
for which the Question is made.
Thus for the present these in the General shall suffice, but if please God to
prolong life much more as to the Practique part Astrologically shall be
handled, but let us seriously from hence note so much, that the prudent, wise,
and skilful Election of time, is not the work of every one professing
Astrology, but of the most Learned Prudent, and most Wise, who not only ought
to attend the state and disposition of the Heavens, but also the disposition of
Inferior Causes, (id est) that their may be a right preparative disposition of
all things, to the time Elected, and this is very easy to be done in things
which are in our own power, as in the beginning of a Journey or the like, but
in those things not in our own proper power, as in speaking to the King, or the
like, at a certain day and hour appointedly Elected, this would be very
difficult in most times, and scarce ever to be accomplished, unless by some
dear and eminent friends, by whose means access may be had, at the hour and
time Elected, therefore these Causes are first to be disposed to the hour
Elected, in like manner we are to proceed in other things.

Thus from these before rehearsed Aphorisms Universally intending Elections, is
sufficiently cleared, how in the General, every Election is to be made, but for
every particular thing, as it relates, and appertains to any of the twelve
Houses of Heaven, Signified in the Caelestial Figure and Position, as these are
peculiarly particular in each respect, so there are certain peculiar and
convenient Aphorisms proper to each particular; of which sort (after the
particular method of the twelve Houses) are these which in proper order, and
method follow.

Its very necessary to premise the signification of each of the 12 houses, that
thereby we may know how rightly to apply every Action, and understand the
proper Significators.

The first house has signification of the Life of Man, Health and Sickness, of
his Stature, Color, Complexion, Form and Shape, and all things that concern
the Body and Mind of Man.

Of the particular Elections relating to the first House, and general and
particular Aphorisms requisite therennto.
1. ATtempt not (in your choice) Impossibilities, but so far proceed as the
Discipline of Science and Natural Reason shall persuade. 2. Elections (says
Ptolomy) most profit, when they most correspond, and are congruent to the
Nativity. 3. The Nativity being known, begin your operations in that hour, that
sign ascends, that Ascended in the Nativity, and see that the four Angles be
free from the Affliction of the Malevolents, unless they were Lords of the
Ascendant, or significant places at birth. This Rule has truth in it, when as
in casual acts you would in a common ordinary way fortunate your design in
reference to your self, but if in your more common actings with others, you
would be fortunate, begin your work in that hour in which the sign of the
11th. or 5th. Houses in your Nativity Ascend; and that the Luminaries be in
Angles, or succedant houses, is always good. 4. Begin your work when the Lord
of the Ascendant in the Nativity, shall be in a fortunate place in the present
figure of Heaven, be he good, or be he an evil Planet, for the evil Planets,
will work good to their proper Natives, according to their Radical
Significations. 5. It is good, an evil Planet be not posited in any the Angles
of your figure, unless he the Lord of the Radical Ascendant, or signify the
thing you desire to begin. 6. The Nativity being not known, Virgo and Pises,
are generally thought the best Ascendants, so that the Luminaries be in Angles
or succedants. 7. In every operation see that the Lord of the Ascendant be
Angular, or at leastwise in a succedent House. 8. In the time of a conjunction,
the Luminaryes, with a fortune in the Ascendant, very good for the Inception of
any particular business. 9. Not good to design a day, or hour to any one to
perfect his designs in, unless first the intention of the Querent concerning
the thing he quesites, be resolvedly free. 10. In every Election erect your
Figure according to the proper Latitude of the place, where the question is
made, for from the diversification of Climates follows a diversification of
Ascendants, and in like manner different Aspects; and so by consequence
different directions; for the alteration of Latitudes alters the circles, and
circular motion, which heedfully observe. 11. If you are necessitated to begin
a work that you cannot defer, cause that the Ascendant and Lord thereof be free
from Affliction, and a Fortune in an Angle, especially the first or 10th. 12.
In the undertaking of great Affairs, and the beginning of weighty Acttions,
cause that the Luminaries be in the terms of the fortunes, Aspecting
themselves, and that the Lords of those terms, have the signification of the
work in Action. 13. Make no address to King or Princes, to Petition or obtain
any suite of them, the Moon existing in Aquary or Pisces. 14. In every Election
Aptate Sol, and the Planet significator of the thing quesited, the part of
Fortune also and his Lord, the fourth House and the Planets in whose houses
these significators are found. 15. Address your self to Princes for Favors
when the head of the Dragon is in the tenth with, the also applying thereto, or
separate from and applying to the Lord of the Ascendant, or the same to the
Moon, the Scots (its supposed) did excel in this Policy in King James his time.
16. In Election of times for Superior Officers, the Signs of the Superior
Planets, and of the Sun are commended to Ascend, In Elections for popular
Inferiors, the Signs of the Inferior Planets and the Moon. 17. The Aspects of
the to, are not commended although from the Houses of, nor to from the Houses
of, for here is Apertio portarum their Houses are opposite. 18. A chief
Observation it is in every Election for good, that the be Fortunate and in a
good place without the unhappy Aspects of unfortunate Stars. 19. More certain
shall you make a sure and Fortunate Election for him whose Nativity you know,
then if you be thereof Ignorant. 20. In Elections for men, Coaptate Masculine
Signs, for women Feminine Signs, but so as they be without the Aspects of
Malevolent Stars, and in like manner a Planet of either Gender, suitable to the
Nature of either Person, and Action. 21. Every Sign according to the diversity
of the Region may have various Signification, from what it has in another
Region. 22. The Debillitys of the Fortunate Planets, are of greater prejudice,
then of the Malevolents. 23. The Caelestiall bodies, opperate according to their
magnitudes their clarity, and Natures. 24. In every Election, choose your
Significators Congruent in Nature to the thing required. 25. You may not
Debillitate the Significators of the Nativity, especially If they were strong
in the Radix. 26. In Election, if you cannot aptate and fortify what you would
do what you can, be sure not to neglect the Planets Significators of your
business. 27. The Eminent fixed Stars in the first and 10th. Houses, are not to
be omitted, which should rightly be (if posible) of the Nature of the thing
intended. 28. Its very requisite the Lord of the Nativity be placed in the most
Eminent Significant place of Heaven, as also the Lord of the current Revolution
be Fortunated, and the Planets that receive them, with the Lord of the hour,
and part of Fortune, and if posible, place the Radical Ascendant in the first,
tenth, or eleventh Houses, and all free from the Infortunes and their Aspects.
29. The time of effecting your desired ends, may be known from the Significator
thereof, and the application he has to other Planets, or from the to the
degrees of a Fortunate Significant star, the distance of Degrees, (according to
the Nature of the thing and Sign) shall signify Days, Hours, Months, or
Years, the same does the Moon show when she applys to the House Signifying the
thing sought, all which according to the Nature of the places, and Signs are
to be weighed. 30. Put a Child to Nurse, the joined to, or Aspecting, from
Taurus or, and if be descending in her Eccentrique or Epicicle it is the
better. 31. Weane a Child and take it from the Nurse the receding from the 90.
degrees at least, to 167. degrees, the may not be in any of the Houses of, for
then the Mother will not part with it through indulgency, but if in the Child
will willingly forsake the Breast, and farther observv that if the and the Lord
of the Ascendant be in Earthly Signs, at the time of its weaning as, or, the
Child shall chiefly love Sallets, Roots, and such things as grow on the Earth,
if in it shall chiefly affect the eating of flesh, if in or it will ever after
delight in eating fish, but if in, it chiefly loves Tame Domestic Fowls as
Geese, Ducks, Capons and the like, Quere, Whether many of our Churchwardens
were not weaned under this Po^^Sion? if in or Scorpio, they indifferently love
every thing that is good; if in they much affect Wild Foul, and if this were
duly observed we might discern some reason why one loves one thing and hates
another, etc. but no more of this till a farther opportunity. 32. In cutting
nails from hands or feet, observe the position of the, though this with many
(through their Ignorance) be a subject of laughter, yet the reason why the
Nails grow thick, crooked, deformed, and suffer many distasteful accidents; is
from hence, of which rationally much might be said, the neatness and deformity
of the nails are of no small consideration, to prevent deformity let not the
be in nor Aries, nor afflicted with the or of or, these are the most
considerable afflictions. 33. If you desire secresy in Counsel, or to do that
which should not be discovered, act when the is combust or under the beams,
rather applying than separating 34. When the significator of a thing in
reference to time, shall be between the ascendant and the 10th. house; it shall
signify hours, or days, answering the degrees: if between the 11th. and 7th.
weeks or months, if between the 7th. and the 4th. it signifies years. 35. These
are chiefly in most Elections considerable to be aptated, viz. the Ascendant
the Luminaries, part of Fortune, the sign of the preceding conjunction, the
Lords thereof, the Lord of the hour, as also the Lord of the thing quesited and
his dispositor. 36. Always take heed to the Lord of the thing quesited, consider
the sign in which he is, if cadent, retrogade or in evil position to the sur.
37. In putting on new garments avoid the her being in, (says Ptolomy) but I
judge the other fixed signs are likewise noxious, as and, for then your
clothes will last long, or not wear out, the reason is sickness or death will
occasion it, see likewise the be not in or with the, nor impedited from the
malevolents. 38. Begin not any building whiles the Moon is meridional
descending in or, for such a Fabric shall quickly come to ruin. 39. In
building of Cities (says Ptolomey) aptate the fixed stars, and see that the
Lords of the Ascendant, 10th. 6th. and 4th. be in good places, and free from
the aspects of the infortunes. 40. Every inception, i. e. any work or business
begun when a Retrogade Planet is joined to the, shall more quickly be ruined,
and come to a worse end, than from any other affliction; this is worse then any
other impediment. 41. The with or increasing in light and Number, good as to
all opperations; but if decreasing, the contrary: the same understand if she be
with and. 42. It predicts a false event of the thing to be done if ascend, the
Angles oblike, or in them. 43. As to good or evil, the thing shall be durable
when the significator thereof shall be stationary, and angular, but of little
continuance, when he shall be Retrogade, and in cadents from the Angles. 44. It
is behoveful in the Election of time, to consider the seasons, for Summer
requires one consideration, and Winter another; for the mutation of times may
often impede our actions, as often it comes to pass through rains, and unseasonable
weather. 45. As I hinted before of the nails, so the hair though it be an
excrement of nature, yet it is an eminent ornament to the body, in man and
woman, and makes as well for Beauty as for health; and therefore necessarily
ought to be cherished, as the other parts of the body, which tends to external
ornament: Now that which tends most to the conservation of the hair consists in
the well ordring thereof, a principal part whereof consists in the orderly
cutting and triming, which cannot be done to the best advantage without a fit
election of time to that purpose, now I expect Momus and Zoilus will show their
teeth in censure of me, for treating of this so inferior a subject, but as it
is an natural ornament, necessarily tending to the Decoration of the body; and
as it is valued in the decent use thereof, I hope my excuse is pleaded, and
these Rules will not be unwelcome to every rational ingenious mind, which
observe as follows. Let the be in in in or when you shave head or beard, and
in if you cut the hair of the head or beard with sissers but by no means shave
it with a Razor the in, or in the ascendant, the being thus posited, and
applying to, or, but in this has the best signification, because it tends most
to beauty and ornament, but if the apply to or it is of evil signification
which be careful to avoid, etc.
Thus much for the Signification of the first House.

Of the second House and its significations in reference to Elections.
FRom this house we are to understand concerning the estate or fortune of any
one, of his wealth or poverty, of all moveable Goods, money lent, of profit or
gain, loss or damage. In suits of Law, it signifies a man's friends and
assistance, in private Duels the querents second, in the body of man this house
represents the neck, and hinder part thereof toward the shoulders.

Of Elections concerning Riches the subject of the second House.
1. IN Lending and borrowing beware that be not unfortunate, and under the Suns
Rays, Combust, unless by reception. 2. In all pecuniary money matters, and in
acts of honesty and justice, intending gain and profit, aptate i. e. fortify
Jupiter, and the Lord of the second house, and their dispositors, that they be
all fortunately placed. 3. He which buyeth cattle or any commodity the passing
from the beginning of to the latter end of buys deer, and sels cheap, and he
that buys the passing from the beginning of to the end of buys cheap and
sells dear. 4. In negotiating and contracting bargains, coaptate, the Lord of
the second house, tenth, Ascendant and the. 5. When you desire gain and profit,
aptate the Planet which has the proper signification of the thing, and the
kind of gain you desire; as in Husbandry, sowing and planting, in pecuniary
matters In warlike affairs, in Honors, dignities and preferments the, in
ornaments and espousals, in all manner of writing and the like, in journeys and
popular affairs the, which are to be fortified and debilitated according to the
nature of your occasional expeditions. 6. Moreover the Planets are to be
aptated according to the names of the days, the Planetary hour, all which
things are seriously to be weighed, and considered. 7. If you would keep your
money or goods long from damage, fortify the first house and the Lord thereof,
the second house and his Lord, the and her dispositer, considering that be well
placed and the part of fortune, and beholding some of them with amiable Aspect,
remove from all fignification, and posite him in a cadent house, and cauda
draconis are evil, debilitate them as much as may be: If you would preserve
commestible goods posite the in the Ascendant, and in signs of that nature, as
the last part of and and let not the nor the Ascendant be in any of the
significations of.
In buying and selling, the Ascendant and his Lord, and the Planet to whom the
applies are significators of the buyer: The 7th. House the Lord thereof, and
the Planet from whom the seperates signify the Seller, the 10th. House and
Lord thereof signifies the Price; the 4th. House and Lord thereof signify the
thing bought and sold, the Moon likewise has Signification of the Price; Now
observe of which side the Significators are strongest, that party shall have
the better, either buyer or Seller: Farther observe if you would buy good
Bargains (as it is the desire of all men,) aptate the part of Fortune, and
posite the same in the House of, and a Fortune applying thereunto, so it will
be better for the Buyer then for the Seller, but if the Moon shall be in Signs
of right Ascentions as,,,,,, and increasing in Light and Number, and applying
to Fortunes, or in her Exaltation, here it shall be better for the Seller then
the Buyer: Its necessary that be Cadent form and the Moon, because in buying
and selling and debts, signifies timourousness, Discontents, contention and
Quarrels, the same Signification has Cauda Draconis; Therefore its necessary
that the Moon be not near the same, although it is less evil then: An Eminent
Author says, it shall be good for the Seller, when the is in her Exaltation or
triplicity, and Cadent from the Infortunes, and not beholding them, and removed
from the Aspects of the Fortunes likewise, that then the seller shall sell to
his own content: Futhermore the Moons Quarterly motion is considerable, for if
you would buy in a Market, at a good and just price do it in the first quarter
of the moon, the Moon joined to, or aspecting, and both free from affliction or
at least that be free from infortunes, though not conjoined to the Moon, and if
you buy for gain, and desire advantageous markets do it in the Quarter after
the full, the in Signs of oblique Ascentions and diminished in Light and
Number, and safe without afliction Aspecting, the buyer shall purchase good
pennyworths, from the first Quarter to the Full is best for the seller, from
the Full to the last quarter is best for the buyer, the in her last Quarter is
good for him that buys, any secret, or hidden Commoditys, such as he would not
have known, chiefly if the Moon be Aspected by a Fortune because this is of
great use to all men, therefore I have been the larger herein.

But farther,

9. Necessity oftimes compels poor Husbandmen oppressed with necessity, Selling
Grain.
to sell their Crops on the ground before Harvest, which that they may do it to
their Advantage, let them sell the Quarter before the Full Moon, the Moon then
increasing in Light and in Signs of oblique Asentions as,,,,,, and let the
Ascendant of time be some one of these Signs and a Masculine Planet in some of
these places, and the Lord of the Ascendant, let the Medium Coeli, and the Lord
thereof be free from affliction, and the Moon with, or aspecting him, and swift
of motion.

One Observation more on this Subject, for the good of the Seller, let sell
when the Moon is in,,, or free from impediments, and it is good that she
separate from one Fortune, by body or aspect, and apply to an infortune by
aspect not by body, this is very good for he that sells, he sells at a deer
rate.

10. Removeing from House to House.
Taking and Letting Houses is very frequent especially in Citys, therefore its
necessary to show what is requisie to be considered, in Taking or Letting a
House, and in removing from one House to another.

First when you are to Elect a time to this purpose, consider whether it be the
parties own House, or a hired House he removes too, if his own, at his entering
into it, let the Ascendant be a fixed Sign viz.,,,, and the Moon in a fixed
Sign, but if it be a hired House, let the Ascendant be a common Sign, and the
Moon likewise in a common Sign, which are,,,. to which end likewise you must
aptate the Ascendant and his Lord, the and the Lord of the Sign in which she
is, the second House, and his Lord, the 4th, and the Lord thereof, and the part
of fortune, likewise is to be aptated, the Ascendant and Lord thereof, the Moon
and her Dispositor are for the person Inhabiting: the second and his Lord and
part of Fortune, signify his goods and the conservation of his Riches, already
got, and this is very considerable, for there is little less Art in keeping an
Estate, then getting it, many Fortune has favored in obtaining an Estate, but
through inconsideration they have simply lost it, the fault of which may lie in
not observing these Rules: Now the second house is well Fortunated if you
posite love therein, Fortunatly aspected, but however Jupiter be Aspected, in
the hour of entrance, its good to place him in the second House. The 4th. House
is likewise to be aptated in reference to the end of the success of the whole
business; Haly his Opinion is (and on good grounds) that or are best to be on
the 4th. House, for these signify the House to be good, delightful, clean,
neat healthful and prosperous; free from Impediments, as venomous Creatures,
or noxtious unholsom Airs, or the like; be careful that be not in the 4th.
House, or that do not aspect the 4th. or be posited therein, and you avoid the
chief and greatest inconveniences. According to these Rules you are to proceed,
being careful that none of these places viz. The first, second, and 4th. Houses
(if posible) be afflicted with the presence or Rays of the Malevolents, but
Irradiated, and fortunated with the presence, or Rays of the Benevolent
Planets, If you cannot thus aptate all the Houses, be sure you fortunate the
first and second as before said, and you may expect a comfortable enjoyment.

Concerning Chemical Operations.
11. Of Chemistry.
MAny have formerly and do to this day study this Noble Science of Alchimy, and
Chemical operations though some do it out of avaritious and coveteous ends,
deceiving others, and in fine lose their labor, time and expenses. Neither
comes this to pass from one only error, but often times from many as sometimes
they are Ignorant of the right method conducing to the end of their work,
sometimes erring not knowing rightly to proportionate, the Materia, or bodies
with the Spirits, and sometimes, and that very often, they err, not knowing how
to choose a right, and proper time to begin the work; nor under a right
Ascendant not to posite the Moon, where she should be placed to bring to
perfection the work, and this is one of the greatest Errors that can befall the
Chemist, neither know they how to aptate the Planet proper to the work they
intend: Therefore if any one intending this operation, and adress himself to an
Artist for instruction, let him make choice of an hour for him to begin, in
which the Moon is in common Signs, free from all Impediments, in position,
Aspect, or what ever may render her unfortunate, and let the Ascendant be a
common Sign, and the Lord thereof aptated, and free from all Impediments, and
chiefly aptate and fortify the Planet signifying the Species you intend to
work, As if in Lead, aptate, if it be Tinn, or Aurichalcum aptate, If Copper,
Brass, Iron, Antimony, Arsnick Brimstone, aptate, if it be Gold, aptate the, If
Copper, white, Brass or the like aptate, if it be Electrum aptate if it be
Silver, aptate the; Thus fortify every proper Significator in the beginning of
the work according to the Species, and essence of every one, and success may be
expected.

Election of time for the obtaining of Money.
12. For the obtaining of Money.
HEre consider that the Ascendant and Lord thereof, are Significators of the
Debtor, that owes the Money, the 7th. House and his Lord are Significators of
him to whom the money is due, o that lends the money, and the signify the Debt,
now when there is concord and amity of Aspects between the Lord of the
Ascendant and 7th. House, in the Ascendant, or with the Lord thereof
fortunately aspected, the money comes with facillity, but if the shall be under
the Suns Rays, the Sun then shall signify the Substance, in place of the Moon,
if the Moon shall be in via combusta, or descending in the Meridian, or shall
be in the first degrees of,,,, or if any of those degrees shall be ascending,
they signify not good to the giver, or payer, but confer Utillity and profit on
the receiver, and some are of opinion that the hours of Saturn, and the Sun,
are unfortunate in these Actions.

Of Elections cocnerning the third House.
1. Which has Signification of Brethren, Brethren
Kindred, Alliance, and Concord, Amity, Love, Friendship, and discord amongst
them, for the concord and friendship of Brethren, aptate the third House, and
the Lord thereof, and see that the Lord of the third apply to the Ascendant, or
Lord thereof with or amicable Aspect either, or by reception, it is good that
the Lord of the Ascendant be in the 10th. or 11th. Houses, and that the Moon
aspect them: If the Election be made in reference to Elder Brethren, its good
to aptate, and that he behold the Ascendant, third, or Lords thereof with a
good Aspect, and with reception: In your business and affairs with middle
Brethren aptate in stead of, with Younger Brethren aptate instead of, If with
Sisters, aptate instead of the other as is aforesaid, in like manner you may
consider Amity, and Concord with Parents, using the 4th. House, as we here
discurse the third; In like manner for Children, by considering the 5th. House,
as here the third, for Friends, the 11th. House, ad so for any House taking the
Signification according to the Rules premised in the third.

2. To this third House we refer short Journeys Travel of one day or more or
less, not relating to War, and when you would Elect an hour to make such a
Journey, aptate the Ascendant and his Lord, the Moon, and the Lord of the Sign
she is in, and part of Fortune, and Lord thereof, the third House and his Lord,
and the Planet to whom the Moon is joined, in like manner the Lord of the hour
and House Signifying the business of the Travellor goes aabout, (if he Signify
the same to thee,) and the Lord of that House.

3. But if it so fall out you cannot aptate all you should, aptate what you
can, amongst which at least aptate the Moon and the Lord of the hour, but if
your Journey be such you cannot defer it, nor cannot dignify the Moon as you
should, at the least aptate the Lord of the hour, and cause that the Moon
separate from the Ascendant and Lord thereof, and this shall Fortunate your
Direction, although weakly; But these things will be more largely handled in
the Elections of the 9th. House, but summarily.

4. Take these Rules, In short Journeys aptate the Lord of the third House, in
long Journeys the Lord of the 9th. and their Lords do this in Islands, as well
as large Continents proportionably.

5. In Reconcilliation of Kindred viz. Brothers or Sisters, or the like, aptate
the Ascendant, the third House, the Moon, and their Lords, with the Moons
Dispositer, or the Lord of the third joined to the Lord of the Ascendant, and
the Lords of either joined or aspecting Fortunes, and the Moon likewise joined
or aspecting the like, and see the Moon be Cadent from the Ascendant and Lord
thereof.

6. and Signify the Elder Brother, or Kindred, the Middlemost, the Younger
Brothers, and the Moon the Sisters, and all Feminine Kindred.

Elections Relating too, and concerning the Significations of the Fourth House.
1. THe Elections of the 4th. House are conversant about the alteration of
Buildings, the beginning of Foundations, Citys Castles, Churches, Tents, and
Houses, the conveyance of Waters, in altering the course of Rivers, in digging
the Earth, in sinking Mines, and searching for Treasures, and all Ceremonys
relating thereunto, It instructs also concerning the making Mills, to sow, to
Plant Trees, to take ground to sow or grase, to take Houses, to expel Evil
Spirits out of houses possessed.

2. Chronos shall be chiefly aptated or fortified in all Rustical affairs and
vulgar business, as Tillage Cattle Ancient men, and Navigation the 4th. House,
the Lord thereof, and Dispositer is likewise to be fortunated; as having
principal signification of the end of Things, in like manner the Moon and her
Dispositer are to be fortified.

3. Note that the first beginning of a Building is not the Digging for the
Foundation, but the laying the first stone, for without digging it might have
been Erected.

4. In entering your own proper House, let the Ascendant be a fixed Sign, the
Moon in a fixed Sign, but if it be a hired house taken for Rent, choose the
Ascendant a Common Sign, and the Moon in a common Sign also, moreover aptate
the Ascendant the 4th. their Lords, and their Dispositers.

5. In the purchase of an Inhetitance, (to enjoy it peaceably, and for
continuance) aptate the ascendant and Lord thereof, the 4th. House also and
Lord thereof, and provide there be some Fortunate Star in some of the Angles
which if he have no dignitys there, at least see that one of the Luminarys
behold the Ascendant, or the 4th. with a Benevolent aspect, and let not the
Lords of the Angles be Retrogade, nor a Planet nor Sign of the fity tryplicity
in the 4th. (says Laurentius Boniventrius, Minoerenses) I know Venice (in her
construction) to have in the 9th. which in process of time indicates her Ruin
by fire, which God avert.

6. A Fortune in the ascendant shows the goodness of Wood and Trees, and
those things which Elevate themselves above the Earth, A Fortune in the seventh
shows the prosperity of the Tillers, and Occupiers of the Land, a Fortune in
the 4th. goodness of the Seed and of the Crop, Infortunes in any of these
places denote the contrary.

7. Jupiter and the Planet from whom the Moon is separate is given to the
Buyer, and the Planet to whom the Moon applys and joins her self shows the end
of the matter.

8. In Reconciliation of Father and Son, you are diligently to Coaptate the
first House, the 4th. and their Lords, and the Moon, and see they are in good
places, and in Amiable aspects of the Fortunes.

9. In the erecting, and building, of Towers, and Citys, coaptate the, the part
of Fortune their Lords and their Dispositors, and if posible posite some
Benevolent fixed Star of the first or second Magnitude (of the Nature of the
Benevolent, or of the nature of if he be well disposed) in the first or 10th.
Houses, and let the Ascendant be a fixed Sign, and mars Cadent from the
Significator of the Building, which if this cannot be, posite in Trine to Venus.

10 In more particular and private Buildings, those observations in the
Building of Citys, are herein laudable, but it will suffice if Fortunate Stars
be placed in the first or fourth, or otherwise in any of the Angles.

11. In conveying Rivers and Channels of Waters aptate the ascendant, the Moon,
their Lords, and Dispositers, let if posible be Oriental, and the Lord of the
first, and let them be in Angles in some of their Dignitys, free from
misfortunes, and Malignant aspects, and the Moon in the third 5th. 10th. or
11th. Houses, in an Earthly Sign, and there likewise, but not joined to the
Moon, aptate also, and beware of any Infortune in the 10th.

12. The Plantation of Trees requires that the Moon be in joyto, or in or, and
let be direct in some of his Dignitys in the first, second, 5th. or 11th. or
have some Dignitys in these Houses and aspecting him.

13. In sowing Seed, let the Ascendant be a moveable Sign, and the Moon be
disposed, as in the last foregoing Aphorism; Taurus rarifies the Seed
therefore let more be sown (the Moon being there) then in any other Sign.

14. In Building Ships, coaptate the Ascendant, the Moon and their Lords, and
let them be in the first, 11th. or 12th. House, let the Ascendant be a fixed
Sign, let the 4th. also and the Lord thereof be well fortified, and a watery
Sign on the 4th. or the Lord thereof in an Aquatique Sign joined too, or
aspecting the Fortunes, but suffer not the Lord of the 4th. or the Moon in any
aspect with.

15. In Erecting and Building of Water-mills observe the same Rules as in
Ships, but let the Ascendant be the last half of or, but for other Mills that
go not by Water, let the Ascendant be a fixed Sign.

16. The time is good to digg for hid Treasure, if the Moon be not Unfortunate
in Angles, and cause that she fortunately aspect the Significator of the thing
hidden, and that the Lord of the fourth behold the Ascendant.

17. When you begin to build a Windmill, posite an Ayery Sign in the
Ascendant, and the Moon in the like, and let her be in the first, 10th. or
11th. Houses, and not in or.

18. Elect not any day or hour to dig for Treasure unless you certainly know it
to be there.

In Building of Houses, posite not the Moon in the Meridian, descending in or,
because that building shall quickly be destroyed let the Ingenious observe this.

20. In the building of Churches observe, if it be ordinary, as a Parish Church
or the like, Fortunate the Ascendant or Lord thereof, in like manner the Moon
and he Dispositer, the 9th. House and Lord thereof; But if it be a Sumptuous
pompous Building, as a Cathedral or the like, consider these under the notion
of Temporal Buildings, and not spiritual, and Elect a time as you would for
Temporal stately edifices, here first aptate the Ascendant, and Lord thereof,
and the Planet who has his exaltation in the Ascendant, the Moon and her
Dispositer, and in like manner Fortunate the 10th. House, and also the 9th. and
if it be a House for study, aptate, that he be strong and Fortunate, and behold
the ascendant with a Trine, or Sextile aspect, if it be a house for pleasure,
as a Banqueting house or the like aptate Venus, that she be Fortunate, well
posited, and strong, and behold behold the Ascendant with an aspect of Amity,
etc. If it be a House for a Storehouse for Victuals, or any manner of provision
aptate, posite him strong, and fortunate, and that he behold the Ascendant with
a Laudable and friendly aspect, if it be a Prison you build, and would have it
safe and Fortunate to that purpose aptate, let him be strong and well placed,
and let him behold the Ascendant, with any aspect, except opposition.

CHAP. V. Treating of Elections of times, for those things which properly
concern the Signification of the 5th. House which are, to this effect.
FIrst, concerning Reconcilliation between Father and Son, Generation and
prolification, the putting Children to Nurse, weaning them and changing the
Nurses, repelling the milk and drying it up, the putting on of New Garments,
the giving and receiving Presents, the sending of Messengers, making of writing
Promises, and Bonds, of Feasting and sweet Odoriferous things, of quitting and
avoiding the dead Birth, in setting Children to Learn any Art or Science, in
storing a Dovehouse, and the time how to send out your Pigeons to alliciate,
and attract others, etc.

1. As the Father may discord with the Son, (as before is touched) so oftimes
it comes to pass that the son of his own Motion may discord with the Father,
from whence it may come to pass that the Father may design to be reconciled to
his Son, and may design an Artist to aptate, and Elect him a convenient time
to that purpose, for which aptate the Ascendant and Lord thereof, the Moon and
her Dispositer, aptate also the 5th. and his Lord, which has signification of
the Son, and cause that the Lord of the 5th. be joined to the ascendant, or
behold the same with an aspect of amity, and if it be by reception it is much
the better, moreover let the Lord of the first be in the Ascendant, or in the
10th. or 11th. Houses, and let the Moon aspect the Lord of the first and the
Lord of the 5th. or either of them, that the Reconcilliation, and Friendship
may be durable.

2. In reference to Generation, the Ancients have not blushed to handle largely
this Subject, as holding it very observable, for the procreation of Noble
spirits, and hopeful issue, which is no more (though to a more Nobler end) then
Prudent Country men at this day use in choice of times for the procreation of
Domestic Animals, and might reason in this Predominate sense, in Rational
Creatures, we might possible find such Heroic spirits and Famous Worthys for
Valor and Learning in the World, as past Ages have produced, whose worths
instead of Equalizing, we discomfortable mention in our storys, finding no
footsteps in these Ages (or very rare) of such productions, probably for want
of such rational modest observations, herein requisite to be observed: Our fore
Fathers, have so far insisted on this Subject, as to inform of Convenient times
for the procreation and production of all Qualifications in Nature, as to the
Conceivement of a Son or daughter, whether for Learning, if so, for what
Science, Art or Learning, so for Valor, for all particulers, Emulating
Eminency in all Qualifications; as also in the Constitution of the body, but
should I enlarge on this Subject, posible I might offend the quesy Stomachs of
some, and gain an immodest repute with the weak, and wilful to reason.

In the Conception of Sons aptate the 5th. House the Lord thereof, in Masculine
Signs, the Moon if posible in the Ascendant, or in a Masculine Sign, aptate
also the Luminary of the time, that it be in a Masculine Sign, or in a
Masculine Quarter of Heaven, which is from the 10th. to the first, its opposite
part, a Masculine hour herein is likewise observable, which are the odd hours,
but be sure the 5th. House and Lord thereof be free from affliction, and well
fortified.

For Daughters, what is said of Masculine, observe in the Feminine; observe
also that when the Planets are Oriental they are accounted Masculine, when
Occidental Feminine.

3. In putting your Children to learn any Art or Science, let the Ascendant be
or but Virgo is best, and let the Moon be separate from the Malevolents, and
joined or applying to with a good Aspect, let be Oriental and strong as also
his receiver, or Dispositer, and let the Moon be increasing in Light, and
Number, and be sure that be not Retrograde nor the Moon slow in motion.

4. If you would send a Messenger, ot Ambassador to any person; in this
consider chiefly the Moon above all other Significators, and cause that she be
joined to the Planet Signifing the person to whom the Messenger is sent, or at
leastwise that she behold the same with a Fortunate Aspect, a Trine or Sextil,
and if you may, cause that Planet to receive the Moon, or the Lord of the
Ascendant, as if you send to a King or Prince, let the Moon be joined to the or
the Lord of the 10th. House, and posite the or the Lord of the 10th. in the 10.
or 11th. or first houses, if this may not with convenience be performed, posite
them in the 9th. or 3d. and this will do indifferently well: In sending
messages, or Embassys to the King, be ware the be not in or, if you send to
other Noble persons, or Ecclesiastical persons, let the Moon behold with the
before mentioned Aspects, in an Angle, and a good place from the Ascendant, if
your message be to warlike persons, let the Moon in like manner behold, but let
there be no Conjunction angular, nor in any Angle, but in succedant houses, if
you send to Ancient men, Usurers, Husbandmen, or the like, let the Moon in the
beforesaid manner behold, and let be well posited in succedant houses, if you
send to the Feminine Sex, let the Moon be conjoynd with; if to Philosophers,
Scollers, Scribes, Merchants, and young persons from 14. years of Age to 20.
let the Moon be joined to, but take heed that be not impedited nor afflicted,
nor any other Planet to whom the Moon is joined.

5. Concerning Childrens Nursing, and weaning; and the buying and putting on
New Apparel, these do partly belong to this house, but they are breisly handled
in the Subject of the first House; therefore I shall only ad this, that in
putting on new Apparel, let not the Moon be in a fixed Sign, unless it be in
Warlike Garments, then a fixed Sign is best, in Aries let be excepted the 7.
Degrees, following the first 8. the 23. and 24. degrees of that Sign, its not
good the should possess them, in except the first 6 degrees, and the last 3; or
let the Moon be in the first half of Libra, or in the first 18 degrees of, or
the first 19 degrees of, or the first 20 degrees of, the first 20 degrees of
are tolerable, as being the House of and exaltation of the Moon; But all
Unanimously disapprove of: Haly says its best the Moon be in moveable Signs,
and indifferent in common Signs, but by no means that the Moon be in with the
or in thereof, nor the in the Ascendant, nor in opposition thereunto.

Of giving and Receiving Presents, Gifts, or Rewards.
6. IN this Subject are two Actions considerable, First the giving, Secondly
the receiving, for as men are generally affected to receive, so sometimes also
they are disposed to give, to be brief, would you Elect a fit time for any one,
to receive a reward or gift from another in, Aptate the first House and Lord
thereof, the Moon and her dispositer, also the second House and his Lord that
the gift may redound to the good, and Utillity of the receiver, the part of
Fortune, and his Lord is to be fortified for the amplification there of, in
like manner Jupiter is to be aptated, which is the Natural Significator of
Substance, by this means acquired, that the Utillity and benifit thereof, may
be conserved, and amplified, and (as it were) past into the Substance of the
Receiver, and become habitually his.

If you are to Elect a time for him that gives, to honor beautify, and
dignify his gift, aptate the 5th. House and Lord thereof, and Jupiter and let
Mars in either Receiving or Giving, be Cadent from the Ascendant and Lord
thereof, from the Moon and her dispositer, from the second from the part of
fortune, part of Substance, from the 5th. House and Lords thereof, and if
possible let the 5th. and first Houses be common Signs amongst which and are
best, next, and, most inferior, and take heed that behold not the Ascendant or
his Lord, the or the part of Substance, without recepcion, and let the Lord of
the Ascendant be elevated above the Lord of the 7th. House, which if all these
cannot be done, aptate the Moon the Lord of the second House, and Jupiter in
reception of gifts, in giving, aptate the Moon the Lord of the 5th. House, and
Jupiter, or part of Fortune.

Of Messengers.
7. IN sending Messengers on business, for the better success, let the Moon
apply to the Planet which is Significator of the person to whom you send, as
suppose the King, let the Moon then apply to the, if a Judge, Lawyer, Divine,
or Merchant, to, if to a General or great Commander, to, if to a Ledy of
quallity to, and so of others, take heed that the Moon nor that Planet be
Cadent from Angles, but free from the infortunes.

Of Writing.
8. When you would write with credit and success let the Moon be free from
Infortunes, applying to, and Mercury strong, not afflicted, nor retrograde, and
also see that the Ascendant and Lord there be free from infortunes, and the
Malevolent Rays thereof.

Of the right ordering of Diet in Feasts and at all times, for Mirth and Health.
9. THe Appetite as to Meat and Drink cannot conveniently escape our notice, or
seem impertinent to this work, therefore this Chapter shall signify how useful
these following considerations are, to Princes, persons of quallity, Rich men,
and all who live high, and do little, in their Feasts and daily Diet, as for
the inferior sort of persons whose daily Labor affords them only a mean
necessary subsistence, they stand not so much in need of these prescriptions.

Therefore let such who feed high, and feast often, In the first place, observe
the Course of the Moon, for if she be in applying to you may safely eat Beeff
and Veale, it shall not surfeit nor so soon offend Nature, so likewise when the
Moon is in appling to to it shall not prejudice to eat Fish, fresh and salt,
even as when the Moon is in or, Milk and whatsoever is made thereof shall not
hurt or offend the stomach, being eaten then: Note if the be in Virgo
unfortunately afflicted by its hurtful to eat any Sallet raw or otherwise, as
also boiled Cabbage and Colworts, but if the Moon shall apply to or the from
the 3d. its good to feed on various, and several Dishes, it may then be done
with less hurt, but if the Moon apply to have a care of eating meat long
powdered, and salt; when the Moon applys to, its good to eat fruits of various
kinds, the Moon in, or applying to Jupiter good to eat of Ox, Weather, and
Creatures libd by Art, edible, as also all manner of Goats flesh, but when the
Moon shall be in or Conjunction of, its not good to eat stale Flesh, neither
when the Moon is in, is it good to eat Wild beasts taken by hunting, also when
the Moon is in and in the Airy triplicity applying to it is evil to eat Wild
foul of a hot temperament, as also when the Moon shall be in applying to its
evil to eat any food of cold constitution, so when she applys to bad to eat any
manner of food of hot qualification.

10. This Section shall briefly show the most proper time for that operation in
the delivery of the mother from the fruit dead within her, or the after Birth,
when any poor soul falls into that sad condition, (as very often it comes to
pass) and without timely, and fortunate help it may be the death of the mother,
its a matter of pity, Conscience, and the greatest concernment, to consult all
lawful means conducing hereunto, amongst which this is not the least, therefore
chiefly make use of such a time for this operation, when the Moon is
diminishing in Light descending in Meridional Latitude or in Meridional
declination, and that the Moon be in the Ascendant, and the Lord of the
Ascendant in Aspect of or, and note that Feminine Signs are better then
Masculine, and Signs of right assention, better then oblique, more plainly if
it be to be done by Chyrurgical operation by medicine, by proper industry, or
by any other means, Let the Ascendant be a Feminine Sign, and of right
assentions, and let the Moon (if possible) be diminishing in Light, and 6
degrees or more beyond the Cusp of the 10th. House toward the Occident in the
descending part of Heaven, and let some Fortune behold the Moon with a or
aspect or a rather then not at all, if behold the Moon in any aspect with
reception it is good in this operation, and without reception it is no evil, so
that the Moon be in a Femines Sign, and the Ascendant a Feminine Sign of direct
Assentions, and chiefly take care that the Ascendant be not a Sign of oblique
Assentions nor the Lord of the Ascendant, nor the Moon in any of them.

11. For the sending out of Doves, Ducks, or any other foul in the nature of a
Decoy, to entice, and decoy others into their Snares, gins, and the like.

When you intend to send out fowls to this end, and to return orderly to their
Nests or abode, be sure the Moon apply not to any Planet which quickly comes to
combustion, and this shall signify they shall go forth, and timely return
safe, but beware the Moon apply not to, because he often suffers Combustions,
and Retrogradations, which will cause the foul to be in Danger of taking, and
impede their safe return, its a good observation to posite the Moon in a watery
Sign, and applying to, and in a Sign of right Assentions, but its evil if the
Moon apply to for usually they fly quite away, and return not, if the Moon
apply to, they lose their way, or fail for thirst, or some such inconvenience
betides them, many that have been herein expert, have observed, that if they
stay long they most usually return with their prey, when the comes to, or
applys to that place she possessed at their first going out, or that day she
applied to that Planet, she beheld when they went forth.

Sixth House.
HAving finished the most Material conclusions of the 5th. House, now in order
the Subject of the Sixth House offers it self to our consideration, and is
conversant about helping, and healing all infirmitys, by Chyrurgical, or
Medicinable means, as Clisters, Vomits, Purges, outward and Topical
applications, respecting restrictives and Aperitives, Gargarismes, and
Cataplasmes, to buy Captives, and hire Servants, to give Orders and Rules of
Command to Captives or Servants, to tame Wild Beasts, to break Horses, to buy
all manner of Beasts, Domestic, both great and small.

1. Note in the first place that the Antiens have assigned the three first
hours after Sun rise, or the first fourth part of the day to the Sanguine
constitution as then principally predominates: The next three hours to the
gubernation of Choler, the next fourth part of the day to Melancholy, and the
last three hours or fourth part of the day to the Phlegmatic constitution, the
same is to be considered of the Night, the Lunar month, and the Quarters of the
Year, beginning with the Spring.

Physicians assign the first six hours after midnight to the Sanguine
constitution, which is the reason, morning sleeps are more pleasing, sweet and
comfortable then others.

The next six hours before Noon Choler reigns, which vigourously acts the
body to motion.

The next six hours after noon Melancholy predominates, which appears by a
Segnitions, dull, stupefactive Humor dislocating the activity of the Spirits
with unaptness to motion.

The last six hours from Sun set to midnight the Phlegmatic humor
predominates, and bears sway, which aptly madifies the brain, which attracts up
Phlegmatic gross fumes which vapors seize the brain with a pleasing stupidity
provoking rest and sleep etc.

2. Touch not any member with Iron or Instrument, the Moon existing in the
Sign, governing that member, in like manner if the Lord of the Ascendant be
there. 3. Phlebetomy is best performed in the beginning of a month, and Cupping
glasses, and ventositys in the end. 4. Give no purging medicine, the Moon
fortified by, not that it is unfortunate, but that it too much fortifies Nature
against the medicine. 5. An apt time to prosecute a Fugitive is when the is
debillitated, and afflicted by the Lord of the first, for that imports his
Captivity. 6. In engaging against a general Distemper that invades the whole
body, let the Ascendant be or a Human Sign if a particular Disease afflicting
some particular part of the body, posite the Sign signifying that member in the
first, and the Lord thereof free from impediments not afflicted, and the Planet
Governing that part of the body free likewise, and then apply your remidy,
which when you do for the expulsion of any grief, let the moon be in the first
joined to a fortune, and the Ascendant or. none of the infortunes in Angles nor
the Moon besieged by, them nor otherways unfortunate, which if this cannot all
be, at least place the Moon in a good Aspect with the forunes, and in the Sign
governing that member you desire to cure if the cure can be without incission.
7. In those cases where any Instrument of Iron is useful, let the moon increase
in Light and Number, fortunately aspected from or, free from all impediments
of, and let the Lord of the first, in the first or the 10th. be joined to the
Lord of the 10th. House. 8. Phlebetomis forbids Mars his presence in the
Ascendant, and in the first, or the moon therein, but aptate the Ascendant, and
his Lord, and see that be not therein, the also free from affliction, and in
good aspect with, so that he be not in nor, nor septentironal Ascending in his
Ange, and let the Lord of the House of the Moon, behold him from good places.
9. Beware of the hour of the and, in bleeding as also that the latter part of
be not Ascending. 10. In the time of letting blood, put not in the Ascendant
the Sign of the 6.8. or 12. in the Nativity, nor the Sign in which an infortune
was in the Birth, neither let the moon be in them. 11. In Laxative medicines
aptate the Ascendant and his Lord, and posite the Moon in the last half of, or
beginning of, and the Lord of the House of the moon, and of the Ascendant, free
from affliction, provide also that the Ascendant be a Meridional Sign, and that
it be not a Ruminating Sign where the Moon is, or the Lord of the Ascendant.
12. In provoking of Vomit, let the Ascendant, the moon, and Lord thereof be in
Ruminating Signs, let not the Lord of the Ascendant be going to his exaltation,
thus you may safely administer your Physic. 13. Bathing requires the moon be
in Aries or, joined to, the, or Venus, or in a good aspect of them. 14. In
buying or hiring of Servants, posited the moon in, or in the second mediety of,
and let the Horoscope be a Human Sign and the Lord thereof in a Human Sign,
and beware you have not, or on the 6th. House, nor the moon nor the Lord of the
first, nor the Lord of the 6th. in any the foresaid Signs, for Aries indicates
a negligent, careless Servant,, a proud prodigal, self conceited fool, and
wastful, Seorpto, an angry peevish piece, and a liar, and Capricoru shows he
shall wast and consume his Masters goods. 15. In curing the Eyes, let the moon
be increasing in Light and Number, and free from the Aspects of the infortunes.
16. In buying of small Domestic Cattle, let the Ascendant, and moon be in a
Sign signifying that Animal you intend to bny, fortunate, and in reception with
the Planet Lord of that Sign. 17. In big Cattle it is good the moon be in, or
the second half of, in smaller Cattle let her if possible be in or or otherwise
in.
More particular Elections of Times for Physicians and Physic.
18. THat Physician who first visits his Patient in the hour of Saturn, his
Patient shall either be long sick, or long in curing, and will suffer much pain
and inconvenience in his cure, nor shall he be cured until both Physician and
Patient almost despair. 19. He that first enters upon a cure in the hour of
Mars, shall find his Patient disaffected to him, and partly disdain, or reject
his medicines, his person slighted, and his pains ill rewarded. 20. He that
first visits his Patient in the hour of Venus or Jupiter, shall have good words
of the sick, be well esteemed and paid for his pains, though he fail of the
cure, yet shall he receive no prejudice thereby, I mean in point of Estimation.
The verity of these few particulers will prompt the ingenious to farther
inquisition: As,

To take notice of the Crisis, according to which, diversity of distempers
appears; as also with Hippocrates to observe the Cosmical rising of many Stars
violently hot, of which nature are these, Procyon, Syrius, Pygasus, Equus,
Capella, Hercules Antares, Pallitium and others which are proper causes of
Epidemical Diseases.

Phlebetomy being of such consequence to the Body humane: It is of necessity
that there be a skilful, judicious and circumspect considerration had, as to
the causes and ends inducing thereunto: As whether it be proper for the Patient
to bleed, for the evacuating of some naughty superfluous pecant humor; for
otherwise blood letting is of dangerous consequence, and opens away to many
inconveniences and infirmities; And note generally, that it is not convenient
for a lean and weak man, and a very fat and gross man to be let blood; neither
for a Child under 14. years of age, nor an old man above fifty and six:
Moreover let not blood when the Moon is either in or Leo, for the one has
power of the Arms, the other of the Heart, to which some late writers (I know
not for what reason) have added the latter half of Libra, but the other Signs
are good for Phlebetomy, acording to this following method.

For the Complexions let blood the Phlegmatic the being in or For the
Complexions let blood the Melancholic the being in or For the Complexions let
blood the Choleric the being in or For the Complexions let blood the Sanguine
the being in or
For his Age, let blood in his Youth from the change to the first Quarter. For
his Age, let blood in his Middle Age, from the first Quarter to the Full. For
his Age, let blood in his Elder Age, from the full to the last Quarter. For his
Age, let blood in his Old Age, from the last Quarter to the change.
Times of the Year.
Spring good, Harvest indifferent.

Times of the day.
Morning after Sun rising, fasting, afternoon after perfect digestion, the Air
temperate, the wind not South.

Not good to let blood.
AT the change of the moon nor two days before nor after, or of forbids the
opening of a Veir, four hours before, and 10 hours after, of the moon with the
Dragons Head or Tail, and the or of the moon to or forbids to bleed a day
before or after. Combust not good.

Good to let blood.
THe moon in or or within the Rays of and, when the Sun shall be in or with or,
when and aspect each other with or or be in, so likewise when and shall radiate
themselves by or these Aspects of the moon to and are not hurtful.

Mercury being fortunate and not afflicted, his aspects are good; hurtful if
contrary.

The moon void of Course, forbids not the letting of blood.

Directions after bleeding.
SLeep not presently, stir not violently.

Use no venery, feed thou warily.

Notwithstanding the Phrensy, the Pestilence, the Squinancy, the Plurasy, the
Apoplexy, a continual Headache, growing Choler and Blood, a hot burning Fever,
or any other extreme pain, in this case a man may not tarry a chosen time, but
incontinently with all convenient speed have to seek and use his remedy, as if
a chosen time might be respected.

Rules forgiving Purges.
The in in or with Purge Melancholy Purge the Phlegm Purge Choler not Combust
With Electuaries. The in in or with Purge Melancholy Purge Phlegm Purge
Choler not combust
With Potions. The in in or with Purge Melancholy Purge Phlegm Purge Choler
not Combust
With pills The in or in or with Purge Melancholy Purge Phlegm Purge Choler not
Combust
With any kind of Medicine.

These are common Rules for Purging, but indeed I never could much approve of
the moon being in or especially when she is in or of.

Good to Prepare Humors The Moon in Gemini, Libra or Aquary Good to Vomit The
Moon in Aries, Taurus or Capri Good to Purge by neezing The Moon in Cancer,
Leo, or Virgo, Good to Take Gliyfters The Moon in Aries, Libre, or Scorpio,
Good to Take Gargarisms The Moon in Cancer or Aries, Good to Stop Rheums and
Flux The Moon in Taurus, Virgo or Capris. Good to Bath for Cold disases The
Moon in Aries, Leo, or Sagittarius, Good to Bath for Hot diseases The Moon in
Cancer, Scorpio, or Pisces
In Bathing this is the Rule, be sure the moon be in Signs contrary to the
nature of the Disease.

The Governing powers in our bodies are, 1 Natural, 2 Vital, 3 Animal.

The Natural comprehend.
The Attractive Faculties. The Retentive Faculties. The Digestive Faculties.
The Expulsive Faculties.
The Natural power is seated in the Liver, by which are gendred the Humors,
Blood, Choler, Melancholy and Phlegm is governed by and in the use of hot and
moist things

The Attractive power is Governed by the, strengthened by the moon passing
through and.

The Retentive faculty is cold and dry, Governed by, strengthened by the moon
passing through,, and, especially in the Sanguine.

The Digestive and Concoctive consists in heat and moisture governed by
assisted by the moon passing through and,

The Expulsive faculty being cold and moist, is adjuvated by the moon existing
in and especially in the Collerick.

2 The Vital power is governd by the having its proper seat in the heart; is
best cherished when the is in good aspects, or within the benevolent Rays of
and it is most cherished by things of hot and dry, and hot and moist
qualification.

3 The Animal faculty being seated in the brain, is divided into

The Intellective Powers. The Discursive Powers. The Sensitive Powers.
The Intellective and Discursive are governed by, the Sensitive by the moon,
and are all strengthened by the benevolent rays of and.

The passing through ruminating Signs as it is good (unless necessity compel)
to abstain from Physic; for by experience we find they excite vomiting, the
ascending in her Epicycle, the humors then arising, causes an aptitude to
vomit, the same if the Lord of the House of the moon or of the Ascendant be
above the Earth when you give Physic.

Of sweating; Natural sweat opens the Pores dissolves gross and thick humors,
cleanses the blood, comforts the spirits, helps cold, consumes raw humors,
qualifieth and quenches raging Fevers, helps numness and the Dropsy.

Artificial sweat cleanses Scabs and Itch, amends dullness in hearing, eases
the Stone, dissolves congealed and cold humors and melancholy blood.

The best Signs to sweat in are when the moon is in and, 2 or 3 days after the
Change, and at the full moon.

Note, Sweating is better in the Evening then morning, for when the Body has
nourishment within, the spirits shall not so easily be drawn forth to the
extreme parts.

Note farther that lean and dry, or feeble persons must sweat little, but fat
folks may sweat well.

The Eyes are best cured of a Pin, Web, Pearl or blow the moon being in,,,, or.

Thus he who ignorantly, or wilfully neglects the Magnetic cure of Diseases by
sympathy and transplantation; and these Astrological principles, my censure of
him is in the words of Hippocrates, Optimus medentium, cujnsmodi medicus est
qui ignorant Astronomiam and Astrologiam, Nemo debet se committere, manibus
ejus, quia non est perfectus medicus. No man ought to commit himself to such a
Physicians hands, because he is insufficient in Art, and not safe to be trusted.

Nam Rusticus ad haec non est Electus Non comunem tantum omnium Hominum Naturam
medico cognoscendam, sed unius cujusque propriam.

Which cannot be without Astrology.

Honicidas, medicos Astrologiae ignaros Avicen.

Elections having the Signification of, and appertaining to the 7th. House.
THis 7th. House has variety and multiplicity of Significations, therefore I
shall take liberty to insist more copiously herein, choosing rather, to serve
the common Utillity, then Brevity, under this head we absolve all particulars
concerning Matrimony, Quarrels, Lawsuits, and mutual contentions, waging War,
and making peace with Enemies, the ruin and destruction of Castles, Camps, and
Warlike places of defense, the making and procuring of Warlike Instruments, and
Engines, of Partnerships, and participations, and all things and actions between
two persons Inquisition concernig Theives, and Fugitives, to cause the Theife
to confess the truth, to buy and purchase, arms and Warlike Ammunition,
concerning Dice, and all manner of play, for gain the finding an apt and fit
time for the casting out and allaying of EvilSpirits from out persons; places
or houses, the discovery of vain Visions, Dreams and Phantasms, and the
discovery of secret Plots, and combinations, of any partys, either against our
selves or others, cum Multis Aliis.

1. In the first place, for happy Marriage, aptate the Ascendant, the Moon and
their Lords with their Dispositers, and let the Ascendant be a fixed Sign as,
or; (avoiding) and the moon in either of them in Trine, or Sextil aspect with
the. 2. In the Marriage of Virgins, let not the be in or, but in the marriage
of Widows, to be so posited does well. 3. The 7th. House and his Lord, and the
Planet from which the moon separated, are the Significators of the Woman, the
Lord of the 10th signifies what shall be hereafter between them, the 4th. and
his Lord, the conclusion of both or either of their successes. 4. If a fortune
posses the 10th. House in the hour of marriage, it signifies the woman shall be
with child, (if capable) the first night she companies with her husband, if she
were before corrupted, consider this Election. 5. In Contracting marriage for
fortune and gain aptate the Ascendant, the moon their Lords and Dispositers,
and posite in the Ascendant a common Sign, and the likewise in a common Sign
except in like manner the Lord of the house of the let him be in, the
Significators all free (if posible) in good places, fortunate and in reception
for reception signifies the benefit and gain, of their society, but if you
cannot observe all these aptate the First, 2d. 4th. 10th. and 11th. Houses, and
their Lords, let the part of fortune be fortunated by or, and let the
Significators be free from the consort, and aspects of the Malevolents. 6. In
the Invasion of Enemies, Debillitate the Lords of the 7th, and 8th. Houses, and
fortify the Lords of the first and second. 7. In Hunting, Debilitate the Lord
of the 7th. and let the moon be infortunated, by the Lord of the first, or the
8th. and not otherwise. 8. In Love affairs, fortify and the moon. 9. Its
prejudice to him that fights a Duel, if the Lord of the first shall be an
infortune, Retrograde, or Combust; in like manner judge of the Lord of the 7th.
for the Adversary, being so affected, he that begins shall obtain the Victory.
10. In the hour of going forth to fight, beware the Lord of the first do not
apply to the Lord of the 7th. 11 Forbear to besige, or assault that City,
Fortress, or Castle, whose Lord of the Ascendant is the Lord of the Annual
Revolution that year, therefore in Elections be Prudent. 12. In a Question
arising of two Armies, suppose the one East, and the other West, the Planets
their Significators, are seriously to be considered for which of these is the
most Potent, shall obtain the victory, therefore aptate and posite the Heavens
for Signification, on that part you affect, and undertake for. 13. In choosing
and selecting a fit time to fight, provide that the Lords of the first and
second, be stronger then the Lords of the 7th. and 8th. for the stronger shall
obtain the victory. 14. Many of the Ancients are of opinion that it is good to
aptate the part of Fortune in the East part of the Circle, in the beginning of
Battle, for if it be in the West, the Invaders shall be repulsed, and the
Invaded will stoutly defend themselves. 15. In Wars, know that the fortitude of
the Superior Planets, is greater then the Inferior. 16. if you would make
peace and settle concord amongst Enemies, choose a time when there is good
Aspects between the Lords of the Ascendant and 7th. Houses. 17. Beware the Moon
be not Unfortunate in the beginning of Battle, but rather free from all
afflictions and impediments, and the Lord of the Ascendant so likewise, if the
moon be unfortunate, he loses which first began the Quarrel. 18. For him that
intends an invasion for the West, let the Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon be
Oriental, if to the South, let them be placed in the Northern Angle. 19. In the
siege of a City, Town, or Castle, assault the East part, when is in the
Oriental part of Heaven, from the 10th. degree of to the 10th. of, and from the
10th. of to the 10th. of, but assault the Westpart, being in the Occident from
the 10th. degree of to the 10th of. 20. Begin no fight nor Battle the moon
being Combust of the Sun, i. e. in her change. 21. Sol, and, in the Ascendant,
promise to him that first begins the Battle Victory, safty and a happy return.
22. Let no man approach to fight, the Sun being joined to the Lord of the
Ascendant, and for your friend, be sure you Elect no such hour. 23. Saturn in
the East (although his Dispositer be well disposed) forbids to engage in Battle
for he shall be precipitated by the wiles of the Enemies horse, but if Saturns
Dispositer shall be Malignantly disposed, the Commander shall be wounded, or
worse. 24. Mars with Cauda Draconis in the Ascendant or with his Dispositer,
ill disposed; predicts the inceptor of the Quarrel to be Mortally wounded, but
he being Dignified his wounds shall not be unto death. 25. Infortunes in the
8th. in the hour of Battle makes many Cowards. 26. the in the 8th. House, or
with the Lord of the 8th. forbids Battle. 27. Infortunes in the 10th. forbids
any approach to Battle. 28. Mars and in the Ascendant, afflicts both partys
with prejudice, if not death. 29. At the time of the Host going forth to
fight, provide that the Lords of the 7th. and 8th. be in the first or second,
and the Lords of the first and second well placed or dignified, and Debillitate
the Significators of the Adversarys, and let the Ascendant be a Sign relating
to some of the Superior Planets, and for the Houses of Mars, Scorpio is better
then Aries, make most strong and fortunate, and let Jupiter be with him, or
freindly behold him, in or from the First or second, 10th. or 11th. Houses, and
Debillitate if she be Lady of the 7th. and likewise, for the recruites of the
Adverse party, because will then be in the 8th, and posite and in the Ascendant
or second Retrograde, Combust, or Cadent if possible, and in no good Aspect of
the 7th. or 8th. Houses. 30. When you would fortunate your friend, and
unfortunate his Adversary, let the Lord of the Ascendant, at leastwise of the
second, be for him, whom thou would help. 13. in the beginning of Battle,
see that be not in the Ascendant, unless he be Lord thereof, but let him behold
the Ascendant with a favorable aspect. 32. At your entering be sure that you
posite not the Lord of the first or second, in the 7th. or 8th. Houses. 33. And
note, that if the Nativity of the principal Commander may be known, (as I have
before observed) it is a safe way to dignify the Lord of the Radical Ascendant,
and that he be aspected or joined with good Stars, and for certain that
Officer or Captain in any Fight, has the best success, whose fare it is to
come nearest this Position. 34. The first twelve hours succeeding the
Conjunction of the Sun and Moon, are evil for him that begins a Battle, but
from those 12 hours to 72. hours, are good for the beginner. 35. If be in the
Ascendant in the hour of Battle fortify the, and if the time of the year will
bear it, posite the in the Ascendant, and Debillitate by Combustion,
Retrogation, or posite him in,, or, and aptate for the Victors part, and see
the Enemy has not in the 7th. or 8th. Houses. 36. At the setting up a Princes
Standard, hanging out a Flag, the Ensign of Battle, or receiving the Colors
as Ensign, Standerd-bearer or the like; you may know the success by observing
the position of the Heavens at that time, for which if you Elect a time,
fortify the 10th House and his Lord, posite the Moon in with if posible, or in
a good aspect of him, as also aspecting or, and Mars free from all impediments,
and if the Moon may not conveniently be in, posite her in Aries free from
affliction, and impediments, and the nearer the change the better, is most
adjuatious. 37. And farther Note, that if the Standard, or Colors be given by
the King to any person, it is best that be placed in the 10th. House and the
and Moon there if it may be. 38. In receiving the Colors or command from a
free City or Commonwealth, that the receiver may undergo the same with
success and honor, let the Moon be in one of the houses of, fortunate and free
from afflictions, not in Cancer; In like manner fortunate Jupiter, and let
neither nor the Moon be in any the Houses of the Infortunes; unless he has a
mind to be taken Prisoner and his Colors. 39. To Advance your Honor in the
Conquest of him against whom you strive, posite the in the Houses of, free from
infortunes, or in beholding the with a good aspect, and let the part of fortune
and his Lord be in the Ascendant. 40. To choose a Fortunate time for the
Besieging of any place, let the moon be diminished in Light, with Meridional
Latitude, joined to fortunate Stars, or in in some Amiable manner beholding
them, and Mars and Trine with the Moon out of a Feminine Sign, and the
Ascendant a Sign of right Ascension, and Fortunes in, or beholding the
Ascendant, beholding the Moon with a Trine is very good, but be sure to shun
the Malignant aspects of and the Moon, and Saturn not Cadent, for then he
intimates delatory proceedings, and prolixity of time in the Siege, to the
great detriment of the Besiegers; this has been experienced often, and is
supposed to be verified in the Siege of Tr^y by the Greeks: Therefore I
propound these Rules for the benifit of all Honorable, Fortunate, and
Ingenious Commanders and Soldiers.
Of choosing a fit Time to Eject Evil Spirits from persons and places, and the
Dissipation of all Phantasmatical Deceptious foolerys.
41. TO Eject or expel Phantasmes, delusive Visions, and Representations, any
hurtful or nocible Spirit, from any possessed person or place, or any
Demoniacal terrible appearance infesting any place, disturbing the Inhabitants,
and vexing any particular person, any person coming to an Artist to Elect him a
fit and apt time for these purposes, aptate the Ascendant and his Lord, and
beware that Cancer, Leo, Scorpio, nor Aquary be in the Ascendant nor the Moon
in any of those Signs, let the Ascendant be any other Sign which you conceive
most proper for your business, being not afflicted, and the Lord thereof free
from Infortunes, and the Moon well placed and joined to, or aspected by a
Fortune, free from all impediments; but in the destruction and ruinating any
Idols, or Idolatrous places it suffices, that you Debillitate, and unfortunate
Venus.

42. When a man would buy Seed to sow that should prosper well, and yield good
increase (which is the desire of all) be it grain for the field of any sort, or
Seeds for the Gardens of any kind, and would Elect a fit and convenient time
to this purpose, aptate the Ascendant and his Lord, and the Moon in the first
quarter increasing in motion if posible, and in Signs of oblique Ascentions,
and in one of the Masculine quarters of Heaven, which are from the 10th. House,
or Meridian to the Ascendant, and from the 4th. House, or Imum Coeli to the
7th. and the Lord of the Ascendant in one of these quarters, and the 10th.
House and Lord there of be free from all impediments of the Malevolents, it is
a good Position if the Moon be joined too, or well aspected by, and he
Oriental, free from impediments, and swift in motion: These things are
necessary to be all observed, but if your occasion will not give you leisure to
observe them all, at leastwise be sure you apt ate and fortify the Moon.

43. When any one would Elect a time for Play at Dice, or any other Game, for
Lucre sake and desire of gain, which I suppose is the end every man proposes
to himself, according to the minds of the Ancients, let the Ascendant be a
moveable Sign, because fixed Signs are not so proper nor profitable common
Signs are between both, i. e. neither much profitable, nor much prejudicial,
as if the Ascendant be a common Sign, and the Lord thereof of good
qualification, it signifies good, but if of evil Signification it signifys
evil; its very behoveful that the Lord of the Ascendant be of good
Signification and well disposed, and the Lord of the 7th. Debilliated, weak,
and impedited, and if posible let the Lord of the 8th. House be in the second,
or in the first House, received by the Lord of the second, or first Houses, but
let not the Lord of the 8th dispose of the Lord of the 2d. especially when you
begin to play, and let the Moon be seperating her self from one Fortune, and
joining her self to another fortune, and above the Earth fortunate and strong,
and let a strong Courrage with hopeful expectation possess the heart and fancy
of him, that thus would win, and his breast always toward the Moon, for if she
be unfortunate usually its contrary to him, who has his breast contrary,
whosoever he be that desires to win let him sit with his face and breast toward
the Moon, if you cannot make all these observations, (as seldom it falls out
you can altogether) however let the Ascendant be a moveable Sign, when you
begin to play, and the Moon in his breast that plays, and if no more may be, yet
let the Moon be in the face and breast of him that plays, and it shall avail.

To know the secrets and whispring of any party.
44. IF you see certain persons separate themselves from the company and
whisper together, and you suspect some evil meaning of them toward you, or
desire to know their intents and secrets, posite a Schen^^ of Heaven, and
consider the first, the 7th. and their Lords, because the first and his Lord,
and the Planet from whom the separated are the Significators of him that first
began to move this secresy, and the 7th. House Lord thereof, and the Planet to
whom the applys, are Significators of him to whom he first began to speak, and
if many be in company he that stands with his face toward the Meridian shall
be understood to be the first beginner, and he that holds his face toward the
East or North, may be considered to be the second person consulting, the 10th.
House and his Lord have signification of him or them that discourse amongst
themselves and of the secret matter discoursed, if there shall be litigious
contention, or War amongst them, the 10th. and Lord thereof shall signify the
victory, of the business in hand, for he shall be victor whom the Lord of the
10th. best aspects, the 4th. House and his Lord, and the Dispositer of the,
shall signify the end of the business, but the Moons Dispositer shall be of
more effectual Signification, than the Lord of the 4th. House.

Farthermore aspect the Lord of the 10th. and see how he is qualified, and
relates to the Significators, namely the Lord of the first or 7th, for if he
behold the Lord of the first with a more favorable aspect then the Lord of the
7th. he which begins shall obtain and have the better, if to the Lord of the
7th. then he which opposes shall prevail.

Farther observe if the Lord of the first be a Planet Signifying truth and
reallity, if he be then he that begins shall proceed Legally in truth without
fallacy, but if he be of a deceptious quality, there will be lying and
falsehood in the business, In like manner may be said of the Lord of the 7th,
also if the Lord of the 10th. be a Planet signifying verity, he to whom this is
most favorable, shall use truth and just dealing in his Actings, but if false,
then he uses fraud, and deceit, in likemanner if the Lord of the 4th. or the
Planet joined to the Moon, have true and real signification, then shall the end
be without fallacy, fraud, or deception, but if otherwise, the end will be
answerable, and thus are you to consider in reference to the end of any thing.

To Inquire after a Theif and Fugitive.
45. When any one would follow, or find out a Theif or Fugitive, any sorded
vile person, or a false Servant or the like, it behooves that the Moon be
impedited and afflicted, in the very degree with the Sun, or within 16 minutes,
but not in or, or in the last half of, nor the first half of, nor within 12.
degrees of the or of the Dragon before, or 7. degrees behind, but if you
cannot thus posite her, let her be posited in the Ascendant, in Conjunction
Opposition, or Quartile aspect, of the Sun or in or, without reception, and
afflicted from the Planet beholding her, or let it be three days before the
Lunar Eclipse, or one day after it, and let the Sun be free from all vitiating
impediments of the Malevolents, and let some one of the Fortunes (if possible)
be in the 10. House or within 5. Degrees of the Cusp of the 10th, before, or 3.
degrees after, and of this be sure, that the more you impedite and afflict the
Moon, by so much the more is the Theif, or Fugitive afflicted.

Elections of Time proper for the Significations of the Eight House.
1. IN acquiring Inheritances, let the 8th. House be well fortified. 2. The
Portion and Dowry of a Wife shall be easily acquired if you choose an apt hour
for Contraction, or Matrimony, that is, that there be benevolent Stars in the
8th. House 3. For acquiring the Substance of your Adversarys, and Enemies,
posite the Lord of the 8th. in the first or second, or at least infortunated by
the Lord of the first or second. 4. Any one being desirous to ordain or make
his last Will and Testament, or so to settle his Estate that it may continue to
his mind, and would Elect a convenient and apt time to this purpose: First let
the Moon be slow in motion, and increasing in Light, for this signifies the Act
or Deed shall continue and stand firm, without change or alteration, its very
convenient that the Moon and the Lord of the Ascendant, or either of them
behold Saturn with an Amiable aspect, or joined to him, for this shall signify
the perfect complement of the thing without change, but shall abide perfect,
and continue, while the Testator or Donor lives, and also after his Death,
Zael is of Opinion that it Signifys a prolongation of the Testators life if
the Moon be joynd or behold Jupiter or Venus (as is before said of Saturn,) the
Ascendant of time a fixed Sign, and the Moon likewise fixed, this intimates
duration, as movable Signs intimates mutability, its much to be heeded that the
Moon be not aspected by, or joined to any Planet under the Suns Rays called
Combustion, or joined to Mars nor aspecting him by Opposition or Quartile
aspect, nor Mars in the Ascendant, or beholding it with any aspect of enmity,
nor the Lord thereof, all these signify a change of the Act, the shortness of
the Testators life, and the non-accomplishment of the Testators Will, and
finally confusion of the Estate, and quarrels and contentions amongst those that
survive.

Elections of and concerning the Significations of the 9th. House.
1. IN Journeys fixed Signs are to be avoided and moveable Signs chosen. 2. You
ought not to Elect a time for a Prince to take a Journey in, the Lord of the
Ascendant being in the 8th. House nor in his exaltation. viz. the Lord of the
8th. 3. In Embassyes, Messages, and all Maritine affairs, the Moon is
principally to be Elected. 4. Mars disturbeth and impediteth Land-Journeys, and
Saturn Sea-Voyages and affairs; therefore the presence of either of them in
the 9th. House is not to be wished. 5. In the beginning of a Journey, see an
Infortune be not in the 9th. and in your teturne beware the like in the second.
6. Being to undertake a Journey, beware the Moon be not in via Combusta,
because then the Traveller will be afflicted with Sickness, or other
impediments answerable. 7. In Electing of time referring to Discipline and the
Mathematics, chiefly aptate Mereury, in things relating to Religion the the
Moon the Ascendant and their Lords are to be fortified and one of the Houses of
Jupiter upon the Cusp of the 9th. House, and the Moon irradiating the third
House. 8. In sending and transmitting Embassys to Kings and Princes, see the
Moon be not in or, but rather aspecting the Sun or Lord of the Tenth with
favorable Aspects. 9. Would you send a Child to School, and desire him to
learn well, and to delight in his Learning, Elect the Horoscope to be Virgo or
Gemini, Mercury fortunate and strong, the Moon not afflicted by the
Malevolents, but free from Combustion, and increasing in Light and Number. 10.
In Journeys by Land aptate the Ascendant to be an Earthly Sign, in voyages by
Water the Ascendant to be an Aquatique Sign, the Moon in the 12th. House going
toward the 10th. and not under the Earth, if this may not be done, posite her
in the 9th. or third Houses, free from the infortunes and in like manner see
that the Lord of the Ascendant, the and their Dispositers be not afflicted. 11.
In Journeys in which you expect gain and profit, aptate and fortify the Lord
of the hour, at your going out. 12. In general for Electing times for Journeys
observe that you aptate the Ascendant and his Lord for your person, the second
and his Lord for the goods, and conveniences you carry with you, the 7th.
House for the place to which you go, the 8th. and his Lord for the benefit and
good expected by your Journey, the 10th and his Lord, for the accidents which
shall hap in the way, the 4th. and Lord thereof, for the end of the Journey.
13. Aptate the Moon with the Planet Signifying the thing for which you make
your Journey, as if you apply to the Prince or a Great person let the Moon be
joined to the Sun, or Lord of the Tenth, or in good aspect with either of them,
let her not be in Aquary, nor in the 4th. nor 7th. House, nor in Pisces,
because the twelfth from Aries wherein the Sun is exalted. 14. If the Lord of
the 7th. be with the first, and the Moon joined to a Retrograde Planet, the
Traveller meets the thing or the Person in the way, for which, or to whom he
goes. 15. In Electing a time for any one to begin a Journey in, forbear and
shun the Moon existing and being in the second, or third face of Libra. 16, In
all Journeys beware the moon be not with the infortunes, or their Aspects. 17.
For speed and Celerity in Journeys and quick return, let the Sun be in
Opposition to some Benevolent Stars, for if he be in opposition to any
Malevolent Stars, the signification is Impediments, Delays, and a slow Return.
18. In like manner as to a speedy return, see the moon be not in the first,
second, or fourth House, any of which pronounce delay, and a tedious stay in
the place to which you go. 19. In Sea voyages be sure you posite not the moon
in Scorpio. 20, Antiquity has not been wanting to inform us, that Elections
conduce to the great Utillity of those who Learn and Practice Music, it being
a Laudable Human Action, (according to that true Maxim, Negotia Humana Astris
indigent) which properly relates both to the 9th. and 10th. Houses, but may
more firly be comprehended under the 9th. because the 9th. house has
Signification of Ecclesiastic Songs and Divine hymes (which ought to be
preferred,) and are used in the divine Worship of God in Temples and Churches,
and Religious excercises, this is the first acceptance of Music, and properly
belongs to this place, the other has relation to the 10th. House, which
comprehends all Lay-musick, and Songs that are used for mirth amongst
Lay People, as if you would Eelect a convenient and fit time to teach any one
in Song or Masick, begin when a rational and human Sign is in the Ascendant or
10th House which Signs are,, and, in singing shun the mute Signs are,, and,
for Prick song and Divine Music aptate principally, for secular Song or
Music, chiefly aptate, and in the second place, but in choice of Musical
Instruments, aptate or fortify both and, or either of them which you may, and
let the Ascendant be or, or at least Pisces, and in either kind of Music let
the Moon be in,, or separate from, and going to a Conjunction or good aspect of
if posible, it is the better if, or, or both be in any of their Dignitys or
beholding with any Amiable Aspect or in Conjunction; and would you have your
Scholar superlatively excel in singing, that no one should exceed, then let
him or her begin under the Ascendants beforesaid, and let Mercury be direct and
joined to Venus Retrograde in House or exaltation, or some other the Dignitys
of either of them, but it is necessary to this that the parties Nativity before
hand be considered, for never any one excells in any thing unless there be a
Natural aptitude, and fitness thereunto, and one special observation is that
the Lord of the Ascendant be fortified in the 9th. or 10th. Houses.
The Ancients give Rules likewise in reference to Musical Instruments, making
several nice distinctions, which have more in them of curiosity then profit;
Therefore its convenient to forbear the farther prosecution.

21. The Merchants Calling principally belongs to this 9th. House, as chiefly
consisting in Foreign Negotiations, and the like: In reference to which not
only the practice of our Forefathers of famous memory, but also daily
experience, convinces us of this truth, that the good or bad Position of the
Heavens at the setting forth of the Ship, conduces much to the good or bad
success in the Voyage, As Storms, Rocks, Fires, Pirates, and Cross-winds are
professed Enemies to the Merchants profit, and mere productions of ill
Positions, so his endeavors should be most conversant in and about the mean by
which these disasters may be prevented, which prevention the Ancient Sages
resolve us, consists in two things; First in a Reverend and devout imploration
of the Divine Majesty for a blessing and success: Secondly in the due and
proper choice and Election of time to that purpose, which is done by observing
the Position of the Heavens, and entering your Ship, and setting sail, at such
a time when the Heavens answer these Rules. First, know therefore it is best to
begin your Voyage when a watery Sign ascends the Horizon, in which you are
(except Scorpio) or the Moon existing in a moist Sign, in Conjunction, or
within the Trine, or Sextil Rays of Jupiter or Venus, but you ought to
debillitate Saturn and Mars, but if they be strong in any fortitudes, be sure
that they Aspect not the Ascendant, or the Moon.

Secondly, The Malevolents do prejudice by being ni the Ascendant, or with the
Sun or Moon or casting their Squares, or Oppositions to any of them.

Thirdly, The next Rock of prejudice is, when with the moon, or in the
Ascendant, there is any of these Malevolent stars, of violent, Turbulent
nature, as the Pleiades, Hyades, Orion, Arcturus, Aldebaran, Delphinus,
Argonavis, Hercules, Canis Major or Minor Hoedi, or Capella.

Fourthly, The infortunes may not Aspect the Ascendant or Moon, unless they be
asisted with the benevolent aspects of Jupiter.

Fifthly, The Malevolents in Angles are to be avoided, but be sure they praeside
not over the Moon or the Ascendant.

Sixthly, Mars is most noxtious being posited in the 10th. or 11th. Houses.

Seventhly, You are heedfully to avoid the Moons passing, or transiting either
of the Nodes, commonly called the Head and Tail of the Dragon, and it is good
she be in the Dignitys of the fortunes, or in Amiable Aspect or Conjunction
with them, and above the Earth, but if she be under the Earth (as sometimes it
cannot be avoided) then posite her in the third, or fifth Houses,

8. Lastly, the Lords and Dispositers of the Moon and Ascendant, must be
strong, and benevolent in Angles, Oriental, and free from being afflicted by
the Malevolents, and strengthened by the Radiant Aspects of the Benevolents,
and in their Dignitys, not peregrine, Combust, nor Cadent, weak, nor in the
abject-houses of Heaven, which are the 6th. 8th. and 12th. nor with Retrograde
Planets, nor Retrograde themselves.

Thus briefly, yet sufficient to make every Seaman and Merchant wise and happy.

Elections for several Matters and Things relating to the 10th. House.
1. THe fortitude of the Sun is much to be considred, in the obtaining of
Dignitys and Princely preferment. 2. In Princely Dignitys, if you Elect a time,
the 10th. House, the Lord thereof and his Dispositer must be aptated, the Moon
and her receiver, let all these be in good Aspect with the fortunes. 3. In
obtaining Courtly Dignitys and preferments, the First House, the second, their
Lords and their dispositers, merit your choice, and if you Elect for a
Counselor, Secretary, or Clarck, aptate Mercury with the aforesaid, if posible
posite Jupiter in the first joined to the Lord of the 10th. or in a good aspect
of him, or in a Square with reception. 4. If you Elect for Dignity, let not
infortunes be in Angles, nor the Moon Combust, or otherwise impedited, nor with
Cauda Draconis. 5. For a time for a man to reconcile himself to his superior
at difference with him, of what conditition soever he be, afflict the Ascendant
and impedite the Lord thereof, and in like manner deal by the Moon, and the
Planet from whom she separated, and that she decrease in Light and Number, and
make the 7th. House and Lord thereof fortunate and strong; and in like manner
the Planet to whom the Moon is joined, and let the Lord of the 4th. House be
well posited in a good House from the Ascendant, and free from the Malevolents.
6. In undertaking, beginning, or returning to any Art or Calling, aptate the
first House, the 10th. and their Lords, the Moon also and the Planet,
Significator of the Mystery, Trade, or Science, and fortify them. As for
Martial affairs and Arms, Mars, for Learning Mercury, for Music Venus, for
the study and practice of Law and Divinity Jupiter for Honor the Sun, for
Tillage and Husbandry Saturn, and the like. 7. oftimes it haps that he that
has been the means of another preferment, may have a desire to remove the
party again from the same, either upon the account of ingratitude, as walking
unworthy of his former favor which is an Epidemical Disease in these days, or
upon the account of benefit and advantage to the party promoting him to higher
Digninitys, if it be upon the account of ill will, and disfavour, Debillitate
the let her be unfortunate, weak, or Combust, and afflicted with any other the
infortunes, and decreasing in Light and Number, and posited in the 6th. or
12th. Houses, in a fixed Sign, and either the exaltation or Dignitys of
Jupiter, Venus, the Sun, or Mercury, they likewise weak and unfortunate, and
let the Ascendant and his Lord be fortunate, and well fortified; if the
intention be to remove him in love to greater Honor, profit and Dignity, let
the Moon bein Virgo, Sagitary, or Pisces, or at least in Gemini, which is
inferior to the former, let the Lord of the Ascendant be increasing in Light
and Number, and the Ascendant a Northern Sign, and let the Moon be fortunated
in the House or Dignitys of any fortune, that fortune being fortified and
strong, well aspecting the Lord of the 10th. House, if the the Preferment be of
Layical, and Temporal Signification, but aspecting the Lord of the 9th, if the
Honor be Ecclesiastic and Spiritual, neither is this position contrary to
that else where affirmed, that the Moon is Significatrix of the business or
matter in action, because here is understood the Ascendant free from
impediments and safe, the Lord thereof strong and fortunately fortified, and
for this, the Lord of the Ascendant shall be the Significator, so far as the
signification pertains to the Ascendant and Lord thereof, but the Moon shall be
Significatrix of the thing, and business for which you Elect your time, and
has her proper Signification different, and separate from the Lord of the
Ascendant, and so understand in all like cases. 8. If any one desires
instruction, so as to be taught in Philosophy and morral Sciences, and would
have a convenient time to begin his studys, let him choose for his Ascendant
Geminy, Virgo, Libra, or the first half of Sagitary, or Aquary, free from
infortunes and the Moon in any of those Signs, the Lord of the 10th in the
10th, or of the Nature or Freindship of the Lord of the Ascendant, and let the
Moon be joined to Mercury by body; or by Sextile or Trine and let Mercury be
safe, and free from impediments, fortunate and strong, and if posible that
Mercury behold the Lord of the Ascendant with some Amiable Aspect, which will
be very good, as also if the Moon be in her Apogeon, or applying thereunto, not
declining, the 9th. House and Lord thereof is to be sortified in like manner if
possible, etc. 9. Would any one be expert in Arms and would choose and Elect a
fit and convenient time to begin, that thereby he might the better profit, and
manage the same with honor safty and credit, let him choose for his Ascendant
Aries, Leo, or Sagitary, and Mars fortunate and strong, and the Moon fortified,
and in Taurus if possible, for she is best there, unless she be otherwise
fortified, but beware she be not in Scorpio nor Capricorn, and chiefly in
Learning, Military affairs, posite also the Lord of the Ascendant in his
exaltation or other Dignitys, and be careful that neither he nor the Moon, be
Cadent from any Angle, especially from the Ascendant, if these cannot be in
yourtime, yet be sure at the least to posite the Moon and the Lord of the
Ascendant, or either of them in the 10th House, or applying thereunto. 10. If
any one desire to be Instructed in the Art of swiming, that he might proceed
with ease, and safty, and be excellent therein, and to the same end would
consult a good time to begin, make choice of Caucer, Scorpio or Pisces, for the
Ascendant, and let the Lord of the Ascendant be either in Angle of the 10th. or
applying thereunto, not distant there from, more then 15. Degrees, and strong
and fortunate, and the Moon strong and in some of her Dignitys, amongst which
Cancer is chief, Taurus next, the other inferior, and ascending in
Septentrional Signs and near her Auge or Apogeum. 11, If an Artist be desired
in a general way to make Elections of Time, according to the variety of men's
Callings, and Practices; As first in reference to Forging, Smiths craft or the
like, what ever Ascendant you take, be sure you aptate the 10th. House and Lord
thereof, and the Moon likewise, and the Planet that properly signifys the work
or business that any one intends to begin, see that he be fortunate and strong;
as for instance, if it be a business of strong, and tedious labor dull and
heavy in the dispatch, as the Culture of the Earth, sinking of Wells, or
Fountains, Coale-pits, or Quarys for stone, or Mines, or any thing about these,
as Gins for the Evacuate water, Water-mills or the like, aptate Saturn
principally, and if it be a business that may admit of much serious
cosideration and judgment, and much business pro and con may be about it as to
Arbitration and the like, then aptate Jupiter and if your business be any thing
of Smiths work, Fire, butchery, or cruelty, aptate Mars, if it be any thing
conversant about Money or Goldsmiths work or the like, then aptate the Sun, and
if it be about matter of Ornament especially of or concerning Women, aptate
Venus, but let Mercury in all these considerations be joined with the
Significant Planet either by body or aspect and Fortunate and strong, because
he has participation in all things wherein Ingenuity is requisite, and if the
work be in reference to Draughts, to Pictures, Imagery, the forming of Stamps
for Coin, Mathematical Instruments, or any thing wherein the subtilty of Wit is
required, in these aptate Mercury, that he be strong and Fortunate, and (if
possible) joined to the Moon, or friendly aspecting her, and both well
disposed, and if the matter be in reference to Navigation or Maritine affairs,
aptate the Moon, and let her be increasing in Light and Number not descending
from her Auge, and in every particular determination, let the Moon be joined
to, or aspect the Planet with an aspect of Amity, that signifys the work or
business you intend to begin, and would have good come thereof, or else see she
be in the House signifying the thing you intend, in some dignitys or well
aspecting the same; and lastly take this general Rule that you take your
Ascendant answerable to the Nature of your business as being most proper and
convenient to the thing or work you intend to begin, as in Terrene things that
participate of the signification of the earth, choose Terrene and Earthly
Signs, in watery significations choose Aquatick Signs in fiery, fiery Signs, in
Ethereal and Airy, choose Airy Signs, and the more nearer you come to a
perfect Election, or the more you fall short of it, answerable will be your
success in the Degrees of good or bad.
Elections concerning the Signification of the Eleaventh House.
1. IN making Pacts, Covenants, concluding peace, and entering into Amity for
durance; the following Position of Heaven is best, i. e. that the Moon be in
the 11th. with the Lord of the 11th. House and (if possible) let the Lord of
the first be there likewise, and all joined to Venus, or Vinus joined to the
Moon, or the Lord of the 11th or in an aspect of Amity or Venus in Taurus,
Pisces, or Libra, receiving some of them, existing strong, and the Moon
received by Jupiter, or posite the Moon strong and fortunate in some of the
Dignitys of Venus, near unto this was the Positions of the Heavens, when the
French and Scots concluded their National durable League, the effects of which
(to her sorrow) England has often felt. 2. In entering Covenants, Contracts, or
Leagues of Freindship where gain is to be expected, posite the Moon in the
Ascendant, or in a Sign of the same triplicity, fortunate and strong, in some
of the assential Dignitys of the Planet that receives her, and the part of
Fortune there likewise. 3. With confidence expect the accomplishment of that
thing you desire by, or through friendship; if these Positions of the Heavens
are, namely, the Moon and her Dispositer, the Lords of the Second and 11th. and
their Dispositers, beholding or aspecting the Ascendant or Lord thereof, and
the Moon or either of them in any good aspect with reception; These being, the
thing will be facile and easy in the obtaining thereof.
Treating of those things wherein we have hope and confidence to gain Fame and
good report.
4. THis Subject seems rather to be comprehended under the 10th. House because
it consults of Honor, Credit, and fame, which are the consequents of a
foregoing hope, but for several considerations it seems more conveniently
comprehended under this head.

A good name and Fame is gotten by honest ingenious study which that you may
accomplish with convenience; Let your Ascendant be Sagitary or Pisces, or at
least Cancer, but Cancer is not so proper as the other two, you must be careful
also to aptate Jupiter as much as may be, as also the 11th. House, and the Lord
thereof, and if you can posite Jupiter in the 11th. House, it will much
advantage your desire, and advance your design; if you cannot posite love in
the 11th, endeavor to place him in the first House, and if you can do neither
of these, at leastwise cause that behold either the first or 11th. House with
some freindly aspect, and be sure that Jupiter be fortunate and strong and free
from impediments, and if you can possible posite the Lord of the first House in
the 11th. or the Lord of the 11th. in the first, this is very efficatious and
proper, its good the Sun be in the 10th House if it may be, or in the first
free from impediments, so that he impediate not Jove, neither the Lord of the
first nor 11th. Houses, let the moon also aspect the Sun with a freindly
aspect, as Trine, or Sextile, at least with a Quartile aspect with reception,
and the moon free from all impediments, and fortunate and strong, and let the
moon separate from Jupiter, or the Lord of the first or 11th. House, when she
applys to the Sun: This much Dignifies your endeavors, and causes that your
land and fame shall be far spread and divulged abroad, to your great benifit,
and you shall be praised of the best and generality of people, to your great
good and benifit, and the more of these Significators you can aptate, and thus
fortify, it is the better; But however its necessary that the Luminarys aspect
each other, or the Lord of the first or 11th, Houses with a Sextile or Trine
aspect, at least in a Quartile with reception, but if they behold each other,
its the better, and does the more fortunate your designs.

5. If any one should desire the love and freindship of any person, up on the
principles of honest real affection and not upon the account of any
uncivillity, and should desire to consult a fit time for his application to
such person, whose freindship and favor he desires; It matters not much what
the Ascendant be, but what suits best with the convenience of the time, so that
other things considerable be heeded, as first posite the moon in the 11th.
House, and if you can, there also place the Lord of the Ascendant, it is the
better, and if possible, and both joined too, or aspecting Venus, but at
leastwise let Venus aspect the moon, or the Lord of the 11th. House, which if
time cannot allow of this do what you can that the moon, or the Lord of the
Ascendant, be joined with the Lord of the 10th. or behold him with a Trine, or
Sextil aspect, or with reception, or aspect Venus, or that the Lord of the
Ascendant behold either of them, from Taurus, Libra, or Pisces, and be free
fortunate and strong, and well disposed, and if none of these can agree with
the time, cause that Venus be received by the moon in Taurus, or Cancer, and
the moon in reception with Jupiter, or the Lord of the second House but
furthermore if none of these can be, posite the moon in Taurus, or in the first
half of Libra, or Pisces, in some of the Dignitys of Venus, free, Fortunate,
and strong.

6. If any one desire the freindship of another upon the account of gain and
that he may benefit his fortune thereby by the means of such love and
freindship, then posite the moon in the first House, or at least in the
triplicity of the first, free from impediments, fortunate and strong, and the
part of Fortune received from the Lord of the House, or the Lord of the
exaltation of that Sign, in which the Moon is.

7. If any party desire the Love, freindship and familiarity of another, that
thereby he might gain an Inheritance, or acquire thereby House, Land, Goods or
the like, posite the Moon in the 8th House in reception with part of Fortune.

8. And if it be upon the account of gaining small Cattle, let the Moon be in
the 6th. House, in reception with the part of Fortune.

9. And if it be with desire of obtaining any great Cattle or Beasts of
considerable price and vallue, posite the moon in the 12th. House, in reception
with part of Fortune likewise, and so understand of every House, according to
the substantial and proper signification thereof, and always let the moon have
reception with part of Fortune, or the Lord thereof.

10. If none of these particulars can with convenience (in reference to your
urging time) be observed, consider another method, that is, if any one would
desire of another that he would be Liberal unto him, and confer gifts by way of
Donation upon him, take your Ascendant what Sign you will that is not
afflicted, so it be a fixed Sign, at leastwise a common Sign, and let the Lord
of the Ascendant be therein or in his triplicity, aspecting the Ascendant with
a favorable aspect, viz. Trine or Sextile, and take great heed that the moon
be not joined, or afflicted by any the Malevolent Planets, nor any other way
impedited, and it is necessary that she behold the Lord of the House in which
she is, because if she aspect not him, it hinders the effecting, and
accomplishment of your business; let the moon be increasing in Number, and
Light, in such beginnings, and joined too, or aspecting fortunes, the Lord of
the Ascendant, also fortunate and strong, and free from impediments, if it be a
fortune to whom the moon is joined direct and increasing in Number it is better
by far for your business, for it signifies the prosperity and good success of
your undertakings, and have a special care to Mercury that he be not impedited
and afflicted, for if he be, it signifies obstruction, and oftimes the loss of
your business, but if there be reception between the Planet that afflicts and
Mercury, it is the better, and prevents the absolute frustration of your
business, so that it may be accomplished and brought to an end, with Petition,
importunity, hard labor, and much difficulty, yet hardly durable and lasting,
always have a care that you posite the Significatrix which is the Moon joined,
or aspected to the Planet Significator of the thing quesited; as the Sun in all
splendid Acts, and the business of great persons, Mars in the matters of War,
and soldiers, Jupiter in matters of Counsel, Law, and Ecclesiastical affairs,
and persons, and so understand of all other Significators.

Lastly, If you would Elect a time for any one to enter into Amity and
freindship with another, posite the Moon free from Malignants, and especially
from their Quadrats, and Oppositions, and let her be joined in freindly aspect
with the Planet-sig-fying the thing, person or business, which you intend, as
is above said, as Venus in the Acts, Relations, and signification of Women,
Mercury, in writings, Scribes, and the like, and so understand of all other
Significators, and if the Lord of the 11th. House behold the moon or her
Dispositer with a laudable aspect it is the better.

For the obtaining of any thing Material promised to you, or otherwise; by
Petition.
When any person desires to obtain a benefit from another, whether by
promise, or by Petition, and would consult a fit, apt, and opertune time to
that purpose, that he might with the more facillity, and certainly obtain his
desire, take what Ascendant you can free from affliction, and fortify the same,
and the Lord thereof, the Moon also, and Lord of the House in which she is,
aptate also the second House and his Lord, the 11th. House and Lord thereof,
and let the Lord of the Ascendant behold the Moon or some of the forenamed
Significators, with a laudable and freindly aspect, or receive them, or some
one of them, and let the Lord of the House signifying the thing desired,
receive the Lord of the 7th. House, and the Moon, or at leastwise one of them;
as for example, should you make your request to a Brother, then its proper the
Lord of the third House should receive the Lord of the first, or the moon, if
of a Father, then the Lord of the 4th. ought to receive the Lord of the first
or the Moon, if from a Son, let the Lord of the 5th. House receive the Lord of
the first, or the Moon, if from a Servant or inferior person, let the Lord of
the 6th. receive the Lord of the Ascendant, the moon or either of them, if from
a Wife, a Husband or Associate, let the Lord of the 7th. House receive the Lord
of the first, the Moon, or either of them, if you would Petition a Bishop, or
Ecclesiastical person let the Lord of the 9th. receive the Lord of the first,
the moon or either of them, if from the King, then let the Lord of the 10th.
receive the Lord of the Ascendant, the moon, or either of them; if your
expectation be from a friend, then let the Lord or the 11th House receive the
Lord of the first, the moon, or either of them; Farther, it you Petition, or
seek to any person signified by Saturn, as Ancient men, Jews, or persons of
mean condition or the like, let the Cusp of the 11th House be in Capricorn,
Aquary, or Libra, or at leastwise in some of the Dignities of Saturn.

If you Petition or seek to a Scribe, a Merchant or young person Signified by
Mercury, let the Lord of the 11th House be in some of the Dignities of Mercury,
omitting the Digties of face, which is the weakest of all Dignities, Atabarus
an ancient Author advises that Mercury be joined to Jupiter or Venus, and
applying to the Lord of the Ascendant, in all Petitions or requests from any
person, and this is taken as a general fortitude, as also if posible aptate the
proper Significator of the thing, which you would obtain, or things which you
Petition for; the first House always signifies the party petitioning, and the
7th. House the party Petitioned, therefore let the Ascendant be free from any
affliction of the Malevolents, and the 7th. House free from their Malignant
aspects, and if you cannot do this, nor observe the former directions in
Electing your time, your business then shall be destroyed your expectation,
frustrated and brought to nothing, and that after it seems probable to be
effected.

Now if your request shall be for money to beg or borrow, or to receive it upon
due or the like, then aptate or fortify the Lord of the Ascendant, and his
Lord, with the aforesaid Significators, and if it may with convenience, let the
Lord of the Ascendant behold the Lord of the second, at least let there be no
Hostile aspect between them, nor afflicted by the Malevolents, and lastly, let
the Lord of the 11th. House, and the Dispositer of the part of fortune, both or
either of them if posible, behold the second House with any freindly aspect.

Haly advises, if it be to Women that you Petition, or seek, or in the way of
love, or in reference to Marriage or the like, have the same consideration to
the 7th. house and his Lord, as you had to the second, and so of all others;
Thus concludes the Significations of the 11th. House.

Of those particular Significations, that referr to the 12th. House.
1. THe first observation we shall make shall be in refference to the
reconciliation of Enemies; Therefore when you would reconcile persons that are
at discord and enmity, aptate and fortify the Ascendant and his Lord,
Debillitate the 7th. House and Lord thereof, let the Lord of the Ascendant have
some Amiable aspect to some Fortune, if posible, and Debillitate the Lord of
the 12th. House, causing him to be Cadent, and if the 12th. House be
unfortunate it is the better, and fortify Mercury. 2. In Expelling Malignant
Spirits or any Diabollical possession, aptate the Ascendant, Lord thereof, and
the Moon, let not the Ascendant be Cancer, Lee, nor Aquary, nor the moon in any
of them, but in what Sign else you posite the Moon in, let her be strong, free,
and Fortunate, 3. For Fishing, if you Elect a time good and convenient for that
purpose, let the Ascendant be a common Sign, fortify and aptate the Lord
thereof, or let the Sign be of the watery triplicity, the Moon and the Lord of
the 7th. unfortunate, and their Dispositers afflicted by Saturn or Mars. 4. If
you would Elect a time for Dice-play that you might win, let not a fixed Sign
be in the Ascendant but let the Lord of the first be strong and well fortified,
the Lord of the 7th. House weak and afflicted, and posite the Lord of the 8th.
House in the second or first Houses, or received in some Dignities, or aspect
with the Lords of the first or second, but let not the Lord of the 7th. or 8th.
receive the Lord of the second, and always see the Moon, separate from one
fortune and apply to another fortune, and its best the moon be above the Earth
Fortunate and strong, and let him that will win always have her in his mind.
5. In Hunting aptate the Moon, but chiefly the Lord of the hour, and let the
Moon be Cadent from the Ascendant, and not behold it. 6. When any person would
wager on a Race to be run by any Creature, either Rational or irrational, and
desiring to win, and conquer the other party, and to that end would choose and
Elect an fit and prosperous hour to bring his ends to pass, to this purpose
aptate the Ascendant and Lord thereof, the moon also, and Lord of the House in
which she is, and the Planet to which she joins her self by aspect; In like
manner fortify the part of fortune, and Dispositer thereof, and its necessary
that the Lord of the first and the moon, or one of them behold the part of
fortune, and after you have aptated these, put the Lord of the hour in the
Ascendant, at that instant the Beast, or Party that is to run first sets his
foot out of doors, upon the first remove toward the Race. 7. In the next place
as to the Number of them that Run, from one to twelve, if a number run
together, to know which shall from the first to the twelfth, first come to the
Mark or end of the Race; observe this Method viz. If you posite the Lord of the
hour in the first House (as is aforesaid) then the first shall come first to
the end of the Race, if the Lord of the hour be posited in the 10th. House, the
second shall win, if in the 11th. House, the third, if in the 7th. the 4th. if
in the 5th. House the 5th, shall first attain the end of the Race, if in the
9th. the 6th. if in the third the 7th. if in the second the 8th. if in the 8th.
house the Lord of the hour be posited the 9th. shall win, if in the 6th. the
10th if the Lord of the hour be in the 12th. or fourth houses, that Beast or
Man shall come last to the end of the Race, or Equivolent to the last. 8. But
if in Election of time you cannot aptate and fortify all Significators
according to these Rules, aptate the Lord of the hour, the Lord of the
Ascendant, and the Moon, and if your Time will not permit you to do this, be
sure to aptate the Lord of the hour, by positing him in the first, and aptate
the Moon likewise: Alkindus is of opinion, that the Moon is best aptated in
Sagitary, or the first half of Libra, and you must take great heed that the
Lord of the Ascendant, or Lord of the hour, or the Moon, be not in any of their
falls, for then it is to be feared that the Horse, his Rider, or both, will
fall and sustain prejudice. 9. When any person would Elect a time to buy a
good Horse, or other serviceable Beast, or to Back him and came him, first
aptate the Ascendant and his Lord, and the Moon, and it is good that she be
joined to a fortune that is direct, Oriental, and ascending in the Circle of
his Auge, but if not all this, at least let the fortune be direct, and be
careful, that the nor that fortune be not joined to any infortune, either by
body or aspect, for that possesses the Beast with timidity and fears, if this
evil position should be at the buying of the Beast, it threatens loss, and a
bad market, if it shall be at the Backing or taming of him, the issue will not
answer your intention, but that the Beast will be abused, and by so much the
worse is the Signification if any impediment shall be in the 12th, House, but
take notice of this necessary observation, if the Horse you buy be already
Backed, or the Beast already tamed, then let the Ascendant at the purchase
thereof be a Common Sign, and the Moon in Taurus or Lee, and let her be joined
to a Planet direct, which is Septentrional ascending, or at least Meridional
ascending, these shall signify that the Horse or Beast shall augment, and
increase both in body and price, but if the Planet to whom the is joined, or
aspected, be Retrograde, this signifies that the Beast shall augment somewhat
in price, but not much, but shall be diminished in body, and if the Planet
shall be direct, and descending, or either Septentrional or Meridional, this
signifys that the Beast shall be increased in body, but diminished in price and
vallue; In like manner if it shall be Meridional and descending, the Beast
shall be diminishing both in body and price, and so much the more as it shall
be the more Meridional: This concerns Tame Beasts that are broke for the
masters use; the next consideration reffers to untamed Beasts that are wild,
for these aptate your Ascendant a Common Sign, and let the moon be in a
moveable Sign, joined too, or aspecting any of the Fortunes, considering the
conditions as to assention and descention, to Direction and Retrogradation, as
is before said. 10. This general Consideration offers it self worth our
Noting; That is, would any one buy a Horse, Ox, or any other Animal with intent
to gain and profit thereby, the moon existing from the beginning of Cancer, to
the end of Sagitary, he shall not gain, but lose thereby, for he shall buy
dear and sell cheap but if he buy the moon existing from the beginning of
Capricorn to the end of Gemini, he will experience the contrary, for he will
buy cheap and sell deer, and it is the opinion of good Authors, that this Rule
holds not only in Beasts and Cattle, but in all things that any one can buy or
sell whatsoever, always, not pretermitting or forgetting that Fortunes
meliorate, and augment the good, and diminish the evil of a thing, and contrary
the infortunes, always augment the evil, and dimish the good, every one both
good and bad, according to his nature, and according to the virtue and power
they have, to help, or hurt, to augment, or diminish. 11. The next
consideration is to show how to Elect a fit and convenient time and hour,
wherein the King, or any person may with the more facillity, take or Debilitate
his Enemy, and this is best done when the 12th House is unfortunated, and weak,
and the Lord thereof unfortunated also, and this affliction to the 12th House
and Lord thereof, shall be the better if it be caused by the Lord of the
Ascendant, but if this may not be, choose a time to prosecute a Theif, or
Enemy, when the is afflicted by the Sun, and the Sun strong and free from
affliction, and if the moon be afflicted from any other, and not from the Sun
it is as well: It is the Judgment of Atabarus, that when a Prince would take
and suprise an Enemy of less force then himself, let him state the moon in, or,
or in via Combusta, or with the or of the Dragon, or in the Ascendant because
the Ascendant is inimiced by reason of Opposition, or let the moon be aspected
by the Infortunes, or before her Eclipse three days, and let the Sun be safe
and free from the Malevolency of Infortunes, and a fortune, or fortunes, aspect
or possess the mid-heaven, this is for a certain Rule, that the more the moon
is infortunated, and afflicted, the more and the greater prejudice, befalls
the Enemy, by reason the moon has populer signification, and is Significatrix
of vulgar, inferior Relations, and Servants: Thus have we finished with
according to Brevity as premised, the Judgment of the best Authors and our own
experience, the Elections of the Twelve Houses; For which, Laudatus, and
Benedictus, sit deus, in sacula seculorum.
Here follows the Signification of the hours of the Planets, very useful in
their proper Significations.
THe Signification of the Planetary Hours, we have taken from the Judicials of
Abablez the Son of Zaed, and from the Book of Albumazar, his Book of Natural
things, confirmed by the Judgment of Haly and others, which here we thought
good to affix least our work might seem Lame, and defirient in any of those
Rules, and grounds, which the wise Ancient Sages have dictated to us.

After these Planatary Hours, we have also in like manner subjeyned, Elections
of the Moon, according to her Mansions, because a great part of the Arabians,
use and opperate by them, and are accounted acceptable Radixes for business, by
the Indians, as appears in the Books of Dorotheus and others, but observe, we
esteem not these Elections of Planetary Hours, nor the Mansions of the Moon of
so great virtue, force and efficacy, as the Elections before handled, which are
taken from the present true Position of the Planets, and their accidents, yet
these in their Notions, may be useful to us, and those Significations they
have, ought not to be despised.

Of the Hours of the Sun.
THe Hour of the Sun is Unfortunate in every thing, unless in Addresses to the
King, or Governor, and not always good in this neither, for all Accesses, and
Addresses about business, are to be shunned at, and near the Suns setting; This
hour of the Sun is not good to put on new Garments, because, the sickness of
the party usually, or some uncomfortable accident causes them to last to long;
Not good to bleed, or breath a Vein; Nor good to Deposite in any mane hands
Money, or any part of your Substance, by way of Partnership or Trade, not good
to begin any Building, nor to buy any Beasts; not good to accompany Naturally
with any Woman, yet in this hour good to apply our selves to Wisdom, and
Learning and to receive instruction, good to buy, and make provision of Arms,
to Ride and Hunt, let any one especially ill Husbands being from home, not
enter their Houses in this hour for fear of disquietness; This Hour is good to
receive Dignity and Honor, to apply to the Prince, or to manage affairs with
great persons, as also to take security from any person, on the behalf of
Money, or any goods or substance, by which profit and gain is expected, and if
you give any sum or goods to any one in this hour, usually the party to whom
it is given dies, before he receives it; If any one be taken with a Disease or
Distemper in the same, it usually converts to a strong Fevour, and ofttimes
falls into sounding Fits, which greatly afflicts the spirits and causes great
Detriment.

Of the Hour of Venus.
IN the Hour of Venus it is good to take Horse, to begin a Journey, but not to
enter a Ship to begin a Voyage, in the hour of Venus, and when she Rules, its
very good and the firest time for all Jocosity and Mirth for Play, for Women's
company, for Marriage and Contracts with Women, good to go from home, but if
abroad not good to enter your house in this hour, good to take Medicines, but
not good to let blood, nor to use Cupping-glasses, or Scarrification, not good
to plant Trees, nor to sow any Seed, not good to give Correction to any
Servant, Male or Female, nor to begin to make a New Garment, nor sleep in that
hour if you can avoid it; Its good to undertake or begin a Journey, upon Women's
occasions or in reference to such ends, this hour is good to act in all things
that relate too, or concern Women, boldness and Confidence is good to be
excercised in that hour, as also Concumbere Cum Muliere licite, he which
receives money on debt, or gift, or otherwise in that hour, usually dispendeth
it on Women, or foolishly in vicious Delights, and Idle Company, a Disease
invading at that time, its to be feared, has its Original from some Malevolent
humore afflicting, caused by the Illicite, and too frequent Company of Women
or the like.

Of the Hour of Mercury.
IN the hour of Mercury, break any Beast for the Saddle, good to write Letters,
to send Messengers, and Messages, to buy, sell, and deal in Merchandise, to
lend, and to receive what is due, to take Physic, to Graft and Plant, to make
Addresses to Princes, not good to Contract Matrimony, to buy either Land or
goods, or to re-enter your house being out, not to buy or hire Servants, nor to
change or remove from one house to another, neither to take any one out of
Prison, for he may quickly return thither again, good to begin any Building, to
dig Wells, and to sink Mines and the like, good to begin a journey, the party
shall receive gain and profit thereby, set Children to School to writing and in
this hour let them begin to be Disciplined in every Science, to put a Child
Prentice to a Merchant, to act in Merchandise, mutually to give, to pay, or
receive is good, he which in this hour borrows any sum, shall well perform
the payment thereof, and he which lends, or gives shall be well content, and
they shall mutually be satisfied each in other.

Of the Hour of the Moon.
IN the Hour of the Moon not good to begin any Building, or lay Foundations,
nor provide any Medicine to take, nor make New Clothes, nor buy Cattle
especially small Cattle, as Sheep or Swine, or the like; Good to sell Timber,
to cut and prune Hedges, to buy Fruits, or fruit Trees, to dig Wells, Pits, and
Quarrys, to Ride and back Horses, good to Complement and proffer respect to the
Feminine Sex, put Children to School to Read and write, prosecute and pursue an
Enemy, good to depart and leave your own Country but not good to re-enter it
again, its good to begin a Journey in this hour upon the death of any friend or
Kindred for he shall accomplish good thereby, but if the Moon be in the Terrene
Triplicity its contrary, he which lends Money in this hour, shall have great
labor, cost, and pain to recover it again, and after he despaires of the
recovery, it shall be Recovered, but not the whole sum.

The Significations of the Hour of Saturn.
IN this hour take no Medicine, neither make or put on any new Clothes, neither
cut your hair, or endeavor any Ornament about the Head, not good to enter into
a Ship to begin a Voyage, good to go out of your own house, if it be no
farther but that you return the same day, enquire after Enemies, Theives and
Fugitives, buy Arms, but purchase neither Man nor Maid Servants for they will
be Lazy, Nasty, sullen, self-willed and dogged, consult with good Company,
write Letters, good to mount some Beasts, as Asses or Mules, but not Horses, or
Mares for usually the Beast flings the Rider, or is slow or uncomso table in
the Journey, or grows lame by some mischance, not good to contend with Arms
against an Enemy, or to begin to pursue any Murderer, neither act in any
Arbitration, or where peace is to be made, in that hour open no vein, nor use
any Cupping-glasses, good to buy Leases, or to take Leases, and to buy Grain or
any sort of food, or Grain for Seed, not good to begin a long Journey, for the
Travellor sustains great peril and danger, or imprisonment, and suffers many
anexieties, and finds much Tartdity and delay, and he that in this hour begins
a Voyage to Sea shall be tossed with Waves, crossed with contrary winds, which will
cast him upon contrary shores, it is good to let Leases, to open the Earth by
digging, and to Plow, he which borrows, or receives the Substance of another
in his hand this hour, will be in danger of losing it, and perchance dye, or
lose his life, within a short time after, and he which takes a Disease in this
hour, it will long abide him, and become a Chronical distemper, and at last
probably dye under it.

Of the Hour of Jupiter.
IN this Hour give honor to Princes, to Ecclesiastical persons, and contract
Matrimony, use no Rigor toward Servants, neither Male nor Female, provide
Riding Apparel, and put them on in this hour, take no unpleasant posion, good
to depart out of house, or Country, buy no Arms, beware of fire, and all
igneal operations, not good to digg Wells or Pits, but very good to sow all
kinds of Seeds, and to plant all manner of Plants, very good to begin any
Building, good to Court the favor of Princes, not good to buy Beasts but good
to buy Birds, and Foul, you may not safely and prosperously enter your Ship,
not good to let blood, or to scarrify, he which begins a Journey may expect
good success, gain and profit, with comfort and benefit from some persons, or
parts that he expected not, good to apply to the Judges, and principal
Magistrates, he which lends or borrows shall have good success herein, and
whosoever falls into any Disease or Infirmity shall quickly be cured and helped.

Of the Hour of Mars.
THe Hour of Mars is to be avoided and has Ill Signification, in the beginning
of every Action, as also not good in the prosecution, unless it be to them to
whom Mars is Benevolent in their Nativities, yet to these also is fear of
Rashness, and over much have, in their Actions begun, or continued in this
hour: Therefore its our wisdom to forbear inception in this hour, where
necessity does not compel.

Of the Mansion of the Moon.
THese Mansions are judged by the Ancients, to be of great efficacy as to the
variation, and state of the weather, as also to general contingent Actions.

And not without ground, by reason of those Eminent fixed Stars, which have
their Positions, accord-to their different Natures, in those different
Divisions of the Zodiac; Three things are necessarily herein observed. As,
First the Number. Secondly, the Limmitation. And Thirdly, the Nature of these
Mansions.


The Indian Authors according to Iaphar divided the Zodiac into 27. parts, and
accounted 27. Mansions of the Moon, allowing 13. Degrees 20. Minutes to every
Mansion, which orderly and accurately divides the whole Zodiac being 360.
Degrees, into 27. equal parts.

But the general Currapt of Antiquity, and all modern Authors do constitute
28. Mansions of the Moon and so divide the Zodiac into 28. parts.

2. The first of these Mansions has its beginning accounted from the first
Star in the Right horn of Aries, which in the beginning of time was in the
first Degree of Aries, but now is divolv'd by reason of the precession of the
Aequinox, (according to our best and latest Authors Morinus, and Mr. Wing,) to
the 28. degreend 28 minutes of Aries, where the first Mansion takes beginning,
and has its Limitation, to the 11. Degree 11. minutes of Taurus, as shall be
observed in the following Table, with each particular Demention, and Limitation
of every Mansion.

3. These are observed to be efficatious in the Moon and all the other Planets,
passing through them, by reason of the different Nature of the fixed Stars in
their several Asterisms posited in them, as for Example, when the Sun passes
the 10th. Mansion in Leo his proximity to the Dog Star, angments his heat, Et
sie de Aliis.

Behold the Table of the Moons Mansions according to Astronomy.
1 Somewhat dryer then the Temperament. gr. 28. 28. 2 Temperate 11. 11. 3 very
Moist. 24. 3. 4 Cold and moist. 6. 55. 5 Dry. 19. 47. 6 Temperate. 2. 39. 7
Moist. 15. 31. 8 Cloudy and inclining to moisture. 28. 23. 9 Dry. 11. 15. 10
Moist. 24. 7. 11 Somewhat more cold then the Temperament 7. 0. 12 Moist. 19. 50.
13 Temperate. 2. 43. 14 Temperate inclining to moisture. 15. 35. 15 Moist. 28.
27. 16 Cold and moist. 11. 11. 17 Moist. 24. 3. 18 Dry. 6. 55. 19 Moist. 19.
47. 20 Temperate. 2. 39. 21 Moist. 15. 31. 22 Temperate. 28. 23 23 Moist. 11.
15. 24 Somewhat Cold. 24. 7. 25 Dry. 7. 0. 26 Somewhat Dry. 19. 50. 27 Moist. 2.
43. 28 Temperate 15. 35.

THe Astronomical Signification of the Mansions, being mentioned in the
foregoing Table; Its necessary to add the Astrological Significations, which
according to the minds of the best Authors are as follows.

The Moon being in the first Mansion, which appears by the foregoing Table,
begins in 28. Degrees of Aries, and ends in 11. Degrees old minutes of Taurus,
its generally good in Merchandise, to vindicate himself against his Enemies,
indifferent good for Journey, Dorothius is of opinion that its not good to
marry, or contract Marriage in that time that the moon passes those degrees,
good to buy tame beasts, its not good to undertake a voyage by water by reason
of sudden fear and danger, neither contract any Society, or bargain with a
Superior for fear of vexation and trouble to follow thereupon; nor enter into
Bond, for the issue will be very bad; that person which is imprisoned in that
hour, is like to sustain a long and chargeable Imprisonment; this time is good
for all operations wrought by Fire, good to Hunt, good to take Physic
especially Laxatives, good to buy Sheep or Oxen, to plant Trees to sow Seed,
and to put on new Cloths, 2. The second Mansion begins at the 11th. Degree of
Taurus and ends at the 24th. degree of the same Sign; Its good for Women to
deck themselves with new Apparel and Ornaments, good to sow Seed, to ruin old
Edifices and to build new; because what building you then begin shall be firm
and durable, indifferent good for Journey, not good to contract Matrimony, by
reason the Bride will be apt to love and fancy others; Its good to hire
Servants, or buy Captives because they will be diligent, trusty and faithful,
good to buy laboring and domestic Cattle, not good to Journey by water by
reason of Wind and Waves, not good to join friendship, or to enter society with
one greater then your self in power, he which is imprisoned in this time
suffers a long and chargeable Captivity, very good for all building, for
digging of Wells and making conveyances for Water, to hire Servants Male and
Female, to apply to Princes and great men, on the behalf of dignity and honor,
in the expectation of reward very good, not good to Purge or Vomit. 3. The Moon
transiting her third Mansion as appears by the Table foregoing; Its good to
Marry and contract Marriage, good to set children to School to write and read,
to make up Medicines, and to Travel, the moon being free from infortunes and
from Combustion, good to hire Servants to have them true and honest, for
Building, Bathing, and washing; not good to contract friendship, nor to be
Imprisoned because of long durance, yet he shall at last pay and come off well.
4. The moon in the fourth Mansion, the Indian Philosophers say, its very good
for a Prince to give Battle, to manage and marshal his Army for advantages,
good for the besieging the Enemies Camp, and Cities, and to prosecute and
pursue an Enemy, and Malefactor, its not good to sow, nor to lend, nor to
demand Money lent, good to Journey by Water and Sea, in reference to the
success, yet no quick return, good to contract friendship, and Partnership,
because they will one be faithful to the other, that party that is commanded to
Prison, is in hopes of liberty within three days, if not he suffers long
detainment, good to hunt, not good for any kind of Physic, nor to open any
dangerous wound; that party that puts on New Apparel will quickly have the
same torn, rent, or spoiled, not good for marriage. 5. The Moon existing in
this Mansion, its good to Plough and sow all manner of seed in its due season,
also good for the adornment of the body with new Clothes, and other Ornaments,
to Ride and the like; he which journeys by Water shall go to his journeys end
according to his desire but shall but slowly return, friendship or Partnership
contracted in this time shall be commendable, convenient and profitable to the
Parties he which is imprisoned in this time unless he have deliverance in three
days, is in danger to dye in Prison. Good to wash, Bath, and deck the hair, to
put on new Apparel, to buy Beasts, to hire Servants, to prosecute an Enemy,
and to compound Enmity, but its evil in purchase of Land, or bargains for
Houses, and to take Physical Potions, as also to begin or attempt that thing of
which he fears the event, or has lately had ill success therein, because he
shall fall in the same inconvenience again. 6. The Moon being in this Mansion,
good to take Physic, for Women to deck themselves with Ornaments, and new
Attire; its affirmed that the Rain that salls when the Moon is in this
Mansion, does more good then ordinary, yet not good for travel by Land:
Dorothius affirms that Marriages that are contracted in this time, shall a
while continue in concord and unity and afterward Discord and disagree, the
Servant that is bought or hired in this time shall be a Deceiver, a Fugitive
and a deceiver of his Master, he which enters a Ship to voyage therein, he
shall safely and quickly arive at his Port and very speedily return, but for
Partnership and contracts to be made herein, not good, for fraud and deceit
shall be practiced on both hands, he which is cast into Prison a long time
continues therein etc. 7. The Eastern Philosophers tells us the Moon being in
this Mansion, its not good to sow any seed, neither to travel, nor to lend any
thing to another, neither to attempt any thing against an other person of
prejudice; other Authors tells us its good for him that sets sail at this time
for he shall quickly go to his own liking, and speedily return; Parties that
join society at this time shall be deceptious and false the one to the other;
the Party imprisoned stays long by it, not good to cut hair, or to make or put
on New clothes, because he is in danger to be drowned or to dye with them, good
for all things of strength and fortification, good to change seed, Wheat and
the like, good to furnish a house with Bedding and the like, that one may
peaceably enjoy and quietly sleep in the same. 8. The Ancients say its good
herein to contract Matrimony, and any part or League of friendship because the
parties shall be helpful to each other, not good for travel nor for new
Clothes, nor bravery, good to lay the foundation of a Building, because of
durabillity, and continuance, not good to trust or lend any thing, any person
imprisoned by the command of his superiors, will suffer long durance, and his
release very difficult. 9. Not good for releasing a Prisoner, or dismissing
Captives, good for sowing and Planting, good to besiege any place, Town, or
Castle, indifferent for Journey and travel, as also for Merchandising, for
buying, and selling those Buildings whose foundations are then laid shall long
endure, those Parties that then contract society and friendship shall be
profitable and helpful each to other, Partners will much advance each others
gain, good to cut hair or wool, not good for new Clothes nor for
Imprisonment. 10. The Moon passing this Mansion its good to begin any Building,
to let out Land, and Gardens, for sowing and Planting, for Marriage, for
putting on new Clothes, for Ornaments of Women, and for Travel, but not good to
lend, for Dorothius says, he which lends at this time shall either never
receive his Money again, or else with great loss, and tedious vexation; and he
which enters a Ship in this time shall have a Laborius, dangerous, and
troublesome Voyage, and be long before he obtains his Port, Its good for buying
or hiring of Servants, and Beasts they will be strong and of good Stomachs; But
the moon passing the latter part of this Mansion, which is the beginning of
Virgo, although they will eat much, yet will be subject to some impediment in
the stomach, will be stubborn and disobedient. 11. The moon in this Mansion its
good to Plough to sow, to Travel, to marry both Widows and Virgins, to dismiss
Captives and to set Servants free, and to hire or buy Servants for they will be
honest and just; he which enters his Ship to begin his Voyage shall experience
a slow voyage; he will suffer much damage which shall then be cast into
Prison, yet at last shall obtain a good end, good to take Physic, to put on
new Apparel, to lay foundations for Building, to Solicit, and Petition the
Prince, Magistrate or Noble person, good for mirth and Recreations, and to cut
hair, and deck the head and body. 12. The moon passing this Mansion, its good
to marry Widows or the like, but not good in the Marriage of Virgins, by
reason Discontents will arise which may cause separation, they will not long
abide together. Good for Physic, to Plant and sow, but not to travel, neither
depose any goods or money in the trust of any one; the Servant that you take
will be trusty and faithful, and love well his Master; Fortunate to him which
then enters his Ship, and to them that contract association and Partnership,
for they shall much benefit each other, he which shall be taken as Prisoner,
shall quickly escape and be delivered. 13. In this Mansion its good to dig
Wells, Pits and Quaries, bad for Travel, good to cure Infirmities of body
proceeding from Ventosity and Windy causes, and not otherwise; Dorothius is of
opinion that those who then marry shall not long continue in unity and concord
but disagree, he which lends money at this time shall be in danger of losing
it; unfortunate to all that begin Travel by Land or Sea, if any enter into
society of friendship or Partnership, they will defraud each other and
disagree, good to remove from House to House to near habitations, if you aptate
the second House his Lord, and the Planet signifying the Place to which you
remove, good to buy and sell all but beasts, and to make requests of good turns
to any one, as also to hire Servants, but not good to cut hair or any thing
you would have grow again. 14. Its not good for travel, nor Physic the moon
passing this Mansion, nor for any mercenary business, neither for sowing, nor
for new Clothes, nor the Ornaments of Women, its unhappy for Marriage because
discord will quickly grow, Its a good time to buy or hire Servants, because
then they will be faithful, diligent and just, but they which contract
partnership shall discord between themselves, and have a suspicious jealousy
each of other, he which is cast into Prison, there is hope of a speedy
deliverance. 15. The moon residing in this mansion, its very good to buy
beasts, and such Cattle as are kept in Flocks, and to put them to pasture, good
to be clothed with new apparel, and to lay siedge to any strong place, he
which supposes he marries a Virgin, is apt to be deceived and mistaken, a
building begun shall be firm and durable, he which enters his Ship shall
experience much anxitey and sorrow before he come out, bad to contract general
friendship, for they shall have continual discord, good to compose differences,
and Law controversies between parties, and to concilliate love, in a special
manner which shall always remain firm and durable, good for all manner of
Physic, not to cut hair nor to hite Servants. 16. The Moon in this mansion is
fortunate, to all manner of building, for Letting, Setting, buying and hiring
of Lands, for receiving dignity, place, and honor, if it begin to rain,
usually it is much or continues long, either Mars, Venus, the Moon, or Sun
passing this Mansion toward the latter end, commonly produce much rain, good
and profitable for travel, and most succesful to him that travels toward the
East, he that marries a Wife, the moon in this mansion with Mars, its almost as
rare as a black Swan if he find her a maid: Its bad to buy and hire servants,
those buildings raised at this time, shall be durable, he which enters his
Ship, shall safely come forth, like Noah out of the Arck, friendship herein
contracted will not hold, its good to Plant, and bad to cut hair and for new
clothes, good to take Physic, and to compose Medicines. 17. Its good and
fortunate to besiege Castles and strong holds, and to Skirmish, and Pikeer with
the Enemy, and to march, and journey; not good to trust, but good to sow and
Plant Trees: its hard to marry a Virgin at this time, its ill for hiring of
servants, and to enter a Ship, because the ship will hardly escape foundering
and dashing in pieces; friendship contracted, converts into enmity and very
ill, for a Captive and Prisoner. 18. Its good to buy Cattle great and small,
and for travel indifferent, if it rain it is good, and not ill, but very bad
for society and captives. 19. The Moon in this Mansion, its good to begin any
building, to buy seed, to buy beasts great and small, to buy or hire Lands, to
buy and make all manner of vestments for women and Ornaments, its but
indifferent good for travel, Dorothius an ancient Author, concludes, that a
woman parted from her husband, or becoming a widow, the Moon in this Mansion,
she shall never be married again, but remain single to her dying day, for
buying or hiring servants, this time is but indifferent, for the servant will
be prodigal, self-conceited, stubborn, self-wild, and of a refractory
condition, and will not humble himself to his betters. 20. This time is good
for Physic, and travel, (to begin either) unless in the latter part of the
day, toward night, which is not good; good to put on new garments, for the
party will enjoy health in the wearing of them, and the forementioned Author
says, that he which marries a wife in this time, shall quickly be parted or
else he dies within six months, or else such discord will arise, and she will
be so petulant, that it were better be dead; bad to take servants, for they
will be false, lazy and idle, and run away; good to enter a ship, but that
perturbations of mind will possess him about returning back, good to contract
society and Partnership, for thereby shall much gain and profit arise, he which
is imprisoned shall quickly escape, or be delivered. 21. The Moon in this
Mansion its good to administer Physic, to deck and beautify the body with new
Clothes, not good to depose money or any thing in trust with another, good for
a long journey, not good for Marriage, for the woman will abuse her Husband,
and they will not long abide together, bad to hire Servants, to enter a Ship,
or begin a short Journey, but good for friendship, and the party imprisoned,
shall quickly be delivered. 22. This time is not good, for Merchandising and
bargains, nor for Ornaments, nor New Apparel, neither good for Marriage, but
good for Physic, and for all things belonging to Soldiers Affairs, and
Martial employment, good to hire Servants for they will prove healthful,
willing and honest, not good to enter a Ship, and very bad for freindship and
Partnership, because it signifies great prejudice, loss, damage and discord in
the end, he which is imprisoned shall quickly be delivered. 23. The moon in
this mansion its held good to lay siedge to any City, Town or Castle, to manage
Engines, and to devise and use Stratagems against the Adversary, oppose and
pursue them, and to put any thing in execution that may tend to their
prejudice, its not good for marriage for they will not live long together, for
sowing seeds, nor for Merchandising, nether for buying Beasts great nor small,
its good for to receive Embassies, good to entertain Servants, for they will
be able, and willing to go through with their work, that Building which is then
begun shall be firm and durable, good to go on Shipboard, it is not good for
friendship or Partnership, because an evil end is signified, with loss, etc.
24. The moon passing this mansion, its good to set out on Travel in the morning
till ten a clock, and not after, to begin any new business is not good, not
good to Marry unless you would quickly be rid each of other, good to hire and
entertain Servants, to lay new Foundations, to enter on Shipboard, only to him
which then imbraques himself it signifies delay, bad to enter Partnership, and
he which is imprisoned shall long induce hardship. 25. The Moon in this Mansion
it is good to sow, and profitable to deal in Merchandise, but not good to
trust or lend, good for Marriage, indifferent for Travel, not good to begin a
Sea-voyage, for loss labor, danger and trouble attends him, he which contracts
friendship, or Partnership shall have in the beginning good, but in the end
damage and discord, he which is made Prisoner hardly ever escapes, not good to
Hire a Servant, for fear of evil qualities. 26. The Moon in this Mansion, its
good for Merchandising, Seminating, and medicating, but neither good to trust
nor lend, good for Marriage, and indifferent for Travel, but that Servant, you
buy, take, or hire at this time, will be evil disposed, dogged, surly, and
insufferable proud, partnership in the beginning will be good, but the end
evil; A Prisoner now committed, scarce ever departs Prison. 27. The Moon in
this Mansion it is good to take Physic, to put beast to Pasture, to travail,
but not good to marry, or contract Matrimony, not only whiles the Moon is in
this Mansion, but whiles she passes thorough the whole sign of Aries, not
good to hire Servants the Moon in this Mansion, for they will be of evil
Condition, Disobedient, and will run away: Good to buy domistick Beasts, and to
set sail, because the signification argues a good voyage, and good success,
not good to enter partnership, because they will fall out, wrangle, and part in
passion, he which is imprisoned at this, time shall have strong, long, and hard
Imprisonment, good to make and prepare Arms, to plant trees, to cut hair, and
wool, to cut nails, or hoofs of cattle, to put on new clothes, and any thing
that tends to ornament, the Moon passing thorough the whole sign of Aries not
afflicted by any Malignant position. 28. The Moon in this last Mansion, it is
good to sow, to travel, but not good for Marriage, and for Servants, and
Captives, the same as in the former, very bad.


ERRATA.
PAge 1. l. 17. dele a. p. 9. l. 16. r. from. p. 42. l. 2. r. 5th. p. 43. l. 4.
r impertinent vide p. 71. l. ult. r. thing.

An Alphabetical Table of the Principal Matters Contained in this second part
being the Doctrine of Elections.
ACquaintance vid. friendship. Amity. Fol. 180. Aphorisms from Fol. 42. to 60.
Apparel, vide Garments. Art or Mystery. Fol. 164. Arms. Fol. 167. Artists in
general. Fol. 169. Arguments against Elections answered. Fol. 30. Assendents
the best. Fol. 63. Astrology useful, etc. Fol. 13.
B. Bathing. Fol. 116. 212. 214. Battle, vide. fighting. Bargains. Fol. 116.
Benefit desired. Fol. 181. Beseigeing. Fol. 141. 212, 216. 222. 225. Beginning
any work. Fol. 62. 71. Bleeding. Fol. 118. Borrowing goods, Fol. 203. 205.
Bonds not to be entered into. Fol. 210. Building. Fol. 71. 90. 92. 94. 204. 211,
212, 216. 221. 225. Buying cattle or other commodities. Fol. 75. 220, 221.
Buying and selling, 76. good for buyer, 77. good for seller, ibid. Buying in a
mnrket. Fol. 78. Buying hidden commodities. Fol. 79. Buying a good horse. Fol.
190, 191, 192. Buisiness done by a man's self, or to which help of others is
required. Fol. 47. Business sudden and requiring speed. Fol. 56. 64.

C. Children to Nurse. Fol. 68. Children weaned. Fol. 68. Children to learn
arts. Fol. 100. 154. 200. Children to School. Fol. 200. 201. 212.
Churchwardens, etc. Fol. 69. Chemistry. Fol. 82. Clothes, vide, garments.
Complexions predominant. Fol. 111. Commands from Cities. Fol. 141. Conception.
Fol. 99, 100. Conquest with Honor. Fol. 141. Controversy. Fol. 53. 221.
Covenants. Fol. 172. Country to leave. Fol. 201. Credit, vide, fame. Crisis.
Fol. 118. Crops of corn sold on ground. Fol. 79. Cupping glasses. Fol. 113.

D. Dead child in the womb. Fol. 108. Decoys of doves and ducks. Fol. 109.
Desires accomplished. Fol. 67. 173. Dice. Fol. 145. 187. Diet in feasts. Fol.
106. Dignities. Fol. 163. Disease. Fol. 199. 203. 205. Dispatch desired. Fol.
49. Disquietness to prevent. Fol. 197. Distemper general of the body. Fol. 113.
Diurnal election. Fol. 49. 54. Dowry. Fol. 150. Dwelling. Fol. 134. Durable.
Fol. 49. 72.

E. Elections about what conversant. Fol. 1. Elections to what house of the
figure belonging. Fol. 44. Embassies. Fol. 154. End of a thing. Fol. 149.
Enemies to debillitate. Fol. 193. Enmity to compound. Fol. 214. Events false.
Fol. 71. Eyes to cure. Fol. 116. 130.

F. Fame. Fol. 174. Feasting. Fol. 106. Fighting. Fol. 135. 136, 137. 212.
Fishing. Fol. 187. Fixed stars. Fol. 59. 67. Fortification. Fol. 216.
Friend-ship desired. Fol. 176, 177, 178. 213. 215, 216. 220. Fugitive to
pursue. Fol. 113. 149. 202. Furnishing a house Fol. 215.

G. Garments new when to put on. Fol. 70. 102. 202. 204. 213. 215. 217, 218.
222. 224. 227. Gain desired. Fol. 75. Generation. Fol. 98. General of Armies.
Fol. 8. General Observations. Fol. 4. Gifts, Presents, or rewards. Fol. 103.

H. Hair when to cut. Fol. 72. 202. 214, 215. 217, 218, 219. 227. Honor. Fol.
75. Horroscope. Fol. 45. Horses to break. Fol. 199. 201. Houses taking and
letting. Fol. 80. 210. Houses first entered into. Fol. 90. House signifying the
thing for which the election is made. Fol. 44. 46. Hour of to be avoided. Fol.
205. Hours of the Planets. Fol. 195. Hunting. Fol. 134. 188. 213. Husbandry.
Fol. 75. 213. 217. 220.

I. Inception. Fol. 62. 71. Intention of the querent to be free. Fol. 63.
Invasion of enemies. Fol. 134. Impossibillities not to be attempted. Fol. 61.
Imprisonment Fol. 200. 210, 211. 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 224. 226, 227.
Iournies. Fol. 75. 86. 152. 154. 155, 156. 198, 199. 201. 204. Iron
instruments. Fol. 113, 114.

K. King of China his practice. Fol. 13. King of Sweden slain. Fol. 19.

L. Lands to purchase. Fol. 214. Latitude of the place, etc. Fol. 63.
Lawsuits. Fol. 53. 221. Leases to buy. Fol. 203. Love Affairs. Fol. 134

M. Malevolents to be heeded, Fol. 58. 62. Merchants. Fol. 159, 200. 210. 226
Marriage. Fol. 8. 132. 198. 211, 212. 214. 217, 218. 220, 221. Marriage
dangerous. Fol. 223, 224. 226, 227. Mathematics. Fol. 153. Medecines. Fol.
115. 198. 222. 211. 214. 218, 219. 222. Messengers. Fol. 100. 105. 199. Mills
building. Fol. 94. Mirth. Fol. 198. Money lent and borrowed. Fol. 74. 200, 201.
219. Money matters. Fol. 75. 213. Money to keep from damage. Fol. 76. Money to
be obtained formerly lent. Fol. 84. Moons signification. Fol. 51. Morinus
opinion. Fol. 14. Music. Fol. 157. Murderer to pursue. Fol. 203. Mines to dig.
Fol. 200.

N. Nails cutting. Fol. 69. 227. Nativity to be inspected. Fol. 43. Natural
Elections. Fol. 49. 54.

O. Officers. Fol. 65. Opparation by fire. Fol. 211.

P. Partner-ship. Fol. 197. 215. 217. 219, 220. 224. 227. Petitions. Fol. 50.
64. 183, 197. 200. 204. Philosophy. Fol. 167. Phisicians. Fol. 117. Physic,
vide medicine. Purges vide Medicines. Fol. Phlebotomy. Fol. 113. to 118.
Planting trees. Fol. 93. 200. 204. 211. Play vide Dice. Popular Affairs. Fol.
75. Preferment, ibid. Presents, vide gifts. Purchasing Inheritance, goodness of
the wood and crop. Fol. 90, 91.

R. Races. Fol. 188. Rain. Fol. 214. 221. Reconcilliation of enemies. 186. of
Kindred 88. of Father and Son. 91. to Superiors. Fol. 164. Removing from one
house to another. Fol. 80. 219. Removing one out of his place. Fol. 165.
Rewards, vide gifts. Riches. Fol. 74. Rivers conveying. Fol. 92. Rules
necessary relating to Elections. Fol. 42.

S. Seasons considered. Fol. 72. Secrecy in council. Fol. 69. Seed sowing. Fol.
93. 144. 204. 211. 228. Servants hyring. Fol. 116. 202. 211, 212. 214. 217,
218. 220. 224. 225. Ships building. Fol. 93. Significations congruent. Fol. 66.
Society. Fol. 211. 215, 216, 219. Spirits evil to eject. Fol. 143. 186. Speed
required. Fol. 56, 57. Standard of Kings. Fol. 144. Study of Arts. Fol. 167.
Substance of enemies. Fol. 150. Sweating. Fol. 129. Swimming. Fol. 168.

T. Testament. Fol. 151. Thief. Fol. 149. Tillage. Fol. 89. Timber to fell.
Fol. 201. Time of Accidents. Fol. 70.

V. Virgins, vide Marriage. Vomits. Fol. 115. Voyage at Sea. Fol. 156. 160.
202. 203. 212. 215. 217, 218, 219, 220. Utillity of Election. Fol. 10. 12.

W. Warlike affairs. Fol. 75. Weighty affairs. Fol. 64. Whispering of any
party. Fol. 146. Wives portion. Fol. 150. Will, vide Testament. Women love to
seek. Fol. 185 198, 199. 201. Women not to be meddled with. Fol. 197. 199. 221,
222. Writing. Fol. 75. 105. 199.

FINIS.

