OBSERVATIONS UPON THE STATUTE OF 22 CAR. II. Cap. 1. Entitled, An ACT to
Prevent and Suppress Seditious Conventicles.

By Sir Edmund Saunders, Knight. late Lord Chief Justice of England.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Dring, at the Corner of Chancery Lane in Fleetstreet.
1685.

TO THE Reader.
TO Recommend this small Treatise to thy perusal, there needs no more then the
Title with the Author's Name, whose Loyalty, Integrity, and profound Learning
in all the Laws of this Realm, were so eminent and conspicuous both while he
was at the Bar, and after his deserved advancement to the Bench, that 'twould
be impertinent to tell thee what a Reverence was always paid to his Opinions;
His Memory is so fresh, that I cannot suppose thee ignorant of the same, or
void of a profound respect to his very name, for the continuance of which, this
Manual is published, as also for the public good of the Realm, which was his
end in its Composition; the immediate occasion of writing these Observations
was to gratify the Requests of diverse of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace
for the County of Middlesex, who desired his Opinion in sundry points upon this
Statute for the better Government of themselves in the Execution hereof with
safety from the malicious Suits of the Dissenting Party, who were, and always
are ready to take advantage of the least slip or mistake of any of the King's
Officers of the Peace. The Lord Saunders being sensible thereof, as likewise of
the great use of this Law, and the necessity of its Prosecution in order to
preserve the public Peace and Quiet of the Kingdom, did write this Explanation
of it even while he was Lord Chief Justice of England, it being all of his own
Handwriting, so far as page 79. where you will see the Additionals printed
with this mark before them ': The great multiplicity of business in his Place,
and the unhappy indisposition of his Body did prevent the completion thereof,
he often wishing for but a few hours time to perfect it; For the residue, as it
had not the same Author, so neither does it expect the same Authority, it
being added as an Essay to supply what was left undone, and yet the supplement
may be not without its use, being made as near as possible to the Lord
Saunders's sense in other Paragraphs, and according to his Method and Rule are
the Constructions made even in such manner as may most advance the Remedy, and
suppress the Mischief intended by this Law, and are mostly grounded upon
approved Opinions and Resolutions of the Judges on this Law, and other Laws of
this Nature. For the Subject, it is well known that this Act never received any
public. Animadversions, and yet does perhaps need an Explanation as much as
those against Recusancy, on which there have been Observations made and
Printed, and not without Approbation. For the seasonableness of this
Publication, there needs no other Apology than what the Age we live, and the
Book it self do bespeak, and if it may prove any way serviceable to the
Public, by being helpful to the Justices and other Officers of the King's
Peace, the Reverend Author's Design, as well as that of the Publisher will
both be accomplished.

Some Books Printed for Thomas Dring over against the Inner Temple Gate in
Fleet Street.
Law, in Folio.
THE Statutes at large, from Magna Charta, to this present year 1682. in
Paragraphs and Sections, with References to the Books of the Law, and an exact
Table: By Joseph Keble of Gray's Inn Esquire in folio.

Kebles Assistance to Justices of the Peace for the easier performance of their
Duties.

Collection Entries, etc. By William Rastall; fol.

The Lord Cokes Book of Entries.

-- His Commentary on Littleton, being the first part of the Institutes.

-- His Commentary on Magna Charta, etc. or the second Part of the Institutes.

-- His Pleas of the Crown, or third Part of the Institutes.

-- His Jurisdiction of Courts, or fourth Part of the Institutes.

-- His 11 Reports in French, with a Table, and the twelfth and thirteenth in
English.

An Abridgment of Cases, and Resolution of Law, contained as well in the
Law Books, Statutes and Records, as of modern Judgments in the Courts of
Westminster. By H. Roll, Sergeant at Law: Published by the Lord Chief Justice
Hales.

The Year Books, in 10 Volumes, the last Edition, with new Notes and Tables to
them all.

Origines Juridiciales; or an Account of the English Laws, Courts of Justice,
Forms of Trial, Punishment in Cases Criminal, Law-Writers, Law Books, Grants
and Settlements of Estates, etc. Also a Chronology of the Lord Chancellors,
Keepers, Treasurers, Justices Itinerant, Judges, Barons, Masters of the Rolls,
Kings Attorneys, and Sollicitors and Sergeants at Law. By Sir William Dugdale
Knight.

Tables to most of the printed Prosidents of Pleadings, Writs and Return of
Writs at the Common Law. Collected by George Townsend.

Anno XXII. Caroli II. Regis.
An Act to Prevent and Suppress Seditious Conventicles.
FOR Providing farther and more speedy Remedies against the growing and
dangerous Practices of Seditious Sectaries, and other Disloyal Persons, who
under pretense of tender Consciences, have or may at their Meetings Contrive
Insurrections, (as late Experience has shown) Be it Enacted by the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by
Authority of the same, That if any Person of the age of Sixteen years or
upwards, being a Subject of this Realm, at any time after the tenth day of May
next, shall be present at any Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting under Color or
Pretense of any Exercise of Religion, in other manner than according to the
Church of England, in any place within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of
Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, at which Conventicle, Meeting, or
Assembly, there shall be Five Persons or more assembled together, over and
besides those of the same Household, if it be in a House where there is a Family
Inhabiting, or if it be in a House, Field, or Place where there is no Family
Inhabiting: Then where any five Persons or more, are so Assembled as aforesaid,
It shall and may be lawful to and for any one or more Justices of the Peace of
the County, Limir, Division, Corporation or Liberty, wherein the Offense
aforesaid shall be committed, or for the chief Magistrate of the Place where
such Offense aforesaid shall be committed; And he and they are hereby Required
and Enjoined, upon Proof to him or them respectively made of such Offense,
either by Confession of the Party, or Oath of Two Witnesses (which Oath the
said Justice and Justices of the Peace, and Chief Magistrate respectively, are
hereby Empowered and Required to Administer) or by nororious Evidence and
Circumstance of the Fact, to make a Record of every such Offense under his or
their Hands and Seals respectively: which Record so made as aforesaid, shall to
all intents and purposes be in Law taken and adjudged to be a full and perfect
Conviction of every such Offender for such Offense; and thereupon the said
Justice, Justices and chief Magistrate respectively, shall impose on every such
Offender so convict as aforesaid, a Fine of Five shillings for such first
offense, which Record and Conviction shall be certified by the said Justice,
Justices or chief Magistrate at the next Quarter Sessions of the Peace, for the
County or place where the Offense was committed.

And be it farther Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if such Offender so
Convicted as aforesaid, shall at any time again commit the like Offense or
Offenses, contrary to this Act, and be thereof in manner aforesaid Convicted;
Then such Offender so convict of such like offense or offenses, shall for every
such offense incur the Penalty of Ten Shillings, which Fine and Fines, for the
first and every other offense, shall be levied by Distress and sale of the
Offenders Goods and Chattels; or in case of the Poverty of such Offender, upon
the Goods and Chattels of any other person or persons, who shall be then
convicted in manner aforesaid of the like Offense at the same Conventicle, at
the discretion of the said Justice, Justices or chief Magistrate respectively,
so as the Sum to be levied on any one person in case of the poverty of other
Offenders, amount not in the whole to above the Sum of Ten pounds, upon
occasion of any one Meeting as aforesaid. And every Constable, Head-borough,
Tythingman, Churchwardens, and Overseers of the Poor respectively, are hereby
Authorized and reauired to levy the same accordingly, having first received a
Warrant under the hands of the sald Justice, Justices or thief Magistrate
respectively so to do; the said moneys so to be levied, to be forthwith
delivered to the same Justice, Justices or chief Magistrate, and by him or them
to be distributed; The one third part thereof to the use of the Kings Majesty,
his Heirs and Successors, to be paid to the High Sherift of the County for the
time being, in manner following; That is to say, The Justice or Justices of
Peace shall pay the same into the Court of the respective Quarter Sessions,
which said Court shall deliver the same to the Sheriff, and make a Memorial on
Record, of the payment and delivery thereof, which said Memorial shall be a
sufficient and final Discharge to the said Justice and Justices, and a Charge
to the Sheriff, which said Discharge and Charge, shall be certified into the
Exchequer together, and not one without the other: And no Justice shall or may
be questioned, or accountable for the same in the Exchequer, or elsewhere, than
in Quarter Sessions; Another third part thereof to and for the use of the Poor
of the Parish where such Offense shall be committed; And the other third part
thereof to the Informer and Informers, and to such person and persons as the
said Justice, Justices, or chief Magistrate respectively shall appoint, having
regard to their diligence and industry in the discovery, dispersing and
punishing of the said Conventicles.

And be it farther Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person who
shall take upon him to Preach or Teach in any such Meeting, Assembly, or
Conventicle, and shall thereof be Convicted as aforesaid, shall forfeit for
every such first Offense, the Sum of Twenty pounds, to be levied in manner
aforesaid, upon his Goods and Chattels; and if the said Preacher or Teacher so
Convicted, be a Stranger, and his Name and Habitation not known, or is fled,
add cannot be found, or in the Judgment of the Justice, Justices or chief
Magistrate before whom he shall be Convicted, shall be thought unable to pay
the same, the said Justice, Justices or chief Magistrate respectively, are
hereby Empowered and Required to levy the same by Warrant as aforesaid, upon
the Goods and Chattels of any such Persons who shall be present at the same
Conventicle; Any thing in this or any other Act, Law or Statute to the contrary
notwithstanding. And the money so levied, to be disposed of in manner
aforesaid: And if such Offender so Convicted as aforesaid, shall at any time
again commit the like Offense or Offenses contrary to this Act, and be thereof
Convicted in manner aforesaid, then such Offender so Convicted of such like
Offense or Offenses, shall for every such Offense, incur the Penalty of Forty
pounds, to be levied and disposed as aforesaid.

And be it farther Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person who
shall wittingly and willingly suffer any such Conventicle, Meeting, or
unlawful Assembly aforesaid, to be held in his or her House, Outhouse, Barn,
Yard, or Backside, and be Convicted thereof in manner aforesaid, shall forfeit
the Sum of Twenty pounds, to be levied in manner aforesaid, upon his or her
Goods and Chattels; or in case of his or her poverty or inability as aforesaid,
upon the Goods and Chattels of such persons who shall be Convicted in manner
aforesaid of being present at the same Conventicle; and the Money so levied, to
be disposed of in manner aforesaid.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person
shall by any Clause of this Act, be liable to pay above Ten pounds for any one
Meeting, in regard of the poverty of any other person or persons.

Provided also, and be it farther Enacted, That in all cases of this Act, where
the Penalty or Sum charged upon any Offender, exceeds the Sum of Ten shillings,
and such Offender shall find himself agrieved, it shall and may be lawful for
him within one week after the said Penalty or Maney charged, shall be paid or
levied, to Appeal in writing from the person or persons Convicting, to the
Judgment of the Justices of the Peace in their next Quarter Sessions; to whom
the Justice or Justices of Peace, Chief Magistrate, or Alderman, that first
convicted such Offender, shall return the Money levied upon the Appellant, and
shall certify under his and their Hands and Seals, the Evidence upon which the
Conviction past with the whole Record thereof, and the said Appeal: Whereupon
such Offender may Plead and make Defense, and have his Trial by a Jury
thereupon: And in case such Appellant shall not Prosecute with effect, or if
upon such Trial he shall not be acquitted, or Judgment pass not for him upon
his said Appeal, the said Justices at the Sessions, shall give treble costs
against such Offender for his unjust Appeal: And no other Court whatsoever
shall intermeddle with any Cause or Causes of Appeal upon this Act, but they
shall be finally determined in the Quarter Sessions only.

Provided always, and be it farther Enacted, That upon the delivery of such
Appeal, as aforesaid, the person or persons Appellant shall enter before the
person or persons convicting, into a Recognizance, to prosecute the said Appeal
with effect: Which said Recognizance, the person or persons Convicting, is
hereby Empowered to take, and required to certify the same to the next Quarter
Sessions: And in case no such Recognizance be entered into, the said Appeal to
be null and void.

Provided always, That every such Appeal shall be left with the person or
persons so convicting, as aforesaid, at the time of the making thereof.

And be it farther Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justice,
Justices of the Peace, and chief Magistrate respectively, or the respective
Constables, Headboroughs, and Tything-men, by Warrant from the said Justice,
Justices, or chief Magistrare respectively, shall and may with what aid, force
and assistance they shall think fit, for the better Execution of this Act,
after refusal or denial to enter, break open, and enter into any house or other
place, where they shall be informed any such Conventicle as aforesaid is or
shall be held, as well within Liberries as without; and take into their Custody
the persons there unlawfully assembled, to the intent they may be proceeded
against according to this Act: And that the Lieutenants, or Deputy Lieutenants,
or any Commissionated Officer of the Militia, or other of his Majesty's Forces,
with such Troops or Companies of Horse and Foot: And also the Sheriffs and
other Magistrates and Ministers of Justice, or any of them jointly, or
severally, within any the Counties or places within this Kingdom of England,
Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, with such other assistance as
they shall think meet, or can get in readiness with the soonest, on Certificate
made to them respectively under the Hand and Seal of any one Justice of the
Peace, or chief Magistrate, of his particular Information or Knowledge of such
unlawful Meeting or Conventicle held, or to be held in their respective
Counties or Places; And that he with such Assistance as he can get together, is
not able to suppress and dissolve the same, shall and may, and are hereby
required and enjoined to repair unto the place where they are so held, or to be
held, and by the best means they can, to dissolve, dissipate, or prevent all
such unlawful Meetings, and take into their Custsdy such and so many of the
said persons so unlawfully Assembled, as they shall think fit, to the intent
they may be proceeded against according to this Act.

Provided always, That no Dwelling House of any Peer of this Realm, where he or
his Wife shall be then resident, shall be searched by virtue of this Act, but
by immediate Warrant from His Majesty, under His Sign Manual; or in the
presence of the Lieutenant, or one Deputy-Lieutenant, or two Justices of the
Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum of the same County or Riding.

And be it farther Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Constable,
Head-borough, Tything-man, Churchwarden, or Overseer of the Poor, who shall
know, or be credibly informed of any such Meetings or Conventicles held within
his Precincts, Parish or Limits, and shall not give Information thereof to some
Justice of the Peace, or the chief Magistrate, and endeavor the Conviction of
the Parties, according to his Duty; but such Constable, Head-borough,
Tything-man, Churchwarden, Overseers of the Poor, or any person lawfully
called in and of the Constable, Head-borough or Tything-man, shall wilfully
and wittingly omit the performance of his Duty, in the Execution of this Act,
and he thereof Convicted in manner aforesaid, he shall forfeit for every such
Offense, the sum of five pounds, to de levied upon his Goods and Chattels, and
disposed in manner aforesaid: And that if any Justice of the Peace, or chief
Magistrate, shall wilfully and wittingly omit the performance of his Duty in
the Execution of this Act, he shall forfeit the sum of One hundred pounds, the
one moiety to the use of his Majesty, the other moiety to the use of the
Informer, to be recovered by Action, Suit, Bill or Plaint, in any of His
Majesty's Courts at Westminster, wherein no Essoin, Protection, or Wager of Law
shall lie.

And be it farther Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person be at
any time Sued for putting in Execution any of the Powers contained in this Act,
otherwise than upon Appeal allowed by this Act, such person shall and may plead
the General Issue, and give the special matter in Evidente; and if the
Plaintiff be Nonsuit, or a Verdict pass for the Defendant, or if the Plaintiff
discontinue his Action, or if upon Demurrer, Judgment be given for the
Defendant, every such Defendant shall have his full treble Costs.

And be it farther Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act, and all
Clauses therein contained, shall be construed most largely and beneficially for
the suppressing of Conventicles, and for the Justification and Encouragement of
all persons to be employed in the Execution thereof; And that no Record,
Warrant, or Mittimus to be made by virtue of this Act, or any Proceedings
thereupon, shall be Reversed, Avoided, or any way Impeached by reason of any
Default in form. And in case any person offending against this Act, shall be an
Inhabitant in any other County or Corporation, or fly into any other County or
Corporation, after the Offense committed, the Justice of the Peace, or chief
Magistrate, before whom he shall be convicted as aforesaid, shall certify the
same under his hand and seal, to any Justice of Peace, or chief Magistrate of
such other County or Corporation wherein the said person or persons are
Inhabitants, or are fled into; whith said Justice or chief Magistrate
respectively, is hereby Authorized and Required to levy the Penalty or
Penalties in this Act mentioned, upon the Goods and Chattels of such person or
persons, as sully as the said other Justice of Peace might have done, in case
he or they had been Inhabitants in the place where the Offense was committed.

Provided also, That no person shall be punished for any Offense against this
Act, unless such Offender be prosecuted for the same within Three months after
the offense committed. And that no person who shall be punished for any offense
by virtue of this Act, shall be punished for the same offense by virtue of any
other Act or Law whatsoever.

Provided, and be it farther Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every
Alderman of London for the time being, within the City of London, and the
Liverties thereof, shall have (and they and every of them are hereby Empowered
and Required to Execute) the same Power and Authority within London, and the
Liberries thereof, for the Examining, Convicting, and Punishing of all offenses
within this Act committed within London, and the Liberries thereof, which any
Justice of Peace has by this Act in any County of England, and shall be
subject to the same Penalties and Punishments, for not doing that which by this
Act is directed to be done by any Justice of Peace in any County of England.

Provided, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the person
offending and Convicted as aforesaid, be a Feme-Covert, cohabiting with her
Husband, the Penalties of Five shillings, and Ten shillings, so as aforesaid
incurred, shall be levied by Warrant, as aforesaid, upon the Goods and Chattels
of the Husband of such Feme-Covert.

Provided also, That no Peer of this Realm shall be Attached or Imprisoned by
virtue or force of this Act; Any thing, Matter or Clause therein to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall
extend to invalidate or avoid His Majesty's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical
affairs; but that His Majesty, and His Heirs and Successors may from time to
time, and at all times hereafter, Exercise and enjoy all Powers and Authorities
in Ecclesiastical Affairs, as fully and as amply as Himself or any of His
Predecessors have or might have done the same: Any thing in this Act
notwithstanding.

Some Observations upon the Statute of 22 Car. Secundi, Cap. 1. Entitled, An
Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles.
SECT. 1.
FOR providing farther and more speedy Remedies, etc. Besides the Statute of 16
Car. 2. cap. 4. which is, and at the time of making this Act was expired. there
were several other Acts yet in force, for the preventing and suppressing of
Seditious Conventicles, as the Statute of 35 Eliz. cap. 1. Entitled, An Act to
Retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due Obedience; which Act being
but Temporary at first by the Statute of 39 Eliz. cap. 18. was continued to the
end of the next Parliament, and by the Statute of 43 Eliz. cap. 9. was
continued to the end of the first Session of the next Parliament. And by the
Statute of 1 Jacobi, cap. 25. was continued until the end of the first Session
of the next Parliament. The same Parliament of 1 Jacobi, continued by several
Prorogations in 3, 4, and 7 Jacobi, so that the next Parliament after the
continuance of 1 Jacobi, was holden in 18 Jac. where only two Bills of
Subsidies past, and nothing more was done in that Parliament; whereupon in 20
Jac. it came to be a Question whether this Act of 35 were in force, or not, as
appears in Huttons Rep. fol. 61. The Judges being in doubt as it seems, by
reason of a Proviso in the Bills of Subsidies, that the Royal Assent to these
Bills should not determine that Session of Parliament, which doubtless it did
not; yet when the Parliament was afterward Dissolved, and nothing more done;
Co. 4. Inst. 27.28.
The passing of these two Bills being matter of Record, made it such a Session
of the next Parliament that discontinued this Act of 35 Eliz. But to prevent
the doubt afterward by the Statute of 21 Jacobi, cap. 27. It was Enacted that
so much of the said Act of 35 Eliz. as has not been since Repealed by any
other Statute, shall be adjudged ever since the Session of Parliament in 7
Jacobi, to have been of such force and effect, as the same was the last day of
that Session. And from thenceforth until the end of the first Session of the
next Parliament, which next Parliament was in 1 Car. Primi. And at the end of
that Parliament, this Statute of 39 Eliz. was again discontinued, but by the
Statute of 3 Car. 1. cap. 4. the Statute of 35 Eliz. viz. so much of it as has
not been Repealed by any other Statute, is continued to the end of the first
Session of the next Parliament in such force and effect, as it was on the first
day of the Session of Parliament holden in An. 1 Car. 1. And lastly by the
Statute of 16 Car. 1. cap. 4. in the close of a Temporary Act, Entitled, An
Act for the farther Relief of His Majesty's Army, and the Northern parts of the
Kingdom. All Statutes and Acts of Parliament (whereof the Act of 35 Eliz. is
one) which have their continuance, or were by the Act of 3 Car. 1. cap. 4.
made, are Enacted to have continuance until some other Act of Parliament be
made touching the continuance or discontinuance of the same, by which last Act
the Statute of 35 Eliz. is made perpetual; there having been no Act since made
either for the continuance, or discontinuance of the same. But yet there
remains one Question upon it still, viz. why the Acts of 21 Jac. and 3 Car. 1.
do not continue this Act of 35 Eliz. totally, but only so much of it as was
unrepealed by any former Act. To this it is answered; That in the Act of 35
Eliz. there are two Clauses, being the 8th and 9th Paragraphs on Mr. Keebles
Statute Book, the first, For imposing a Penalty upon such Persons as should
harbor or entertain in their Houses any Person, which should obstinately
refuse to repair to Divine Service by a Month. And the next Clause being a
Proviso, That the Law should not extend to the harboring of a Wife and other
Relations there named, are both Repealed by the Statute of 3 Jac. cap. 4. which
was the reason that the Statute of 35 Eliz. was not wholly continued, but only
so much as was Unrepealed, which is the whole Statute, save only these two
Clauses.

I have been the longer about this Act of 35 Eliz. to prove it in Force at this
day: for that notwithstanding the Judgment of the whole Parliament that it is
in Force declared in the expired Act of 16 Car. 2. cap. 4. by which every Man
ought to be concluded in point of Law; it has often been affirmed to me, that
the Act of 35 Eliz. was discontinued, and not now in Force: but such
Affirmation rather proceeded from affection to have it so, than from any other
Ground.

The Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 1. against saying and hearing of Mass.

The Statute of 13 and 14 Car. 2. cap. against Quakers.

The Statute of 13 and 14 Car. 2 cap. 4. for Uniformity of Public Prayers.

The Statute of 17 Car. 2. cap. 2. commonly called the Oxford Act, for
Restraining of Nonconformists from Inhabiting in Corporations. All which
Statutes, and several others did in part provide Remedies against the Seditious
Practices of Sectaries, and Disloyal Persons. And this Act provideth farther
and more speedy Remedies against them.

2. That is any Person, etc. This word Person extends both to Men and Women.
See the 16th Paragraph of this Act, And to Peers as well as Commoners. But
Peers are not to be Arrested or Imprisoned, as Commoners may be. See the 17th
Paragraph hereunder. So a Justice of Peace, or Mayor, or other head Officer,
being dofuntarily present at a Conventirle, for any other Cause, except for the
suppressing of it, may, and ought to be Condviued as an Ostendes within this
Law.

3. Of the Age of 16 years or upwards, etc. This is plain, and if Evidence be
given against a Person for being present at a Conventicle, who is of the
growth, or stature of a young Man, or young Woman, it is to be intended that
such Person is of the Age of 16 years, unless the contrary be specially made
appear. And in such Case the proof, or Onus probandi, rests upon the Offender
in such Convictions, whereupon there lies an Appeal by this Act, and so I take
it to be likewise where the Offender is Personally Convented at the time of his
Conviction, and objects not his Nonage to prevent his Conviction. But if one be
Convicted as an Offender when absent, from which Conviction no Appeal is given
by this Act, as where the Penalty is only 5 s. or 10 s. There, it may be the
Conviction will be utterly void, and the Offender may maintain an action of
Trespass against the Officer that Levies the Penalty of 5 s. or 10 s. upon his
Goods, for that he has no other Remedy to help himself. And therefore if the
Offender be present, when Convicted, it will be the safest way to mention it in
the Record.

4. Being a Subject of this Realm, etc. The word (being) relates to the time of
the Offense to be committed, and not to the time of passing the Act; for if an
Alien at the time of the Act passed, were afterward Naturalized, and
afterward be present at a Conventicle, he is within the word, Being a Subject,
etc. Though he were not a Subject of this Realm at the time of the Act passed.
It is next to be considered, who shall be said to be (or rather not to be) a
Subject of this Realm, within the meaning of the Act, for all men within the
Realm are Subjects to the King, either (1.) By Birth, as born in England, or
any other of the King's Dominions. (2.) By Naturalization, as where an Act of
Parliament of England gives an Alien the same Privileges that a Subject born
has, by reason of his Birth. (3.) By Denization by the King's Letters Patents,
whereby an Alien is made a free Denizen to purchase Lands, and to hold them to
him and his Heirs, which an Alien cannot do, or, (4.) By residing, or being in
England, under the King's Protection, as Aliens are, which makes them Subjects
to the King of England, so long as they remain in any part of his Dominions,
but no longer. But the word, Subjects of this Realm, in the Act intends a
distinction, that some Persons Inhabiting within the Realm, should not be
comprehended within the Law. And therefore by these words all Natural Subjects
born in any of the Kings Dominions. All Persons, that by Act of Parliament of
England, are Naturalized Subjects, and all Persons Endenized by the King's
Letters Patents under the great Seal of England, are comprehended within the
Law (I mean) are to undergo the Penalty of the Law, for being present at a
Conventicle. But Aliens resident in England, and those that are Naturalized, or
Endenized in Scotland. or Ireland, and not in England, and so continue still as
Aliens in England, are not within this Law, nor shall they be punished by it.
Now in this Case, as well as in the Case of Infancy, under the Age of 16 years,
the proof rests upon the Offender, for every one in this Case shall be presumed
to be a Natural Subject of this Realm, unless the contrary be made appear. And
the Conviction will be of the same effect against an Alien, as it is above
declared to be against an Infant; only this I conceive fit to add, that if an
Infant under 16, or an Alien, having been present at a Conventicle, be summoned
to appear before the Justice of Peace, or chief Magistrate, to show Cause why
he should not be Convicted for such offense, and refuses, or neglects to
appear, and make his defense, and thereupon he is Convicted; I take such
Conviction to be binding, and the Infant, or Alien shall never avoid it, and
the rather, by reason of the first part of the 13th Paragraph of this Act.

5. Shall be present at any Assembly, Conventicle, or Meeting, etc. Yet every
one that is present (though a Subject of the Realm, above the Age of 16) shall
not be punished as an Offender within this Law. For (1.) One that is an Idiot,
or a Lunatic, (unless it be during some lucid interval, wherein he enjoys the
use of his reason, so far as to be supposed knowing of what he does) though
present at a Conventicle, yet cannot be said to be present, under color, or
pretense of Exercise of Religion. (2.) One that is Imprisoned, and kept at a
Conventicle against his Will. For Actus non facit reum nisi men's sit rea; the
like may be said of him that is under a Terror of Bodily harm, by reason of
Threats or Menaces of others, which he could not otherwise avoid, but by being
present; but if a Servant by Command of his Master, or a Wife by Command of her
Husband, be present, this will not excuse them, because they might, (without
the Guilt of Disobedience) have refused to obey such Command; what if the
Husband enforce his Wife, co-habiting with him, to be present at a Conventicle
against her Will, whether is she to be Convicted or not? In this particular
Case I conceive she is; for by the 16th Paragraph of this Act, the Penalties of
5 s. and 10 s. are to be Levied upon the Goods of the Husband. And so the Wifes
being present at a Conventicle, is within the Letter, and the punishment of the
Husband is within the meaning of the Act. If one be present at a Conventicle,
to the end to detect, and discover the Conventicle, and to give Evidence
against the Offenders, in order to their Conviction, he is not an Offender
within this Law; but he that is present at a Conventicle, out of Curiosity to
observe what they say or do, he is an Offender against this Law, and ought to
be Convicted as well as any other.

6. Under Color, or pretense of any Exercise of Religion, etc. The Preamble of
this Statute says, That Seditious Sectaries, and other Disloyal Persons, under
pretense of tender Can sciences, at their Meetings contrive Insurrections. And
those Meetings were, and are commonly under Color, or pretense of Exercise of
Religion. Now if there be a Meeting of Sectaries, of the number of 5, or
upwards, above the Household, or of five, or upwards, where there is no
Household; but before they proceed to any pretended Exercise of Religion, they
are disturbed, and suppressed, the Question is, whether these, or any of them
may be Convicted for being present at a Conventicle, under Color, or Pretense
of any Exercise of Religion, seeing none was there Exercised? This is a
Question that may, and I suppose does often happen, and I take it somewhat
clear, that in such Case they may, and ought to be Convicted; For the chief end
and design of that Statute was to prevent Sedition and Insurrections, and as a
means to obtain that end, this Law is made to suppress Conventicies, where (as
the Statute takes notice) Sedition and Insurrections were contrived. Now if
they should not be Convicted, though there was no actual Exercise of Religion,
then their Plotting Sedition, and contriving Insurrections being the greater
Evil, should escape Correction, whilst a pretended Exercise of Religion being
the lesser Evil, as being but in order to the greater Evil of Sedition and
Insurrections, should be punished, which is not, nor could be the intent of the
Statute; for in my Apprehension, the Statute meant, to punish all those that
should meet together under pretense of Exercise of Religion, though none were
actually Exercised; for that it is the same, or a worse mischief, than if there
were any Exercise of Religion.

7. In other manner than according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of
England, etc. What the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England is,
appears by the Act of Uniformity of 13 and 14 Car. 2. cap. 4. which is commonly
printed before the Service Book, or Book of Common Prayer; so where there is
any Exercise of Religion in Public, that is, where five, or more be met
together, besides those of the same Household, there, if the Prayers in the
Service Book be not used, and directions of that Book observed, that is an
Exercise of Religion in other manner than according to the Liturgy, and
Practice of the Church of England. But it may be Objected that the Service Book
has appointed the Form of Public Prayers and Administration of the
Sacraments, etc. But has not appointed any Order to be observed in Preaching,
and therefore Preaching in a Conventicle cannot be said to be in other manner
than according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England; there
being no manner appointed by the Liturgy for Preaching. To To this it is
answered; that by the 22d Paragraph or Section of the Act of Uniformity, it is
Enacted, That at all and every time and times, when any Sermon or Leaure is to
he Preached, the Common Prayers and Service in and by the said Book (viz. the
Book of Common Prayer, appointed to be read for that time of the day) shall be
openly, publicly, and solemnly read by some Priest, or Deacon in the Church,
Chapel, or place of public Worship, where the said Sermon or Lecture is to be
Preached before such Sermon or Lecture be Preached, and that the Lecturer then
to Preach shall be present at the reading thereof. So that Preaching in a
Conventicle, where the Common Prayers appointed to be read for the time of the
day are not first solemnly read, is an Exercise of Religion in other manner
than according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England, and an
Offense against this Statute.

8. In any place within the Kingdom of England, etc. These words are plain, and
therefore if there be an Assembly or Meeting in a Church by five Persons or
more, under pretense of any Exercise of Religion in other manner than according
to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England, the same is a Conventicle
within this Act, where any one, or more present, who is of the Age of 16, or
upwards, and a Subject of this Realm, ought to be Convicted. But this is not to
be understood of Foreigners, and Aliens of the Foreign Reformed Churches,
allowed, or to be allowed by His Majesty, his Heirs, or Successors in England;
for the Act of Uniformity (which this was made to strengthen) does not extend
to them, as by the Proviso in the 15th Paragraph of that Act appears, and
which Prerogative of allowance to such Foreigners, or Aliens Churches is saved
to His Majesty by the last Paragraph in this Act.

9. At which Conventicle, Meeting, or Assembly, there shall be five Persons or
more Assembled together over and besides those of the same Household, if it be
in a House where there is a Family Inhabiting, or if it be in a House, Field,
or Place where there is no Family Inhabiting, then where any five or more are
so Assembled as aforesaid, then, etc. Now are we come to a complete definition
of a Conventicle within this Act, which is, where five or more where there is
no Household are met together under Color or pretense of any Exercise of
Religion in other manner than according to the Liturgy and Practice of the
Church of England, wherein these things are to be observed, (1.) That the
Person or Persons that are to be punished by this Law, for being present at a
Conventicle, must be of the Age of 16, or upwards, and a Subject of this Realm.
(2.) That though the Person to be punished, must have these Qualifications, yet
Aliens (or Minors) if they are of discretion, may make up the number of five,
to make it a Conventicle within this Law; as for Example, suppose five are met
together in a House, besides the Household, under Color and pretense of
Exercise of Religion in other manner than according to the Liturgy, etc. and
four of those are Aliens, and the fifth a Subject of the Age of 16, this is
nevertheless a Conventicle, though four of the five cannot be punished, as
being Aliens, yet the fifth being a Subject, shall be Convicted and punished by
this Law for being present at such Conventicle; for the Law describes him that
is to be Convicted, to be of the Age of 16, or upwards, and a Subject of this
Realm; but the Conventicle at which he was present, and for which he is
Convicted, is only to be a Meeting together, or an Assembly of five, or more
Persons, whether Aliens, or Subjects, is all one. (3.) That where there is a
Meeting in a House of five Persons, or above, besides those of the Household,
and so a Conventicle; there those of the same Household, if present at the
Conventicle, being of the Age of 16, and Subjects of this Realm may and ought
to be Convicted for being at the Conventicle, as well as any others. I think by
the word Household, both Lodgers and Inmates are included; so that there must be
five over and above the Household, and the Lodgers and Inmates as part of the
Household. (4.) The Preacher or Teacher in such Conventicles, though an Alien,
or not of the Age of 16, ought to be Convicted. See the third Paragraph of this
Act. (5.) If a Subject of the Age of 16, or upwards, be present at the Church
or Assembly of Foreigners or Aliens of the Foreign Reformed Churches allowed by
His Majesty, he is not to be Convicted for being at a Conventicle, for seeing
the Assembly it self is Lawful, he that is present at it cannot be said to
have committed an Offense within this Act.

10. Then where any five Persons or more are so Assembled, as aforesaid, it
shall and may be Lawful to, and for any one or more Justices of the Peace of
the County, Limit, Division, Corporation or Liberty wherein the Offense
aforesaid shall be committed, or for the chief Magistrate of the Place, where
the Offense aforesaid shall be committed, and he and they are hereby required,
etc. By this Clause are the Magistrates described that have Authority, and
ought to Convict Offenders for being at Conventicles, which are one or more
Justices of the Peace of the County (that is, where there are Justices of the
Peace of the whole County, as there are in most Counties in England) Limit, as
in Lincolnshire, where there are two Commissions of the Peace, one for the
parts of Holland, and another for the parts of Kesteven Division; as in
Torkshire, where there are three Divisions, namely, the East Riding, the
West Riding, and the North Riding, and a several Commission of the Peace for
each of those three Divisions; (Corporations) as London, York, Bristol, and
others that are Counties of themselves, and wherein the Justices of Peace for
the County at large, have nothing to do, or else such Corporations that
continue parcel of the County at large, yet have Justices of their own
exclusive to the Justices of the Peace of the County where the Corporation is,
so that the Justices of the County may not intermeddle. And lastly, Liberties
which have Justices of Peace within the Liberty, and yet the Justices of the
County or Riding where such Liberties have a concurrent Jurisdiction. Now if
where the Offense happens, be such a Liberty that the Justices of the County at
large may not intermeddle; then the Justice or Justices of Peace of such
Liberty are only bound to Convict the Offender; but if the Offense happens in a
Corporation, or Liberty where the Justices of the County have a concurrent
Jurisdiction with the Justices of the Liberty, there both the Justices of the
County, as well as the Justices of the Liberty, are bound upon Notice to
Convict the Offenders. Now what if the chief Magistrate, and one or more
Justices of Peace of the place, should jointly Convict Offenders, where the Act
says, That one or more Justices of Peace, or chief Magistrate, is such
Conviction good? I think it may be good enough, however I would not advise it
as safe, because it seems prejudicial to the Appeals given by this Act, for it
may fall out that all the Justices and chief Magistrate might Record the first
Conviction, and the Party grieved would have no Appeal but only to the same
Persons who Convicted him, which would be inconvenient. And yet it seems any
Justice or Justices of Peace of the Corporation or Liberty, as well as the
chief Magistrate of the place may make such Conviction, or all together, for
though the Appeal should happen to be given to the same Persons who made the
Conviction, yet that takes not away the benefit of such Appeal, for besides the
supposed honor and impartiality of the Magistrate making such Conviction, upon
the Appeal the Trial of the Fact is to be by a Jury, whereas the Conviction is
by the Opinion and Judgment of the Justice or Magistrate, and so as to the Fact
the Party does as it were Appeal to a Jury from the Justice. See hereafter,
Sect. 6. concerning Appeals.

11. Upon proof to him or them respectively made of such Offense either by
confession of the Party, etc. This Confession must be Judicial before the
Justice himself at the time of the Conviction, and not a Confession at another
time, or before other Persons; for such Confession, though sworn before the
Justices by sufficient Witnesses, is only an Evidence, or Circumstance of the
Fact, but not a ground to Convict the Offender ipso facto, as a Confession
before the Justice himself is.

12. Or Dath of two Witnesses, etc. An Infamous Person, as one Convicted of
Perjury, Forgery, or of Felony, and not having had his benefit of the Clergy,
nor pardoned, is by Law disabled to give Testimony in any matter or cause
whatsoever, and therefore cannot be one of the two Witnesses within this Act,
upon whose Oath the Offender is to be Convicted, nor ought to be suffered to be
sworn, if the Justice know him to be such; but if such Person be sworn, and the
Justice not knowing of such disability of the Party sworn, do proceed, and upon
such Oath, and upon the Oath of one other Witness, does make a Record of
Conviction, such Record will be good in Law, and bind, unless (where an Appeal
lies) it be avoided by Appeal according to the direction of this Act; a Jew
has been often admitted as a Witness by the Judge without the consent of
Parties, and sworn upon the Old Testament, and so I conceive he may be in this
Case. A man present at a Conventicle, though an Offender himself, is
questionless a good Witness to give Evidence in order to the Conviction of any
other for being present at the same Conventicle. A Man that is only Indicted of
Perjury, or any other Infamous Crime, but not Convicted, is a Witness, for no
Man is disabled to give Testimony upon Oath upon a bare Indictment only; note
in this Case the Oath of the Witnesses, and all other Evidence given upon Oath
before the Justice or Justices Convicting, should be put in Writing, and
subscribed by the Party swearing, or giving such Evidence at the time of his
Deposition or Examination, especially where an Appeal is given by this Act, for
that by the 6th Paragraph it is required, That upon an Appeal the Justice
certify to the Sessions the Evidence upon which the Conviction past, which he
cannot so well nor safely do, unless the Evidence be taken in writing and
subscribed by the Party upon whose Oath the same is taken.

13. Or by Notorious Evidence, and Circumstance of the Fact, etc. It is very
difficult, if not impossible to lay down the exact measure or bounds, what
shall be said to the Notorious Evidence and Circumstance of the Fact, and what
not, and therefore it must be left to the Judgment and Discretion of the
Justice, or Justices Convicting, upon weighing well, and considering of the
Case, what does appear to be a Notorious Evidence or Circumstance of the Fact.
But this is to be taken notice of particularly, that the proof of two things
are principally material. (1.) That there be a Conventicle, and, secondly, That
the Party to be Convicted, was present at it. Now if a Conventicle be kept, and
the same is afterward dispersed, and the Preacher or Teacher in such
Conventicle, or the Owner of the House where such Conventicle is held, or
several Persons present at such Conventicle be Convicted for such Offense,
afterward another Person by two Witnesses is proved to have been there, or
that he confessed he was there at the same time and place where the others
Convicted were, but the Witnesses cannot prove it a Conventicle; yet here is a
Notorious Evidence and Circumstance of the Fact sufficient to ground a
Conviction. If the Justice of Peace be present at the suppressing of an
Assembly of People, some of whom are immediately Convented before him, and
Accused for holding and being at a Conventicle in such Assembly, but no direct
proof be made that it was a Conventicle, farther, than that they were Assembled
together; if the Persons Convented can or will not give an account for what
other Cause they were so Assembled or met together, or if they or some others
at such Assembly are commonly known, and reputed to be frequenters of
Conventicles, or that they commonly (though not always) do neglect coming to
Church, or have declared, or any way made their dislike of, or aversion from
the Liturgy or Doctrine of the Church of England: This is (in any Opinion) such
a Notorious Evidence and Circumstance of the Fact, as is sufficient to ground a
Conviction within the intent of the Law, and in such and the like Cases the
Record of Conviction needs not make mention of any thing more, but that the
Offender is Convicted by the Notorious Evidence and Circumstance of the Fact,
without particularizing the Fact, for that where no Appeal lies, the Justice is
the sole Judge of the Notoriety of the Evidence and Circumstance; and where an
Appeal is given, there the Fact must be tried over again, and so the Offender
cannot be injured.

14. To make a Record of every such Offense under his or their Hands and Seals
respectively, etc, For the Form of such Record, see hereunder. And note, that
the subscribing the Justices hand to the Record, is absolutely Essential, for
though the Justice set to his Seal, and it be so mentioned in the Record (which
is as much as the Law requires in most Cases,) yet this Act requiring the
Record to be as well under his Hand as Seal; if it be not under both, the
Record, and all that is done in pursuance of it will be altogether void, though
it be not of absolute necessity that the Record should mention that the Justice
has put his Hand and Seal (so that it be actually done) but the better and
safer way is to mention it in the Record according to the Precedent.

15. Which Record so made as aforesaid, shall to all intents and purposes be in
Law taken and Adjudged to be a full and perfect Conviction, etc. So as the
Party Convicted shall be concluded to say that he is not guilty of the Offense
contained in such Record he is so Convicted.

16. And thereupon the said Justice, etc. shall impose on every such Offender
so Convict as aforesaid, a Fine of five shillings for every such first Offense,
etc. This imposing the Fine must be in the same Record of Conviction, and not
in any other Record by it self, and it is not safe nor justifiable, to make a
Warrant to Levy any Fine, but what is contained in the Record of Conviction.

17. Which Record and Conviction shall be Certified by the said Justice at the
next Quarter Sessions, etc. The next Quarter Sessions is intended next after
the Conviction, not next after the Offense committed; for perhaps the Quarter
Sessions next after the Offense committed, may be past before the Offenders be
Convicted. Next Quarter Sessions, i. e. for the place where the Offense was
committed, and the Conviction made, if by a Justice of the Peace for the County
at large, then to the next Quarter Sessions held for such County, if in a
Corporation, or other Liberty, by the chief Magistrate or Justice of such
place, then to the next Quarter Sessions for such place, if the Conviction be
made by a Justice of the Peace of the County for an Offense committed in a
Liberty or Corporation where the County Justices have a concurrent Authority,
then the same must be certified to the next Quarter Sessions of the County.
Note by the Statute of 2 H. 5. cap. 4. The Quarter Sessions are appointed to be
holden in all the Counties of England four times in the year, that is to say,
the first week after the Feast of St. Michael, and the first week after the
Epiphany, and in the first week after the close or end of Easter, and in the
first week after the Feast of Translation of St. Thomas the Martyr, which as I
take it, always falls upon the 7th day of July. These are the four Quarter
Sessions: But the same Statute directing that the Sessions should be held
oftener, if need were; the Sessions holden at other times are called General
Sessions, but not Quarter Sessions, by the Statute of 14 of Hen. 6. c. 4. The
Justices of Middlesex are bound to hold Quarter Sessions but twice in the year,
but they may (as they do) hold Quarter Sessions at the four times of the year
abovesaid, and each of these Sessions is a Quarter Sessions, and Sessions
holden at other times are General Sessions. Now every Quarter Sessions is a
General Sessions, yet every General Sessions is not a Quarter Sessions, and not
holden at the time appointed by the Statute of 2 Hen. 5. above mentioned.

SECT. 2.
1. THat of such Offender so Convicted as aforesaid shall at any time again
commit the like Offense, Obs.
etc. By this Clause these two Points are to be observed, (1.) He that is to be
Convicted, and to incur the Penalty of 10 s. must be Guilty of such Offense
after the time he was Convicted of the former Offense, and not only after the
time he committed the former Offense; for if one commit two or more Offenses
before he be Convict, he may be afterward Convicted for each of these
Offenses, but he shall only pay a Fine of five shillings for each Offense, and
not 10 s. for either one of them; for that though he Offended twice, or oftener,
yet he never Offended after he was once Convicted. (2.) Where any one is
Convicted for the second Offense, whereby the Penalty of 10 s. is imposed on
him, the Record of such Conviction ought to mention and take notice of the
Record of the former Conviction.

2. Which Fine and Fines for the first and every other Offense shall be levied
by distress and sale of the Offenders Goods and Chattels, etc. But the Officer
may seize ready Moneys of the Offender if he can find it in his House, but he
may not take it from the Person of the Offender, and by the word Chattels, must
be understood Personal Chattels, which may be distrained, or levied as well as
sold, and therefore a Lease for years, or other real Chattel, cannot be sold by
the Officer for levying any Penalty imposed by virtue of this Act. Goods and
Chattels, this reaches to the Utensils, Tools, and Instruments of Trade, as
well as any other Goods and Chattels; for the rule of the common Law (that
exempts such, (where there is sufficient besides) from distress,) extends not
where distress is given as an Execution by any particular Statute, as for Poors
Rates, Hearth-money, and so the like on this Law, and governs only in
distresses for Rents, Amerciaments, and the like.

3. Or in Case of the Poverty of such Offender, etc. What shall be said in a
case of Poverty, and how shall it be determined, I conceive the Justice is the
Judge of it, and may determine it at the time of the Conviction, and thereupon
impose the Fine upon any other Convicted of the same Offense; but if the Party
Convicted be taken to be Responsible, and a Warrant is made to Levy, and
afterward the Constable, or other Officer to whom the Warrant is directed,
shall afterward certify the Justice of the Poverty of the Offender, in that
Case I take it, if it be within the three months, the Justice at his Discretion
may impose the Fine upon any other Offender that is then Convicted of the same
Offense; but if the three months are elapsed, then I think he cannot, though it
is not clear. See the 14th Paragraph of this Act.

4. Upon the Goods and Chattels of any other Person or Persons who shall be
then Convicted in manner aforesaid of the like Offense, etc. That is, of being
present at one and the same Conventicle. For if A. and B. be both present at a
Conventicle, now it is the like Offense in both, considering the Offense in it
self. Now though A. has been formerly Convict, and so he is to incur the
Penalty of 10 s. and B. having not been formerly, is to incur the Penalty of 5
s. only. Now here the Penalty is different, yet the Offense is the like, and
therefore in case of Poverty, the Fine of 10 s. for the Offense of A. may be
imposed on B. or the 5 s. for the Offense of B. may be imposed upon A. or upon
any other Convicted of being present at the same Conventicle; but I think the
Preacher or Teacher in this Conventicle, is not within the meaning of this
Clause; for that though he be present, yet he is to be Convicted of a greater
Offense, for taking upon him to Preach or Teach in the Conventicle, and not of
the lesser Offense of being present at it.

5. At the Discretion of the said Justice, etc. Note this Discretion is bounded
in these points, (1.) There must be Poverty of an Offender in the Case (at
least in the Judgment of the Justice) or else there is no Room left for
Discretion. (2.) The sum to be levied on any one Offender in Case of the
Poverty of others must not amount to above 10 l. upon occasion of any one
Meeting or Conventicle. These two Points being observed, the Law has lest it
absolutely to the Choice and Discretion of the Justice upon what other of the
Offenders at the same Conventicle (except the Preacher or Teacher there) to
impose the Penalty he shall think fit, wherein he may do well to have regard to
the estate, and forwardness to offend of such Person or Persons, upon whom he
shall impose the Penalty.

6. And every Constable, Headborough, Tythingman, Churchwardens, and Overseers
of the Poor respectively are hereby Authorized and required to levy the same
accordingly, having first received a Warrant, etc. The Warrant to levy the
Penalties being under Hand and Seal of the Justice Convicting, is in its Nature
an Execution for the King, and therefore the Officer upon demand made to have
the Doors opened, and declaring of his Warrant at the same time, may break open
the Doors to enter, and make Execution of the Warrant by levying of the Goods
of the Offender, if upon such demand the Doors shall not be opened to him.
Though it has been questioned by some, yet there is no color to the contrary;
the objection they have made, is, that this is a particular mode of levying a
penalty by way of distress prescribed by an Act of Parliament, and the King
has no share or interest therein, till distribution of the Money levied into
three parts; but certainly this is the King's Suit, it is a breach of his Law, a
Conviction by his Officers, and the distress is an Execution for him, the
Record of Conviction is a Judgment, or Award for the forfeiture of so much,
etc. and before distribution the whole is his, to be returned into the
Sessions, at least it is an Execution for a third part for him, and as for that,
the Doors may be broken open, and being so open, the rest may be levied. The
rest of this Paragraph is plain.

SECT. 3.
1. AND be it farther Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every Person who
shall take upon him to Preach or Teach in any such Meeting, etc. Here the words
(every Person who shall take upon him) are general, so that an Alien or Person
under the Age of 16, who shall take upon him to Preach, etc. is to be
convicted, and forfeit 20 l. for the first Offense, as well as a Denizen, or
Subject of the Realm, of the Age of 16 years, or upwards, (though every one
that is to be Convicted for only being present at a Conventicle, must be a
Subject of the Realm, and of the Age of 16 or upwards, as is abovesaid. And
here by this clause, if in such Meeting several shall take upon them
successively to Preach or Teach, though at one time of Meeting, yet every such
Person comes within the penalty of this clause, and their Penalties to be
levied, as in case there be but one.

2. And if the said Preacher or Teacher so Convicted be a stranger, and his
Name and Habitation not known, or is fled, and cannot be found, etc. These
words must be taken in the disjunctive (that is) if the Preacher be a stranger
(who is presumed to be not known (or if his Name be not known (for then he
cannot be Convicted) or if his Habitation be not known, for then by presumption
the Penalty cannot be levied. In either of these Cases the Penalty may be
levied upon other Offenders present at the same Conventicle, and where the
Statute says (not known) that must be intended not known to the Justice or
Officers that suppress the Conventicle, and prosecute the Offenders, for there
is no Question but the Preacher, and his Name and Habitation is or may be known
to the Conventiclers themselves; but if not known to the Officers, he is not
known according to the intent of this Law.

3. Or is fled and cannot be found, etc. That is so fled, that he cannot be
found by the Officers that prosecute him for the Offense, though perhaps he is
not so fled, but may easily be found by his own Disciples.

4. Or in the Judgment of the Justice, Justices or chief Justice or Magistrate
before whom he shall be Convicted, shall be thought unable to pay the same,
etc. This Clause supposes the Teacher or Preachers Name to be known, otherwise
he cannot be Convicted at all. I say the Preacher or Teacher cannot be
Convicted, if his Name be not known, but by the former Clause, if his Name be
not known, the Penalty of 20 l. may be imposed upon others present at the same
Conventicle, where the Preacher or Teacher's Name is known. The Judgment of the
Justice, etc. of the Preacher's inability to pay, ought to appear upon Record
under his Hand and Seal.

5. The said Justice, Justices, or chief Magistrate respectively are hereby
Empowered, and required to levy the same by Warrant as aforesaid, upon the
Goods and Chattels of any such Person who shall be present at the same
Conventicle, any thing in this or any other Act, etc. By this Clause it seems
to me that the Penalty in this Case may be imposed upon any Person present at
the same Conventicle, though such Person upon whom it is imposed, be not
Convicted for being present at the Conventicle, nor can be Convicted for being
present as an Alien or Subject under 16 years of Age: And the different penning
of this and the precedent Paragraph, seems to make it clear; for in the
precedent Paragraph the words are, that the Penalty there mentioned, in case of
Poverty of such Offender, (12) He is Convicted for being present at a
Conventicle,) shall be levied on the Goods and Chattels of any other Person or
Persons who shall be then Convicted in manner aforesaid of the like Offense at
the same Conventicle; so the Penalty there can be laid upon none but such as by
this Law are, and ought to be Convicted for being present at the same
Conventicle; but an Alien or Subject under 16 years, cannot be Convicted for
that Offense. But here the words of this Paragraph say, that the Penalty of 20
l. here mentioned, may be levied upon any such Persons who shall be present at
the same Conventicle, whether Convicted or not, and an Alien may be present at
a Conventicle, though he cannot be Convicted, whereby to Forfeit 5 s. as a
Subject may; but the Penalty imposed on the Preacher, so far as 10 l. may be
levied upon him, and the non obstante in this Paragraph does seem to confirm
this Construction.

5. And the money so levied to be disposed of in manner aforesaid, etc. That is
as above directed by the next precedent Paragraph, (viz.) One third to the
King, one other third to the Poor of the Parish where the Offense was
committed, and the other third to the Informer, and such Person as the Justice
shall appoint.

6. And if such Offender so Convicted as aforesaid shall at any time again
commit the like Offense, etc. The commitment of the said Offense must be after
the Conviction for the first. See above, 2. Obs. 1.

7. shall for every such Offense incurr the Penalty of Forty pounds to be
levied and disposed as aforesaid. This Penalty of 40 l. may be levied upon the
Preacher as the 20 l. penalty above; and in case of Inability of the Preacher,
upon the Goods of others present at the same Conventicle, in like manner as the
penalty of 20 l. might.

SECT. 4.
Obs. 1. AND be it farther Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every
Person who shall wittingly and willingly suffer any such Conventicle, etc.
These words conclude Aliens as well as Denizens, and Peers as well as Commoners.

2. To be held in his or her house, etc. That is, in the House or Out house in
his or her Possession, whereby he or she might have hindered the Conventicle
from being held there, for in this Case the bare possession of the House
(though without any Title) makes it to be his or her House within the intent of
this Law; as for Instance, if a man enter upon me, and put me out of Possession
of my House by wrong, and keeps me out of Possession, and in that time suffers
a Conventicle to be holden in the same House; now he that has sold the
Possession of my House, is to be punished for suffering a Conventicle in his
House, though in truth the Title of the House be mine.

3. Or in Case of the Poverty, etc. This is in the Judgment of the Justice of
Peace Convicting as above, in case of the Preacher, but the Penalty in this
Case of Poverty is only to be levied upon such as shall be Convicted for being
present at the same Conventicle, and not upon Aliens, who are not to be
Convicted for being present at the Conventicle. The penning of this Clause, and
the like Clause in the second Paragraph, do exactly agree, but are both
different from the Clause in the third Paragraph, where the Penalty of the
Preacher, in case of his Poverty or inability, is to be levied on any Person
present at the same Conventicle, though not Convicted.

SECT. 5.
1. This is clear, yet it may be doubted whether more than ten pounds may not
be imposed upon one Person for the Penalty of the Preacher, where his Name or
Habitation is not known, for that Penalty is not imposed in regard of the
Poverty, or inability of the Preacher; but because he is not known, so as the
Justice might judge whether he were able to pay the Penalty or not. The Husband
and Wife co-habiting, are both present at a Conventicle, and Convicted, whereby
the penalty of 5. s. imposed upon the Wife, is to be levied on the Husband's
Goods; yet the Husband may be charged with 10 l. besides, for, and in regard of
the Poverty of another, for the Wifes Penalty of 5 s. is not laid upon the
Husband in regard of her Poverty, but in regard of the Relation between them.
Where there is a Penalty of twenty Pounds or more to be imposed in respect, the
Justice may assess what sum he thinks fit upon each party liable, so that no
one be charged with more than 10 l. in regard of Poverty, etc.

ACT.
SECT. 6.
1. PRovided also, and be it farther Enacted, That in all Cases of this Act,
where the Penalty, or Sum charged upon any Offender, exceeds the Sum of 10 s.
This Paragraph gives an Appeal to the Offender in certain Cases, whereupon
these things are to be taken notice of, (1.) The Person that may Appeal must be
an Offender charged with above the sum or Penalty of 10 s. for if he be
charged with the sum or Penalty of 10 s. only, or under, he is concluded by
the Conviction, and cannot appear. A Constable Convicted upon the 11th
Paragraph of this Act may Appeal. (2.) The time when he may Appeal, and that
must be within one week after the Penalty above 10. s. be levied upon his
Goods, etc. or else after the voluntary payment of such Penalty either to the
Officer or Justice Convicting, so that before the whole Penalty charged upon
the Offender, be either levied or paid, the Offender cannot Appeal, neither can
he Appeal at all, if a week be elapsed after the Penalty levied or paid, and no
Appeal within that time; but in such Case the Offender is for ever concluded by
the Conviction before the Justice, etc. (3.) The manner of Appealing must be in
writing from the Person or Persons Convicting (i. e.) the Justice or Justices
of the Peace. But such writing need not be subscribed by the Party Appealing.
(4.) The Judges to whose Judgment the Appeal lies, are the Justices of Peace
in their next Quarter Sessions (that is) next after the Appeal, and not next
after the levying or payment of the money, and it must be the Quarter Sessions
for the same County, Liberty, or Place where the Offense was committed, and the
Offender Convicted, and not any other. If it were in a Corporation by the chief
Magistrate, and Justices of the Corporation, the Certificate and return of
moneys levied, and the Appeal must be to the Sessions for such place, and not
to the Quarter Sessions for the County at large, and so was it ruled in the
case of the Town of Southmolton in Devon, to the Mayor of which place the Court
of King's Bench, Mic. 35. Car. 2. granted a mandamus for the receiving an Appeal
from a Conviction of a Conventicle held in that Town, made by the chief
Magistrate of that Corporation.

2. To whom the Justice or Justices, etc. that first Convicted such Offender,
shall return the money levied upon the Appealant, etc. Though the words are
only the Money levied upon the Appealant; yet the Money paid by the Appealant
is to be returned by the intent of the Law; and here is a necessary Caution to
be observed by the Justice Convicting, that where any Penalty of above 10 s. is
levied upon, or paid by one Offender, he do not proceed to make distribution of
the Penalty so levied or paid, till one full week be past after the levying, or
payment of it, for the Offender has that time to Appeal in, and if he does
Appeal within that time, the Justice is to return the whole Moneys to the
Sessions; and if the Offender upon his Appeal be acquitted by the Sessions, he
is to be restored to all his Money. The Justice upon his Appeal is to certify
the Record of the Conviction, and the Evidence upon which the Conviction past
under his Hand and Seal, and also the Appeal made before him in writing, that
the Sessions may the better be enabled to proceed, as the merits of the Cause
shall appear before them.

3. Whereupon such Offender may plead, and make defense, and have his Trial by
a Jury thereupon, etc. The Offender may plead that he is not Guilty of the
Offense contained in the first Conviction, which in this Case stands instead of
an Indictment, and thereupon Issue being joined for the King, the Appellant may
give in Evidence, that it was not a Conventicle where he was present, but a
lawful Assembly, or that he was elsewhere, and not present at such Conventicle
as the Conviction supposes, or any other matter that is legal Evidence for his
Acquittal; and on the other side the Prosecutor for the King may produce, and
give in Evidence any new matter for the proving of the Appellant guilty of the
Offense contained in the Conviction from which he has so Appealed. And I take
it, that though the Statute has indulged the Offender to plead to the Fact,
and to have a Trial by a Jury, yet if the Appellant thinks fit, he may by a
Demurrer insist upon matter in Law at the Sessions, for that the Conviction is
insufficient in substance (for want of Form is no exception by the 13th Clause
of this Act) as that it does not appear that any Conventicle was holden, or
that it appears by the Record of the Conviction, that it was a lawful
Assembly, and not a Conventicle, or that it does not appear that the Appealant
was present at any such Conventicle. In those or the like Cases, if the
Appellant does demurr to the Conviction, and the Prosecutor for the King joins
in demurrer, the Court of Sessions ought to give Judgment either for, or
against the Appealant, as the matter in Law does appear before them: But now
let us see what other matters of Fact, besides not Guilty, the Appellant may
plead at the Sessions; and first I conceive he may plead the Kings Pardon after
the Offense committed, and before the Conviction; for after the Conviction, the
Pardon comes too late, (save only for the King's third part) and if such pardon
under the great Seal be showed in Court, as it must be, if it be pleaded, the
Court (if the Pardon appears to be sufficient in Law) ought to discharge the
Appealant of the Conviction, and the Penalties imposed by such Conviction; the
Appealant may likewise plead Auterfoits Convict, (viz.) that he was formerly
Convicted of the same Offense, and has paid the Penalties, or that the same
have been levied upon his Goods, and so ought not to be twice charged for the
same Offense; and this is a good Plea to discharge him, but if the Penalties
upon the other Conviction be not paid, or levied, then such Plea of Auterfoits
Convict ought not to be allowed; for perhaps the former Conviction might be
past by some contrivance of the Offender or his Agents, that the Penalties
should not be levied, and so by a mean the Offender might escape unpunished, if
the Plea of Auterfoits Convict should be allowed without the Penalties being
levied or paid. On the other hand, it can be no mischief to the Appellant, for
though he stands twice Convicted for the same Offense, yet the first payment of
the Penalties discharges him of both Convictions; for if the Penalties should
be again levied upon him, he has liberty in a week after to Appeal, and upon
showing his Case by Plea at the Sessions ought to be relieved, and restored to
his Money so levied the second time.

And in Case such Appellant shall not prosecute with effect, etc. If at the
next Quarter Sessions, the Appealant shall not appear, and plead matter of Fact
or Demurr in Law to the Record of the first Conviction, this will be a
Non-prosecution whereby treble Costs are to be given against him, so that if he
do not appear at the day given him, from time to time, till the Appeal be
determined; but if he appears, and upon motion, the Court of Session, for some
Cause seeming reasonable to them, do grant farther time to the Appealant for
drawing of his Plea, or if after Plea pleaded, they grant him farther time than
ordinary for Trial, in such case this is no default in the Appealant, and
therefore no Costs to be awarded against him; so if the Court do take time to
consider of the matter in Law, this is not a Failer of Prosecution of the
Appealant whereby to subject him to the payment of any Costs, and in all cases
of Non-prosecution, there must be a Record of it made by the Sessions.

Or if upon such Trial he shall not be Acquitted, etc. It is not said, if upon
Trial the first Conviction shall be affirmed, or found true; but, if the
Appealant shall not be acquitted; suppose the Appealant be Convicted of being
present at a Conventicle, and 5 s. Penalty imposed upon him, and in regard of
the Poverty of the Teacher, 10 l. more is imposed upon him, which being levied,
he Appeals, and pleads that the Teacher was able to pay himself, and therefore
the Appealant ought not to have been charged with the 10 l. In this Case I
conceive such Plea is insufficient, and though it were found so by verdict at
the Sessions, yet the Appealant is not acquitted of the Offense (which (...))
of being present at the Conventicle, nor is the Teacher found Innocent, and
therefore the Appealant cannot be relieved, but ought to pay treble Costs for
his unjust Appeal; but what if upon the Appeal the Appealant does not make it
appear, and it is so found by Verdict, that though the Appealant was present at
the Conventicle, and thereby forfeited 5 s. ^^t the Person, in regard of whose
^overty the sum of 10 l. or any ^^sser sum was imposed upon the appealant,
was not at all present (...) the same Conventicle. Now ^^e Appealant is not
totally acquitted, for the Conviction of his being present at the Conventicle
^^ands in force; yet in this Case I conceive he is to be discharged of the
other Penalty imposed upon him, and to be excused from payment of any Costs,
and the difference between this Case and the next precedent is this. In the
former Case the Person in regard of whose Poverty, etc. was either a Teacher,
or present at the Conventicle, whereby the Justice Convicting had a
Jurisdiction to impose the Penalty either upon the Party himself, or upon some
other; but in this case the Justice has no Authority at all to impose a
Penalty either upon one that was not present at the Conventicle, or in regard
of the Poverty of one that was not present at the Conventicle, which diversity
is apparent; what if the Penalty in regard of the Poverty of. another imposed
upon the Appealant, has been imposed upon the Party himself, or upon any
other, and has been actually levied or paid? In this Case I think the
Appealant is to be relieved against that Penalty, and though he be not totally
acquitted, yet he ought not to be charged with Costs.

Or Judgment pass not for him upon his said Appeal, etc. This Clause seems to
confirm the Opinion above, that the Appealant may demurr in Law to the
Conviction, and pray the Judgment of the Court of Sessions upon it, without
Pleading to Issue, or having a Trial by a Jury, as the Act says. Note, that
where the words are (Judgment pass not for him upon his said Appeal) it is to
be understood that Judgment pass not for him upon the determination of the
Appeal at the end of the Suit; for whilst the Appeal depends undetermined, it
cannot be known whether Judgment shall pass for him or not.

The said Justices at the Session shall give treble Costs against such Offender
for his unjust Appeal, etc. That is, the Justices at the Session shall give
Judgment that the Offender pay treble Costs, for that is the meaning of the
words, (give treble Costs) but who shall have this treble Costs? I conceive the
Prosecutor of the Conviction that Prosecutes at the Sessions, whose Name ought
to appear in the Record of the Sessions. But what if the Offender Appeals to
the Sessions, and the Justice Convicting Certifies the Record of Conviction,
the Evidence and the Appeal; but the Appealant does not appear at the Sessions
at all, nor does any thing in Prosecution of his Appeal; how shall the
Prosecutors Name appear in such Case? To this I answer; that in this Case no
Costs are to be given, but only the Appealant's Non-prosecution to be Recorded,
whereby he Forfeits his Recognizance given to prosecute his Appeal with effect;
but if the Appealant one appears and pleads, or demurrs, as he must, then the
Prosecutor's Name will appear. And if afterward the Appeal is not Prosecuted
but discontinued. Then treble Costs are to be awarded to the Prosecutor, as
well as where the Offender upon Trial is not acquitted, or Judgment pass not
for him upon the determination of the Appeal.

And no other Court whatsoever, etc. By this Clause the Justice of Peace
Convicting where no Appeal lies, and the Justices of the Session, where an
Appeal is given, are made the final Judges of the Offenses of being present at
a Conventicle. And of any Person's taking upon him to Preach or Teach in a
Conventicle, or wilful suffering a Conventicle to be held in his or her
dwelling House, etc. And of a Constable's Omission of the performance of his
Duty in Execution of this Act, and this exclusive to the great Courts at
Westminster Hall, and all other Courts whatsoever; yet if a Certiorari, or Writ
of Error issue out of any of the great Courts at Westminster Hall, and be
delivered either to the Justices Convicting, or to the Sessions, they ought not
to proceed till the Court, out of which such a Writ issued, be informed of the
matter, and shall think fit to supersede their own; for though the Justices of
Peace, and the Sessions, be made the final Judges of the Offenses aforesaid,
yet they are not Judges of the Process of the superior Courts, but only the
superior Court it self, out of which the Process issued.

SECT. 7.
1. UPon the delivery of such Appeal as aforesaid, etc. The time for delivery
of the Appeal must be within one week next after the Penalty levied or paid,
and at the time of the delivery of the Appeal in writing the Appeal is made.
Now the Act appoints that a Recognizance be entered into for the prosecuting of
the Appeal at the same time, that is, at the same instant of time the Appeal is
delivered. And the Recognizance must have these Circumstances, it must be
entered into by the Party himself Appealing, and (in strictness) not by any
other, (though sufficient) security for him, it must be acknowledged before,
and taken by the same Justice that made the Record of the Conviction; but if
the Conviction be by two or more Justices the Appeal delivered to, and the
Recognizance acknowledged before any one of them is sufficient. But if both, or
all of the Justices Convicting are together, the Recognizance must be
acknowledged before them all, though the Statute has not appointed any sum to
be contained in the Recognizance; yet it ought to be in a reasonable sum, which
is commonly, and usually double the sum in Question, which in this Case is
double the Penalty imposed on the Offender that Appeals. There may be some
doubt how the Appeal is to be made, or the Recognizance entered, when the single
Justice Convicting shall happen to die, or be out of Conviction before the time
of Appeal; but that being a matter rarely happening, I shall not spend time
about it at present.

SECT. 8.
THat is at the time of making the Appeal, and the Appeal cannot be said to be
made till it be delivered, and the Recognizance entered.

SECT. 9.
AFter refusal or denial, to enter, break open, and enter into any house, or
other place where they shall be informed, any such Conventicle as aforesaid is
or shall be held, as well within Liberties as without, and take into their
Custodies the Persons there unlawfully Assembled, to the intent, etc. In all
Cases where the outward door of a House may be broken, the Law (as this Act)
does require, That first, A Demand be made to have the Door opened, for Force
is not to be used where the Law may be Executed in a peaceable and quiet
manner. Now a refusal or denial to enter, is not only intended of an Actual or
express denial, or refusal to open the doors, but also of a refusal or denial
in Law, as where the Officers require the Doors to be opened, and the
Conventiclers make no answer whether they will or will not open the Doors; or
if they answer that they will open the Doors, but notwithstanding they do not
open the doors, this is a refusal and denial in Law, as strong as if they had
expressly refused or denied to open the doors; and thereupon the Officers may
break open the doors, and seize the Offenders (of mean Conventiclers) and
secure them in Custody until the Officers can conveniently bring them before a
Justice of Peace to be Convicted, and then the Offenders are to be discharged
out of Custody. But what if any Offender in such Case, being brought before a
Justice of Peace to be Convicted, shall refuse to discover his Name and Place
of Habitation, whereby the Justice cannot proceed to a Conviction of him. In
such Case the Justice may commit him to the common Gaol for his Contempt, and
by the Mittimus showing the Cause of such Commitment, the Offender will be held
until he does discover his Name and Habitation (for it is impossible he can be
Bailed) for though an Offender may be committed without a Name, yet his Name
must be known before he can be Bailed, and then the Justice may proceed to
Convict him of the Offense, for being or Preaching at the Conventicle, as the
Case falls out, though it be after the end of three months, for that the first
was prosecuted within the three months. Now it is to be considered what is to
be done, supposing there be a Conventicle held, and the doors are open, or upon
demand made by the Officers, the doors are immediately opened, and they are
permitted to enter freely; whether then the Officers may take any of the
Offenders into Custody or not? And I take it, that if the Conventiclers do make
known their Names and places of Habitation, and do depart peaceably when
commanded by the Officer, they may not be taken into Custody, because in such
Case they may be Convicted without being taken into Custody: But if the
Offenders do refuse to make known their Names, then such of them as do so
refuse, may be taken into Custody, and if at Command of the Officers, the
Conventiclers refuse to depart, or do not depart and disperse themselves
peaceably, they may be taken into Custody likewise, and this seems clear by the
latter part of this Paragraph.

And that the Lieutenant or Deputy Lieutenants, etc. Here the Military Power as
well as the Civil Power, is to be assisting for the dissolving, dissipating,
and preventing of Conventicles; but the Lieutenants or Deputy Lieutenants, etc.
are not to intermeddle, before they have first received a Certificate under the
Hand and Seal of a Justice of Peace or chief Magistrate of his particular
information or knowledge of any unlawful Meeting or Conventicle held or to be
held, and that he with such Assistance is not able to suppress and dissolve the
same. This Certificate may be made sometime before the Conventicle held as well
as at the time; and though it cannot be so well known before hand, whether the
Justice or chief Magistrate with such Assistance, etc. be able to suppress the
Conventicle or not; yet if the Justice has reason, or any probable ground to
believe that he shall not be able to suppress the Conventicle, whereof he has
notice, he may make his Certificate, that the Military Power may be ready; for
if a Certificate should not be made till the very time of the Conventicle held,
it would perhaps be too late for the suppressing of them, and the words of the
Act are, To prevent such unlawful Meetings as well as to dissolve and disperse
them. And note, that if there be such a Conventicle as cannot be suppressed by
the Justice himself with such Assistance as he can get, but there is need of
Military Power, or some other greater power to be raised by the Sheriff or
other Officer, in such case the Conventiclers, or so many of them as the
Officers suppressing of them shall think fit, Peers of the Realm only excepted,
may be taken into Custody, and kept in Custody for such convenient time, till
they shall be Convicted by the Justice or chief Magistrate. But suppose the
Justice that would suppress the Conventicle, be himself a Deputy-Lieutenant,
and he as a Justice is not able to suppress the Conventicle, I conceive in such
Case he may make use of his Military Power, and get such Troops or Companies of
Horse and Foot, as he shall think meet, and can get in readiness with the
soonest; by this Law any Justice of the Peace, Constable, or other Officer
going in Execution of this Act to suppress and disperse such unlawful
Assembly, they may call or command any Person whatsoever into their Aid or
Assistance, and in Case of refusal they are punishable, as by the 11th Section,
see hereafter; And did not this Law expressly enable them to do it, they might
do it by the general Authority of their Offices in this Case, as they may for
the suppressing of Affrays, Riots, Routs, and other unlawful Assemblies.

And take into their custody such persons so assembled as they shall think fit.
Some are of opinion, and it has been so resolved, that by force of these words
they may imprison any of them for any convenient time in order to examination,
not only of their own names and places of Abode, but of the Teacher or the
like; and that the Military Power they may use in taking and detaining of such
persons till examined of such things as may be needful for the making a
Conviction of such Meeting or Assembly, and this they ground upon the words as
they shall think fit: Sed quaere, for the Lord Saunders his opinion before: Page
76. seems more consonant to the letter of this Clause, viz. that their
Commitment is to be only till make known their own names and places of Abode,
that they may be proceeded against, etc.

Provided always that no dwelling House of any Peer of this Realm, etc. This
seems not to extend to the dwelling House of any Duchess, Countess, Baroness,
or other Noblewoman, but they may be searched by virtue of this Act,
notwithstanding this Clause, as by the reading of it appears plain, it being
said to be such House where he or his Wife shall be Resident; this must be
meant actually Resident, and therefore extends not to any House which a Peer
has leased to another, nor to any Mansion House uninhabited, or wherein he
has only Servants, and does not Personally reside in; for suppose a Peer have
several Houses, to which he repairs at several Seasons of the year, and has
Servants in all, and a Meeting prohibited by this Law does happen to be held in
such of his said Houses, where at that time he nor his Wife is resident, such
House may be searched by virtue of this Act, and broken open too for the
dispersing such Meetings, for the words are, shall he resident at such time: If
a Conventicle be held in any Barn, Stable, or other like of a Peer's, not being
parcel of his dwelling House, such place may be searched, though the same be in
the possession of a Peer: And notwithstanding this Clause, a Conviction may be
made of such a Meeting that has been held in the dwelling House of a Peer,
though he be resident in it, and such Peer incurrs the Penalty of this Act as
Owner of the House, permitting the same. See above on the 4th Section.

Except in the presence of, etc. Such dwelling House feems not searchable by
any Corporation Justice, he not being named in this exception, but a
Lieutenant, or Deputy Lieutenant of such County, may search such a House upon
the Information of a Justice of the Peace, though he be no Justice himself, nor
of the same Riding.

SECT. 11.
BE it farther Enacted, that if any Constable, etc. This Clause extends to his
not executing any Warrant for levying the Penalties of this Act by distress, as
well as to his not informing some Justice of a Conventicle whereof he knows; so
if he inform not some Justice thereof (when he conveniently may) till the
Meeting be over, and so they could not be suppressed, nor the Persons so well
known, in order to the making of a Conviction: If a Constable, etc. keep or
suffer a Conventicle in his House, he forfeits the Penalty of 20 l. for so
doing, and 5 l. for not informing a Justice thereof, the like if he be present
at any Meeting, and not in order to detect it; he may be punished for being so
present, and sued for the 5 l. also, for they are several Offenses: Credibly
informed, etc. such Information as another gives him of his sight of sundry
Persons going to an House suspected, or generally used for such purposes at
such times as usual, etc. is sufficient information to oblige the Constable to
acquaint the Justice, for a less information here will serve him than a Justice
of the Peace for to make a Conviction, the Justice is to have it upon Oath,
etc. the Constable, etc. is not Judge of the truth of the Fact, he is only a
Ministerial Officer or Servant in this Case. A Constable, or Tything Man or the
like, that gives notice of his Warrant, or of a Justices coming to suppress
such Meeting is undoubtedly Guilty of this Offense, and besides liable to be
Indicted at common Law for any such misfeazance or neglect, it being contrary
to his Oath and Office, by the Authority of this Act it is become the Duty of
his Office to which he is sworn, any breach whereof is Indictable at common
Law, and punishable by Fine and Imprisonment, and this may be too often
necessary, in the last Case, I mean especially, the 5 l. penalty seeming too
small for an Offense of such a Nature; but note, then he cannot or ought not to
be punished both ways, for it is but one Offense, though when prosecuted as on
this Law the Fine is certain, as at common Law it is undetermined. If a
Constable uses not all Lawful means to prevent, suppress, and get Convicted
such Meetings, as if he breaks not open a door after request to have it opened
in execution of a Warrant to levy the penalty by virtue of this Act, he is an
Offender by this Clause.

Every Person whatsoever refusing or neglecting to give his Aid (being called
thereto in execution of this Act) forfeits 5 l. especially, if such whom the
Justice or Constable shall call in, do by private notices or otherwise,
forewarn those Assembled to withdraw, for to prevent their being known, and by
consequence their being Convicted.

If any Justice of the Peace, or chief Magistrate, shall wittingly or wilfully
omit the performance of his Duty in the execution of this Act, he shall forfeit
100 l. etc. This Clause is general, omit the performance of his Duty which is
by all lawful ways to get Information and notice of all such Meetings open or
clandestine, that are held within his Limit, Precinct, or Jurisdiction, every
thing which is prohibited by the Law, a Justice is bound as a good Officer, not
only to punish it when discovered, but by all convenient means to inform
himself, if such Offenses are committed, and such Offenses the more secret, the
more dangerous; and therefore every Officers Duty is to detect them, to be
ready to receive Informations, to grant Warrants to Constables, to go in Person
and endeavor to disperse them when met, or prevent their Meeting, to imprison
those that oppose or resist them, to break open Doors, if shut against them, to
secure such Offenders till know their Names and Places of abode in order to
make Convictions, and of such Convictions to make Records to grant Warrants on
them for distresses, such Records to certify to the next Sessions, and in
short, to do every thing which this Act Authorizes and requires them to do, and
in the best and most convenient way that may be for the Attainment of the end
of this Law, which was the suppression and prevention of Seditious
Conventicles, a wilful neglect of any thing this Act impowers such Justice of
the Peace to do in order to that end, is an Offense within this Clause, and
incurrs the Penalty of 100 l.

Justice of Peace or thief Magistrate, etc. It must be intended for, or in
Relation to Offenses committed within their Respective Jurisdictions, for this
Clause punishes nothing but the omission of what they were empowered, or
enabled to do by the foregoing part of this Law, viz. to a Corporation Justice,
for what happens within the Corporation, etc. and sic respective, although it
be here said any Justice or chief Magistrate, yet any Justice of the Peace in
any Liberty, City, or Corporation, is within this Clause as well as the chief
Magistrate of such Liberty, City, or Corporation, for such Justices are bound
by the former Clauses to disperse such Meetings, and make Conviction of them,
and by consequence they are here intended.

Wittingly or wilfully omit, for the satisfying of those words, either his own
knowledge or information is sufficient, I do not mean of the Law in the Case,
for he is bound to take notice of this and all other Acts relating to his
Office, and a pretense that he knew not he had power, or that 'twas his Duty,
will be no excuse, but his own knowledge or information of the Fact; for if a
Justice do not suppress a Conventicle, nor make a Conviction thereof, he is no
Offender, provided he have no notice of it, but yet if a Justice know a
Conventicle to be held in the next House, and he do not his Duty, he is
punishable by this Clause, though no Informer came and gave him notice of it;
If any one come to inform him of a Conventicle that has been held, he is bound
to give the Informer his Oath, and it is no excuse for him that the Informer did
not require him to tender an Oath, for his coming is impliedly a Request, it
being in order to make a Conviction, and if he refuses or omits to give him his
Oath, in order to the making a Conviction, he is punishable, whether a
Conventicle were held yea or no, for being informed there was one, he is an
Offender in not taking the Information upon Oath, and so was it resolved by the
Court of King's Bench, Mic. 34 Car. 2. Banco Regis, on a motion in Arrest of
Judgment, in an Action between Smith qui tam, etc. verse. Langham of
Northamptonshire.

The one moiety to the use of the Informer, etc. Although it be not expressly
declared unto whom the other moiety shall be given, yet the King shall have it,
for wheresoever a forfeiture or penalty is given by any Act of Parliament upon
any Offense, it is intended to be to the King, his Heirs and Successors,
though not particularly named, unless it be otherwise specially Ordered;
Informer here is meant, not he that informs the Justice, but he that sues for
the 100 l. and so informs the King's Court of such an Offense committed by such
a Justice, for otherwise the Justice may go unpunished by agreeing with him
that is Informer in the first sense, besides, if none but such Informer might
bring the Action, there would in all probability be a failure of proof in this
Case, for none but those who informed the Justice, are for the most part
capable of proving the Justice's refusal, or neglect to do his Duty; Although a
Moiety be here given to the Informer, yet if none will sue for the same, the
whole may be sued for at the King's Suit, for there being a Forfeiture created
by the Act, and by the Law given to the King, the not suing by any Informer for
his part, shall not prejudice the King, the Moiety going only to the Informer
(i.e.) to him that will and does sue for the same, if none will sue for it, the
whole is the King's, and before any Information, Action or popular Suit
brought, he may pardon or release the whole Penalty, and it shall be a good Bar
against all men; but what if an offending Justice within this Law should get a
Friend to file an Information against him by consent, to prevent and anticipate
a real Informer, and such Prior Suit the Offender should plead to the real
Informer's Action to trice him thereof? I answer, that such Plaintiff may by
virtue of 4 H. 7. cap. 20. aver the former Suit to be by Covin and Collusion,
and such Covin he may in his replication plead generally, and if the former
Suit be found to be by Covin to evade the Act, and trice the present Plaintiff,
the Defendant shall suffer two years Imprisonment, and such averment the
Plaintiff may make, though on the first Suit there were a Verdict for the
Defendant for want of Evidence or the like, nay, though there were a recovery
against him.

SECT. 12.
IF any Person be at any time sued for putting any of the Powers of this Act in
Execution, etc. Whether it be for Informing, disturbing, searching,
imprisoning, or distraining, etc. By the 7th and 21 Jac. all Justices of the
Peace, Constables, and several other Officers have this privilege if sued for
any thing done by Color of their Office, they may plead the general Issue, and
give special matter for their excuse or justification in Evidence; but this Act
gives the same advantage to all manner of Persons doing any Act in the
Execution of this Statute, whether they are Officers, or no, and the end is to
prevent their being prejudiced by a nicety of pleading, and that the truth of
their excuse may fairly and clearly appear upon Evidence, any Informer or other
Person going in Assistance of any Officer for the executing any power given by
this Law, has the same privilege and benefit.

Every such Defendant shall have his full treble costs, etc. (i.e.) the Costs
given by the Jury in case of Trial, and the Costs likewise given by the Court,
de incremento are to be trebled both, such Costs as the Defendant would have in
case this Law were not, he is now to have treble, and in case the Plaintiff be
nonsuit, if without Evidence, or after Evidence he ought to have thrice so
much Costs as he otherwise should have in such Case.

SECT. 13.
AND be it farther Enacted by Authority aforesaid, that this Act, and all
Clauses therein contained, shall be construed most largely and beneficially for
the suppressing of Conventicles, and for the Justification and Encouragement of
all Persons to be employed in the execution thereof: This Clause shows the deep
sense our Lawmakers had of the pernicious effects of such unlawful Meetings,
which is emphatically expressed in the preamble of this Act, where the reason
of this Clause, and of the whole Act is declared, (viz.) For providing farther
and more speedy remedies against the growing and dangerous practires of
Seditious Sectaries, and other Disloyal Persons, who under the pretense of
tender Consciences, have or may at their Meetings contrive Insurrections ( as
experience has shown) and that experience has been much more abundant of late
days, and therefore the Act continues as necessary as ever, it being too well
known that the Persons so pretending to a greater tenderness of Conscience than
the rest of the Christian world, are no less disaffected to the English
Government, than they avow themselves to be to the Church of England; and it
seems to be a base reflection on the Wisdom and prudence of our Lawmakers,
that the prosecution of this Law should be thought unnecessary in the same age
wherein 'twas made, and the reason continuing for which it was at first
provided, viz. the danger of Mutiny and Sedition, for the prevention and
suppressing whereof there is no better means than the Execution of this Act,
which (as this Clause is) ought to have the largest and most beneficial
Construction imaginable (i. e.) such an equitable Construction, (although it be
a Penal Law) as may best conduce to the suppression of such Conventicles,
though perhaps the thing be not expressly within the letter of the Law, yet it
ought to be construed within the intent; as for instance, suppose a certain
number of men should meet and Assemble themselves together under the color and
pretense of exercising Religion, and there should be no formal Preaching and
Teaching, but only an extempore Enthusiastical Prayer, yet the Prolocutor, or
Speaker in such Assembly ought to be construed with the intent of the third
Section of this Act, and incurr the Penalty of 20 l. being certainly within the
intent, though not within the precise Letter of that Clause; the like of the
Quakers Meetings, though they cannot properly be within the third Section, when
it is as they call it a silent Meeting, yet even such Assembly of them seems to
be within the first Section, and is a Conventicle within the meaning of this
Act, for it is a Meeting under color of the exercise of Religion, though none
be exercised, they pretending that they meet out of Conscience, and for such
purpose, and it is plainly within the mischief, viz. The danger of contriving
Mutinies and Insurrections at such Assemblies, and there is as much danger of
that in such Congregations as any other; and by the design of this Clause such
Construction ought to be made, as may most suppress the Mischief intended to be
remedied by this Act; the like equitable Construction ought to be made for the
encouragement and justification of the Officers of Justice, and others employed
in the Execution of this Act, the meaning of which is, that by no strained
interpretation ought such Persons to be brought to damage for any thing done by
color of this Statute; and so this Clause requires all encouragement to be
given to such Persons by the King's Courts of Record of Westminster, upon all
occasions, and particularly by the next Clause, which is, that No Record,
Warrant, or Mittimus to be made by virtue of this Act or any Proceedings
thereupon shall be reversed, avoided, or any way impeached for any default in
Form, (i. e.) No Record of Conviction, Warrant, for to disperse a Conventicle,
or to levy the Penalty by distress, or Mittimus to Prison, shall, etc. This
extends to all Courts, as to the Sessions, so to the King's Bench, or any other
Court where such Record, etc. may be removed, or otherwise come in question
upon any Action that may be brought against any Person for any thing done in
pursuance of this Act; although the Court of King's Bench may by Certiorari
command such Records to be removed thither, etc. yet it is a good Act of their
legal discretion to deny such Certiorari's as of late years is done; it being a
Writ discretionary, and not ex debito Justitiae sent only to certify his
Majesty in his said Court of the Proceedings against such a Man, and the
Justices below are the proper Judges of the Fact, and this Act seems to order
the final determination of such Offenses to the Justices particularly, for that
this very Law gives an Appeal to the Sessions where the Party has his
advantage for matter of Law as well as Fact; but it may be questioned what
shall be deemed a default in Form? I confess that may be of some difficulty,
but however by the virtue of this Clause, though it be by a Penal Law it ought
to be helped by Intendments and Presumptions as much as any Plea in Bar, or any
other pleading in a Civil Action, but to make the best Judgment in this Case,
will be to compare this Clause with the Statute of Demurrs, viz. the 27
Elizabeth, cap. 5. where the words are, any imperfection, defect, or want of
Form, and the words here are, by reason of any default in Form, which are
plainly all one; upon the former the rule is, whatsoever it is without which
the right does sufficiently appear to the Court, it is form within that Law,
and so e converso, whatsoever is wanting, or imperfect, whereby the right
appears not, is not remedied as Form within that Statute; so here whatsoever it
is without which the Offense does sufficiently appear to the Court that is Form
within our Law, so if it appear a Conventicle were held against this Law, and
the Parties meant to be Convicted were present at it, if there be but
sufficient expressed that it may appear upon the whole Record the Party Convicted
is an Offender against this Law, 'twill be well enough, and there needs no
more, for which see above under the first Section, the description of a
Conventicle, which will direct you how such a Conviction ought to be made, as
the President hereafter given you is; And in Case any Person offending against
this Law shall fly into any other County or Corporation, etc. This Clause
makes provision for the punishment of such Persons Convicted on this Act as are
Strangers inhabiting, or Fugitives flying into any other County or Corporation,
that must be meant such Corporation where the Justice Convicting has no
Jurisdiction, so as the Penalty cannot be levied by his Warrant, and therefore
this Paragraph provides that there may be a Certificate made of such Conviction
under the Hand and Seal of such Justice as made it, that must be meant a
Certificate that there is such Conviction made, or a transcript thereof under
the Justices Hand and Seal, not the very Record of Conviction it self, for that
perhaps may be returned into the Sessions and diverse other Persons inhabiting
where the Offense was committed may be perhaps Convicted by the same Record,
and then 'twould be inconvenient to transmit that same; it may be to any
Justice of the Peace of such other County or Corporation, and if such Offender
be inhabiting or fled into a Corporation where the County Justices have nothing
to do, there the Certificate may be to any Justice of that Corporation, as
well as to the chief Magistrate of the same, notwithstanding the wilful Error
of some who in Corporations would have none but the chief Magistrate of that
Corporation as Mayor, etc. and no other Justice of such place empowered by this
Law, whereas the whole tenor of the foregoing Sections shows the contrary;
such Justice is to levy the said Penalties as fully as the Justice Convicting
might, etc. (i.e.) by Warrant for distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods and
Chattels, but it may be queried what shall such Foreign Justice do with Money
so levied? I think this somewhat plain that he ought to return it to the
Justice that did Convict, and he to the Quarter Sessions for the place where
the Offense was committed, and the Foreign Justice must not return it to the
Quarter Sessions of his own County, and my Reasons are, First, Because the
Convictions are not to be returned thither. Secondly, A third part of such
Penalties is to go to the Poor of the Parish where the Offense was committed.
Thirdly, The third is to go to the Informer or Informers, or such other Person,
etc. which distribution the Foreign Sessions cannot conveniently make; but then
it may be queried what will become of the Parties Appeal, how shall that be
made? I answer, if he has the benefit of any, as I think he has
notwithstanding, it must be to the Quarter Sessions of the place where the
Offense was committed, for the Statute expressly requires it should be delivered
to the Justice Convicting, he is to take Recognizance for the Prosecution
thereof with effect, and this with the Conviction he is to return into the
Sessions; but then it may be again queried how such Offender shall know who is
the Justice Convicting, for to him he must deliver his Appeal in writing, and
that within a week after the Penalty paid or levied? I answer, that will be
known by the Warrant of the Foreign Justice upon which the levy is made, for
his Warrant either mentions a Conviction by himself, or by another Justice of
another County or Corporation which will inform him, but he must take this Note
with him always, that his Appeal must be delivered in Person, for he himself is
to enter into a Recognizance to Prosecute it, and this is to be done at the
same time before the Justice Convicting, the rest of this Pargraph is plain
enough.

SECT. 14.
PRovided also that no Person shall be punished for any Offense against this
Act, unless, etc. Prosecuted within three months, it is not necessary that the
Penalties be actually levied within three months, nor that a Conviction be made
of Record, but to fulfill the sense of this Clause, I think it sufficient, if
Information be given to some Justice of a Conventicle already held in order to
the making a Conviction of it, this being within three months, is enough, for
such Information being in order to a Conviction, is a Prosecution within the
meaning of this Clause, it is not said Convicted, but Prosecuted, and such
Information is a commencement of the Suit, this is the primum movens toward a
Conviction after the Offense committed; as in civil Actions which are limited
to be brought within such a time, the beginning of a Suit is the suing an
Original, or other first Writ as Latitat, etc. If within the time limited, is
well enough, though the Suit be not effectually Prosecuted, though there be no
Judgment in a long while after, so in Capital Criminal Causes, which must be
Prosecuted within a certain time, by the order of any particular Law, if an
Indictment be found within the certain time, if the first Act of the Suit be
begun, it is enough, though the Party be not Convicted within twice the time, so
here the same rule will govern, no Person shall, this extends to an offending
Justice or Constable, as well as to the Conventicles; yet if such Justice,
Constable, or other Officer neglects his Duty against the Tenor of this Act,
be Indicted, or otherwise sued within three Months after such neglect or
refusal to do their Duty, it is a sufficient Prosecution within the three
months, although not Convicted within that time, as I said before; and that no
Person who is punished by this Statute, shall be punished for the same Offense
by any other Law; For the same Offense, notwithstanding this, a Conventicler
may be punished for his absence from Church, because such Meeting and his
absence are several Offenses; Shall be punished, this does not hinder but that
such Offender may be Prosecuted and punished, as at the common Law for any
thing prohibited by this Statute, which is an Offense at the common Law, I say
he may be Prosecuted as at common Law, if he has been actually punished for
the very same Offense by virtue of this Law, but if he has been once punished
by this Law, if sued as at common Law, or on another Statute he may plead his
Conviction and punishment on this thereto, but this he cannot do till the
Penalty be either levied or paid, for till then he is not punished; however, as
I said, any Offender within this Law may be sued as at common Law, as a
Conventicler may for a Riot, Rout, or unlawful Assembly, and punished for it
by Fine or Imprisonment, but he shall not be punished both ways, and that is the
sole meaning of this Paragraph, viz. That such Person should not be double
punished for one and the same Offense; but yet again if any Preacher, Teacher,
or other Person should at such Meeting speak Seditious or Treasonable words,
resist the Magistrate coming to disperse them, or give opprobrious Language to
the Justice or other Officer in the Execution of this Act, he may be Indicted
and punished for any such Offense, and by this Act too.

SECT. 15.
PRovided also that every Alderman of London, etc. Had this Clause not been
added, it would be no great Question but that they were included in the meaning
of this Act, for they are the chief Magistrates and Justices of the Place, this
Proviso therefore seems added for perspicuity and prevention of all scruple,
and for to empower such of the Aldermen under the Chair, as are not Justices of
the Peace; for it will not be doubted, but the Aldermen of Exeter and Bristol,
and other such like Cities and Counties as are Justices of the Peace, are bound
by this Act to prevent, disperse, and suppress such Meetings, otherwise the Act
would be of least force where it is most needful, viz. in those Populous Cities
where the most idle People likeliest to be seduced, whereas in other Counties
the common People are generally employed in hard labor either about Husbandry
or other painful Callings, and by consequence not so liable to seduction.

Provided that if the Person Offending and Convicted be a Feme-Covert,
co-habiting, etc. In this case Co-habitation as a Wife, is a sufficient
Evidence her being so, and the Justice need look no farther, for the Husband's
Goods and Chattels are liable. Co-habiting (i. e.) for the most part, or
generally, for though she be in Country House about this Town, and her Husband
in London, yet his Goods will be liable; if it had been otherwise, 'twould have
said then Co-habiting, or then Personally residing, so if the Husband be upon
any Occasion from home, for Co-habitation here is used only in opposition to a
separate living by sentence of Spiritual Court, or by agreement of themselves,
not being apart now and then, or at certain Seasons of the year, or on an
occasional Journey, for in all such Cases the Husband is still supposed to have
the Command over his Wife, so far as to restrain her from breaking this Law,
and in case she offends, it is to be supposed by his consent or connivance, and
therefore this Law lays the Punishment upon his shoulders.

SECT. 16.
PRovided also that no Peer of this Realm shall be Attached or Imprisoned by
force of this Act, etc. Peer here seems to include all such as by Law are
Privileged from Personal Arrests in Civil Actions, Attached or Imprisoned, is
in their Bodies, for their Goods may be distrained upon a Conviction for such a
Meeting as well as any Commoners, this is merely designed to privilege their
Persons from all trouble, who are Consanguinei and Comites Regis, and always
intended to be busied in arduis negotiis regni, in the Service of his most
Sacred Majesty.

SECT. 17.
PRovided also that this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall extend to
invalidate or avoid his Majesty's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs, but that
his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors may from time to time, and at all times
hereafter exercise and enjoy all Powers and Authority in Ecclesiastical Affairs
as fully and as amply as any of his Predecessors have or might have done the
same, any thing in this Act notwithstanding. This Clause is an ample affirmance
of the King's Prerogative in Ecclesiastical Affairs notwithstanding this Act,
which I shall not presume here to discuss, especially considering that it will
no way be instructive for the better Execution of the Powers and Provisions of
this Act, which was the only end of our great Judge in making these
Observations, and is the end of their present publication, and therefore I
shall here conclude with this one Remark, viz. That the time of making this Act
is mistaken in the Print, which may be of use to observe in case any Action be
brought against any Justice of the Peace or other Person for the 100 l. Penalty
for the neglect of his Duty, it is there said to be at a Parliament continued by
Prorogation to the 14th of Febr. 1669/70 from whence it is continued by
Adjournment made the 11th of April, 1670. to the 24th day of October following,
which makes a kind of discontinuance, for it says the Adjournment made the 11th
of April, from the 14th of Feb. before, it is safest therefore to omit the
Adjournments and take no notice of them, but only at a Parliament begun at
Westminster the 8th of May, An. Dom. 1661. in the 13th year of, etc. and there
continued by several Prorogations to the 14th of Febr. 1669/70 and no more.

Midd' MEmorandum, Quod decimo die Novembris, anno Regni Domini nostri
Serenissimi Caroli Secundi Deigratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae,
Regis fidei defensoris, etc. tricesimo quinto venit J.S. de in Com' Midd'
Yeoman, coram nobis ad tunc and adhuc duobus Justiciar' dicti Domini Regis ad
pacem suam pro com' praed' conservand' assignat' apud S. in com' praed' Et
dedit nobis intelligi and informari de quodam Conventiculo and illicit'
assemblation' sub color exeolendi Religionem in alio modo quam secund'
liturgiam and usum Ecclesiae Anglicanoe ante tunc tempus tent' contraformam
statut' Et super inde Examinatione debita adtunc and ibid' habita tam per
Sacrament' praed' J.S. and A.B. de, and c. and C.D. de, and c. coram nobis in
ea part legitimo modo praestit' quam per notoriam Evidentiam facti nobis
Justiciariis praed' manifest and plene apparet quod M. N. de, and c. L. M. de,
and c. cum multis aliis, in toto se attingent' ad numerum vigint' personarum
praeter familiam praed' M. N. and quilibet eorum die dominica, viz. Primo die
hujus instantis Novembris, ultra aetatem sexdecim annor' and subdit' dict'
Domini Regis nunc existentes praedicto primo die hujus Novembris in simul
assemblaverunt and praesentes fuerunt, and quilibet eorum praesens fuit in domo
mansionali ipsius M.N. in Parochia de in Com' praed' ad Conventiculum sub
pretextu Exercitationis Religionis in alio modo quam allocatur per Liturgiam
aut usum Ecclesiae Anglicanae, adtune and ibid' tent' contra formam Statut' ad
praevenienda and supprimenda seditiosa Conventicula nuper edit' and provis. Ac
etiam quod praed' M. N. tempore and loc^ ultime supradictis scienter and
voluntary permisit Conventiculum praed' fore tenend' in domo mansionali sua
praed' etiam contra formam Statut' praed', quodque praed' O. P. tempore and
loco ultime supradict' assumpsit super se docere in Conventiculo praed' and in
eodom adtunc and ibid. docuit contra formam Statut' praed. Record' quarum
quidem separal' offensar' nos

Justiciarii praed' quibus (secund' formam and effect' Stat' praed') separales
offens' praed' fic ut prefertur fore commiss. sufficienter apparet per
praesentes sub manibus and sigillis nostris hocce instanti decimo die Novembris
anno tricesimo quinto supradict' apud S. praed' in Com' praed' fecimus,
praedictique M. N. L. M. O. P. and c. de separalibus offensis suis praed'
superius mentionat' virtute Statut' praed' sunt convicti and quilibet eorum
inde separaliter convictus est. Et nos praefati Justiciarii superinde virtute
Statut' praed' die anno and loco ultime supradictis in and super praed' L. M.
and c. Sic ut praefertur ad Conventiculum praed' praesent existent'
proseparalibus offensis suis finem separaliter imposuimus, praedictusque O. P.
pro offens. sua praed' in docendo ad Conventiculum praed' forisfecit summam
vigint' librar' vigore Statut' praed' praedictique M. N. pro offens. ejus
praed' in permissione Conventiculi praed' fore-tenend' in domo sua mansionali
praed' forisfecit summam vigint' librar' vigore ejusdem Statut'. In quorum
omnium praemissorum testimonium Nos praefat' Justiciarii die anno and loco
primo superius mentionat' manus and sigillum nostrum, praesentibus apposuimus.

ERRATA.
Page 48. Lin. 24. r. imposed. P. 54. l. 15. r. in respect of poverty. P. 86.
l. 24. for get, r. take. p. 87. l. 7. r. himself and readily to receive notice
and information.

FINIS.

