TWELVE SERMONS.

UPON Several Occasions.

BY SAMUEL SCATTERGOOD, Late Vicar of Blockley in Worcestershire.

LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall for John Hartley, over against
Gray's-Inn-Gate in Holborn, 1700.

crest of Trinity College Cambridge Collegium S. S. et Individuae Trinitatis in
Academia Cantabrigiensi


TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Here present thee with Twelve Sermons, being Part of a greater Number which
the Author, some time before his Death, permitted me to Print. According to
thy kind Acceptance of these, I may perhaps be hereafter encouraged to present
thee with the Rest.

I shall not trouble thee with any Account concerning the Author; nor offer to
fore-stall thy Judgment, in commending his Works to thee: I shall only beg of
thee to believe that, if I had not great Reason to hope that thou would
think these Sermons well worthy of thy Perusal, no private Interest could ever
have induced me to have made them Public.

J. S.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I, II, III.

Gal. IV. 4, 5. But when the fullness of the Time was come, God sent forth his
Son made of a Woman, made under the Law,

To redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of
Sons.

Page 1, 16, 32 SERMON IV, V. 1 Cor. VI. 20. For ye are bought with a Price:
therefore glorify God in your Body, and in your Spirit, which are Gods. P. 47,
66 SERMON VI. Heb. IV. 14. Seeing then that we have a great High priest, that
is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our
Profession. P. 85 SERMON VII. Matthew. XI. 28. Come unto me, all ye that Labor,
and are heavy Laden, and I will give you Rest. P. 100 SERMON VIII. Col. II. 18,
19. Let no Man beguile you of your Reward, in a voluntary Humility, and
worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things which he has not seen,
vainly puffed up by his fleshly Mind.

And not holding the Head, from which all the Body by Joints and Bands having
Nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases with the Increase of God.

P. 115 SERMON IX. Matthew. V. 20. For I say unto you, That except your
Righteousness shall exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees ye
shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. P. 133 SERMON X, XI. 1 Pet.
IV. 18. And if the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the Ungodly and
Sinner appear? P. 148, 164 SERMON XII. 1 Cor. X. 12. Wherefore let him that
thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. P. 180

SERMON I.
GAL. IV. 4, 5. But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his
son made of a woman, made under the law,

To redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of
sons.


THE Galatians, unto whom S. Paul writes this Epistle, had in his absence been
perverted and seduced from the true Doctrine of the Gospel which he had
preached unto them, by some false Teachers that had crept in among them, and
had persuaded them, that though they did believe (and that rightly) that Jesus
was the true Messiah whom the Prophets foretold should come into the world, yet
still it was necessary for them to be Circumcised, and to conform to the Law of
Moses (which they thought was never to be abrogated) as well as to the Law of
Christ, unto which they had so lately vowed Obedience. This Doctrine S. Paul
confutes in this Epistle, and thunders an Anathema against whosoever he be that
teaches it, though it were an Angel from Heaven. Though we, says he, or an
Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which we have
preached unto you, let him be accursed, chap. 1.8. And afterward in the close
of the Epistle, he proves to them at large, that the Ceremonial Law was totally
abrogated by the Law of Christ, and that by Faith in him, not only Jews, but
Gentiles were the children of Abraham, and heirs of the Promise. Know ye
therefore, that they which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham;
and the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Heathens through faith
preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all Nations be
blessed. So then they which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham,
chap. 3. 7, 8, 9. And though indeed the Jews had most glorious Privileges and
Favors conferred upon them by the bounty of God under the Mosaical Economy,
beyond what he had vouchsafed to any People upon earth besides ( for unto them
were committed the oracles of God, and they received the Law by the disposition
of Angels. God had chosen them to be his own peculiar People, his only visible
Church upon earth until the coming of the Messiah: So that the Psalmist had
great reason to confess, that he had not dealt so with any Nation) yet for all
this our Apostle assures them, that how great soever these Privileges of the
Jews might seem (and indeed really were) in comparison of what God had
vouchsafed to other Nations, during the time of the Law, yet they were, far
inferior to those which the Church was afterward to enjoy under the Economy
of the Gospel, the glorious and everlasting Kingdom of Christ: Whereupon he
resembles the Law to a Schoolmaster which was to bring us unto Christ, that we
might be justified by faith, chap. 3.24. But, says he, After that faith is
come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster. For ye are all the children of
God by faith in Christ Jesus. And in the beginning of this fourth Chapter he
compares the Church under the Law to an Heir in his Minority, but the Church
under the Gospel to an Heir now come to Age, and in Possession of his
inheritance. Now, I say, that the Heir, as long as he is a Child, differs
nothing from a Servant, though he be Lord of all; but is under Tutors and
Governors, until the time appointed of the father. Even so we, when we were
children, were in bondage under the Elements of the world. But when the
fullness, etc.

Thus ye see the coherence and scope of the Text; and ye cannot choose but
apprehend, at the first view of it, that it is very suitable to this present
Season, and that it will furnish us with excellent Matter, with a most
magnificent and heavenly Feast of fit and proper Meditations, to entertain our
Souls with at this great Festival, which we celebrate in Memory of the
wonderful Incarnation and Nativity of our blessed Savior. Indeed it is hard to
instance in any other Text of Scripture, wherein the whole Mystery of our
Savior's Incarnation is so amply and fully explained in so few words, as it is
in these which I have now made choice of for the Subject of my Discourse, which
evidently contains all these important Truths. 1. Here is our Savior's
Divinity implied in these words, God sent forth his Son. 2. Here is his
Humanity, together with the manner how he became Man, and how qualified; made
of a woman, made under the law. 3. The time when the blessed Son of God was
thus sent forth; it was when the fullness of the time was come. 4. The reason,
or end, of his Mission; it was to redeem them that were under the law, that we
might receive the adoption of sons. But though I shall, more or less, touch
upon all these Points, yet for the more plainness I shall confine my self to
this method: I shall prove to you, that our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ is the true Messiah, whom God has long since sent forth into the world,
and that no other is to be expected: and this I shall do, as by other
Arguments, so particularly by these which are mentioned in my Text, the time
when, the manner how, and the reason and end wherefore he came into the world.
The coming of the Messiah is a matter of so great importance, that it concerns
all Mankind diligently to enquire about it, and to inform themselves aright
whether he be already come, or no; and if he be, who is the true Messiah, whom
God has sent into the world. For to err in this Point, is the most fatal
Error imaginable, an Error that inevitably entitles us to Damnation; for it is
most certain, that in the Messiah were all the Families of the Earth to be
blessed: and as all Mankind share in the transgression of our first Parents, by
which we lost our state of Innocence, and fell into a state of Sin and Death,
and became obnoxious to the wrath of God; so has all Mankind an interest
likewise in the Messiah, who has destroyed the works of the Devil, abolished
Death, and brought life and immortality to light; and by virtue of this
Interest every Son of Adam has a right to God's favor, and an unquestionable
Title to the Kingdom of Heaven; if he loses not this Interest, and this Title
to that glorious inheritance, by unbelief. And since God was graciously pleased
to show so great Mercy to Mankind (greater than whatever he vouchsafed to any
of his Creatures besides) as to reconcile them unto himself, through the
Mediation of the Messiah; it was necessary for him to give the world timely
notice, that in his good time he would send such a person into it, who should
accomplish this great work; and also to describe him so plainly, by such
infallible Marks and Characters, as that the whole World might be sensible of
his coming, that he might be visibly discernible from all Mankind besides; that
no man might be mistaken in him, so as to adhere to a false Messiah, or to
reject the true one, except it were such as took little, or no care to inform
themselves, or such as were wilfully obstinate, and resolved to shut their Eyes
against the clearest light. And that God has done thus, is granted even by the
very enemies of Christianity. The Jews themselves acknowledge it: and indeed
every man must needs do so that knows the Scriptures, and owns them to be the
word of God. He declared this gracious Design of his to send the Messiah even
in the very beginning of the world; and no sooner had our first Parents brought
themselves into a condition to need a Savior, but God presently assures them
that he has ordained one for them, and that the seed of the woman shall bruise
the serpents head. He declared it afterward more plainly to Abraham, and the
rest of the Patriarchs; more fully yet to Moses: And lastly, most clearly of
all by the Prophets; for to him give all the Prophets witness. If then these
things be so (as most certainly they are) it is plain that by the Scriptures we
may most evidently discern whether the Messiah be already come or no; and if he
be come, who he is, that we may believe in him. And that he is already come,
and that our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is he, will be undeniably
apparent from these following Arguments; in the managing of which I shall show
you, how exactly the New Testament and the Old agree together, like two
Indentures to prove this great Truth which both of them chiefly aim at, that
Jesus is the Messiah, or Christ, which is the same thing in another Language
signifying, Anointed, a Person set apart and appointed by God, to a most high
and eminent Office and Employment.

First then, that Jesus is the true Messiah appears from his coming into the
world punctually at the time, wherein God had foretold in the Scriptures of the
Old Testament, that the Messiah should come. So says our Apostle here in my
Text, When the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his son, i. e. at
that juncture of time which God had appointed and foretold by his Prophets.
That the coming of the Messiah should be deferred for some considerable time
was very reasonable; that men might the more earnestly desire, and long for the
Accomplishment of so great a Blessing: and it was as reasonable that the exact
time of his coming should be pointed at, and decyphered by some remarkable
Signs and Tokens; that they might not be weary of exspecting him before the
time was come; or when it was come, that they might not be unable to know him,
and continue to expect another. And accordingly God has dealt with the world:
He sent not the Messiah quickly (for he came not until the World was near 4000
years old) and, besides other later Prophecies of it, he punctually foretold
the time when he should come near 1700 years beforehand: all which Prophecies
agree exactly even by the Jews own Confession) to the time of our Savior's
coming in the Flesh. I shall instance only in these three as being the chief
and principal of them, and abundantly sufficient of themselves without the
concurrence of any other to prove this Point. The first is that ancient
Prophecy of Jacob, Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a
Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the
gathering of the people be. All the ancient Expositors of the Jews understand
these words as we do) to be a Prophecy of the coming of the Messiah, called
here by the name of Shiloh, which signifies sent, or, as some perhaps better
interpret it, a Peacemaker, viz. that the Scepter should not depart from
Judah, i. e. that that Tribe should continue all along, without any
Interruption, to be a Body politic, having a power of Government and
Jurisdiction within it self, until the coming of the Messiah, the great
Peacemaker, whom God would send to reconcile the world unto himself. Thus far
the Jews and we are agreed about the sense of this Text: But we say further,
that it means not only that the Tribe of Judah should continue to be invested
with the power of Government within it self, until the coming of the Messiah
(as it is manifest that it did, after it had once received that Power, from
David's time until the coming of our Savior) but that it should be deprived of
this Power, and cease to be a Commonwealth soon after the coming of the
Messiah: and that it did so about 40 years after our Savior's Crucifixion is
matter of Fact, as evident and undeniable as the other. Nay more than thus,
forasmuch as it is plain in Chronology, that the Commonwealth of the Jews was
not destroyed immediately upon the Birth of our Savior, nor immediately after
his Death. This Prophecy points directly at the time when that fatal
Destruction should come upon them, that should wrest the Scepter out of their
hands, if we understand it as the Learned Mr. Mede does, much more agreeably to
the Original, and to the completion of it, than is our English Translation,
viz. thus, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah until Shiloh come, and the
gathering of the people be to him: and so it is plain that this Destruction of
the Jewish Polity was not to happen immediately upon the coming of the Messiah;
but first the people were to be gathered unto him, i. e. were to submit to his
Government, and to own him for their Lord; which was fulfilled, when the
Apostles had executed the Commission which our Savior gave them, and had
converted the Gentiles in all Countries of the then known World to the
Christian Faith: then immediately followed the utter Subversion of the Jewish
State, as our Savior had foretold. Matthew. 24.14 This Gospel of the Kingdom
shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto all Nations; and then
shall the end come. Then did the Scepter finally and totally depart from Judah,
according to this ancient Prophecy of the Patriarch Jacob.

The second Prophecy which I shall instance in, to prove that our Savior came
at the time appointed by God for the coming of the Messiah is Hagg. 2.6, 7, and
9th Verses. Thus says the Lord of hosts; yet once, it is a little while, and I
will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land; and I
will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come: and I will
fill this house with glory, says the Lord of hosts. The glory of this latter
house shall be greater than of the former, says the Lord of hosts: and in this
place will I give peace, says the Lord of hosts. Unto which I shall join that
of Mal. 3.1. as being exactly parallel. Behold I will send my Messenger, and be
shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come
to his temple, even the Messenger of the covenant whom ye delight in: behold he
shall come, says the Lord of hosts. The chief end and design of both these
Prophecies is to foretell that the Messiah should come while the second Temple
was standing, viz. that Temple which was built by Zerubbabel, after that the
Jews were returned from the Babylonish Captivity, and afterward repaired and
beautified by Herod. Thus the ancient Rabbis and Doctors of the Jews
understood these Texts, as well as we, however their modern Writers now labor
to wrest them to some other sense, that they may not be forced to own our
Savior to be the true Messiah, at whom it is evident nevertheless, that these
Texts do directly point. For whereas (as we read Ezr. 3.12.) when Zerubbabel
had begun to build this Temple, many of the ancient men among the Jews, that
remembered the former Temple that was built by Solomon, wept, when they
considered how much inferior this would be to that; thereupon God sends the
Prophet Haggai to encourage them in the building of it, and to assure them,
That the glory of this latter house should be greater than of the former. But
wherein was the Glory of this Temple greater than that of Solomon's? Indeed it
lasted a little the longer of the two, and but a little; not the Age of a man;
for it never attained to be threescore and ten years older than the former. But
if it had lasted twice as long, what is this to the Glory and Splendor of it?
For if Glory be the product of Age, then an old Cottage is more honorable than
a new Palace. And as for any other Glory, except that which it received by
being honored by the Presence of the Messiah, it is certain, that in all other
respects it came far short of Solomon's Temple. For who can with any reason
suppose that a conquered Nation newly returned out of Captivity, from under the
hand of a potent Enemy, should have so much Wealth and Riches as to be able to
build a Temple that might vie with that of Solomon's, who exceeded all the
Kings of the earth for riches and for wisdom? And though it be true, that
Artaxerxes gave very large and magnificent Contributions toward the building
of this second Temple, yet is it not to be imagined that Artaxerxes an Heathen
King, either took so much care, or bestowed so much cost about the building of
this Temple, as Solomon did about his, who according to that mighty Wisdom and
Riches, with which God had blessed him, built unto the Honor of God's name,
both for Cost and Workmanship, undoubtedly the stateliest Fabric that ever the
world beheld. Neither is it at all probable that Herod, when he rebuilt and
beautified this Temple anew made it equal to Solomon's. But suppose it had been
equal to it, or exceeded it in the Splendor and Magnificence of its building;
yet it is certain (and the Jews themselves acknowledge it) that it was far
inferior to it, in matters of an higher Nature. For gold and silver, and
precious stones were the least part of the Glory of Solomon's Temple. Its
greatest Glory was that God was pleased to make it the peculiar place as it
were of his Residence, and especial Presence here upon Earth, The place where
his honor dwelt, and that far more visibly and eminently, than ever it did in
the second Temple before the coming of Christ. For besides that, at the
Dedication of Solomon's Temple we read that Fire came down in a wonderful
manner from Heaven, and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices; and the
glory of the Lord filled the house, so that by reason of it the Priests were
not able to enter into it; and there is no mention made of any such Miracles
being showed at the Dedication of the second; it had also the Urim and Thummim
and the Ark of the Covenant, which were signal Tokens of the Divine Presence,
and from whence God was wont to give Answers to the High Priest when he came to
enquire of him, both which were wanting in the second. To this we may add also
the Spirit of Prophecy, so frequently manifest in the Prophets during the time
of the first Temple, and ceasing all the time of the second, for about 400
years together, even from Malachy, the last of the Prophets in the Old
Testament, until the coming of our Savior. Since then in all these respects
the Glory of the second Temple was far short of that of the former, and yet God
here by his Prophet promises to make it greater; it must needs be that it was
greater only by being honored with the gracious Presence of the Messiah, unto
whom alone those glorious Titles mentioned in the afore-cited Prophecies do
properly belong, The desire of all Nations; the Lord whom ye seek; and the
Messenger of the Covenant whom ye delight in. And who should this Messiah be
but our blessed Savior, who came while this Temple was yet standing, and
foretold that it should be destroyed in the same Age, and moreover declared
himself to be the Messiah, and confirmed and demonstrated it by such wonders
and miracles as the World never saw either before, or since. It was he
therefore that rendered the second Temple truly more glorious than the first,
when he taught in it such heavenly Doctrine, so far beyond any thing that had
before been revealed unto the World, and filled it with his glory, the glory as
of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth.

The third Prophecy which I shall produce for the Confirmation of this point
is, Dan 9.24. Seventy weeks are determined upon thy People, and upon thy holy
City, etc. and ver. 26. it is said, that after threescore and two weeks shall
Messiah be cut off. Now that this Prophecy is an exact Prediction of the time
when our blessed Savior was to suffer, and also of the time of the Destruction
of Jerusalem is the unanimous Opinion of all learned and judicious Expositors,
who by the seventy week here mentioned understand weeks for years ( i e.)
seventy times seven years, which amounts to just 490. At the end of those years
(reckoning from the timewhen the second Temple was finished) was Jerusalem to
be destroyed, and a final period to be put to the Jewish State; which learned
Chronologers have computed to fall out accordingly (as near as can be guessed
in a matter so remote from our times) almost to a day; and the threescore and
two weeks also when the Messiah was to be cut off, to expire exactly at the
time when our Savior was crucified. That these things were punctually
fulfilled, viz. both the Crucifixion of our Savior, and the Destruction of
Jerusalem, according to the time foretold in this Prophecy, appears so plain in
History, that it cannot be denied with any tolerable show of reason: and
therefore the Jews, since they are forced to acknowledge, that both our
Savior's Crucifixion, and the Destruction of Jerusalem, fell out exactly about
the time foretold in this Prophecy, being thus understood, that they may not
own our Savior to be the Messiah, deny that by that word the Messiah himself
is here intended, but that it means some other person; but who that is they are
by no means agreed; some applying it to one person, and some to another, to at
least five several persons amongst them, and to never a one of these with the
least probability of truth, which that it is a most intolerable obstinacy
appears from this one remarkable Observation, that the Messiah is no where
called by his own name directly, as he is here Messiah, ver. 26. and more
Emphatically, to prevent all mistakes, in the preceding Verse, Messiah the
Prince in any other place, but this throughout all the Old Testament; but only
by way of Type every where else: and it is very likely that the ancient Jews
before our Savior's time, learned to give unto the Messiah his proper name
from this very Prophecy, which they will not own now, to have any relation to
him; so strange a Power has prejudice to pervert and blind the Hearts of men.
Thus I have made it sufficiently evident by these three samous Prophecies, that
of Jacob, that of Haggai, (jointly considered together with that of Malachy)
and this of Daniel, that our Savior is the true Messiah, forasmuch as he came
into the world when the fullness of the time was come, foretold and signified by
all these Prophecies, and declared himself to be the Messiah, which none else
did about that time, but only some few notorious Impostors, which were all
quickly renounced as such, even by their own most zealous Disciples and
Followers. I might prove this Truth further from several more Arguments, which
I could produce out of the Old Testament for this purpose, as also from the
general Opinion and Expectation which the Jews had, that the Messiah should
come about that very time when our Savior was born, which no doubt was
grounded upon these Prophecies which I have been handling, and others of the
same Nature. And that they did at that time expect the Messiah is evident, not
only from their own Writers, but even from some of the Heathen Historians: for
both Suetonius and Tacitus tell us, that at that time the Jews were in great
Expectation of a mighty Person that should rise up amongst them, under whose
Conduct and Government their Nation should flourish far beyond whatever it had
done in former times, even so as to become the Head of all the World: which
Opinion was their ruin in a short time afterward, for it made them so
confident, that upon this Presumption they rebelled against the Romans so
obstinately, that at the last they were utterly destroyed by them, and their
City and Temple demolished. But I have already said enough to clear this Truth,
that our blessed Savior came into the world precisely at that time, which God
by his Prophets had foretold and prefixed for the coming of the Messiah, and
consequently that he is the true Messiah, since none other, neither about that
time, nor since, ever laid claim to that Title with any probable appearance of
truth; neither can any one do it hereafter, seeing that, if these Prophecies be
not already fulfilled, it is now many Ages too late for the accomplishment of
them: for the fullness of the time is long since past, and God has already sent
forth his son made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were
under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.

SERMON II.
GAL. IV. 4, 5. But when the fullness of the time, etc.


IN the handling of this portion of Scripture, I undertook to prove this
Proposition, that our Lord Jesus Christ is the true Messiah, whom God has long
since sent into the world, and none other is to be expected. This I have
cleared already in one particular, viz. that of the time when, according to the
Predictions of the Prophets in the Old Testament, the Messiah was to come;
which I have proved to be the very same time in which our blessed Savior was
born. When the fullness of the time was come God sent forth his son. Thus far
therefore it is evident, that our Savior has a just right to the Title of the
Messiah, in that he appeared in the world precisely, at the time prefixed by
God for the coming of the Messiah. But this Circumstance alone (although
without it all others would be too little) is not sufficient of it self to put
this matter out of Dispute: and had we no other Argument but this for the proof
of our Proposition, we should be altogether as unreasonable in believing in
Jesus Christ, as the Jews are in rejecting him, when they find this one
material Circumstance attended and corroborated invincibly, beyond all
Exception, with every other material and necessary Circumstance mentioned in
the Old Testament, relating both to the person and office of the Messiah. For
it is not to be imagined, that our Savior was the only person that was born at
that time. No, without question there were thousands in the world that were
born at the same instant; many of the same Tribe; perhaps some very near the
time of the same Family, and in the same City: for we find in the Gospel,
mention made of his brethren and kindred. This Circumstance of the time
therefore, though it be absolutely necessary to prove our Proposition; yet it
is not sufficient of it self, being applicable to other persons as well as to
the Messiah; but will most fully demonstrate it being joined with the two other
Circumstances contained in my Text, viz. the manner how our Savior came into
the World; and the reason, or end wherefore he came; which I come now to
consider: In the doing of which I shall show you first, that our blessed
Savior came into the World exactly in the same manner, in which the Prophets
in the Old Testament foretold that the Messiah should come; secondly, that he
came for those very reasons and ends, for which the Prophets foretold that the
Messiah should come, and that he effected and accomplished those ends in the
very same way and method that, according to the Predictions of the same
Prophets, the Messiah was to do.

First, I say, our blessed Savior came into the World in the very same manner,
punctually, even in every minute Circumstance, in which the Prophets foretold
that the Messiah should come. Our Apostle here in my Text takes notice only of
these two; that he was made of a woman, and that he was made under the law: but
I shall handle this Point more largely, not consining my self to these two
Particulars only, but insisting upon all the most material Circumstances that
were to attend the coming of the Messiah; and in so doing I shall show that
they were all fulfilled to a tittle in the manner of our Savior's appearing in
the world. Now the chief Circumstances relating to the manner of the Messiah
appearing in the world are these. 1. of what Tribe he was to be; 2. of what
Family of that Tribe. 3. in what Town he was to be born. 4. in what Manner. 5.
in what Quality and Condition. The first Circumstance to be enquired into is,
of what Tribe the Messiah was to be: and in this particular the Jews agree with
us, that he was to be of the Tribe of Judah, according to Jacob's Prophecy, The
scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet until
Shiloh come; upon which account that Tribe was by God honored with many signal
and eminent Privileges, beyond any other of the twelve Tribes of Israel. Now
that our blessed Savior was of this Tribe is a thing so undeniable, that the
Apostle writing to the Jews takes it for granted that they all acknowedged it,
without any dispute. Hebr. 7.14. For it is evident that our Lord sprang out of
Judah: which Expression he would never have used had it not been a thing so
certain, and known to be so at the time when he wrote his Epistle, that no man
could deny it. But this will appear yet more clearly from the Consideration of
the second Circumstance, observable in the coming of the Messiah, viz. of what
Family he was to be: and that was of the Family of David, who it is most
certain was of the Tribe of Judah. And this was so plainly and frequently
foretold by the Prophets, that the Jews themselves never made any question of
it, but do even unto this day expect that their imaginary Messiah, whom they
yet look for, shall arise out of the Family of David. This Promise God made
unto David, and confirmed it with his Oath. Psalm. 89. 35. Once have I sworn by
my holiness, that I will not lie unto David. His seed shall endure for ever,
and his throne as the sun before me. It shall be established for ever as the
moon, and as the faithful witness in heaven. So Isa. 11.1. There shall come
forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots:
and the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, etc. And ver 10. There shall be
a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an Ensign of the people; to it shall the
Gentiles seek: and his rest shall be glorious. By these Texts, together with
several others to the same purpose, the Jews were fully convinced of this
Truth, that the Messiah was to be of the Family of David; insomuch that they
used that Expression of the son of David to signify the Messiah, unto whom in
a peculiar and eminent manner it properly belonged, as appears by the
Acclamations of the multitudes that attended our Savior, when he rode in
triumph to Jerusalem, Crying, Hosanna to the son of David, Matthew. 21.9 And in
the next Chapter, ver. 42. when our Savior asks the Pharisees this question,
What think ye of Christ? whose son is he? They readily answer him, without any
scruple, The son of David; though they could not so readily answer him the next
question, How then does David in spirit call him Lord, saying, The Lord said
unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy
footstool. Thus then it is plain, that the Messiah was to be the Son of David:
and it is as plain, that our blessed Savior whom we believe to be the Messiah
was the Son of David: for S. Matthew gives an account of his Genealogy from
Abraham; and S. Luke proceeds farther, and reckons it even from Adam himself:
and that both these Evangelists were faithful in the account that they have
given us of it is manifest, in that the Jews never offered to find any flaw or
error in it; which certainly they would have done, if there had been any such
failure to have been found, and have made the whole World acquainted with it.
But by the providence of God, until the coming of the Messiah, the Genealogies
of the Jews were so carefully recorded and preserved, for this very reason,
that it might be apparent, when the Messiah did come, that he was of the Family
of David, according to the Predictions of the Prophets, that there could be no
dispute about this Point. This is the second Circumstance observable in the
manner of the Messiah his coming into the World, he was to be the Son of David;
and so was our Savior. The next is the place where he was to be born. And
herein the Jews agree with us again, that, according to the Predictions of the
Prophets, the Messiah was to be born in Bethlehem. For so we read, Mic. 5.2 But
thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah;
yet out of thee shall be come forth unto me, that is to be ruler in Israel;
whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting. Now that the Jews
did expect the Messiah should be born in that City is plain, from the answer
which the Scribes and chief Priests gave to Herod, when being troubled at the
News which the wise men of the East brought him, of a King being born unto the
Jews, he enquired of them where Christ should be born; they answered with one
accord, In Bethlehem of Judea, grounding their answer upon this Prediction of
the Prophet Micah. And so Joh. 7.42. when the people were divided in their
Opinions concerning our Savior, and many said, Of a truth this is the Prophet.
Others said, This is the Christ. But some said (perhaps not knowing where our
Savior was born, or else maliciously pretending not to know it) shall Christ
come out of Galilee? Has not the Scripture said, that Christ comes of the
seed of David, and out of the Town of Bethlehem, where David was? By these
passages it appears, that the Jews did unanimously confess and acknowledge that
the Messiah, or Christ, was to be born in Bethlehem. And that our blessed
Savior was born there, both S. Matthew and S. Luke have fully assured us. The
manner and occasion of his being born there is most punctually recorded by the
latter: and it will be worth our while to take a short view of it, being a
thing wonderfully effected by the secret and overruling Providence of God,
contrary to all likelihood and probability, that the prediction of the Prophet
concerning this matter might be fulfilled. For had not our Savior been born in
Bethlehem, the Jews had then had an invincible Argument against us, to prove
him not to be the Messiah. And that he should be born there was very unlikely,
until within a few days before it came to pass. For both Joseph and the blessed
Virgin Mary dwelt together at Nazareth, about twenty Miles from Bethlehem, from
the time, when at the Salutation of the Angel Gabriel, she conceived our
Savior, until the time of her Delivery was at hand, excepting only those three
Months which she spent with her Cousin Elizabeth in the Hilly Country, from
whence we read expressly, that she returned to her own house, Luke 1.56. In all
probability therefore, our Savior was likely to be born at Nazareth, had not
God unexpectedly ordered the matter otherwise: which accordingly he did. For
when her full time drew near, by a Decree of Augustus Caesar, both Joseph and
she (no doubt much against their Wills, as not being then very able to
undertake a Journey) are constrained to go to be taxed in the Town belonging to
their Family, which was Bethlehem. And so it was, says S. Luke, that while
they were there, the days were accomplished that she should be delivered. And
she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and
laid him in a manger; because there was no room for them in the Inn, Luke 2.6,
7. Thus did God in his great Wisdom order this matter so, that (all the Family
of David being called together at the same time, as it were on purpose to be
Witnesses of our Savior's Birth) we might not want sufficient evidence to
prove, that our blessed Lord was not only born of the House of David, but also
in the Town of Bethlehem. The next Circumstance to be considered in the coming
of the Messiah is the manner of his Birth, and this was to be wonderful: for he
was to be born of a pure Virgin, a thing which never did, nor ever shall,
happen to any man in the World besides. This was foretold by the Prophet
Isaiah, chap. 7.14. Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall
call his name Immanuel; which, as S. Matthew tells us, being interpreted, is,
God with us, and that in a peculiar and miraculous manner, so as he never was
with any other Creature but man; with us by a personal, and eternal Union. Now
that this is an express Prophecy of the Birth of the Messiah, is so clear that
it affords no tolerable grounds for any Objections to be made against it. For
unto whom can that great name Immanuel properly belong, but unto that ever
blessed Person, that was to mediate betwixt God and Man, and reconcile them
together? Or upon whom can we imagine that God would bestow the honor of such
a Birth, if not upon the Messiah, who was undoubtedly to be honored with far
more glorious Privileges than any other of the Sons of men besides? Since then
God by his Prophet did foretell that such a wonder as this should be effected,
that a Virgin should conceive and bear a son, we cannot with any probability
imagine that any other person should be so born but only the Messiah. And that
he is here meant, is yet more fully evident from the Character which the
Prophet gives of him afterward, Chap. 9.6. Unto us a child is born, unto us a
Son is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulders, and his name
shall be called, Wonderful Councellor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father,
the Prince of Peace. These high Titles can be applied to no other person but to
the Messiah; which is yet more clear by what follows in the next Verse. Of the
increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of
David and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and
with justice, from henceforth even for ever. Certainly none other person but
the Messiah was to sit for ever upon the Throne of David, even by the
Confession of the Jews themselves. It is true, that there is not any one thing
in all the Gospel which the Jews are more unwilling to believe than this, that
our Savior came into the world by such a miraculous Birth as this, this one
Circumstance being in a manner of it self sufficient to convince any reasonable
person that whosoever was so born could be none else but the Messiah: And
therefore, rather than they will give credit to it, they deny that either in
this place, or any other in the Old Testament, God ever foretold that the
Messiah should be born of a pure Virgin; whereby they rob him of one of the
highest and most honorable Privileges that God bestowed upon him upon Earth.
And for proof of this, against all sense and reason, they affirm that the
Hebrew word in this Prophecy, which we translate Virgin, does not always
signify so; but is sometimes used for a married Woman; and that it ought to be
so rendered in this place. Which is a most malicious and false Assertion, and
contains two notorious errors and absurdities, the one visible only to the
Learned, the other easily discernible by men of ordinary Capacities. For sirst,
learned Men, that are as well acquainted with the Hebrew Tongue as the Jews
themselves, have evidently made it appear, that wheresoever this word occurs in
any other place of the Old Testament it always signifies a pure and undefiled
Virgin; and no tolerable reason can be given, why it may not signify so in
this place as well as in all the rest; nay on the contrary very great reason
may be given, why in this place above all others it may, and must of necessity
signify a Virgin as well as elsewhere, forasmuch as otherwise this Prophecy
will be made downright Nonsense; which is the second absurdity contained in
this Assertion of the Jews, which I say is obvious enough to be discerned by an
ordinary Capacity. For this Prophecy was delivered upon this occasion; Ahaz
King of Judah being much afraid of the Kings of Syria and Samaria that were
coming to war against him, God sends the Prophet Isaiah to comfort him, and to
assure him that they shall not prevail against him, and withal gives him leave
to ask some great Sign to be given him, to satisfy him that God would
certainly protect him, which when he refused to do ( I will not ask, says he,
neither will I tempt the Lord) God himself most graciously promises to give him
a Sign; therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign. And surely if God
pleases to give a Sign he will give such a one as is worthy of himself, one
that is exceedingly wonderful and extraordinary. But after all, as the Jews
would interpret the Text, the Sign only to be this. Behold a woman shall
conceive and bear a son. What Sign, what Wonder is there in this? Certainly no
more than what is to be seen every day, every hour, every minute in one place
or other in the world. If therefore we interpret the Text thus, it is not
reconcilable to Sense. But as our Translation renders it ( Behold a Virgin
shall conceive and bear a son) this is a Wonder indeed, such as the world never
did, nor ever shall, behold, but once; this is an astonishing Sign, worthy of
God to give, and a Prerogative so eminent as none else but the Messiah was
worthy to receive. Now that our biessed Savior was born of a pure Virgin, is a
thing so clearly revealed and firmly attested by persons of unquestionable
Fidelity and Integrity authorized and commissioned by God himself to give the
world a true account of these matters, and guided and assisted by his Spirit in
the doing of it, that it can be denied by nothing less obstinate than the same
malice which would pervert the sense of that famous Prophecy which foretold it.
That the Evangelists and Apostles have given us this account of the Birth of
our Savior is so well known, that I need not insist upon it; and to prove that
their Writings are the word of God, and consequently that they are most
certainly and infallibly true, is beyond my present Purpose, which is to show
that there is not any one Prophecy in the Old Testament concerning the Messiah
which we find not punctually fulfilled, even to the least tittle, in the person
of our Savior in that account, which the Evangelists have given us of him,
which sufficiently demonstrates him to be the true Messiah, and their Writings
to be of Divine Authority. This manner of our Savior's Birth is very
emphatically expressed by our Apostle in my Text. God sent forth his son made
of a woman. As he is God he is not made, but begotten of the Father by an
eternal and unspeakable Generation; and as he is Man he was not begotten, but
made of a woman after an unconceivable manner, by the omnipotent Power of God.
And thus it was necessary, that the Messiah should make his Entry into the
world, who was to be conceived and born without sin, sanctified from the Womb,
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners. Thus much of the fourth
Circumstance relating to the manner of the Messiah his appearing in the world.
He was to be born of a Virgin; and so was our Savior.

The next thing to be considered, is in what Quality and Condition he was to
come. This is that grand Stumbling Block at which the Jews are irreconcilably
scandalized. They are very ready to acknowledge that our Savior appeared in
the world in a very poor and despicable State, and thus far they believe the
Gospel as well as we: but because he did appear in such a Condition they
utterly deny him to be the Messiah, whom they still expect to come with
exceeding great Pomp and Splendor, and Glory becoming so great a King as was
to sit for ever upon the Throne of David, and to suddue all the Nations of the
Earth, and to reduce them to his obedience. Had our Savior come in this
manner, and made their Nation the head of the World, it is more than probable
that this one Circumstance would have fully satisfied them, and without any
scrupulous Enquiry of what Tribe he was born, of what Family, in what Place,
and in what manner they would have unanimously proclaimed him to be the true
Messiah, the Son of David, and the redeemer of Israel. But that a person of so
mean and obscure a Birth as our Savior was, one, who as to his external
Condition, made so inconsiderable a figure in the world, that the Carpenter the
Son of Mary (as they scornfully called him) should declare himself to be the
greatest of all the Sons of men, their so long expected, and earnestly desired
Messiah, the Son of God, and the King of Israel; they looked upon to be so great
an affront to their Nation; that instead of owning him to be the Messiah, they
reject him as an Impostor, and cut him off by an ignominious Death, little
knowing that in all this they fulfilled the Scriptures, and that their very
opposition, rejection, and Crucifixion of him were all necessary and material
Arguments, which we could by no means have wanted, to prove him to be the true
Messiah. Since then we cannot deny that our blessed Savior did come into the
world in a poor and mean Condition, far different from that wherein the Jews
expected the Messiah should appear; in such a Condition indeed in which humane
Reason, would little imagine that God would send into the world his only
begotten Son, the Son of his eternal Love, in whom he is well pleased, him who
was to be so highly exalted, and to have a name given him above every name. For
all the world as well as the Jews might very reasonably expect that such a
person as this would come attended with the most pompous and magnificent
Circumstances imaginable, suitable to the Grandeur and Glory of him who was to
be higher than the Kings of the earth; it concerns us above all other
Circumstances relating to the coming of the Messiah, firmly and substantially
to prove this, which of all others seems to be the most improbable, that he was
to come in this mean and contemptible Condition. For since it is manifest from
the Writings of the Prophets that the Messiah was to be a most mighty King, of
the increase of whose Government and Peace there should be no end upon the
throne of David and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with
judgment and with justice for ever; if this great person was to be born of mean
Parents, in a Stable, and afterward all his life time to continue in a
Condition answerable to that obscure Birth; not to enjoy so much as an house of
his own wherein to hide his head; to be despised and hated by his own
Countrymen, and persecuted unto Death; it was necessary that God by his
Prophets should foretell this also; or else it could never have been expected
that when he did come, any Man living should have been able to discern him in
so strange a Disguise, God having no where revealed any such thing. But if God
has revealed this also, as clearly as any of the aforementioned Circumstances,
and has by his Prophets as plainly foretold the Humiliation of the Messiah, as
his Exaltation; then it is evident that our Savior's coming in that mean
Condition, in which we confess he did, is so far from being any Objection
against us, that, joined with the former Circumstances, and with what I shall
further insist upon, it is an unanswerable Argument to prove that he is the
true Messiah; seeing he came exactly in such a Quality and Condition, as God by
his Prophets foretold the Messiah should come in. And that God did foretell that
the Messiah should appear in this low and despicable State, besides other
places of Scripture, we have the whole 53d. Chap. of the Prophecy of Isaiah to
convince us; which of all others is the most full and plain Prophecy, both of
the Humiliation and Exaltation of Christ. And it is a wonderful thing that the
Jews even to this day should continue so obstinate as not to believe it; though
this very obstinacy and unbelief of theirs is a very strong Confirmation of our
Faith, since even this also is expressly foretold by the Prophet, and that in
the very first words of the Chapter: He ushers in his Prophecy with an
admiration at the stupidity and unbelief of his People, who he foresaw would
not receive it. Who has believed our report? And to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed? And then in the two following Verses he gives an exact
Description of this mean Condition in which the Messiah was to come. He shall
grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground; he
has no form nor comeliness: and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that
we should desire him. He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him: he was
despised, and we esteemed him not. Now if this be truly (as we affirm it is) a
Prophecy of the Messiah, it is manifest, that it agrees exactly with the manner
of our Savior's appearing in the world. And though the modern Jews deny it to
be a Prophecy of him, yet we have sufficient Arguments to prove that it is. I
shall instance only in these two. First it is very unreasonable to imagine,
that God would suffer every punctilio of this Prophecy to be completely
accomplished and fulfilled, in the person of one who owned and declared himself
to be the Messiah, except the Prophecy were really intended of the Messiah, and
he in whom it was so fulfilled, were that very person whom it meant. Now that
there is not one tittle of this Prophecy which was not fulfilled in the person
of our Savior, who professed himself to be the Messiah, and applied this
Prophecy to himself, is evident in the account the Evangelists have given us of
him: and then it follows, not only that this is a Prophecy of the Messiah, but
also that our Savior is the Messiah whom it points at. The second Argument to
prove this to be a Prophecy of the Messiah is the unanimous Opinion of many of
the ancient Rabbis and Doctors of the Jews before, and about, our Savior's
time, who all acknowledge this whole Chapter, together with the latter end of
the former, to be a Prophecy of the Messiah. And therefore, if the modern Jews
will not acknowledge as much, they differ as much from their own Writers as
from us; and no reason can be assigned for their so doing, but their obstinate
prejudice, that will not suffer them to apply any passage of Scripture to the
Messiah, that seems to be inconsistent with worldly Pomp and Grandeur. Thus I
have proved to you, that our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is the true
Messiah from these two Circumstances, the time when he came into the world, and
the manner how. The same truth may be yet further evinced from the reason and
end of his coming; but this I shall leave until another opportunity.

SERMON III.
GAL. IV. 4, 5. But when the fullness of the time, etc.


YE may remember that when formerly I began to handle this portion of
Scripture, I laid down this Proposition as the Foundation of my Discourse, That
our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is the true Messiah, whom God has
long since sent forth into the world; and that none other is to be expected.
This I undertook to prove chiefly by these Arguments with which the Apostle
furnishes us here in my Text, taken from the Consideration of the time when,
the manner how, and the end wherefore he came into World. The two former of
these Circumstances (the time when, and the manner how, our Savior came into
the World) I have already handled; and in the doing of it have sufficiently
cleared the truth of this Proposition, That our Lord Jesus Christ is the true
Messiah: but to make it yet more evident, there remains one Circumstance more
to be considered; and that is the reason and end of his coming, which the
Apostle comprises in these words, To redeem them that were under the law, that
we might receive the adoption of sons.

It was not for nothing that so great a person as the Messiah was to come into
the World. No, he had a mighty work to do, which none was able to perform but
himself: for he was to interpose betwixt the Divine Vengeance and Sin, which is
its proper Object; to redeem all Mankind from the Curse of the Law, to which we
were become obnoxious, and to reconcile us again unto God, and to purchase for
us the adoption of Sons. This was a work worthy of the Messiah, and what the
Scriptures plainly foretold that he should accomplish: and that he might effect
it, it was necessary, First, That he should most fully and clearly reveal to us
the whole Will of God concerning us, and that he should instruct and teach us
how to behave our selves acceptably in his sight: Secondly, That he should make
an atonement for our Sins, and satisfy the Justice of God incensed against us,
by our Disobedience: And thirdly, That he should assist and defend us against
all the attempts of our spiritual Enemies, and furnish us with means sufficient
for the working out our Salvation. And accordingly we find him represented in
the Scriptures of the Old Testament, sometimes as a Prophet that should in a
more eminent manner, than any that ever were before, or shall be after him,
publish and declare the Will of God. This God himself foretold unto Moses, and
by him unto all Israel. Deuteronomy. 18.18. I will raise them up a Prophet from among
their brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth, and he
shall speak unto them all that I shall command him. And it shall come to pass,
that whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my Name,
I will require it of him. Sometimes we find him represented as a Priest that
should make an atonement for the Sins of his People. So Psalm. 110.4. The Lord
has sworn, and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedeck. And wherein his priestly Office chiefly consisted the Prophet
Isaiah informs us (chap. 53.) He was to pour out his soul unto death, to be an
offering for sin; to be numbered with the transgressors; to bear the sin of
many; and to make intercession for the transgressors. And sometimes we find
him to be represented as a King reigning with sovereign Power and Authority in
a Kingdom that should have no end. So Psalm 2.6, 8. Yet have I set my King upon
my holy hill of Sion. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Thus it
was necessary, that the Messiah should be qualified in order to the
accomplishing the great Work of our Redemption. Since by Nature we are utterly
ignorant of the Will of God, and destitute of all saving Knowledge, it was
necessary that he should be a Prophet sent from Heaven to reveal it unto us.
Since by Sin we were become Enemies unto God, it was necessary that he should
be a Priest, to make Reconciliation and Intercession for us. And since we were
to engage in a dangerous War, to fight against Principalities and Powers,
Adversaries far stronger and mightier than our selves, that with all their
force continually withstand us in our way to Heaven, and that had already
enslaved us all under their accursed Tyranny by the Dis-obedience of our first
Parents; it was necessary that he should be a mighty King, endued with Power
from on high, to assert our Liberty, and to subdue and discomfit our Enemies
before us. All these Qualifications, I say, were necessarily required in the
Messiah, and all are expressly ascribed unto him in the Old Testament: Now that
our blessed Savior did come into the World for this very end, for which the
Prophets foretold that the Messiah should come, and that he was most eminently
qualified in the same manner as they foretold he should be, is most clearly
evident in the account which the holy Evangelists and Writers of the New
Testament have given us of him.

First he came for that very end for which the Messiah was to come, which (as
the Prophet Daniel speaks) was to finish the transgression, and to make an end
of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting
righteousness; which is the same in effect which the Apostle says here, in my
Text, To redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the
adoption of sons. That this was the end of our Savior's coming, not only my
Text, but almost every page of the New Testament assures us. The son of man,
says our Savior of himself, is come to seek and to save that which was lost,
Luke 19.10. and Matthew. 20.28. The son of man came not to be ministered unto, but
to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many. There is one God, and one
Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom
for all, to be testified in due time, 1 Timothy 2.5, 6. I need not insist any more
upon this Point, than which nothing is more evident in all the Scriptures. For
this is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners. The end of all his Sermons, of all his
Miracles, of his most holy Life and heavenly Doctrine, of his most meritorious
Death and Passion, of his most glorious and triumphant Resurrection and
Ascension into Heaven, of his most gracious Mission of the Holy Ghost, and of
his continual Intercession for us at the right hand of God, was that he might
redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works. Thus ye see the end of our blessed Savior's coming into
the world, is both by himself and his Apostles plainly declared to be the very
same for which the Messiah was to come. But still this is not sufficient: for
one that was but an Impostor might impudently avouch himself to be the Messiah,
and go about to persuade the world that he came for this very end. But it was
necessary that he that did come for it indeed, and did truly accomplish it,
should bring with him, as it were, credential Letters from Heaven, to assure
the world that he was truly and really sent by God upon so great an Embassy.
And that he did do so is evident beyond all Contradiction in the Gospel. All
those eminent Offices which the Prophets in the Old Testament ascribe unto the
Messiah, he undertook and performed to a tittle, and was both a Prophet, a
Priest, and a King in all respects incomparably beyond what ever the world
either did or shall behold.

First he was a Prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people.
His Doctrine was most Divine and Heavenly, far surpassing what had been
formerly delivered by Moses and the Prophets, and agreeable to what they
foretold should be delivered by the Messiah. Though it is most true, that the
Religion which was taught by Moses and the Prophets had God himself for its
Author, and therefore could not choose but be good; yet it is certain that it
was a far more imperfect Revelation of the Divine Will, than what was
afterward to be made by the Messiah, who was to establish a Religion, unto
which not only the Jews, but all mankind should be obliged to submit, or perish
upon their refusal of it. For the proof of this I might produce many places out
of the Writings of the Prophets; but the beginning of Isa. 42. shall suffice
for all. Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul
delights: I have put my spirit upon him; he shall bring forth judgment to the
Gentiles. He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the
street. A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he not
quench: He shall bring forth judgment unto truth. He shall not fail nor be
discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth: and the isles shall wait
for his law. By this one passage, which is a plain Prophecy of the Messiah, it
is manifest that he was to be the greatest Prophet that ever should come into
the world; an Elect and chosen Servant of God, in whom he delighted in a
peculiar manner, above all the rest of Mankind; one upon whom he would pour out
his Spirit without measure, and anoint with the oil of gladness above his
fellows; one that was not only to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore
the preserved of Israel, but was also to be a light to the Gentiles, and
salvation unto the end of the earth, filling it all, even the Isles as well as
the Continent, full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.
Now that our blessed Savior was such a Prophet as this, for greater than all
the Prophets of the Old Testament, even than Moses himself, is manifest in the
Evangelical History, both from the Doctrine which as a Prophet he taught, and
from the Miracles which as a Prophet he wrought for the Confirmation of it. As
for his Doctrine, whosoever reads it must needs acknowledge that it contains a
far more perfect and full Revelation of the Divine Will, than what was
delivered by Moses and the Prophets, in regard both of Commands and Promises.
All his Precepts and Commands were such as highly became the infinite goodness
of God to give unto us, for the refining and perfecting our Nature, and fitting
us to partake of that Happiness for which he designed us. All those seemingly
venial Vices and Imperfections connived at in the Mosaical Law were made
capital Crimes, and strictly forbidden, upon pain of Damnation, by the Law of
Christ. All the false Glosses, and corrupt Doctrines of the Scribes and
Pharisees, he has utterly rejected and condemned as gross Hypocrisy: and by
his Law whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her is already become an
adulterer; whosoever hastily reproaches his Brother as a Fool does thereby bring
himself in Danger of Hellfire; he that hates his Brother is a murderer; he
that loves not his Enemy is guilty of an high breach of Christian Charity, even
so as to deprive himself of the love of God. In a word, he has commanded us to
be perfect, even as our Father which is in heaven is perfect, not only with
outward, but with inward Purity: for his Law reaches not only our Hands, but
our Tongues, and our Hearts; and he has told us expressly that not only for our
Actions, but also for every idle word, and every sinful thought, we shall give
an account at the Day of Judgment. And as the Precepts and Commands of our
Savior far exceed those of Moses and the Prophets, so likewise has he
enforced the performance of them with the Promise of a far more glorious Reward
to the obedient, and the threatening of a far more dreadful Punishment to the
Transgressors, than any mentioned in the Law of Moses. And all this he did with
far greater Authority, as one that was empowered with a higher Commission, than
Moses and the Prophets. Whatsoever they taught, they taught in the name of God,
ushering in their words with this Preface, Thus says the Lord: but our blessed
Savior, though what he taught was most truly the Word and Will of God, which
he was sent into the world to reveal unto us; yet, as one that knew that in
him, it was no robbery to be equal with God, he delivers it not in God's Name,
but in his own; I say unto you, throughout all the Gospels. And as our
Savior's Doctrine surpasses that of Moses in its Excellency and Purity; so
does it likewise in its Extent and Universality: and whereas the Law of Moses
was published only to the Children of Israel, that of Christ extends it self to
all Mankind, wheresoever dispersed over the face of the whole Earth, Goye,
says he to his Apostles, into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature, Mark 16.15. And that nothing might be wanting to satisfy us, that he
was indeed a Prophet sent by God on purpose, in his Name, and by his Authority,
to teach this Doctrine, he confirmed and ratified it with the broad Seal of
Heaven, with innumerable and most astonishing Miracles, than which, greater or
more certain Testimony God himself cannot give us for the Confirmation of any
Truth. These Miracles of his were so many and so wonderful, that more could not
be expected from the Messiah, by the Confession of many of the Jews that
believed on him: When Christ comes, say they, will he do more miracles than
these which this man has done? Joh. 7.31. Even the Rulers of the Jews
themselves, as well as the common People were convinced that he did work
Miracles; and for that very reason they conspired against him, and put him to
Death, as we read they did upon his raising of Lazarus from the Dead. Joh.
11.47. Then gathered the chief Priests and Pharisees a council, and said, What
do we? for this man does many miracles. If we let him thus alone, all men will
believe on him: and the Romans shall come and take away both our place and
nation. To these Miracles we may add also his Predictions of future Events,
very strange and unexpected; and yet all punctually fulfilled to a tittle, in
the very same manner and order as he foretold they should be. All these things
(which I only name, presuming them to be well known to all that live within the
sound of the Gospel) evidently demonstrate our blessed Savior to be far the
greatest Prophet that ever came into the world; even such an one as all the
Prophets before him foretold that the Messiah should be.

And as he was a Prophet, so he was also a Priest, as eminent in that Office as
in the other, Superior to all those of the Aaronical Priesthood, even to Aaron
himself, who, as well as his Successors; was but a Type of our great
High Priest Jesus Christ. And that he was such a Priest as this is frequently
declared in the New Testament, and most clearly demonstrated by his performing
the Offices belonging to such a Priest, which are especially these two. First
to offer up unto God a most holy, perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice, to
satisfy his Justice, and to make an atonement for the Sins of all Mankind.
Secondly, to appear continually in the Presence of God, making most powerful
and effectual Intercession for all true Believers. That he has already
performed one of these Offices, and that he does still perform the other, we
are assured by all the holy Penmen, whose business it was to give us a true
and faithful account of these matters. First, he has offered up unto God such
a Sacrifice as he himself required, with which his Justice is fully satisfied,
and his Wrath appeased. And this was that Oblation of himself, of his own most
precious Body and Blood, when he poured out his soul unto death, to be an
offering for sin, upon the Altar of the Cross. Christ, being come an
High Priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle,
not made with hands, that is to say, not of this building, neither by the blood
of goats and calves, but by his own blood, entered in once into the holy place,
having obtained eternal redemption for us, Hebr. 9.11, 12. And, without looking
any further, that one Epistle to the Hebrews may satisfy us in this Point, the
main Design of it being to convince the Jews that Jesus Christ was such an
High Priest as we are speaking of, Who was once offered to bear the sins of
many; and who shall appear unto them that look for him the second time without
sin unto salvation. Secondly, as our blessed Savior has offered this holy,
spotless, and most acceptable Sacrifice of himself unto God for us, so does he
likewise continually intercede for us at his right hand, pleading the merits of
his most precious Death and Passion in our behalf, that we thereby may be
delivered from the Curse of the Law, and receive the adoption of Sons. Christ
is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of
the true, but into heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us,
Hebr. 9.24. and Hebr. 7.25. He tells us, That he is able to save them to the
uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession
for them. So Romans 8.34. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea
rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also
makes intercession for us. And if any man sin, says S. John, we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, 1 John 2.1. Thus then it
is evident, that our blessed Savior is by the holy Evangelists and Apostles
(that have given us a true and faithful account of him) represented to be, as
great an High Priest as it was possible that the Messiah could be; for who can
be higher than he that is set down at the right hand of God?

And this naturally brings me to the Consideration of his last and highest
Office, which is that of a King: For surely he that is exalted unto the right
hand of God, can be no less than a King in the highest Degree, a King of Saints
and Angels a King of Kings, and Lord of Lords Let the Jews persuade themselves
what they please concerning the greatness of the Kingdom of their imaginary
Messiah, whom they fondly dream is yet to come into the world, though they
cannot deny that the time prefixed for his coming by the Prophets is long since
past, yet a greater King they cannot imagine him to be than we know, and are
fully assured by the unanimous Testimony of most faithful and unexceptionable
Witnesses, that our blessed Savior already is; who is, and ever shall be, a
King upon Gods holy hill of Sion, whom he has exalted, and set at his own
right hand in the heavenly places, far above all principality and power, and
might and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but
also in that which is to come, and put all things under his feet, and given him
to be the head over all things to the Church, Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22. That our
blessed Savior was to be such a King as this the Angel Gabriel expressly
foretold to the Virgin Mary at his Conception, Luke 1.31. Behold, thou shall
conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shall call his name Jesus. He
shall be great, and shall be called the son of the highest: and the Lord God
shall give unto him the throne of his father David. And he shall reign over the
house of Jacob for ever; and of his Kingdom there shall be no end. Which words
plainly imply that he was not to be a temporal King, a King of this World,
whose Kings and Kingdoms shall all perish and come to an end; but a spiritual
King of a Kingdom which is everlasting. Such a King as this our Lord owned
himself to be. I appoint unto you a Kingdom, says he to his Disciples, as my
father has appointed unto me; that ye may eat and drink at my table in my
Kingdom, and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel, Luke 22.29,
30. A King even Pilate himself seemed positively to declare him by the
Superscription upon his Cross, Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews; which he
would by no means alter at the request of the chief Priests. Such a King he
most powerfully demonstrated himself to be by his triumphant Resurrection from
the Dead. Such a King he yet more fully proved himself to be by his most
glorious Ascension into Heaven. Having first told his Disciples that all power
is given unto him in heaven and in earth, he shows them the truth of it by
ocular Demonstration, visibly in their sight ascending up into Heaven, to take
Possession of his eternal Kingdom; sending moreover two Angels to comfort them,
and assure them that he, the same Jesus, which was taken up from them into
heaven, shall so come in like manner as they had seen him go into heaven, Act.
1.11. And after all this, according to his Promise, as a King that was ascended
on high, that had led captivity captive, and received gifts for men, he bestows
upon them a gift fit for the King of Heaven, to bestow upon his choicest
Favorites, even that of the Holy Ghost upon the Day of Pentecost, thereby, to
the astonishment of all that beheld them, impowering them to work Miracles and
to speak with Tongues, in order to the accomplishing that great work about
which he employed them; which was to proclaim him over all the World to be such
a King, such a Savior, and to gather him a Church out of all the Nations of
the Earth, declaring that unto all those that will believe and obey him, and
receive him for their Sovereign Lord and King, he will most assuredly be the
author of eternal salvation, having redeemed them from the Curse of the Law,
and purchased for them the adoption of sons; and that, when at the last day he
shall come again in the Glory of his Father, to judge the world in
righteousness, he shall then as an omnipotent King, whose Power nothing can
resist, execute Vengeance upon all his Enemies, and reward all his faithful and
obedient Subjects with everlasting Felicity, receiving them into his heavenly
Kingdom, there to Reign together with him in Glory, as Kings and Priests unto
God for ever; thus I have proved to you I hope beyond all Contradiction (except
such as proceeds from wilful and obstinate Malice, or notorious Ignorance or
Prejudice, which must needs be weak and groundless) that our blessed Savior is
the true Messiah, whom God has long since sent forth into the World, and that
none other is to be expected by us: and this I have done according to my
propounded method, chiefly by those Arguments with which my Text furnishes us,
taken from the Consideration of the time when, the manner how, and the reason
and end wherefore he came into the World: And in the doing of it I have
insisted more or less upon all the material Circumstances mentioned by the
Prophets, as it were so many infallible Notes and Characters, by which the
Messiah was to be known and discerned from all the rest of Mankind, and showed
you that every one of them is exactly fulfilled to a tittle, in the person of
our Savior; and that it is absolutely impossible, that they ever should agree
to any other person whatsoever, the time prefixed by God for the coming of the
Messiah being long since past; so that it is now beyond the Power of
Omnipotence it self to recall it. If then our blessed Savior be the true
Messiah whom God, out of his great love to Mankind, has sent into the World to
reconcile it unto himself, redeem us from the Curse of the Law, that we might
receive the adoption of sons, and that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life, woe be to all those that receive him not as
such How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation? For there is none
other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved, but that of
the Lord Jesus Christ. In him therefore let us steadfastly believe, committing
the keeping of our souls unto him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Redeemer
that is both mighty and willing to save us; owning him to be our great Prophet,
that has revealed unto us the whole Will of God, by our firm Belief of all his
Divine Doctrine; owning him to be our great High Priest, who, by the Sacrifice
of himself once offered, has made an atonement for our Sins, and ever lives
to make Intercession unto God for us, by our relying wholly upon his merits for
Salvation: owning him to be our Sovereign, our Almighty Lord and King, able to
defend and protect us in this World, and to reward us in the next, by yielding
a constant, impartial and universal Obedience to all his most holy Laws and
Commandments. Thus if we own him here before men, he will hereafter own us
before his Father which is in Heaven; and, when those that have rejected him
shall be covered with eternal Shame and Confusion, blacker than that darkness
into which they must be for ever banished from the Presence of the Lord, he
shall cloth us with the glorious Robe of his own righteousness, and admit us
into the everlasting Happiness of his heavenly Kingdom, to those Pleasures
which are at God's right hand for evermore.

SERMON IV.
1 COR. VI. 20. For ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your
body, and in your spirit, which are Gods.


INgratitude is a Crime so base and unnatural, so repugnant to the Dictates of
reason, that no Man of a generous Spirit can endure to be guilty of it. The
slightest Favor we receive from any of our Friends, if it proceed from an
hearty Intention to do us good, deserves at least our kind acceptance and
thanks. But such a Signal and extraordinary Obligation may be laid upon us even
by an earthly Benefactor, that we can do no less than devote our lives and
fortunes to his Service, and think it little enough for an acknowledgment of
his kindness. But still the greatest Benefits that we can receive from the hand
of Man, are nothing in comparison of the least of those which we receive daily
from the hand of God, from whom alone comes every good and perfect gift. Every
Favor of his is inestimable; that we breath his Air, that we drink his Water,
that we tread upon his Earth, that we seed upon his Creatures, that we behold
his Light, that he created us and brought us out of the dark Abyss, when before
we had no Being, and that he still preserves and protects us: these Mercies
sufficiently declare, that all that we have, all that we are (except what we
made our selves by sin) we have and are from him; and that therefore he most
justly Challenges a right, both to our Bodies and our Souls: all that we can do
or suffer for him is inconsiderable, in comparison of the good we have received
from him. And yet all these Mercies which I have already mentioned are nothing
to that which is behind, his Redemption of us by the Death of his only begotten
Son, whereas otherwise we had been lost and undone for ever. This surely was
the utmost Effort of infinite Love and Goodness; a Mercy which the more it is
considered, the more it will be admired, and will be the eternal Subject of our
wonder, as well as of our Praise and Thanksgiving in Heaven. And now what does
God require of us, as an acknowledgment of this unconceivable Favor? Not
thousands of rams, nor ten thousands of rivers of oil: it is only this, that we
will glorify him that has redeemed us. For ye are bought, etc.

Which words contain these three things. 1. God's Mercy toward us; he has
bought us with a Price, and so we are his by right of Purchase. 2. The Duty
which thereupon he requires us to perform to him; we must therefore glorify
him. 3. The manner how; we must do it in our Body and in our Spirit, forasmuch
as he has redeemed and purchased both of them, and both are his. For ye are
bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit,
which are Gods.

Let us take a view of God's mercy toward us first; and when we have had a
true Prospect of that we shall be the better enabled to discern how great an
Obligation lies upon us to perform that Duty, which thereupon the Apostle in
the name of God requires of us. To take a view of God's mercy is an hard Task,
though it is a very pleasant one; to take a full view of it is indeed
impossible for either Men or Angels, since his mercy is, as himself is,
infinite: and the greatest instance of his mercy, which the Scripture makes
mention of is that which he has showed to Mankind. It Is true he created
Creatures of an higher order and nobler nature than Man, even the glorious
Angels of Light whom he ordained to be the immediate Attendants about his
Throne, and advanced to the highest Honor and Felicity in his heavenly
Kingdom. These, as they were the Firstborn of the Creation, so they received a
double Portion from their Creator; and whereas he made Man only the Lord of his
Footstool here below, he admitted them to be Inhabitants of his Palace above,
and assigned to them everlasting Mansions of Light and Glory. Thus far God's
Love and Goodness was greater toward the Angels than toward Man. But when
some of these (once glorious) Creatures rebelled against their Creator, and
fell from their happy Station, God was pleased to admit of no Mediator to
intercede for their Pardon, but left them to reap the fruit of their Folly, and
condemned them for ever to that remediless Misery into which their sin had most
deservedly plunged them. But with Man he dealt otherwise: for when he also by
transgressing that easy Command which was given him in Paradise, had incurred
the same Condemnation with those apostate Spirits, God was pleased here to
mingle Mercy with Justice, and to order the matter so, that though he did both
pronounce and execute the Sentence of Death upon him, which he had threatened in
case of his disobedience, yet he made even Death it self a Happiness to him, as
well as a Punishment, a gate of Life and Immortality, and an inlet into a far
more glorious Paradise than that which before he had forfeited. This was a
Mercy beyond all Expectation, above the thoughts of Men or Angels to
comprehend, that whereas he left no place of Repentance to the fallen Angels,
but hat reserved them in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of
the great day, yet he had pity on Man though a Creature of an inferior Nature,
so that even before he pronounced against him the Sentence of Death, he
published a short Gospel of Peace and Reconciliation, and assured him, that the
seed of the woman should bruise the serpents head. Thus did God utterly
confound the Malice of Satan, and cause his mischief to return upon his own
pate; his aim was to bring Man into the same Perdition with himself, without
any hopes of recovery; that so he might insult over him as his Captive and
Vassal for ever: but so far was God from suffering him to enjoy the Pleasure of
such a Triumph, that he presently declares that that supposed Victory that he
had gained over Man, should end in his own eternal overthrow; that though he
had dispossessed the first Adam of his earthly Paradise, yet he would at his
appointed time send another Adam that should conduct all the race of Mankind,
that would believe in him and obey him, to take Possession of those glorious
Mansions from whence he and his rebellious Companions were fallen; a Man whom
all the Angels of God should worship; a Man that should trample Satan under his
feet; a Man that should be one with God; at whose name every knee should bow,
of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth, a Man
that should have the keys of hell and of death, who having lead captivity
captive, and spoiled principalities and powers should ascend into the highest
Heavens, and sit on the right hand of God, Angels and Authorities, and Powers
being made subject unto him. But though God was resolved, that though Man was
thus miserably lost, and sold into the hands of Satan, to the utter confusion
and astonishment of him that had wrought his ruin, he should be redeemed and
restored again; yet this was no easy Task even to Omnipotence it self, but God
was forced to be at the Expense, both of pains and charge to effect it. The
Creation of Man, and of the whole World, cost him no trouble at all: For he
spoke, and it was done; he commanded and it stood fast: but Man's Redemption
cost the highest price that Heaven had to give; not corruptible things, as
silver and gold, but the precious blood of the Son of God, as of a lamb without
blemish and without spot. That Man might live, God himself was fain to become
Man, and to die for the satisfaction of the Divine Justice. A Mystery so great,
so incomprehensible, that though nothing be more plainly and fully revealed in
the holy Scripture, yet many (who notwithstanding call themselves Christians)
will not be persuaded to believe it, most impudently and ungratefully denying
the Lord that bought them, and bringing upon themselves swift destruction. Thus
you see the ransom that was paid for us; we were bought with a price, a Price
inestimable, a Price infinite, a Price greater than which the mercy of God
could not give, and less than which his Justice would not accept. The greatness
of this Price sufficiently intimates the great reason that there was, that such
a Price as this should be paid. For certainly God who does nothing in vain
would never have been at such a vast Expense as this, had not there been great
occasion for it: and so there was upon all accounts. The Wisdom, the Mercy, the
Justice, all the Attributes of God at once required this Price, and all at once
were glorified by the Payment of it far more than by the Creation of the World.
The malice and cruelty of Satan required, that this Price should be paid for
his Confusion; and above all the Misery of Man required it for his Redemption.
Though some of the Angels fell yet others (and doubtless the greatest part of
them) kept their Station; and so God was pleased to punish the one for their
Rebellion, and to reward the other for their Fidelity. But with us the Case was
otherwise: all the whole race of Man was lost in Adam; insomuch that not one of
his Posterity could plead Exemption, either from Death or Hell. And had God
suffered them to have been all thus lost without any hopes of recovery; Satan
would have had too great cause to triumph, and blasphemously to boast that he
had baffled the Wisdom and Goodness of God, having utterly ruined and destroyed
Man the chief work of all the visible Creation, a Creature highly beloved of
God and precious in his sight, whom he plainly declared that he designed for
great and noble Ends, first by taking (as it were) special Counsel and Advice
about his Creation, and then imprinting upon him his own glorious Image, and
making him Lord of all the Creatures upon Earth. Let us make man, says he, in
our own image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of
the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the
earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth, Genesis 1.26.
It was therefore a Stratagem worthy of the wisdom and goodness of God, to
rescue so considerable a part of the Creation out of the paw of that roaring
Lion who thought to have devoured it, and to make the wicked malice of Satan
contrary to his Expectation, tend to the increasing not only of his own Misery,
but of Man's Felicity. Lastly, the deplorable Condition of fallen Man required
that this Price should be paid for his Redemption: and certainly it was none of
the least Motives that induced God to lay it down. Our Savior himself seems to
intimate that it was the chief. For, says he, God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life, Joh. 3.16. In the prosecution of this Point I might
be very large: for I should insist first upon that blessed Estate that Man
enjoyed at his first Creation in innocence; the Consideration of which would
give us a truer prospect of that Misery, which he afterward brought upon
himself by his disobedience: for none can be so miserable as they that were
once happy: and lastly, I should show you how great Glory this price has
purchased for us, which would appear likewise the greater after the sight of
that Misery from which it has redeemed us: for rest is most welcome to the
weary, ease and liberty is by none so highly valued as by those persons that
have been long detained in Bondage and Slavery, and Joy and Happiness doubles
its sweetness to them that have drunk deepest of sorrow. But who is sufficient
for these things. How can we that are all conceived and born in Sin apprehend
the Happiness of the state of Innocence! Who is able to describe the horror of
the infernal Pit, or to tell what it is to lie in Chains of darkness, exiled
for ever from the Divine Providence! Who can ascend into the holy Hill of the
Lord, that he may give us an account of those Pleasures which are at God's
right hand for evermore! Even St. Paul himself, though he was bred up at the feet
of Gamaliel and abounded with Learning and Eloquence, yet wanted words to tell
us, what he heard and saw when he was caught up into the third Heaven, and
could say no more of that wonderful Vision than that he heard (...), words, or
things unutterable. And in another place he tells us, that eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God
has prepared for them that love him. No, these Subjects are all of them too
great either for our tongue to express, or for our thoughts to comprehend. Let
it suffice us then to know in short, that whereas by Sin we had rendered our
selves obnoxious to the greatest Misery that could possibly befall us, had sold
our selves to be Slaves and Vassals of Satan, to be the most forlorn Objects of
the eternal Scorn, and Insolence, and Cruelty of the Devil and his Angels; God
in his infinite Mercy has been pleased, by paying an inestimable price for our
Ransom, even the precious Blood of his only begotten Son, to redeem us out of
this Bondage into the glorious liberty of the children of God. He has bought
our Bodies from the everlasting torment of those Flames which never shall be
quenched, and our Souls from the gnawing of that Worm which shall never die, to
be the Temples of his holy Spirit here, and hereafter to be fellow-citizens
with the saints, and of the household of God in the heavenly Jerusalem. We are
bought with a price.

And has God thus bought us with so invaluable a Price, out of so dreadful
Misery, unto so unspeakable Felicity? What returns then ought we to make unto
him of praise and thanks for such infinite Mercy! How can we choose but stand
astonished and break out into the Psalmists Exclamation, Lord, what is man,
that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that thou visitest him! What
was Man being in Honor, when he was but a degree lower than the Angels, that
God should regard him above the rest of his Creatures; that he should make him
have dominion over the works of his hands, and put all things under his feet?
But when through his own fault he fell into Dishonor, and became like the
Beasts that perish, what was he then, or what else could he expect, but that
God should cast him for ever out of his Presence as the filth of the Creation?
And when after all this he meets with Mercy instead of Vengeance, when God
himself becomes his Advocate instead of his Enemy, and instead of condemning
him to Hell, sends his only begotten Son to purchase for him the adoption of
Sons, and to make him more than ever the Darling and Favorite of Heaven; what
Testimony of gratitude ought we to show for so incomprehensible Love? What can
we say, what can we do, to this Preserver of men? The Apostle tells us in the
following words of my Text: we must glorify him. Ye are bought with a price:
therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit which are Gods. And so
I pass from God's mercy to our Duty. He has bought us with a price, we must
therefore glorify him.

How easy an acknowledgment of how great a Mercy! What could God do more for
us than he did? and what could we offer to him, even for the least of his
Benefits, less than what he requires of us for the greatest? The slightest
Favor that we receive from the bountiful hand of God, surely most justly
Challenges from us the Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving: and he requires no
more of us when he has given us the highest Demonstration of Love that ever he
showed to any of his Creatures: when he has redeemed us from the lowest Abyss
of misery, into which our Nature could sink, unto the most glorious and
unspeakable Felicity, of which it could be capable; and has done all this by
paying for our Ransom, the richest and most precious Jewel that was to be
found in all the Treasury of Heaven, still he asks but the same thing of us
that he did before, viz. that we will glorify him. And is it possible that
there should be any man found that can refuse to perform so reasonable and
pleafant a Service as this to so great a Benefactor? Is it possible that when
the blessed Son of God, has for our Salvation shed his most precious Blood,
laid down his Life, and poured out his righteous soul unto death, and made it
an offering for our sins, we should after all this think much to offer unto him
the calves of our lips, and refuse to sing an Hymn of praise to our Redeemer,
saying with the Saints in the Revelation, Salvation, and glory, and honor, and
power unto the Lord our God? Yes it is so possible, that this black Ingratitude
should be found amongst us, that the greatest part of Mankind are guilty of it.
How many thousands are there amongst the Sons of men, that instead of
glorifying God in their body, and in their spirit, even in the very face of the
glorious light of the Gospel that shines about them, against all the strength
of Reason, the universal Consent of Mankind in all Ages, and the secret
Reluctancies, and dreadful Checks of their own Consciences impudently deny both
the being of God, and the immortality of their own Souls? How many thousands
are there more, who, though they own the name of Christians, and acknowledge
one eternal and omnipotent God, yet instead of glorifying God because they are
bought with a price, against the express words of the Apostle in my Text, and
the concurrent Sense and Harmony of the whole Gospel, absolutely deny that
there was ever any such purchase made, disowning both the Divinity of Christ,
and the satisfaction of his Sufferings? As if the God of Truth had studied to
impose upon the credulity of Mankind, and when he tells us most plainly in his
word, that he has purchased his Church with his own blood, that we are bought
with a price, and that our blessed Savior gave himself a ransom for all, and
that not only (...) neither, but (...), a full, sufficient, and satisfactory
Ransom; yet all this while he means quite otherwise than what the words seem
to import, and none but these few sagacious Sophisters are ever able to
discover the Divine Fallacy. How many thousands are there yet, even amongst us
Christians, who, instead of glorifying God in their body and in their spirit,
openly dishonor him in both, glory in their shame, and by their wicked and
profligate Lives crucify afresh the Son of God, and blaspheme that worthy Name
by which they are called? Lastly, how many Myriads, how many Millions are there
besides all these, that yet sit in darkness and in the shadow of Death? Who
never heard of the glad tidings of the Gospel, nor have had their
understandings enlightened, and their hearts revived, and awakened out of the
deadly Lethargy of Pagan Ignorance, and Superstition, and Idolatry, by the
benign and salutiferous influence of the Son of righteousness? Who instead of
glorifying God, give away his Glory to his greatest Enemy, and do Sacrifice
unto the Devil? These are sad Considerations; that infinite Mercy and Love
should be received with such prodigious Scorn and Ingratitude; that so
invaluable a price as God has given for us should be paid in vain for the
greatest part of Mankind; that but a small and inconsiderable number in
comparison of the whole Race of Adam should wash their robes and make them
white in the blood of that Lamb that was slain for the sins of the whole World,
and was a Sacrifice every way sufficient to make an atonement for them all. Who
can reflect upon these things without sorrow?

Since then the Case is thus with us, that most of us are liable to lose the
benefit of this Price, by neglecting to perform this Duty of glorifying God, to
which it has indispensably obliged us, let us briefly consider the
reasonableness and necessity of this Duty (that we may be the more encouraged
unto it) upon these following Accounts. First, this Duty of glorifying God is
exceeding reasonable, forasmuch as God himself is the only Object in the world,
that is in, and for himself glorious and adorable. It is a Maxim in Heraldry,
that the King is the Fountain of Honor: how much more then is that Prerogative
peculiar unto God, By whom Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice? From whom
all Honor, both in Heaven and Earth is derived, and unto whom it returns
again, and centers it self as the Rivers in the Ocean. When we look upon the
Moon shining in its full strength and beauty, we cannot but confess that its
Light is very pleasant and comfortable to behold: but it diminishes much from
its Excellency, when we consider that all its Luster is borrowed, and that
should the Sun withhold its influence, the other would be nothing else but a
dark invisible Globe. So likewise when we consider the Angels and Archangels,
and all the mighty Powers of Heaven that excel in Strength, and Goodness, and
Holiness; we must needs acknowledge that these are Creatures beyond all our
thoughts happy and glorious: but when we consider further, that as great and
good, and happy as they are, yet still they are but Creatures, and that all
these rich Endowments that they have received they owe to the father of
spirits, from whom alone comes every good and perfect gift, all the Praise and
Glory redounds solely to the Almighty Creator, Who makes his Angels spirits,
and his Ministers a flaming fire, and to whose Sovereign Will, and
uncontrolable Power, the highest Archangel is as subject and subservient, as
the most despicable Insect that we trample under our Feet. Since therefore it
is most plain, and undeniable that God is the only Object in the world that is
in, and for himself glorious, and is the Spring and Fountain of Glory and
Honor to all his Creatures that do in any measure participate of it, reason
dictates to us (and we need enquire no further) that it is our Duty to glorify
him; and that should we do otherwise even the very stones under our feet might
justly rise up in Judgment against us and condemn us. Secondly, as God is the
only Object that is in, and for himself glorious, and that in an infinite and
incomprehensible manner; so he created all things at the first for the
manifestation of his own Glory, and requires this Homage to be paid him by
every one of his Creatures in their respective Capacities. For any of the
Creatures, even for the greatest of them, to love himself above all things, or
to make his own Glory and Honor the end of his Actions is Folly, is Injustice,
is Sin, is such foolish and unreasonable Pride, as cast the fallen Angels out
of Heaven, and Man out of Paradise. But for God to do thus is both wise and
just; seeing that Wisdom and Equity requires, that nothing less than infinite
Perfection should be the adequate Object of infinite Love and Glory, and
therefore it would be a manifest piece of Injustice (of which God can never be
capable) for him to give that Love or Glory to another, which is due to none
else but himself alone. And accordingly he himself has told us, that he never
will do it; I am the Lord, says he; that is my name: and my glory will I not
give to another, Isa. 42.8. No, he has reserved it wholly to himself, and for
the manifestation of it he has created all things. So the four and twenty
Elders confess. Rev. 4.11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and
honor, and power: for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they
are, and were created. The ultimate end of the whole Creation, was the Glory of
the Creator. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows
his handiwork, says the Psalmist, Ps. 19.1. whoth at considers the certain
and regular Motions of the celestial Bodies, can choose but extol and magnify
the Power and Wisdom of that God that made them, saying with the Psalmist,
Praise ye him, sun and moon; praise him all ye stars of light. Let them praise
the name of the Lord: for he commanded, and they were created. He has also
established them for ever and ever: he has made a decree which shall not pass?
Neither were the Heavens only created for the Glory of God, but the Earth also
declares the same, and his wonders are seen in the Deep. Even the merciless and
unruly Sea obeys the Decree of him who has shut it up with doors, and suffers
its proud Waves to be bounded and checked by the Sand. There go the ships, and
there is that Leviathan whom he has made to play therein. The Earth faithfully
performs the Task that was imposed upon it at its first Creation, and ceases
not to bring forth its fruit in its Season; and the most inconsiderable
Creature that it nourishes, even the smallest Fly, publishes the wisdom and
power of its Creator, as much as the greatest Elephant. And who again that
considers these things can choose but proceed with the Psalmist, and say, Praise
the Lord from the earth ye dragons, and all deeps: fire and hail, snow and
vapor; stormy wind fulfilling his word. Mountains and all hills; fruitful
trees and all cedars; beasts and all cattle; creeping things and all fowl. And
shall all these inferior Creatures daily laud and magnify their Maker (as
most plainly they do, while in their several Stations they perform his
Commands) shall the little Birds warble out Hymns of Praise, and every Hedge
produce a Quire to sing an Hallelujah, and shall Man alone be silent? Man whom
God himself has crowned with glory and honor; whom he has made to have
dominion over the works of his hands, and has put all things under his feet:
all sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field; the fowl of the air, and
the fish of the sea, and whatsoever passes through the paths of the seas? Man
whom when he had lost all this Honor; when Sin had laid both it, and himself
together in the dust, out of which they were both raised at the first, God was
pleased by a Miracle of mercy to restore to Honor once more, nay to greater
Honor than he had before, even to the Honor (if he forfeits it not again by
his own monstrous Ingratitude) of being made like unto the Angels in Heaven, of
being numbered among the children of God, and having his lot among the saints? I
say shall Man whom of all the rest of his Creatures, God has delighted most to
Honor, be of all the rest of the Creatures, the most ungrateful and most
backward to give Praise and Glory to God? Oh, wheresoever this Ingratitude be
to be found, let it not be found amongst us; but let us still join with the
Psalmist, and say, Kings of the earth, and all people; princes and all judges
of the earth: both young men, and maidens; old men, and children: Let them
praise the name of the Lord: for his name only is excellent; his glory is above
the earth and heaven. Thirdly, that this Duty of glorifying God, is both
reasonable and necessary is evident, in as much as all Mankind, both good and
bad, shall most certainly, one way or other, give glory to God. For the Lord
will be King for ever, be the people never so tumultuous and unquiet: and
though he be offended, and provoked, and blasphemed every day, yet he is strong
as well as patient, and will one day vindicate his abused patience and
longsuffering, and will exalt himself above the heavens, and his glory above
all the earth. Then shall all those foolish Wretches that refused to give unto
the Lord the glory due unto his name, and to celebrate the Praise of his mercy
that endures for ever, be forced by their everlasting Punishment to glorify
his Justice. For the glory of the Lord shall endure for ever: the Lord shall
rejoice in his works. For he has made all things for himself, says Solomon;
Yea, even the wicked for the day of evil, Prove. 16.4. Thus did God get himself
Honor, as well by punishing the stubbornness of Pharaoh, whom he overthrew in
the Sea, as by rewarding the obedience of Moses, to whom he gave Power to
command it. And thus at the end of all things, will he cause his Justice
eternally to shine as bright and glorious below, even in the midst of the
infernal darkness, as his mercy shall above in the Regions of light and
happiness. And Oh how sad, how dreadful will our Condemnation be, if we neglect
this great Salvation that is offered us; if notwithstanding this wonderful
Redemption that God has wrought for us, we will again sell our selves Slaves
to Sin and Satan? And if but the tasting of a forbidden fruit brought Death
into the world, and made all Mankind obnoxious to the eternal wrath of God,
what Vengeance is reserved for them that tread under foot the Blood of his only
begotten Son; that despise the very height of his Love, and the utmost riches
of his Mercy. Since then we must unavoidably glorify either the Mercy of God,
or his Justice, let us choose rather to adore the former, than to be broken in
pieces by the latter: for they that will not submit to his gentle Government
while he holds forth his golden Scepter, shall be sure to feel the Severity of
his rod of Iron. Lastly, (for I must not be tedious, though the Subject be so
copious that I might heap up Arguments without number: Since there is not the
least part of the Creation, excepting wicked Men and wicked Angels, but what
sets us an Example, and invites us to glorify our Creator) this Duty of
glorifying God is most highly reasonable for us to perform while we are upon
Earth, because it will be our eternal Task if ever we come to Heaven. Those
glorious Mansions above resound incessantly with Hymns of Praise unto the King
of Saints, To whom all Angels cry aloud continually, the Heavous and all the
powers therein, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath. Heaven and earth are
full of the Majesty of thy glory. If therefore we desire to perform this Duty
in the next Life, it is not only reasonable, but necessary that we begin is in
this. For certainly if we do not now tune our Voice to an Hallelujah, and
practice the Music of Heaven while we are upon Earth, Candidates for a Place
in the celestial Choire, we shall never be qualified to bear a part in that new
Song, which is to be sung before the throne of God, and none shall be able to
learn it but the Saints, that are redeemed from the Earth. Let us therefore
now, and evermore join with those blessed Spirits, in glorifying our Almighty
Creator, saying as our Church teaches us, (and with which words we will at
present break off our Discourse) Therefore with Angels and Archangels, and with
all the Company of Heaven, we laud and magnify thy glorious Name, evermore
praising thee, and saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts, Heaven and
Earth are full of thy Glory; Glory be to thee, O Lord most high.

SERMON V.
1 COR. VI. 20. For ye are bought with a price, etc.


THE reasonableness of this Duty of glorifying God, to which in these words the
Apostle exhorts us, we have already seen; and indeed he must be blind that sees
it not, when the whole Creation joins unanimously in the constant performance
of it, and every Corner of it declares the Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness of
the Almighty Creator. But though the reasonableness of this Duty must needs be
apparent to all Men that believe that there is a God (and they that believe not
that, though they may seem to be Rational Creatures, are certainly most
notorious Fools) yet all Men are not so clearly agreed how to perform this
Duty: and that is the next thing that falls under our Consideration, and the
last Particular to be handled in my Text, the manner how we must glorify God;
we must do it in our Body and in our Spirit, forasmuch as he has redeemed and
purchased both of them, and both are his. For ye are bought with a price, etc.

First, We must glorify God in our Spirit; that is, in our Soul: and in this
all Parties are agreed; even the very Quakers themselves, the most stupid and
senseless Fanatics, that have surfeited upon Religion, and overwhelmed and
oppressed their Reason by that very thing which was designed to refine and
perfect it, will all of them acknowledge, that God is to be worshipped in
Spirit and in Truth; and that their Soul ought to bow to him, though their Body
be as inflexible as a Pillar of Marble. And indeed this is the chief and main
thing that we are to take care of in the worship of God, that our Soul be
zealously and earnestly intent upon what we are about: for God sees not as Man
sees; he regards not so much the outward Gestures of our Body, though (as I
shall show hereafter) he expects these from us too; but he looks especially
upon the inward Thoughts and Intentions of our Heart; and if these be not right
all our bodily worship is nothing worth. If we draw near to God with our Lips,
and our Heart be far from him; if we lift up our Eyes and our Hands to Heaven,
and our Mind be wedded to the World; if we prostrate our Bodies upon the Earth
and lay our Mouths in the Dust, yet if our Spirit be not proportionably
humbled, all this is no better than gross Hypocrisy, a downright mocking of
God who cannot be deceived with counterfeit shows and shadows of Religion. If
therefore we desire to glorify God aright, we must be sure chiefly and
principally to glorify him in our Spirit, and as Solomon advises us, we must
keep our Heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of life, Prove.
4.23. Now this glorifying God in our Spirit implies briefly thus much; That we
make a free-will-offering of our Soul unto God, committing the keeping of it
unto him as unto a faithful Creator, permitting him to guide and govern it
according to his own good will and pleasure throughout the whole course of our
life, in whatsoever circumstances, both in Prosperity and Adversity; so that
every thought and motion of it may evermore tend to his Glory. He that has
made such an Offering as this unto God will always remember that he is not his
own, but that his Body and Soul are bought with a price, and that both of them
are God's; and consequently will be careful to direct all his Thoughts, Words
and Actions to this one end, that the Glory of God may be advanced by
whatsoever he undertakes. He will have God always in his thoughts, as the only
Object of his highest Love and Adoration: and this will make him watch
continually over his Soul, and keep it pure and undefiled, that no unclean
thing may enter into that Spirit which is wholly devoted to the God of Purity.
For certainly nothing can be a more powerful motive to induce us to keep our
Heart with all diligence than the consideration of God's Omnipresence and
Omniscience, that he sees us perpetually in our most private Retirements, and
searches and knows our most secret and hidden thoughts. Hence it was that God
himself gave that command to the Father of the Faithful, Genesis 17.1. Walk before
me, and be thou perfect. He that walks before God, that is, he that orders his
whole Life and Conversation as knowing and considering that God's Eye is always
upon him, cannot choose but endeavor to keep both his Soul and his Body
blameless and undefiled, and strive to be perfect as his Father which is in
Heaven is perfect. Again, he that has made such an Offering as this of his
Soul unto God will be careful that in all things his Soul be obedient and
conformable to the Will of God. In his Health and Prosperity, if Riches
increase he will not set his Heart upon them; but with Humility and
Thankfulness will receive them as knowing himself not to be a Proprietor, but a
Steward only of the manifold Blessings of God, and will accordingly dispose of
them so that God may have the Glory, and his distressed Brethren the benefit of
his Wealth. On the other hand, if God sends Trouble and Affliction unto him, if
he deprives him of his Estate, or his Health, or both together, whatsoever
Calamity befalls him, he will still bless and praise his Name as well when he
takes away as when he gives, when he smites as well as when he heals; knowing
and considering that whatsoever he either enjoys or suffers in this World comes
to him from the Hand of an infinitely wise, and good, and gracious Father that
will be sure first or last to make all things work together for good to them
that love him: Thus will the blessed Will and Pleasure of God be unto him as it
were the Load-star to guide and direct his Soul how to steer its course toward
the Haven of everlasting Happiness straight and steady through all the Changes
and Chances of this mortal life, teaching him that hard Lesson, which so few
can learn, how to separate Riches from Pride, and Poverty from Impatience; that
neither the one may prevail with him to forget God and worship Mammon, nor the
other to repine at the Divine Providence, and to fret and vex himself at the
Prosperity of his Brethren. If God blesses him he will acknowledge himself to
be less than the least of all his Mercies; and if he afflicts him, he will
receive it as the Correction of a tender Father that pities and loves his
Children, even when he chastizes them. Lastly, He that has made this Offering
of his Soul unto God whenever he is in God's House in order to the
celebration of his Public Worship, or whenever he is in his Closet
performing his Private Devotions, will be exceeding careful to set his Heart
and Affections then especially upon those things which are above; he will be
sure to banish all worldly thoughts out of his Mind, and study to behave
himself so as becomes one that is admitted to appear in the Presence Chamber of
the King of Kings, either to put up his Petitions to him, or to receive his
Commands; following that excellent Counsel of Solomon, Eccl. 5.1. Keep thy Foot
when thou go to the House of God, and be more ready to hear than to give the
Sacrifice of Fools: for they consider not that they do evil. And how few there
are that do follow this Counsel is but too evident from that vain and loose
Deportment of many persons which we daily see in the Church, to the great
scandal and grief of all pious and devout Christians, who cannot choose but be
exceedingly troubled and offended to see God publicly dishonored and
affronted in his own House, by persons that pretend to come thither on purpose
to join in the Celebration of his Public Worship and Praise. But of this I
shall have occasion to speak more anon, when I come to show you how we are to
glorify God in our Body, which I proceed now to do.

And First, as before I observed, That we are to glorify God in our Spirit, by
keeping it pure and undefiled by sin; so must we do in our Body too, For it is
impossible that a clean Soul should dwell in an unclean Body: but if the one be
foul the other will certainly partake of its Pollutions. Indeed it is
impossible that the Body should sin without the Soul, since it cannot act but
by the Command and Concurrent Assistance of the Soul, whereas the Soul may sin
without the help of the Body, and we may commit Adultery, or Murder, or Theft
in our Heart though our Body never be concerned in the perpetration of any such
Crimes. And therefore whosoever truly and sincerely glorifies God in his Spirit
will by a most inevitable consequence glorify him in his Body also. He that
has banished all unchaste thoughts out of his Mind will make a Covenant with
his Eyes too, that they shall not cast a wanton glance upon Beauty. He whose
Heart is free from all covetous Desires after his Neighbor's Goods will keep
his Hands also from picking and stealing. He that is perfectly in Charity with
all Men, and is not only ready to forgive, but heartily loves, his Enemies will
not only fetter his Feet that they shall not be swift to shed Blood, but he
will also bridle his Tongue, and keep it from evil-speaking, lying and
slandering, and will be so far from hurting any Man by word or deed, that he
will most gladly embrace every opportunity that is offered him of doing good to
any that stand in need of help. He therefore that has devoted his Soul wholly
to the Glory of God, will devote his Body likewise to the same end; he will be
careful to cleanse his Hands as well as his Heart, to purify his whole Man;
and since God has bought his Body as well as his Soul with a price, since one
as well as the other is a Temple of the Holy Ghost, and a Member of Christ, he
will endeavor to the best of his power that both of them may be preserved
blameless, and undefiled, and unspotted of the World, knowing that God will in
no wise accept of a polluted Offering. And this is the direct sense and meaning
of the Apostle's Argument from the fifteenth Verse to the end of this Chapter,
whereby he labors to dissuade the Corinthians from Fornication, and all manner
of Uncleanness. Flee Fornication, says he, every sin that a Man does is
without the Body; but he that commits Fornication sins against his own
Body. What, know ye not that your Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost which is
in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? For ye are bought with a
price: therefore glorify God in your Body and in your Spirit, which are God's.
But further, if we will glorify God in our Body as we ought, we must not only
be careful to keep it chaste and undefiled by Lust and Wantonness, but we must
study to adorn and beautify it, so that it may be acceptable in the sight of
God, by Temperance, and Sobriety, and Moderation in all things, endeavoring to
preserve it free from all manner of Luxury and Excess whether in Meat, or
Drink, or Apparel, or Recreation, or whatsoever else with which it is
concerned. Meat and Drink in this mortal life are so necessary to us that we
cannot live without them; but if we indulge our selves in the immoderate use of
either of them, instead of preserving our Health it will most certainly destroy
it. So likewise modest and decent Raiment is in a manner as necessary, for the
covering our Nakedness, and defending us from the Injuries of the Weather; but
still at the best it is but the Devil's Livery, which we had never worn had it
not been for the Disobedience of our first Parents, and which it much better
becomes us to be ashamed of than to glory in. If therefore we affect vain and
pompous Attire, if we long for every fantastic Dress as fast as the apish
Fashion-mongers can invent them, till we have arrayed our selves so that we
think we may vie both for Smell and Beauty with the Lilies of the Field; by so
doing, though we may hide the Nakedness of our Body, we shall most certainly
discover that of our Soul; and we shall appear loathsome and deformed, not only
in the Eyes of God, from whom nothing can be hid, but in the Eyes also of all
godly and sober Christians, and shall stink in their Nostrils amidst all our
precious Odours and Perfumes. And therefore our Blessed Savior has commanded
us not to take any care for the Provision either of Meat, or Drink, or Raiment,
any further than what Necessity and Decency requires, Matthew. 6.31. Take no
thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, what shall we drink? or, wherewithal
shall we be clothed? (for after all these things do the Gentiles seek) for
your Heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all these things. But seek ye
first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all these things shall be
added unto you. Such care as this much better becomes an Epicure that expects
his Portion in this life, than a Christian that owns himself to be but a
Stranger and a Sojourner here upon Earth, and whose Treasure, and Heart, and
Conversation is in Heaven. Therefore, as our Apostle exhorts us, 1 Cor. 10.31.
Whether we eat, or drink, or whatsoever we do, let us do all to the Glory of
God.

Again, we are to glorify God in our Body, by laboring daily in some honest
Calling; that so we may provide for our selves and our Families, and be useful
and serviceable to our Country. It was a Command as well as a Curse that God
laid upon all Mankind in the person of Adam immediately after his
Transgression; In the sweat of thy Face shall thou eat Bread. And if we yield a
conscientious Obedience to this Command, laboring as God has ordained in a
lawful Employment, we may turn this Curse into a Blessing, and provide for our
selves not only that Meat which perishes in this World, but that which endures
unto everlasting life in the next. And on the other hand, whosoever thinks to
exempt himself from the force of this Command, until some natural, or
accidental Infirmity has dispensed with him, shall not escape the Sentence of
the Curse; but if he will not sweat here, he shall be sure to burn hereafter:
he shall have no Bread in this World (or at least, none that he can justly call
his own) and he shall want Water in the other wherewithal to cool his Tongue.
Not that all Men are obliged by this Command to the same measure and Degree of
bodily Labor (this were to degrade the Statesman from the Council Table to
the Threshing-floor, and the King himself from sitting upon his Throne to grind
at the Mill) but that all Men are obliged in their several Stations and
Capacities to employ their Body as well as their Soul to the Glory of God, and
to the Service of the Country wherein they live. And this may be done by him
that manages but a Pen as well as by him that holds a Plough; and, if he orders
his business well, of the two the former undoubtedly does not only do the
greatest service both to God and Man, but takes the greatest pains also, and
does most hurt and prejudice to his Health: for the wise Man has told us, That
of making many Books there is no end, and much study is a weariness of the
Flesh, Eccl. 12.12. Therefore as our Apostle exhorts us again, 1 Cor. 7.24. Let
every Man wherein he is called therein abide with God. But further,

We must glorify God in our Body not only by our Sweat, but, if we be called
to it, by our Blood too, which we must be always ready patiently and cheerfully
to shed for his sake, whenever he is pleased to require it of us. The Cross
of Christ is a Burden that every Christian is obliged to bear, and none ought
to think it grievous, though many nowadays are ashamed of the very sign of
it. And Persecution, though it be a thing at which Flesh and Blood is apt to
startle, yet it is no more than what every Disciple of Christ must expect to
have his share of. Our Savior himself has told us as much, Luke 14.26. If any
Man come to me, and hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children,
and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my
Disciple. And whosoever does not bear his Cross, and come after me, cannot be
my Disciple. And St. Paul tells us, That all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus shall suffer Persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. This indeed is the hardest Task
that God requires us to perform: but as it is the hardest so it is the noblest,
that which of all things tends most to the Glory of God, and to our own
Happiness; and therefore we should be so far from fearing it, that above all
things we should most earnestly desire it, and as our Savior commands us, and
as we read, that the Apostles, and Primitive Christians did, we should rejoice
and be exceeding glad whenever God calls us to suffer Persecution, knowing
that great is our reward in Heaven, and that our light affliction, which is but
for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory.

Lastly, (for I do but name these Particulars, designing to insist something
more largely upon that which I am now propounding) We must glorify God in our
Body by an humble, reverent and decent behavior of our Body in the House of
God, especially in the time of the Celebration of his Public Worship. This is
a thing so undeniable, that one would think it should be very needless to
produce any Arguments to enforce the practice of it: and surely that Man must
either have lost the use of his Reason, or at least must have extremely
impaired it by Prejudice and a bad Education that will not readily acknowledge,
that God is to be glorified and worshipped by us as well with our Body as with
our Soul. But yet if we consider the profane and graceless deportment of many
(especially of the vulgar sort of People) in our Country Churches nowadays,
that are so far from worshipping God with a bended Knee, that they will not
vouchsafe so much as to uncover their Heads before him; but most irreverently
and impudently sit themselves down upon their Seats and put on their Hats even
in the very Face of the Lord of Hosts; as if they came into his House rather to
defy him than to adore him, and to publish to the World, that Dust and Ashes
dares presume to sit unconcerned in the presence of that infinite Majesty
before whose Throne Angels and Archangels and all the glorious Inhabitants of
Heaven cast their Crowns and fall down and worship, it cannot but be granted,
that it is both seasonable and needful to prove the necessity of Bodily Worship
in the House of God, and to exhort all Men to the practice of it; which I shall
do (as briefly as I can) from these following Considerations.

And first, that we must worship God with our Body as well as with our Soul is
evident from this one Consideration, because God has redeemed our Body as well
as our Soul from Hell, and designs to glorify the one as well as the other in
Heaven, which is the Apostle's Argument in my Text, and is abundantly
sufficient of it self, though there were no more to back it. For ye are bought
with a price: therefore glorify God in your Body and in your Spirit, which are
God's. What has God redeemed our Bodies as well as our Souls from everlasting
Misery? and has he promised to raise our vile Body out of the Dust, and to
change it into a Glorious, Immortal and Incorruptible Body, and to admit it
together with our Soul into the Regions of Eternal Joy and Happiness, and shall
this Body, as if it were utterly insensible of this inestimable Favor, show no
demonstrations of Gratitude to so great a Benefactour? What can be more
ungrateful? What can be more unreasonable?

Secondly, That God requires that we should worship him with our Body as well
as with our Soul is plain from the Second Commandment, wherein he has
forbidden us to bow down our Body before an Image for this very reason, because
he is a Jealous God (i. e.) jealous of his Honor, which he declares that we
rob him of whenever we bow our Body (thereby intending Religious Worship) to
any other but himself alone. And therefore we find in the Revelation, that when
St. John offers to fall down and worship before the Feet of the Angel, the
Angel forbids him; See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow Servant, and of thy
Brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the Sayings of this Book, worship
God, Rev. 22.9. Whosoever therefore neglects to pay Religious Worship unto God
with his Body transgresses the Second Commandment, as well as he that pays that
worship to any other thing, or person, but God only. Hence is that pathetical
Exhortation of the Psalmist; O come let us worship, and fall down, and kneel
before the Lord our Maker; which our Church has appointed daily to be repeated
by us in her Morning Service, that so we might be continually put in mind of
this duty; and be careful always to behave our selves Humbly, Reverently, and
Devoutly in the House of God.

Thirdly, It is necessary that we worship God with our Body for the
satisfaction both of Men and Angels. It is the peculiar Prerogative of God that
he only can discern the secret Thoughts and Intentions of our Hearts; and
therefore though a private Ejaculation of our Soul, wherein our Body is not at
all concerned, may be very acceptable and well-pleasing in his sight at other
times; yet in the time of our Public Devotions in the Church the case is
otherwise. For there both Men and Angels are Spectators of our Piety, neither
of which can judge of the Sincerity of it any otherwise than by our outward
Behavior; which if it be devout and reverent they will conclude, that our Soul
is so too, and will gladly join with us in our public Worship of that God who
is the common Lord and Master of us all. But if otherwise, not only all good
Men will take offense at our Profaneness, but we shall much more offend those
blessed Spirits, and provoke them to loath and abhor our Religious Assemblies,
which delight to frequent them so long as they observe that we behave our
selves so that they may plainly discern our inward Piety by our outward
Deportment. And for this reason St. Paul forbids Men to be covered in the
Church, and Women to be uncovered because of the Angels, 1 Cor. 11. The Angels
cannot endure to behold any such indecency and disorder in the Church; but are
highly displeased at it as a thing that tends much to the dishonor of God, and
most evidently discovers, that such persons as are guilty of it are destitute
of true Religion; for it cannot be imagined, that when every little Passion of
our Mind causes (more or less) some visible alteration in our Body, that
Religion, which is the noblest Passion with which our Soul can be affected (and
that too at that very time when we come with a pretense to profess it openly
before Men and Angels in God's own House) should cause no alteration at all,
but that our Body all this while should sit as unconcerned as one of the
Pillars of the Church. No certainly, if our Soul were truly humbled, as it
ought to be before the Throne of Grace, it would command the Body to humble it
self likewise, to uncover the Head, and bend the Knee, to lift up the Eyes and
the Hands, and to bear it company, with a devout and reverent behavior of all
its Members, in its Suit and Supplication to the Divine Majesty. Therefore as
St. James exhorts us, to show our Faith by our Works, so likewise let us show
the Devotion of our Soul by that of our Body. For as Faith without Works is
dead, so is inward Piety (especially in the time of God's Public Service in
the Church) dead also, except it be accompanied by bodily Worship.

Lastly, That God is to be worshipped with our Body as well as with our Soul is
evident from the universal consent and practice of Mankind in all Ages, all
Nations, and Countries of the World whatsoever. Not only Christians, but Jews,
Mahometans, Heathens and Pagans, all agree in this point, that Divine Worship
is to be performed by our Body as well as by our Soul. And therefore those Men
that imagine Bodily Worship to be needless in the Service of God and behave
themselves accordingly, do in effect render themselves no better than Monsters,
not only to be wondered at, but even to be abhorred in that particular by all
the rest of Mankind; and certainly an honest Pagan (being before acquainted
with the Custom of our Country, which obliges us to uncover our Heads, and to
stand bare in the presence of our betters, though but mortal Men like our
selves) should he come into some of our Churches, and observe Men sitting
irreverently with their Hats on in the House of God, even at the very time when
they are receiving a Message concerning their everlasting Salvation from the
Mouth of his Ambassador, would stand astonished, and exclaim against
Christianity, as the most impious and profane Religion in the World, that
allowed men to be hail fellow well met with that God whom they pretend to
worship, showing him less respect and reverence even in his own House than they
ordinarily pay to a Man that is but a little their Superior either in Estate
or Quality. And I would fain have those persons that dare be thus impudent in
the presence of the Almighty, answer me this one Question, Whether they would
do the same thing in case they should see God visibly sitting upon his Throne
of Glory, or in case they should see the Lord Jesus coming in the Clouds of
Heaven attended with all his Angels. If in this case they would fall down and
worship (as I question not but that they would) I know no reason why they
should not likewise behave themselves with a profound Reverence and Devotion
both of Body and Soul in the Church, which is the place of God's special and
extraordinary presence, and is (when we behave our selves in it as we ought) a
lively emblem and representation of Heaven it self: and then surely it is but
reasonable that we that sit at God's Footstool here on Earth should uncover
our Heads and bend our Knees in his presence when we read that the Holy Angels
do no less above, casting their Crowns and falling down and worshipping before
his Throne in Heaven: and if we will not follow their Example now, it is
greatly to be feared that we shall never be admitted to bear them company
hereafter.

But after all this, granting (which I hope I have sufficiently proved) that
bodily Worship of God is necessary, it may reasonably be demanded wherein this
bodily worship chiefly consists, and what Gestures and Ceremonies are to be
used by us in our performance of it. To which I answer, that herein we are to
be determined by the Custom of the Country wherein we live, and the
appointment of the Church whereof we are Members. In general therefore those
Gestures and Ceremonies which by the Custom of our Country we are obliged to
use in token of civil Honor and Respect in our Addresses to men that are much
our Superiors; as for Example, to the King himself; we are to use likewise by
way of religious Worship to Almighty God. If therefore it be an affront to the
King for a Subject to be covered in his presence, or to offer a petition to him
in any other posture but upon his Knees; reason will tell us that it must needs
be a much greater affront to God for any man to put his Hat on in his house, or
to sit irreverently upon his Seat when the Minister is upon his Knees offering
up Prayers and Supplications unto the Throne of Grace in the Name of the whole
Congregation. Persons that thus mis-behave themselves in the Worship of God may
justly expect such an answer from him as he gives to the Priests that offered
polluted bread upon his Altar, Mal. 1.8. Offer it now unto thy Governor, will
he be pleased with thee or accept thy Person, says the Lord of Hosts. In the
Oriental Countries therefore where men never use this Ceremony of uncovering
their Heads to their Superiors, but stand covered even in the Presence of
their Emperor; neither is it practicable in their Temples; since amongst them
the uncovering of the Head is so far from being acknowledged to be a
Demonstration of Honor and Respect, that it is indeed looked upon to be an
absurd and ridiculous thing, and therefore instead thereof they use to put
their Shoes off their feet whenever they entered into their Churches; which
is a Custom in those parts of greater Antiquity perhaps than Moses himself; it
being not at all improbable that that command which God gave to him in the Bush
( Exodus 3.5.) was no institution of a new Ceremony, but only an information
that that place was hallowed by the extraordinary Presence of God; and
therefore he ought to behave himself with the same fear and reverence, and to
use the same manner of Worship and Adoration which in those Countries was usual
and customary in the Temples and holy Places dedicated to the Service of God.
Put off thy shoes, says he, from off thy feet; for the place whereon thou
stand is holy ground. And had the Ceremony of uncovering the Head been in
use in those Countries as it is here, we may rationally conjecture that God
would have altered his Command accordingly. But to leave these remote
Countries, with which we are not much concerned, and to return to our own: from
what has been said it is plain that the outward Gestures and Ceremonies which
we are obliged to use in the public Worship of God are chiefly these three;
kneeling at Prayers, Standing up at other times when it is appointed by the
Church, and having our Heads uncovered at all times. As for sitting, though the
general practice of all men has made it to be connived at in the time of the
Sermon (or the like) yet it is a posture that is never very commendable in the
Church: it is certainly in the time of Prayer most intolerable: and he that
uses it least at other times deserves most commendation, and comes nearest to
the practice of the first and purest Ages of Christianity. It was therefore a
pious resolution of Biship Hall to this purpose in one of his Meditations. God,
says he, is the Lord of my Body also: and therefore challenges as well
reverent Gesture as inward Devotion. I will ever in my Prayers either stand, as
a servant before my Master; or kneel, as a Subject to my Prince. I might
instance in more particulars, but, that I may hasten to a conclusion I shall
name only this one, which will comprehend all the rest; and that is, That our
Bodily Worship may be complete, we must take care that our Tongue be duly
employed in bearing, its part in the public Service of God as the Church has
appointed: which if we would do, we should avoid that scandalous Behavior
which is too commonly seen in our Churches, of whispering, and laughing, and
playing idle Tricks; which is a thing to be abominated by all pious and devout
Christians. Thus I have showed you according to my ability the Sum and
Substance of this duty of glorifying God in our Body, and in our Spirit; which
that we may evermore perform effectually: God of his infinite mercy vouchsafe
to direct, sanctify, amd govern both our hearts and Bodies in the ways of his
Laws, and in the Works of his Commandments that through his most mighty
protection, both here and ever, we may be preserved in Body and Soul, through
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

SERMON VI.
HEB. IV. 14. Seeing then that we have a great Highpriest, that is passed into
the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our Profession.


THERE are four several Steps or Degrees of our Savior's Exaltation: Three of
which are already past, and the other is yet to come. The first is his
Resurrection from the Dead: The second is his Ascension into Heaven: The third
is his Session at the Right Hand of God: The fourth is his coming again with
Glory to judge both the Quick and the Dead. The first of these, his
Resurrection from the Dead we Commemorated at Easter, and the present time
invites us now to Exercise our Meditations upon the second, his Ascension into
Heaven, and any Text furnishes us with a very excellent Method for the doing of
it to the Glory of God, and the Good and Comfort of our own Souls. For first,
the Apostle lays down the Truth of this Doctrine, that our Savior is ascended
into Heaven, and secondly, he shows us what influence the consideration of his
Ascension should have upon us. So that the Text it self is an Epitome of a
Sermon containing both Doctrine and Application. The Doctrine that our Savior
is ascended into Heaven, the Apostle takes for granted in the former part of
the Verse, Seeing then that we have a great High Priest, that is passed into
the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God. And this Doctrine he confirms, chap. 9. ver.
24. For Christ is not entered into the Holy Places made with Hands, which are
the Figures of the true, but into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence
of God for us, and chap. 7. ver. 26. Such an High Priest became us, who is
Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, separate from Sinners, and made higher than the
Heavens. The Application which the Apostle makes of this Doctrine is in the
latter part of my Text, and it is this, that since Christ is ascended into
Heaven, we ought stoutly and resolutely to maintain the Profession of our
Christian Religion, and to contend earnestly for the Faith which was once
delivered to the Saints. Seeing then, etc.

In speaking to which Text, I shall do these three Things; First, I shall show
that Jesus Christ our Redeemer, the Eternal Son of God, is truly ascended into
Heaven. Secondly, That he ascended thither as our High Priest. And Thirdly, I
shall conclude with the Apostles Application, and show you how strongly this
should oblige us to hold fast our Profession. First, I shall show you, That
Jesus Christ our Redeemer, the Eternal Son of God, he who we own and believe to
be the true Messiah, whom all the Prophets pointed at, is truly ascended into
Heaven. And here it will be necessary to clear two Things by the way. First,
What is meant by that Heaven into which Christ is ascended; And secondly, how,
and in what manner he is said to have ascended thither. For the first of these,
not to trouble you with an account of all the several Significations of the
word Heaven in Scripture, we are to understand by that Heaven into which our
Savior is ascended, the Heaven of Heavens, the highest and most glorious
Heaven, which is the Imperial Throne of the Majesty of God, far above all those
Celestial Orbs which are visible to our Sight, wherein the Sun, and Moon, and
Stars perform their constant and regular Motions, according to those Laws which
God gave them at their first Creation. Through all these Heavens our Savior
passed in his Ascension, as is plain from my Text, if we consult the Original
(for what our Translation Renders is passed into the Heavens, is in the Greek,
(...), which is passed through the Heavens, (i. e.) through all these visible
Heavens, into that invisible one, wherein he dwelt with his Father in
inaccessible Light and Glory, and Majesty from all Eternity. And that this is
the meaning of that Heaven into which our Savior is ascended, is plain from
that Expression of our Apostle, which I cited before, Hebr. 7.26. where he
tells us, That such an High Priest became us, as was made higher than the
Heavens: And likewise from that, Ephesians. 4.10. He that descended is the same also
that ascended up far above all Heavens. Thus ye see what is meant by that
Heaven, into which our Savior is ascended. For the second Thing, how, and in
what manner he is said to have ascended thither: I answer, he ascended not by
any local Motion or Translation of his Divine Nature from Earth to Heaven, (for
that being Infinite and Omnipresent, filling all places at once, cannot be
supposed to be capable of being removed any whither, where before it was not)
but he ascended by translating his humane Nature, his whole Man, both Body and
Soul, from Earth, where he had assumed that Nature, and hypostatically united
it to his Divinity, unto the Right Hand of God in the highest Heavens. And that
Christ is thus ascended into Heaven, the Scripture most amply and plainly
assures us. First, this Ascension of his was typified and prefigured under the
Mosaical Law, by the Highpriests entering once a Year into the Holy of Holies,
to make an Atonement for himself, and the People, as our Apostle shows us,
chap. 9. of this Epistle. The Holy Ghost, this signifying, says he, That the
way into the holiest of all was not made manifest, while as the first
Tabernacle was yet standing, which was a Figure for the time then present. But
Christ being come an High Priest of good Things to come by a greater and more
perfect Tabernacle not made with Hands, that is to say, not of this Building,
neither by the Blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own Blood, entered in once
into the Holy Place, having obtained Eternal Redemption for us. Again, this
Ascension of our Savior into Heaven, was Typified by those extraordinary
Translations of Enoch and Elias. Secondly, it was foretold by the Prophets, as
appears by that of Ps. 68.18. Thou have ascended on high, thou have led
Captivity Captive. Thou have received Gifts for Men; which place St. Paul
expressly applies to our Savior's Ascension, Ephesians. 4.8. and Ps. 24. is almost
all of it a prophetical Description of this Ascension, and is therefore very
fitly appointed by our Church, to be Read upon that Day, which we set apart for
the Commemoration of it. To the same effect, is that Prophecy of Isai. chap.
63.1. where the Prophet describes the Holy Host of Heaven rejoicing and
wondering at the Glorious Ascension of our Lord into those everlasting
Mansions. Who is this, say they, that comes from Edom, with died Garments from
Bozrah? This that is Glorious in his Apparel, traveling in the greatness of
his Strength? I that speak in Righteousness, mighty to Save. And as our
Savior's Ascension was typified and foretold in the Old Testament, so we find
that all those Types and Prophecies were made good, and fulfilled in the New.
There we have a most faithful and punctual Account, as of his Nativity, his
Passion, his Resurrection from the Dead, so likewise of his Ascension into
Heaven. This we find that our Savior himself plainly foretold some Days before
it came to pass; Go to my Brethren, says he to Mary Magdalen, and say unto
them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God, Joh.
20.17. And when this was to be fulfilled, that there might not want sufficient
Witnesses to attest the truth of his Ascension, the Evangelist St. Luke tells
us, That when he was about to ascend up to his Father, he led his Disciples out
as far as to Bethany; and that there he lift up his Hands and Blessed them; and
that while he Blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up into
Heaven. But still further, lest any should doubt, notwithstanding our Savior's
being visibly parted from his Disciples, and received up into the Air, whether
he did really ascend into Heaven or not, to remove all manner of occasion of
such doubting God immediately sends two Angels from Heaven to certify them
that he was really ascended thither: for the story tells us, Acts 1.10. That
while they looked steadfastly toward Heaven as he went up, behold two men stood
by them in white Apparel; which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye
gazing up into Heaven? This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into Heaven,
shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into Heaven. Now there
remains no ground at all of doubting whether our Savior be really ascended
into Heaven, or no, since what the Apostle's eyes were not able visible to
behold, the Testimony of two Angels has undeniably confirmed. Thus much
briefly of my first particular, that Christ our Redeemer is truly and really
ascended into Heaven, i.e. that his humane Nature, both Body and Soul, are
actually by the Omnipotent Power of his Godhead translated into the highest
Heavens.

The next thing to be considered is, that he is ascended into Heaven as our
High Priest. It is true, that Christ ascended into Heaven for his own sake as
well as for ours. For surely, he that for the expiation of God's Wrath had
humbled himself so low, he that had wrought so glorious a Work as the
Redemption of Mankind, and that by undergoing most bitter and unconceivable
Sufferings did highly deserve to be exalted to the Right Hand of his Heavenly
Father. And therefore he himself says that these sufferings of his were the
way to his glory. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter
into his glory? Luke 24.26. But although Christ ascended into Heaven for
himself, that he might take possession of that Kingdom which he had justly
deserved; yet he ascended thither for us also: As at his Resurection he arose
from the dead not for himself only, but for us also, and became the
First Fruits of them that slept, so likewise at his Ascension he passed into
the Heavens; as our High Priest, by virtue of whose Ascension all his Elect
shall ascend up after him unto the same place of Glory and Immortality. This is
evident from these words of my Text, Seeing then that we have a great High
priest, that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God. This the
Scripture testifies frequently in other places. We have such an High Priest,
says our Apostle, who is set on the Right Hand of the Throne of the Majesty in
the Heavens; a Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle which the
Lord pitched and not Man, Heb. 81.2. and c. 6.20. he tells us that the
Forerunner is for us entered into that within the Veil, even Jesus, made an
High Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck. Now the office of Christ
our High Priest consists chiefly in these things. 1. In being our Advocate to
make intercession for us to the Father. If any man sin, says S. John, we have
an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, 1 John 2.1. and who is
he that condemns? says S. Paul. It is Christ that died; yearather that is
risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession
for us. Romans 8.34. How great a favor how inestimable a benfiet is this to have
the only beloved Son of God in whom he is well pleased, and to whom he will
deny, nothing continually to plead and make intercession for us unto his
Father! They only are truly sensible of this Blessing who are wounded with the
Arrows of the Almighty, and pressed sore with his hand, so that there is no
soundness in their flesh, because of his anger, neither any rest in their Bones
because of their Sin, They find the benefit of such an Intercession, and how
desperate and remediless their condition would be, had they not such an
High Priest that is ever ready upon their true Repentance to make an atonement
for them, to plead the merit of his sufferings in their behalf, and to
interpose betwixt them and the wrath of God.

2. Christ ascended into Heaven as our High Priest, that being thither ascended
he might send unto us the Comforter, even the Holy Ghost to abide with us for
ever. This was one main reason of his Ascension, as himself declares to his
Disciples. John 16.7. Nevertheless, I tell you the truth. It is expedient for
you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you;
but if I depart, I will send him unto you. This he had promised long before by
the prophet Joel c. 2. of that Prophecy, v. 28. It shall come to pass, says
he, that I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your Sons and your
Daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall dream Dreams, your young men
shall see Visions. This promise he fulfilled upon his Apostles upon the day of
Pentecost, Acts 2. and he performs it daily to all his elect continually
begetting and increasing in their hearts the Graces of his Holy Spirit by the
Ministry of his word. This is that blessed Spirit of truth that guides us into
all truth and teaches us all things, that bears witness with our Spirits that
we are the children of God, and seals us unto the day of Redemption; and this
Holy Spirit Christ as our High Priest sends unto us from Heaven. For although
he be present every where, in respect of his Divine Essence, which is
Omnipresent; yet by his gracious Operation, he is present only in the Hearts of
his Elect, unto whom he is sent by Christ as a Pledge of his Love, to abide
with them for ever. The third Office which Christ performs for us, as our
High Priest is, to prepare a place for us in Heaven. The Sin of Adam had shut
the Gate of Heaven against us: For nothing that is Defiled or Unclean shall
enter into the New Jerusalem; but Christ by his perfect Obedience, and by his
meritorious Sufferings for our Sakes, has Expiated the Guilt of this Sin; and
by his ascending up thither himself, has opened unto us the Gate of Heaven
again, and given us assurance that he will draw us up after him. This he
promised to his Disciples, Joh. 14.2. I go, says he, to prepare a place for
you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive
you unto my self; that where I am, there ye may be also. Thus is Christ
ascended into Heaven as our High Priest, he is gone thither before us to
prepare a place for us; a place of endless Bliss and Felicity in those glorious
Mansions of his Heavenly Father. And so I have done with the Doctrinal part of
my Text, and showed you that Christ is really ascended into Heaven, and that he
is ascended thither as our High Priest.

I come now to the last Thing I propounded, which is, to press to you the
Apostles Application; and to show you how strongly the Consideration of this
Doctrine should oblige us to hold fast our Profession. And what can oblige us
more to hold fast our Profession, to lead a Godly and a Christian Life, and to
have our Conversation in Heaven, than this; that we have a great High Priest,
Jesus the Son of God, that is already passed into the Heavens, on purpose to
prepare for us there an Everlasting Crown of Glory? The consideration of the
blessed Effects of the Ascension of our Lord, if we make a right use of it,
will enable us to fight the good fight of Faith with Courage, to keep our
selves unspotted of the World in whatsoever Circumstances we are, and to steer
our Course aright through all the manifold Changes and Chances of this Mortal
Life, till we arrive at the end of our Hope, even the Salvation of our Souls.
Let our Condition be what it will, good or bad, I say, the thoughts of this
will enable us to behave our selves so, as shall be most for the Glory of God,
and our own Good. For, first, Has God Blessed us with Peace and Prosperity in
this World? Has he given us a plentiful Portion of the good Things of this
Life? Has he heaped upon us Riches and Honor, filled our Barns with Plenty,
and caused our Presses to burst out with new Wine? Though these things are
strong Temptations, and very apt to alienate our Hearts from God, yet the
consideration of our Savior's Ascension will enable us to overcome them. If in
the midst of these worldly Blessings, we frequently and seriously call to mind,
that we have a great High Priest, that is preparing for us things that are
incomparably better, and more glorious in Heaven; our Eyes then will not be
dazzled, nor our Hearts bewitched, with these fading and perishing Enjoyments
upon Earth: We shall set no higher an Estimate upon them than they deserve, but
shall be careful to use them with a Christian Prudence and Moderation, to the
glory of God, and the good of our Selves; and such poor Members of Christ as we
see stand in need of our Charity. We shall look upon all these temporal
Blessings to be but only lent us for a time; but our Hearts and Affections will
be wholly fixed with most ardent and longing Desires upon that eternal and
incorruptible Inheritance which our High Priest has purchased for us in
Heaven. Thus I say, if in this World God has blessed us with Wealth and
Honor, the consideration of our Savior's Ascension will be a powerful means
to restrain us from the abuse of those Blessings; so that we shall neither
Idolize our Wealth with the Covetous, nor with the Prodigal waste and consume
it upon our Lusts: But shall wisely improve it to our best advantage, so as to
make to our selves friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness. Secondly, On the
contrary, has God dealt otherwise with us? Has he withheld these Blessings
from us? Is our Condition in this World very Poor and Mean, so that we have not
where-withal to help our selves, but are fain to be beholding both for Food and
Raiment, and whatsoever is necessary to the support of our Lives to our richer
Neighbors? The consideration of our Savior's Ascension into Heaven will
exceedingly comfort us, and support our Spirits in the midst of our Want and
Penury. For how can we be troubled at our low Fortune in this World, when we
remember that we have an High Priest in Heaven, that has a Crown of Glory in
his Hand ready to put on our Heads, as soon as our Earthly Tabernacle is
dissolved? Nay, more than this, is our Condition here yet worse? Are we not
only Poor and Despicable, but are we moreover Persecuted for Righteousness
sake? Does the World frown upon us, and rage against us with all its Fury? Let
us not be discouraged for all this: And we cannot be, if we consider, as it
follows in the Verse after my Text, that in Heaven we have not an High Priest
which cannot be touched with the feeling of our Infirmities; but was in all
points tempted, like as we are, yet without Sin. He himself, when he was here
on Earth, was so Poor, that he had not an House wherein to lay his Head. He was
all his Life long a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief, and was at the
last most cruelly and despightfully Persecuted even unto Death. And as he
himself was for the suffering of Death, crowned with Glory and Honor, so has
he promised the same Reward to all those that suffer for his sake. Blessed are
they which are Persecuted for Righteousness sake: For theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven, Matthew. 5.10. How then can Persecution seem grievous to us, when we
consider that we suffer for our High Priest, who has suffered far greater and
bitterer Torments for us, than we can do for him, and who now sits on the Right
Hand of God, ready to make us a vast amends for our light and momentary
Affliction here, by bestowing upon us a far more exceeding and eternal weight
of Glory? Thus powerful is the Meditation of our Savior's Ascension, to guide
and direct us, to make us wary and cautious in Prosperity, and to strengthen
and comfort us, and to make us patient and courageous in Adversity, and to arm
and fortify us both against the smiles and frowns of the World. Nay, Secondly,
When Death it self approaches near us, when the King of Terrors is ready to
seize upon us, the same Meditation will make us bid that Hour welcome, when we
consider that we have an High Priest in Heaven, that has swallowed up Death in
Victory, so that to all true Believers it is now but asleep, the Gate through
which we must enter into Eternal Life. Again, Thirdly, Which is worse than
Death, and which is the very sting and poison of Death it self; are we at any
time terrified and affrighted at the sight of any grievous Sin, into which, by
the Temptation of the Devil, and through our own Lusts we have fallen? Is our
Soul smitten into the place of Dragons, and brought down as it were even to
Hell with the dreadful apprehension of the Wrath of God, which thereby we have
justly deserved? Let not the Devil (who in such a Case, is ever ready to do it)
persuade us to Despair, that there is no hopes of Mercy for us, but that now
God has hid his Face from us for ever, and that he will be no more entreated
by us. But let us say with the Psalmist, Why art thou cast down, O my Soul, and
why art thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God: For I shall yet praise
him, who is the health of my Countenance, and my God. Let us remember, that
though we have sinned, yet we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our Sins. Let us remember, that though
we have sinned, yet we have a great High Priest, that is passed into the
Heavens, Jesus the Son of God, who ever lives to make Intercession for us. Let
us not therefore Despair, but Repent. Let us, trusting in the Merits and
Righteousness of our High Priest, come boldly, though humbly and penitently, to
the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in time
of need. And if we do so come, we may assure our selves, that we shall find
both Grace and Mercy. Not one Tear that proceeds from godly Sorrow shall drop
to the ground, not one penitential Sigh shall be breathed in vain, but our
High Priest will be sure to present all our Tears, our Sighs, our Prayers and
Supplications before his Father, and never cease his Intercession in our
behalf, until our Pardon be Sealed in Heaven. Thus you see that in whatsoever
Circumstances we are engaged, the Meditation of our Savior's Ascension is ever
extremely beneficial to our Souls. And seeing that it is so, how should it
oblige us to hold fast our Profession? How should the thoughts of this, as they
are ever profitable, so be ever welcome and dear unto us? Let us not then set
up our Staff on this side Jordan, let us not lie grovelling upon Earth, nor
suffer our selves to be enamoured of the Things of this World, which are not
worthy of our Thoughts; but let us seek those Things which are above, where
Christ sits on the Right Hand of God. Let us remember, that here we are but
Strangers and Pilgrims, and therefore let us behave our selves so as becomes
Sojourners; using this World so as if we used it not, knowing that our own
Native Country, where we expect our Inheritance, is afar off, even in Heaven,
whither our High Priest is passed before us to prepare a place for us. Oh then!
if we desire hereafter to ascend up thither after him, that we may for ever be
Happy in his Presence, let us now hold fast our Profession: That we may be able
at that great Day to meet the Lord in the Air, and to ascend up with him into
Heaven; let us now Purify our selves, even as he is Pure. Let us lay aside
every Weight, and the Sin which does so easily beset us, and let us run with
patience the Race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and
finisher of our Faith; who, for the Joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, despising the Shame, and is set down at the Right Hand of the Throne of
God. Let us continually lift up our Hearts with most devout and ardent
Affections unto him, who is our Prophet, our Priest, and our King; yielding as
far as we are able an entire and impartial Obedience to all his Laws,
submitting our Selves wholly to his Will, and to the guidance of his Holy
Spirit in all Things. So when this King of Glory shall come again with the Keys
of Heaven and Hell in his Hands, to render unto every Man according to his
Works, he shall open for us those everlasting Doors, through which he himself
is already passed as our Forerunner, and place us in those happy Mansions of
Bliss and Joy, which he has prepared for us, where we shall be Kings and
Priests unto God for ever. Unto which unconceivable Glory and Honor, etc.

SERMON VII.
MATT. XI. 28. Come unto me, all ye that Labor, and are heavy Laden, and I
will give you Rest.


GREAT Travel is created for every Man, (says the Son of Sirach, Eccles.
40.1.) and an heavy Yoke is upon the Sons of Adam, from the Day that they go
out of their Mother's Womb, till the Day that they return to the Mother of all
Things. Their imagination of Things to come, and the Day of Death trouble their
Thoughts, and cause fear of Heart; from him that sits on a Throne of Glory,
unto him that is humbled in Earth and Ashes; from him that wears Purple and a
Crown, unto him that is clothed with a Linen Frock. This is the sad Condition
of all the Sons of Men by Nature; an unhappy Patrimony entailed upon us by the
first Adam's Disobedience, and from which nothing but the perfect
Righteousness, and satisfaction of the second Adam can deliver us. The former
utterly ruined and undid us, when we were once Happy: The latter came on
purpose to seek and to save us, when we were lost. The former hung upon our
Necks, the heavy and intolerable Yoke of Satan; a Burden under which the whole
Creation groans, and which, if we shake it not off, will at the last sink us
down into the bottomless Pit: The latter came to rescue us from this Bondage,
and to lay upon us a Yoke indeed too, but such a Yoke that should be so far
from pinching and oppressing us, that it should exalt us, and draw us up with
it even to the highest Heavens, a Yoke that should be light and easy to us at
the present, and that should procure for us Eternal Rest and Felicity
hereafter. And here in my Text he makes a most gracious Invitation, and a
promise of Refreshment to every Man, that finding himself thus Burdened and
Oppressed, will come unto him for help. Come unto me all ye, etc.

In the handling of which Words, we will consider these three Things. First,
Who they are that are here invited. Secondly, Unto whom they are invited.
Thirdly, For what end they are invited. First, Then they to whom this
Invitation is made, are they that Labor, and are heavy Laden; and that not
some few of them only, but all without any exception; all such are welcome
Guests unto Christ. Come unto me, says he, all ye that Labor, and are heavy
Laden. This Invitation then seems to be made without respect of Persons, to all
Mankind: For nothing is more certain, than that all Mankind is heavy laden with
the burden of Sin, which is the Thing here meant in these Words. This is so
evident from innumerable Texts of Scripture, that I need not produce Arguments
to prove it: For all have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God. But though
nothing be more plain than that all have sinned, and consequently that all are
laden with this Burden; yet nothing is more plain also, than that all do not
Labor under it. Many Men, indeed, most Men, are so far from laboring under
the Burden of Sin, that they delight and take pleasure in it, and can by no
means be persuaded to think of parting with it. Such Persons as these are so
far from seeking Rest, in being eased of their Sins, that on the contrary, they
seek for Rest and Happiness in Sin it self, where it is certain that it never
can be found: For there is no Peace says my God to the Wicked. Such therefore
are excluded from this Invitation of our Savior, who, though he calls Sinners
unto him, yet calls none but such as are weary of their Sins, and desire to be
delivered from them. Secondly, Such are excluded likewise, who trust in their
own Righteousness, and presume that they have little or no need of a Savior.
Such were the Pharisees of Old, of whom our Lord gives us a Character, Luke
18.11. in the Example of the Pharisee that justified himself, and despised the
Publican, praying on this manner, God, I thank thee, that I am not as other Men
are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Publican. I fast twice
in the Week; I give Tithes of all that I Possess. And such are those of the
Church of Rome at this Day, who presume that they can merit Heaven by their own
Works; nay, more than so, that they can do Works of Supererrogation, and sell
them also for the benefit of others that stand in need of them, contrary to the
express Command of our Savior to his Disciples, Luke 17.10. When ye have done
all those Things which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable Servants: We
have done that which was our Duty to do; and contrary to the Example of the
wise Virgins, Matt. 25.9. who refused to part with any of their Oil unto the
Foolish; lest there be not enough, say they, for us and you: But go ye rather
to them that sell, and buy for your selves. Such Persons as these then, both
such as delight in Sin, and such as trust in their own Righteousness, are
utterly excluded from this Invitation of our Savior: There is no Promise, no
hopes of Rest for any such. But all they that would be welcome Guests unto
Christ, must be sensible of the heavy Load and Burden of their Sins, so as to
be heartily weary of it, and most earnestly to desire to be rid of it. So that
here is a double Qualification required in all those Persons, whom Christ here
so graciously calls unto him. First, They must feel the Burden of their Sins,
so as to Labor under it, to be extremely wearied and oppressed with it.
Secondly, They must unfeignedly desire to be rid of this Burden, so as to be
delivered not only from the Punishment that is due unto Sin; but from the Guilt
also and Pollution of Sin, that it may no longer reign in their mortal Body,
that they should obey it in the Lusts thereof.

First, I say, all that will come unto Christ, must feel the burden of their
Sins, so as to labor under it, and to be extremly wearied and oppressed with
it. This is evident from the express Words of our Savior's Invitation here in
my Text, Come unto me, all ye that labor, and are heavy laden. Now that Sin is
a most intolerable and insupportable Burden, must needs appear to all Men that
will seriously consider it upon these two Accounts. 1. From the danger of it.
2. From the foulness and loathsomness of it. First, That Sin is of all things
the most dangerous is acknowledged by all men that believe that there is a God
who as he is a rewarder of all them that diligently seek him, so he is a God
also to who vengeance belongs, that will by no means clear the guilty, but will
turn the wicked and all that forget him into Hell. All the Miseries both of
this life and of that which is to come are the effects and consequence of Sin:
what dismal plagues and judgments it renders us obnoxious to in this world we
read at large, Deuteronomy. 28. and, Lev. 26. It brings a curse upon our selves and
all that belongs to us in all places whithersoever we go, in all Business
whatsoever we undertake; a curse in the city, and a curse in the field, a curse
upon our basket and our store, upon the fruit of our Body, and the fruit of our
land, the increase of our kine and the flocks of our sheep. It brings upon us
War, Famine, Pestilence, a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of
mind: so that our life shall hang in doubt before us, and we shall fear day and
night, and shall have none assurance of our life. In the Morning we shall say,
would God it were Even; and at even we shall say, would God it were Morning:
for the fear of our heart wherewith we shall fear, and for the sight of our
eyes which we shall see. This, and much more than this is the danger of Sin in
this life, as ye may see in the Chapters beforementioned. And surely this, if
there were no more might be enough to satisfy us, that Sin is a burden under
which no man living is able to stand upright. And yet all this is but the
beginning of sorrow, is nothing in comparison of that misery which Sin will
certainly bring upon all those that forsake it not in the world to come. There
shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. Those torments as they
shall be incomparably greater than what any man can suffer in this life as to
extremity of pain, so they shall be infinitely greater in one respect for they
shall know no end; but when the reprobate Men and Angels shall have lien in
Hell ten thousand thousand times as many Millions of ages as there are drops of
water in the Ocean or grains of dust in the Body of the Earth, their punishment
will still be as far from an end as it was at the beginning: for all this is but
a moment to eternity; still their worm dies not, neither is their fire
quenched; but the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever, and they
have no rest day nor night. Surely this then if there were no other argument
might of it self be sufficient to convince us that Sin is a most intolerable
burden, since it will inevitably sink us into so unconceivable and remediless
Misery. But secondly that it is such a burden will appear further from the
consideration of the foulness and loathsomness of it: and this is so exceeding
great, that indeed nothing in the world is really and truly filthy and
abominable but Sin it self. For although there be many of God's creatures (as
for example a Toad, or a Serpent, or the like) which by some secret antipathy
in this our lapsed Estate we cannot choose but abhor the sight of; yet the most
noisome Vermin that the Earth affords is so far from being filthy and ugly,
that if rightly understood it is quite contrary, being created by God for wise
and gracious purposes: for Moses tells us in the beginning of Genesis, that he
saw every thing that he had made; and behold it was very good. If therefore any
of God's Creatures appear to us to be otherwise, it is purely through the fault
of our corrupt reason which is apt to take a false estimate of things. But that
Sin is a most foul and loathsome thing cannot but be granted by any one that
seriously considers it, since it is most directly contrary and opposite to the
Nature of God, who is the most perfect, wise, good, and glorious Being in the
world; who cannot be deceived or biassed by any prejudice or partiality; but
passes a true and just censure upon all things. And he has declared in his
word, that Sin is a most filthy and abominable evil, that it is a most
offensive stink in his Nostrils; and that he abhors and hates it with an
irreconcilable and eternal hatred. How pleasant soever therefore Sin may seem
to us whose understanding is darkened, and whose reason is enslaved and led
captive by our unruly lusts and passion, so that it is of it self utterly
unable to judge aright of any thing it is notwithstanding most certain and
undeniable that Sin is the most foul and loathsome thing in the World, seeing it
is pronounced to be so by God himself who is infinitely wise and cannot be
deceived and infinitely good and cannot hate any thing but what is evil. From
these 2 considerations then it is sufficiently evident that Sin is a most
intolerable burden, both upon the account of the danger of it and the foulness
of it. The foulness of it is such that God is not able to endure it in his
sight: for he is of purer Eyes than to behold iniquity: and the danger of it is
such, that it will certainly plunge us into such misery as the heart of man is
not able to conceive. He therefore that has taken this strict and impartial
survey of Sin, and finds that himself is guilty of it, will soon be ready to
cry out with David: Mine iniquities are gone over mine head: as an heavy
burden they are too heavy for me. My wounds stink and are corrupt, because of
my foolishness. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly: I go mourning all the
day long. For my loins are filled with a loathsome disease; and there is no
soundness in my flesh, Ps. 38.4. etc. Or he will complain with S. Paul, O
wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the Body of this death? Romans
7.24. But though the case of every one of us be thus bad, yet it is not
desperate to any man that is thus truly sensible of his condition, that feels
the weight of his burden and desires to be eased of it. For behold a Deliverer
is ready at hand, one that is mighty to save; one that is both able and willing
to help us, and has here in my Text made this gracious invitation with his own
mouth to all men that are thus qualified to come unto him. Come unto me all ye
that labor and are heavy laden.

And so I proceed to the second thing I propounded to speak of, which is the
Person unto whom we are invited to come for help, and that is Christ. And here
we must understand that by coming unto Christ is not meant any corporeal
approach, as if we were obliged to see him with our Eyes, or to touch him with
our hands: for alas how can we that are but worms upon earth come thus unto
him who is exalted unto the Right Hand of God in the highest Heavens? But
though we cannot come thus to him, yet we may come nearer to him than thus,
even so near as to be one with him, to be members of his Body, of his flesh,
and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30. And this is that coming unto Christ, which is here
meant in my Text, a coming to him and laying hold on him by a true and lively
faith. This is the only way that we can come unto Christ, so as to receive any
benefit from him. For as his hands were tied while he was here upon Earth, so
that he could not work any Miracles where he found not faith; so are they tied
still upon the same account now he is in Heaven; so that he cannot save us, he
cannot ease us of our Burden, except we believe: we have his own word for it,
Mark 16.16. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved; but he that
believes not shall be damned. And if this be all that is required of us in
coming to Christ, to believe that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners, and to acknowledge our selves to be such, who then shall not be saved?
surely then the way to Heaven is much easier than it is generally represented
to be, and few there be that shall not find it. But our blessed Savior has
assured us of the contrary and told us expressly, that few there be that shall
find it, Matthew. 7.14. And therefore it is more than a bare historical faith
that is required of us, if we will come unto Christ aright, so as to find rest
unto our souls: and this is plain from the words in the Verse after my Text:
Take my Yoke upon you and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye
shall find rest unto your Souls. Here is something implied more than just
coming unto Christ: for we must not only come to him but we must resolve also
to do something for him, which he expects we should do, if ever we look for
salvation from him: and that is to be obedient to those most holy Laws, and to
follow as far as we are able through the Assistance of his Grace, that most
excellent Example which in his last Will and Testament he has left us for the
Rule of our Life and Conversation. I will not deny but that it is faith alone
by which we are justified and saved: for S. Paul tells us more than once in his
Epistles, that the just shall live by faith. But then he tells us what this
faith is, Gal. 5.6. It is faith which works by love, and 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. he calls
it the work of faith, and Labor of Love. If then faith be a work it must needs
be more than a bare assent to, and belief of, the truth of the Gospel, together
with a groundless application of the promises therein contained to our selves;
which too many men are apt to think to be a faith sufficient to salvation. For
what work is this, to believe the truth of a Store when there are most
unanswerable Arguments to prove it? though indeed it is a work, and an hard
work too; the Devils work to persuade us to apply those precious promises which
are made in that sacred Story to our selves, when they do not at all concern
us. Let us take heed therefore of deceiving our selves, and thinking that we
have faith when we have it not: but if we desire to approve our faith in the
sight of God, and Men, and Angels, and to the quiet and satisfaction of our own
Consciences, let us follow the advice both of S. James and S. Peter. The former
tells us that Faith without works is dead, and that by works Faith is made
perfect. And the latter upon the substantial, and never failing, foundation of
a true faith raises a most noble Structure by which we may gradually ascend
into those Mansions of Glory which our blessed Savior has prepared for all
those that love his appearing, 2 Peter 1.5. Add, says he, to your faith
virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance
patience, and to patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and
to brotherly kindness charity. For if these things be in you, and abound, they
make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ. But he that lacks these things, i. e. any one of them, is
blind and cannot see a far off and has forgotten that he was purged from his
old Sins. Wherefore the rather brethren give Diligence to make your calling and
election sure: for if ye do these things ye shall never fall. For so an
entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting knigdom of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. From hence ye may plainly see that the faith
which is here meant by coming unto Christ, is more than a bare belief of the
truth of the Gospel, more than a bare recumbency and leaning upon Christ for
Salvation, and applying his Merits to our selves as it were at a venture right
or wrong, whether we have any interest in him or no. Such a faith as this many
men trust to, that have been strangers all their lifetime to the perfect Law of
Liberty, by which S. James tells us that we must all be judged at the last. But
the faith which our Savior here requires in all that come unto him, implies,
besides, a full and steadfast belief of all that is contained in the Gospel, a
firm purpose and resolution, and a cheerful endeavor to the best of our power
throughout the whole course of our Life, to be obedient and conformable to all
those rules, and precepts, and Laws which the Gospel injoyns us to perform, to
imitate that most holy example which our blessed Lord has set us, striving to
be perfect as he was perfect; and when we have done all this, still to
acknowledge that we are unprofitable servants, utterly disowning any Merits or
Righteousness in our selves; but desiring with S. Paul to be found in Christ,
not having our own Righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through
the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil. 3.9.
This is a true and saving Faith indeed: and whosoever thus comes unto Christ,
may assure himself that he shall be heartily welcome; he shall most certainly
obtain the benefit of this invitation and shall find rest unto his Soul.

And this brings me to my third and last particular, which is the end wherefore
all that labor and are heavy laden with the burden of their Sins, are invited
to come unto Christ: and that is that he may give them rest. Ye have already
heard that there is no burden so intolerable as that of Sin; and the rest which
Christ here promises to give to them that come unto him in that manner, which I
have showed you, is a freedom from this burden, and from all the dreadful
consequents and effects of it; a freedom from the anguish of an afflicted
conscience, from the insupportable troubles of a wounded Spirit, that is
smitten with the arrows of the Almighty from the wrath of God, and from the
Torments of Hell; from the guilt of Sin, and from its punishment. And this
Christ does by taking the burden of their Sins upon himself and making a full
satisfaction for them unto the Divine Justice. For the Lord has laid on him
the iniquity of us all, Isa. 53.6. And God made him to be sin for us, says S.
Paul, who knew no Sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2
Cor. 5.21. And he that by a true faith applies these Merits of Christ's Death,
and passion to himself, he has already obtained this rest which Christ here
promises; he is delivered from the burden of his Sins, and from that vengeance
which is due unto them. This rest therefore is, in a word, our justification in
the sight of God by which purely for the sake of the Merits of Jesus Christ, we
are acquitted and absolved of all our Sins, and are reconciled to God. Being
justified by faith, says the Apostle, we have peace with God through our Lord
Jesus Christ, Romans 5.1. This is that peace which passes all understanding; a
peace which nothing can disturb or interrupt, but it will always continue firm
and unshaken among all the changes, and chances of this mortal life: and when
we shall have most need of it it will stand us in greatest stead. When we walk
through the valley of the shadow of death it will not leave us; but will bear
us company even before the Tribunal of Christ, and will enable us to lift up
our Heads with joy in that great day when the whole World shall tremble, and
will at the last conduct us into those glorious regions of rest and happiness
which the Prince of peace has purchased for us. Thus ye see who they be that
are here invited, unto whom they are invited, and for what end. Sad and
disconsolate Sinners that are oppressed with the weight of their Sins are
invited by Christ, to come and cast that insupportable burden upon him who
alone is able to bear it and instead thereof to receive from him the most
blessed rest and peace imaginable. What remains then but that with most ardent
prayers we continually besiege the Throne of Grace, and beg of God that he
would open our eyes by the Grace of his H. Spirit (without whom we can do
nothing that is good) that so we may discern both the Misery of Sin with which
by nature we are laden, and the blessedness of that peace which by the grace of
Christ, we may obtain. And when we once do discern these things let us
immediately without any delay run unto Christ for help. Let us not seek for
this peace from any one else but from him who alone has promised it to us, and
who alone is able to give it us. Let us not seek it in the vain Pomps and
Pleasures of this present World: for all that this world can do for us without
this peace will do us no good; and with it all that it can do against us will
do us no harm. Let us not (as the Papists do) seek for it from any merit or
rightteousness in our selves: for all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags:
neither let us (as they do likewise) seek for it to Saints, or Angels, or
Archangels: for the Angels refuse our Worship, and own themselves to be but our
Fellow Servants; as is evident by two plain instances in the Revelation, Chap.
19.10. and 22.9. And as for the Saints, Abraham though he be the father of the
faithful, yet he is ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not. Nay the blessed
Virgin her self, though the Papists blasphemously call her the Queen of Heaven,
and pray to her not only to entreat but to command her Son in their behalf,
doubtless could she hear such Prayers as these, and had leave to answer them,
she would presently send such Persons as these to Christ, and give them no
other answer from Heaven than what she gave to the Servants at the
Marriage Feast in Cana of Galilee, while she was upon earth, John 2.5.
Whatsoever he says unto you do it. Let us therefore acquiess in this answer of
hers, as if it were an Oracle from Heaven; and instead of seeking either to her
or any other Person for salvation, let us come unto the Lamb of God which
takes away the Sins of the World, even to Christ himself who has invited us
and whatsoever he says unto us in his Gospel let us do it. Thus, if we come
unto him we shall be sure to find him ready to receive us, and to perform unto
us this gracious promise which he has here made in my Text: he will give us in
this World peace of conscience and joy in the Holy Ghost, and in the World to
come everlasting joy and rest in his Heavenly Kingdom.

SERMON VIII.
COL. II. 18, 19. Let no Man beguile you of your Reward, in a voluntary
Humility, and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things which he has
not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly Mind;

And not holding the Head, from which all the Body by Joints and Bands having
Nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases with the Increase of God.


THESE words are such a plain and direct Prohibition of Angel-worship, (and
consequently of Saint-worship too) that it is one of the greatest wonders in
the World, that there should be found in it a Christian Church, that styles her
self Catholic, (and that in so arrogant a manner as to appropriate that Title
to her self exclusively to all Christian Churches in the World besides) and yet
in open and hostile Opposition of this Text of Scripture should not only allow
of the Worship of Angels and Saints as lawful, but proceed so far as to impose
it upon all Men as a necessary Article of Faith, anathematizing all that will
not join with her in it. But these things must be, that the Scriptures may be
fulfilled. For certainly whosoever laying aside all Prejudice, and Partiality,
and Hypocrisy, devoutly and seriously consults the Holy Oracles of God, will
find in the Writings of the New Testament, as plain and punctual a Prediction
and Description of Antichrist, both as to the time and manner of his Coming,
and his Behavior and Reception in the World, as in the Old Testament there is
of the Messiah; and seeing both exactly foretold, will not think it a greater
wonder, that by one part of the World the Man of Sin should be worshipped as a
Saint, than that by another the Holy One of God should be rejected as an
Impostour. For the blessed Spirit of Truth, who alone can guide us into all
Truth, has told us expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from
the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Demons. That
there shall arise a great one in the Earth, that shall oppose and exalt himself
above all, that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God, shall
sit in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God. Whose coming shall be
after the working of Satan, with all Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders, and
with all Deceivableness of Unrighteousness in them that perish; because they
received not the Love of the Truth, that they might be saved. And that for this
cause God shall send them strong Delusion, that they should believe a lie, that
they all might be damned who believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in
Unrighteousness. And since this Prophecy must needs be fulfulled, it was highly
necessary that the Holy Ghost should forewarn us to beware of all those false
Doctrines, and corrupt and abominable Practices, which this grand Impostour
should endeavor to obtrude upon the Church of Christ as necessary to
Salvation; one of which the Apostle cautions us against in the words of my
Text. Let no Man beguile you of your Reward, etc.

The Text in the Original is something difficult, and has therefore occasioned
some difference in Translations; though none so great, but that any one of them
that I have seen, and I have consulted several) contains as direct a
Prohibition of the Worshipping of Angels, as the Greek it self: For whether we
render the word (...), Let no Man judge against you, as Beza, or, Let no Man
condemn you, as Diodate, or, Let no Man master, or govern you, as the French;
or, Let no Man seduce you, as the Vulgar Latin, and the Rhemish Translation;
or, Let no Man beguile you of your Reward, as our Translatours have rendered
it, it comes all to one and the same thing, viz. that no Man upon Earth has
any Power to impose upon us the Worship of Angels; but whosoever goes about to
do so puts a dangerous cheat upon us, to the hazarding of our Eternal
Salvation. The main difference that I can observe consists in joining the word
(...) (as it may be indifferently) either to the preceding or following words.
If we join it to the words that go before it, the Sense will be this; Let no
man beguile you of your Reward, or condemn, or master, or seduce you willingly,
arbitrarily, usurping over you a Power and Authority which was never committed
unto him; and so they will look with a malignant Aspect upon his Holinesses
pretended Supremacy. If we join it to the words that follow it, the Sense will
be, as our Translatours have rendered it; in a voluntary humility, or being a
voluntary in humility; and so the Worship of Angels will appear to be but
Will Worship, having no Foundation in Scripture. These things being premised, I
shall confine my self to our English Translation, which in my Judgment is of
all that I have seen, the most faithfully rendered according to the Original,
and out of the words of my Text I shall observe this; that no Man whatsoever
has any Authority to impose upon us the Worship of Angels being a thing
absolutely unlawful and repugnant to the Will of God, for the proof of which
proposition (besides some other Arguments which we may produce) the Apostle
furnishes us with four in my Text. 1. This Worship of Angels is a false and
voluntary Humility, a Will Worship invented by Man, not enjoined by God. 2. It
proceeds from a real and carnal Pride: He that goes about to impose it upon us,
intrudes into those things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his
fleshly mind. 3. It is highly injurious to the incommunicable Honor and
Prerogative of our Lord Jesus Christ: they that are guilty of it hold not the
Head. 4. It is destructive and deadly to our own Souls, and the End of it will
be Damnation; for he that prevails with us to join in this Worship, beguiles us
of our Reward.

First, This Worship of Angels is a false and voluntary Humility, a
Will Worship invented by Man, and not enjoined by God. Of all the Temptations
with which Satan is wont to assault our Souls, there are none so dangerous as
those which he offers to us under color of Religion. The common Baits of
sensual Pleasures of worldly Profit, or Honor, and the like, sinell so rank of
the old Serpent, that he that has but half an Eye may discern that there is an
Hook under them; and it is merely the Predominance of his Corruptions that
prevails with any Man to swallow it. But when he assumes the Habit of an Angel
of Light, when instead of tempting us to Vice he recommends to us some
extraordinary Grace and Virtue, as being not yet sully understood nor practiced
by us, according to the true intent and meaning of the Gospel, it is not every
Man that will look for a cloven Foot, nor be able to discover it under such a
sanctified Disguise, and it is no marvel, that even some learned Men have been
imposed upon by the Stratagem. Now of all those Excellent Graces which the
Gospel requires of us, there is none more lovely and amiable, none that does
more adorn and beautify our Souls, and renders them more pleasing and
acceptable in the sight of God through the Merits of Christ, than Humility; and
therefore no Temptation could be more likely to prevail with Persons inclinable
to Devotion, than one that was gilded with the specious Pretense and Show of so
incomparable a Virtue. Upon this plausible Foundation the grand Enemy of our
Salvation, established the Worship of Angels among some Heretics very early,
even in the Apostle's Time; which was the occasion of S. Paul's giving the
Colossians this necessary Caution against it here in my Text. Theodoret upon
the place informs us that they that maintained it necessary to observe the Law
introduced also the Worship of angels affirming that the Law was given by them.
And this wickedness was long practiced in Phrygia and Pisidia. Wherefore the
Council of Laodicea (which is the Metropolis of Phrygia) made a Canon on
purpose to prohibit praying to Angels. And even to this day, says he, there
are to be seen amongst them and their neighbors, Oratories of S. Michael. Now
says he they did this upon pretense of Humility, saying, That whereas God
Almighty was invisible, incomprehensible, and inaccessible, therefore we ought
humbly to sue for his favor through the intercession of Angels. Now I would
fain know the difference betwixt that Worship of Angels which the Church of
Rome calls Catholic (and has declared to be good and profitable for us) and
this which Theodoret condemns as Heretical, and was anathematized by the
Laodicean Council. For my part I can see no difference at all: for as this
honest Father has (no doubt faithfully) stated the case, the Phrygians (had
they but known them) might as justly have pleaded the Distinctions of (...) and
(...) for their Excuse as ever the Romanists could, only the former were so
impudent as to venture their Heresy into the World naked; these later are so
crafty, that they have done what they can to palliate and clothe it: but the
Mischief is, the Garment they have bestowed upon it is so exceeding thin, and
threadbare, that it does rather expose than conceal its Deformity. Well then
the pretense for Angel-worship was of old, and is to this day, Humility: the
Patrons of it tell us that for us miserable Sinners directly and immediately to
address our selves, in our devotions, to the most sacred and infinite Majesty
of God is too great a presumption, and that therefore it becomes us rather
humbly to implore the help and assistance of the blessed Angels and Saints,
(and especially of the Virgin Mary, who as a Mother cannot choose but be very
powerful with her Son) and to beg of these holy Persons, that are so gracious
in the Court of Heaven, to present our Prayers and Supplications, and to make
known our wants unto God; and that by thus doing we perform an acceptable piece
of Humility, paying both to God and to the Holy Angels and Saints, that Honor
which is due respectively unto them both, ascribing unto God a Superior, to
the Angels and Saints, an inferior, though to both a religious, Worship. This
I take to be the Doctrine of the Church of Rome in this point, together with
the Reason and Ground of it, which (as they pretend) is Humility: whether it be
so or no, we are now to enquire. And here I understand not the word Humility in
its largest and most comprehensive sense; but only as it signifies our humble
Deportment toward God in our Religious Worship of him, which cannot be
performed, as it ought, in Truth and sincerity, without humbling our selves
before his Divine Majesty, even as low as the Dust out of which we were formed,
acknowledging his Supreme and absolute Power and Sovereignty over us, and our
necessary Dependence upon him, from whom, and in whom we live, and move and
have our Being. And so the question in short will be this, Whether the Church
of Rome or we and the rest of the Reformed Churches, that have justly separated
our selves from her, as from a Church that is full of Corruptions, and is
Schismatical from the whole Body of the Holy Catholic Church of Christ, show
the most sincere and acceptable Humility unto God in our Devotions and
Religious Worship; and the case is so plain, that one would a think few words
might decide the Controversy among Persons that are not more zealous, and
industrious in the Defense of a party, than of the Truth. But now the mischief
is, that we Heretics (as they are pleased to call us) will never submit to the
Judgment of any one but God himself for the Decision of any of these
Controversies in Religion, and are so partial as to be guided by one plain Text
of Scripture though there should be an hundred places in the Fathers that seem
to contradict it. This they take very ill from us: but for all that, we shall
confidently appeal to the same Tribunal still, at which we are sure no man
shall ever be condemned, but for the Injustice of his Cause. Now nothing is
more evident in Scripture, than that we cannot demonstrate our Humility to God
better, than by a strict and punctual Obedience and an entire Resignation to
his Will in all things, as he has revealed it to us in his Word. This is so
certain a Maxim, that I cannot believe any Man is so impudent as directly to
call it in question; though, indirectly, I know there are many that do: and
therefore I shall presume upon it as granted. And hence will follow these two
things. 1. That whosoever directs all his Religious Worship wholly and solely
to that Object unto which God in his Word has commanded him to direct it,
exclusively to all other Objects, is, in that respect, insallibly secure of
paying unto God as much Humility as he requires of him. 2. That whosoever
presumes to direct any part of his Religious Worship to any Object unto which
God has not commanded him to direct it; though in so doing he intends (and
that never so sincerely) to honor God the more by it, yet can have no
Assurance that he does not thereby dishonor him; and if God has expressly
prohibited that Object so to be Worshipped, I can not see how he can excuse
himself from gross Idolatry. I shall illustrate these two propositions by the
Example of Saul, which one would think should be a sufficient warning to deter
any man from interpreting any of God's positive Commands otherwise than
according to the direct sense and meaning of the Words, in their most natural
and proper signification. When God sent that unhappy King to destroy Amalek, he
commanded him in these words; Go, and smite Amaleck and utterly destroy all
that they have, and spare them not; but slay both Man and Woman, Infant and
Suckling, Ox and Sheep, Camel and Ass. The sense of this Command seems to be
plain enough, that God would not have one Man, Woman or Child, or Beast saved
throughout all the Country, but every one of them to be destroyed. And if Saul
had done so he might have been secure, that he had obeyed God's Command:
Whereas, if he spared but one of the Men, though it were the King himself, and
a few of the best of the Sheep and Oxen, though he designed them for a
sacrifice to the Lord; in so doing he could not possibly be sure that he had
obeyed it; at the best he could but hope that he had done it: but ye know that
in doing of it he highly offended God, in so much that he deprived him of his
Kingdom for it. Now to apply this to our present business, God has in
Scripture given us a strict command to direct all our Religious Worship to
himself only, and to no other Object whatsoever. It is our Saviors Answer to
the Devil, and it may serve for an Answer to all his Agents unto the Worlds
End) Thou shall Worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, Matt.
4.10. Now it is demonstrably evident to any man, that is in his right Wits that
he that directs all his Prayers and Religious Worship solely and immediately
unto God himself, and to no other Object, does not therein transgress this
Commandment; and it is as demonstrably evident, that whosoever directs his
Prayers and Religious Worship to any other Object but God, upon whatsoever
pretense (though it be to honor God the more by it) cannot be sure that he
does not therein transgress this Commandment. If then we had no other Text in
Scripture but this one to be guided by in this case, it is manifest that we who
(understanding these words of our Savior in the strictest sense) refuse to
give Religious Worship to any one but God himself, cannot thereby incur his
Displeasure; since he cannot condemn us for it, without directly giving himself
the lie, and renouncing his own Law: whereas the Church of Rome interpreting
this Law without any warrant for it, in a larger sense ( viz. as not
restraining all Religious Worship solely unto God; but only prohibiting the
giving of it to wicked Spirits, or to the Heathen Gods or Idols, and the like)
and thereupon presuming to give such Worship, though in an inferior Degree, to
the Holy Angels and Saints, is altogether as inexcusable in so doing, as Saul
was in his expedition against the Amalekites. But though Readiness Fault was great
enough as it was; yet it would have been much greater, if God in the Commission
which he gave him had expressly named Agag, and forbidden him to save even the
King himself, and he had spared him notwithstanding: certainly this had been a
willful and obstinate Rebellion against the Divine Command. And yet the Church
of Rome ventures as far as this, and curses all the World that will not join
with her in it. For God has not only in general forbidden us to direct our
Religious Worship to any other Object but himself only, but he has moreover in
express Terms commanded us particularly not to Worship Angels in these words of
my Text. Let no man beguile you of your Reward in a voluntary Humility, and
Worshipping of Angels: nay and has also given us two plain instances, by way of
example, to satisfy us that the Angels themselves abhor such Worship, and dare
no more to accept of it, than Man may dare safely to give it to them. For in
the 19th, and 22d, Chapters of the Revelation, when S. John sell at the Angels
seet to Worship him, the Angel immediately forbids him, and reproves him in
both places for it in the same words; See thou do it not for I am thy
Fellow Servants. Worship God. And yet all this will not satisfy them, that the
Worship of Angels is unlawful, and it seems God cannot make a Law so plain
(even though he interpret it, and make it a judged case by an example) but the
Schoolmen will find out some subtle Distinctions, or other to evade the force
of it. And yet all these Distinctions, may be easily baffled (and they will be
so at the Day of Judgment) with this one question, Who has required this at
your hand. They are not able to give any tolerable Answer to it now. For in the
New Testament they confess that There is neither any direct Command nor Example
for the Worship of Angels. In the Old they can find never a Command for it, and
all that they insist upon there is the Examples of some holy Men that did
worship Angels, without being reproved for it, which they think is a plain
Argument, that such Worship was not then unlawful, and consequently cannot be
so now. But all this may be answered in two words. For first, it is the opinion
of some of the Fathers, and of most of the best Expositours of Scripture, that
it was our blessed Savior himself, that appeared to those holy Men in the Old
Testament: and then it is no wonder, that he received Divine Worship from them
without giving them a check for it. But secondly, though we should grant (which
we do not) that before the Coming of Christ the Worship of Angels was Lawful;
yet it does not at all follow that it is so still, since God has since
expressly forbiden it, and declared it to be unlawful both by Precept and
Example. And therefore if they will answer ingenuously to this Question, Who
has required this at your hand? they must confess that it was not God, but
themselves; that it is a Will worship of their own devising. And if so, I am
sure that Saul had every whit as fair a Pretense for his voluntary M^rcy, in
sparing Agag, as they have for their voluntary Humility, in worshipping of
Angels: and God deliver us from such lame Obedience. Thus much of the Apostles
first Argument against the worshipping of Angels. It is a false and voluntary
Humility; a Will Worship, as he expressly calls it, and other such like humane
Impositions, in the last Verse of this Chapter.

His next Argument is this; It proceeds from a real and carnal Pride: he that
goes about to impose it upon us intrudes into those things which he has not
seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly Mind. We have been long enquiring after
Humility, and have missed of it after all our search; for it proves a false
one: but we need not look so long for the Pride of the Imposers of this
Worship, for that will soon discover it self to be a real one. And indeed Pride
is very often found, and easily discerned under the false Mask of Humility; and
we know who would never stoop so low as to style himself Servus Servorum Dei,
if it were not to add a greater luster to his more beloved Title of Christi
Vicarius; which how pleasing soever it may seem in Latin, I am sure has a very
unlucky sound in Greek. For the word (...) as properly signifies Christi
Vicarius, as Christi Adversarius: and it is not improbable but that the Holy
Ghost made choice of this word on purpose to point at a Person unto whom it
might be applicable in either sense; one who under pretense of being Christ's
Vicar should indeed be his Enemy. Now the Pride of the imposer of his Worship
is so notorious, that I need not go about to expose it, since every own knows
that he exalts himself above all that is called God, not only in a mystical,
but even in a literal, sense. For as if it were a small matter to tread upon
the Necks of Kings and Emperors and to kick their Crowns off of their Heads at
his pleasure, he ventures once in his life ( viz. at his Inauguration) to come
as near as possible to the trampling upon Christ himself placing his Feet upon
the high Altar esteeming his Masters Throne no better than his footstool, and
himself as God sitting in the Temple of God, and showing himself that he is
God. This I think is a sufficient Demonstration of an unparallelled Pride in
one that is vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind. I might as easily show, that
he intrudes into those things which he has not seen; whilst by counterfeit
Miracles, fabulous Legends, and such like Impostures, he endeavors to persuade
us, that he is thoroughly acquainted with all the Transactions of the other
World; telling us that the holy Angels and saints do not only pray for us; but
that they also can hear our Prayers; nay that any one of them can hear the
Prayers of ten thousand several Persons; though they all pray at the same
instant for several things, in several Places or Countries of the World. Nay,
and he can tell us too unto what Angel, or Saint, it is most proper for us to
direct our Prayers in every particular Exigence: of all which matters S. Paul,
after he had been caught up into the third Heaven, either was utterly ignorant
or most unpardonably negligent, in fourteen several Epistles never to acquaint
us with this comfortable Doctrine. Nay, which is worse, he seems directly to
contradict it as if he were as obstinate an Heretic as we are, affirming
positively, that there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the
Man Christ Jesus. 1 Timothy 2.5. And so I shall pass to the Apostles third
Argument against the worship of Angels, which is this.

It is highly injurious to the incommunicable Honor and Prerogative of this
one Mediator between God and Men, our Lord Jesus Christ: they that are guilty
of it hold not the Head: that is by offering such a manifest affront to the
blessed Son of God they do in effect deny him to be the sole Head of his
Church, cutting themselves off from being Members of his Body, and bringing
upon themselves a most dreadful Anathema. The Office of a Mediator between God
and Man is an Office of so high and Divine a Nature that no Person could be
capable of it, but one who was both God and Man. For it was necessary that
whosoever undertook this Office should not only make satisfaction for our Sins,
but should also receive our Prayers, and present them unto God, and render them
acceptable unto him through his Intercession. Now not to insist upon the former
of these two things, it is plain from what I have already said, that the latter
of them ( viz. to receive Prayers and divine Worship) is an incommunicable
Prerogative of God, of which none can upon any Account whatsoever be capable
but himself only. God the Father therefore having conferred this high Honor
upon his only begotten Son our Lord Jesus Christ, who as he was Man, had
purchased it by his Death and Passion, and as he was God equal with the Father
was qualified for it, without any injury to the Divine Majesty; I say, God the
Father having conferred upon his Son this Honor, not only of being our
Redeemmer, but our Advocate also, to receive and present our Prayers, and to
make intercession for us, and having not given us the least Intimation in his
word that he allows any part of this Honor to any of the holy Angels or
Saints, what can be more plain than that they who pray to Angels and Saints as
Mediators, at least, of Intercession together with Christ, do thereby highly
affront him by joining Copartners with him in this incommunicable Honor of
being the only Mediator both of Redemption and Intercession between God and
Man. And that our blessed Savior is so, the Scripture most plainly and
frequently declares. There is but one God, and one Mediator between God and
Men, the Man Christ Jesus. Says S. Paul, in the Place abovementioned, where
it is observable, that this Office of Mediator between God and Men, is an
Office so divinely glorious and honorable, that the Apostle thinks it no
sacrilege to mention it with the same Reverence and Respect that he does God
himself; There is one God, and one Mediator. And indeed so well he might;
Since this Mediator is God, and Sits together with his Father in his Throne,
being able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever lives to make intercession for them, Heb. 7.25. Let the Church of Rome
produce but any one plain Text of Scripture to Satisfy us that there is any
other Mediator (whether of Redemption or Intercession) between God and men,
besides the Lord Jesus Christ; and we will confess our selves to be (as they
are pleased to call us) gross Heretics: but if they can produce no such Text
let us repose all our Trust and Confidence in that one Mediator whom God in
his Word has pronounced to be so, assuring our selves, that whosoever join
other Mediators together with him praying upon that Account either to Angels
or Saints, yea even to the blessed Virgin Mary her self, by so doing offer a
manifest Affront to this one Mediator between God and Men, cutting themselves
off from Christ, and not holding the Head.

And now I need say very little concerning our Apostles last Argument against
the Worship of Angels, which is this, that it is destructive and deadly to our
own Souls, and the End of it will be Damnation; for he that imposes this
Worship upon us beguiles us of our Reward. I say I need not insist upon this,
since it is sufficiently evident from what I have already delivered. For if the
Worship of Angels be a false and voluntary Humility, a Will Worship flatly
repugnant to the Word of God; if it proceed from a real and carnal Pride in the
Imposers of it, who intrude into those things which they have not seen, vainly
pufft up by their fleshly mind; if it be injurious to the royal and
incommunicable Prerogative of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is to be the sole
Mediator between God and Men, insomuch that whosoever owns any other Mediator
besides him (whether it be Saint or Angel) does thereby in effect renounce his
Savior, not holding the Head: then certainly this Worship of Angels must needs
be deadly to our Souls, and whosoever imposes it upon us, beguiles us of our
reward, and brings us into apparent Danger of Damnation. Hence then it is
evident, that had we no other Reason (as we have many and great ones) this one
were abundantly sufficient to justify our Separation from the Church of Rome;
wherein the Worship of Angels and Saints is not only allowed, but imposed upon
all its Members, as a necessary Term of Communion, contrary to the express Word
of God, and the Practice of the Primitive Christians, for about three hundred
years after Christ. This, I say, is sufficient to prove our Church to be herein
Catholic and Apostolical, and theirs Heretical and Schismatical from the
Catholic Church of Christ, cut off from his Body, and not holding the Head;
that is not the true Head, which is Christ, though they have a false one that
has usurped that Title, wherein they have literally fulfilled these words of
my Text. Stand fast therefore, Brethren, in the liberty wherewith Christ has
made you free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. Ye see that
the Worship of Angels and Saints is notoriously Sinful: let no man therefore
impose it upon you neither by fraud nor violence, since whosoever does so
beguiles you of your Reward, that crown of life which our Lord has promised to
give unto all that are faithful unto death.

SERMON IX.
MATTHEW V. 20. For I say unto you, That except your Righteousness shall exceed
the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees ye shall in no case enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven.


OF all other Sects among the Jews, the Scribes and Pharisees were the Chief,
and by their Learning and the outward show that they made of Religion, had
gained an extraordinary Respect and Veneration from the common People, who
looked upon them as infallible Doctors of the Chair, and received all their
Tenets and Traditions as Oracles. And as they were highly esteemed of by the
People, so they had also a very good opinion of themselves: they loved the
uppermost Rooms at feasts, and the chief Seats in the Synagogues, and greetings
in the Markets, and to be called of Men Rabbi: they despised all other Persons
in comparison of themselves, and as they sat in Moses his Seat, so no doubt but
they expected as honorable a place in the Bosom of Abraham. But though this fair
outside of theirs appeared very lovely, and took much with the People, yet our
Savior saw through it, and discerned that there was nothing but Rottenness and
Hypocrisy in their Hearts; that though they made clean the outside of the Cup
and of the Platter, yet within they were full of Extortion and Excess; that
though they fasted often and made long Prayers, yet it was only for a pretense
to devour Widows houses; that though they paid Tithe of Mint and Anise, and
Cummin yet they omitted the weightier Matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and
Faith, and that the Gate of Heaven would prove too straight to give any
Entrance to their broad Phylacteries, and large Borders of their Garments: and
therefore he often charges his Disciples to beware of treading in their steps,
not to acquiesce in such a vain and Hypocritical Ostentation of Religion, which
however it may gain the Applause of Men, who can see no further than the
outside, will be nothing worth when it comes to be examined before his
Tribunal, but to labor for Sincerity and Pureness of Heart without which no
Man shall see God: For I say, etc.

In the handling of which words I shall endeavor, 1. to show you what the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees was, which will not be thought
worthy to be admitted into the Kingdom of Heaven. 2. What manner of
Righteousness ours must be, that will procure us an entrance thither. 1. For
the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, if we examine it by the
Character which the Holy Evangelists give us of it, we shall find it extremely
faulty: and indeed it is impossible to suppose it to be otherwise, when we
consider how many sharp Reproofs and dreadful Woes, are denounced against it
by our Savior. The chief Particulars which render it faulty and deficient are
these. 1. Their Righteousness could not be acceptable in the sight of God, for
as much as in general they had a very false Notion of the Obligation of the Law
of God, which they interpreted only in the literal Sense of the words, and
thought that it extended only to outward actions, but reached not to the inward
Thoughts and Intentions of the mind. So long as they washed their Hands they
regarded not the foulness of their Heart, and so long as they kept themselves
free from any open and external Breach of the Commandments they thought
themselves innocent, though their mind was never so much set upon wickedness.
So long as they abstained from open Adultery, they thought they might lust
after a Woman, and still be chaste. So long as they kept their Hands from
shedding any Blood they thought it no sin, or at least a small and venial one,
such as God would take no notice of, to hate their Brother in their Heart. So
long as they did not bear false witness against their Neighbor before a Judge
in open Court they thought it no Crime to backbite and slander him, and that
they might securely blast his Reputation and wound his good Name without any
prejudice to their own Souls. So long as they abstained from plain Theft, and
kept their Hands from picking and stealing, they thought that, like the Priest
and the Levite in the Parable, they might innocently pass by their Neighbor
whom they saw wounded by Thieves, and that no Obligation lay upon them to
relieve him in his Distress. Thus they grossly erred in their Interpretation of
the Law, which reaches not only our Actions, but our words and our thoughts,
and confines our Tongues and our Hearts as well as our Hands. Such Commandments
as these they taught to be the least Commandments, that the Breach of them was
a very light and trivial sin, and that for an idle Word or for a lustful or
malicious thought or Intention, provided that it broke not out into Action,
there was no fear of Damnation. But our Savior passes a very severe sentence
upon them for teaching this Doctrine, in the verse immediately before my Text,
Whosoever says he, shall break one of these least Commandments, and shall
teach Men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven; that is,
he shall not be accounted worthy to enter into that Kingdom. And then he
confutes this false Doctrine of theirs, in the several branches of it in the
following part of the Chapter. Ye have heard, says he, that it was said by
them of old time, Thou shall not kill, and whosoever shall kill shall be in
danger of the Judgment: but I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his
Brother without a cause shall be in danger of the Judgment. Ye have heard that
it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not commit Adultery; but I say unto
you, that whosoever looks on a Woman to lust after her has committed
Adultery with her already in his Heart. Ye have heard that it has been said by
them of old time, Thou shall not forswear they self, but shall perform unto the
Lord thine Oaths: but I say unto you, Swear not at all: but let your
Commuunicatian be, Yea, yea: Nay, nay: for whosoever is more than these comes
of Evil. Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thy Neighbor,
and hate thine Enemy: but I say unto you Love your Enemies; bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you and pray for them which despitefully
use you, and persecute you. This then was the first thing wherein the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees was deficient: They misunderstood
the sense and meaning of the Law which our Savior in this Sermon of his
Restores to it self, and interprets in its full and proper Latitude. And
secondly, as it must needs be that Uno absurdo dato mill sequuntur, upon this
first false principle they built a second, and having confined the Sense of the
Law to so narrow a Compass, they thereupon concluded that they were able to
keep and perform it to a Title without any Supernatural Grace and Assistance
from Heaven. And indeed if this Construction of the Law had been true, it is
possible that this Conclusion which they drew from it might have been so too;
for if the Law had required no more of us than the bare abstaining from those
outward Acts of Adultery and Murder, and Theft, and Perjury, and the like,
which in express Terms it forbids, perhaps then we might have fulfilled it by
our own strength. But when a wanton Glance is Adultery, when a revengefull
Thought is Murder, when Usury (or Extortion at least) is Theft, when not giving
to the Poor is stealing from the Lord, when a tatling Tongue bears false
witness, and every idle word is to be accounted for at the Day of Judgment, who
then can pretend to innocence? who then can say, that he has made his Heart
clean, and that he is pure from his Sin? No, the best of Men must then be
forced to acknowledge himself to be a debtor to the Law, that he falls more
than seven times in a day, and that there is not a just Man upon Earth that
does good and sins not. And yet that the Pharisees had this fond opinion of
themselves, is plain from the Parable of that proud Pharisee that justified
himself in his Prayer to God Almighty, Luke 18.11. God, I thank thee, says he,
that I am not as other Men are, Extortioners, unjust, Adulterers, or even as
this Publican. I fast twice in the week, I give Tithes of all that I possess;
and from the confident Answer of the young Man, Matthew. 19.20. who when our
Savior showed him that the way to enter into Life was to keep the Commandments
and what those Commandments were, presently replies, All these things have I
kept from my youth: but all this while though he thought that he had exactly
kept the Commandments of the second Table he understood not the meaning of
those of the first; he knew not that Covetousness was Idolatry; for when our
Savior to complete his Righteousness and make him perfect, exhorts him to sell
all that he has, and give to the poor, and to come and follow him, though he
promised him the Recompense of Treasure in Heaven, yet he went away sorrowful;
for he had great Possessions upon Earth, and was loath to part with them. But,
thirdly, they stayed not here, but they proceeded a step further, and having
entertained that false Opinion, That they were able to perform a perfect
Obedience to the Law, they thereupon persuaded themselves, that that Obedience
of theirs was meritorious in the Sight of God, and they boldly justified
themselves upon the account of their own Works: and arrogantly boasted of them
even to God himself, as ye may see by the instance I but now mentioned of the
Pharisee that trusted in his own Righteousness, and despised the Publican.
Fourthly, this good Opinion they had of themselves, puffed them up with so much
pride, and vain Glory that they scorned and despised all Men that were not of
their own Sect. They were so well satisfied, and pleased with their own virtues
that they took no care to examine their own hearts, but they made it their
business to invade the Prerogative of God, to search the hearts of other Men,
and one of the most remarkable Instances of their Piety was their forwardness
to censure and condemn the Lives and Conversations, of their Neighbors. Let a
Man behave himself never so innocently, and blamelesly, both toward God, and
toward Man, yet if he was not one of them, he must pass for a Sinner. The
Temperance of John the Baptist, if it be tried at their bar, would be judged to
proceed from his being possessed with a Devil, and the free and cheerful
Conversation of our Savior to be Gluttony, and Wine-bibbing, Friendship and
Fellowship with Publicans, and Sinners. Fifthly, they did all their good Works
for an ill End and Purpose, out of a vainglorious Desire to gain the Applause
of Men: for this end they made long Prayers in the Synagogues and in the
Corners of the Streets, in the most public places they could find, that they
might be seen of Men, and perhaps none at all in their Closet. For this end
they made broad their Phylacteries and enlarged the Borders of their Garments,
disfigured their faces when they fasted, and sounded a Trumpet before they did
their Alms; they put on demure and sanctified Looks, that the People might have
their piety in admiration, when all the while it was nothing but gross
hypocrisy, and they made Religion only a stalking horse to their worldly
interest. Sixthly and lastly, they preferred their own Traditions before the
written Word of God, upon which account they are sharply reproved by our
Savior, Matt. 15. Why, says he, do you transgress the commandment of God by
your tradition? For God commanded saying, Honor thy Father and Mother, and he
that curses Father or Mother let him die the death. But ye say, Whosoever
shall say to his Father or his Mother, it is a gift by whatsoever thou might
be profited by me, and honor not his Father or his Mother, he shall be free.
Thus have ye made the commandment of God of none effect by your tradition.
Among these traditions of theirs were those of washing of Cups and of Pots and
of Brazen Vessels and of tables, but above all that which they observed with
the greatest preciseness and strictness imaginable was their washing of their
Hands before they eat, which as the learned Dr. Hammond tells us upon that
occasion they held to be so necessary and indispensable a duty that one of
their Rabbis says, That he that takes meat with unwashed Hands is worthy of
Death, and that the same person being in Prison and having some water given him
for his use to wash and to drink, having accidentally spilt one half of it he
washed his Hands in the Remainder, thinking it more necessary to do so than to
drink, and to die, than to violate the tradition of his Ancestors. This is, in
brief, the Sum and Substance of the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, as we find it described to us in the holy Scriptures, and if we mark
it narrowly and consider on the one hand the great veneration they had for
unwritten Traditions, their false and corrupt interpretation of the holy
Scriptures and their great confidence and trust in the merits of their own
works, and on the other hand their rash and intolerable censoriousness, and the
ungoverned liberty which they gave to their tongues, their vainglorious
Ostentation of Religion, their excessive Pride, and their ambitious desire of
being accounted Saints, the Children of Abraham and the precious People of the
Lord, it seems to be a complete mixture of Popery and Phanaticism, and however
they pretend now to be ashamed one of the other, and are at so much odds and
variance that a large Kingdom is too little to contain them both, yet there was
a time when they shook hands together, and were both peaceably united in one
man's breast. Having thus taken a view of the false and Hypocritical
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees which shall in no case obtain an
entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven, let us in the next place consider what
manner of Righteousness ours must be which will bring us to those Mansions of
Glory. And, 1. it must not have any of these Faults with which the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees was tainted, and rendered odious, and
abominable in the sight of God. Their Righteousness (as ye have heard) was such
as consisted only in the performance of external Actions according to the
literal Sense of the Law, but ours must proceed further, even to the cleansing
and purifying our Hearts from all manner of evil thoughts. Blessed are the pure
in Heart, says our Savior, for they shall see God. They, and they only shall
enjoy that beatifical Vision whose Heart is undefiled, for it is that which God
chiefly respects; and so long as that is right and sincere as to the Main,
though we do sometimes through the Frailty of our Nature and the strength of
some Temptation that has overcome us, fall into any sin, yet we shall
certainly obtain Pardon at the Hand of God upon our true Repentance. They
thought themselves well enough if they did no evil; nay, more than so, if evil
was done them by another Person, they thought they might with a safe Conscience
revenge themselves, but our Master has commanded us not to resist Evil, but if
any man smite us upon the Right cheek to turn to him the other also; and not
only not to hurt our Neighbor, but to love our Enemies, to bless them that
curse us, to do good to them that hate us, and to pray for them which
despitefully use us, and persecute us. It is not sufficient for us that our
outward Actions are not Evil, but we must take heed to our Words and our
Thoughts, we must make a Covenant with our Eyes, keep our Mouth with a bridle
that we offend not in our Tongue, and bring into Captivity every Thought to the
Obedience of Christ; for, for every idle Word and every misguided Thought we
shall give an account at the Day of Judgment. 2. Our Righteousness must not be
such as makes us presume, that we can of our selves, and by our own strength
keep all the Commandments, and fulfill the whole Law. Alas, we are not able of
our selves to keep any one Commandment; and S. James tells us, that if we
offend in one point we are guilty of all. The Scripture has most plainly and
fully discovered to us, our weakness in this case; that we are so far from
being able to perform any good Work, that we cannot of our selves so much as
think a good Thought without the Holy Spirit of God inspires it into our
Hearts, who work in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure, that there
is not a just man upon Earth that does good, and sins not, but that in many
things we offend all, and that if we say that we have no Sin, we deceive our
selves, and the Truth is not in us. These, and the like expressions in
Scripture, if we consider them, are sufficient to satisfy us that we are so
far from being able to keep the whole Law, that we cannot perform any one Title
of it as we ought: and therefore we must not as the Scribes and Pharisees, did
place our Righteousness in this, that we are able, and do perform an entire
Obedience to the Law. And if so, much less must we in the third place, as they
did, and the Church of Rome, who follows their Example, does at this day, boast
of and Glory in our own works, as if they were meritorious in the sight of God.
The Scripture every where condemns this as the most dangerous and damnable
Pride with which our Hearts can possibly be infected, and nothing will more
certainly bar the Gate of Heaven against us, than our supposing that we can
deserve that it should fly open unto us. How can a Man be just with God? says
Job, and In thy sight, says the Psalmist, no man living shall be justified.
And if no Man living can pretend to be just in the sight of God so as to escape
his Condemnation, surely, much less can any Man pretend to have done him so
great service as to merit a Reward from him. No, all boasting and glorying on
our part is utterly excluded, except it be glorying in our infirmities that the
power of Christ may rest upon us. We are taught a quite contrary Lesson, a
Lesson of Meekness and Humility; when we have done our best, to say that we are
unprofitable Servants, and to desire that the iniquity even of our most Holy
things, and the shameful Nakedness of our Righteousness may be covered and hid
from the pure Eyes of God, by the white and spotless Robe of the Righteousness
of Christ. Fourthly, we must not as the Pharisees did, (and as too many that
tread in their steps do at this day) place our Righteousness in our forwardness
to censure the Lives and Conversations of other Persons, and in our
backwardness to enquire into our own. Censoriousness in some men's Opinion
passes for a Gospel-virtue, and he that is most forward to speak evil of
others, and especially of his betters, of his Superiors, and Governors, is
for so doing looked upon to be the greatest Saint. But surely, these are Saints
of a new stamp; and I know no reason why they arrogate that Title to
themselves, except it be by an Antiphrasis; because they walk directly contrary
to the Doctrine of the Gospel, which has expressly commanded us not to judge,
lest we be judged our selves, and to speak evil of no Man, especially not to
despise Dominion and speak evil of Dignities, except we have an ambition to be
of the number of those mockers which S Jude prophesied should come in the last
time, who should walk after their own ungodly Lusts, Separating themselves,
sensual, having not the Spirit: all incomparable qualifications for Saint-ship!
Fifthly, we must not, as the Pharisees did put on a show of Religion purposely
to gain the Applause of Men, and to carry on our worldly Designs. I am sure
this unhappy Nation has swarmed with Pharisees enough of this sort; Men that
with a specious show of Piety led captive silly Women, beguiled unstable Souls,
and gained Admiration of the credulous and easy Vulgar, that with sanctified
Pretentions, Holy Looks, frequent Fastings, long Prayers, and canting and
treasonable Sermons, carried on the most villainous and accursed Designs, that
ever publicly disgraced Christianity. And God grant that there be not too many
such Pharisees among us still: but I pass them by: their Names are odious, and
their Religion scandalous. Lastly we must not as the Pharisees did, and we know
who does Still, prefer unwritten Traditions before the holy Scriptures. God
has caused that sacred Book to be written on purpose for our Instruction, and
has therein fully revealed so much of his Will to us, as is sufficient for us
to know in order to our obtaining everlasting Life: and we must not add to it,
nor diminish from it, but acquiesce in it, and make it the sole Rule and
Measure of our Faith, imposing nothing upon our own or other men's Consciences,
but what is manifestly consentaneous and agreeable to the Doctrine contained
therein. Thus ye see that our Righteousness must be thoroughly purged and
cleansed from all those Defects with which the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees was defiled. But still all this is not sufficient: if our
Righteousness does not exceed theirs infinitely more than thus it will be
nothing worth; we shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. That
Righteousness which must bring us thither must be absolutely complete and
perfect, without Spot or Blemish such as the All seeing Eye of God can discern
no Defect in; and that it is impossible for us ever to find such a
Righteousness as this in our selves I have already showed you: and yet such a
Righteousness we must all of us have, or else never expect Salvation, for
without Holiness, ay, and perfect Holiness too, no man shall see the Lord.
Since therefore we our selves are not able to perform such a Righteousness as
this, and yet such an one is absolutely necessary to bring us unto Heaven, we
must seek it from some other person: and to whom should we have recourse for
it, but to Christ our Savior, who of God is made unto us Wisdom and
Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption. Let us therefore if we
desire to be saved, not trust in our own Merits, as the Pharisees did: for by
the Works of the Law shall no flesh be justified; but with the Hand of a true
and lively Faith let us put on the Robe of Christ's Righteousness which will be
sure to hide our faults, and to present us holy, blameless, and undefiled in
the Presence of God. But let us not deceive our selves neither, and pretend to
have this Faith, and consequently that we have an interest in the Righteousness
of Christ, when there is no such Matter; but let us try and examine our Faith
whether it be a true and lively Faith or no. If it be not a Faith that Works by
love; if it be not fruitful and productive of good Works, it is dead and
insignificant, it will stand us in no stead at all; but if we pretend so to lay
hold on Christ, we shall only grasp a shadow. No, though we must not rely upon
our own performances, yet we must work, ay, and work as heartily as if our
Works were Meritorious too; but when we have done all we must utterly disclaim
our own Righteousness, trusting only in the Merits of Christ, and desiring with
S. Paul that we may be found in him, not having our own Righteousness, which is
of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of Christ the Righteousness
which is of God by Faith. This is such a Righteousness as will never fail us;
but whereas the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees and of all other
Hypocrites and Dissemblers with God shall sink them into the bottomless Pit,
this Righteousness of Faith will refresh our Souls, and cheer our Hearts with
the sweet Hopes and comfortable Expectation here, and bless them hereafter
eternally with the joyful Fruition of that Glory which God has prepared for
all them that love him.

SERMON X.
1 PET. IV. 18. And if the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the Ungodly
and the Sinner appear?


THAT there shall be another Life after this, in which all Mankind shall reap
the Fruit of their Actions done in the Flesh, and be adjudged to an unalterable
State, either of Happiness or Misery to all Eternity, is not only an Article of
Faith amongst Christians, but a Truth of which the wiser sort of the Heathens
were generally convinced. This, I say, is a Truth which all Christians profess
firmly to believe; but yet alas how small is the Number of those that
demonstrate the Truth and Sincerity of their Faith, by their Holy Lives and
Conversations? We all of us know, and are assured, that there is a just God who
will render to every man according to his deeds, Romans 2.6. and will by no means
clear the guilty, Exodus 34.7. We believe that there is an Heaven prepared for
Saints, and an Hell for Sinners; and yet notwithstanding this belief, how many
thousands that are called by the Name of Christ run on headlong, boldly and
impudently in Wickedness, and pursue with all imaginable Eagerness and Delight,
those fatal Paths that lead to Destruction; as if the Joys of Heaven were a
Trifle not worth our Acceptance, or the Torments of Hell the object rather of
our Desires than Fears. But notwithstanding all this Obstinacy and Hardness of
our Hearts the Lord God, who is ever merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and
abundant in goodness and truth, leaves us not to our selves, but is continually
calling and inviting us to Repentance by the preaching of his Word, and by the
secret and powerful Operations of his Holy Spirit. Sometimes Heaven is pleased
to smile upon us, and as it were kindly to desire and entreat us to come and be
its Inhabitants, to accept of the glorious Liberty of the Children of God, to
be made Citizens of Sion, and free Denizens of the New Jerusalem: and at other
times it frowns and awakens us with Thunder out of our sinful Lethargy. God
tries all ways imaginable to reclaim us, and deliver us from the Jaws of Death.
Sometimes he pours down his Judgments upon our Heads, that in our Affliction we
may seek him early; and sometimes he stretches forth the Arms of his Mercy to
embrace us, and draws us to him with the Cords of a Man, with the Bands of
Love, Hos. 11.4. Sometimes he holds forth the golden Scepter to us, and
graciously invites us to come and kiss the Son lest he be angry, and sometimes
he shakes his Rod of Iron over our Backs, and threatens to dash us in pieces if
we will not hear the Rod and who has appointed it. Hence are those many and
gracious Invitations to Repentance which God has made to us in his Word, and
those terrible Threatenings which he has therein denounced to affright us from
Sin: amongst all which there is scarce one to be found, that is more emphatical
and piercing than this of my Text, which must needs fill the Hearts of all
obstinate and impenitent Sinners with Horror; yea, and it strikes a Terror
even into the Godly themselves, and makes them work out their Salvation with
fear and trembling: It thunders Hell, certain and inevitable Damnation to the
Wicked, and hardly admits the Righteous into Heaven: And if the Righteous
scarcely be saved, where shall the Ungodly and the Sinner appear?

The words are propounded by way of interrogation; a thing very frequent in
Scripture, and generally used for the more powerful enforcing of some weighty
and material Argument. What could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I
have not done in it? says God, Isa. 5.4. that is, as much as if he had said, I
have spared for no care, nor pains, nor cost, and could not possibly do any
more in it than I did. So here in my Text, where shall the Ungodly and the
Sinner appear, intimates to us, that they shall not be able to appear at all,
but shall be cast for ever out of God's Presence; when in the great and
terrible Day of the Lord, they shall look upon him whom they have pierced, they
shall be confounded with Horror, and shall wonder and perish. The words offer
to our Consideration these four things, two different sorts of Persons, the
Righteous, and the Wicked; and the two different Ends of these Persons, and
their unalterable Estates in the next World, Salvation of the one, and
Damnation of the other: So that we may resolve the Text into these two
Propositions. 1. The Righteous shall be scarcely saved. 2. The Wicked shall
most certainly be damned.

First, The Righteous shall scarcely be saved. In speaking to which
Proposition, I shall first show you who are here meant by the Righteous: And
secondly, I shall show you why they are here said to be scarcely saved. First,
I shall show you who are here meant by the Righteous; and it is a far easier
matter to describe, than either to find out their Persons, or to imitate their
Example. For though Christian Charity obliges to judge no Man rashly, but to
hope the best of all Men; yet in such a Deluge of Profaneness and Impiety, as
has now overflowed the whole World, we may look for Judgment, but behold
Oppression; for Righteousness, but behold a Cry, Isa. 5.7. We may easily
mistake the Shadow for the Substance, and a Pharisaical Ostentation of
Righteousness may impose upon the Charity of some Men, so far as to make them
reverence a Hypocrite, and be ready to canonize a Person, whose Name God has
blotted out of the Book of Life. For if the All-seeing Eye of God, could
discover but one just Person in so great a City as Sodom; nay, but one
righteous Man (Noah) upon the Face of the whole Earth; surely we can expect to
find but few righteous now, when we have great Reason to apprehend that the End
of all things is at hand, and Sin abounds to such a Degree, that it seems to
have made the World as ripe now for the last Deluge of Fire, as it was of old
for that of Water. And yet in the Midst of this perverse and crooked
Generation, amongst whom the Divine Providence has appointed us to sojourn, it
is hard to meet with any Man that does not desire to be accounted righteous,
except some notorious and profligate Wretches that bid open Defiance to God and
Goodness, and pride themselves in being the Enemies of Heaven. For Virtue is so
lovely and beautiful, that she commands Respect and Reverence even from her
professed Enemies, and extorts Applause out of the Mouth of Vice her self. All
Men commend her, but few embrace her: Many there are that render to her the
calves of their lips, but few their heart. The Drunkard will preach Temperance
over his full Cups. The Extortioner will magnify Justice and Honesty, and yet
still grind the Faces of the Poor. The ambitious Man will extol Humility; but
he loves it in others, not in himself; and is never better pleased, than when
he sees his Brethren at his Footstool, that he himself may be exalted. The
covetous Man will pretend as much as any one to Charity; but when any of
Christ's afflicted Members naked, or hungry, or thirsty, or sick, or imprisoned
implores his help; he may perhaps, as St. James speaks, bid them depart in
peace, be ye warmed and filled, and that is all the Charity that he will afford
them. The common Swearer will exclaim sometimes against Profaneness, and be
ready to ask God pardon almost after every Oath, and swear again with the next
Breath. The wanton, if he light into severe and grave Company, will sometimes
pretend to abhor his darling Sin, and preach a Lecture of Chastity, when
perhaps he has made an assignation the very next Hour to meet his Minion. Thus
is Holiness and Piety so excellent in its own Nature, so desirable a
Perfection, that almost all Men praise it, but few practice it. Every Man,
though he loves the Wages of Unrighteousness, is ready to wish with Balaam,
that he may die the Death of the Righteous, but how few are there that are
careful to live his life. Certainly such Persons as these are not the Righteous
that are here meant in my Text, who shall be accounted worthy through much
Tribulation, to enter into the Kingdom of God; but they are notorious
Hypocrites, whose hope shall perish.

But to proceed further, there are another sort of Men in the World, whose
Righteousness, though it exceeds that of the Scribes and Pharisees, yet if it
be weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, it will be found too light. And
though it may commend their Memory to Posterity and raise a lasting Name for
them here upon Earth, yet it will never be able to write one for them in the
Book of Life. I mean Men who in general are of honest and upright Conversation,
who endeavor to frame and order their lives so according to God's word, that
no Man can find any just reason to question their Title to Salvation: but
nevertheless they have some beloved sin or other known perhaps to none but God
and themselves, which will hinder their flight toward Heaven: and though the
Pleasure they take in it, makes them willing to think it but a little one, it
will at the last prove so big as to hinder their entrance at the strait Gate.
But come what will on it, they can by no means be persuaded to part with it; but
they hope God will bear with them in this one thing; as Naaman said to the
Prophet Elisha, 2 Kings 5.18. When I bow down my self in the House of Rimmon,
the Lord pardon thy Servant in this thing. They can willingly conform to God's
Pleasure in other things, and contentedly endeavor to keep all his
Commandments but this one; though, as S. James assures us, by ossending but in
one point they are guilty of all: by indulging themselves in the wilful breach
of any one of God's Commandments, they transgress the whole Law, and utterly
exclude themselves from all hopes of Salvation. Such an one was the rich young
Man, Matthew. 19. that came to enquire of our Savior what good thing he must do
to have eternal Life. No doubt he was to all outward appearance of an
unblameable Conversation, and of good Repute in the place where he lived; and
Jesus himself began to love him, when he heard him give so good an account of
himself, and found him desirous to be still further instructed in his duty. But
little did the young Man expect so severe a Command as to sell all his
Possessions, and to take up the Cross and follow Christ. This was sore against
the hair. It was an hard thing, he thought to sell his Possessions to take up a
Cross; an hard thing to part with his Wealth to purchase Affliction, and to
exchange a Garland of Roses for a Crown of Thorns. If Salvation must cost so
much, he was resolved to let it alone, and thought it not worth his while to
part with his present Enjoyments for the Reversion of Heaven: but though he had
made so great a show of Religion, and had kept (as he pretended) all the
Commandments from his Youth, yet Christ's Yoke was too heavy for him; and he
went away sorrowing, for he had great Possessions. This is, no doubt, the case
of many now in the world that pass in the Eyes of Men for good Christians. They
make a very fair show of Religion, insomuch that they cheat even their own
selves, and persuade themselves into a groundless presumption of their own
Salvation, and that the condition of their Souls is very good when it must of
necessity be otherwise, so long as they harbor a Serpent in their bosom which
will be sure to sting them to death, some beloved sin or other of which they
cannot find in their Hearts to repent. Perhaps they come to Church constantly,
and for the most part receive the word with gladness. But nevertheless, their
goodness is but as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goes away. Though
sometimes at the hearing of a searching Sermon, their affections may be
extraordinarily moved for the present; yet the good seed of the word can take
no firm Root in such stony Ground. It is but only a sudden Motion that they
feel in their Hearts, which passes away as quick as it came. It is but a faint
representation, an empty shadow of that unspeakable comfort and joy in the Holy
Ghost which is a continual Feast to the Godly, a Heaven upon Earth to all those
happy Souls, who are sealed unto the day of Redemption. These Men, like
Agrippa, are but almost persuaded to be Christians. Some good thing there is in
the them toward the Lord; but it is so very little, that their faith is less
than a grain of Mustard Seed. They would fain enter into Heaven at the last;
but neither the hopes of Heaven nor fear of Hell can prevail with them, to lay
aside that darling Sin which does so easily beset them. They can be content to
let God have a good share of their Heart; but they cannot be persuaded to give
him the whole. They can endure to hear God's Word preached, and perhaps, for
the most part they delight in it too. They love to hear Sin condemned, and
Godliness commended, so long as they imagine themselves to be unconcerned. But
if the Preacher chance to touch one of these Men to the quick, and says to him
in plain Terms, Thou art the Man; then he is more ready to fly in his Face like
Ahab, and to tell him, that he is a Troubler of Israel, than to confess with
David, that he has sinned against the Lord. Or at the best he goes away
sorrowing like the Rich-man, or trembling like Felix, and desires to hear no
more of those matters till the Archangel's Trump shall summon him to hear of
them, to his Everlasting Confusion. Whilst the Prophet speaks to these Men
smooth things, so long they can hear him with pleasure, and he is to them, as
Ezekiel was to the Jews, as a very lovely Song of one that has a pleasant
Voice, and can play well on an Instrument. But if he sharply rebukes Sin, and
they find their own Consciences touched to the quick, then they are pricked to
the Heart, not with godly Sorrow and Contrition, but with Fury and Indignation.
While he speaks to them in the still small Voice of the Gospel, and preaches
the glad Tidings of Peace and Reconciliation with God by Jesus Christ, they are
pleased at the Heart, and are too ready to lay hold on those Promises which
belong only to the Israel of God. But if he thunder out against them the Curses
of the Law, and denounces the Wrath of God against all impenitent Sinners; then
they sit but at little ease in their Seats, and the Church begins to be too hot
for them. They like it well, so long as the Spiritual Surgeon pours Balm
into their Wounds; but if he takes his Probe and begins to search them, they
are not able to endure it. The Prophet Micaiah had never been condemned to be
fed with Bread of Affliction, and Water of Affliction, had he been one of the
lying Prophets, and prophesied good concerning Ahab. S. John Baptist's Head
might have remained secure on his Shoulders, and never have been served up in a
Charger, to satisfy the longing of a revengeful Woman, had he but permitted
Herod quietly to enjoy his beloved Herodias. Our blessed Savior had never been
Crucified, had he not so frequently and publicly reproved the Hypocrisy of
the Scribes and Pharisees. Thus ye see the Righteousness of these partial
Professors of Piety, and how dangerous a thing it is for Men to take the
liberty to cherish any one Sin. For though at the present it may seem to be but
a little one, it will one Day show it self more at large, appear in its proper
Colors, and like the little Cloud that arose out of the Sea like a Man's hand,
it will suddenly overspread their whole Heaven, and darken their Consciences
with Horror and Astonishment. They may pass for good Christians in fair
Weather; but what will they do in foul? They may venture abroad, and show their
Heads boldly while the Sun shines; but can they outface a Storm? They appear
like Saints in the Halcyon Days of the Church, when she enjoys Peace and
Tranquillity, and flourishes under the Protection of pious and prudent
Governors; but surely they will tremble at the fiery Trial, and make Shipwreck
concerning Faith in the Tempest of Persecution? They may bless God when they
are in Prosperity, while he makes an Hedge about them and their House; but can
they do it as heartily (like Job) when they are in Affliction? A Judas may own
Christ, and cry Hosanna, to the Son of David, when he rides in Triumph toward
Jerusalem; and a Peter may deny him when he is at Calvary. It Is Persecution
that is the surest Touchstone to try a Christian: It Is that which will
discover the true Metal from the counterfeit. For certainly, he that will
readily lay down his Life for Christ's sake, will much more be willing to part
with all his Sins for him, and will not dare to harbor the least Lust which
may provoke his Displeasure. But suppose there arises no such thing as
Persecution to disturb them, but all be calm and quiet, such Persons as these
must needs be very unhappy notwithstanding. For surely, they will find but very
little Satisfaction in any of their Actions, no not in their very Prayers
themselves; For we know that God hears not Sinners; and he is a Sinner (though
not so great a one) that willingly allows himself in the Commission of any one
known Sin, as well as he that sells himself to do evil in the sight of the
Lord, and commits all Iniquity with greediness. Israel must fall before their
Enemies, so long as there is an accursed thing amongst them; and so long as we
allow our selves in the Commission of any one Sin, our very Prayers themselves
will be turned into Sin. And now, if it will profit a Man nothing though he
gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul, what a Madness then are they
guilty of, who being otherwise well affected to all the Duties of Religion,
forfeit Heaven for the Satisfaction of but one predominant Lust? This is like
Esau to sell their Birthright for a Mess of Pottage; like our first Parents,
to lose the whole Garden by the eating of but one forbidden Tree. Methinks,
when they have proceeded thus far, when they are advanced so near to the Gate
of Heaven, they might take one step more, and enter in. When they have
mortified all their Lusts but one, what a shameful thing is it to yield to
that at the last; and how dismal will their Fall be, who shall be cast down to
Hell from so fair a Prospect of Salvation?

But to leave these there are another sort of Men, who though they have
attained to an higher degree of Righteousness than this, yet are not the
Righteous which are here meant in my Text. For there are Some Men of so
unprejudiced and unbiassed Understanding, so quick sighted, that they can
discover such a splendor and beauty in Virtue, and such an abominable
Filthiness and Deformity in Vice, that the former is sweeter to them than their
Life, and death it self less dreadful than the latter. Neither Art, nor Force,
neither Flatteries, nor Threats can divorce them from that sweet content and
joy, which is the natural effect and consequence of a Virtuous Life, or
persuade them to ingulf themselves in that deplorable Misery which torments
those Souls that are enslaved to Vice, but they constantly do their utmost
endeavor, as the Apostle exhorts, to abstain from all appearance of evil. They
see that the laughter of those fools, who combine together to make a mock at
Sin, proceeds only from the teeth outward, and is but like the crackling of
thorns under a pot. They see all that Madness that reigns and rages in the
World, and they find that there is no true Comfort and Satisfaction to be had
in any thing, but Virtue alone; and therefore to that they steadfastly cleave,
with a resolution to part with their lives and fortunes, and whatsoever else is
dearest to them, rather than to violate any of its Laws. But notwithstanding
all this, though I must needs confess that such persons as these are burning
and shining Lights in the World, yet if they have not one qualification more to
make them perfect, they are not the Righteous here meant in my Text. For such
persons, as Historians tell us, were Socrates, and Cato, and many more of the
ancient Heathens who never heard of the blessed Jesus, the only Name under
Heaven given among Men whereby we must be saved.

Thus far I have given you only a negative description of the Righteous Man,
and showed you what Manner of Persons, that make a fair show in the World, have
nevertheless no just right to that Title. And now to declare to you positively
who he is, and to show you the difference of the Righteous Man here meant in my
Text, from the three former sorts of Men which I have been describing, I must
tell you, that he has nothing at all in him of the first sort (for it is
impossible that ye should imagine him to be a notorious Hypocrite) and he has
all in him that is good in either of the two latter, and to all this he adds
the last, and best qualification, which is Faith in Christ. It is Faith alone
by which he lives; it is Faith alone which renders him truly Righteous, and
justifies him in the sight of God. And here I mean not a false and dead Faith,
which indeed is no Faith at all; but a true and lively one that brings forth
Fruits meet for Repentance, such a Faith as will be sure to show it self in him
by the Holiness of his Life and conversation, and his works praise him in the
gates. All those excellent Virtues which have commended the Names of Cato and
Socrates, and other renowned Heathens to posterity, are in him; but in a more
eminent Manner Sublimated and refined by Grace, and made acceptable to God by
Faith, without which it is impossible to please him. Cato might love his
friends; but he loves his Enemies. Cato might do good to them that did good to
him, but he does good to them that hate him, blesses them that curse him, and
Prays for them which despitefully use him and persecute him. Cato's heroic
Spirit might (one would have thought) patiently have endured Tribulation; but
his unhappy End plainly shows that he fainted under it: but Job does not only
patiently bear all that heavy chain of afflictions with which he was tried, but
he blesses God in the midst of them all as heartily as ever he did in the
height of his prosperity: as well in his Sickness as in his health; as well
when God takes away from him all that he had as when he caused his candle to
shine upon his head, and made him the greatest of all the Men of the East. Cato
might prefer Death before Vice, and choose rather to endure the most exquisite
torments, than to commit a wicked action; but the Righteous Man does not only
willingly lay down his Life for the truth whenever he is called to it, but he
rejoices that he is counted worthy to suffer shame for the Name of Jesus. In a
word that love of Virtue which was in Cato and Socrates, and the rest of those
excellent Worthies which we read of amongst the Heathen, though it has
procured them a Name which is far better than precious ointment, and will shine
in History as long as the World shall last, to the shame of all Christians that
come short of their perfections, yet it is probable that it proceeded chiefly
from self-interest; either from some hopes and expectation they had of a reward
in another Life, or else from that Peace and Tranquillity of mind which they
found that it procured them in this: but the Righteous Man aims chiefly at the
Honor of God. All his actions, as near as he can, he designs primarily and
principally to advance the Glory of his Creator and his own Salvation
possesses but the second place in his thoughts. As S. Paul exhorts, Whether he
eats or drinks, or whatsoever he does in word or deed, he does all in the Name
of the Lord Jesus, and to the Glory of God. And after he has passed the time
of his Sojourning here in fear; when he has fought the good fight, finished
his course, kept the Faith, overcome all his Spiritual Enemies, resisted the
temptations of Satan, subdued and mortified his own Lusts and Corruptions,
despised the Derision of those Fools that sit in the seat of the scornful;
trampled upon all the vain pomps and flattering Glories of this present World,
and after all this perhaps at the last is called to suffer an ignominious and
painful Death for the testimony of a good conscience and to endure the
cruellest torments that the wit and malice of wicked Men can inflict upon him;
then he takes up his Cross with joy, goes like a Lamb to the Slaughter,
acknowledging that he has done nothing, that he is but an unprofitable
Servant, that he is less than the least of all God's Mercies, and that his Life
is a Sacrifice unworthy of his acceptance; and therefore he desires to appear
before God's Tribunal not having his own Righteousness which is of the Law, but
that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by
Faith. This is such a Righteous Man as is here meant in my Text, This is that
Blessed Man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose Spirit there
is no guile. And this is that Man who (as it is plain from my Text) shall
Scarcely be saved. How that comes to pass I shall hereafter endeavor to show
you. For though he shall be Scarcely saved, yet saved he shall be infallibly;
for to him that is faithful unto Death Christ will give a Crown of Life.

SERMON XI.
1 PET. IV. 18. And if the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the Ungodly
and the Sinner appear?


IN the handling of these words I have already showed you, who the Righteous
Man is, and how he is distinguished from the rest of the World. He is a Man of
a Temper and Conversation exceedingly different from the generality of Mankind,
and lives amongst them like a Stranger, and a Sojourner in a foreign Country,
where he has few or no Acquaintance; like a single Stalk of good Corn in a
large Field of Tares. Few Men mind him, few regard him, few keep him company,
few delight in his Conversation, and fewer imitate it: He is a Proverb, and a
Byword among the Ungodly, who account his Life madness, and his End to be
without Honor. For Christ's sake he bears Reproach: They that sit in the Gate
speak against him; and he is the Song of the Drunkards. The World and he are
irreconcilable Enemies, as contrary one to the other, as Light and Darkness, as
Heaven and Hell, as Christ and Belial, while the Wicked and Ungodly rejoice, he
mourns; while they laugh, he weeps; while they triumph in the very Gall of
Bitterness, and Bonds of Iniquity, he is a Prisoner of Jesus Christ; while they
are in great Power, and spread themselves like a green Bay tree, lie upon Beds
of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their Couches, and eat the Lambs out of
the Flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the Stall, live in Idleness, and
Luxury, and Pleasure, nourishing their Hearts as in a day of slaughter, and
pampering up those Lusts, which of themselves are too apt to rebel, he keeps
under his Body and brings it into subjection, crucifies the old Man, that the
Body of Sin may be destroyed, subdues and mortifies his Corruptions by Prayer
and Fasting, and walks mournfully before the Lord of Hosts. He meets with
scarce any thing in this sinful World, which can delight his Soul; but almost
every Spectacle that he beholds is to him an occasion of sorrow. He grieves for
his own Sins, and he grieves for those of other Men, whom he sees with so much
Eagerness and Jollity posting toward the Gates of Death: He grieves for the
Afflictions of Joseph, and laments to see the Church of God in Adversity.
Nothing contents him, nothing pleases him in this Valley of Tears, but that he
is pleased at nothing here below; but his Affections are set on those things
which are above, and the earnest Desire of his Heart is to depart, and to be
with Christ: Which happy End he shall at the last most certainly attain to,
though it shall not be without great Pains and Difficulty, and as my Text
expresses it, scarcely. And so I proceed to make good my second Undertaking,
which was

To show you why St. Peter here supposes the Righteous to be scarcely saved.
Which word implies not an Impossibility that they should be saved (for
certainly then of all Men they would be most miserable) nor a Possibility that
any one of them should not be saved: For every one of them is as sure to obtain
Salvation, as he is sure to obtain it scarcely. Those that thou gave me,
says our Savior, I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the Son of
Perdition, who never was one of the Number of the Righteous. But this word
scarcely denotes only the many and great Difficulties, and Troubles, and
Dangers, through which the Righteous are to pass in their way to Heaven. They
must be tempted, afflicted, scorned, derided, persecuted; They must labor,
they must sweat, they must die, that they may be saved, and pass by the very
Gates of Hell in their way to Paradise. There are large Mansions, and a
Glorious, and Everlasting Kingdom prepared for them; but they have many potent
and malicious Enemies, all which they must overcome before they can take
possession of it. There is a Crown of Glory laid up for them; but they must run
for it if they will obtain it. They must wage War with Devils, and wrestle
against Principalities and Powers, before they can be accounted worthy to be
Companions for Angels. And now if David that reposed so great a Confidence in
his God, and was sufficiently assured, that he was ordained to be King over
Israel, did nevertheless begin to despond, and was sore afraid that he should
one Day perish by the Hand of Saul, much more may the Righteous fear and
tremble, who have far greater and mightier Enemies than Saul, to oppose them,
able to dismay the stoutest Soldier in the Camp of Christ, had he not a Shield
of Faith to defend him from their Weapons, and an Eye of Faith to discover,
that those that are for him are more than those that are against him. When a
mighty Host of the Syrians besieged Elisha, God placed Horses and Chariots of
Fire round about him for his Defense. So though the Righteous Man has Devils
for his Enemies, yet he has Angels for his Guardians, and Jesus Christ the
Captain of his Salvation. He may march on then with Confidence and Assurance of
the Victory; but he must fight, if he will obtain it. Heaven is his
Inheritance, the Kingdom prepared for him from the Foundation of the World; but
he is a Stranger and a Pilgrim here in a far Country, and his Journey to it is
long and troublesome: He has a narrow and rugged way to walk in, tedious and
irksome to Flesh and Blood, and the Gate that must admit him into those
Mansions of Glory, is exceeding strait, and he must strive hard, if he will
enter in at it. Thus ye see in general, that the Righteous shall scarcely be
saved; that is, it shall cost him much Labor, and Sweat, and Pains, to work
out his Salvation; and through much Tribulation, through many and great
Troubles and Afflictions, through many amazing Difficulties and affrighting
Dangers, he shall at the last enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and receive a
Crown of Glory. And this will appear more plainly, if we consider distinctly
these several Difficulties which he has to encounter in his way to Heaven.

And these are, First, his own natural Corruptions. The best and holiest of Men
(our Blessed Savior only excepted) who was sanctified from the Womb) are all
conceived and born in Sin. By one Man, says St. Paul, Sin entered into the
World, and Death by Sin, and so Death passed upon all Men, for that all have
sinned, Romans 5.12. And this Original Sin (as it is generally styled by Divines)
which the Righteous themselves (even the best of God's Saints, as well as other
Men) bring into the World with them, deriving it from Adam by a wonderful, but
certain, Propagation, is of a spreading and infectious Nature, as dangerous and
deadly to the Soul (if it be not carefully subdued and mortified) as Leprosy
to the Body. It is ever active and stirring, laboring and struggling
continually to get the Mastery over the Soul, that so it may break out into
open and actual Transgressions: And too often it does so even in good Men, and
prevails sometimes over the most pious and devoutest Christians. This was that
which moved David to commit Adultery and Murder. This was that which shook the
Constancy of Peter, and made him so timorously and basely to deny his Master.
And this is that which causes so many Weaknesses, and Failings in all the
Saints of God; so that there is not a just Man upon Earth that does good, and
sins not; but in every Man there is a Law in his Members, warring against the
Law of his Mind, and bringing him into Captivity to the Law of Sin which is in
his Members, Romans 7.23. In every Man, as the same Apostle speaks, Gal. 5.17.
The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh: and these
two are contrary the one to the other; so that, by means of this intestine War
within him, it comes to pass often times, that he cannot do the things that he
would. Even the Heathen Philosophers did observe and complain of (though they
knew not the Cause of) this strange Depravation of humane Nature. Plato tells
us, that Men are by Nature wicked, and cannot be persuaded to do that which is
right; and that the two great and principal Diseases of the Soul are Ignorance
and Vice. And to the same Effect Tully observes, that Nature is to Man a
Stepmother, that brings him into the World with a naked Body, feeble and
helpless, and with a Soul throughout the whole Course of his Life, sorrowful
and distracted with Multiplicity of Cares and Troubles, tormented with Fears,
tired with Labor, and prone to Lust, wherein the Divine Light, Wit, and good
Manners are as it were overwhelmed and stifled. This sad Condition which all
Mankind is in by Nature, I say, the wiser Sort even amongst the Heathen, amidst
the gross Darkness of Paganism and Idolatry had some little Knowledge of,
though they were utterly ignorant of the true Cause and Reason of it. And
therefore they made it their chief Care and Business, by their Learning and
Philosophy, according to the best of their Power to correct and amend it. But
unto us Christians God has unlocked this Secret, and has fully discovered
this great and hidden Mystery, which all the Learning of the profoundest
Heathen Philosophers was not able to search out. In the lively Oracles of the
Holy Scriptures he has fully explained unto us both the Cause, and Danger, and
Remedy of this Corruption of our Nature. In that Sacred Book we have it
represented to us under diverse Names and Characters, all of them foul and
abominable like it self. This is that which ( Romans 7.17.) St. Paul calls the
Sin that dwells in us: Because since the Fall of our First Parents it is become
natural and hereditary to us, and never leaves us nor forsakes us in this
World, but abides continually in our Flesh, even unto Death; whence in the same
Chapter it is called, the Evil that is present with us, and Hebr. 12.1. the Sin
which does so easily beset us; because it cleaves to us so closely, and
inseparably, and with so much Force and Violence, presses and besieges all the
Strength and Powers of our Soul. The word in the Original is very Elegant and
Emphatical, and but once used in all the New Testament, (...), the Sin which
does so easily beset us; that Sin which does as it were hug and embrace us, and
is continually insinuating and winding it self like a Serpent into our Hearts,
with a Design to deceive and beguile us. This is that which ( ver. 15. of the
same Chapter) is called a Root of Bitterness springing up to trouble us;
because it is ever plentiful in producing evil Branches, and corrupt and deadly
Fruit. This is that which by St. James is called, the Lusts that war in our
Members, James 4.1 and by St. Peter, the fleshly Lusts which war against the
Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. St. Paul calls it the old Man, and the Body of Sin, Romans 6
6. And what the Members of that Body are, he tells us, Coloss. 3.5.
Fornication, Uncleanness, inordinate Affection, evil Concupiscence, and
Covetousness, which is Idolatry? Thus ye see the first Difficulty that the
Righteous Man has to encounter within his way to Heaven, which renders that
way so troublesome to him, that notwithstanding all his Courage and Resolution,
he cannot walk in it without great Pains and Labor. He carries a most
unwelcome and heavy Clog about him, from which he cannot possibly disengage
himself, which continually pulls him back, and hinders and retards his Soul in
its Flight toward those glorious Mansions of Joy and Happiness, toward which
it does so eagerly press forward. And had he no other Enemies but this one to
vanquish, even this alone might be sufficient to satisfy us, that he shall
scarcely be saved; since it is most certain that he never shall be saved at
all, except he do overcome this first Enemy of his Salvation, which of all
others is the most formidable. One deceitful Dalilab was worse to Samson, than
all the Philistines: and this one innate, intestine Foe of ours, which lies
continually in our Bosom, is more dangerous to us than either the World or the
Devil, both which join their Forces together, with this, to bring us to
Destruction: And could we (as we have all solemnly promised, and engaged to do
in our Baptismal Vow,) renounce all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, we might
easily renounce also the Devil, and all his Works, and the Pomps and Vanities
of this wicked World.

But still to render the Righteous Man's Task harder, and his way to Heaven
more rugged and difficult, he has besides this Enemy within him (his own
original Corruptions) two Enemies more without to engage with, the World, and
the Devil. First, The World, which with all its Pomps and Vanities, its gilded
Baits, and deceitful Enticements allures and invites him to set his Heart and
Affections wholly upon these worthless Toys and Trifles here below. With all
the specious Promises of Pleasure, Riches, Honor, and what not? It seeks to
alienate and estrange his Thoughts from God, from his native Country, from the
Heavenly Canaan, that Jerusalem, which is above, the Mother of us all; and to
persuade him to set up his staff here in this Vale of Tears, where he is but a
stranger and a Pilgrim; and, like the Children of Reuben and Gad, to content
himself with an inheritance on this side Jordan; for the Transitory and
perishing enjoyments of this present Life, to exclude himself out of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and to lose the eternal Glory and Happyness of the Saints in
light. This World is a Shop, an inexhaustible Magazine of Temptations suitable
and correspondent to the Constitution and desires of all the Sons and Daughters
of Adam. Here then the Righteous Man, the constant and faithful Soldier and
Champion of Jesus Christ, is again, fiercely assaulted in his way to Heaven by
this second Adversary the World Here he meets with every thing that can
gratify the most carnal and sensual Appetite. Which way soever he stands most
inclined (and some way or other that natural Corruption, wherein all Men are
conceived and born, will be apt more or less, to sway him) he shall be sure to
have a Bait fitted to his Humor. Whatsoever it be that is most likely to
seduce, and entice him into the Snares of Sin, the World is amply stored with
all things, and is ever ready to furnish him: so that it highly concerns him to
stand continually upon his guard praying always that God would turn away his
Eyes from beholding Vanity, and quicken him in his way; that he may so pass
through things Temporal, that he finally lose not the things Eternal.

But further yet; besides these two Enemies of his Salvation, his own flesh,
and the World he has still another that is indefatigable in plotting, and
contriving his Destruction; and that is the Devil, whose business it is
continually like a roaring Lion to walk to and fro in the earth seeking whom he
may devour. This is the great and chief Enemy of Mankind, to whose accursed
designs the other two are fatally helpful, and subservient. It was he that
beguiled our first Parents in the state of Innocence, and by that Means plunged
both them, and all their posterity into a state of Sin, and Corruption. And now
he makes use of that advantage he has gained over us: he joins against us,
together with our lusts; and when they seek to draw us away to any thing that
is evil, he is ever ready to back and strengthen their Temptations with his own
secret whispers, and suggestions. When the World offers any thing to us that is
pleasant and inviting, he is ready to set a fresh gloss upon it, that may
render its Charms more prevalent. He leaves no Stone unturned, no project, nor
Design unattempted, by which he may bring us into the Bondage and Slavery of
Sin. His Power is great, his Industry unwearied and his Malice implacable
against all the Sons of Men: and by how much the more vigilant and careful, the
Person against whom he bends his Force, is to stand upon his Guard, and to
defend himself against his Assaults and Stratagems, so much the fiercer are his
On-fets so much the more violent and outrageous is his Fury. So that above all
others the Righteous Man, that constantly withstands and resists his Wiles has
the hardest Task to perform. Other Persons that easily yield to his
Temptations, he may safely leave to themselves. He knows that they have an
Enemy within them, that will be sure to be their Ruin; that their own Lusts
will be sufficient to prevail against them; and that they themselves, without
his help, will work out their own Damnation. But where he meets with
Opposition, there he doubles his Diligence, and uses all the Means that Power,
or Policy, or Malice can suggest to him in order to the effecting of his
Designs. No sooner has the Man of God overcome one Temptation, but he
presently sets upon him with another: No sooner has the Shield of Faith
quenched one of his fiery Darts, but it is again assaulted with a second. We
read, that he dealt thus with our Blessed Savior himself. Three several
Attempts he made upon him and would not leave him, until he found that he was
indeed the Son of God, and that it was utterly in vain for him to hope to
prevail against him by any of his Temptations. And surely, if he had so much
impudence as not to leave Christ our Head before the third Assault, he will
much more hardly suffer a repulse from any of his Members. Thus ye see how
great opposition the Righteous Man is sure to meet with, and with what cruel
and dangerous Enemies he is daily to fight, during the time of his Sojourning
here upon Earth. And by this Means it comes to pass that he is scarcely saved;
so scarcely, that if the incessant importunities of his own corruptions, the
sweet and alluring Baits and Temptations of the World; and all the restless
Malice, and Power, and Policy of Hell could prevail against him, he should
certainly be damned. All these Adversaries must be subdued by him, before he
can be esteemed worthy through the merits of Christ, to receive a crown of
Life. Yea, and besides all this, I might proceed further and show you that as
to outward Appearance, and in the Opinion of Men, even God himself, sometimes
seems to be his Enemy here in this World; forasmuch as he often lays upon him
heavy and great Afflictions for the Trial of his Patience and Faith. His
Portion in this Life is, Sorrow, Persecution, taking up the Cross and suffering
for Righteousness sake. All these things are entailed upon every true Disciple
of Christ, and he must expect to have his share, more or less, of every one of
them While the wicked are in great Power, and spread themselves like a green
Bay Tree, while they enjoy the world at will, and live in Ease and Plenty and
Prosperity, the Righteous are killed all the day long, and accounted as sheep
for the Slaughter. This was our blessed Savior's own Condition here upon
Earth. All his whole Life was but one continued scene of sufferings; and even
from his Mother's Womb to his Death he was all along a Man of Sorrows, and
acquainted with grief. When he first came into the World, he came in a very
Mean, and despicable Condition, so poorly provided for, that he had not so much
as a House wherein he might lay his Head, nor a cradle wherein he might rest;
but was forced to be content with a Stable for the one, and a Manger for the
other. And all the rest of his Life was answerable to this Mean beginning. He
was continually affronted, and abused, and persecuted by the Chief Priests, and
Scribes, and Pharisees, and by almost all Men, with whom he conversed: and
after all this he was most perfidiously betrayed by one of his own Disciples,
denied by another of them, and forsaken by all the rest and at the last most
barbarously murdered by bloody and sinful Men. And if God dealt thus hardly
with his only begotten Son in whom he was ever well-pleased, it would be
unreasonable for his Disciples and Followers to expect to fare so much better
than their Lord, as to be wholly exempted from Afflictions in this Life. If the
Captain of our Salvation was not made perfect but through sufferings; surely,
then we shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, except we drink more or
less of the same Cup. This our blessed Lord has assured us shall be the
Portion of all that will follow him, Luke 14.26, 27. If any Man come to me and
hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and
Sisters, yea and his own Life also, he cannot be my Disciple. And whosoever
does not bear his Cross and come after me, cannot be my Disciple. And In the
World ye shall have Tribulation, John 16.33. And this the holy Apostles
afterward found true by their own Experience. They were all hated, and
maligned, and persecuted whithersoever they went, and not one of them died a
natural Death, but S. John the Disciple whom our Savior seemed to love above
the rest, and perhaps was therefore pleased to exempt him from suffering a
violent Death, as the other did. And thus it fared afterward with their
Successors the Bishops and Pastors of the primitive Church: yea and not only
with them, but with the greatest part of their Flock too. Every one that was
known to profess the Faith of Christ was persecuted as a Traitor; and to be a
Christian was to be a capital Offender. And though at present by the blessing
of God, the Light of the Gospel shines amongst us gloriously; yet even amongst
Christians themselves those few rare Examples of Piety, those Persons that are
extraordinarily strict, and careful, to live answerable to their Profession, in
all Holy Conversation and Godliness, are generally hated, and scorned, and
looked upon with an evil Eye, and suffer more Sorrow and Affliction in the
World than other Men. And now I have given you an Account of all those
dangerous Enemies, and those manifold and great Difficulties and Troubles,
which the Righteous Man has to overcome in his way to Heaven. And from what I
have said, it is sufficiently evident, that he shall scarcely be saved: that
is, it shall cost him great pains, and striving to work out his Salvation, and
through much Tribulation he shall enter into the Kingdom of God.

And if the Righteous be thus scarcely saved; I need not insist much upon the
other Proposition, nor spend many words to show you that the wicked the ungodly
and the sinner shall most certainly be damned. For this follows from the former
Doctrine by an undeniable consequence: and therefore the Apostle takes it for
granted, appeals to your own Judgment, and leaves it to your selves to
determine the question in the words of my Text; If the Righteous scarcely be
saved, where shall the Ungodly and the Sinner appear? If the Righteous that
has undergone so many Troubles, has taken so much pains to subdue and
mortify his Lusts, has with so much Constancy and Resolution turned away his
Eyes and his Heart from the bewitching Baits and ensnaring Pomps and Vanities
of this sinful World, has with so much Courage and Faith resisted the
Temptations of Satan, and quenched all the fiery Darts of the Wicked, has with
so much Patience and Meekness born his Cross, and endured the Afflictions and
sufferings of this present Life, is after all these painful and glorious
Performances, even when he has gained a full and complete Victory over all his
Spiritual Enemies, and is a Triumphant Conqueror over Principalities and
Powers, still but an unprofitable Servant, and dares not appear before God's
Tribunal, trusting in his own Righteousness, but in that which is through the
Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith, how then shall the
Ungodly and the Sinner, that has taken no pains at all, to fight the good
Fight of Faith, that has let loose the Reins to his Lusts, that has yielded
himself a Slave to his Passions, that has put God out of all his Thoughts,
has set-his Heart and Affections wholly upon the things which are on Earth,
and glutted himself with sensual Pleasures, has harkned to the wicked
suggestions of the Devil, has walked according to the Course of this World,
according to the Prince of the Power of the Air, the Spirit that works in the
Children of Disobedience, has enjoyed his good things in this Life, and has
not come into trouble like other Men, be able to stand before the Righteous
Judge of all the Earth, when he shall be summoned to give an account of all his
Actions done in the flesh. The case is plain: he shall not be able to stand at
all; but shall be overwhelmed with everlasting Confusion, and Misery and
Despair. The Ungodly, says the Psalmist, shall not stand in the Judgment, nor
Sinners in the Congregation of the Righteous: For the Lord knows the way of
the Righteous, but the way of the Ungodly shall perish, Psalm. 1.5, 6.

If then we desire to stand in that great Day, and to lift up our Heads with
joy at the coming of our Savior, let us resolve and labor with all our Might,
now to stand and fight the Lords Battles Manfully against all the Enemies of
our Souls. Ye see in what Circumstances we are, how great Opposition every
faithful Champion of Jesus Christ is like to meet with in this troublesome
Wilderness, before he can arrive at his heavenly Canaan. But though the
difficulties which threaten us be great, yet they are not insuperable; but we
may by the Assistance of God's holy Spirit (who is ready to help our
Infirmities) overcome them if we will. Let not any thing then discourage nor
affright us from our perseverance in well-doing: but let us animate our selves
by the Example of the blessed Apostles and Martyrs and Confessors to run with
patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the Author and
finisher of our Faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the Right Hand of the Throne of
God. Let us consider him that endured such Contradiction of Sinners against
himself; least we be wearied and faint in our Minds. So God will certainly give
a blessing to our endeavors: his Grace will be ever ready to prevent, assist,
and further us in all our Actions here; and his Bounty will not fail to crown
us with Glory, and Honor, and Immortality hereafter.

SERMON XII.
1 COR. X. 12. Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he
fall.


OF all those manifold and subtle Stratagems, with which the great Enemy of
our Salvation seeks to beguile us of our Everlasting Inheritance, there is none
more dangerous, than that by which he end eavours to persuade us, that we have
already attained to such a Measure of Perfection that we are fully ripe for
Heaven, and that our Faith is so strong, that it is able to quench all the
fiery darts of the wicked, to baffle the strongest Temptation with which it can
be assaulted, and to stand invincible, even unto the End, against all the Force
and Policy of the Powers of Darkness. This Temptation had prevailed so far
among the Corinthians, that many of them were so puffed up with the conceit
they had of that great proficiency, they had made in the School of Christ, and
of that knowledge they had gained in the Mysteries of the Gospel, under so
excellent a Tutour as S. Paul, that they thought that now they had done their
work, and that they were past all danger of falling away from Christ. And
particularly upon the Notion they had entertained of Christian Liberty, they
ventured upon some Actions, which though they might perhaps in some Cases be in
themselves lawful; yet upon the Account that they gave offense to weaker
brethren, they could not be practiced by them without breach of Charity, and
were therefore by this Circumstance rendered sinful and hurtful to their own
Souls. One of which practices was their eating of things offered to Idols:
which though the Apostle seems to grant to be a thing indifferent to them that
have knowledge to discern, that an Idol is nothing in the World, and that meat
commends us not to God: but that if we eat we are not the better; neither if
we eat not are we the worse: yet he advises them to take heed least by any
means this liberty of theirs become a Stumbling block to them that are weak,
least through their knowledge the weak brother perish for whom Christ died.
Therefore from this abuse of their Christian Liberty and from that too
confident Opinion of that knowledge and Faith which God had bestowed upon them,
he labors to reclaim them in several Chapters of this Epistle. And this he
does first by propounding to them his own Example, showing them, that as to the
point of Christian Liberty he was so tender of the Salvation of all Men, that
he very frequently abridged himself of that Liberty which otherwise he might
have used, and that he became all things to all Men, that he might by all means
save some; and that he would eat no flesh while the World stands, rather than
by so doing to make his brother to offend. And as for being puffed up with the
consideration of the manifold Graces which God had bestowed upon him he
declares that he was so far from it that instead of that he still called to
mind the length of that race which he had to run before he could obtain the
Prize; least he should faint and come short of it; and the strength of those
Enemies which he had to overcome; least by his carelessness and security he
should give them an occasion to get an advantage over him. I therefore so run,
says he, not as uncertainly; so fight I, not as one that beats the Air: but
I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection: least that by any Means,
when I have preached to others, I my self should be a Castaway, Chap. 9.26,
27. And lest his own Example should not be sufficient to dissuade them from
this Spiritual Pride, he propounds to them in the second Place the Example of
the Children of Israel, in the beginning of this tenth Chapter unto my Text.
God had bestowed most extraordinary Graces and Favors upon that People, and
yet upon their abuse of them he was so highly displeased at them, that he
destroyed them all in the Wilderness, but two; and not one of those Persons
that came out of Egypt entered into the Land of Promise, but only Caleb and
Joshua. Now these things, says he, were our Examples, to the intent we should
not lust after evil things, as they also lusted. They who had received great
Grace under the Law, by their abuse of it came short of their earthly Canaan,
and we who have received far greater Grace under the Gospel, may by our abuse
of it come short likewise of our heavenly one. Wherefore let him that thinks,
etc.

In the handling of which words I shall do these three Things. 1. I shall show
you, that they who think they stand, nay, that do stand, (i. e.) are for the
present true Believers, may nevertheless depart from the Faith, and fall from
Grace. 2. That it is every Man's Duty to take heed lest he do so fall. 3. I
shall give you some necessary Rules and Directions to be observed by all that
will take heed that they do not so fall.

First, I say that true Believers may depart from the Faith, and fall from
Grace. And here by true Believers, I mean not the Elect: For although even they
also may fall for a time; yet it is certain that they shall rise again (for as
much as God's Election ever supposes and includes final Perseverance) whereas
the other, though they be for the present regenerate and true Believers,
(though not Elect) may fall from Grace, not only totally, but finally, so as
never to rise again by Repentance. And this, as it is the express Doctrine of
our Church, which declares in her sixteenth Article, That after we have
received the Holy Ghost, we may depart from Grace given, and fall into Sin, so
it is most agreeable also to the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, as will
appear by these following Instances. 1. It is plain from our Savior's Parable,
Matthew. 18. of the Servant unto whom his Lord upon his humble Supplication,
freely forgave that vast Debt of ten thousand Talents, which he was in no wise
able to pay, by which is meant God's pardoning and justifying of a Sinner upon
his true Repentance: As therefore, that Servant forfeited his Lord's Favor
again by his Cruelty to his Fellow Servants, so likewise may he that is at the
present regenerate and reconciled unto God, fall again into a State of
Damnation. 2. There is nothing more plain than this from those Passages, Ezekiel.
18.24. and 33.12. When the Righteous turns away from his Righteousness, and
commits Iniquity, and does according to all the Abominations, that the
wicked Man does, shall he live? All his Righteousness that he has done shall
not be mentioned: in his Trespass that he has trespassed, and in his Sin that
he has sinned, in them shall he die. Again, The Righteousness of the Righteous
shall not deliver him in the Day of his Transgression; as for the Wickedness of
the Wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the Day that he turns from his
Wickedness; neither shall the Righteous be able to live for his Righteousness
in the Day that he sins. Without all Controversy by the Righteous in these
Places is meant, one who is truly and indeed righteous and just in the sight of
God; as appears by the Description which he gives of him from the 5th Verse of
this 18th Chapter of Ezekiel unto the 10th, where he expressly declares him to
be one that has walked in his Statutes, and has kept his Judgments to deal
truly. For if we should understand it otherwise, viz. of one that was only
outwardly and hypocritically Righteous, these Texts would be downright
Nonsense, and must mean this (which is indeed nothing) When the Righteous (i.
e. the Hypocrite) turns away from his Righteousness, (i. e. his Hypocrifie)
he shall die. Certainly God would never threaten to punish any Soul with Death
for turning away from Hypocrifie; neither would he oppose Hypocrifie to
Iniquity, as a thing contrary to it, when he has so frequently declared in his
word, that Hypocrifie it self is most gross Iniquity, such as his Soul abhors.
Since therefore we cannot suppose God here to speak of Counterfeit and
Hypocritical Righteousness, it must needs follow from these Texts of Scripture,
That he who was once truly Righteous may turn from such Righteousness, and
commit Iniquity, may fall from Grace into a State of Damnation, and that he may
continue in such a State, and die in his Sins. Again, Thirdly, This is evident
from our Savior's Parable, John 15.1, 2. I am the true Vine, and my Father is
the Husbandman. Every branch in me that bears not fruit he takes away. Now
no Man can ever be a Branch of this Heavenly Vine (which is Jesus Christ) but
by a true Faith: And yet our Savior declares here, that such a Branch as this,
that was once in him, may cease to bear Fruit, and thereupon be taken away;
such a Man may depart from the Faith, and fall from Christ. Fourthly, This is
clear from that Passage, 2 Pet. 2.20. If after they have escaped the Pollutions
of the World, through the Knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they
are again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter End is worse with them
than the beginning. For it had been better for them not to have known the way
of Righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the Holy
Commandment delivered unto them; unto which Place, that of Hebrews 6.4, 5, 6.
is parallel. From both which Places it appears, that they who were once
enlightened, and had tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and were made partakers of
the Holy Ghost, and had tasted the good Word of God, and the Powers of the
World to come; that they who have escaped the Pollutions of the World, through
the Knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, (i. e.) by a true Faith in him (for
none but such can enable any Man to escape those Pollutions) may
notwithstanding all this fall away, ay, and fall so too, that it shall be
impossible to renew them again unto Repentance. I might produce many more Texts
of Scripture for the Confirmation of this Doctrine: But I shall content my self
with those, which I have already cited; and for the further Proof of it, I
shall insist upon some few Examples of holy and just Men in Scripture who have
fallen from Grace; which certainly were recorded on purpose to teach us this
excellent Lesson here in my Text, that he that thinks he stands may take heed
lest he fall. And here I shall omit the Case of the fallen Angels who were once
Holy, but kept not their first Estate, and the Case of our First Parents, who
though they were created by God in his own Image, in Righteousness and
Holiness, yet quickly fell from that happy Condition into a State of Sin and
Misery. But the Examples I shall insist upon shall be these. 1. Saul, who
certainly at the first was a pious and good King, though afterward he became
quite otherwise, and was finally rejected of God for his Disobedience. The
Adversaries to th^^ Doctrine object, that Saul never was really good nor endued
with true Grace. But for all that, the Story tells us plainly, that the Spirit
of the Lord came upon Saul, and rested upon him while he behaved himself well;
and that afterward he departed from him, and an evil Spirit from the Lord
troubled him. And certainly unto whomsoever the blessed Spirit of God
vouchsafes to come, Grace, and true Grace too, must needs come along with him,
who is the Fountain and Author of it, and if ever he departs (though but for a
season,) Grace can never stay behind him. They therefore, that deny, that Saul
had once true Grace, may with as good reason deny, that the Man in the Parable,
Matthew. 25. that received but one Talent, ever had a true Talent: and then he
had very hard measure to be condemned for not putting it to the Exchangers,
when he had received nothing but false Coin. But if this Example be not
satisfactory, perhaps the next may, and that shall be that of David, who the
Scripture tells us, was a Man after God's own Heart; and there is no Man but
will readily acknowledge that God had bestowed upon him an extraordinary
Measure of Grace. And yet by those two grievous Sins of Adultery, and Murder,
he fell from this Grace, and continued in a state of Sin, and damnation, for
the space of many Months together and never thought of Repentance, until he was
restored again by the Ministry of the Prophet Nathan. St. Paul tells us
expressly, that Adulterers shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1. Cor. 6.9.
And S. John says, that no Murderer has Eternal Life abiding in him, 1 John
3.15. It is manifest therefore that by these Sins, David did fall from Grace,
and had he died without Repentance must have perished Eternally. I might
instance further in Solomon, who was once beloved of the Lord, and yet in his
old Age became an Idolater; in S. Peter who denied his Savior; in Demas, who
was once one of the fellow laborers with S. Paul, and perhaps one of those he
means, Phil. 4.3. whose Names were in the Book of Life; yet he forsook S. Paul,
having loved this present World, 2 Timothy 4.10: but by what I have said already,
it is sufficiently evident, from Scripture, that true believers may depart from
the Faith, and fall from Grace. I shall instance only in one thing more, to
show that this is agreeable to the Doctrine of our Church. In the Rubric after
the Order of public Baptism of Infants, the Church tells us, that it is
certain by God's Word, that Children which are baptized, dying before they
commit actual Sin, are undoubtedly saved. Now it is as certain, by God's Word,
that no Man can be saved but by Grace: and then it follows on the one hand,
that all Infants in their baptism do receive Grace; or else by virtue of their
baptism, without it, they cannot be saved: and it follows likewise on the other
hand, that they that have received grace may fall from it, or else no Children,
that have been baptized, can be damned; which no Man living will admit of. It
is manifest therefore that they that have Grace may fall away from it. And if
so, then certainly it is every Man's Duty to take heed lest he do so fall.

And this is the second thing I propounded to speak of. Let him that thinks he
stands take heed lest he fall. To fall, let it be in what manner it will,
always implies danger and mischief: but to fall from Grace is the most
dangerous and dreadful fall imaginable. It is a fall from Christ, a fall from
God, a fall from Salvation, a fall, like that of Lucifer, from the highest
Heavens into the bottomless Pit, a fall from the Glory, and Light, and
Happiness of the bright Sons of the Morning into the Eternal Confusion, and
Horror and Misery of the Children of Perdition. Of all the rich Jewels which
God has to bestow upon us, there is none so precious as that of Grace: For
upon whomsoever he bestows this, upon him he designs to bestow Heaven it self,
Grace being the only sure and certain Guide to conduct us to those blessed
Mansions of Everlasting Glory. Without this we are able of our selves to do
nothing at all that is good; we cannot walk one step in the way of Life; we
cannot do a good Action, nor think a good Thought, except the Holy Spirit of
God enable us, Who works in us both to will, and to do of his good Pleasure.
The Enemies of our Salvation are both numerous and powerful, and the very
weakest of them will be sure to be too strong for us, if we be not assisted
from on high: For we wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, but against
Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness of this
World, against Spiritual Wickedness in high Places, against such Adversaries as
(if they were not restrained by the Omnipotent Power of God) would quickly
destroy the whole Race of Man, and cause Confusion and Desolation throughout
all the Earth. How does it behove us therefore, that we may be able to overcome
them, to take unto us the whole Armor of God; the Girdle of Truth, the
Breast Plate of Righteousness, the Shield of Faith, the Helmet of Salvation,
and the Sword of the Spirit? It is Grace alone that can furnish us with these
Weapons: And so long as we are thus armed we may assure our selves, that the
Gates of Hell shall never be able to prevail against us. But if once we fall
from Grace, and thereby disarm our selves of all this Spiritual Armor, how can
we expect then to fight the Lord's Battles, when we have cast away the Weapons
of our Warfare. That roaring Lion that seeks to devour us, and dares venture to
assault us when we are armed Cap a pe, with the Armor of Heaven, though he
dreads a Wound from the Sword of the Spirit, and knows that the Shield of Faith
is impregnable against all his fiery Darts, will easily make a Prey of a naked
and defenseless Soul, a Soul that has forsaken God, and is therefore forsaken
of him, and delivered into the Hands of the Enemy, to be taken Captive by him
at his Will. Let us take heed then, lest having begun in the Spirit we end in
the Flesh; lest having once run well we turn aside, and leave the Paths of
Vprightness, to walk in the ways of Darkness; lest having for some time fought
manfully under Christ's Banner the good Fight of Faith, we afterward grow
weary and faint, desert our Colors, make shipwreck of our Faith, and forsake
the Captain of our Salvation. Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he
fall. And so I come to the last thing I undertook to do in handling these
words, which is

To give you some necessary Rules and Directions to be observed by all that
will take heed that they do not so fall. First, then, that we may take heed
that we do not fall, let us remember that we may fall. As there is a
possibility for him that is already fallen to rise again; for him that is at
the present defiled with the pollutions of Sin to be washed again, and
sanctified, and cleansed from those Pollutions; for him that is at the present
in the Gall of Bitterness, and in the Bond of Iniquity, entangled in the snare
of Satan, to be delivered from that Bondage into the Glorious Liberty of the
Children of God; and therefore we ought not to despair of the Salvation of any
Man: so likewise there is a possibility for him that for the present runs well
the good race that is set before him to faint before he comes to the End of it
and by so doing to lose his Prize; for him that for a while believed in time of
Temptation, when tribulation or persecution arises because of the word to be
offended and fall away; for him who had once escaped the Pollutions of the
World through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to be again
entangled therein and overcome; insomuch that his latter end shall be worse
than the beginning: and therefore no Man ought to be over confident, and
secure, of his final Perseverance, nor to presume that because at the present,
upon a strict Examination of his Conscience, and of the Condition of his Soul,
he finds that he is in a State of Grace, that that State is unalterable and
that he shall infallibly continue in it unto his life's end: for he that thinks
he stands may fall. And of what a dangerous Consequence such a presumption is
we may see by the Example of S. Peter, and indeed of all the rest of our
Savior's Disciples: for as they all joined with S. Peter in that good
Resolution of never forsaking Christ (for Peter said unto him, Though I should
die with thee yet will I not deny thee. Likewise also said all the Disciples)
so they did all of them in effect join with him also in the denial of him, for
S. Matthew tells us, that they all forsook him and fled. But S. Peter that was
the most confident of all denies him the most shamefully and basely of all,
with Oaths and Curses, swearing that he knew him not. Thus dangerous was
Presumption to that great Saint, and it will be as dangerous to every one of
us, if we entertain it in our Hearts. He that thinks he stands so firm that he
can never fall, it is much to be feared that he is fallen already, and fallen so
low, that he is in danger never to rise again; except it be by some
extraordinary Act of Mercy, such as our Savior showed to S. Peter, when he
turned and looked upon him after his fall, and by that look infused new Grace
into his Heart, which immediately burst out at his Eyes, in tears of
repentance. Let us not therefore be high minded, but let us fear: for happy is
the Man that fears always: but he that hardneth his heart shall fall into
mischief, Proverbs 28.14.

Secondly, if we will take heed that we fall not from Grace, let us take heed
that we fall not into Sin, especially into presumptuous and willful Sin,
against the light of our conscience. All Sin whatsoever, though it be but a Sin
of Ignorance, or Infirmity, tends more or less (if it be not speedily repented
of) to the impairing, and diminishing of the Grace of God in our Hearts; which
is bestowed upon us on purpose to preserve, and defend us from the power of
Sin, that it may not Reign in our mortal Bodies, that we should obey it in the
lusts thereof. But Sins of Presumption and Wilfulness against our knowledge,
and the checks of our conscience, do not only much impair Grace, but they
totally exstinguish it, and bring us into great danger of final Apostasy. For
there can be no fellowship betwixt Righteousness and Unrighteousness, no
Communion betwixt Light and Darkness, no Concord betwixt Christ and Belial, no
Agreement nor Cohabitation of the Spirit of God and Satan. And therefore David
prays most earnestly against such Sins as these, Psalm. 19.13. Keep back thy
Servant from presumptuous Sins: let them not have domminion over me: then shall
I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the great Transgression. And how
deadly a wound such Sins make in the conscience, God for our instruction (that
his example might be a warning to us to beware of the like Sins) suffered him
to find by a sad Experience. That premeditated wilful Murder of one of his
innocent subjects changed the Man after God's own Heart into one after the
Heart of him who was a murderer from the beginning, and made him such an one as
Satan would have all Men to be, if he could prevail. It is impossible while he
was in this Condition, that he should find any comfort in the performance of
his Devotions, if he did then perform any at all. His Hand, his Tongue, his
Heart were all out of tune, all unfit for the Celebration of God's Praises in
which they were wo^ continually to be employed. Even his own sacred Hymns, and
Anthems were nauseous to him, and the sweet Psalmist of Israel was become a
stranger to the songs of Sion. Grace was then lost, and Sin reigned in him; the
Spirit of God had for that Time forsaken him, and Satan had taken Possession of
his Soul. Let us take heed then of presumptuous and wilful Sins (and every
habitual Sin is a step toward them, they wrought a sad change in David; but
they may work a worse in us. God was pleased to raise him again: but if we fall
after the same manner, he may perhaps deny the same Favor to us, and then our
Case is irrecoverable.

Thirdly, If we will take heed that we fall not from Grace, let us endeavor
daily to grow in it, and improve it. So S. Peter exhorts us, in the end of his
Second Epistle. Ye therefore beloved seeing ye know these things before, beware
lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own
steadfastness. But grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord, and Savior
Jesus Christ. He that thinks he has Grace enough already has indeed very
little, or none at all: but blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
Righteousness; for they shall be filled. The path of the just, says Solomon,
is as the shining Light, that shines more, and more unto the perfect Day,
Prove. 4.18. And our blessed Savior compares the Kingdom of Heaven (by which is
meant the Grace of God in our Hearts) unto a grain of mustard seed, which
though it be less than all the seeds that be in the earth, yet when it is sown,
it grows up, and becomes a tree. So likewise should the Grace of God grow, and
increase, in our Hearts, and so it will do, if it be not (purely by our own
fault) hindered and stifled. That we may not therefore fall from Grace, let us
be careful to improve that Grace which God has already bestowed upon us, by
waiting upon him duly, and constantly in all those Ordinances, which he has
appointed for the begetting, preserving, and increasing it in our Souls: such
as are diligent Reading and Meditating in his Word at home, hearing it preached
and expounded in his House, frequent receiving the Holy Sacrament, and praying
unto God continually both in private and public as our Church teaches us, that
his Grace may always prevent and follow us; and make us continually to be given
to all good Works. He that does these things in Truth and sincerity shall never
fall; God will never leave nor forsake such a Man, but will be sure to guide
him with his Counsel here, and afterward receive him to Glory.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by John Hartley, over against Gray's Inn in Holborn.
A Dissertation upon the Epistles of Phalaris, with an Answer to the Objections
of the Honorable Charles Boil, Esquire By Richard Bentley, D. D. Master of
Trinity College in Cambridge, Chaplain in Ordinary, and Library Keeper to His
Majesty, 8vo. Price 6 s.

The History and Fate of Sacrilege, discovered by Examples of Scripture, of
Heathens, and of Christians, from the beginning of the World continually to
this Day. By Sir Henry Spelman, Knight. Wrote in the Year 1632. A Treatise omitted
in the late Edition of his Posthumous Works, and now published for the Terror
of Evil Doers. To which is added, an Historical Account of the beginners of a
Monastic Life in Asia, Africa, and Europe. By Sir Roger Twisden, Knight. and
Baronet. Price 4 s.

Catalogus Universalis Librorum, in omni Facultate, Linguaque Graeca
praesertim, insignium and rarissimorum non solum ex Catalogis Bibliothecarum
Bodleianae, Lugduno-Batavae, Ultrajectinae, Barberinae, Thuanae, Cordesianae,
Tellerianae, Slusianae, and Heinsianae, sed etiam ex omnibus fere aliis prelo
impressis, magno labor and sumptu, in usum Studiosorum collectus. Cura J. H.
Bibliopolae Londinensis.

Herodian's History of the Roman Emperors, containing many strange and
wonderful Revolutions of State in Europe, Asia, and Africa. Also their most
remarkable Embassies, Speeches, Antiquities, etc. Together with the most Solemn
Ceremonies used at the Deification of the Roman Emperors; with a Character of
the ancient Britains. Done from the Greek by a Gentleman at Oxford.

The Blasphemous Socinian Heresy disproved and confuted: Wherein the Doctrinal
and Controversial Parts of those Points are handled, and the Adversaries
Scripture and School-Arguments answered: With Animadversions upon a late Book,
called, Christianity not Mysterious. Humbly Dedicated to both Houses of
Parliament. By J. Gailhard, Gent. Price 3 s. 6 d.

The Epistle and Preface to the Book against the Blasp^mous Socinian Heresy,
vindicated; and the Charge therein against Socinianism, made good: In answer to
two Letters. By J. Gailhard, Gent. Price 1 s.

The true Character of the Spirit and Principles of Socinianism, drawn out of
their Writings. With some additional Proofs of the Most Holy Trinity, of our
Lord's, and of the Holy Ghost's Divinity. By J. Gailhard, Gent. Price 2 s.

The Principles of the Christian Religion, briefly explained; together with the
Scriptures on which they are grounded: By Archbishop Usher; Now fully corrected
and much enlarged. Also a Summary of the same, by the incomparable Judge Hale:
To which is added the Catechism, and Thirty Nine Articles of the Church of
England, containing the true Doctrine thereof: Very necessary and profitable
for all Persons, and proper to be given away by such who are charitably
inclined. The Second Edition. Price 3 d. per Book, and 20 s. for a Hundred.

Verdicts of the Learned, concerning Virgil's and Homer's Heroic Poems:
Quarto. Price 6 d.

Regular and Irregular Thoughts in Poets and Orators: Quarto. Price 6 d.

Utopia: Written in Latin by Sir Thomas More Chancellor of England: Translated
into English, by Bishop B.

Antonii le Grand Dissertatio de Ratione Cognoscendi: and Appendix de Mutatione
Formali, cum Castigationibus Errorum, Calumniarum, Praevaricationum, quibus J.
S. in duobus Libris, quorum prior Methodus sciendi, alter Solida Philosophia
intitulatur: Cartesium, Malbranchium, Ideistas, quos vocat Omnes. Immo and
Aristotelem, si non Deum ipsum, multa cum Futilitate, nec minore Fastu,
nuperrime adortus est. Price 2 s.

* There is now going to the Press, and will be speedily Published, Justin's
Abridgment of Trogus Pompeius's Universal History: With some Geographical and
Critical Annotations, and a Dissertation about the Author. Done into English,
for the Use of his Highness the Duke of Gloucester. By Mr. T. Brown.


