THE Recantation OF DANIEL SCARGILL, Publicly made before the UNIVERSITY OF
Cambridge, IN GREAT St MARY'S, July 25. 1669.

LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwel. 1669.

The Recantation of DANIEL SCARGILL, publicly made before the University of
Cambridg, etc.
WHereas I Daniel Scargill, late Batchelour of Arts, and Fellow of Corpus
Christi College, in the University of Cambridg, being through the instigation
of the Devil possessed with a foolish proud conceit of my own wit, and not
having the fear of God before my eyes: Have lately vented and publicly
asserted in the said University, diverse wicked, blasphemous, and Atheistical
positions, (particularly, That all right of Dominion is founded only in Power:
That if the Devil were Omnipotent, he ought to be obeyed: That all moral
Righteousness is founded only in the positive Law of the Civil Magistrate: That
the Scriptures of God are not Law further than they are enjoined by the Civil
Magistrate: That the Civil Magistrate is to be obeyed, though he should forbid
the Worship of God, or command Theft, Murder, and Adultery) professing that I
gloried to be an Hobbist and an Atheist; and vaunting, that Hobbs should be
maintained by Daniel that is by me. Agreeably unto which principles and
positions, I have lived in great licentiousness, swearing rashly, drinking
intemperately, boasting my self insolently, corrupting others by my pernicious
principles and example, to the high Dishonor of God, the Reproach of the
University, the Scandal of Christianity, and the just offense of mankind. And
whereas the Vicechancellour and Heads of the said University, upon notice of
these my foul enormities, upon a full examination and clear conviction of these
premised offenses, after suspension from my Degree, did expel me out of the
said University: Now I the said Daniel Scargill, after frequent consideration,
strict examination, and serious review of the said Positions, do find by the
grace of that God whom I had denied, that they are not only of dangerous and
mischievous consequence, inconsistent with the Being of God, and destructive to
human society; but that they are utterly false, the suggestions of a lying
spirit, wholly against my own judgment resolved upon better consideration, as
well as against the common sense of mankind. And I do freely acknowledge the
proceedings and sentence of my Governors, the Vicechancellor and Heads of the
University, to be just and equal, agreeable to the duty of their place, and the
Trust reposed in them: That they could not have done less to vindicate the
Divine Honor and suppress that Mischief growing up in this Age, which no
former has known.

And now I adore and bless the highest Majesty of God in his infinite mercy to
me, that he has not suffered me to go on unreclaimed in my enormous principles
and practices, but has made my face to be ashamed, that I may seek his Name.
Righteousness belongs unto thee, O Lord; but unto me, and to those who have
seduced me, and to those who have been seduced by me, shame and confusion of
face. Oh what height of wickedness had I arrived unto! For I must confess my
self guilty of impleading the Divine Majesty at the Tribunal of human Wit,
making man judge whether God should be God or no. Nay, whereas the Devil, my
tempter, to whom I had hearkened, does believe and tremble, I vile wretch have
been void of the Faith and fear of God, in the manifold manifestations of him.
Wherefore I humbly ask pardon of God above all, whom I have blasphemed of my
Governors in the University, whom I have disturbed; of all Christians, and all
men, for the great offense I have given unto all: more especially of so many as
have been misled into any error or vice by me. And I do also humbly and
earnestly beseech all men, especially so many of the younger Scholars as have
been seduced by me (who now abhor what I formerly boasted to assert) that they
beware, by my example, of the most subtle insinuations of the Devil, in the
vain ostentation of their own wit. That they lean not to their own
understanding, but consult the holy Scriptures, the lively Oracles of God, That
from thence they may learn (...) to be wise unto sobriety: as the holy Apostle
with great wisdom requires. And now I humbly hope, and trust in the infinite
mercy of that God against whom I had audaciously opened my unhallowed mouth,
that He who has promised that all sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men
(excepting only that resolved malicious blasphemy against the Holy Ghost) will
be graciously pleased to glorify his mercy in the forgiveness of my most
detestable errors, and abominable sins. And I thank God that he has awakened
me in good measure to a just detestation of the accursed Positions asserted by
me, and of all other like wicked principles.

Wherefore, I do here in the presence of God, Angels and men, cast my self down
in a deep dread of the just judgments and vengeance of God upon the accursed
Atheism of this age, acknowledging my self to be highly guilty of the growth
and spreading thereof; having contributed what my profane wit could devise, or
my foul mouth express, to instill it into others, to confirm them therein. And
I do profess, I believe (and judge it most reasonable so to believe) that the
openly professed Atheism of some, and the secret Atheism of others, is the
accursed root of all that abounding wickedness, perjury, sacriledg, debauchery,
and uncleanness, in this present age: That in a deep sense of that wretched
part I have acted in the propagating thereof, I do now abhor my self in dust
and ashes, and that from the bottom of my heart, I do disclaim, renounce,
detest, and abhor those execrable Positions asserted by me or any other:
particularly, 1. That all right of Dominion is founded only in Power. 2. That
all moral Righteousness is founded only in the Law of the Civil Magistrate. 3.
That the Holy Scriptures are made Law only by Civil Authority. 4. That
whatsoever the Civil Magistrate commands, is to be obeyed, notwithstanding
contrary to Divine Moral Laws. 5. That there is a desirable glory in being, and
being reputed an Atheist: which I implied when I expressly affirmed that I
gloried to be an Hobbist and an Atheist.


For these unhallowed assertions and expressions, I now find such inward
contrition and remorse, that I pray God his mercy may withhold me from relapse,
or his Judgments prevent it. But do I think that a bare Recantation can
satisfy for my prodigious offenses? No, Let me do penance all my days,
submitting my self to Gods will, and the charity of pious minds; and whatsoever
my portion may be in this world, Let me live and dye in the fear of God, and
the faith of Christ, Amen.

Now lest any one should mistake or suspect this confession and unfeigned
renunciation of my sinful and accursed errors, for an act of civil obedience or
submission in me, performed according to my former principles, at the command
of my Superiors, in outward expression of words, though contrary to my judgment
and inward thoughts of my heart; or that I have not now expressed the most
sincere and secret sense of my soul: I call the Searcher of all hearts to
witness, that I loath and abhor such practices as the basest and most damnable
hypocrisy: That from my heart and soul I detest such principles in all
persons, as worse than the basest villainies and reservations, which the Jesuits
are said to practice or allow. And I openly avow, that I do acknowledge, that
all persons so principled, ought to be held by all mankind as the most
dangerous and declared Enemies of the common Faith amongst men. That they are
not to be trusted upon any obligation of their Faith, or pretensions to Piety,
Loyalty, or common Honesty, in any Corporation, College, University, City,
Commonwealth, or Kingdom: but, that by those Principles, destructive to all
Society and Commerce amongst men, they may and do delude and defeat all Oaths
and Protestations, all Faith given to God or man: They may and will comply, if
their own Interest or Advantage prompt them to it, with any Invader or Usurper:
with any Faction or growing Sect, however destructive to all Order, and the
very being of human Society in the world. I believe also, and openly avouch,
That no Power upon earth, no persuasion or imagination about natural Right; no
opinion in pretended Philosophy, concerning self-preservation, can free me from
the obligation that is now upon me, in this my open profession of Repentance
for my accursed errors and grievous sins, to speak the truth in sincerity
before God and man.

This Recantation, and sincere Profession, I make willingly and freely of my
own mind and choice: not in compliance with the command or will of any other,
not upon design to gain a better opinion amongst men in the world; not for any
worldly advantage, profit, or self-end of my own: but out of a hearty
detestation of my foul errors and sins: and I am glad of this opportunity to
disburden my soul, oppressed with the weight of the same.

So help me God. DANIEL SCARGILL.


