A SERMON Preached in the CHURCH of PVTNEY IN THE COUNTY of SVRREY, Upon the
24th of April, 1681.

HIS Majesty's Declaration Being Read that day.

By EDWARD SCLATER, M. A. Minister there.

From all Sedition, Privy Conspiracy and Rebellion, Good Lord deliver us.

LONDON, Printed for R. Horn at the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill. 1681.

PSALM 106.16. They envied Moses in the Camp, and Aaron the Saint of the Lord.


IT IS a strange powerful charm their Rhetoric works by, who undertake to
persuade a People there are Distempers in their Government: they never want
Multitudes of credulous Auditors; who, as in the Affairs of the Body Natural,
they lend their Ears to those Mountebanks, who make glorious promises of curing
either their Diseases or their Fears; so in the Body Politic, they as easily
follow the sly allurements of those, who promise to make the yoke of Government
more easy and pleasant. These Undertakers shall not fail to gain all those to
be their Proselytes, who think their Native Liberty is imposed upon, and
unjustly restrained, by whatsoever Positive Laws and Constitutions: and may be
able to apprehend those defects, whereunto every Government is subject (for
none can be absolutely without, on this side Heaven) but cannot judge of or
discern those lets and impediments, those insuperable difficulties and
invincible oppositions with which even the best of Governments is visited.
These are easily persuaded to take Physic from any hand, either such as their
ill chosen Physicians (having cheated them into the belief they are Diseased)
tell them is proper for the cure or (if they cannot work this belief in them)
prescribe for the prevention. One way or other, the less discerning multitude
become their Patients, either to cure their Imaginary Diseases, or their
Infused Jealousies.

Absalom is thronged with attentive Proselytes in the Gate, whilst David is
almost solitary and alone upon the Seat of Judgment. His Insinuations (whose
especial business it was slily to publish the Defects of his Royal Father,
there is no man deputed of the King to hear thee, 2 Samuel 15.3. and to hide
those infinite impediments and difficulties, that were the invincible causes of
whatsoever the People suffered (if they suffered any thing at all.) His
Insinuations, I say, of his Royal Father's neglect in doing Justice, and
glorious promises of what he would do if he were made a Judge in Israel,
together with his flattering Kisses and treacherously courteous Deportment and
Affability, have a most miraculous power and operation upon the easy and
unstable Multitude.

David their King chosen by God and anointed by Samuel with God's Holy Oil, and
therefore his Majesty cannot be less then Sacred, is forced to fly from
Jerusalem and desert his Royal Palace because of their Rebellious Tumults and
Threatenings. And Absalom the fair spoken Hypocrite, (...), stole away, says our
English, makes his own proper goods, says the Septuagint, the Heart of the Men
of Israel, verse. 6.

In which expression of theirs, it is easy to discern these three things.
First, That his (...), his making of them his own, or stealing of them,
supposes they were the Proper Goods of another man, and it is God that gives all
Propriety. So that Absolom's stealing them away was a Rebellion as well against
God, who was the fountain of that Propriety, as against his King, in whom it
was so settled. Secondly, That Absolom's treacherous heart had so powerful an
Instrument of his Tongue, as to steal away almost the whole People: for the
Septuagint express it by (...)in the Singular number, the Heart of the Men of
Israel. Lastly, That the Hearts of Men toward their David, the Anointed of the
Lord, should be all cemented together by Loyalty and Allegiance that they
should become as one, (...), the Heart of the Men of Israel.

Offenses will come says our Savior, but woe be to him through whom they do
come. This Heart has several times been divided, and God has often showed his
infinite Displeasure and burning Indignation against them by whose hands or
tongues this Division has been made. Had Zimri peace who slew his Master? Had
Absalom, who rebelled against his Royal Father and stole away the Heart of the
People from him? Had Corah, Dathan and Abiram, the persons in my Text, had they
peace who envied Moses in the Camp, and Aaron the Saint of the Lord?

No, you know they had not. Zimri burns himself to death, 1 King. 16.18. God
burns the Remnant the Accomplices of Corah, Dathan and Abiram by a miraculous
Fire from Heaven, Numb. 16. Absalom is hanged in an Oak, 2 Samuel 18. Sad and
direful Judgments all, and therefore it should seem the Crime was heinous. For
to divide the Heart of the People from their Moses or their David, what is it
but to divide the Heart of the People from their God? for they have not
rejected Thee says God but they have rejected Me that I should not reign over
them, 1 Samuel 8.7. For what is a Moses or a David? nay a Saul or a Cyrus, or a
Nebuchadnezzar, but the Breath of our Nostrils that God has breathed into his
People the Anointed of the Lord? Lam. 4.20.

And is not this the reason why Solomon joins God and the King together, and
makes them as it were the one object of his Peoples Fear? Prove. 24.21. and a
greater then Solomon, Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto
God the things that are Gods', Matthew. 22.11. The Holy Spirit of God, the Spirit
of Peace has made them both the one object of our Obedience, and must not that
Hand or Tongue be highly impious that shall divide those, whom the whole
Blessed Trinity have thus signally united and made one? No marvel if he who has
set his King upon his Holy Hill of Sion not only have them in Derision, but
break them with a Rod of Iron, and dash them in pieces like a Potter's Vessel,
Psalm. 2.4.9.

But Rebellion were not as the sin of Witchcraft, if those who engage in it
were not bewitched by it, if it would suffer them (without a mist before their
Eyes) to behold the goodly work they are going about. For if this mist take
away from their sight the Fear of the King, so it does the Fear of God too: so
says Xenophon, if the subjects were (...), true Servants of God and not
Hypocrites, calling themselves Saints and the Godly and making only a specious
show of Godliness, if they did not deny the power of it they would give the
King his Honor seeing they are in so close a conjunction, Fear God and Honor
the King, 1 Pet. 2.17. Samuel you see has rankt this sin of Disobedience in its
due order, 1 Samuel 15.22. and given it its right name, it works powerfully as by
charms and spells and the instance in my Text will give it its best
Description. They envied Moses also in the Camp, and Aaron the Saint of the
Lord.

In the words consider these particulars.

I. The Parties rebelled against Moses and Aaron. II. The Parties rebelling,
Corah, Dathan and Abiram, and 250 Princes of the Assembly. III. What they did
or wherein their Rebellion manifested it self and broke out they Envied.
Lastly, The Place were they did it, in the Camp.
Of these in their Order: I begin with the first, the Parties rebelled against,
who they were Moses and Aaron, the Prince and the Priest, and first Moses. They
envied Moses also in the Camp, etc.

Moses, That he had Regal Power is attested by Holy Scripture, Deuteronomy. 33.5.
where we are told, that he was King in Jesurun, when the Heads of the People
and the Tribes of Israel were gathered together. And if King then their Judge
too, Deuteronomy. 17.9. and in the singular number, and that must intimate that he was
the Judge of all other Judges in Israel, and had the Supreme Power in his hand:
that he was not only a Minister of the Law, but a Lawgiver. Moses commanded
us a Law, Deuteronomy. 33.4.

And that he was not a Titular Prince, but invested with the Supreme Power, is
plainly read in that God committed to him the two Trumpets of Silver, and in
them the Power to convocate the Assembly, Number. 10.1, 2. a work of the highest
consequence of all in whatsoever Kingdom, and seated only in the Supreme Power
of it. A Power formerly only in the hands of God himself, Number. 9.18, 20, 23.
till now he pleases to transmit it to Moses his Vicegerent: for he is made as
well the keeper of the two Trumpets, as of the Tables of the Law.

There are two parts of Moses his Power intimated fairly enough in the
Delegation of these silver Trumpets, both Regal. The first was their use ad
Castra movenda, for the pitching of their Tents, and their marching to the
places appointed: So he had by this the power of the Militia, he was the
Generalissimo of all the Host. Secondly, ad comitia Convocanda, to call their
Assemblies, to summon and convene the Princes of the Tribes to come together to
consult de rebus quibusdam arduis, of some hard and difficult Questions and
Affairs of and concerning the weal of the People and the service of their God.
For by this Power does he gather together the Heads of the People, and the
Tribes of Israel, Deuteronomy. 33.5.

I stand not to tell you, that he was faithful in all God's House, and by that
gained that honorable appellation of the Man of God: or that he was a very
Meek man above all the men that were upon the face of the Earth: how zealous he
was for God's Honor, and how severe in punishing the worshippers of the Golden
Calf: that he was exactly just and wronged no man: and for his Learning, that
he was learned in all the Learning of the Egyptians: excellent Accomplishments
all: able (you will easily acknowledge) to make his bad Subjects blush at their
Rebellion, if they had had any shame left in them. But the true Israelites in
whose mouths there is no Guile, much less Rebellion in their hands or hearts,
let their King be what he will, a Moses or a Manasses, a David or a Jeroboam,
had fully learnt non tangere Christos Dei, not so much as to Touch the Lord's
Anointed, nor to Revile the Gods or Curse the Ruler of the People, Exodus 22.28.
Not to wound him with their tongues (they can smite too Jer. 18.18.) much less
kill him with the sword.

Who ever looks upon Moses his Power and Prerogative will easily find, that he
was the life of Religion and Law. Indeed it is hard to imagine any People, that
in their right minds have not thought their King so, or that have not found
Religion degenerate every day and decline still more and more into Atheism and
Profaneness, or crumble into multiplicity of Opinions: and their Law to want
its strength, as if its Sinews were cut in pieces, in his Absence. So that when
Corah and his Accomplices rebel against Moses, they cannot aim more at his life
then at the life of these. Religion must bleed and Law expire in him who is the
life of both.

And this was fairly intimated in that Miracle, by which God was pleased to
attest the Mission and Commission of Moses. His Rod or Scepter is thrown upon
the Ground, and turned into a Serpent, but when taken by the Tail it turned
into a Scepter again. When his Regal Power lies under the peoples Feet,
(there is no restraining them from poisonous Practices) the Scepter is not only
accounted a Serpent a fellow Creature with them and therefore shall have no
more power over them who are themselves a brood of Serpents and a generation of
Vipers: (perhaps by subtlety one Basilisk or Cockatrice domineers over the
rest,) but they will all agree to bruise this Serpent's Head if Moses take it
not into his hand again. And when he does, you see they become a glorious
Nation, a Royal Priesthood, Exodus 19.5. Every man of them a King when the
Scepter was again taken by him that had the just right to it.

Well, God has made Moses the Ruler of his People, and therefore whosoever
resists his Power, resists the Ordinance of God. And would you think that
men who are forbid to speak evil of him, no not in their thoughts, Eccles
10.20. and assured that it shall come to light, for a Bird of the air shall
carry the voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter; would you
think these should rise up in open Rebellion against him? that they should list
Armies and gather themselves together against Moses, the servant of the Lord?
No reason can be given for it but that of Samuel, Rebellion is as the sin of
witchcraft, as well in its fascination, as its guilt; none but men bewitched
could be guilty of so grievous an Impiety.

For judge you, did they observe that counsel, that was written in the Hearts
of every Loyal Israelite by the Hand and Pen of Wisdom it self, before it was
written in their Books by the Wise man, I counsel thee to keep the King's
commandment, and that in regard of the oath of God? Eccles 8.2. Did not the
same Wisdom tell them, that against a King there was no rising up? Prove.
30.31. and that in the word of a King there is Power, and who may say unto him
what do thou? Eccles 8.4. And had they not forgot it? And could such Lessons
as these be unlearned but by some strange fascination? could men in their wits
recede from them? Let St. Peter speak, they which despise Government and are
not afraid to speak evil of Dignities are as natural brute beasts, 2 Pet. 2.12.
And you know if it be not witchcraft, it is something as bad, that turns men
into beasts. Thus you have the first Object of their Envy, Moses. They envied
Moses in the Camp, and Aaron, etc.

Solomon built the Temple and the King's Palace together, which soever of them
decays first, the other does not long survive it. If Moses fall, Aaron must not
think to stand. If the Throne be subverted, the Altar must needs sink. And
therefore God sometimes placed both Offices in one and the same person,
Melchisedeck was both King and Priest of the most high God. And when God made
them two men's work, they were to be like Hippocrates his Twins, so linkt
together, that they could not happily subsist, if there were any distance
between them. And Moses and Aaron are both Brethren. The King and Priest not
only Cooperatores, Fellow workmen in the Government of the People, but
Consanguinei, of the same Blood, that they might be a mutual support to one
another.

And therefore Corah and his Accomplices, though they begin with one, yet aim at
both; and like Man and Wife both are equal sharers in the direful issues of
this Rebellion, both intended for the same Sword or Axe.

But yet you may see they observe a Method, Moses tells us they aim at him,
What (says he) have I done against you? yet they began with Aaron, but what is
Aaron that you should murmur against him? It Is a piece of Satan's Polity, a
facilioribus progredi, to begin with the weaker vessel: The Church, who has
nothing to offend her Enemies but Prudence and Innocence, Weapons, that to be
sure, draw no Blood, nor break any Bones; no Buckler to ward a blow but her
Faith, and what care boisterous Enemies for what these can do unto them? The
Church, I say, is in all their designs the first sufferer: Judgment still
begins at the House of God, and through the Temple lies the Enemies Road to the
King's Palace.

For that sin, that is as the sin of witchcraft, must needs first take away the
fear of God from before the Eyes of those that are resolved to admit it into
their Hearts, and commit it with their Head and Hands, and then to be sure
Aaron the Saint of the Lord, the chief Priest or Bishop, shall be the first man
they lay violent hands upon: and this for three Reasons.

1. He and his Brethren are men of great Learning and incorruptible Integrity.
The first renders them able to discern the guilt of such impious undertakers,
and lay their shame open to all impartial beholders, and display their Malice,
Hypocrisy, Covetousness, Ambition, and whatsoever Viper else lies in the Womb
of that Monster Rebellion. The other renders them impregnable and immovable to
all the Temptations and Allurements can be used to work them over to the
Enemies Party. So that these grave men will be sure not only to do them no
good, ( Aaron cannot be a Neuter in a cause of God's,) but to be their great
hinderance, as being the first men, because of their profound Abilities, that
can discover their Intentions and display their Projects. Seeing then they
cannot ensnare the Consciences of Aaron and his Brethren, all their Subtlety
and Polity must be bent against them, or else how shall they captivate the
Consciences of the common People, who will so long as any sparks of Religion
remain in them, be seeking knowledge at their Lips? and therefore unless Corah
and his Accomplices first stop Aaron's mouth, their hopes are all blasted, and
their design must come to naught.

2. They were men of Gravity, of an awful and austere Deportment. If a Grave
Cato or a Severe Aristides would make a sinner blush and fall back from the
pursuit of any sin, what would an Aaron a Man of God do? And therefore a
resolved sinner must make it a Maxim in his Polities to remove these checks of
Consciences, that neither themselves be deterred from their impious designs by
that Reverence that these may extract from them or strike into them, nor their
Accomplices from joining with them and assisting them.

3. They ( Aaron and his Brethren) had large Revenues. And you know the Wolf in
the Fable draws up a thundering Accusation against the Lamb, that hurts no
body; not because the poor innocent Creature was his Enemy, but because he was
resolved upon it, as a matter very convenient, to account him so, that he might
proceed against him accordingly and devour him. It Is easy for you to find out
the reason why never any but he, who wrought the greatest Miracles, could ever
make the Wolf lie down with the Lamb. And yet, I believe, never could any man
say, that ever the Lamb wronged the Wolf; or so much as troubled the Waters
where he used to drink: but you never knew a Beast of Prey reconciled to those
Creatures they prey upon, or want an Accusation to excuse their Ravening and
Cruelty.

Thus you may read Corah and his Rout clamouring with open mouth against Moses
and Aaron, and all they can say against them is, you take too much upon you. It
is not likely they should make it good against Moses God's Vicegerent, and
Aaron the Saint of the Lord. Not likely that these should so forget themselves
to go beyond their Commission. But how shall Corah put swords into his
followers hands to destroy their Persons unless he put some bitter malicious
words (no matter whether they be true or no) into their mouths to wound their
Reputations? The first step to their Ruin and his Design is to make them
odious with the People, and then who more ready to throw dirt in their faces
then the very Sheep themselves? And, if the Sheep become so unnatural to revile
the Shepherd, his Enemies have a fair opportunity to call in the Wolf to devour
him.

And if the Sheep themselves do not turn Wolves (as by these enchantments they
many times do) and fasten their teeth in the sides of their Shepherds, yet
they will stand by and look on whilst they are devoured and like it. For you will
find them in the passages of this History Numb. 16. crying out, All the
Congregation are holy every one of them: wherefore then lift you up your selves
above the Congregation of the Lord, verse. 3. As if they should say, No Moses,
no Supreme Magistrate, down with Prerogative; No Aaron, no Priests; you may
suppose with that hideous outcry a rude Multitude must needs make.

And then it must needs follow, that they themselves must seek the Priesthood,
verse. 10. (...). S. Basil de Spiritu Sancto.
Those that have but a few Coleworts or Onions growing in their Gardens, think
themselves skillful enough to extract out of them a sovereign juice shall cure
all the distempers of their Souls. It Is the custom of discontented Soldiers
to raise the discontents of their mutinous spirits with such insolent and
unreasonable Language against their Leaders as this. We by our long experience
(and too long obedience) can lead the Companies now as well as you, and need
not any longer learn of you to fight against an Enemy. Alexander the
Coppersmith, when Ambition and Discontent has corrupted his Brains, will
presently fancy and brag he can martial an Army and manage a Combat with the
Devil as well as St. Paul: and if he be but a little more heated with this
Frenzy he will add, I and as well as Michael the Archangel too.

The meanest of Corah's Accomplices trained up in his School of Rebellion, I make
no question, thought he could lead the Army of the Israelites as well as Moses;
and do you think he did not fancy he could offer Incense as well as Aaron?
Methinks I fancy some such discourse as this amongst them, (you cannot expect
it should be very learned or rational from people of their capacities) cannot
we slay a Bull or a Goat as well as he? and lay it upon the Altar and put fire
to it? Why we can slay him if he do not please us, and sacrifice the Sacrificer
with his own Knife. Incense will burn if fire be put to it. Cannot we put fire
to it as well as he? Cannot we read a few Prayers out of a Book and Bless the
people in those words that are put in our mouths as well as he? Cannot the
meanest among us say, The Lord bless thee and keep thee, the Lord make his face
to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee? And Aaron did no more. Numb.
6.24. Cannot any of us perform the same Ceremonies that were to be performed by
the Priest at the cleansing of the Leper? which were no more then thus, That he
take for him that is cleansed two Birds alive and clean, and Cedar wood and
Scarlet and Hyssop, and that he command that one of the Birds be killed in an
earthen vessel over running water, and that he take the living Bird and the
Cedar-wood and the Scarlet and the Hyssop and dip them and the living Bird in
the blood of the Bird that was killed, and sprinkle upon him that is to be
cleansed seven times, and then pronounce him clean, and let the living Bird
loose into the Air. These are the Ceremonies to be performed, all easy and
without the least difficulty, a Child may be taught to do as much, and cannot
we do it as well as Aaron, or any of the whole Tribe? It Is easy to confute
this unreasonable discourse with a parallel one. Are not Abanah and Pharpar
rivers of Damascus better then all the waters of Israel? may I not wash in them
and be clean says Leprous Naaman? 2 King. 5.12. His Servants clear the case; he
could not because God had not endowed any other Waters with that cleansing
faculty. And as he can do whatsoever he pleases so he can do it it with
whatsoever he pleases: Raise up children unto Abraham out of these stones,
Restore sight to the blind with clay and spittle. Nothing can move the least
mote in the Sun without his Word, and the least mote in the Sun can move the
greatest Mountains with it. What Artificer will not say proportionably the same
concerning the Instruments he works withal? Can a few hairs and paint decipher
out the lively representation of a man, that noble Creature the image of God?
Can a few pieces of Iron make a Watch? They can and they cannot: of themselves
they are as ineffective as if there were no such materials; but by the
operation of those workmen who prepare them for his use and his skill and
management that guides them to their ultimate design, they wonderfully produce
their curious effects.

But to what purpose do I oppose more then Naaman's Servants sound and solid
Questions to the loose discourse of Corah and his Accomplices? Men that lie under
the enchantment of Rebellion are not capable of sound Reason, and must return
to their Allegiance again before they can be Masters of Wits and Senses. When
they are again reduced to Reasons just Dominion over them, when that Witchcraft
has done working upon them and they are again converted from Beasts into Men,
they will presently without any more ado discern what a senseless discourse they
made against Moses and Aaron. Till then there is no reason can silence their
clamours, or any the soundest Arguments oppose their rage and animosities.

And therefore as good spare that pains, and spend that breath and time in
Prayers to him, who stilleth the raging of the Sea, and the noise of its waves:
that he would also suppress the Madness of the People, Psalm. 65.7.

And Moses and Aaron do so, Numb. 16. with this assurance that God will hear
them, for their comfort and the comfort of all that retain their Loyalty to
them: That their counsels against Moses cannot stand because they are against
God, in as much as Moses was his Vicegerent, and in rejecting him they rejected
God. And in what they designed against Aaron, he whom God gave as a Mouth to
Moses: he whom God made his own Spokes man to the people, Exodus 4.6. Whom he
thought fittest to be employed in the best place of Trust and highest
Importance in the Commonwealth of Israel under Moses: He that was an Earthly
Savior and Intercessour between the People and their Maker, is made an
unparalled spectacle of scorn and derision to the lowest of the People. Can
those Counsels prosper (or if they do, can it be with any other prosperity
then that fading one David speaks of, that shall pass away like a morning dew
or Jonah's Gourd?) that aim at the ruin of God's Sanctuary? In their
Consultations that conspire the subversion of Throne and Altar, God is so
certainly excluded the Councilboard, that he is not in all their thoughts. We
may truly say they have nothing of God amongst them. And then shall not God at
one time or other visit for these things? shall not his soul be avenged on such
consultations as these? Yes, And cloth his Priests with Salvation, and his
Saints (those that are so indeed, i. e. those that retain their Loyalty to
Moses and their dutiful Reverence to Aaron, not those that only call
themselves so) shall shout aloud for joy. God shall make the Horn of David to
bud, and ordain a Lamp for his anointed. Yes, And his Enemies shall be clothed
with shame, (how can they otherwise choose?) but upon himself shall his Crown
flourish.

For if God have a Controversy with that People, that are as those that strive
with the Priest, Hos. 4.4. how much greater with those, that as Corah, Dathan
and Abiram contend with Moses and Aaron too? If a man that will do
presumptuously and not hearken unto the Priest that stands to minister there
before the Lord thy God shall die, shall not he more deserve it that shall
resist the Ministration of the Priest and Judge too? Deuteronomy. 17.12. If Schism in
the Church be an evil to Israel deserving death, can Rebellion in the State be
a less evil and deserve a less punishment? This assurance the Loyal and Devout
party had, who remained faithful unto Moses and Aaron, that God was angry with
the Rebels and would assuredly at one time or other visit them for their
presumptuous doings, and be severely avenged of them.

Nay, they (the Rebels I mean) might, I make no question, see, that if they
should go on and prevail, they were big of that brood of Vipers that must at
last gnaw out their bowels. For when Moses, whom God had seated, should be
thrown from his Throne, Tyranny must needs ascend it, and Servitude and Slavery
must be the portion the best of men can look to receive from her, for she
advances none but the worst and most needy.

It Is true, Moses had a Rod, but would not a wise people rather endure that, (a
Rod is for their good and comfort as well as correction, Psalm. 23.4.) would not
a wise people rather choose it then Rehoboam's Scorpions? All the Athenians got
by expelling one whom they called Tyrant, was (by God's Providence for their
just punishment) they chose thirty in his place; and if they had made it a
Commonwealth I cannot guess at how many thousands.

And therefore if Corah and his Accomplices plead that Moses was a Tyrant, and
Aaron an Innovator, that the one would make himself (...), an absolute disposer
of their Lives and Fortunes, and had (as they were jealous) design to expose
their lives, and directly or indirectly kill them in the Wilderness, and that
the other designed an unwarrantable superiority over all the Tribe of Levi, and
took more upon him then God had committed to him: Nay, suppose Moses as bad as
malice could paint him out, and Aaron to have set up another Golden Calf, and
made the people worship it, Jeroboam the Son of Nebat did so: Nebuchadnezzar
King of Babylon made an Image of Gold, and commanded his people to worship it:
Ahab, Manasses, Julian, did the like: yet neither the Jews under Jeroboam, Ahab
or Manasses, nor the Prophet Daniel, or the three Children in Babylon, nor any
Christians that were thoroughly good in the times of Julian or other Persecuting
or Idolatrous Kings and Emperors, made use of or prescribed any other Weapons
against them or Remedies then earnest Prayers to God to turn their hearts.

Not for want of strength and numbers, for the Christians that were at
Jerusalem when St. James suffered death from their hands were more in number,
and greater in power then their Persecutors. But in reverence to their Master
and his Example, interimi se a paucioribus quam interimere patiebantur, they
rather suffered themselves to be killed by a smaller number then themselves
were, then to kill even their Persecutors. Nemo nostrum quando apprehenditur
reluctatur, quamvis nimius and copiosus noster populus, etc. says St. Cyprian,
none of us when we are apprehended strive or endeavor to revenge your unjust
violence, although our people are very many and more numerous then you are: and
Tertullian gives the reason, Occidi licet, occidere non licet, God has made it
lawful for us to suffer our selves to be killed, but not lawful for us to
kill. Baronius tells us that before the 350. year of Christ, Ne gregarius
quidem miles inveniri quidem possit, there was not to be found so much as one
of the common Soldiers that would hold up his hand against the Emperors,
though they were Heathens and Persecutors of the Christians: and Nazianzen
tells us that the wrath and rage of Julian the Apostate was at last repressed
only by the tears of Christians power'd out in their Prayers to God for their
Deliverance, and this, says he, notwithstanding they had strength enough to
reward his wrongs done to them with violence.

But I cannot choose but take notice of Corah and his Accomplices vain jealousies,
that Moses should purposely expose their lives in the Wilderness. For no King
can design the destruction of his people, but he must destroy his Dominion, and
make himself not only a private man, but be alone in that Land which was his
Kingdom, whilst he had Subjects to govern in it. No, in the multitude of
people is the King's honor, says Solomon, and in the want of people is the
destruction of the Prince, Prove. 14.28.

So then, that King that should destroy his people would turn his Kingdom into
a Wilderness. Can Corah reasonably think that Moses should design the
destruction of his people that so he might turn the Wilderness into a Kingdom?
and think it more honorable to be King of Beasts then men? or could they
perish and he survive them? did it not concern him to be solicitously careful
for their lives as for his own, when his depended upon theirs? and might not
Moses justly say of the whole body of the Israelites what Jacob said of
Benjamin (for the King of a People was always accounted their Father) If
mischief befall you by the way in which you go, then shall you bring down my
gray hairs with sorrow to the grave? Genesis 32.48. So little reason had this
Jealousy to bottom it self upon: but you know Rebellion is called the madness
of the people, and therefore it cannot be expected, that Reason should have any
prevalency with them. Which shall bring me to the consideration of my next
part, the Persons Rebelling, Corah, Dathan and Abiram in the word They. They
envied, etc.

They. Our Fathers in Egypt, says the Psalmist, verse. 7. and therefore they
were first Israelites, Moses and Aaron's Countrymen, and Partem Patria
vendicat, there is not a man among us that our Country does not lay claim to
one part of us. Who would think that the seed of Abraham, in which God had
promised to bless all the Nations upon the Earth, should degenerate into such
noxious Creatures that should endeavor the ruin of his whole Progeny? But,
Nihil ex omni part beatum, it seems nothing is perfectly happy on this side
Heaven. No man can answer for all his Children; Abraham the Father of the
Faithful is not without an infidel, treacherous and rebellious Corah, Dathan
and Abiram, and more, their Accomplices in the same condemnation with them. You
see, if we were all one man's Children, 'twere all one, we should be sure of
false Brethren.

2. They were of the same Tribe too, of the Tribe of Levi, and therefore
Brethren again upon another account. This any Loyal Heart would think enough in
all Conscience to make them remember their Father's words, Let there be no
strife betwixt me and thee, nor betwixt my herdsmen and thy herdsmen, for we
are Brethren.

3. Corah and his Company of the Tribe of Levi, and Dathan and Abiram the Sons
of Eliab, and On the Son of Peleth, Sons of Reuben, these with 250 Princes of
the Assembly, famous in the Congregation, men of Renown. So that you have
Simeon and Levi, Clergy and Laity Brethren in this Iniquity. If Corah preach it
up (as it is all things to nothing but he will be thus exercising his Gifts)
what a matter of sad consideration is it, that he should blow the Trumpet to
Battle, whose employment tended wholly to pacification and atonement? that
those whose business it was only to assist them that shed the Blood of Beasts
at the Altar, should by the Sword sacrifice their Brethren in the Field? that
these should preach the Nobles in a Kingdom into a Rebellion against that
Prince that God had set over them, who most certainly were by their Office and
Function to kindle no Fires but in the Sanctuary?

4. Both Parties were of the same Religion though Corah will seem purer then
all those of Moses and Aaron's side, and charge Moses for an Impostor in
Religion; Will thou, says he, put out the eyes of these men? verse. 14. Corah's
side may have more of the form of godliness and outward show, but Moses his
have more of the power of it. For nothing is more the bane of Religion, then
that Hypocrisy that propagates Religion by the Sword: that presents a Bible to
the Eyes of a man and a Dagger to his Heart. If the Sword be in the Right hand,
no Book becomes the Left like the Alcoran; especially if this Sword be intended
against Moses the Lord's Governor and Vicegerent. Let his fine outside make
never so glorious a show, though he pray never so much or often, he is not a true
Israelite in whom is no guil, that with Corah will not give Moses the things
that are Moses's, and God in Aaron the things that are God's.

Lastly, Corah had received high and eminent Favors and Preferments from God;
he was separated from the Congregation of Israel to the Service of the
Tabernacle, brought near to God himself to stand before the Congregation to
Minister unto them: is not his ingratitude the more notorious, and his sin the
more transcendent? that he should go about to set the Altar on fire in stead
of the Sacrifice? Will they because they have not the Preferments they aspire
to in the Church (though they have far greater then they deserve) destroy the
Tabernacle in the flames of Schism? which has always been that gap which the
enemies of God have entered in at, when they have brought in all Impiety and
Profaneness into his Church, and at which they have endeavored to send out
whatsoever part of pure and undefiled Religion. Can there be a more horrid
Treachery, then for one of the Tribe of Levi thus to betray the Tabernacle? Can
there be a greater Ingratitude?

Did it not add much to the dimensions of his sin of whom David complains, who
being a familiar Friend that eat of his Bread, and went up to the House of God
together with him, yet was the person that did him a notorious injury? Does he
not say he could have born it had it been a stranger that had done it? Do you
not think that Judas was the more intolerable Traitor, for that he was one of
the Twelve? May we not think that Ananias, or Caiphas, or Pilate will be better
able to answer what they did at the General Account then Judas? May we not
read his sadder condition in that Woe denounced against him, Vae illi homini,
Woe to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed?

Nor indeed are the Princes of the Assembly and the men of Renown less guilty
of this Ingratitude: for how came they to be so, but by Moses his favor and
bounty toward them? Could they have been his Peers unless he had made them so?
Was there an Office or Trust that was not his gift, and will they destroy the
Fountain of their own Honor? What shall we say of both Improbus a nullo
flectitur obsequio, Neither those Favors and Honors that God had bestowed
upon the Levites, nor those Moses their King had bestowed upon the Nobles, can
satisfy their froward spirits. No Preferment appease and settle the rebellious
thoughts of their discontented Souls. If there be not witchcraft in it, judge
you, seeing there is no such Fiend as Ingratitude. Notwithstanding all
obligations that Heaven and Earth can lay upon them, Hell gets the upper hand:
They envied Moses in the Camp, and Aaron the Saint of the Lord. And so I come
to my next part what they did, They envied, etc. They envied Moses, etc.

Our English Translation comes somewhat short of any other Language I read it
in. They Envied them: and yet this expresses one of the most base and
unworthiest Passions man's mind is affected withal; so base and unreasonable
that sometimes (and I take it the Parties in my Text is such) it can give no
reason for it self. Non amo te Sabidi, etc. I do not love thee, Sabidius, nor
can I tell a reason of my hate, only this, I do not love thee. If any can find
out the hidden reason why Vultures so abominate sweet smells, or Horse-flies are
so distasted with odoriferous ointment: I shall desire them to instruct me in
the reason why Corah should be angry with Aaron's Incense, or Dathan and Abiram
with Moses his Unction.

It has been noted of Envy, that it does fascinate and bewitch, and therefore
though Envy make so little noise in our English Tongue, it is as well as
Rebellion, that makes a greater, a Witchcraft too. For this Envy in the Text to
be sure was not a corrupt black Blood running in their Veins, but had its
outward operations: And their Eyes like the Evil Aspects of Malignant Planets
darted forth their infectious Influences, from which no power could have
secured them they aimed at but his, Qui regit astra, that disappoints the most
direful presages and the horrid consequences of them. For Moses is in his
glory in the Camp in the Head of the Tribes of Israel, Generalissimo of the
whole Host: Aaron the High Priest their spiritual Generalissimo too. Now, if
an envious Eye (as they say it does) take edge and courage at this sight, and
be whetted by this spectacle, its infectious beams will dart themselves with
the greater vigor and virulency and so do the more hurt, especially if the
Spirits of the person envied do come forth, (as Joy and Triumph will emit and
dilate them) for then they meet the stroke in the midst and full of all its
strength.

But the baseness of this Passion is more apparent in that it is observed that
those who have no virtue in themselves are the only men that envy virtue in
others. This argues their stomachs are so envenomed, that what is the greatest
Cordial and best nourishment in others, is digested by them into deadly poison.
For can you give any other reason why the Jews envied the Savior of the World,
but because he was innocent and had done so many mighty works amongst them?

But yet I take it the English expresses it not so fully. They Envied, so they
might, and not attempt or be able to show their Envy. For Envy is Envy how
impotent soever it is: and therefore the Greek goes a little nearer the
Original, (...), they sinfully angered them: and this must be by some
transgression, some treacherous design or attempt upon Moses, and some
sacrilegious act against Aaron.

But this is not all, aemulati sunt, says the Latin, (...)says the Original,
both of them signifying they so envied them, that they did eodem studio
certare, strive to displace them and seat themselves in the same Authority.
Irritaverunt, they provoked them, concitando Schisma perniciosum and
Seditionem, etc. by stirring up a pernicious Schism and Sedition against him
and the Priesthood, says Menochius. And Marinus Brixianus renders it by Zelari,
and gives account of it thus: Est autem Zelari proprie in rem alterius
concupiscentia maxima ferri vel tuendi vel auferendi gratia: that is, it
signifies properly to covet (and eagerly too) another man's substance or
concerns, either to defend them in his behalf (but that good intention was far
from the Hearts of these men) or to take them totally from them.

So then it was apparently an Active Envy, and its aim was nothing less then
the Government of Church and State: and so you may plainly see the Contents of
the 16. Chapter of Numbers has done it no wrong in calling it the Rebellion of
Corah, Dathan and Abiram.

But hold. Suppose they had but sinned against them in Thought; why, even this
is a Rebellion by Solomon's rule. Speak not evil of the King, no not in thy
thought: for this is so heinous a Crime, that a Bird of the Air shall carry the
voice, (it seems in this case our very thoughts are clamorous) and that which
has wings shall tell the matter, Eccles 10.20. But you will easily find Corah was
not so modest a Rebel. Each word that proceeds out of his mouth is a Libel, and
his discourse wholly licentious. Indeed the least evil thought, much more the
least dis-respectfull word, is Rebellion against him. For Reverence is that
with which God girts his Anointed: whatsoever does abate that loosens the Belts
of Princes, and exposes them to contempt. But to describe their Rebellion a
little more particularly.

1. You must know Pride was the Mother of this Brat. This causes in them an
opinion of their own Parts and Excellencies, and that they are more fit to be
the Governors then the Governed. 2. This Pride and Ambition in the Heart grows
ready for the Birth and breaks out through the Mouth in Murmurings, depressing
of the Just Magistrate, and exalting of themselves. Thus, What is Moses but a
Man, subject to failings as well as we? and seeing we are all Holy, wherein are
not we as good as he? and the like sparks of the fire of Sedition, which they
cunningly strike out upon the People, who are always as ready as tinder to
receive them.

And it is not long e're it grows up into a Flame: a little Nitre added to it, a
small encouragement presently begets it. Moses in a while after sends forth his
Command to them to come before him, they peremptorily send him word, they will
not come up, Numb. 16.12. and in that you may see, they resolve to be no longer
obedient to him, but make good what the Septuagint says of them in the second
Verse, (...), they made an insurrection against Moses: and so the horrid and
hideous Monster Rebellion is brought to the Birth.

If you would inform your selves of its direful Nature, and take a view of its
ugly Shape, you can do it no better then by reflecting upon the objects of its
rage and madness. Moses whom God himself had set over them as their King and
Captain, must submit to their pleasure either to govern as they will have him,
or totally to desist from meddling with those affairs, which God himself had
entrusted to him. If he refuse, their Swords are presently drawn, and the great
Master of crude mischiefs, whose design it always was to animate a People
against God and his Anointed, has in all Ages taught his Disciples this Maxim
of Hell's Polity, that he who once draws his Sword against his Prince, must
throw away the Scabbard, and never so much as think of sheathing it again. In
this case the most base of all the base qualities of Envy is, that where it has
once done an injury it hates perpetually; and the more inveterate is its
perpetual hatred the less cause it had to do that injury. Nec iniqua finis in
ira. Tanto magis instat and ardet.

Another Object of their Rage is Aaron: the Sacrificer must become a Sacrifice;
and you may be sure the inferior Priesthood will in short time be made
partakers of the same lot. The Altar, as amongst some Heathens (for all are not
so barbarous) must run down with the blood of Men. If this be not a Sacrifice
to Devils I despair of ever knowing what is.

And did the inferior Laity think it would be better with them? If the Lives
of the Priesthood were invaded, did they think their Property could escape? I
could find in my heart to have so much charity for these Rebels, as to think
they would never have attempted Moses and Aaron's lives, if they could have
otherwise made themselves Masters, and continued secure in that Tyranny over
the Peoples Property. Thieves are seldom guilty of Murder, when they can rob
as securely without. They would never overburthen themselves with the
insupportable load of Blood upon their Souls if they could in safety carry away
the poor Traveller's money in their Pockets. In a Rebellion the blinded People
may think what they please, but it is their Fortunes and Property is the main
thing aimed at. This is it they resist God's Vicegerent and High Priest for.

And now can you imagine a greater Crime and more odious deformed Sin then to
take up Arms with the Giants in the Fable to beat God from his Throne?
Witchcraft if I mistake not is not so great being perhaps but a secret
renouncing of him and subscription to the power of Satan, without any act of
such hostility against God: and therefore the Crime of Rebellion cannot be put
in language bad enough. I am apt to believe there is no Language has words bad
enough to express it by; and that the Holy Ghost himself, by reason of our
Infirmities, has expressed it short of its guilt even when he called it as the
sin of Witchcraft. And may I not think the Reason there are so many Opinions
concerning the sin of the fallen Angels is, because it was certainly Rebellion;
but then that sin is of so vast dimensions, that no mortal man can ever
apprehend the utmost of its Guilt? and so I come to my last, the place where
they did it, in the Camp. They envied Moses, etc.

The Camp. That is, their own Houses. I, God forbid Satan should erect his
Council Table in the House of God; that Holy Ground should be profaned and
desecrated by such impious Consultations. In God's House we preach Obedience to
all lawful Powers. In God's House we make Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions, and Giving of thanks for all men, especially for Kings, 1 Timothy
2.1. This is the Practice of the Temple. But it should seem when we come to our
own Houses, in corners and private Conventicles, it is otherwise: those often
prove the Schools of Rebellion. But is it not a matter of sad consideration,
that when the Temples of God are those stately Edifices that make Civitatem
Dei, a whole Land the City of God, our own Houses should be that Babylon, or
City of Satan inhabited by Fiends, raising Rebellion against and designing the
ruin of it?

And yet you see Corah and his Accomplices have their Seditious Meetings in the
Tents, in which the Conspiracy is hatched against Moses God's Vicegerent, and
Aaron the Saint of the Lord. Veritas non quaerit Angulos: Truth and Honest
dealing dares stare the Sun in the face, only Treachery and Rebellion have
their lurking holes and secret places, till they are hatched up and grown big
enough to break forth. These are the fittest places for such Children of the
Prince of disorder and darkness: for he that does evil, says our Savior,
hates the light.

If Thoodosius the Emperor be in a fault (never was there Prince without but
the Prince of Peace) St. Ambrose does in the spirit of meekness admonish him of
it. Nathan a Prophet of the Lord reproves David. Saint John Baptist tells Herod
his duty. Nor these nor any Saint of God did ever creep into corners and secret
holes to lay their heads together, with the discontented spirits of the Times,
to raise a Rebellion against a Moses, or a David, or a Manasses, etc. to bring
them to their demands by open violence; and those that did received to
themselves damnation. Corah, if Rebellion be but as the sin of Witchcraft, will
not have wrong done him, if he be called the Conjurer that raised those evil
spirits; the Ground opens in his own Circle and devours him and his Accomplices.

Saint Jude tells us there were them in his time, that perished in the
gainsaying of Corah, and then, it seems, that sin of his may be acted over
again. And therefore having as well as I could described the sin, and showed
its punishment, I shall keep you no longer from your Prayers, that God would
please to make your own Houses partake of the service and blessings of his.
That as you ought to learn Obedience here, you may practice it at home; and as
you pray for all men, especially for Kings and all in authority in the Temple,
you may frequently and honestly repeat the same Petitions in your private
Closets.

To encourage you to Obedience, the most thank-worthy Duty that man can pay
unto his God, the only quality that is Sacred in man, consider, they are the
words of God, Obedience is better then Sacrifice; and in the performing this
most acceptable Service assure your selves, Our God who is the King of Kings,
who has delivered our Moses, our David, The Breath of our Nostrils, the
Anointed of the Lord, so often from the peril of the Sword; and so miraculously
and peaceably (a Blessing never to be forgotten but by wicked men) brought him
again to his People, and set him on the Throne of his Forefathers, will make
him a Patron of his People, a Nursing Father to his long-afflicted Handmaid the
Church of God amongst us. And he that has preserved us formerly from the
gathering together of the froward, and the insurrections of those wicked doers,
that were confederate against God and his Anointed, will still defend us from
all evils they shall contrive against us, and make us hereafter Kings and
Priests to live with him for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom with
the Father and the Blessed Spirit be ascribed as is due, All Honor, Glory,
Praise and Dominion, now and ever. Amen.

THE END.

