Catholic Loyalty: UPON THE SUBJECT OF GOVERNMENT and OBEDIENCE.

DELIVERED IN A SERMON, BEFORE THE King and Queen In his Majesty's
Chappel-Royal at WHITE HALL, On the Thirtieth of January, 1687.

Prove. VIII. 15. Per me Reges Regnant: By Me Kings Reign.

Published by his Majesty's Command.

By the Reverend Father EDWARD SCARISBRIKE, Priest of the Society of JESUS.

London: Printed for R. Booker. 1688.

TO HIS Sacred Majesty.
SIR,
IN Duty and Obedience to Your Majesty's Order, and in a most Profound and
Reverential Acknowledgment of the Honor of Your Royal Command, I have presumed
to lay these Papers at Your Sacred Feet, as the truly Catholic Doctrine of
that Society, whereof the Author has the Honor to be a Member; and who is, to
the highest degree of Veneration,

Sir, The most Dutiful of your Majesty's Subjects; EDWARD SCARISBRIKE.

Catholic Loyalty: Upon the Subject of GOVERNMENT and OBEDIENCE, etc.
Prove. VIII. 15. Per me Reges Regnant. By me Kings Reign.


HEre is a whole Sermon (Sacred Majesty) wrapped up in a short Text, of only four
words, Per me Reges Regnant: And in this plain, short Text, the Wisdom of God
Preaches to the Sons of men. It Preaches, I say, to All, without Exception; to
Rulers as well as to Subjects. It admonishes Kings, by whose Commission they
Govern, and Instructs the People at the same time, whom they are to Obey. If
the Irrefragable Doctrine, and the Vncontestable Authority of this Emphatical
Portion of Holy Writ, had been taken into Thought and laid to Heart, when time
was, as it ought to have been; there would have been no occasion for the Ruful
Solemnity of this days meeting: No Subject for an Anniversary, in perpetual
Memory (and Detestation) of so Execrable, Treasonous and Barbarous a Regicide:
A Regicide, committed in the Face of the Sun in Cold Blood, and under a Pretext
of Law; Nay, and to consummate the wickedness, by the Hands of Rebellious
Subjects, and before the very Gate of their Sovereigns Royal Palace.

This is not a place or an Argument for high Flights, or florid Discourses; but
without more words, it was a Diabolical Violence upon the Person and Dignity of
a Lawful, a Just, a Merciful and most Excellent Prince. Now if Innocent Blood
shall desite a Land, even in a private, single case of Murder; and barely for
defacing the Image of God in a kind of Theological Allusion or Figure; what
Judgments may not a Nation reasonably dread, and expect, from Gods Justice and
Vengeance, for so National, so Daring, so Complicated a Murder as this was! A
Murder, that carried Oppression, Treason, Sacrilege, and the whole Roll of
Crying Mortal Sins in the Veins of it. A Murder, that struck at the Divinity of
Power, as well as at the Administration of it; and at the same time attacqued
the Life of the Prince, and bid a defiance to his Royal Character.

Upon this consideration it is, that we are called together to Humble our
selves before Almighty God, with Fasting and Prayers, to Implore the Divine
Mercy to accept of our true Repentance and hearty Contrition for all our
bypast heinous Sins, and grant us his holy Grace, that we may live hereafter
in perfect Union and Charity, and in a dutiful Obedience to God and our
Governors, and in Love, Peace and Agreement with one another. For this reason
it is, that we are now met to prostrate our selves before the Father of
Mercies, most fervently to beseech him in his Infinite Goodness, to be Gracious
to our Brethren, as well as to our selves; and to avert that destroying
Vengeance which we may so justly fear, and cannot but tremble under the thought
of, for the almost inexpiable Sin of Blaspheming Gods Anointed, and for the
effusion of his Blood. Not but that I do in Charity hope, and in a full
persuasion of Reason presume, that every Soul that hears me this day, can lay
his Hand upon his Heart, and acquit himself of having had any part in this
Hellish Tragedy, either in Thought, Word or Deed, in a direct tendency to so
black an end. We cannot so much forget the Duties of our Profession, either as
Christians, as Catholics, or as Subjects, for we have been taught better
things; But a National Wickedness we know, calls for a National Punishment. And
briefly, Be it what it will, we are all Offenders, all Provokers, and every
good Christian is to bear his own Burden without Criminating Instruments or
Parties. No, Beloved Christians, Repentance and Forgiveness is the Work and
Duty of the day: and it would have a very ill Grace, whilst we are upon our
bended Knees, in Supplications to the Dispencer of all Mercies, for an Act of
Oblivion for our selves; at the same time not to allow an Amnesty one to
another.

But to hasten to my business, Here is a horrid thing done, which most
certainly would never have been done, if the Doers of it had but kept seriously
in their thoughts these words, Per me Reges Regnant, By me Kings Reign; and I
do not know a better preservative for the future, against these Principles and
Practices, that wrought all Our former Misery and Woe, than a plain Expounding
upon this Text, Per me Reges Regnant. St. Paul speaks to the same purpose, Non
est potestas nisi a Deo, C. xiii. V. 1. ad Romans That is to say, Government it
self, and all the Powers of Government, are of Divine Appointment and
Institution: And this shall be the first point of my Discourse.

Now if it be granted, that Government is of God, it follows necessarily, that
Subjection must be so too; for Order is the Excellency of Power it self; and
they derive both from the same Fountain. Superior is Nonsense without Inferior:
and the Relatives cannot stand one without another. If Governors be from God,
so are the Governed; if Power, so is Subjection. Briefly, I find one
Proposition here involved in another; and that the Obedience of the Subject
falls as naturally within the prospect of my Text, as the Power of the Prince:
and since they cannot be separated, I shall treat of both. First, of
Government, how sacred it is, as being of Divine Authority. Secondly, of
Obedience; with Doctrines and Applications suitable to the Matter and Occasion.
They are both joined in the Methods of Gods Providence in Nature, Reason,
Religion, Policy, Law, Practice: In a word, the same Power which appoints Kings
to Command, obliges Subjects to Obey. To understand these two important
Truths, we must beg the Assistance of the King of Kings and and Lord of all
Powers, by the Intercession of the Virgin Mary. Ave Maria.

The First Part.
IT is observable, that in the whole Book of Life, we do not find any thing
more plainly set down, more accurately read upon, or oftener inculcated, than
the Doctrine of the sacredness of Governing Powers, which is no more at last
than what naturally results from the very words of my Text: By me Kings Reign.

To begin with the Institution of Power, give me leave to put three short
Queries: 1. This Power; Is it so sacred? 2. Are we very certain that it is so?
3. With reverence to the Supposition, What if it be? I answer in order: First,
That it is as sacred as the having God the Author of it, can make any thing.
Secondly, We have the Veracity of Scripture that so it is; and lastly, If so it
be; there is no contending with an Almighty Power, who has placed Governors
and Rulers over us; no expostulating with an Infallible Wisdom, who knows what
is best for us; no playing fast and loose with an All-seeing God, who inspects
the Thoughts as well as the Actions: There is no room in this case either for
Fallacy, or force; Arms, or Arguments: But the Decretory four words here in my
Text, By me Kings Reign, confounds all Sophisms, dissolves all Scruples, stops
all mouths, and silences all Disputes. The challenges of the People, as if
Authority were radically in them; the contradictory persuasions of Co-ordinacy;
that is to say, of a sharing of Sovereignty amongst Subjects; the fancy of a
Conditional Power, and a Conditional Duty; (as if Kings were only the Trustees
of the People) the Paradox of a singulis major, universis minor; the conceit of
erecting Government upon the sandy foundation of a diffusive multitude: Take
all these Cavils and Objections, and as many more of the same kind as were ever
hammered out by the malice and wit of Hell, and corrupt Nature: In these two
little syllables, Per me, By me; they are all answered and put to flight like
the dust before the wind, and beyond all thought or possibility of resource:
Unless they will appeal from the Potter to the Clay; from Omnipotence to Flesh
and Blond; from the Truth of the Scriptures, to the Dreams of some here and
there -- What shall I say? some disaffected Achitophel, or Man of State. To
proceed: By whom was the World made? By me, says the Divine Wisdom. Whence had
the Stars their Influences? the Celestial Orbs their Motions? Vegetables and
Minerals their Virtues? Who was it, in fine, that made every thing out of
nothing by one word; and by another drew Order out of that Confusion? This was
all done, Per me still; and the original of Government was as much the work of
Gods Providence, as the Creation was of his Power. The holy Fathers speak so
home, and so unanimously to this point, that the multiplying of Instances and
Authorities, would but weary out your patience, and burn daylight.

You will do well to observe and still keep in your mind, that the Doctrine of
the Institution of Power, as I have here delivered it, is no other than that
which has been faithfully transmitted unto us by the blessed Author of Power
himself. Per me, By me, is a sufficient Testimonial that it is of Divine
Authority. But then there is Reges and Regnant, yet to come. And here we are to
take notice of the extent and term, or duration of this Commission. It is
spoken to all Kings, to all Sovereign Powers, under what form soever; and so it
is to all People, in all Places, at all Times, and for ever; without any sort
of condition, limitation, or restriction, in respect of Customs, Decrees, or
any Political Sanctions, or Provisions: I speak this with all reverence
imaginable to the Dignity of Humane Laws, and to the Order of Humane Society.
But my meaning is, that as God is the Fountain, the inexhaustible Fountain of
Power; and incomprehensible in all his Attributes, beyond what the Spirit of a
Man is able to conceive: so we cannot without Blasphemy so much as fancy to our
selves, that Wisdom it self can ever mistake its measures: Which Contemplation
brings me to the point I am now speaking of; which is, That all Humane Powers
are but as Emanations out of the Bosom of Gods Eternal Providence, without any
other respect to mankind, than as a Rule and Direction for them to Govern by:
Not but that Men are apt, instead of carrying the Copy to the Original, to
bring down the Original to the Copy. But still By me Kings reign, is a Doctrine
not to be questioned; an Authority not to be disputed, and a Foundation never
to be undermined.

But it will be said perchance, That the Universality of this Proposition goes
too far, and that the Canon of our Scripture is no Rule to a Pagan: I answer,
This is a Truth founded in reasonable Nature; A Truth that every Man finds writ
in his Heart; and in short, a Truth that is calculated for all Meridians, for
all Religions, for all Nations, Civil or Barbarous, with a particular regard to
the Comfort, the Peace, and the Well-being of Mankind. There are in the World
that take upon them to bound Sovereign Powers, by certain State-Measures and
Models, according to popular Conceptions of their own, and to furnish plausible
Arguments to the common People upon this subject. But these are Governments of
man making, not of Gods: and a sort of Kings, that King Solomon never dreamed
of, in his Per me Reges Regnant; By me Kings Reign.

You have had here the Dignity of Power secured, and the Officer Commissioned;
and the last word of my Text does now hand us forward, from the Faculty and
Signature of Power, to a Consideration of it in the Exercise, with a respect to
the right Use or Abuse of it. I shall not need to enlarge upon it, that in all
Power there is first a Regard to be had to the Character; and then again to the
Use or Administration of it. The first is wholly Divine and Perfect; the second
liable to the frailties and passions of Flesh and Blood; so that as the
Divinity of the one shall in no sort excuse the personal failings of the other:
Neither shall the Sacred Image of God that is stamped upon Sovereignty suffer
any diminution of Reverence for these mistakes; on the other hand it is not in
the Power of the Person to V-nking the Office; and much less in the Power of
the People to call Gods immediate Minister to an Account: It is Per me Reges;
by me Kings: Not per me Senatus Populusque: By me the Senate and the People
Reign, in an Imperial State. There is no room for Intruders, betwixt the King
of Kings and his Vicegerents. Be this spoken to the shame of Calumniators, and
to the confusion of those that instead of Trying the Crooked by the Straight,
bring the Straight to the Crooked; and force the Oracles of the Holy Scriptures
to the bent of their own Carnal Lusts, Interests and Designs. Is a Prince
Religious, Just, Gracious, Merciful? Is he Resolute in War, and Temperate in
Peace? Is he Firm to his Honor, to his Word, to his Conscience? Is he Tender
of his People and his Friends, and placable to his Enemies? Is he all this, and
as much more as might be added, to make up the most Consummated Character of a
Governor after Gods own Heart? Per me Regnat, He Reigns by me. On the
contrary, is his Government Heavy upon us by Oppression, by Injustice, by all
sorts of Vexations? Per me Regnat still. The Good and the Bad Prince are
Creatures both of the same Power, stamped with the same Impress, and as
inviolably Sacred the one as the other. Happy is that People however whose
blessed Lot it is to fall under the influence of so Divine a Conjunction; as
when the Person that Governs is previously adapted by Grace and Nature to all
the ends of his Office and Employments. I cannot pass this Hint without a
thankful Consideration of Gods infinite Mercy and Goodness to us, in the Person
of Our Dear and Dread Sovereign. It is no flattery, but Duty, Truth and
Gratitude, to own the Comforts we enjoy in the Confluence of all those Royal
Endowments in the Ruler whom God has set over us, which may make a Prince,
Great and Glorious, and a People Happy. A Blessing that has scarce left us any
Temporal Comforts further to pray for, beyond the Continuance of what by Gods
Mercy we at this day enjoy. A Prince under whose Protection we are safe; in
whose Clemency we are free and easy: A Prince whose Benignity of Nature has
left us nothing to fear; and whose overflowing Piety and Goodness has hardly
left us any Place for more to hope for. It would be as endless to Enumerate the
Mercys that we are possessed of, as it would be difficult to say what we want.
Blessed be Gods Holy Name, for the share we have, (all that are here present)
in so inestimable a Blessing; a Blessing that has been snatched out of the
very Jaws of so many several deaths, by as many Miracles. May the same
Watchful, Powerful Providence, still and for ever cover that sacred Head: and
preserve Him hereafter as hitherto, from his open, and from his secret Enemies;
and in one word, from the raging of the Seas and from the tumults of the
People. I have done with the Division of my Text in the several parts of it
upon the heads of Government: It remains only to speak a word of the whole, by
way of Innuendo or Application, taking it all together.

Per me Reges Regnant, By me Kings Reign. These few words in the Context,
Preach this Doctrine to all Kings and Governors: By me, it is you Monarchs of
the Earth, says the Almighty, that you Reign: You hold your Commission at my
Will and Pleasure; There is no other Power that has any thing to do with you.
I have placed you in the Throne of my Greatness, invested you with the Robes of
Dignity. I have armed you with the Sword of Justice, I have deposited all the
Ensigns of Majesty in your hands: Not for your selves to Alienate or Dispose
of, but in Trust, as you shall Answer it at my Tribunal. Who then shall dare to
Oppose You? You Reign by my Order, and who shall presume to dispute your
Authority? You Reign in my Name, and who shall Question your Deputation? In few
words, You Reign for me, in me, by me; stick to the Order I have given you, and
execute it. I will-have no sharers in Royalty; I will suffer no Popular
Competitions, whether the Prince or Subject shall be uppermost; or, which is
the same thing, whether God or Man shall be Master. Do you maintain the Dignity
and Prerogative of your Commission; and I Will maintain the Sacredness of your
Persons. Do not suffer your selves to be transported in the Contemplation of
the dazzling Splendour of a Crown: But look up to the Original of all your
Greatness and Glory, in whom you Live, you Move and have your Being: and by
whom Kings Reign, Per me Reges Regnant.

But it is time now that I speak a word to the Subject, upon the point of the
Obligation of his Obedience; for the same Power (as I have said) which ordains
Kings to Command, obliges Subjects to Obey.

The Second Part.
IN this member of the Partition I shall observe the same Method of
Distribution I did in the former. Per me, etc. By me Kings Reign. That is to
say, God makes Kings, and Commissions them to Govern. Do they Govern well?
Thank God and bless Heaven for it. Do they Misgovern? There is no affronting
the Minister upon any account whatsoever, without falling foul upon the
Ordinance, and consequently breaking in upon the Divine Authority it self. The
common Objection upon this Topique is this; Rulers are to be a terror to Evil
Doers, not to those who do well; and that the Almighty Wisdom never gave a
Commission of Power to destroy the main Ends of Government, which consists in
the Order and Peace of humane Society. Put case that this Power may be sometime
perverted. Is Fire and Water ever the less necessary for the Use and Comfort of
Life, because of now and then a Deluge or Conflagration? The Possibility of an
abuse of Power is Incontestable; for a Prince cannot Defend or Protect his
People, without such a force as may enable him to oppress them. But what need
many words? Every man stands or falls to his own Master: he that gives, may
take; he that sets up, may cast down. By me Kings Reign, is exclusive of any
other Commission. It sounds as much, as by me alone they Reign: Which is all
one with saying in the Inference, To me alone shall they account for the
Execution of their Trust.

It would be well, if all the Despisers of Dignities, and the Murmurers against
the ordinary Courses of Gods Providence in the Government of the World, would
thoroughly weigh and consider the Force, the Intent and Authority of this same
Per me, in my Text, before they enter into Censorious Expostulations with God
himself, about the Prerogative of his Ordinance of Power; or with Gods
Ministers, about certain imaginary Conditions, which they fancy to be implied
or included in their Original Grant. If they would but give themselves time for
one sober Thought upon this matter, it is impossible but they must be convinced
of the Vanity and Folly of all those Popular Schemes and Systemes of Power,
which Ambition and Carnal Policy have fashioned to themselves. Are they afraid
of Tyranny, and not of Anarchy? The one, at the worst, is only Personal,
Temporary, Local; the other extends to all Men, to all Times, to all Purposes,
to all Places, and Embroyls Humane Society in a Civil War over the Face of the
whole Earth. But what is it at last that the Troublers of Public Order
contend for? Would they be Uppermost? There is no Uppermost upon a Level; and
that is the very point before us. As for Liberty and Property, there is no such
thing, where all is Common. Our Reason tells us so, and upon woeful Experience
we have found it so. There is no thought of removing the bounds that God has
set us: no place for Reforming or Refining upon the Regulations of Providence;
Government and Governors are Sacred and Inseparaable: God has joined them,
and Man is not to divide them. It has a more pardonable appearance, I must
confess, to wage War with Man, then with God. But what is the difference
betwixt saying to the Almighty, We will have none of your Governors; and we
will have none of your Government. Non te abjecerunt, Sed me, says God to
Samuel, They have not cast you off, but in you, Me they have Rejected. For it
is not only Per me, By me, But Pro me, For me, that Kings Govern: That is to
say, It is in Gods stead, as well as by his Divine Commission that they Reign;
they are covered over with the Rays of his Glory, and are the Instruments of
his Wisdom, as well as the Creatures of his Power.

Per me (By me) that Kings Reign, is a word of Comfort to the Obedient, seeing
they have the Creator of Heaven and Earth for their Protector: and it is a word
of Terror on the other hand, to the Stubborn or Rebellious; when they consider
that they Fight against God, and have the Lord of Hosts for their Avenger. And
there is no place neither for doubting whether it be Per me, or not; for Truth
it self has made Proclamatation of it, in the very Syllables of my Text. There
seems to be a certain kind of Rhetoritical Dignity in the very Marshaling of
the words; a particular Emphasis in this same Per me, that puts a little stop
to a man's thought, as if it were to bespeak a Reverence for that which follows:
the very style imports a Declaration, with a Be it known to Men and Angels, to
Heaven and Earth, that by me Kings Reign. So that as the Obedient are sure of
Gods Favor and Indulgence, so the Almighty takes to Himself all the
Indignities that are offered to Majesty. They that make no Conscience of laying
Violent hands upon the Thrones or the Persons of Kings, would not spare the
Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, if they could reach him. Whosoever strikes
at the Divine Order of the World, strikes at the Power and Wisdom that Created
it. Take away that Order, and what is the remaining Mass without it, more than
the Chemists Caput Mortuum, that serves for nouse or purpose?

I cannot but take notice here, over and above, of the Indubitable Truth and
Authority of the Assertion; that By me Kings Reign; carries a much greater
weight and force with it, then (Kings Reign by Me) the latter imports only a
bare Answer to a plain Question. As if a body should say, By whom do Kings
Reign? By me, says my Text. The other with a wonderful Energy, determines the
Question by Anticipation. He goes too far that doubts. The whole Scheme of
Power is accurately Delineated and in the uttermost extent of it, as fully
comprehended in these four words: The very Stamp consecrates the Matter; and
challenges a Resignation, even before and without knowing what our Obedience is
to be exercised upon. For all the measures we have of Good or Evil, are the
proportion our Thoughts, Words and Actions hold to the Holy Will and Pleasure
of Our Heavenly Father. It is Per me, that teaches the People their Duty, sets
them Right, and keeps them right: It prevents Mistakes, clears all Cavils, and
answers all Pious Ends: And in all cases of Difficulty, Claim or Dispute,
whether should we fly, but to the Original of Power, with our last Appeals? It
is Per me in fine, and only Per me, that decides all Controversy.

We are now come in course to the two remaining parts of my Text, Reges and
Regnant, Kings and Reign. These words give the People to understand, that their
Governors are Gods Ministers, and so there is no meddling with them; and as the
Prerogatives of Government are Gods Powers, so there is no controulling them.

It would be hard after all this, yet if the Opposers of Royalty and Royal
Preheminences, should not find something at last to say for themselves in
Excuse, at least, if not in Defense of their departure from the Doctrine of the
Revealed Will of God, as we read it both in his Holy Word, and in the common
Principles of Reason and Nature. It is their way to hold their Disciples in
hand, that the Per me here in the Text, does not so much import an
Authoritative Institution, as a Permission of Government; as if Order were the
work of Passion, Interest or Chance: and an effect rather of Humane Necessity,
then of Divine Appointment. The very fancy of such a Permission, is little less
then Blasphemy: for it lays the Foundation of all Policy, in Blood and
Confusion; so that out of War, and from plain Cutting of Throats, comes forth
the Whimsey of their distinction of a Divine Permission.

There are others again, that will allow Kings to Govern as Gods Ministers; but
for the behoof of the People; infer a forfeiture of their Right to Govern, from
a violation of their Commission. These People are not aware, that the Character
does not depend upon the Administration: for whatever the Man be, the King is
Gods Ruler still, and the People are still the Kings Subjects. The
Administration I say, does not dissolve the Relation. To sum up all in a few
words; Kings are Gods Deputies, and the Powers of their Commission are of no
less Authority than the Character of their Creation. It is God that is the
Author of both; and the Duty of our Allegiance is of the same extraction with
the function of the Government. What is Reigning, without Subjection? What Is
the Dignity of Power, without the Obligation of Submission or Obedience? Or
what is Government it self, but such a Chain of Connection, as if but one Link
of it be taken out, the whole Frame would be in danger to fall to pieces? To
pass now from the Doctrine to the Application. How vain, how foolish, and how
impious is it for men to contend with an invincible, and irresistible Power,
and to oppose false Glosses and Reasonings, to the undeniable voice of Truth?
In a word, the Foundations of Power are laid in the Decrees of God, and there
is no undermining of them. By me Kings Reign; denounces a thousand woes to the
Undutiful and Seditious. Who shall dare to say they shall not Reign, when God
says they shall? And especially upon the Terms of a Qui resistunt sibi ipsi
condemnationem ferent.

This minds me of the Celebrity of this day; a day for Sackcloath and Ashes: A
day of Blackness and Horror: A day not to be mentioned, not to be thought of,
but with weeping Eyes, and bleeding Hearts: A day of Sin, and a day of
Judgment, meeting in the same Act; as in a kind of deplorable Contention, which
of the two should exceed the other. No Age, no Story can match either the
Transcendent Degree, or the Daring Pomp and Ostentation of this wickedness. In
short, behold a Great, a Glorious, and a Gracious Prince, exposed upon a Stage
as a Criminal of State: Arraigned, Tried and Sentenced as a Traitor to his own
Subjects; and his Head severed from his Body by the Common Ax, under a form of
Justice. You have here before you the fruit of a Rebellion, that perfected the
Ruin of Three Kingdoms in the Murder of their Sovereign. The Common People
felt on it too; and by contending for an unnatural Freedom, became the most
wretched and contemptible of Slaves: I shall not need to run into History, and
rifle the Journals of those days, for instances of Merciless, and of Inexorable
Cruelties. The Havoc that was made upon the Subjects Liberties and Properties;
the Depredations upon the Revenues of the Crowns; the Oppressions of Widows and
Orphans, the Sacrilegious abuse of Holy Places, and Holy things, the concurring
eviednces of the numerous Train of crying sins which were cast in, to inflame
the Reckoning. This was our miserable condition. This, and as much worse, as it
is possible for any man to imagine. And how could it well be otherwise, so long
as the Laws were either silenced, or turned like Guns against their Master: and
all Controversies left to the Decision of the Sword?

What have I to do now, beloved Christians, but to beseech you to ponder well
these things, and by a close and affectionate application of matters, to see
what good may be drawn out of evil. Here was Resistance with a Vengeance. A
Resistance attended with all sorts of Sins, to draw on all sorts of Calamities:
and the Punishment still treading upon heel of the wickedness. I would beg of
you, as you love God and your Sovereign, your Souls, Bodies, Liberties and
Estates; as you tender your Religion, your Country, Peace of Conscience, and a
Good Name; do but look back now into the leading causes to these dismal
effects. Consider the Reasonable Tendency and Operation of them; and how
naturally one thing passes into another through the whole series of this
History, from first to last. You will find upon the scrutiny, that this Bloody
Rebellion began in Thought, Thoughts broke into hard Words, and those Words
were followed with Blows.

They began first with Jelousies, Fears, Misunderstandings, Misinformations,
Invidious Reflections, False Reports, False Appearances of things; and from
thence, sprung impotent Passions, Provoking Language, Bold and Intemperate
Words, Audacious Prints and Discourses in diminution of the Royal Dignity,
Character and Administration: for the making of the Prince Cheap and
Contemptible, And at the same time, Clamorous Remonstrances and Complaints were
blown about to render him as Odious to the Common People; while the multitude
in the mean while were misled by false Doctrines about the Original and
Sacredness of Power, by false Notions of qualifying Conditions, cases of
Government mis-stated, false Descants upon the Laws; and the Liberties of the
Subject set above the Prerogative of the Prince: These were the intoxicating
Amusements that poisoned the Understandings of the Ignorant; this was that
License that put things to extremities; and without consideration either of
Heaven or Hell, hurried us into those barbarous confusions that brought Charles
the First of happy memory to the Scaffold. This was the Root of all our Woes;
and from hence we may gather the necessity of setting a Guard upon our Actions,
our Lips and our very Thoughts. Upon our Thoughts, not only by the exclusion of
rash Censures, but with a regard to the reverence of Imperial Edicts and
Commands. And so upon our words; for the Reviling of a Prince, is a foul step
toward the Beheading of him. The wounding of him in his Honor, is only a
slyer way of striking him to the Heart. But pray take notice, I do not speak of
Words only of Outrage and Disrespect; for the sins of Omission are sins of
Commission, in this case: the want of Love and Affection is a grand failure in
Duty. Neuters are lost to the ends and service of Government; and men grow cold
by example. The ways of Flattery and Reproach are in some sort somewhat akin.
That Is the most dangerous flattery that is covered under an artificial
appearance of Reproof; and that the most Popular and Operative Calumny, that is
couched under the countenance of Good Faith, Compassion and Respect; with the
sting of a But in the tail of it. We are not only to Obey Kings, but to Please
them also, in all things not repugnant to the will and commands of a just and a
gracious God. Nay we do but discharge our souls toward God himself in so
doing. Let me add, that Obedience at last is not so much the Ornament of a
Christian, as a peremptory Obligation upon him: a Duty that he is bound to,
upon a Penalty. But to perfect the Character, there must be certain free will
offerings over and above: There must be a study to please, and industry to find
out what will please; a Joy in the Discovery of it, and Cheerfulness in the
Performance. Lord, cries out a Pagan upon this Topique, If I had known thy
Will, my Obedience should have prevented thy Command: Shall the Feet presume to
direct the Head? or the Animal Nature take upon it self to give Laws to the
Reasonable? Such as the Soul is to the Body, such is the Ruler to those that
God's Wisdom has placed in a state of Subjection. It Is the Office of the One
to Direct, and of the Other to Excuse; without the Indisputable Authority of
the One, the Obedience of the Other, is but Precarious; and it is left at the
choice of the Multitude, whether they shall think fit to be Above, or Below;
what Government to Resolve upon, or whether there shall be any Government or
no. My words are too scant for my affections, and my Time for my Matter: But
before I Conclude, I beseech you turn your Eyes yet once back again upon the
Judicial Tragedy that has occasioned this Anniversary. Be not imposed upon
hereafter by false Maxims and Rumors; let us be Wise, though at the cost, upon
Miserable Experiment, of Royal Blood, and Three desolated Kingdoms. Beware of
Wolves in Sheeps clothing. May God open your Eyes, that you may see and discern
the Blessings which you do this day enjoy; and grant that the calamities of the
last Age may be documental to the present, and those Ages that are yet to come.
In a word, I shall commend to every one this General Rule to walk by. Where
ever you find private Medlers in Politics, commenting upon the Kings
Prerogatives; or haranguing to the People, upon the subject of
Maladministration; know it to be a seditious Post, and Practice that they
have taken up, for the undermining of the Grown: and that there is most
certainly a Snake under that Leaf. These are not Liberties to be either given
or taken; for when men are once possessed with cross Principles, so as to set up
Conscience against Duty, to make God and the King, Plaintiff and Defendant; the
Honester the men are, the more desperate is the Conspiracy.

I am not unmindful that I have passed my, measures; but it is the goodness of
Gods Providence many times to turn Mourning into Rejoicing; and to improve our
deepest Humiliations into an occasion of Thansgiving. We have proceeded thus
far in a dutiful, and a sorrowful reflection upon the most execrable Murder of
one of the best of Princes; whose Memory ought to be for ever tender and dear
to us, not only for the sake of his Royal Blood, Function and Qualities; but as
he was moreover the Instrument of Divine Providence, in transmitting unto us
the Blessings, (in Compensation of so inestimable a Loss) which through God's
Mercy we at this day enjoy, in the Life, Virtues and Government of our most
Gracious Sovereign, whom God long preserve. A Prince, in short, of Piety,
Tenderness, and Justice, to the Perfect wish of all Good Men, and to the
uttermost possibility of flesh and blood. May the Spirit of Grace and Wisdom
rest upon his Sacred Head. May his Life be long, and his Reign happy; happy in
Himself, in His Illustrious Consort, and in a never-failing Succession, to
inherit the Virtues as well as the Crown of their Royal Progenitors. And it is,
finally, our fault, beloved Christians, if we do not contribute all that is
possible, by a cheerful and an Indispensable Resignation and Obedience, to the
further comfort and satisfaction of a Prince, whom God, in a manner,
miraculously has placed over us. For a conclusion, I wish the words of my
Text, Per me Reges Regnant, By me Kings Reign, which have been so often in my
mouth, were deeply writ in your hearts; that so having discharged our Duty in
this Life toward God, and our King, we may come all in the next to Reign for
ever, with the King of Kings; which God of his infinite goodness grant us. In
Nomine Patris, etc.

FINIS.

