SOME ACCOUNT OF THE TRANSACTIONS OF Mr. William Paterson, In Relation to The
BANK of England, AND The Orphans Fund.

In a LETTER to a Friend.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXCV.

SOME ACCOUNT OF THE TRANSACTIONS OF Mr. William Paterson, etc. In a LETTER,
etc.
SIR,
BY your last to me, you signify your Trouble to hear that our Friend Mr.
Paterson, after so much Expense, Pains and Patience, in the course of several
Years, in his promoting the Fund of the Bank of England, with so great success,
should instead of being satisfied with the Honor and Profit thereof, prove so
inconsistent with himself and what he was engaged in, as in a few Months to
begin another Design, so opposite to the Bank as you understand the Orphans
Fund to be; and this being so unaccountably otherwise than what you had
expected from Mr. Paterson, you desire to be informed of the particulars
relating thereunto.

Your Commands as well as my own Inclination easily induced me to inform my
self of those Matters of Fact, which I find to be thus: Paterson's return into
England, from Transacting some Affairs of his own abroad, where among other his
Insights in Trade and Improvements, he had learned the Use and Convenience of
Transferrable Funds of Interest, and how Beneficial such might be to the Real
and Personal Estates of England, if Incorporated with Funds of ready Money to
quicken and circulate the same. And likewise considering how much such an
Institution might contribute to the support of the Nation in the present War;
he drew up a Scheme thereof, and proposed the same to some considerable Persons
in the Revenue.

But whether it was that those great Men were not much acquainted with the
Principals of Trade and Revenue, and the practice abroad; or from what other
cause, it is not for me to determine: But as plain and as easy as it was, and
some of the same Persons think it now, it could not or would not be then
understood; nor would they venture upon this new way of raising Money, as they
called it, without a considerable Number of Creditable Vouchers; upon which Mr.
Paterson was advised to make a Company, or voluntary Society of Monied Men, to
countenance and support the Proposal. This Society was accordingly formed, and
consisted of upwards of Twenty Persons, of Estates and Reputation: But after
much time spent, neither the Reasons of the Persons concerned, nor the
Reputation they had in the World, could prevail, unless they would become
obliged to the King for the Sum proposed to be raised. You can well think
this put the whole Company to stand, when instead of such Reception and
Encouragement, as they had Reason to expect, they found themselves put to the
Test of Personal Obligations to the KING for a Million or Two of Money.

But as an Expedient, it was proposed by some, that the Bills should be made
Current, that so they might of course supply the Government with the Money: But
this was by others opposed, and after many Disputes found impracticable, as
tending to reduce every thing to Confusion and Uncertainty, and yet not be the
nearer, but much the further, from Answering the proposed End; thus the Society
were discouraged and broken to pieces.

But Mr. Paterson endeavored to get the Experiment made upon a small Sum,
and to that end induced such of the Society as were not yet fallen off, and
some others, to offer themselves to become Obliged for a Sum not exceeding
Five Hundred Thousand Pounds, to be raised upon a Transferrable Fund of
Interest: But the Ministers would not play at such small Games as these, so the
first Year passed without doing any thing in it.

Paterson resolved to persist, and spent most of the ensuing Summer in suiting
his Proposal to the Time and Circumstance, and in forming a Society to
undertake for a Considerable Sum of ready Money to quicken and circulate the
Sum proposed to be raised by Parliament: But the Sum of ready Money being
only Two Hundred Thousand Pounds proposed to circulate a Million, it was
refused, unless the Undertakers would become Obliged for the whole; so the
Proposed Sum of Ten Hundred Thousand Pounds was raised upon the Project of
Survivorship and Lives at Fourteen per Cent. and the Transferrable Fund of
Interest still postpon'd.

Paterson, who ceased not, Night or Day, Summer or Winter, to do his utmost in
promoting his Proposal, and after every Repulse to bring it about again,
judging that though the Men of our Times had neither strength of Mind, nor
Virtue enough to apprehend and encourage so plain and useful a thing, yet it
was not impossible but at one time or other even their Weakness might be
prevailed upon, by long Cultivation and unwearied Solicitations, or at least
the Necessity of Affairs, might so order it, that when they had gone through
all the bad ways of raising Money, they might happen upon some good ones at
last, whereof this might be one: But by the continual Fatigues and Troubles
both of his Body and Mind, his Health was exceedingly impaired, and likewise
his Affairs, which were considerable, were very much prejudiced both at home
and abroad: But nevertheless he resolved still to try what could be done in the
Sessions of Parliament of the Year 1693.

Some time before that Session a Minister, of State sent for Mr. Paterson, and
much encouraged him once more to set it afoot, upon which he drew a Proposal
for raising two Millions, at Seven per Cent per Annum; but when this had been
bandyed at Court upon several Occasions, and particularly in the Treasury, the
Lords were of Opinion there could be no Dependence upon the Money by this Fund,
unless there were an Undertaking for the Sum proposed, or at least for some
considerable part thereof: Upon this Mr. Paterson was obliged to frame a New
Society, to consist of Forty Men, with Five Thousand pounds each, to be a Fund
of ready Money, to circulate Ten Hundred Thousand pounds, proposed to be raised
upon a Fund of Interest of Eight per Cent; but when it came to be Debated
again, the Officers of the Revenue, who had been in the Management of the Tally
Trade, and much devoted to the Old Norman Rules, made their Computation, that
as they had been obliged to give Twenty, Thirty, nay, sometimes Forty per Cent.
or more Discount for Tallies, with Eight per Cent. Interest, that had but four
or five years, or less to run, by this sort of Arithmetic the Tallies as they
called them upon this Bank or Perpertual Fund, being never like to be paid,
must be at least double the Discount; so that the Undertakers must of Necessity
lose all their Money, and yet the KING could not be sure of half what was
Proposed. Thus we see our Prince has sometimes had the Misfortune to have
least Credit by those who were nearest his Person. While things were thus in
Suspense, some of the Undertakers, though much against Mr. Paterson's Opinion,
took Advantage of the Despondency of the Courtiers, and resolved to get as much
as they could, how unreasonable soever; they therefore proposed that for a
further Encouragement for the Proposers, and greater Security, that the Money
should come in, that there might not only be Eight per Cent. per Annum, paid
for the Ten Hundred Thousand pounds to be raised for the Government, but also
Eight per Cent. per Annum more for the two Hundred thousand Pounds designed to
circulate the same, to which the Treasury readily agreed.

Thus the KING must have paid Eight per Cent. per Annum, for for Twelve Hundred
Thousands Pounds, and had but Ten Hundred Thousand, which would have made near
Ten per Cent. per Annum Interest upon the Money raised, but some Gentlemen in
the House of Commons opposed, that this would be too great a profit for the
Undertakers if the Money should come in; and here was but Two Hundred Thousand
pound Security for the raising of Ten, wherefore they thought it not
reasonable, unless the Undertakers would become obliged for the whole; and
others thought it a great deal too much, as indeed it was. Thus the Proposal
was dashed again, and the Million Lottery succeeded it.

After this Mr. Paterson framed his Proposal anew, for raising of Twelve
Hundred Thousand pounds, upon a Fund of One Hundred Thousand pounds a Year, and
drew some Clauses to that effect. About this time Mr. Michael Godfrey, a Person
of great Parts and Industry, and well known at Court and in the House of
Commons, began to Understand and espouse the matter, and with him joined some
of the late Solicitors against the East India Company; who being disappointed
of their Expectations therein, were now the more at leisure; most of those
Gentlemen in the beginning knew little or nothing of the matter, being induced
to espouse it rather from Example than Reason, but by those Men's appearing
therein, several Persons who opposed it before fell in with it now, and such as
could not be gained by reason before, came now over by Example. So that after
all its Revolutions, the thing was at last reduced to its first Basis, a
Voluntary Subscription.

Thus notwithstanding all the Industry and Expense of Mr. Paterson, backed by
so many considerable Persons for Parts and Estates he could never bring those
whose Interest and Business it was, to understand it, until he was overtopt and
brow-beaten by such as were strangers both to him and the Business; and that
instead of being at the Head thereof, as he had hitherto been, he was now
obliged to promote his Sentiments in the Treasury and elsewhere by others, who
were still but raw in the matter, and when it came to the Regulations of the
Charter, some who had spent so much of their time in finding Faults with the
East India Company and others, that they had forgot most of their own, being
rather prepossessed with prejudice against other People, than furnished with
right Reason or Justness of Temper themselves: It was commonly reasonable
enough for them if things were but settled otherwise than they were in the
Constitution and Practice of the East India Company.

After the Difficulties were over, and the Subscriptions begun, and had Success
beyond the hopes of its Friends, or the Expectations of any; though Mr. Paterson
was known to be the Original Contriver of the Bank by such as were acquainted
with him, yet the common Vogue and cry went for others, who at that time were
more known and Popular than he; who Disdaining officiously to put himself
forward, he had probably not been Chosen a Director, had not some of his
Acquaintance, who were moved with a sense of Justice and Gratitude as well as
Zeal to the Bank, been apprehensive he might be left out but a Day or two
before the Election.

When the Directors were Chosen, it appeared that some were brought in by
Side-winds, some by Parties, and others by Accidental Reputations, without any
Consideration of their fitness for the Bank, among whom were not a few who had
always been the most unaccountable Enemy's thereof; and now being brought over
and convinced by Example and Success; they took the Scent, followed the Crowd,
and when they were promoted, they began to lay about them amain; what they
wanted in Reason they made up in Assurance, and though they thought and did less
of the Essential Business of the Bank than others, yet to furnish their Quoto
one way or other, they generally said more; but still such as best understood,
and most promoted the true Interest of the Bank had always a great Value for
Mr. Paterson, and a due sense of what he had done, and his Experience therein,
so far as they were acquainted therewith; of which Respects and Kindness the
Proselytes had no small jealousy, and what they could not directly do in
opposition thereunto, they practiced otherwise; sometimes saying, They were not
Apprised of Mr. Paterson's Services; and at other times, That it was not the
Business of the Directors, but of the KING, the Treasury, or the General Court
of the Bank, or of all of them to Gratify him; but however it were, they would
not move a Finger therein. Thus all that was done in it, was only a
Recommendation to the Lords of the Treasury for a Thousand Pounds for Mr.
Paterson's Charges, and something said of Recommending him to the KING for a
further Reward. This happened about the beginning of February last.

All this Mr. Paterson took patiently, resolving not to leave the Bank, though
that had so much left him, until he was obliged by the following Accidents to
do what otherwise he never intended; for more than two Years past Mr. Paterson
had informed himself of some things which might contribute toward the
introduceing of a Voluntary Register for Lands; but this he always reserved
until that either by the Legislative Power, or some Voluntary Constitution a
Bank might be Established in England, the Practice of which would render the
Introduction of this more easy and profitable to the Undertakers; and the Bank
of England being now fully settled, he considered that after the Treatment he
had met with therein, he had no Reason to expect any sort of suitable Return
for this or any other of his Contrivances from the Bank: And besides that, the
Directors were utterly averse from doing any thing in Land: To which may be
added, that Mr. Paterson had been long enough a Servant to the Public, and
neglected himself, it concerned him the more to take some Care that he might
partake of the good as well as the bad success of what he should contrive and
set afoot in time to come; he therefore inclined to have this Fund for a
Voluntary Register, separate and appart from the Bank; and to that end pitched
upon the perpetual Fund of Interest payable to the Orphans and other Creditors
of the City of London; but was so far from designing any prejudice to the Bank
thereby, that he consulted some of the Directors thereof, whom he esteemed his
particular Friends, some of whom slighted it as they used to do every thing
else at first; but others though they would not be concerned, approved thereof,
and gave Mr. Paterson their best Advice therein, so far were they from thinking
it would interfere with the Bank. Upon this a Proposal was framed, and a
Subscription begun for Four Hundred Thousand Pounds.

But when the Subscriptions upon the Orphans Credit was begun, and the
Proposals public at a Court of Directors, Mr. Paterson being present, one of
the Directors presented one of the Proposals to the Governor in order to be
read, which being done, Mr. Paterson stood up, and acquainted the Governor
that this Proposal related to him, and by what he perceived, supposed that some
of the Gentlemen might think it a Design to Interfere with the Bank; that he
was ready to satisfy the Court he had no such Designs, whatever the
consequence might be, and in order to such satisfaction, if they pleased to
appoint a Committee, he was ready to impart his whole Design to them, of which
they would be Judges: Upon which one of the Directors, who I dare say meant no
ill to Mr. Paterson, whatever use others made on it, but only being a
Motion-Maker, what was in must out, stood up and said, that it was not as he
conceived so much their Business to enquire into what Mr. Paterson designed, as
to enquire if what he had done was consistent with his Duty, and the Trust in
him reposed; so upon this Mr. Paterson withdrew, expecting they would enter
upon some Debates among themselves, and give him time to speak for and clear
himself; not so much as supposing they would proceed to Censure, much less to
conclude him, before he were heard; but in his Absence they not only made their
own Constructions of his Actions, but even of his Words, and to make short work
on it came to the following, or a Resolution to this Effect, viz.

That the Subscription upon the Orphans Fund of Interest was prejudicial to the
Band, and that it was a Breach of Trust for any Director to promote the same.

Some of the most moderate were only for Inserting, that it was unbecoming a
Director, and for leaving out the hard Expression of a breach of Trust, but the
Zeal of the New Converts prevailed, so no Moderation or Temper would be
admitted. Mr. Paterson returned before the Court was up, upon which the
Governor acquainted him with the said Resolution, and withal, that it was not
the Opinion of any of the Directors, that Mr. Paterson had any Design of doing
the Bank a prejudice, but that others would make use of him as a handle for
Designs he never Intended; upon this Mr. Paterson thanked the Directors for
their good Opinion of, and Justice to him, and said he could not answer for
Consequences, but that he was much surprised to find that what the Governor
acquainted him with was so directly contrary to their Resolution, which plainly
Voted him guilty of a breach of Trust; that in all the Transactions of his Life
he had been the most nicely tender, and had the highest regard for his
Integrity and Reputation; and it grieved him exceedingly to find that now
struck at, and that so undeservedly, from the Bank of England, from which he
had Reason to expect other things; that it was strange they should Vote him
guilty of a breach of Trust for a may be, and by their own Confession not for a
may be of his own, but of other peoples; that he was the first, and perhaps the
greatest Benefactor of the Bank; that besides the Labor of several Years, he
had expended, lost, and been damnify'd more than Five Thousand Pounds in
promoting thereof: That notwithstanding he was so much a Sufferer, yet had he
in a great measure hitherto held his peace, and not put himself forward, as
under the like Circumstances some others would have done; that he was moved to
say what he said, by apprehending himself exceedingly wronged, wherefore he
hoped the Directors upon further thoughts would alter their Resolution, and the
more because otherwise all terms and means of a future Correspondence were
broke; for he could not in Prudence, and Justice to himself, converse with
those who had so wrongfully adjudged him guilty of a breach of Trust, as he
apprehended they had done.

The Governor made Answer, That it was not as he conceived, the Business of
the Directors, but of the Government, or a General Court of the Bank, to
gratify Mr. Paterson, and seemed much concerned at Mr. Paterson's Pretensions,
who thereupon withdrew, hoping they would alter their Resolution, but nothing
of that Nature was done. After this Mr. Paterson being willing to remove all
Occasion of Offense, how ill grounded soever, and rather to remain a Friend to
the Bank that had cost him so dear, though he were sure to be a loser, than be a
gainer by any thing else that might but seem to interfere therewith; and
considering that what by the Animosities of Men, and by Consequences, that it
was impossible for him to foresee this Design of his might possibly come to be
prejudicial to, and interfere with the Bank, though never so much contrary to his
Intentions. The next Court of Directors he appeared, and freely communicated to
them his Design in its utmost Extent, in order to have their Judgments therein,
the better to prevent what might be prejudicial to or interfere with the Bank.
What he communicated to them was as follows, First, That the Subscriptions was
designed for a Fund to Insure Titles of Land. Secondly, To Negotiate in Trusts
and Settlements. Thirdly, To borrow and lend Money upon Land.


Thus you see the two first could not in any sort prejudice the Bank, and the
last was only a Consequence of the former, and arose from the Necessity
occasioned by the Banks aversness from meddling with Land. Thus Mr. Paterson
endeavored still to open the way for a good understanding, and to decline
every thing that might but seem to interfere with the Bank; but when he was
withdrawn, they entered into a Debate, whither what he had offered was
satisfactory, which was carried in the Negative, and it was moved and carried,
that though the Court of Directors could not suspend a Member thereof, yet they
resolved that the Governor should acquaint Mr. Paterson that it was their
Opinion that he should decline his Attendance among them, until this
Misunderstanding should be composed.

Thus they not only persisted in not suffering Mr. Paterson to answer for or
explain himself, but presumed in Effect to Suspend a Director without a General
Court, to whom they are only answerable. But Mr. Paterson having no certain
Information of these Resolutions, appeared at the next Court of Directors, but
being somewhat late, the Minutes of the preceding Court were read, and they
were entered upon other Business; where when Mr. Paterson had staid a
considerable time, some of the Directers began to whisper the Deputy Governor,
who was then in the Chair; upon which he abruptly broke off from other
Business, and ordered the Secretary to read some part of the last Minutes,
which are mentioned before relating to Mr. Paterson, who thereupon stood up and
said, that by these Resolutions he perceived the Directors still persisted to
conclude him in his Absence; that since they had given him this Occasion, he
should not only decline coming among them, but also the being a Director, and
should give place to some or other of whose Head they might have less Cause of
Jealousy, but never to any whose Heart was more true to the Bank; that although
what the Bank had done for him laid no Obligations, but much the contrary, yet
what he had done for that should always induce him to Wish its Prosperity;
upon which he withdrew, and in a few days after Transferred his Stock in the
Bank, and so disabled himself from being a Director.

This was Mr. Paterson's Reward for all his Hazard and Labor, and the Expense
of near seven Hundred Pounds in promoting the Bank, whereof not above Fifty
Pounds was contributed by any other Besides One Hundred and Twelve Pounds ten
Shillings he had for three quarters of a Years Allowance as a Director.
; and by his great Attachment thereto, and unwearied Attendance therein, had
been Damaged in his other Affairs here and beyond the Seas upwards of Four
thousand Pounds more. He now finds by Experience, that had it been a
Miscarriage, it had been his, and there had been no Danger of Competition; but
now its a Success, it belongs to other People, and they reap the Fruits of it.

When you consider these things in themselves, as also that they were done by
an Infant Corporation of but six or seven Months old, and this to a Person to
whom the Bank owed the highest Respect and Gratitude, and all this Influenced
by a sort of Men who have spent no small time in appearing against the
Arbitrary and Illegal Proceedings of the East India Company; and who have been
so very Nice in their Justice therein, that rather than not have Justice done,
they would restore us the old Pagan Custom of punishing the Innocent with the
Guilty; perhaps you will think it strange.

Doubtless what Mr. Paterson did for the Bank, was so freely and generously
done, with a Dependence only upon the success, that it is not only the Duty of
the persons concerned, but even of the Standers by, to do their utmost to
procure him right, so far as it comes within their Knowledge or Power, if that
be a Rule of Righteousness, That Men should love their Neighbors as
themselves, and do as they would be done unto; and since the Case is such, as
may be to Posterity a Reflection not only upon the Bank but upon the
Government, and it may be upon the very Nation; and certainly it can be but an
odd sort of Omen for those who set up for Trustees for the Nation, and it will
be no easy matter to persuade that those who are unjust and ungrateful in the
beginning to the first Contriver and Promoter of the Bank, will prove otherwise
in the end to other people, though they may make some shift so long as most is to
be got by being just, or pretending to be so.

It Is hard that neither a Man's Justice nor Usefulness, should sometimes be able
to protect him from Discouragement, Ingratitude and Injury; but though it be
hard, it is not strange; for even the Prophets and Heroes of old were seldom or
ever endured in their Lives; its true when Death made them incapable of Good or
Hurt, Love or Hatred, and that there was no further danger of their Competition
with any. Men commonly began to build and adorn their Sepulchers, and to
display and magnify their Virtues, but usually those Ghostly Qualifications
were rather raised up in order to conjure down those of the Living, or for an
Umbrage to worse Injuries to others then to make any atonement for those done
unto them, how much soever pretended.

But thus it will be, so long as men have a sort of reserved and hidden itch
and pleasure in deceiving and being deceived, and to follow Mock Lights rather
than true, and have respect to the person speaking and doing, and not for the
nature of the thing spoken and done; it often happening among the Crowd, that
these who have least reason have most Impudence; and sometimes men are looked
upon for the sake of their Ancestors, and not for their own, or because they
have been Fortunate, Rich, or well allayed, they must therefore be good for
every thing; thus many times whole Societies of Men and Nations have the Virtue
and Reason among them chilled and frozen up by that, or that supposed of
sombodies Ancestors, or by the power or fortune of some or other, who gets the
Ascendant over them, but when a Prince or People are blessed with so much Virtue
as to break those formal fetters, and to make some use and account of true
Virtue, where ever they find it, they always do wonders, this being the
ordinary means by which Almighty God exerts his power of making great things
little, and little things great.

It Is wonderful to consider from what small beginnings and occasions sometimes
great things have their rise, for how casie had it been to have laid perpetual
Obligations upon Mr. Paterson to the Bank of England; for perhaps had but a few
more of the Directors harbored the same generous Seniments of, and Kindness
for Mr. Paterson, that eight or nine of them did, or if the Court of Directors
had but used softer words in expressing themselves in what related to him, as
the most moderate and discreet among them advised; the Orphans Fund had not
now, if ever been, what it is, and is like to be. Thus the Antipathies of those
Gentlemen who have been so great Opposers of Mr. Paterson, and what is due unto
him, have providentially been of greater use to the World in this, then perhaps
ever their Sympathies were in any thing else, and have, how little soever they
intended it, thereby rendered Mr. Paterson and what he proposed far more
considerable then ever they could otherwise have been.

Providence thus seasonably putting some reasonable Stop and Limits to the
Course and Bounds of the greatness of the Bank of England, which has and does
proceed from the nature of the thing, and not from the singular Virtue and
Conduct of the Managers more than other men; as some who judge of things only
by their outsides have thought; which being in the hands of men who cannot
endure Prosperity, no not for six or seven months, might have been of dangerous
Consequence to the very Nation as well as themselves. Thus when Almighty God
will disappoint or destroy, he first hardens Men's Hearts, and blinds their Eyes.

And surely it is strange, to see how far the Passions of men will carry them;
for though the Gentlemen of the Bank, but a few months since, have seen the
prejudices and little shifts of the Goldsmiths return upon their own heads,
which have been so far from answering the Ends proposed, as to be none of the
least immediate causes of the subite and surprising success of the Bank; yet
that those very men should be so infatuated, as to take the same and some other
more preposterous Courses with the Orphans Fund in their, but especially in
some of their Carriage to Mr. Paterson, and in refusing to take, or so much as
to receive the Notes of the Orphans Fund, thereby manifesting to the World
their imposing and insulting Dispositions more than others could have done; a
feasonable caution not only to the Proprietors of the Orphans Fund, but to all
others, what to expect if they happen to come within their reach and power. In
the mean while, it has served only to make the Orphans Fund the better
beloved, and to distinguish it the more, rendering even their own Friends and
Customers the more uneasy with them; and the more inclinable to the Orphans
Fund; thus we find the Directors of the Bank of England such a sort of
Christians, that for the very satisfaction of thinking they torment others,
they are content to be tormented themselves. But whatever it may be with
Directors of Banks; we know its but usual for such sort of Animals as want, or
have not the use of, reason to have recourse to rage.

Thus having given you some account of Mr. Patersons Transactions in, for and
with the Bank, I shall now proceed to do the same with relation to the Orphans:
Fund.

This Fund was begun by a Subscription of the Orphans-Fund of perpetual
Interest for Four Hundred Thousand pounds, and afterward two hundred thousand
pounds more was added thereunto, and sixty pounds in money allowed as an
Equivalent for one hundred pounds of the said Orphans Interest. This Fund was
and is principally designed for Land, but being a free and voluntary
Settlement, they have also liberty to do what otherwise they shall find for
their Advantage, they have no Legislative nor Royal Concessions for shelter or
recourse; nor have they any lofty Titles or Dazzling Denominations for or
toward their support; but they lie open and have not, nor expect not any
protection but from their own Integrity and the Common Laws of their Country;
which will of course induce them to the greater Caution and Vigilance in their
intended Undertakings which are not designed to prejudice others, but only to
improve their own Estates so far as they lawfully may; in fine they have both a
public and particular good in their Hands, and seem to be the happy
instruments for handing thereof to the present Age and Posterity.

And what is like to remain a blemish to the Bank of England, will be the
lasting glory of the Orphans: Fund, for though the Institution of both be equally
due to Mr. Paterson, to whomsoever some of the particular Constitutions may be,
and the Bank Cost him incomparably the most Time, Pains, Hazard and Expense,
yet from the Bank he had only such Returns as you have heard; but the Trustees
and Proprietors of the Orhans: Fund, generously and unanimously conceded to Mr.
Paterson five per Cent. per Annum of their profits above the Orphans Interest
for one and twenty years, to come and if it be under some Restrictions, they
are such as he always intended as just and reasonable, and therefore willingly
submitted unto; and which sufficiently show the value the Directors and
Proprietors of the Ophans-Fund have for him, all which has doubtless laid him
under perpetual Obligations to do his utmost for their advantage since to a
just and generous person, no Obligation upon Earth can be more firm and durable
than what they have laid upon Mr. Paterson.

Whosoever shall duly consider the Settlement of this Fund, will find it to be
one of the clearest, least entangled, and most suitable, and convenient, that
ever was of that kind in the trading World. But things which depend so much
upon the practice, can never be easily expressed by words, wherefore I shall
leave it to time to explain, and only say, that the Bank is a Fund for the
public, but the Orphans-Fund for the particular Estates of England; the Bent
of the Constitution of the Orphans-Fund is for real Estates, the Bank for
personal; the Bank resembles the Goldsmith altogether, but the Orphans Fund
also much of the Money-Scriveners; the Orphans Fund may lawfully do whatsoever
is permitted to the Bank, and also many other things, which the Bank is not
permitted to do, for the better Understanding whereof I shall here insert

An Abstract of the Deed of Settlement for Constituting The Orphans Fund.
I. THe Subscribers agree to Consolidate their several Rights and Interests,
amounting in the whole to Six Hundred Thousand pounds, by Transferring the same
to the Trustees and Directors there Named, for the better Improvement thereof.

II. The Trustees accept the Trust, subject to the Uses and Conditions, and
assume the Name, and Addition of Trustees and Directors of the Orphans Fund.

III. First Trustees to continue 'till the first day of May, 1696. and from
thence 'till others be Chosen, and have the Trust vested in them.

IV. From and after the said First day of May, the Owners of the Fund upon some
day or days of the said Month of May, and so Annually, shall Choose the
Trustees and Directors thereof, the Number of whom are not to be less than
Twenty One, nor more than Twenty six.

V. Elections to be by Majority of Votes, of the persons present each Five
Hundred pounds to have One Vote, and none to have more than Five Votes.

VI. Three days Notice of Election at least to be affixed on the Royal Exchange
London, from time to time.

VII. In case of the Death or Avoidance of any of the Trustees, the Survivors
of them to assemble the Owners of the Fund to elect others.

VIII. None to be elected Trustee unless he have two thousand pounds at least
in the Capital Stock of the Fund.

IX. No Trustee to be admitted to transfer any part of his two thousand pounds,
qualifying him thereto, before he have Resigned and Conveyed his Trust.

X. In Case any Trustee shall refuse to Resign and Convey his Trust, his two
thousand pounds to go to the Use and Benefit of the rest of the Owners of the
Fund.

XI. If the Trustees do not summon a General Assembly in the Month of May, any
Ten or more qualified for Electors may in June next ensuing, by Notice as
aforesaid, Summon a General Assembly to be held in the same manner as if held
in the Month of May.

XII. Trustees at any time upon demand of any ten or more of the Electors to
summon a General Assembly.

XII. Upon the Refusal of the Trustees by the space of ten days or more, such
ten or more of the Electors may by such Notice as aforesaid, Summon and hold
such General Assembly.

XIV. In the removal or displacing of all or any of the Trustees, and all other
Matters and things by them transacted, (excepting only in Electing Trustees and
Directors as aforesaid) the General Assembly to act and proceed by Majority of
Votes of the persons present qualified for Voting as aforesaid, every person
having One Vote and no more.

XV. General Assemblies, upon reasonable Cause assigned, may remove and
displace all or any of the Trustees and Directors for the time, and Elect
others in their stead; and order and direct the making of the Dividends, allow
Gratuities to the Trustees and Directors, and to make and settle such further
and other Rules and Constitutions for the good Government and Improvement of
their Capital Stock or Fund, as they shall from time to time think needful, but
subject to the Trust, which Acts and Proceedings of theirs shall be binding and
conclusive to all and every the Proprietors and Owners of the said Fund.

XVI. Trustees or Majority of them Assembled, to act by plurality of Votes,
each person having one Vote and no more.

XVII. Trustees may constitute Sub: Committees, or lesser numbers of themselves
to act as they see cause.

XVIII. Trustees may borrow Money at Interest, or without, charge the Fund by
Bills or Notes of Credit, with the payment of any sums of money, as also may
charge the same or any part thereof with any other Contracts, Debts or
Engagements by them or their order, to be given out upon security thereof.

XIX. May Lend Money upon, or purchase Lands, Leases, Goods or Chattels, or in
Exchange for other Bills or Notes.

XX. May lend money on the Stock, or any part thereof, without any actual
Transfer.

XXI. Stock answerable for all Debts due from the Proprietors thereof to the
Company.

XXII. Trustees may take to themselves, or any of them, for the use of the
whole, any Conveyances or Assignments of Lands or other Estates, and suffer the
persons Conveying to draw Bills fer the value. And may transact and do all such
other matters and things as they shall judge for profit and improvement of the
Fund.

XXIII. May appoint Officers and Servants, allow Sallaries, settle Fees, and do
all other things needful for the management of the said Fund.

XXIV. Trustees in Person and Estate indempnified for acting therein, unless
for wilful fraud, or apparent Breach of Trust, in which case only, the person
or persons guilty shall be chargeable therewith.

XXV. Trustees and Owners of the Fund in their Persons or Estates, not liable
for more, or further, than their respective proportions in the said Fund.

XXVI. Subscribers directed to Transfer the Legal Interest of the Orphans
Credit to the Trustees.

XXVII. Trustees may accept of 60 l. as an equivolent for, and in lieu of each
100 pounds in the Orphans Credit.

XXVIII. Power to purchase Supplimental Funds with the money so paid in lieu of
Orphans Credit, but may employ the money at Interest until such Purchase can be
made.

XXIX. The whole Fund shall Continue and Remain in the Trustees and Directors,
as a perpetual Fund of Credit and Security, and be called, The Capital Fund
consolidated in the Trustees and Directors of the Orphans Fund, never to be
sold nor alienated in any other way and manner then is herein declared.

XXX. That for the space of one and twenty years, from the 24th. of June, 1695.
The Trustees out of the profits annually or oftener shall pay and divide among
the owners of the Fund so much of the profits as shall amount to so much money
for every hundred pounds as shall be equivalent to the Interest paid by the
City of London, and so for a greater or lesser Sum.

XXXI. That the Surpluss of the profits and incomes for the first eleven years,
part of the said one and twenty years, be laid out in Funds of Augmentation to
the same uses, for Corroborating, Strengthening and Augmenting the Fund.

XXXII. That the Rents, Profits, and contingent Improvements of such Funds of
Augmentation, be annually or oftener if need be, for ever divided in manner
following, that it to say, one twentieth part, the same being into twenty equal
parts divided, to Mr. Paterson, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for
proposing and contriving the Settlement, and the Residue to the owners of the
Fund, proportionable to every ones interest therein.

XXXIII. And for the remaining ten years, other part of the said one and twenty
years, after the payment of the Orphans interest thereout as aforesaid, the
Residue of the Profits and Incomes to be annually and oftener divided, one
twentieth part to Mr. Paterson, and the Residue to the Owners of the Fund, in
proportion to every ones interest therein.

XXXIV. The Public Books and Accounts of the Company to be conclusive, to Mr.
Paterson his Executors, Administrators and Assigns for the said twentieth part,
and he or they not allowed to demand any other Account either in Law or Equity.

XXXV. In case Mr. Paterson shall dye before the end of the said one and twenty
years, the Trustees and Directors for the time may purchase the said twentieth
part of the profits, reducing the first seven years of the same into an
average, and deducting six per Cent. per Annum interest for their money in the
usual way of purchasing Annuities.

XXXVI. If Mr. Paterson shall Sell or Transferr his Two Thousand pounds,
qualifieing him for a Trustee; or in case he shall at any time settle, or
establish, or accept, or take upon him any place of Trust, in any other Bank,
or public Fund of Credit and Security within this Kingdom, without Consent of
the General Assembly of the said Fund, then and from thenceforth the said
twentieth part of the Profits shall result and go from Mr. Paterson to the use
of the Owners of the Fund, proportionable to every ones Interest therein.

XXXVII. That from and after the said One and Twenty Years, the whole Profits
and Improvements for ever to go to the Owners of the Fund, proportionable to
their respective Interests.

XXXVIII. Dividends not to be made but by order and consent of the General
Assembly.

XXXIX. The Fund and all the profits and improvements thereof subject to the
Uses and Trusts therein, to be to the use and benefit of the Owners and
Proprietors, proportionable to every ones interest in the Register Books of the
Company, and for no other use or uses.

XL. Register Books of Credit and tranfer to be kept by the Trustees, wherein
and whereby every ones interest in the Fund shall be expressed and ascertained.

XLI. That the manner of transferring shall by an Entry in or upon some or one
of such Register Books, signed by the person transferring the same, or some
other thereunto, on his or her hehalf, by him or her appointed.

XLII. Likewise the Acceptance thereof shall be by an Entry in such Register
Books, signed by the party accepting, or some other by him or her thereunto
appointed.

XLIII. Mr. Paterson 's twentieth part to be transferred in such manner as he
or his Executors or Administrators shall by writing in and upon such Register
Books direct and appoint.

XLIV. No other transfer and assignment of the Fund to be good.

XLV. The Fund in trust to descend to Executor and not to Heir.

XLVI. Transferrable by Executors, notwithstanding devise in specie, but not to
alter the devise.

XLVII. Power to Trustees and Owners of the Fund to make further, and other
Deeds, Settlements and Declarations of Trust, for the more effectual
Constituting, Settling and Establishing of the said Fund, upon the Trusts and
for the uses aforesaid, as shall by Counsel learned in the Law be reasonably
Advised, Devised or Required.

XLVIII. This Deed to be enrolled in the High Court of Chancery:


Thus you see an effectual Course taken to prevent the smaller Participants by
Animosities or other Corruption, to render the Government of the Fund over
Precarious and Mutable, by allowing one Person to have a Number of Votes not
exceeding Five, in Election of Directors: As also here is due Care taken that
the greater Participants may not be able to overtop the lesser, and Contract
the Management in a few, to the Prejudice or Discouragement of the rest, by
allowing only One Vote in displacing of Trustees and Directors, and in all
other Matters of the Government of the Fund.

Here is also sufficient Provision made to prevent what has ruined most
Companies, which is the dividing and taking out not only the Profits, but often
all or the greatest part of the Stock; and if the Liberty of making Dividends
at large be pernicious to all Companies, it must needs be abundantly the most
to Companies of Credit and Security.

And here is not only Care taken to prevent Dividing or Weakening the Stock, but
a way found to strengthen and Corroborate the same by every Dividend, and yet
every particular Person's Occasions may be served as well or better than if the
Dividend were made in Money; for Yearly or oftener when Funds of Augmentation
are settled, there can be no better or readier Purchases for the Company, than
to buy such Proportions thereof, as are to be disposed at the Original Rate.

Thus Widows, Orphans, and others, instead of taking ready Money, and be left
to Improve it how they can, will have it in their Choice, whether they will
take that, or an Annual Income settled to their hands, thus the Fund may
improve it self by it self, having opportunity to make interest upon interest
by every Purchase of this kind.

By this and the scope of the whole Settlement, every part of the Fund will not
only be made quick and Living Stock, but whatsoever else they Transact, and
shall be suited to their Constitution, will also be such. Thus by allowing the
small difference of Three per Cent. per Annum, or such like, People will always
have the Use, Convenience and Command of ready Money for their Effects, in or
with this Fund.

I shall not speak of some things they intend, different from other Banks or
Funds, as their Design toward introducing a Voluntary Register for Lands, and
several other things not yet in practice, they have already brought the
Interest of Money upon Bullion, Bills of Exchange, and Bills in Trade, to three
per Cent. per Annum. And were it fit for me to publish what I have heard of
their intended Undertakings, perhaps I might say them faster, yet never so well
as they may do them; time in the steps which they shall take, will doubtless be
the best and clearest demonstrations.

Thus you see, that though Mr. Paterson be not so Industrious to publish his
Merit, as some others would have been, yet has he not less, but much more
deserved of the Bank of England than the Orphans Fund, how different and
unsuitable soever the Returns may be, and I hope he will at one time or other
give us in Writing the full Account of what has passed in these Matters,
together with the Authentic Pieces relating thereunto, if not from his own
Inclinations, yet at the Request of his Friends, that though the present age and
posterity may lose by the ill usuage and discouragements he has met with, not
only from the influence it may have upon himself, but upon the Spirits of
others, who might otherwise be capable and ready to serve their Country in
things of this nature, yet at least that they may not be deprived of so
material a piece of History relating to the practice of Men and Things, and in
the mean time what else of moment of this kind shall occur, I shall not fail to
advise.

I am Yours, J. S.
London, 3 July, 1695.

