1. La Maintenon 2. Scarron 3. Ragotin 4. La Rancune 5. La Rapiniere


F. H. van. Hove. sculp:



SCARRON INCENSED: OR, His Appearing to Madam de Maintenon, His late Wife,
Reproaching her Amors with LEWIS the Great, Present King of France.

And discovering several SECRETS of that COURT,

Written by a Lady in French.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, 1694.

TO THE READER.
I Make you this small Present, not through any Inducements of Vanity, nor to
set up for an Author not having the Honor to be known to ye. Your
Divertisement is my Design, and to give you a faithful Account of some
Particulars of the Court of France, always abounding in Amorous Intrigues,
which merit Attention, and the Pains of committing 'em to White Paper, as
coming from the most Polite Part of the World, and where all the Sweets of Life
are tasted with the greatest Pleasure.

The Subject of my Story is a Real Adventure that lately befell Madam de
Maintenon, as you will find by the Sequel. Scarron appeared to her with a
pensive and louring Air, and upbraided her with the whole Conduct of her Life,
but more-especially with her Amorous Correspondence with Lewis the Great. The
Persons I have made choice of to accompany his Ghost into this World, will make
you believe, perhaps, the Story to be Fabulous; but my dear Friend, let not
that infuse into ye any Sentiments of Incredulity. For I only mention the same
Persons which the Marchioness of Maintenon named her self, in recounting one of
her Dreams to a Lady of my intimate Acquaintance, for whom she has a passionate
Kindness, and in whose Breast she lodges all her Secrets, who was pleased to
impart to me the knowledge of it in these Words, That she found her self in a
deep melancholy, for having seen and spoken to M. Scarron, who was attended by
his Friends, La Rapiniere, La Rancune, and Ragoutin.

You are not ignorant that these Illustrious Personages were Famous Hero's in
the Romances of that Author, and that he mentions 'em every day, as well as our
Heroess; for she had also her important Shares in his Conversations, for the
Pastime of the Court. Moreover, the Pilgrimages and Penances which the
Marchioness has lately undertaken, may be looked upon as sensible Proofs of the
Truth of her Vision; those Hardships being thought a sort of Exorcisms to send
Scarron to a Place where he may be better employed then to take notice of his
Wife's Behavior in this World: for it is thought he is still in Purgatory, and
is afraid his Wife will follow him thither. Which is the reason that the poor
Lady is continually at her Prayers; especially at St. Cyr, whither I have the
Honor frequently to accompany her, as being very much in her Favor.

These are the prevailing Reasons why I durst not give this History to the
Booksellers in France, being assured that they would never have printed it, by
reason of certain Passages in it that nearly concern the Court; and you know
it is a dangerous thing to have Potent Enemies.

Therefore I resolved to send it into Holland, in hopes it would there be
welcome: for every Body has an itching Ear for what passes in this Kingdom, and
more particularly, all Men gape after the Secrets of the Louvre.

If you meet with any Faults in reading this small History, be so kind as to
remember, that 'twas a Lady that wrote it, pursuing partly such Adventures as
she had seen with her own Eyes, and partly to deceive her solitary Half Hours.
In the mean time, I should be overjoyed to hear that she had gained her Point;
which was, to please your Fancies with telling Truth, and which for that reason
occasioned her Gadding abroad: assuring you, that merely that Satisfaction
would make me gladly to forget the Trouble I have had to keep her secret in
this Country.

SCARRON Appearing TO Madam de Maintenon, etc.
THe Posture of the French Affairs at this day, obliges the Most Christian
King, as every body knows, to keep fair with the Northern Crowns; from whom as
he may reap great Advantages, so his Majesty neglects nothing to preserve their
Amity. Of which, his Officious Sedulity which he made appear in the magnificent
Entertainments that he gave the Prince of Danemark, during his stay in Paris,
was a sufficient proof: and it may be said, that the Court of France out-did it
self at that time; there being nothing omitted to engage that Prince, and lock
him to her Interests.

To this purpose Madam de Maintenon, and all the rest of the Court Ladies, had
Orders from his Majesty, to caress him with all Imaginable Kindness; and
therefore to charm the Prince's Youthful Heart, she resolved to appear in a
Ball, which the Duke of Orleance prepared for 'em in the Palace-Royal. This
Ball had been preceded by a most Sumptuous Banquet, to which the Prince of
Danemark, Monseigneur the Dauphin, the Princes and Princesses were invited.
Several Healths went briskly about; and the King's, and that of the Princes who
were Kind to him in the Present War, in not entering into the Confederacy
against him, were drank first: after which the Dauphin's Health, and the
Healths of all the Princes of the Blood went round, and then the Prince of
Danemark's, and that of the Young Princess of ***** his Mistress. Presently
after this, the Duke of Orleance, whispering to the Prince, gave him to
understand the extreme Joy of his Majesty and the whole Court to see so perfect
a Union, and so strict an Amity between the two Crowns: to which he added, that
the most prevailing means to render that Amity and that Union eternal and and
inviolable, was to see one day his Royal Highness wedded to a Princess of
France.

The Banquet being over, they prepared for Dancing, and the Princesses appeared
with that Pomp and Magnificence, that the like had never been seen. The Duke of
Orleance perceiving that the Company thickened by reason of a great number of
Lords and Ladies that had not been invited, caused the Apartment, where he was
together with the Princes and Princesses to be shut, and left the rest of the
Crowd in the New Gallery of the Palace, with the Music, where they made up a
second Ball, and where several Ladies of Quality were habited in Masquerade. In
the Prince's and Princess's Apartment, the Duchess of Chartres being Queen of
the Ball, took out the Prince of Danemark several times to dance. Nor was any
thing so charming as that Young Beauty, the Luster of whose Jewels drew upon
her the Eyes of all the Assembly.

Madam de Maintenon, whose Care did not a little contribute to the Good Order
which was there observed, was taken out in her Turn by the Prince to dance, but
she refused him, and repaid the Honor which he did her with a Profound
Reverence, without stirring out of her Place. She answered the Prince of
Danemark, who addressed to her, That her Character of Governess of St. Cyr,
would not permit her so much Youthfulness; That she was there only as a
Spectatrix, for that she had a long time ago, bid adieu to the Pleasures of the
World.

Nor was her Answer to be wondered at, for in truth that Lady is at this day
the Greatest Pattern of Piety in France. However it were, never were the French
Ladies so forwardly eager to make their Magnificence glitter in the Eyes of
Foreign Princes, as they were at that time. Toward Midnight several Pleasing
Metamorphoses took place, every one appearing in disguize and Masquerade. The
Prince of Danemark disguised himself like a Moresco Slave, attended by Eight
Lords that accompanied him in the same disguize. The Prince's Patron, taking
upon him to personate a Bashaw, presented him to all the Ladies of the Court,
to see who would buy him, which occasioned the most pleasing Pastime in the
World: and twelve young English Lords sent by King James, appeared at the same
time like Quakers, which made all the Company Laugh, and was an Extraordinary
Addition to the Spectatours delight.

After so many various Metamorphoses, at length appeared a Lord disguised like
a Devil. Nothing ever appeared so hideously dreadful: the Dismal Appearance was
so terrible to the Ladies, but more especially the Duchess of Chartres, that
they were forced to take a world of Pains before they could allay the
Commotions of her Fear; and in regard of her Condition, not so seasonable for
such sort of Spectacles, they were in terrible Fears that she would have
miscarried: but it so fell out, that she was more afraid then hurt.

Madam de Maintenon by this time perceiving 'twas past one a Clock, retired
first of all Incognito; and being got into her Chamber, she called La Caverna,
one of her Damsels, who spread her Toilet, and brought her all her
Accoutrements to pass away the Night. Now Madam de Maintenon is a Woman proper
and delicately shaped, plump, full Visag'd, lovely Eyes, and about five and
forty Years of Age, but still appearing Young; Learned and extremely Witty,
well versed in the Lives of the Saints, but particularly in that of St. Lewis,
to which she applies her self with extraordinary Attention, reading in it every
day an Hour or two before she goes to Bed.

By such Pious Exercises as these she has rendered her self worthy the
tenderness of the Holy Society: and Lewis the XIV. from whom the Merit of this
Lady could not be concealed, has vouchsafed her both his Heart and his
Affections, which gives us a perfect Demonstration of the nice and delicate
Judgment of that Prince: as having never tied himself but to Persons of her
Character. Consider him in the Choice of his first Mistress, Mademoiselle de
Machini, who was by no means handsome, and had the worst Air in the World, but
she was infinitely witty; and they that had heard her but speak, forgot all her
other Defects. Mademoiselle de la Valiere, had no less the Ascendant over the
Heart of this Monarch, even to the raising of Violent Passions in his Breast.
But let us leave this Prince to his Tender Affections, and set what became of
our Heroess Madam de Maintenon? After some moral Considerations, she took up a
Book, entitled, Reflections upon the Mercy of God, by Madam de Valiere. This
devout Damsel having written the most curious Thoughts that ever were, and with
Expressions enough to move the most worldly minded; in those Meditations it was
that our Pious Marchioness was Exercising her Thoughts, when she heard a noise
in her Chamber. She thought at first it had been Diana her little Bitch; but
looking behind her, she saw a Man with a Nightcap upon his Head, wrapped up in
a Winding Sheet. Who should it be but her Husband Scarron, that Famous Author,
whose touring Genius, and his Verses, have made such a noise upon the Earth,
and who is still no less good Company in the Kingdom of Pluto, accompanied with
three of his Friends, Rancune, carrying a Folio, entitled, [The Annals of Hell,
wherein are contained all the most Secret Actions of Mortals.] La Rapiniere,
who carried the Contract of Marriage before God and their Consciences, passed
between Lewis XIV. King of France and Navarr, sirnam'd God's Gift, and Frances
d'Aubigne, Widow of Mr. John Scarron: And Ragotin, who carried the Flambeau;
but he, out of Respect, retired into the next Gallery. Madam de Maintenon, who
was not a little dismayed to see so much Funeral Pomp, would fain have hid her
self in her Closet, had not the Ghost stopped her, crying out, Whither so fast,
Madam? Pray stay here a little, and hearken to the grievous Complaints of the
most Unfortunate of all Men. Since the Fatal Sisters cut the Thread of my Life,
and my descent into the Lower Regions, I have done nothing but pined away,
being all along tormented with Despair, and unconceivable Pangs of Grief, to
hear every day, by all that thick and threefold arrive in our Territories from
the Middle, Sides, and both Ends of Europe, the wicked Life you lead, and the
Mischief you have been the cause of, by your dangerous and pernicious Counsels.
It Is the Discourse of all the Infernal Court; there is nothing talked of but
your Name upon the River Styx, and you are the Mirth for the most serious Souls
in their Six-penny Passages by that Black Water. You have utterly confounded my
Reputation, to my irreparable Damage, in regard I am frequently in the
Societies of the Poets, who are the rankest Scoffers in the World; and as often
in the Assemblies of the Philosophers, no less Satirical, and full of their
Girds and Sarcasms. One day, as I was musing for some Thoughts proper for a
certain Copy of Verses which Proserpine had commanded me to make, in Honor of
Virtuous Women that had been always Constant to their Husbands, I flung out of
that same dreary Academy, dull and morose, and not half so witty as I was wont
to be in this World. Upon that, I walked a Turn or two in the Elysian Field to
refresh my Brains, where Pluto met me, and swore to me, like a Beau of an
incensed Deity, that as soon as ever he had ye in his Clutches, he would
thrust ye into Tartarus, the most dreadful Place in all his Dominions, and
there excruciate ye with all the most exquisite Torments that your Crimes have
merited. I was in a terrible Agony to hear him pronounce so dismal a Sentance.
Thereupon, I besought him to grant me Audience, to the end I might obtain the
liberty to give you a Visit, on purpose to admonish ye to alter your
extravagant course of Life, and to repent betimes, in order to your avoiding
Eternal Punishment. And now that Tenderness, all that is left, and indeed the
more Noble part, which I always had for ye, has made me take this long
Journey, with three of my Friends: Anaximenes, one o our Philosophers, having
given us Air, as the Principal of all things, that we might appear Corporeal.

Oh, Sir, (ery'd Madam de Maintenon,) how am I surpised at the cruel
Reproaches which you cast upon me! Miserable Creature that I am, what have I
done, to be thus exposed to the Anger of a Deity! Nothing can equal my Pains,
nor the unfortunate Condition to which I am reduced: Heaven and Earth conspire
against me, and my Name, it seems, is the Sport of Hell.

What a pretty Art, Madam, you have to counterfeit and disguise all your
Intriegues? but there is nothing concealed from us, in the Inferior Regions. I
will show you in this Book, what you would be very unwilling to have known
concerning your Amors, and all the other Particulars of your Life.

Oh, -- Sir, (replied Madam Maintenon,) you may perhaps be very much deceived:
It Is a long time since the Charms of this World have had any more then a feeble
Operation over me; God having infused it into me, to betake my self to a more
satisfactory Retirement, I mean, the beautiful Abbey of St. Cyr; to which I
dedicate all the Days of my Life with a Pleasure no way interrupted by the
fading Allurements of the World, that enchant others without Intermission. How
ill grounded and unjust are all your Reproaches! I beseech ye, tell me, what
mean ye by those Amors, and all those Gallantries that supply your daily
converse with Merriment and Disdain, within those gloomy Mansions where you now
abide? I have heard you hitherto with a great deal of Patience; but I must tell
ye, I look upon my self as much abused; and could a Scandalum Magnaium reach
ye, I should make ye sensible of it; for I look upon my Conduct to be
Exemplary, and that there is no fault to be found with me, as being the Model
and Pattern by which so many young Ladies and Gentlewomen of Quality are to
regulate and square their Lives and Conversations.

I am well informed, Madam, (replied Scarron) who put it into the King's Head
to erect that same What d^^e (...) of St. Cyr, and to do several other things
prejudicial to his Honor, and the Repose of his Kingdom. The King hearkens to
your Advice, and you are she that guides the Chariot of his Counsels, and his
Government. Yet all the World too apparently sees, that all his Conquests are
hardly able to support him. I remember I have observed in History, that
Hercules, who was once the most Illustrious and most ^^^^ous of all the Heroes
of Antiquity, after all his unparalleled Achievements and Exploits, at length
became the Slave of Women. His Love for Omphale, Queen of Lydia, was so
violent, as to make him exchange his Club for a Distaff, and spin in Petticoats
among her Maids, only that he might have the opportunity to gaze upon her
Beauty, and the Honor to be her Waiting Woman. We read in the Histories of
France, that several of our Princes would have been happy, had they not
suffered themselves to be bewitched and possessed by the Love of Women. It Is a
Softness that effeminates the Courage of a Hero, and extinguishes the Luster of
his sublimest Qualities.

Though you, Sir, in the Height of your T'other-World-Gravity, (replied Madam
de Maintenon) would fain make it out, That it is a Weakness for a Prince to love
our Sex; yet we cannot forbear being so vain as to boast of it, when we make
our selves the domineering Mistresses of a Heart so transcending in Value.
There is nothing so charming as to Reign, and for a Woman to see her self the
Depository of all the Secrets and Favors of a Court; to preside, as it were,
in Council, and to dispose of the good or bad Fortune of the Courtiers. If all
your Accusations were true, you had some ground for what you say. But lay aside
these morose Thoughts; you wrong the Magnanimous Heart, and Great Soul of our
Monarch; nor are you acquainted with his Humor, while you subject his Absolute
Will to Female Control. It Is true, he vouchsafes me some Proofs of his Esteem,
in Acknowledgment of some Services that I have done him. --

I see, Madam, (said Scarron) by your Discourses, that you take it for a
Celestial Honor to be beloved by a King, and to find that all your Services
are not repaid with Ingratitude. But here it is that I must tax ye with a
rank Oblivion of that Faith and Oath which you so solemnly swore to me, before
God and Men, That you would never -- never forget me after my Death; never --
have any more Traffic with the World. But I find now, that you are no less
inveigl'd and transported with the Vanity and Pleasures of it, then a Girl of
Eighteen: and that the dazzling Glitter of a Crown has made ye forget your
Extraction; as being beholding to America for Primitive Daylight, and the
first Minutes of your Life. 'Twas enough for you to have been contented with
the Honor which I did ye, when I raisd ye from the Dust of abject Meanness,
and matchd ye to our Illustrious Family, the most Ancient of all the Scarrons
in Paris.

It Is true (replied Madam de Maintenon) that the Obligations which you heaped
upon me were infinite; and I must as sincerely protest to ye, That my first
Knowledge of the King was extremely Innocent. You know that after your decease,
I kept my dark Chamber as disconsolate as the Ephesian Matron. But I was low,
and knew not which way in the World to turn me: so that after I had long mused
upon my sorrowful Destiny, I resolved to look out for a Service; and one of my
Friends promised to procure me a Place to wait upon a Lady, if I would go into
Portugal: which Damsel lived at that time with Madam de Montespan; with whom I
was often admitted to Chat, when I went to visit my Friend, who did all she
could to bring me into the good liking of her Mistress. One day that I
discoursed with the Lady about Indifferent Matters, I perceived her to be well
enough pleased with my Company; which infused into me so much Confidence, as
modestly to beseech her to recommend me to some Person of Quality. How!
Mademoiselle, cried she, would you go to Service? -- Most gladly, said I, --
for I can assure ye, without any Hyperbole, I was so cast down for loss of
You, that I was for any thing in an honest way. At the same time, Madam de
Montespan frequently received Letters from the King who then, and after that,
most tenderly loved her. Being indisposed one Evening, she prayed me to answer
him. I obeyed her, but not without difficulty, as thinking my self not fit to
write to a Monarch. This Modesty of mine was quickly perceived by the King, who
is infinitely Witty; and next Morning he asked of his Mistress why she had not
writ to him? She answered, That she did according to Custom, the Pleasure of
writing to him being too charming for her to neglect it. Ha! Madam (says His
Majesty, laughing) the Complaisance of the Fair Sex is always acceptable to me;
but tell me truly, who was it that did you that piece of Service? Madam de
Moncespan answered without Ceremony, that I composed the Letter, and she copied
it. From that moment, I tell you freely, His Majesty has always evidenced a
great Passion for me. Here is also the Copy of the first Letter which His
Majesty wrote to me.

The King's Letter to Madame de Maintenon.
I Did not believe, most Incomparable Lady that after I had seen all the
Charming Obje^^s of the Court, there had been any thing in the World that could
have touched me so sensibly. The strong Impressions which your rare Qualities
have made upon me, convince me, and accordingly I speak it sincerely, That a
King would be advanced to the highest pitch of Happiness, were he as much
beloved by you as (...) desires. Do not then oppose your self my Fairest to
that which may render me happy; and be firmly persuaded, that never any Man was
so passionately in Love as I. The Pledges which I design to give you, my most
An table Lady of a Love so sincere and tender, are of a very high Value, and
merit your most tender Affections. The Crown and Scepter which I lay at your
Feet, my Aderable Lady, are sensible Proofs of the high Passion which I
entertain for you, Farewell, my dearest Dear.


And to engage me further (continues Madam Maintenon) his Majesty advanced me
to the Quality of Lady-Governess to the Duke de Maine, his Brother the Count de
Vexin, and the Mademoiselles de Tours and Nantes. You cannot imagine what
trouble I had to resist all these obliging Methods which his Majesty made use
of, to bring me to be what I am.

To say the truth, An Ambition to re^^^^ my self Glorious and Famed in the
World, cancelled all the Impressions which my Duty, or Marriage-Covenant, had
laid upon me; but I love you still, in spite of Death, which has made a
Separation betwixt us: And the greatest part of my Conversation with the King,
is, upon the Loss I have sustained of such an Husband, who was the Glory of all
the Wits of his Age.

All those Arguments which you bring, Madam, (replies Scarron) to make your
Innocence appear, don't justify you in the least; for you are still a
faithless Woman, and I am unhappy to hear you continually talked of: The
Public takes no notice of your private Treaty of Marriage, of which, look you,
here is a True Copy.

Scarron calls upon Rapiuicre, and taking the Contract of Marriage, reads it
before Madam de Maintenon.

The Contract of the Private Marriage betwixt Lewis XIV. King of France and
Navarr, sirnam'd, The Gift of God, and Frances d'Aubigne, Marchioness of
Maintenon.
THE Council of Conscience belonging to Lewis XIV. surnamed, The Gift of God,
having most wisely considered that the said Prince, together with the Dauphine,
has sufficiently provided the Crown of France with Heirs, so that there is no
reason to fear that it may fall to a Daughter, or that the Family of Bourbon
should be extinguished for want of Heirs Males. And moreover, there being no
Princess in Europe upon whom his Majesty casts his Eyes, in order to a second
Marriage; and his Majesty besides thinking himself of such an Age, as it is not
convenient for him to meddle any more with the Affairs of the World, because of
the particular Care which he designs to take for the Quiet of his Conscience,
and the Salvation of his Soul, by sacrificing unto God, from his Heart, all the
criminal Passions which have turmoil'd him from his Youth, till now.

These weighty Considerations prevailed upon his Majesty, with the Approbation
of his Confessor, to cast his Eyes upon Frances d'Aubigne, the Honestest, most
Virtuous, and most Pious Woman of the Age, that he might contract a Secret
Marriage with her; by virtue whereof, those Parties are inseparably united
together before God, and Holy Mother Church: And thereupon, Lewis XIV. promises
henceforth to renounce all Commerce which he has, had, or might have with
other Mistresses in time to come, and to acknowledge Frances de Anbigne, during
the rest of his Life, for his true and lawful Spouse, to love her tenderly, and
treat her with the same Respect as he did the late Queen Mary Therese, of happy
Memory.

On the other side, Frances d'Aubigne promises before God; and Holy Mother
Church, to be Faithful to his Majesty, even to her Death; to Love and Obey him
as a Faithful Spouse ought to do her Husband.

His Majesty declares further, That on the Day of his Marriage he presents
Frances d'Aubigne, his future Spouse, with the Marquisate of Maintenon, that
she may carry the Title thereof during her Life; and does also promise to found
a Nunnery; under the Title of The Ladies of St. Cyr, whereof she shall be
Directress.

The said Frances d'Abvigne does further engage, in consideration of the Honor
which the King has conferred upon her, by advancing her to the Dignity of the
Queens of France, to endeavor with all imaginable Zeal, by the Assistance of
the Reverend Father La Chaise, to extirpate the Hugonot-Heresie, whereby she
may bring the Blessing of God upon his Majesty's glorious Reign, so that all
France may have cause to rejoice in the happy Choice which his Majesty has
made of such a virtuous Spouse. Amen.

You see, Madam, (says Scarron) that your Honor is not preserved by this
Method: All the World look upon you for all this as a Harlot; and speak of your
Amors with the King, as they do of those of his other Mistresses. Father La
Chaise, formerly my Friend, has persuaded you, that by this secret Treaty of
Marriage, your Converse with the King would make less Noise; but his Design
was, to destroy Madam de Montespan's Interest, who was his Enemy, and by this
means he surmounts those Difficulties which stand in the way of his Designs,
and at the same time secures himself of the King's Favor.

And besides those specious Titles, of being Lady Abbess of St. Cyr, and
Marchioness of Maintenon, both Eminent Qualities, make a great Noise in the
World, and draw upon you insensibly all that People say of you.

Ha! (cried Madam de Maintenon, in anger) who could reveal to you this Secret?
You told me, Sir, that you hear News every day from this World, by those who
arrive in yours: It could be none but the Marquis de Louvois: He acquainted you
with this Contract of Marriage.

Treacherous Villaian! This is but a sorry Acknowledgment of his Master's Royal
Bounties, who spared nothing to raise his Fortune to the height, first
Minister and Secretary of State, Commander and Chancellor of the Royal Order:
Are not these very Honorable Titles? besides a thousand other Advantages which
he received from his Majesty, who honors him still every day by a continual
Regret for the Loss of him. It is true, the King has great need of his
Assistance in this present Juncture, to bear a part of the Fatigue which he
endures by this present War.

This War, Madam, (answered Scarron) which the King maintains with so much
heat, appears very unjust before our Judgee of the Lower World, and against the
Sentiments of all disinterested Persons. That Prince having broke the Truce
which he made with the Dutch for Twenty Years, banished all the Hugonots out of
his Kingdom, revoked the Edict of France, and acted a thousand other things
contrary to the Peace of a State.

And not without good reason (continues Scarron) a part of those Mischiefs are
chargeable upon you, supported by Father La Chaise, and the Archbishop of
Paris, the sworn Enemies of the Public Peace; so that the Dauphin has but too
much reason to hate you, and call you his Stepmother. You may remember many
Affronts which you your self put upon the Dauphiness, and which did not a
little contribute to the Distemper that carried her off: And King James II. of
England is also indebted to you for the loss of his Three Kingdoms by your
pernicious Counsels.

If the King has banished all the Hugonots from France (says Madam de
Maintenon) it was only to immortalize his Name and Memory, according to the
Examples of his Predecessors Charles IX. and Henry III. by endeavoring, as
they did, to extirpate Herefie, the King having a true Zeal for the Service of
God.

The Reverend Father La Chaise, and all the Cabinet-Counsel, possessed him with
the Apprehensions of a general Ruin impending over his Kingdom, if he did not
entirely convert all those Heretics; and that he was never to expect the
Blessing of God, if he did not bring back all those poor Souls to our Holy
Mother the Church. The King, whose Zeal for the Catholic Religion is
Exemplary, and which is altogether surprising in a Monarch who is at this day
the Terror of Europe, and justly pretends that all other Sovereigns ought to
submit to him, and hold of his Empire, subjects himself with a profound
Obedience to all those things with which Piety inspires him. And by the
Foundation of St. Cyr, this religious Prince has given a Proof how much
Devotion has the Ascendant over him; for we may see that Holy Places, such as
Churches, subsist much longer in the Minds of the People, then Palaces, and
Houses for Civil Use.

In the mean time, Madam, (answers Scarron) we see that for the most part,
those Princes who have ruined their Countries and People, are those who have
caused most Churches and Monasteries to be built; witness Justinian, who filled
Italy and Greece with 'em, after he had ruined and pillaged all the Provinces
of his Empire: And John Galeas, Duke of Milan, who founded the Charter House of
Pavia, the finest in Christendom. Devotion is not always the true Mark of the
Virtue and Bounty of Princes.

Charles IX. and Henry III. his Brother, being cruel Kings, Men of ill Conduct,
and no Justice, yet were the greatest Bigots imaginable in every thing by which
they could merit Heaven; as, going Barefoot on Pilgrimages, in Pentients
Habit, in the Streets of Paris, wearing coarse Hoods, having Death's Heads
embroidered upon their Clothes, and shutting themselves up in Oratories with
Hermits; yet all this external Devotion could not hide their bad Lives, and ill
Government. It Is always Glorious for a King to show good Example to his
Subjects; but Lewis XIV. is so far from doing so, that he imitates the Infidels
in every thing.

The strict Alliance betwixt the French Court and the Ottoman Port, makes it
apparent, that that Prince follows the vicious Manners of the Turks; insomuch,
that he copies their greatest Crimes, and has made himself a perfect Mussulman.
We need go no further then St. Cyr, which may truly be called a Seraglio, under
the Title of a Religious Nunnery; and I have no reason to doubt, Madam, that
you are the scandalous Instrument of a thousand criminal Intrigues which that
Prince carries on there.

And by this means you also procure to your self a great number of Creatures
throughout the Kingdom, among those of Eminent Birth and Merit, who make their
Court to you for an Alliance with those Ladies, in hopes of obtaining
considerable Employments by your Favor.

Ah! Sir (cries Madam de Maintenon) away with Thoughts so impious, and be not
guilty of such an Outrage against the Modesty of that Holy Place. The King
having entrusted me with the Conduct of that Spiritual Militia, you wound me
sensibly, and sin also against the Virtue of that Religious Prince.

It Is the Noblest and most Glorious Charity that ever was heard of, to have so
many young Damsels that want Estates, bred up at the Expense of that great
Monarch; and though that agreeable Retirement be within a League of Versailles,
it may well be called a Holy Solitude, where nothing troubles their Repose.
There is nothing there of that Magnificence which is to be found in the Palaces
of Kings, but a noble Simplicity is its chief Ornament, and yet there appears
in the same a thousand beautiful Charms. When you see all those young Ladies,
and hear them sing the Praises of Jesus with so much Modesty, you cannot but
conceive an Idea of the blessed Angels, and holy Martyrs in Heaven; and to
speak sincerely, there is no Religious-House where more of Order and Piety is to
be seen.

All things are so well disposed in that Society, that Idleness is entirely
banished thence: There they pray to God Day and Night; and those Damsels seeing
nothing but good Example, are bred incomparably better then they could have
been in the most pious and regular Families. The King, who is the sole Founder
of that School of Christianity, will always be the Admiration of his People;
and by that Sacred Place, his Name and Memory shall be rendered Immortal.

In fine, Madam, (replies Scarron,) seeing the time when I must leave you draws
near, and that Rancune and Rapiniere, my Friends, do signify as much unto me,
Pluto not having allowed us any more time then what I have spent with you, we
cannot go beyond his Orders; and I observe also that Ragotin's Flambeaux is
also burnt out. Make good Use of the Conversation which I have had with you;
consider that your Life passes away like a Dream, and that in a little time you
may be summoned before our severe Judges, Rhadamanthus and Minos, who will
pronounce your Eternal Sentence.

In what a terrible Condition will you find your self, if you come to sojourn
in the bottomless Abyss, for not having reflected seriously upon the Vainglory
of the World, and the Counterfeit-Lustre which attends its Honor. I perceive
you are engaged to follow the Course of the Great Ones; but if you have any
remainder of Shame left, I advise you to sacrifice the Interest of the Court,
and the King's Embraces, to your own Honor and mine: Retire into a Convent, as
did La Valiere and spend the rest of your days in the Service of God. The King
being accustomed to change, will treat you in the same manner as he has done
his other Mistresses.

I assure you, Sir, (says de Madam Maintenon) that I have profited extremely by
the good Advice which you have given me; and be persuaded, that neither the
Splendor of the Crown, nor the Glory of the Court, shall hinder me from
acknowledging the Changeableness and Inconstancy of this present Life; and I am
very well satisfied, that nothing can be better said, then what you have now
spoken.

You are still the same for solid Reasoning, and have lost nothing of that
sublime and patherick Wit which procured you the Adoration of all your Hearers.
I wish that the Time allowed you were longer, that I might enjoy your dear
Presence: But seeing it is weak to wish for Impossibilities, I had rather
improve the precious Moments which remain; and I assure you, that I shall never
lose the Idea nor Remembrance of all your Kindnesses.

The Moral which you have made use of to make me sensible of them, has made a
very great Impression upon my Heart; but as to your Advice, of retiring into a
Convent, it is impossible; for I am wedded to the King by indissoluble Bonds,
and neither fear Change nor Disgrace, having taken such just Measures, that
nothing but Death is capable to make a Separation; and moreover, I am more
Sovereign then ever the late Queen was. But I can also tell you, That I never
observed such a Changeable inclination in that Prince as you imagine: He always
loved those very passionately, who had the good fortune to please him. I
remember, that as to Mademoiselle Mademoiselle de Fontange, the King said, one
day, to the Duke of St. Agnan, That he was never so much in Love, and that
according to all appearance, he should never change. -- But, Sir, (continues
Madam de Maintenon) I would willingly have some News concerning that beautiful
Damsel, and what Rank she keeps in Pluto's Kingdom of Darkness; for I can
assure you, that his Majesty was extr^mely grieved at her Death.

Madam, (says Scarron) I can tell you no other News of Mademoiselle de
Fontange, but that she continually complains of you. The Prince, and the
Marquess de Louvois look upon you as a wretched Woman, and say that you caused
her to be poisoned, which has procured you a very bad Name in those dark
Regions.

Proserpine our Queen, was not grieved when she saw that beautiful Nymph arrive
in her Kingdom; for she is now the greatest Ornament of her Court, and chief
Maid of Honor.

In truth Sir, (answers Madam de Maintenon) I want Words to express my
Astonishment, there must be some fatality in my Lot, for true or false I am
always reckoned guilty of whatever Mischiefs happen at Court. But Heaven is the
Witness of my Innocence.

Madmemoiselle de Fontange, the Prince of Conti, and the Marquis de Louvois,
have had their Enemies since they believe themselves to have been poisoned; but
being so Great Masters of Reason as they were, methinks they ought to have
considered that Death spares none, of what Quality, Age or Sex soever. I think
I have read that the Pagans erected Altars to all their Deities, and being
asked once on a time, Why they had not erected one to Death, they answered
Because he was inexorable. I have still one thing of Importance to say to you
before we part, which I did not think on. You must know, Sir, that the Reverend
Fathers the Jesuits had no sooner perceived my being in Favor with the King,
but they resolved to gain me to their Party, they accoasted me with all manner
of Civility and Submission, against which I was not able to stand out. They
ordered the Reverend Fathers La Chaise and Bourdalon, to praise me to his
Majesty, and to insinuate, that he could never have made a better Choice, nor
one more worthy of his Conversation then he had done; by which those Religious
Fathers gained so much upon that Prince, that I found my self obliged to
receive their Visits daily, and to testify my Satisfaction therewith.

I confess to you, that I had a Confidence in that Order, and therefore chose
one o^ them for the Director of my Conscience, and could have been content to
have born the Title of a Lady of the Society of Jesus ^ and since that time
Father La Chaise ha^ been my Confessor in Ordinary, insomuch that being at
Confession one day, I pray'^ him to pardon all those Sins which I might commit
with the King; and for this end I discovered to him all the Secrets of my
Heart. He was so far from blaming me, that he assured me I was not at all
Culpable, and that it was no Crime to entertain an Amorous Correspondence with
the oldest Son of the Church, but that I must comply with that Monarch in such
things as he was most sensibly delighted with; that those things which were
called Sins with other Men, were not so in regard of Kings and Princes; that
God had set them above the rest of Mankind, that they might prescribe Laws to
themselves; and that it was not lawful for any man to Control them, but that
their Subjects were bound to pay emblind Obedience.

Just so, Madam, (says Scarron) Sinners do generally flatter themselves, and
find out Expedients to Extenuate their Guilt; but one may eternally Damn
themselves by such a dangerous Practice, and those are the admirable Lessons
which the Reverend Fathers the Jesuits teach their Penitents of both Sexes; can
one then make use of the Sacred Tribunal which ought to be an Asylum for the
Salvation of Souls to destroy them utterly? I am not now surpised at your
having given up your self with so much Freedom to satisfy his Majesty's
Desires, since you have so rare a Secret, and such excellent Instructions from
the Reverend Father La Chaise, who tells you, that you may entertain an amorous
Correspondence without any scruple, and not be so much as guilty of the least
Venial Sin in so doing; that is the rare Morality which he learned from Father
du Vaux his Tutor in Philosophy, who has since that, been advanced to the
highest Preferments in the Order. It Is to him that he owes this fine Education
and the Advancement of his Fortune. I wonder much, how those Doctors, who are
apparently the Guides to Salvation and Lights of the Church, can reconcile this
Conduct with the solemn Vows they are under to maintain Chastity.

But the Reverend Fathers have a certain sort of fine-spun Morality, which they
don't teach publicly in the Schools; for in truth, as they say, It is not
Convenient that all the World should know it, and therefore they keep it in
Reserve for Great Wits, and such as are capable of relishing the same. These
are the Mysteries which make them so much admired. Behold here what one of the
sublime Doctors says.

Then Scarron taking the Register from Rancune showed Madam de Maintenon the
Morals of the Reverend Fathers the Jesuits.

When a man finds himself extremely pressed with the Rebellion of the Flesh,
and and that an occasion offers for an Amorous Rancounter, if he distrust his
own Weakness, and be afraid that he shall not be able to prevent his falling
into the same, that Person is guilty of no Crime, if he keep his whole
Intreague secret to avoid worse.

Here is also another Remark of their Doctor Escobar, If you cannot prevent
your Loving of Women, it is not so much as the least Venial Sin to give your
self up to Love, for I know that it acts upon People with great Violence, and
sometimes puts them out of an Estate of Salvation. St. Francis Xavier, one of
their most famous Religious Persons, has fully informed us of it during his
Life, by all the Torments which he suffered; and therefore he says very
Judiciously, That every man who sins after having reasoned a little, his Faults
are pardoned, though with some more difficulty. Behold the Divinity of the Holy
Fathers of the Society, and the secret Doctrine which they teach their
Disciples!

Scarron having signified to Madam de Maintenon by bowing his Head, that he was
not allowed to say any more, being pressed by Rancune and Rapiniere to return
to their shady Palace, left the Heroess in a profound Trance, reflecting
continually upon the Conversation which she had had with him, and the sensible
Reproaches wherewith he had upbraided her.

Ha! (says she) if all the Ladies of Pleasure which I know, and who have lost
their Husbands, had such Visions as these, they would not take so much care to
conceal their Intriegues; and if the King knew the Vexation that I am in at
present, I am sure he would be touched with it, but he does not expect such an
Extraordinary piece of News.

In this manner Madam de Maintenon passed the Night without being able to
sleep; next Morning La Caverne her Maid entered her Chamber as usual; and asked
her Lady what she would have her to do. The Marchioness answered in a
discomposed manner, That as soon as she was dressed, she would go to St. Cyr.
Some hours after she took Coach to go to the Abbey, where St. Lewis's Ladies
received her with incredible Joy, because they had been deprived of her
presence for eight days time, that she had been taken up with the King's
Affairs, and particularly the Ball which the Duke of Orleance gave in the Royal
Palace. Our Heroess having considered a little of what she had to do, took a
general Review of that sine House, and was saluted by all the Damsels with a
Charming Modesty, who accompanied her four and four abreast to the Church, to
hear Mass.

The King, who is always impatient where he loves, bethinking himself that he
had not seen his Mistress in a long time, slew to give her a Visit, without any
Consideration of St. Cyr. Into her Closet he went; and having saluted her after
his usual manner, that is to say very tenderly, he recounted to her all the
Pleasure he had taken at the Ball, imperfect only in this, that he could not
enjoy her Company till the end of it, and then asked her why she went away so
soon: telling her withal, That had she stayed but a little longer, she might
have seen the pleasantest and most delightful Disguizes in the World; for that
the twelve English young Lords who were sent by King James in the Dress of
Quakers, escaped a most terrible Danger; for that in making their way through
all the Flambeaux that lighted that numerous Assembly, they missed but very
narrowly of being every one of 'em sacrificed to the Sport of the Night.

You may have probably observed, Madam, (continued the King) in the History of
France, what befell Charles VI. upon the like Occasion, at the Nuptials of one
of the Queen's Maids of Honor. At what time, some of the Noblemen dancing
masqueraded in the Shape of Bears, the Duke of Orleance holding down a Flambeau
to look upon their Noses, set fire to the Linen that was joined together with
Pitch. Presently the Room was all in Flame and Affright; the People crowded one
upon another to get out, some cried, God save the King; but the Duchess of
Berry covered the King with the Skirt of her Gown, and preserved him from the
fiery Torrent. You see (said the King, siniling) how useful Women are in this
Life; for that by their Assistance we many times escape great Dangers.

Oh -- Sir, (answered Madam de Maintenon) if all Men had the same savourable
Sentiments of us, we should not be so much slighted as we are at this day. But
we find that there are many Persons no way inconsiderable for their merit, who
strongly oppose your Kind Opinon of us, while they assert, That Women are the
cause of all the Mischiefs and Misfortunes that happen in the World.

Perhaps, (said the King) those Persons have not been able to pay Fortune a
sufficient Sallary, to procure 'em the Favors of the Female Sex. For my part I
can assure ye, Madam, that were it not for Women, my Life would be but very
burdensome to me. It Is the sweetest of all those other Pleasures that slatter
our Senses. Which therefore seems to me, to be the reason, why Nature
foreseeing that we would make 'em the Objects of our Adoration, formed 'em so
amiable as they are.

The King would have continued this Discourse, but he was interrupted by one of
his Gentlemen, who brought him Letters from the Duke of Luxemb^rgh and Mashall
de Bou^^lers. So that his Majesty immediately took Coach and returned to
Versailles: where after he had spent some time in reading his Letters and
returning Answers, He began again to reflect upon the Melancholy Humor
wherein he found his Mistress. For in truth she had appeared to him to be
incredibly cast down; so that the mighty Monarch not being able to penetrate
the real Causes of such an Extraordinary Pensiveness, wrote her the following
Lines.

The King's Letter to Madam de Maintenon.
DId I not Love ye, so well as I do, (Madam) I should never busy my self to
study with so much attention what could afflict ye to that degree of
Discomposure which I last beheld in your Countenance. But whatsoever pains I
take to find it out. I cannot possibly divine the Rea^ Cause. You know how well
I love ye, and that there is nothing I will spare to satisfy your Revenge upon
your Enemies. Adieu, Madam; speedily let me know whatever it is that grieves
ye, for I am Impatient till I understand what it may be.


The King gave this Letter to one of his Pages, with Orders to carry it to
Madam de Maintenon, who joyfully received it, and returned this Answer to it.

Madam de Maintenon's Letter to the King.
OH! my dear Prince, in what an Ecstasy am I, to find that you concern your
self so deeply in my Grief. It Is true, that I conceal the Real Motives of my
Disquiet: but there are some Secrets in this Life which we cannot unfold but
with some kind of Torture; and this, of which you seek so earnestly to be
informed, is that of Nature. I can say nothing farther in This: but I shall
reserve all my Eloquence, till I happen to be alone in your Presence.


Our Marchioness folded up her Letter with a more then Ordinary Curiosity, and
sent it to the King, who read it two or three times, but all in vain; for he
could not find what he sought with so much earnestness. The next Morning, his
Majesty went to St. Germains, to visit the King and Queen of England, attended
by several of the Nobility.

Madam de Maintenon who had intelligence of it, failed not to be there also in
company with Mademoiselle de Luine, and Mademoiselle de Soubise, the most witty
and most obliging Persons in the World. But the King was not presently to be
spoken with, and therefore while he was discoursing with King James and the
Queen, M. de Maintenon went to walk with the Ladies. At what time, rambling
from one thing to another, at ^^^^th they sell by degree; to talk of the little
Cupids of Marble that flood in the midst of the Garden And then it was, that
Mademoiselle de Luine, who is a Lady of a bri^k humor, asked Madam de
Maintenon why Poets and Painters had to ill represented Love in the Figure of a
Child; and what use he made of his Flambeau, and the Fillet about his Eyes; and
that it would have been much more proper to have painted him a Young Man full
grown, and in his flourishing Years.

This Pleasant Question of Mademoiselle de Luine put the Ladies into a fit of
Laughter. You are as yet too young, Fair Lady, replied our Marchioness, to make
a true Comment upon all the Figure that you see. Pardon me therefore, if I
undertake to unfold these Mysteries, and satisfy your Scruples. This Infant is
a perfect Emblem of Love; that Passion in some respects being Weakness and
Childhood it self, and in others mere Dotage and Foppery: As for the Swathe
about his Eyes, it denotes his Blindness, which is not able to discern those
things that are most proper and convenient for him. The Flambeau signifies that
violent Heat which burns us in the most sensible Part of the Body, which is the
Heart.

Well, Madam, (cried Mademoiselle de Luine) I shall take care, I warrant ye, to
keep my Heart from being burned by any such Flambeau's as that. Twill be very
well, my dear Darling, (replied our Her^ess) if you can. How far this discourse
might have led 'em no body c^n tell, for the Subject was alluring enough, but
the King meeting 'em at the end of a wide Alley, put an end to it, and the
Ladies taking another way, left the two Lovers by themselves together. The King
thus finding himself alone with his Mistress: Oh, Madam, (said he) you have too
unkindly prolonged my Languishing Desires to know the unhappy Occasion of your
so deeply Afflicting Sorrows. You know the tenderness that I have for ye; and
therefore you cannot, without a great deal of Injustice, conceal any thing from
me.

It Is very true, Sir, (answered M. de Maintenon) your Majesty's Kindness and
Affection have been so singular toward me, that there is nothing which I can or
ought to hide from your knowledge. Give me then leave to tell ye, that the
other Night returning from the Ball, after I had been meditating a while in my
Chamber, I heard a noise; but much more Terrible was my sudden Astonishment to
behold the Ghastly Appearance before my Eyes of Monsieur Scarron and three of
his Friends.

How! Madam, (said the King) do the Dead then begin to rise before we come to
the End of the World.

I know not that, Sir, (replied Madam de Maintenon) but I am sure, to no
Comfort of mine, God knows, I was constrained to hold a Dialogue with him for
above Two Hours.

'Twas long enough in all Conscience, (answered the King) for a Man without
Flesh and Bones; but all this while, what said the Ghost to ye?

Oh, Sir, (replied Madam de Maintenon) the most grievous things, and the most
abusive and scandalous things that ever were heard. He Reproached me with an
unparalleled Confidence, that I had violated my Faith and Oath which I swore to
him before God and Men; and that being beloved by your Majesty, I was looked
upon both on Earth, and in the Infernal Court, as a Woman without Reputation,
or in plain Terms a Harlot; and that Pluto, the Prince of the Abyss, has
threatened already (the Holy Virgin keep me out of his Clutches) to make me
feel the Effects of his Fury; and that France was beholding for all the
Mischiefs and Calamities that had befallen her of late, to the dangerous and
pernicious Counsels which I gave your Majesty.

But that which most surpised me was, that he showed me the Contract of
Marriage, by which you were so Good and Gracious as to espouse me to your
Person; nor can I imagine how this Fantom could come by such a piece of
Secrecy, and which your Majesty took such care to conceal. For my part, I must
p^sitively accuse the Marquis of Louvois, who most certainly has betrayed your
Majesty in the Kingdom of Darkness. And for a further Accumulation of Grief
upon Sorrow, he told me, That the Prince of Conti, Mademoiselle de Fontange,
and the Marquis of Louvois, assured him, that I had caused 'em to be poisoned.
Could any Man have said any thing more Extravagant or more Injurious.

Madam, (replied the King) I am somewhat at a loss what Answer justly to return
ye upon the Discoveries you have made me; nor can I readily believe these
Things to be real: It Is only a Vision which perhaps you may have had in your
Sleep, proceeding from some little Kindness which you may still retain for the
Memory of that good Man.

Sir, (answered Madam de Maintenon) all that I have told ye is most certainly
true: neither was I ever looked upon to be a Visionary.

But, Madam, (replied the King) you made mention of the Marquis of Louvois; now
you know that he has been a long time in the other World, and it is impossible
the Dead should know what is done in this.

Oh -- Sir, (said Madam de Maintenon) I was always of the same Belief as well
as you; but M. Scarron showed me a large Register, which la Rancune brought
along with him, wherein are contained all the most Secret Actions of Mortals.

At the Word Rancune, which signifies Hatred and Malice, the King fell a
Laughing; and asked her, whether she knew what the Name signified.

Sir, (said Madam de Maintenon) never believe the Names of Rancune, R^piniere,
and Rag^uti^ to be sain'd like the Names of the Persons in a Comedy. For they
were M. Scarron's very good Friends that always kept him Company in this World.

Why then it seems they take Journeys at pleasure from the other World hither,
(continued the King, with some kind of Astonishment.) And yet if I could see
once more the Men and Women which I have lost, it would be a Pleasure to me
beyond imagination. But I believe it not so easy a thing to rise from the
Dead; and yet methinks I could be willing to hear some Tidings of poor
Mademoiselle de Fontange.

Sir, (answered Madam de Maintenon) it is a thing that I have studied to bring
to pass as much as any thing in the World, well knowing thereby, that I should
oblige your Majesty; for I am convinced of the passionate Love which you had
for her; but I was troubled that she had such an ill Opinion of me.

It may be, Madam, (said the King) 'twas only a Scandal which that same Aesep
raised of himself. I always looked upon Mademoiselle de Fontange to be too
prudent to harbor any such groundless Thoughts; and for your part, Madam, I am
sure it is impossible but you must be innocent of so heinous a Crime.

However, Sir, (replied Madam de Maintenon) all this while I suffer in my
Reputation, and in regard that M. Scarron told me, how that beautiful Nymph is
looked upon with an Eye of Favor at the Infernal Court, and that she is one of
Queen Proserpine's Minions, she may say what she pleases.

These are Trifles, Madam, (said the King) not worth your Thoughts. I rather am
afraid least Pluto should fall in Love with her, and consequently, least the
poor Lady should incurr Proserpine's Displeasure, the ready way to bring upon
her Head the dire Effects of Proserpine's revengeful Jealousy.

I do not believe, Sir, (replied Madam de Maintenon) that those sooty Deities
are capable of such a noble Passion.

How! -- Madam, can a Person so witty, as you are, be ignorant how the Deities
of old pined away and languish'd in the Fetters of beautiful Women! Their
amorous Transports are known to all the World. Did not Jupiter, chief Sultan of
all the Deities, transform himself into a Thousand Shapes, even of Beasts
themselves, to bring about the Designs of his Concupiscence: and all the other
Demi-Deities, did they not imitate him with extraordinary Delight? If Venus's
little Baby had the confidence to discharge his Quiver into Heaven, What Reason
is there to believe that Mortals are not sensible of his Wounds?

I find Love, (continued the King) the most Noble of all the Passions: without
it the World could never subsist. If I love an Admirable Object, I know I do no
more then what my Predecessors did, being as little Insensible as they.

For this Reason it is, (replied Madam de Maintenon) that I blame the King of
Barathrum, and all his Subjects, for being so saucy as to make your Amors
their Hell-discourse. I know, the time was once when Pluto was in Love himself;
and it is not unlikely but that some new Beauty may inflame his Heart at this
very time.

What you say, Madam, may very well be; but I know that the Prince of Darkness
can never gain the Affection of Women. He was always so Deformed, and so ill a
Courtier withal, that there was never a Hat-nos'd, Blubber-lip'd Nymph in the
Roll of Antiquity, but scorned him. One Day therefore, in the height of his
Despair, he bully'd away Proserpina by force, as she was picking Dasies in a
Meadow: and therefore I set my self above a Thousand petty Railleries that they
can put upon me, let 'em criticize as much as they please. I remember the Duke
of Mazarin, who counterfeited a World of Godliness, desired a Private Audience
of me one Day; I consented: but all the while he held me in a long Story of a
Vision of his, That the Kingdom would be turned Topsy turvy if I did not quit
the Company of la Vallicre; adding withal, that he admonished me by a
particular Commission from God. And I, (said I) advize ye to take a particular
Care of your Brains which are in a very sad Condition, and to restore me all
that your Uncle robbed me of.

The Duke made a low Conge, and sneaked away. By and by comes to me Father
Anat, my Confessor, egged on by the Queen, to tell me, That he would leave the
Court, for that my Trading in Love made too great a Noise. I smiled, and bid
him take his Liberty. But then the poor Father, finding himself taken at his
Word, would sain have turned Cat in Pan; but I told him, my Curate would serve
my Turn for the present.

You cannot believe, Madam, how all his Order teased him for being such a
Ninny. I cannot endure such a Number of Hypocrites, that take a Pride in
reforming others, but spare for nothing to gratify their own Pleasures. For my
part, I love Liberty in this Life.

The King, who was in a good Humor, would have gone on, but he was obliged to
return to Versailles with the Lords and Gentlemen that attended him.

After he was gone, Madam de Maintenon went to join the Ladies again, who were
diverting themselves in a Terrace Walk, at a distance off.

Ah, Madam, (said Mademoiselle de Soubise, what a while have you been
discoursing with the King.

I assure ye, (replied our Marchioness) I never in my Life saw our Monarch in
so good a Humor.

All the Reason in the World, Madam, (replied Mademoiselle de Luine) for you
inspire him always with Jocundry and Blitheness.

No, no, my Dear, (said Madam de Maintenon) it is not from my Influences that he
derives his Gayety. -- But here she stopped. -- Her Lacquey came to tell her,
that the Coach attended at the Gate, and she had a mind to be at Versailles
that Night.

But for all this, Madam de Maintenon could not be rid of her Melancholy. Her
Husband had left her, but the Dialogue still continually haunted her.

The next Day she went to wait upon the King at his Hour of rising: And after
they had discoursed together of several Things, she told him with a sad and
lamentable Air, That she could not Sleep for the Phantom that was always
hovering before her Eyes; and that her Soul was in great Disorder.

The King, whose Heart is very Tender and Compassionate, in respect of his
Mistresses, bid her go to their Common Confessor, Father La Chaise, and impart
her Afflictions to him.

Immediately Madam de Maintenon called one of her Pages, and sent him away Post
to Paris, to tell the Reverend Priest, he was to attend the King. But he was
not to be sound; for he was gone to refresh himself with his Creature
Enjoyments, at his House in the Fauxburgh St. Anthony. So that the Page
returned as wise as he went.

Thereupon Madam de Maintenon, without any more ado, made bold with the King's
Closet; where, in a short time, she wrote the following Note, and sent it away
with all speed: For her Conscience was all this while upon the Rack.

The Marchioness of Maintenon's Letter to the Reverend Father La Chaise.
AT length, Reverend Father, after long Musing upon the unfortunate Accident
that has befal'n me, I have cast my Eyes upon you, as the Person from whom I
expect my Deliverance; being fully persuaded that you can rid me of the Torment
which I undergo. It Is not any Politic Affair nor any Intriegue that I am
driving on, which engages me to send you these Lines. My Sufferings are inward,
my Soul is harras'd with Remorse of Conscience. Hasten then to me with all
possible speed, dear Father; for you alone can procure the Peace and
Tranquillity of my Soul.


The Page was no sooner arrived, but one of Father La Chaise's Lacqueys carried
him into a Cabinet hung with Forest Work, where were also present the Bishop
of Paris, and several other Persons of Quality.

So soon as the Father saw the Messenger, he smiled, believing he had some
Message to deliver to him from the King. To which the Page replied, That he was
sent from Madam de Maintenon, to deliver him that Letter.

It Is all one; (said the Reverend Father) for Tidings either from the One or
the Other, are equally grateful. And so reading the Note, with an Air of
Satisfaction, he told the Page, that he would speedily do himself the Honor of
going to affure the King and Madam de Maintenon of his most humble Respects and
Readiness to serve 'em. And indeed the Reverend Father took no small delight to
let all the Company see the Esteem and Tenderness which he had for that
virtuous Lady, by expaciating into a Panegyric upon the glistering Virtues
that adorned her Mind.

And certainly it may be said, without any Aggravation, that among all the
Clergy of France, there never was a Person that understood so well to comply
with all the Humors, all the Fegaries, and all the Intriegues of the Court of
Lewis XIV. with so much Wit, so much Policy, and so much Dissimulation. No
wonder then that having so many Sleights and Ways to gain a Prince's Heart, we
see him towering in so high a Sphere of Prosperity, and the Envy of his whole
Order, who see him almost the sole Possessor of the King's Ear, and by that
means, with Ease surmounting all Obstacles that oppose his Designs.

Being then so eminent and so great a ^erson, let us wait upon him to
Versail^s; where he arrived at what time the King was in company with Madam de
Maintenon. The King no sooner saw him, but reaching forth his Hand for him to
Kiss, Father, (said he) you are she most Happy among Men; you were wished for
here with a more then ordinary Passion; every Hour was thought ^ Day till you
came.

Sir, (replied the Reverend Father) with a Monkish Humility, all the Happiness
that I have in this World, is to be beloved by your Majesty.

The King was pleased with his Complement, and bid him take his Place. Their
first Discourse was about the present Affairs; but that being soon over, the
Father turning toward our Marchioness, In truth, Madam, (said he) I have a long
time had an extreme desire to enjoy the Happiness of your Presence: Father
Bourdalon has Preached two or three times, but you never wouchsaf'd him the
Honor to hear him; which did not a little surprise me, knowing your Devotion
to be so exemplary.

Truly Father, (replied Madam de Maintenon) I have been forced to kee^ my
Chamber for some time, not finding my self very well: Besides, I an^ fallen
into a deep Melancholy that very much disturbs my Mind.

May not the Cause, Madam, of s^ much Grief, (replied the Reveren^ Father) be
inquired into, and whenc^ it derives it is Original?

Assuredly, Father, (said the March^^oness) I am firmly convinced, That the^^
is nothing that one of your true Penitents ought to conceal from your
Knowledge; and that we ought to apply ou^selves to you, as to the real
Comforte^ of our Souls. I Will tell ye then what '^ that thus torments me.
Monsieur Scarron is returned from the other World, and has laid those Things to
my Charge^ that pierce my very Heart: For he told me, That he could not be
admitted into Eternal Rest, for that I had neglected him after his Death, not
having caused Masses and Prayers to be said for him sufficient to release him
out of his present Misery. And this is that which afflicts me extremely, that I
should be the Cause of his Sufferings in Purgatory.

I must confess, Madam, (said the ^ather) you tell me very sorrowful News --
But pray Madam, how ^ong has he been Dead?

As far as I can remember, Father, replied the King) he died that very Year
that I was married to the deceased Queen, which was in 1660.

Then, Sir, (answered the Reverend Father) we may reckon it to be about Thirty
four Years that this poor Soul has been in fiery Tribulation. Good Soul! --
sufficiently Purisy'd! -- A Martyr in Purgatory. -- We must intorm the Pope,
that we may get him Canorin'd.

His Holiness, Father, might do well to put him in the Calendar of Saints, and
order his Bones, as a new Discove^y, to be carried to all the Churches in
Christendom. But pray tell me, -- Is there a time limited for us to be in
Purgatory?

Sir, (answered the Father) we have no certain time appointed for our
Sufferings. We are confined to this Place, according to the demerits of our
Crimes, For a longer or shorter time, sufficient to purge us from all our
Transgressions and Sins committed in this World: For the Scripture tells us,
That no Defilement can enter the Kingdom of Heaven.

But that which very much surprize^ me, (said our Heroess) is, that M. Scarron
should be so long detained in this same Mansion of Pain; for I always found him
to be a merry Soul indeed but full of Piety and Devotion: Besides the good Man,
being seized with a paralitick Distemper, lived many Year without the Use of
his Limbs; by which means God gave him time enough to Repent.

Repentance, Madam, (replied Father la Chaise,) is the only means to obtain the
Mercy of God. But in regard that as I told ye before, we must for all that,
suffer out our Sufferings in the Place appointed for the perfect Expiation o^
our Sins, I advize ye to use your utmost Efforts for this Martyr; to give
Money speedily to two or three Churches, to say a sufficient Number of Masses
for his Deliverance: It Is the surest way to get his Soul admitted into
Paradise. You must also your self be continually at your Prayers to the Holy
Virgin and all the Saints, that they will vouchsafe to put up their Petitions
for him.

What think ye, Father, (cried Madam de Maintenon) if I should undertake a
Pilgrimage to our Lady of Deliverance, or perform some other Penance to get
this wandering Soul out of Torment with all the speed that may be. I would fain
have him, I cared not how soon, in the Saints Everlasting Rest, rather then be
troubled with him here upon Earth

Lord! Madam, (cried the Reverend Father) what Religious, what Charitable
Sentiments are these for a Woman of this World, and in your Prosperity. But I
sind that you have still an unexhaustible Spring of Piety in your Heart.

Alas! Father, (said Madam de Maintenon, with an extraordinary Air of Modesty,
I am not so Devout as you take me to be. -- The World, -- the World, Father,
will get the upperhand in spite of all Reluctance, -- and I am continually
waging War with the Rebellions of my Flesh --

Madam, (answered the Father, fetching a deep Sigh) we shall never be perfect
till we get to Heaven, where we shall meet with no more Trials and Temptations
of this Life.

I am apt to believe, Father, (interrupted the King with a Smile,) that we have
been at a Sermon: You have preached to us the best Morality in the World.
Nothing grieves me, but that I fear me it will have so strong an operation upon
Madam de Maintenon, that she will forget all the Pleasures of this Life, and we
shall lose her in these Divine Contemplations.

I will tell ye, Sir, (answered the Marchioness) that there is an
unexpressible Joy to be met with, in the solid Contemplation of the Divine
Mysteries. For my part I no longer wonder that so many Souls of the Saints have
been transported to Heaven in Raptures and Enthusiasms. But this same Zeal. God
knows, is not perfect in us; so that we may say, that we always feel in our
Heart, something that opposes right Reason

Observe, Father. (said the King) that Madam de Maintenon never proposes any
Argument, but she also supports it with a Philosophical Proof, with so much
Strength, and Solid Reason, that Plato could have done no more. In all these
Lovely Arguments, continued the King, beholding our Heroess with a wistful Eye,
How pleasant it is to hear a Person so witty as you are, argue so Pathetically.
In good earnest, I find the Fate of Men is very Frail, in reference to the
Female Sex. But who can help it? The Author of Nature having given 'em a
sensible Heart, and Senses capable to receive all Impressions, how is it
possible for 'em to resist so many Enemies? So that it is no wonder, if many
times, in despite of our own Wills and Consents, we suffer our selves to be
surpised.

It Is very true, Sir, said the Reverend Father, that there it is where Human
Weakness shows it self, and in that we are more unfortunate then Criminal,
since we are not able, as your Majesty well observes, to Triumph over those
Senses of ours, that without Intermission oppose our Will. I sind nothing in
all St. Paul's Theology, that better agrees with the Frailty of Human
Creatures, then when he says, that when he would do Good, evil is with him; but
that he sinds another Law that hinders him from doing what he would.

Father, replied Madam de Maintenon, you have exactly hit the meaning of that
Great Apostle, I am charmed with this Discourse, nor do I care how long it were
to continue. But in regard his Majesty has already Laughed at me, for taking so
much pleasure in these seeming Enthusiasms, I am afraid of provoking him, and
rendering my self in some measure troublesome.

No, no -- Madam, replied the King smiling, I am too great a Lover of what you
delight in, to oppose your Holy Recreations. Besides, that a Converse wherein
you intermix so much of your own Wit, and so engaging, can never be otherwise
then most agreeable to me.

Sir, said our Marchioness, I am infinitely beholding to your Majesty for that
Esteem with which you Honor me; and I return thanks to Heaven for my Good
Fortune, and for that inestimable Minute, wherein I had the Felicity to obtain
your Favor. But your Majesty always exercises a sort of Goodness natural to
your Royal Inclination, which is to excuse all the Defects of the most humble
your Servants.

The King was about to have returned an Answer, but a Page brought Word, that
the Cloth was laid. So that, now they minded nothing but Eating and pleasant
Discourse. The King began the Reverend Confessor's Health; and he carried it to
Madam de Maintenon, who received it very obligingly. Dinner being over, Father
La Chaise, who has the Honor to accompany the King every day at Dinner, took
his Leave of the King, alleging the necessity of his Return to Paris to his
Professed House, where he gives Audience twice or thrice a Week to several
persons of all Conditions that come to kiss his Hands.

Said the King to him, I give you leave to go home, but upon Condition that you
return in the Evening. Upon which the Father Transported with the King's
Civility, displayed his Acknowledgment by a profound Reverence, and a Humility
attended with an extraordinary Respect.

After he was gone, the King went to Fontainbleau, with the Duke of Orleans,
and the Dauphin to make a Hunting Match in the Forest of Vincennes. In the
mean time, our Heroess retired to her Chamber, to muse at Leisure upon her
intended Pilgrimage to our Lady of Deliverance. But before her departure, she
stayed three Weeks in her Abbey, from whence she went every morning in the
Habit of a Penitent to the Great Church of Paris, to Order the saying of Masses
for the Ghost of Scarron, attended only by La Caverne, who waited on her in her
Chamber.

But the Marchioness was not contented with a Legion of Orisons, which she
caused to be power'd forth in the Cathedral; for she set all the Devout People
at Work in several other Churches; more particularly at St. Eustachius's, and
the Abbey of St. Lewis, for whom she had a secret Veneration. After all these
Mortisiations, she went the next day to St. Cyr, to prepare the Ladies of the
Abbey, and all the young Damsels to live in her absence, with great
Reserv'dness, and with all the Discretion imaginable, giving 'em to that
purpose the most admirable Precepts in the World. They took their Leaves of
her, full of Sorrow and Affliction for their Cruel Separation from her dear
Presence. And at length, when those doleful Complements and Formalities were
over, she took Coach with La Caverne, in Order to her Travels, which were to be
for a Month. It Is not to be imagined, what Floods of Tears her Absence cost the
whole Society; but then the sorrowful Sisters solac'd themselves again, with
the hopes of their beloved Abbesses Return in a short time: Assuring
themselves, that her Virtue and her Devotion would secure her from all Attempts
upon her Person, either of her incensed Husband, or Pluto himself.

The King, who stayed at Versailles, with an incredible Impatience to see his
Mistress before she departed, could not readily resolve to want her Company for
so long a time; and disputed warmly with himself, whither or no he should grant
her Request. But as he was musing and pondering upon this mournful Journey, for
by that Name he called it; the rather, because his Majesty was no Admirer of
Penances and Pilgrimages, Madam de Maintenon made her Entry, to pay him her
last Adieu's, with a Sorrow surpassing all Expression.

The King Embracing her, Ah, Madam said he, how dear will this Absence of yours
cost me! Those Words went to the Marchionesses heart, and overcame her with
such a piercing Disconsolation, that for a time she could not speak.

The King, who had his Reasons for what he did, had let fall this on purpose.
For he knew that she stood in need of his Assistance upon several occasions.

Before they parted for good and all, Madam de Maintenon settled all his
Majesty's Suspicions, by a thousand charming Protestations. The Reverend Father
La Chaise, who by good luck Arrived just in the nick of time, bestowed au
infinite Number of Benedictions upon her, to encourage her in her Noble design:
Assuring her, that he would not cease to offer up his Prayers to God, and all
the Male and Female Saints, that they would be pleased to depute a good Angel
to be her Companion and Conductor, and that he hoped the Success of her
Pilgrimage would be greatly to her Glory. Adding withal, that it was a good
Office of a high Nature, which she was going to do for her Husband. Thus it
was, that Pyramus and Thisbe separated with mutual assurances, never to be
forgetful of each other.

The Father, who was an Ear Witness of all these Protestations, stayed behind
with the King, discoursing for some time about the Marriage of Boufflers with
Mademoiselle de Gramont, the Daughter of Antony Charles, Duke of the same Name,
and whose Dowry was no less then 40000 Livres, besides a Magnificent Present
from the King in Jewels; and some talk of several other considerable Emoluments.

But let us return to our Monarch, who was extremely turmoyl'd and uneasy to
be so long a Widower, as one that was never Idle in his Amors. Therefore, to
pass time away, he went every day to St. Germains, to Visit the Queen of
England. He found that Princess well Built and very Charming, and that she had
a Heart not altogether insensible of his Caresses. And indeed, her deplorable
Condition, after her Husband had lost his Crown, cans'd her to entertain the
Caresses of our Monarch, with a more then ordinary tenderness, as being the
most probable future support of a King's unjoyntur'd Widow; so that his Majesty
succeeded perfectly to his Content. For one day that King Jame was at Paris,
his Majesty had the Opportunity to be all alone a whole afternoon with the
Queen, and to make her a Formal and Ample Declaration of his Love.

Lewis the Great's Declaration of his Love, to the Banished Queen of England.
Madam,
WERE it for that Reason, that I must be accounted one of your most Cruel
Enemies, I could not forbear to Caress the misfortune, that brought you so
happily into this Kingdom, and which has, by that means, procured me the
Charming pleasure of your Company. I must needs declare to you, Madam, that
ever since that Fortunate day, I have always preserved a most profound Esteem
for your Person, which has bred up and cherished in my heart, something that I
can hardly tell what it is. I fancy to my self the most pleasing Idea that ever
was in the World, of all your Sparkling Qualities, and I take delight to recall
'em to my mind every Minute of the day, and to Dream of you in the Night. I
have habituated my self to that which appears to me the only thing that
asswages the Disturbances of my Love; that is to say, an unfeigned Vow which is
made to your self, by the most passionate of Men, and who burns with an Ardent
desire to let you see, how far it is possible for that Passion, which he has
for you, to extend it self.


The Queen was not a little at a Nonplus, to hear such enforcing and passionate
Expressions; which was the Reason why she could not return a sudden Answer;
for it behooved her to look well about her on every side. She was afraid least
her Husband should take notice of the King's Tenderness, and least Madam de
Maintenon should turn her mortal Enemy, to whom she had been infinitely
beholding, during her abode in France; foreseeing also, that her Succor might
be very necessary still; and for that in her Afflicted Condition, it became her
to make use of all her Policy and Precaution to preserve her friends.

On the other side, it was not in her Power to look upon the King with an
indifferent Eye; She felt within her self an Inclination strong enough to love
him; besides, the Offers of his Service, and the continual Assurances of his
Royal Word, never to forsake her, and to use his utmost endeavors for the
Restoration of her Husband; all these Considerations staggered the Resolutions
of her Chastity, and turmoyl'd her with a thousand various thoughts.

In the mean time, the King, to whom the Queen had not as yet opened her Lips,
since the Vow that he had made her, first breaking silence, Madam, said he, I
know not to what cause to attribute the disturbance which I behold in your
Looks, or whither I may be able to make a favorable Construction of it.

To which the Queen, not able to reject the Courtly Addresses of our Monarch,
and no less willing to keep him in hopes, that one day he might see himself
Gainer of the Conquest to which he aspired; Sir, said she, after a most Amiable
and engaging manner, The expressions you have made use of, to let me understand
the Condition of your Heart, have plunged me into a deep Meditation; and I can
hardly believe, that a Prince, like you, who are the Terror of all Europe,
should be in want of better Objects, to Sigh for a Person, whom Fortune has so
severely handled. My Misfortunes are daily before my Eyes, and the Fatal
remembrance of 'em will never leave me till Death.

Madam, replied the King, it would be in vain for me to reiterate what I have
so often repeated over and over again; that I am deeply sensible of your
Misfortunes, and that they never yet could make me loose the least respect
which is due to your Birth. I look upon you still as a Queen and what is more,
absolute over the Empire of my Will; and the secret Charms which I have
discovered in your Perfections, the force of which is inevitable, have
constrained me to acknowledge the Torments which I suffer. Among a thousand
Beauties that appear at Court, I do not meet with those subduing Allurements,
which I find in you, and by which I perceive my self so mortally Wounded.

The Queen was about to have returned an Answer, and to have let his Majesty
know, how infinitely she was beholding to him, for his kind Sentiments and
Favors bestowed upon her, when King James, who had been at Paris to Visit
Father La Chaise, came in and spoiled a good Complement. The Reverend Father,
it seems, had carried him to his House in the Fauxburg St. Antony, where they
had spent the whole day together, and where among other things, they fell into
Discourse about the Affairs of England, and so by degrees, into a deep debate,
which was the most probable way for the King to regain the three Kingdoms he
had lost. The Reverend Father, whose Brains are Fertile in Counsel and
Intrigues, had displayed upon that Subject, the whole extent of his Eloquence,
promising the distressed King all the Assistance, that he was capable to afford
him. Those Assurances so sincere and profitable, had warmed the Unfortunate
King's Heart, and brought into his Countenance an Air of Gayety, which
accompanied all his Actions. In this humor, entering the Room, Brother, said
he, you have a Blessed time on it, to be always courting the Ladies. It Is very
true, replied his Majesty, they have a powerful Ascendant over me.

The Scene of the Discourse being thus Changed, King James fell into a long
Story of the Fathers kind Entertainment, the various Subjects upon which they
had been conferring Notes together, and the wholesome Consolations he had
received from that same Conscience-Director. He extolled his Wit and his Merit,
and applauded his Majesty's Choice of such an Excellent Father Confessor.

But our Monarch, who had other Things to trouble his Brains withal, then the
Encomiums of Father La Chaise, looked upon K. James's Chat as impertinent; as
being altogether uneasy in his Mind, and not knowing how his Affairs stood in
the Heart of his New Mistress, who was no less displeased with the Interruption
on her Side: And in this humor the King took his leave with only a Farewell,
Brother, till I see you again. King James waited upon him to his Coach, where
he paid him a thousand Complements, and prayed him to continue his wonted
Goodness toward him; and the King assured him he should be always the same.

Being come to Versailles, he abandoned himself wholly to his Amorous Passion,
revolving in his mind all his Mistresses Charms, and the Obliging Ways by which
she had engaged his Heart, were the Subject of his Ruminations all that Night.
The next Morning he returned with an Unconceivable Impatience to revisit the
Object of his Love. But foreseeing, that perhaps he might not have a favorable
Opportunity to find the Queen alone, she being Visited by the Duchess of
Portsmouth, and Madam de Noailles, her Intimate Friends, he wrote her the
following Lines.

The Kings Letter to the Banished Queen.
Madam,
SInce I was born, I never loved so much as now I do; my Love for you is of
another Nature then what I was wont to feel upon the like Occasions. This
Violent Passion can proceed from no other cause then from your Merit, which
distinguishes you from other Women. Never say then, Madam. that this is the
usual Discourse that Men make use of, to inveagle the Fair and Beautiful, since
the Troubles of my Heart, and the restless Disquiet of my Mind continually
prove the contrary. Answer my Love more kindly then hitherto you have done;
assuring you, that if you afford me the least Hope, I shall quickly find Repose.

Adieu Madam.

The Queen received this Letter with an extraordinary Joy; but she did not
think it proper to return an Answer: which very much disturbed the King; and
made him resolve to return that day to St. Germains. He found the Queen in her
Closet, reading an Amorous History sent her out of England; to whom, Madam,
said he, I draw ye from a more pleasing Divertisment. To which the Queen made
answer, that not having else to do she took a Book in her Hand; but that now
she would make a better use of the happy Hour that presented it self, to enjoy
his Majesty's Company.

The King whose Passion was Violent, asked her in a kind of Disorder that
frequently befalls true Lovers, why she had not written to him; and told her
withal, that she had reduced him almost to utter Despair to find his Love so
ill repaid by a Person so Amiable; and that he had great reason to bewail his
Destiny, not having ever Sighed in vain before.

The Queen, who is Witty, and ready at Replys, told him that her Husband never
parted from her all that Day; and that his Majesty having a Love for Madam de
Maintenon, she was unwilling to draw upon her self the Hatred of a Rival, who
might trouble that little repose that was left her.

The King, who is an utter Enemy to Arguments and Reasons where he Loves, told
her that he had power sufficient to preserve her from all her Fears; that he
had a high Esteem for that Lady; but that he still preserved a Tenderness for
an Object of Adoration: and that the Marchioness of Maintenon had too much
Discretion to contradict him in his Pleasures.

An Answer of that Nature split the Queen's Heart, and inspired her with
several thoughts, that might have carried her a great Way; but the Duchess of
Portsmouth's Arrival delivered her out of her Perplexity; and the King, who is
very Complaisant in Ladies Society, tacked the Conversation together for a long
time, so that the Day passed merrily away. They fell into Discourse of the
French and English Customs, and of other things very diverting. But the Evening
drawing on, as jealous of their Happiness, brake off these pleasing
entertainments, and separated the Illustrious Company.

Madam de Maintenon, who was by this time got safe to our Lady of Deliverance,
upon All Saints Eve* and tired with her Journey, having traveled half the way a
foot in the Habit of a Penitent, went to a House of one that was her
Acquaintance, with her Damsel La Caverne, who was no less weary then her
Mistress. The Lady of the House was very much surpised to see that such a
Person, as she was, should undertake such painful Mortifications; but the
Marchioness up and told her the Important occasion of her Pilgrimage: That her
Husband Scarron had appeared to her, and upbraided her; and that she was to say
so many Masses for him: For this Reason, said she, my Dear Friend, I am come
hither to Pray to the Patroness of your Parish, the Mother of Deliverance, to
aid me in my present Affliction. To which the Lady answered, that she was the
best Saint in the World, and that she wrought several Miracles every Day, and
that of all those that besought her with an Ardent Zeal, she never sent any one
away, without some effect of her Goodness.

The next Day our Heroess lay all Day long in the Church, (which was a great
Testimony of her Piety and Zeal) continually and most Ardently imploring the
favor of the Saint in the following form of Prayer.

The Marchioness of Maintenon's Prayer to our Lady of Deliverance.
QVeen of Heaven, Guide to Salvation, Refuge of Afficted Souls, take Pity of
Me, and of Him, whom I recommend to thy favor, and who has lain languishing
for these thirty Years in Purgatory; and who perhaps without thy Succor must
be for'd to stay there till Doomsday: Send me not back, dear Mother of Mercy,
without Affording me some Sign of thy Protection. I recommend the Soul of
Monsieur Scarron into thy Hands, and beseech thee to admit him into Paradise.
This is the only favor, which a Miserable Penitent, Devoted only to thy
Service, begs at thy Hands. Pardon ^ne my past Transgressions, and all those
Sins, which I shall commit for the future: Safely direct all the Designs of St.
Lewis ^ur Good King; and so order it, that he may obtain Victory over his
Fnemies, and particularly over the Huguenots that Profane thy Holy Name. Thou
know how much I love the Light of the Eaithful; and that I put all my
Confidence in thy Divine Power: Now then show it, by giving Repose to this
Martyr, who must otherwise be a perpetual Slave to his Torments.

She also said a world of Ave Maria's, which brought up the Rear of all her
Pious Ejaculations. In these Extraordinary Devotions the Day was spent; besides
that, she was present with a most Religious awe, at all the Prayers that were
said to the Ghost of Scarron. The Festival being over, our Marchioness, who is
as Generous as the Sun, scorned to depart the Holy Place, without making a
Civil Present to our Lady of Deliverance, from whom she expected so much ease.
She therefore presented her with an Infinite number of Wax Tapers, desiring the
Priest, who was to say the Masses to let 'em burn Night and Day, as many as he
thought sitting for the Honor of the Saint; which she left to his Discretion,
well-knowing that he would not cheat her for all the World. Madam, answered the
Priest, you may return with full Assurance, and believe that ^ think my self
extremely happy, that it is in my power to be Serviceable to a Lady of your
Quality; besides, that it is a matter of Conscience. This humble reply mollify'd
the Heart of Madam d^ Maintenon, and drew out of her Pocket a little Purse full
of Single Money, which she presented to the Priest, conjuring him by all that
was Sacred in the World to pray to God and all the Saints continually for her
poor Deceased Husband.

The next Morning, our Heroess set forward again in order to her return for
Paris, very well satisfied and almost convinced of the Good Success of her
Voyage. Upon her arrival at Paris, the King was over joy'd to see her; He told
her, that the Time of her Absence had been very tedious to him; that she had
performed such an Extra ordinary Penance, that she could not question the
Success of it, and that he believed that Scarron was by that time in Heaven; or
else he was certainly the most Miserable of all Mankind.

To which, Madam de Maintenon fetching a deep Sigh, replied, that having done
her Doty, she lest the Rest to the most Blessed Virgin to whom she had
recommended (...) Martyr a thousand times: So that (...) all that Died were to
give the Living so much Trouble, there would be no felicity in this Would.

I must acknowledge, Madam, replied the Monarch, that Purgatory is a thing
which very much perplexes me; for when we have done all we can do in this
World, we know not, when we are about to die, whither we shall go.

Sir, answered the Marchioness, your Majesty cannot choose but know that Good
Works and Penances are of great force to moderate the Pains of Purgatory, and
to avert the Anger of Heaven that hangs over our Heads; and in regard I know
that M. Scarron had never any Inclination for these sort of Mortifications; his
Genius carrying him rather to Jollity and Mirth, I am firmly persuaded that
this is the Reason why he is kept so long in Purgatory.

'Slife, then cried the King, what an Unhappy Man am I, Madam, who love the
Pleasures of this Life, as I do, and whatever is capable to Charm the Senses;
and find but a very feeble Inclination in my self, God knows, to Penances and
Mortifications; what can I expect but to burn Eternally in the Fires of
Purgatory?

Sir, replied Madam de Maintenon, your Majesty carries things a little too far.
I find ye extremely Godly, and full of Devout Sentiments for Religion. You have
performed a most noble Action of late Days, in Extirpating the Heretics out of
your Kingdom, and causing the Catholic Church to Triumph. These Great Exploits
will never dye; but will Infallibly carry ye to Heaven without any danger of
Purgatory.

This is that indeed which comforts me a little, Madam, said the King; for God
knows, the real Motives of my Design were grounded upon the Propagation of the
Faith.

While the King was yet speaking, in came King James, his Spouse, and the
Duchess of Portsmouth, being newly arrived at Versailles to Congratulate our
Heroess upon her Return from her Pilgrimage, which she had concealed from them,
as being unwilling that any Body should know it. Ah, Madam, said the Queen,
saluting her, you keep your Affars very Private. I asked the King several
Times, what was become of ye; but he would needs persuade me all along, that
you were still at St. Cyr, which I could hardly believe, because I never met ye
abroad.

You know, Madam, that the Concerns of Devotion are or ought to be carried
Privately; and that our Works of Piety are then most Meritorious, when they
make least Noise.

You must not take it ill then of the Marchiness, replied the Duchess of
Portsmouth, that she kept her Pilgrimage Private, for Reasons of Conscience: we
must do all we can to purchase Heaven.

What you say, answered K James, is admirably well said: but you must agree
with me, that there are some Persons born under bad Constellations; and that
frequently those Stars shed down their Malignant Influences upon us in such a
manner, that it is Impossible to avoid 'em. My Misfortune is an Apparent Proof
of what I have set forth. For all that I did in England, while in possession of
the Crown, was only out of a Design to labor the Propagation of the Faith, to
Reform the Laws, Polish the People, and to have done many other Things of that
Nature; Nevertheless you all see what I got by it.

Sir, said the Duchess, what you have told us, would carry us too far; it
deserves too long Reflections; and the Subject being Mournful would beget a
Conversation that would Kill us with Melancholy. Our business is to divert
Madam de Maintenon, who looks as if she came out of the Monuments. Let us all
go to Morrow, if his Majesty pleases, to choose King and Queen at Marli, and put
a New Crown upon the Head of our Unfortunate Prince.

All the Company applauded the Dutchesses Motion, who is Mistress of the most
Engaging Charms in the World, and who has the knack to win Affections when she
pleases her self: And here it may be proper to let the World know, who this
Duchess of Portsmouth was, that Enslaved the Heart of Charles II. till Death.
She is Daughter to the Marquis de Keroues, a Person of Quality in Britany, who
had lost much of his Credit, before he got his Daughter into the Service of the
Princess Henrietta Stuart, where the K. of England saw her the first time, and
Loved her ever after.

But to return to that Part which was acted next Day at Marli, where there were
a great Number of Lords and Ladies to Solemnize that same Courtly-Festival, the
K. who was in a good humor, spoke a thousand pleasant things to the Queen; Nor
could he retain from giving her Signs of his Passion. Madam de Maintenon
seemed a little Nettled at it; but being very Politic, she dissembled it.
Abundance of Healths were Drank, and K. James was K. of the Ceremony. Whereupon
our Prince said, siniling, that he was mightily pleased that Fortune had
savored him so well, and that he was disengaged from his Word: For that he had
often promised to make him King, and restore him to his Throne; and now he had
no Reason to complain: adding, that to convince him further of the care which
he took for his Welsare, he would entertain him with the Merit of the Duchess
of G -- on. K. James answered with an Air of Gayety, that he did not deny but
that he had been touched with Love and respect for that Amiable personage. I
know it very well, Brother, replied our Monarch, that you had an Extraordinary
respect for her, and I agree with you that we are created to Love the fair Sex.
The Duchess of Portsmouth displayed her sparkling Wit upon many occasions; and
particularly in sustaining the Kings Sentiments, who sat near to the Queen,
and the most Passionate of all Mankind; but the Princess being afraid of her
Riwal, seemed to be tormented with Jealousy upon this Occasion.

The K. who is Sagacious enough, perceived it at first, and to convince her
that he was above those Little things, he pulled out of his Pocket some Verses
which he had made for her in the Morning, telling her very pleasantly that he
was happy in a Lovely Muse, which made him oftentimes have a mind to play the
Poet, and that sometimes he took a Ramble with her to Parnassus. Look ye, says
he, what she has inspired me with to Day, But he presented them to the Queen in
such a very Earnest and hasty manner, as discovered the Confusion he was in.
The Princess received them very Civilly, and read these words,

My Tender Heart fair Iris has inflamed,
He who has seen her, cannot for Love be blamed:
How amiable are those Charming Eyes!
And yet how Guilty, Monarchs to Surprise.
This last Blow was Like to have caused Madam Maintenon to die for Grief, but
her Love not being so Nice as to endure no Sharer, she comforted her self the
more easily, being unwilling to oppose the pleasures of her Prince, as
preferring her Fortune and his Good Will to all the pleasures of an Amorous
Amusement.

The Day being spent in such agreeable diversions, every one took leave of each
other. The K. attended the Q. of England to St. Germains, and our Marchioness
was fully resolved to return back to her Abbey. As soon as she arrived, all the
Ladies of St. Louis, and the Young Damsels embraced her tenderly, signifying
that her absence was insupportable to them. Our Heroess, on the other hand,
assured them, that she had had her share of the Grief, and suffered no less
then they, having continually thought on her Spiritual Militia; and as it was
not long since she returned from her Pilgrimage, she had always a strong
Inclination to see them again; but could not prevent her staying sometime at
the Palace of Versailles to pay her respects first to the King, and that now
she was to be more at St. Cyr, being obliged to pray further to God and St.
Louis for Monsieur Scarron, that he might have a speedy entrance into his
desired rest.

Although the King, and all the Ladies whom I have mentioned, did their utmost
to remove the Marchionesses discontent, nevertheless she abandoned her self to
a Continn'd Pensiveness. Two mighty things did constantly operate in her Mind,
the Reproaches wherewith Scarron had upbraided her extremely, and the
Admonition which he gave her, as to the Changeable humor of that Prince, and
the inconstancy of his Love to any particular Object, as finding always Variety
of new Charms, which presaged that she should have the same fate with others of
his Mistresses.

These Last Words of Scarron had made a mighty Impression upon the Mind of our
Heroess, and the Adventures which befell her on the day of the three Kings at
Marli, did fully confirm her in her thoughts, especially when she reflected
upon the pleasure and transport, which his Majesty discovered in presence of
the Queen of England; which convinced her, that her own good Fortune was not to
be of any long duration, if she did not behave her self with great Complaisance
and Conduct. She very often blamed the Inconstancy and Volatile humor of Men,
whose Love is guided by their Sense, and lasts no longer then while the beloved
Object is able to Charm them; it being Impossible to lay any Solid Foundation
upon their Conduct. She considered also, that the Weakness of a Woman was Great
to yield up what is most Dear and Valuable to her in the World upon such false
Appearances; confessing Ingeniously, that a true Friendship had a thousand
times more sweet Attractives and lasted till Death; that Love was only a
Passion begot by the presence of an Amiable Person, but that Friendship was a
Virtue which Sympathy fixed betwixt two Friends by their Mutual care of, and
continual Services to one another. Those Moral Reflections obliged our
Marchioness to spend several days in great Solitude, although she assisted at
the Masles which where said for Scarron's Soul, with all her Damsels at Saint
Cyr, every Day according to Custom.

The Reverend Father La Chaise, and Father Bourdalon, who had not seen Madam
Maintenon after her return, being taken up with Ecclesiastical Affairs, were
impatient till they had given her a Visit; whereupon they took Coach and went
to her Abbey, where our Heroess received them very Agreeably after her Devout
and Modest manner. The Reverend Fathers made known the Satisfaction which they
had to hear of her Arrival, and that apparently her Journey had been happy, for
they had not ceased during her Absence, to Pray and make Vows for her and
Monsieur Scarron, whose Soul must needs be now in the Enjoyment of the height
of Bliss.

I wish it be so, Fathers, answered our Marchioness, with all my Soul, for
that is the true rest to which all of us ought to Aspire, there being nothing in
this Vast Universe certain nor Solid; we often possess Grandeur without
tranquillity, and pleasures without repose, our Reason not being able to
surmount all those Obstacles which oppose themselves to those good things,
sills us with continual Cares, which give us perpetual Disquiet.

In the mean time, Madam, replys Father La Chaise, we have that share of Reason
which ought to distinguish us from other Animals, and direct us here to find
Remedies for those things which torment us.

It Is true, Father, says our Heroess, but Reason, of which we make such a
Noise, affords but a small assistance against our Passions and the Troubles of
Life; It opposes it self to all, but overcomes nothing; Tears our Hearts with a
thousand Remorses and perpetual disquiets, and those are all the effects which
it produces by its severe strength.

If it be as you say, Madam, answered the Reverend Father, the Beasts are
happier in their Innocence then we; for they follow their Natural Inclination
with great Tranquillity, and never feel any thing of those troubles which
Ambition or Interest create within us Mortal Men.

You have spoke Excellently well, Father, says Madam Maintenon, for we have
reason to Envy the quiet and sweet repose of those peaceful Creatures; and
consider that all the Advantages, which we brag of with so much Vanity, are not
equal to their Living without inward trouble.

But, Madam, Answers Father Bourdalou, that Tranquillity is all the happiness
which these Animals enjoy in their being, for their Soul dies with their Body,
and returns to its first nothing.

In truth, Father, if it were not the hopes which we have that our Souls are
Immortal, and that after this Life we should enjoy a peaceable Repose, we
should be more to be pitied then the Brute Beasts; but I believe that those
Sweets and Joys shall be only dispensed, according to our Good Works, which I
do always believe to be Meritorious.

It is certain, Madam, Answers the Father, that our Works justisie us before
God, and that they Merit not only Eternal Life, but likewise an Augmentation of
Glory; and we can also satisfy the Punishment due to our Sins by our own
Sufferings.

Then Father, says Madam Maintenon, it is of great Importance to a Believer to
Labor with Great care for Mortification by a continual Penance, and to do many
Good Works to augment their degree of Glory.

Madam, replys Father La Chaise, God has Elected us, as having foreseen our
Works, and the Good Motions of our Free Will; for the Conversion of a Man is in
part due to his own Natural Strength, and not wholly to Grace.

But, Father, Answers our Heroess, If there be any Persons persectly Just in
this World, ought they not to be assured of their Salvation.

I will tell you, Madam, Answered the Father, that Believers may fall from the
Grace of God, and perish finally. But we hope still that by our Mortifications,
our Penances, and the Pains which we endure in Purgatory, we may co^^ to
Paradise, for our Lord Jesus Christ has delivered us from the Guilt, but not
from all the Punishments due to our Sins. We must then be purged by the
Expiation of our Faults and endure those Torments; and this is what the
Children of God are to expect when this Life is ended.

I assure you, Father, answered Madam, Maintenon, with a Penitent Visage and
Tone, that such thoughts as those do entirely cool my Heart, take it off from
all the pleasures of this Life, and make me Groan earnestly for a Holy
Solitude, where I may Work out my Salvation without any Interruption.

Madam, says the Reverend Father, what we said was not a design to affect you,
as it plainly appears to have done. This is only Discourse; We ought not to
understand the Articles of our Faith in such a rigid manner, we must take up a
milder sort of Morality; and moreover, a Person so Young and Charming as you
are, is not obliged to abandon the Pleasures of Life so soon,

In the mean time, Father, says the Marchioness, I begin to disrelish them, and
if it were not for the Engagements I am under to his Majesty, I would retire my
self out of the World for the rest of my Days, and go into a Covent; and I must
Confess, that I have a mighty Inclination to the Capuchins: I envy the
happiness of those Religious Persons, they Live in much Devotion and Austerity,
and every Day before they go to Bed they say a Rosary, with the Litanies of the
Holy Virgin, all which Piety Charms me Extremely.

But, Madam, Answered Father Bourdalou, methinks you have reason to be
contented, seeing you enjoy an Abbey, wherein you may carry your Devotion to
what height you please.

True, Father, replied our Heroess; but in this Society I am divided betwixt my
Devotion and the World, and sometimes cannot be private, because of the
continual Care which I must have of the Youth, and the Orders I must give out
every Day to the Community. I tell you freely, that that does oftentimes vex my
mind.

Just as the Father was going to Answer, a Gentleman from the King Arrived at
St. Cyr, and was Conducted into the Marchionesses Closet, by one of the
Penitent Sisters, which broke off that Conversation, and obliged the good
Fathers to return to Paris.

Our Marchioness asked the Gentleman what his Majesty's Commands were; who
answered, that he prayed her to come to Versails to morrow.

Madam de Maintenon, who knows above all things how to take her Measures, went
to wait upon His Majesty next day, who was the most Melancholy and out of
Humor that could be, upon Monsieur Catinats Arrival at Versails, to regulate
the State of the War for next Campaign, after his Marriage with Mademoiselle de
Dangeau.

After Dinner, Our Monarch to divert himself, went with Madam Maintenon to the
D. of Orleans; where were present the Danphin, the D. of Chartres, the Duchess
of Nouailles and Duchess of Portsmouth, with many other Ladies and Lords; and
being the time of the Carnival, they played all day. After Supper, those in
Masks came in to Dance, but retired betimes, referring it to another Season,
because there had been a Comedy, in which were Represented all the Celestial
and Rural Deities, with their Royal Equipage and Extraordinary Machines upon
the Theater.

The first Scene was a Plain, encompassed with an Infinite Number of Trees just
Budding, which surnish'd a most delicious Shade in that Solitary Place. These
are the Names of the Gods which appeared there.

Saturn or Time with a Hunger Starved Countenance, devouring every thing he met
with; the very Stones not excepted: Jupiter darting Thunderbolts, and keeping
the Universe in Obedience; The Sun environed with a thousand Lights, and his
Oracles, was mounted on a Chariot drawn by the Hours; Mercury the God of
Eloquence, Ambassador and Interpreter to all the Gods with Wings at his hands
and feet, and a Caduceus in his hand, twisted with two Serpents, to denote
Peace and Concord; Bacchus on a Triumphal Chariot drawn by Tigres covered with
Deer-Skins, his Scepter Adorned with Leaves of Ivy and Vines; Mars the God of
War and Battle Armed Cap-a-pee, having a Helmet on his Head, a Lance in one
Hand, a Pike in the other; Neptune with his Trident, sitting in a Great
Scallop-shell for his Chariot, and being drawn by Whales and Sea Calves; the
Tritons half Men and half Dolphins, attended him Sounding a Trumpet made of the
Scales of Fish.

Pluto with an Infernal and Gloomy Air, marched before the Old Ferryman Charon,
who received into his Barge without distinction, all those that Arrived in the
other World, and had by his side a horrible Dog, with Three Heads crawling full
of Serpents. The Furies followed after, with Burning Flambeaux, soming with
Rage, their Eyes sparkling, and instead of Hair, had their Heads covered with
dangling Vipers.

Sleep bringing quiet Repose to mankind, attended by one of the Officers,
called Morpheus the God of Dreams, who drew all sorts of Figures.

The Theater changed Scenes, and represented a pleasant Meadow, enamelled with
thousands of Flowers; and there all the Goddesses appeared.

Cibele Queen of the Earth sat Crowned with Cities, and a multitude of of
Trees and Animals. Round her was Juno in the middle of Kingdoms and Riches,
followed by Hebe the Goddess of Youth, who continually filled out Nectar for
Jupiter to drink.

Pallas Armed all over, having a Lance in her hand, with the Liberal Arts, and
the Sciences for her Ornaments; she was followed by Diana Goddess of the Woods,
and Huntsmen carrying a Bow and Arrows, with her Nymphs attending her. Venus
the Goddess of Love and Sensuality, an incomparable Beauty, was drawn in a
Chariot with Swans and Doves, and followed by the three Graces her Daughters.
After her came Aurora Laughing, in a Gilded Chariot, with her rosy Fingers,
to proclaim the Coming of the Sun; she was followed by Blind Fortune, having
Honor and Riches in her Power, and managing a Wheel which she turned about
without ceasing.

Flora was in the midst of a fine Garden, which produced a thousand Flowers,
caressed by the Zephyri, which never abandon her; and Proserpina with her other
Nymphs, who are always busy in gathering Posies.

The Third Scene represented Mount Helicon, Parnassus the Fountains of
Dipnocrania and Aganippides Consecrated to the Muses, Apollo sat in the middle
of that pleasant Solitude, composing Musical Airs and Verses.

Upon the Mountain sat Pan, God of the Shepherds, with his Beard. Goats Feet,
and Horns on his head, playing on a Melodious Flute. The Goat-footed Fauns and
Satyrs, danced several Giggs with the Neighboring Nymphs.

Cupid the God of Love, hovered pleasantly over this Illustrious Assembly,
fluttering his Wings with extraordinary Delight and Sweetness, but maliciously
surveying all the Arrows in his Quiver, with a design to Wound all the Heroes
and Heroesles. He thought fit to Wound Jupiter as the most sensible, and
metamorphos'd him into all sorts of shapes, as assuming the form o^ a Ball,
carrying Europe on his back and passing the Sea; at another time into a Shower
of Gold, descending through a Power of Brass to the fair Danae; then into an
Eagle to Ravish young Ganimedes, and putting himself into all Shapes convenient
for his Gallantries; so that we must say here with Tertullian, that we must not
be surpised at those Natural Inclinations, to which Love carry men, since the
Deities themselves give us Examples of it.

All those Gods and Goddesses were the Idols of the Pagans, who moreover
believed, that the Air was full of Petty Gods or Demons, and imagined that they
did ordinarily employ themselves in humane Affairs. They paid them homage every
day, because of their sublime Virtues and extraordinary Merits, coming very
near, say they, to the perfection of the other Deities; and they did ordinarily
Consecrate a Dragon to them, as a Mark of their Immortality to which they were
Arrived, as may be seen in Plutarch, where Cleomenes was esteemed a God by the
Egyptians, because they saw a Serpent come out of his body after he was put to
Death. All those Fictions did strongly seize the Spirits of those people, and
the young following the Example of the Old, made one of the Ancient
Philosophers say, that Man was a True Animal of Imitation.

But we must leave those thoughts, and return to our Theatrical Piece, which
was made designedly, and by the Dauphin Commanded to be represented by the
Kings Comedians, on purpose to divert those disquieting thoughts, into which
that Monarch falls many times in a day, upon the Account of France, which lies
desolate on all sides, and cries out, that it can do no more, if Heaven don't
Bless it with a favorable Aspect.

Another considerable disquitet, which he Labors under, is how to find Money
to maintain such a pressing War; but all those Reflections don't hinder the King
and Court from diverting themselves, as if they were in the most profound
Peace. Every day a thousand pleasant designs are formed to please the Ladies.
The Comedy entertained them a long time in Charming Sports of Wit. All the
Princes and Lords taking a mighty pleasure to give proofs of their fine Genius,
by drawing Morals from the Figures represented, and applying them conformably
to their Inclinations.

I don't find since France was Governed by Kings, that there has been any Reign
more like this of Louis XIV. then that of Hen. III. When Pleasures abounded, in
spite of the Miseries of the Kingdom. Sensuality Triumphed, and led all other
passions Captive. When that Prince had tried all the divertisements which
Nature had formed, and denied himself nothing which could Charm his Senses; he
went in Penance with all his Minions and Lords, to the Convent of Augustins,
and to the Great Church of our Lady, two and two, like the Votaries of Rome, or
Avignon, clad in White Holland, in the same manner that is observed by the
Religious Fraternities.

In this Procession, the King marched without Guard, or being distinguished from
others, either by Habit or Order, the singers went before, clothed in the same
Livery, and Singing the Litanies of the Blessed Virgin Melodiously. All those
Pious Penitents being Arrived at Church, Sung Salve Regina on their Knees in
Charming Music. The Great Rain which lasted the whole day, did not hinder them
to perform those Mysteries and Exemplary Ceremonies, though their Hoods, etc.
were Wet through to the Skin.

It Is ordinarily the Genius of the most Voluptuous, to give some share of their
time to Devotion, to make it appear by that External preciseness, that their
heart is always filled with good Principles, and that all the Pleasures which
they are taken up with, bear no proportion to their Piety.

I cannot leave this Subject, without taking notice how well Henry III. could
make his Devotions and Sensuality agree, by an unusual Sympathy. After having
used diverse Mortifications, during the Festival of Corpus Christi, where he was
Solemnly present. The Week following, he made a Feast for the Duke his Brother
and the Lords and Captains who accompanied him at the Siege of Charity, who
were served by all the finest Ladies of the Court clad in Green and in Man's
Habit, and all the Guests were Clothed in the same, being followed by Pages
and Gentlemen, Clothed in like manner; so that, there was bought in Paris and
other Towns, 60000 Livres worth of Green Silk for the Solemnity.

It may be said without Hyperbole, that this is to carry on their Criminal
Pleasures too far, and a very sorry acknowledgment to Heaven for its Bounties.
Men in General have Natural Weaknesses, with which they can in no manner be
Reproached, without reflecting upon the first Cause as Unjust, God having
sinish'd and bounded his Nature: It is not in the Power of Man to surmount his
Infirmities; but we must distinguish well, betwixt Natural Defects, and those
acquired by Habit or Imitation. The Latter may be cured by care, and our
endeavors by good Education, to form a second Life in our selves; for to
continue always in Evil, is not to Live.

I have lest my pleasant Company to employ their Wits. Let Us now see, what our
Heroess is doing. We shall find her Laboring under Jealousy, not that she
Loves the King so entirely, but that she is afraid, lest her Rival should carry
off some part of her Happiness, and share in her good Fortune. After she had
well ruminated on the inconstant humor of the Prince, and reasoned in a
Philosophical Manner; she found it good to put a New Obligation upon him, being
well assured, that that was the way to take him in the most sensible part, and
that by this Method, she should always keep her Station with his Majesty; for
we are ordinarily thankful, to those who procure us such things, as we believe
to be proper for us. Our Marchioness then, to divert that Prince, brought to
him at Versailles, the most Beautiful Damsel of the World; but you will pardon
me, if I don't tell you her Name, because it is a Court Intrigue, which we keep
very secret for Madam Maintenons sake. It Is sufficient, that she is under her
Conduct in the Abbey of St. Cyr. Let Us return to our fair Lady, who was
presented to the King, on purpose to Charm him, and to give the greatest
Mortification that could be to her Rival.

His Majesty, whose tenderness to the Sex is unlimited, and who Loves all
Amiable Objects, took it very kindly from our Heroess, and thankt her very
Joyfully, telling her, that he was indebted to her, for the most pleasant
Moments of his Life, and that having ^ost Mademoiselle de Fontange that she had
also given him, and whom he che^isht alone, as an Adorable Person, and one
Worthy to be Loved, This Lady might with Justice be said to fill her place, and
satisfy for the Loss which he had sustained, finding her every whit as
Charming as she was.

Madam de Maintenon was extremely glad, to find that her design had taken so
well, and that thereby, she had rendered her self always necessary for every
thing that might tend to the satisfaction of the Princes desires, and having
brought him acquainted with the Beauty of the Seraglio, she left our Amorous
Monarch with his New Chains, to satisfy himself at Leisure, with the Pleasures
of his New Conquest.

In the mean time, she was taken up in her Ordinary Devotion, which was, to
pray to God for the Soul of the Deceased Scarron, and Lent being at hand, she
went continually to St. Lazarus, to say her Prayers, with an almost
unparalled Devotion.

La Caverne, one of her Maids, whom she loved for her good Qualities, Nature
having Adorned her with a Wit proper for her purpose, accompanied her every
where; and her Mistress oftentimes entrusted her with her Secrets.

One Day our Heroess acquainted her with the trouble she endured, in Dreaming
continually of Scarron's Ghost; I confess to you my Dear, says she, in a
Mournful tone, that so long a Penance in Purgatory, is a severe Payment for the
Pleasures which we may enjoy here in this World.

For my part, Madam, replied La Caverne, I believe Monsieur Scarron to be at
rest, and methinks that you have no further need of Praying to the Saints, and
the Saints for Him: and this I observed when we were together in the Church of
our Lady of Deliverance; for as you were upon your Knees before her, the good
Mother of Devotion seemed to me to have heard your Prayers.

Ah! my Dear, (cried the Marchioness) how came thou to penetrate her Sacred
Mysteries: thou must have surely had some secret Revelation from Heaven. I feel
within my self that Comfort which is not to be expressed, from what thou have
told me; and with all my Heart I beseech that Incomparable Saint to afford me
her Assistance all the rest of my Life.

Never question it in the least, Madam, (replied La Caverne for she is a good
Conductress to Salvation, that listens to every word that is said to her with a
most Saint-like Affability, and works surprising Miracles every day. One of my
Cousins, (Madam) who had lost her Sight with the Smallpox, had no sooner
performed a Pilgrimage to this same Queen of Heaven, but she saw as well as I
do: moreover, she makes the Cooked Straight, and the Dumb to speak, and does a
hundred other things becoming her Grandeur.

I was informed a long while ago of the most Admirable Virtues of this renowned
Queen of Glory; for which reason I cannot do better then in addressing my
Prayers for Mr. Scarron, to this Motion of Mercy, whose Goodness is so much to
be admired. I assure thee, I have always had a particular Veneration for the
Discretion and Civility of our La^^ of Deliverance: as long as I live I shall
always make her a Sacrifice of all the Affections of my Heart, my Vows and my
Prayers: nay, I will make her privy to all my Sins and Transgression for I am
persuaded she will cleans^ me with Hysop, and pardon 'em all.

What a Happiness it is, (replied La Caverne) to find a Loving, General Saint,
that will pardon us our Sins; for I find, (Madam) that you and I wander and go
astray every hour of the Day, as Father Commire said in his Pulpit last Sunday.
And therefore it behooves us to pray to her, That she would be pleased to let
her sweet Faced Angels continually accompanied us.

There would have been no end of this Superstitious Jargonry between the
Marchioness and her Secretary, but that she was to send her to Paris to buy
something that was plain and modest for her to wear all the Lent; for that she
resolved to haunt the Capuchin's Church in the Dress of a Penitent. The
Imparting of which Secret to the King, gave him as great a Satisfaction, as if
his Minioness had made him a Discovery of a Gold Mine. Nor did his Majesty make
any Body privy to it, but the Duke of Luxemburgh, and that too under
Enigmatical Expressions, telling him, That he had a Dream which had so
vehemently charmed him, that 'twas impossible for any man to express in words
the Pleasure he found in it.

Oh -- Sir, (said the Marshal) of necessity these must be some Sweets of Love
that have infused into your Majesty this charming Enthusiasm. For I know
nothing in the world that more delightfully invades our Senses then Amorou;
Reflections. Moreover, continued the Marshal) I know that you are never
offended to see your self willingly drilled along by that inevitable
Inclination to which we are reduced by the powerful Attractions of Beauty that
so strongly fascinate us sometimes, that we are no way able to defend our
selves against 'em.

It Is true, (answered our Monarch) that the Great Pleasure of my thoughtful
Meditations, was to see my self beloved of the Person most deserving Adoration
in the world: but my Happiness appeared so great, that it furpass'd my
Knowledge. I could have wished with all my Soul, that the Dream had been real,
but Felicities so real are seldom to be met with.

Nevertheless, (replied the Marshal) a Prince that carries a thousand Charms
about him as you do, never sighs long, as being assured of his Conquest. You
are like Caesar, you do but see and vanquish. I Will swear it upon all the
Evangelists in Christendom, that you are passionately beloved when er'e you
please.

In good sooth, (said the King to the Marshal) if all Women's Hearts were as
tender as yours, We might affirm our selves happy. But I know some that are not
so easily subdued. A man must take an incredible deal of Pain; about 'em, and
yet they continue cruel to the end.

I know very well, (replied the Marshall) that a Woman's Merit is extremely
serviceable to her, toward the support of her haughty Humor: but so soon as
they begin to love us, that Cruelty ceases by degrees; and then a Man may
easily perceive that Love which they take so much care to conceal upon the
score of Modesty: and generally it is that same Modesty that charms me most: the
more Reserv'dness I find in Virgin; or married Women, it is all one to me, the
more eager am I in my pursuit.

All Men (answered the King) are of the same Opinion: no body loves an easy
Victory: the Pleasure consists in the Pains, and Resistance increases it, if it
be not carried on too far. Painters therefore are in the Right to show us
Enjoyment attended by a Tomb, to let us understand by that Emblem the Death of
our Passions.

But, Sir, (replied the Marshal) it is seen that we continually aspire to what
we have not; and when we have it, our Joy deceases in the Possession. Therefore
it is better to enjoy the Felicities of Life in Imagination, then lose 'em in
the Taste of Pleasures.

That which causes this unequal Conduct in us, (answered our Monarch) proceeds
not from our selves. Nature is the Occasion of all these Changeable Motions,
with a design to inform us, that the Creator is only constant and unvariable.

But then Madam de Maintenon, whose Entrance altered the Scene of the Marshal's
discourse, appearing, said the Marshal to her with a Smile, I thank my good
Fortune that has afforded me the Honor of your good Company, which I never
could yet enjoy, since I returned from the Army.

To tell you the Truth, Sir, (answered the Marchioness) I have been for some
time taken up with a world of Business; beside that, I was forced to undertake
a long Journey of above twenty Leagues from Paris, greatly to my sorrow; for I
do not love to be absent from the Court: besides that I am continually slav'd
and turmoil'd with looking after my Young Fry at Saint Cyr.'s

It Is very true, Madam, that your Eminent Piety and Virtues are very rare in
our Age; for, methinks, Devotion is at a very low Ebb. Any other Person but You
would endeavor to make the best of so fair an Opportunity, being the Darling
of so Great a Prince as you are; it is a wonder to see you place your Felicity
in such Noble and Sublime Employments.

But the King, who was desirous to improve that little time the Marshal had to
spend in Winter Quarters, fell into a long Conference with him concerning the
Strength of the Enemy, and other Important Affairs of the War. Which being at
an End, the King told him, That he intended to treat him with a Splendid
Banquet and a Ball.

The next day, his Majesty gave Order to Madam de Maintenon, to take Order for
a Magnificent Banquet, and a Jolly Ball, to which several Princes and
Princesses were invited, and where all the Ladies of the Court appeared in the
most pleasant disguizes in the World: and the Queen of England was the Goddess
of that Charming Assembly.

The King, whose thoughts were all entangl'd in his new Chains, carried himself
with an Extraordinary Gaity toward that Princess; he never stirred from her all
the while the Ball lasted, making a thousand Courtly Addresses to her, to which
the Queen gave all along most engaging Answers: So that a man would then have
thought she had forgot all those Fears, which the Jealousy of her Rival had
infused into her.

On the other side, our Heroess, who was at her Wits end to hear all those
Expressions that past between our Monarch and the Queen, durst not for her Ears
display her resentment; but rather condescended to several Complacencies, which
the King took mighty obligingly at her hands.

It Is the usual Humor of the Marchioness to favor and forward all the King's
Amors: On the Other side, she procures all the Lovely Morsels she can meet
with, to feed his Pleasures by the By, a sort of Afternoons Luncheons in Love;
as being assured that it is the Only way to keep Possession of his Heart: but
she cannot endure that his Majesty should make the Choice himself. And this is
that which has lain heavy so long upon her Stomach, to see the King have such
an Inclination for the banished Queen. The King also, who wants no Wit,
observing her Jealousy, takes great delight, in his turn, to fret and
discompose our Heroess, by caressing the Queen, some times, with a greater
Passion then ever he showed to his Mistress.

The Day was spent in the usual Employment of Eating and Drinking; and now the
Night being come, they fell to Dancing helter-skelter. But as for Madam de
Maintenon, she was always reserved in all her Divertisements; and it may be
said of her, That she made good the godly Character which she had acquired. You
shall never see her blither nor more jocund at one time then another and this
Equality of Temper gains her the Esteem of all that see her; and for these
Eminent Qualities it was that the King deemed her worthy of his Affections. But
Marshal de Luxemburgh, who had taken notice of the Tenderness which the King
had for the Queen of England, being desirous to assist him in his Inclinations,
took her out to dance several times; and in regard she carries her self with a
most charming Air in Dancing, our Monarch signified his Acknowledgment to the
Marshal, by telling him, That there was no Sight so amiable, as to see two
handsome Persons dance together.

To whom the Marshal replied, That if there were any thing of Extraordinary and
Eminent in him, he was beholding first to the Queen's more Orient Luster, the
Rays of which reflected only upon Him; and that it was a usual thing for the
Sun to shed down his Beams upon every Thing in this World, and conferr Ornament
upon Things the most deformed.

This was looked upon as a notable Complement for a Soldier, who has not time
to study soft Addresses to Ladies.

The next day, the King remained all day long with the fair Queen of the
Seraglio, where he displayed the Excess of that Passion which he felt for her;
assuring her a thousand times of his Constancy, and the Continuation of his
Love, and that he would never so much as seek after another change, as having
never met so lovely a Person, and one so worthy of Royal Affection.

Nor was our Prince, who found his Happiness so great, content to load his
charming Minioness with tender Protestations; he put it home to her several
times, When he should be so happy as to be beloved by a Person so much
deserving Adoration as she?

To whom the lovely Queen, with an Air of perfect Modesty, Sir, (said she)
though you had neither Scepter nor Crown to embrighten the Luster of your
Person; yet all your Lineaments concurring with so much Majesty and
Accomplishment, it is impossible that you should be put to the Recoil where-e're
you attempted Victory. 'Twould be a Crime in Love, to permit a Hero, like your
self, to receive a Foil in his Amors.

Charmed with so much Wit and Tenderness for his Mistress, he testified his
Acknowledgment in so passionate a manner, that nothing but the Vehemence of his
Love could have supplied him with the Vehemence of Expression.

Madam de Maintenon, who then lay at her Abbey, busily taken up with Religious
Care, expected the Queen's Return; who gave her a faithful Account of all the
King's Love. On the other side, she begged her Counsel what Course to take for
the good Management of this fortunate Beginning. The generous Abbess told her,
That all depended upon the First Movements, and that no body but she alone
could secure her an advantageous Success: That her Experience had infused into
her a little Knowledge in these Affairs; and therefore when she was alone with
his Majesty, at the same time she studied all manner of Ways to accompany her
Words with a discreet and modest Air; a little Haughtiness (continued our
Heroess) intermixed with Softness, if it be well managed, produces no bad
Effect; for several young Ladies have lost their Fortune, by rendering the
Victory too easy. Mademoiselle de Lude may serve ye for an Example, whose
good Fortune proved so short, that one Day began it, and the next concluded it:
her too much Condescension spoiled all; she made too much haste to be happy,
and became unfortunate in a moment. These were the admirable Instructions which
Madam de Maintenon gave her Illustrious Scholar.

But Madam de Villeroi, who had been severely reprimanded by Madam de
Maintenon, was under a most mortal Affliction, to see her self so contemptibly
looked upon by that Lady. The important Occasion of the Quarrel that had so
warmly chafed the pious Marchioness's Choler, was this: During her Pilgrimage
to our Lady of Deliverance, Mademoiselle de Villeroi had taken a Walk with some
of her Companions, among whom were several Courtly Gentlemen, as the Chevalier
Colbert, the Marquis of Belfond, the Duke of Cheuvreuse, and the Count of
Bussi; and she had been a little too profuse in her Expenses upon 'em. Madam de
Maintenon was no sooner returned from her Pilgrimage, but she was informed of
Madam de Villeroi's Adventure. Upon which, she rated her with all the Rigor
and Severity imaginable; she spared for no Reproaches the most tart and
cutting; telling her, she would never see her more; That she would banish her
for ever from the blessed Assembly, where her good Fortune had enrolled her;
That the Habit she wore ought to have put her in mind that she was a Person
distinguished from the Common sort of young Damsels in the World; and that by
meeting Young Men abroad at public Houses of Entertainment, she herded her
self with the Gossips of the Town, that met their Gallants above half way. Did
you but know (continued our Heroess to the fair Damsel) how dangerous it is for
a young Maiden to hearken to the deceitful Language of such Enamorato's,
especially Soldiers, who talk at random a thousand things more then they think,
and who have no sooner made the Heart of a young Virgin flexible to Love, but
they are presently seeking out for another Booty, you would never trust that
inconstant and wavering Sex, who thinks their Happiness consists in roving from
one fair Lady to another, and never speak sincerely. You see how Painters set
forth Love with Wings at his Back, to show the Lightness and little
Consideration of that Passion. It becomes a modest Virgin to stick close to her
Needle; to spend her Time in Prayers and Devotions to God, and his Holy Saints;
and to endeavor to imitate Them, as the Divine Patterns of her Life and
Conversation. It Is also very necessary that young Maids should read and study
the Life of one of St. Lewis's Disciples, where you find that that same holy
Martyr having had the Misfortune to feel in his Heart a petty Scuffle between
the Flesh and the Spirit, flung himself into a Bath of Water so cold, that it
presently mortified all the criminal Desires of rebellious Nature. Do you
believe, that if the King knew you were a Coquet, he would ever permit ye to live
at St. Cyr's? Never deceive your self, -- he is too Religious a Prince to
encourage Libertinism. The Marchioness was just concluding her Morality with
several severe Menaces, If ever, etc. when Marshal Luxemburgh arrived to the
seasonable Relief of the poor disconsolate Mademoiselle de Villeroi, who was
presently dispatched away to pray for more Discretion for the future. On the
other side, Madam de Maintenon, who still retained that Anger in her Eyes which
her holy Zeal had kindled in her Countenance, received the Duke but very
coldly: who thereupon demanded the Cause of her Discomposure? Oh, -- Sir,
(cried the Marchioness, if you knew the Trouble that these giddy-brain'd Girls
put me to, you would never wonder at it: I endeavor to give 'em good
Education, and set 'em an Example of Prudence and Piety; but the idle Baggages
are so given to Romances and Love-Stories, so carried away with Coquettry, and
other considerable Miscarriages, that I have much ado to rule 'em; and this has
put me into an ill Humor.

Madam, (replied the Marshal) you must consider the Lady; are Young, and Youth
is apt to go astray; but riper Years, and your sublime Instructions, will make
those deep Impressions in their Hearts, that there is no question but you will
reap the expected Fruit of your glorious Labors.

What you say, Sir, (replied our Noble Heroess) is very obliging; but there is
a necessity of correcting the Vices of Nature, and to make it our business to
infuse Virtue betimes. There is nothing in the World so praiseworthy in young
Maidens, as Discretion and Modesty; which are the Principles by which they
ought to act, and which only can assure 'em Happiness both in this and the
other Life.

It Is true, Madam, when Nature has made us a Present of these Noble Principles,
it is a glorious thing to improve 'em, so that they may be the prevailing
Virtues triumphing in our Hearts.

Sir, (said Madam de Maintenon) I would entertain ye further upon this
Subject, but that I hear my Nephew, the Abbot d'Aubigne, entering in, who will
certainly alter the Scene of our Discourse

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for H. Rhodes, at the Star in Fleet Street: And J. Harris, at
the Harrow in the Poultrey.
THE Great Historical, Geographical, and Poetical Dictionary: Being a Curious
Miscellany of Sacred and Profane History, etc. collected out of the best
Historians, Chronologers, and Lexicographers; but more especially out of
Morery's Sixth Edition, Corrected and Enlarged by Le Clerk By seveveral
Learned Men. To which are added the last Five Years Historical and Geographical
Collections of Edmund Bohun, Esquire

The General History of Europe, contained in the Historical and Political
Monthly Mercuries, from the late happy Revolution in November, 1688. to this
present Time. Giving an Account of all the Public and Private Occurrences,
Civil, Ecclesiastical and Military, that are most Considerable in every Court:
The Interest of Princes, their Pretenses and Intrigues, etc. and generally all
that is Curious. With Political Reflections upon every State. Done from the
Originals, published at the Hague by the Authority of the States of Holland. In
Four Volumes: With an Index to each Volume.

Memoirs for the Ingenious: Containing several Curious Observations in
Theology, Philosophy, Mathematics, Physic, History, Philology, and other Arts
and Sciences. In Miscellaneous Letters to several of the Reverend Bishops and
Clergy, Eminent Physicians, Fellows of the Royal Society, etc. for the Year
1693. Bound up in one Volume. With a large Alphabetical Table to the Whole. By
J. de la Crose, Eccles. Angl. Presb.

The Triumph-Royal: Containing a short Account of the most Remarkable Battles,
Sieges, Sea Fights, Treaties, and Famous Achievements of the Princes of the
House of Nassan, etc. Described in the Triumphal Arches, Pyramids, Pictures,
Inscriptions, and Devices, erected at the Hague in Honor of William III. King
of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland. Curiously Engraven in 62 Figures on
Copper Plates, with their Histories; an Elaborate Piece of Curiosity. First
done in Dutch, then into French, and now into English. Dedicated to Her Majesty.

The Present Court of Spain. Or, The Modern Gallantry of the Spanish Nobility
unfolded: In several Histories, and Seventy five Letters from the Enamored
Teresa, to her Beloved the Marquis of Manscra. By the Ingenious Lady -- Author
of The Memoirs and Travels into Spain. Done into English by J. P.

Voyages and Travels over Europe. Vol. I. Containing the Curiosities of France.

The Second Volume of the Historical Voyages and Travels: Containing all that
is most Curious in Spain and Portugal.

An Antidote against a Careless Indifferency in Matters of Religion. Being a
Treatise in Opposition to those that believe that all Religions are
Indifferent, and that it imports not what Men profess. Wherein the vulgar
Objections of Atheists, Scepticks, Libertines, Latitudinarians, etc. are
briefly Answered. Done out of French. With an Introduction, by Anthony Horneck,
D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

The Present Condition of France, in reference to her Revenues, comparing them
with the infinite Expenses she is forced to be at. Demonstrating thereby, That
it is impossible for her to support her self, if the War with the Confederates
continues. Done out of French.

The Paris Relation of the Battle of Landen, July 29th. 1693. between the
French, Commanded by the D. of Luxemburgh; and the Confederates, by the K. of
Great Britain; published by the French King's Authority: With his Letter,
ordering the Archbishop of Paris to sing Te Deum. And a Private Letter from a
very good Hand in Paris, with another Account of the Battle. As also Reflections
upon the King's Letter, by a very Learned French Pen. And Observations by
another Hand here, proving the French King and his Gazetteers Account to be
inconsistent with themselves, and one another, as well as contrary to Truth:
And that though the French kept the Field, yet they were really Losers by the
Action. Published for Undeceiving the Public, who are so much Abused by
Seditious Relations.

An Exact Relation of the Battle of Landen, July 29. 1693. between the Army of
the Confederates, Commanded by the King of Great Britain; and that of the
French King, under the Command of the Duke of Luxemburgh. With his Majesty's
Letter to the States o0f Holland, from his Headquarters at Eppegem, Aug. 12.
1693. With a Description of the Order and Embattelling of both Armies at the
Beginning of the Fight, in a Copper-Plate.


