

Attacked by Sickness, and to pain a prey,
I keep my humor cheerful Still, and gay,
With ^^^^r grimace, and Magisterial pride
Those ^anting Sots the Stoics pain defied,
Yet fell beneath the burden, ^^^ it was tried:
None but my Self did ere that pitch attain
To Sport with misery, and jest in pain
Novel.
THE Whole Comical WORKS OF Monsr. SCARRON.

CONTAINING

I. His Comical Romance of a Company of Stage Players. In Three Parts, Complete.

II. All his Novels and Histories.

III. His Select Letters, Characters, etc.

A Great Part of which never before in English.

Translated by Mr. Tho. Brown, Mr. Savage, and Others.

-- Ridiculum ^^^i
Fortius and Melius Mag(...)rumque Secat res.
Hor. Rebus in Angustis facile est contemnere Vitam:
Fortiter ille Facit, qui miser esse potest.
Mart. LONDON, Printed for S. and I. Sprint, at the Bell, and I. Nicholson, at
the King's- Arms in Little-Britain; R. Parker, under the Royal Exchange, and
Benj. Took, at the Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleet Street. MDCC.

A CHARACTER Of Monsieur Scarron's Works,
In a Letter from the Famous Monsieur de Balzac to Monsieur Castor.
THE Book you sent me from Monsieur Scarron, was a very acceptable Present, and
such a one as I am obliged to set a great value upon so long as I live. I had
scarce opened it, but it performed a Cure upon me, and gave me ease in a cruel
fit of the Spleen, which had certainly done my business, had not this Cordial
come so seasonably to my Relief. I hope it will work greater cures, if I often
apply it. Perhaps it will rid me of my pensive Melancholy, and Philosophical
Sadness: Perhaps it will teach me to Rhyme, and make me cheerful by Contagion.
To deal plainly with you, this Friend of ours Monsieur Scarron, is a strange
sort of a Gentleman. With all his Distempers he has something in him though I
know not how to describe it, better than Health, I mean, a stupid, insensible
Health; for I need not tell you that the Arabians call Joy the Quintessence and
Elixir of a lively, active Health. Now since you are desirous to know my
different thoughts upon our Author, and require me to say something particular
upon this Head; I must tell you that he is either the most dissembling, or the
most resolute Man in the Universe. I farther add, that he is a living Testimony
that Mankind is not so effeminate, as it is commonly believed, unless pain uses
him more gently than it does other Men. One that has conversed with his
Writings, and sees him so merry in his Afflictions, would think that the
Executioner flattered the sufferer. I never see him laugh in the midst of his
Torments, but he makes me think that his pain does not give him any smart, but
only titillation. In short, I will Affirm, that the Prom^theus, the Hercules,
and Philoctetes in our Fables, to say nothing of Job in his real History, speak
abundance of great and manly things in the height of their pains, but nothing
that is gay and cheerful. Among the Ancients, I have frequently met with those
griefs that have been sedate and calm, that have appeared to be wise and
eloquent, but I never found a Grief that was cheerful till now; or a Soul that
was able to dance a Saraband or a Jigg in a paralytical Body. So pleasant a
Prodigy as this, deserves the consideration of our curious Virtuosos. History
ought not to forget it^ and if ever the whim takes me to set up for an
Historian, as I am already an Historiographer, I shall reckon it among the
greatest Miracles of our time, which has been so fruitful in Miracles. What
would not your Friend Seneca have said upon so noble a Subject, he that took so
much pleasure to treat of these matters, and so often sought opportunities to
do it? Is it not a plain case, that that arrogant and haughty Virtue, which is
so extravagantly commended by him, and pretends to be at ease even in
Phalaris's Bull, nay, maintains, that Pain it self is a Blessing, falls
infinitely short of this easy and humble Virtue, which can put in execution
the Paradoxes of the Stoics, without the least touch of their Ostentation^ Let
us therefore conclude in honor of our Author, that either there is something
of ecstasy and possession in his Distemper, and that his Soul performs it is
functions apart, without concerning it self with his Body, or that he is a Man
of extraordinary Resolution and Vigor, and that in the perpetual Dispute
between his Soul and his Body, the Nobler part finds those Advantages over the
other, which the strongest use to have over the weakest.

To the Courteous Reader that never saw me.
UNknown Friend, who never saw me in thy Life, and perhaps never troubledst
thy self much about it, because there is no great matter to be got by the sight
of such a fellow as I am; be it known unto thee that neither am I very desirous
thou should see my Person, but that I have been informed that some facetious
Gentlemen make themselves merry at the expense of an unhappy Wretch, and
describe me another sort of a Monster, than really I am. Some of them give out,
that my Rump-bone sticks out like the Ace of Spades, by the same token that it
perforates all my Breeches, and that I am set upon a Table in a Cage, where I
chatter like a blind Magpy. And others will tell you, and swear to it too if
you would have them, that my Hat is fastened to a Cord that runs through a Pully,
and that I pluck it up or let it down, when I am to compliment and Friend, that
does me the honor of a Visit.

I therefore thought my self obliged in Conscience and all that, to prevent
their telling so many horrid Lies, and for this reason ordered my Picture to be
engraved, as thou see it, in the beginning of this Book. I know thou will
grumble, Courteous Reader, for every Reader in the World is a Grumbletonian
more or less; and for my part, I can grum^le as well as the best of them, when
it is my turn to be a Reader. Thou will grumble in thy gizzard, I say, and
snarl, and quarrel, and huff, and puff, because forsooth, I show thee my
Backside. But prithee, Old Friend, don't be too Choleric. Assure thy self that
I did not do it with a design to turn my Breech upon the Company; but only
because the Convexity of my Back is more proper to receive an Inscription, than
the Concavity of my Stomach, which is wholly covered by the Pent-house of my
Head, that hangs over it, and because the Situation, or rather the irregular
Plan of my Person may be seen as well behind as before. I am not such a Coxcomb
as to pretend to make a Present to the Public (for by those Jolly Damsels the
Nine Muses, I swear and protest that I never dreamt in my life of seeing my
Head stamped in a Medal) but I would have had my Picture drawn, if I could have
found a Painter bold enough to take my Phyz in black and white. For want of a
Picture therefore I Will describe my self to thee as near as I can.

I am past thirty, as thou may see by the back of my Chair. If I live to be
forty, I shall add the Lord knows how many Misfortunes to those I have already
suffered for these eight or nine years last past. There was a time when my
Stature was not to be found fault with, though now it is of the smallest. My
Sickness has taken me shorter by a foot: My Head is somewhat too bigg
considering my height, and my Face is full enough in all conscience for one
that carries such a Skeleton of a body about him. I have hair enough on my Head
not to stand in need of a Periwig, and it is gray too, in spite of the Proverb.
My Sight is good enough, though my Eyes are large; they are of a blew color, and
one of them is sunk deeper into my head than the other, which was occasioned by
my leaning on that side. My Nose is well enough mounted. My Teeth, that in the
days of yore looked like a row of square Pearl, are now of an ashen color, and
in a few years more, will have the complexion of a smallcoal Man's Saturday
shirt. I have lost one Tooth and a half on the left side, and two and a half
precisely on the right, and I have two more that stand somewhat out of their
Ranks. My Legs and my Thighs in the first place compose an obtuse Angle, then
an equal Angle, and lastly an acute Angle. My Thighs and my Body make another,
and my head leaning perpetually over my Belly, I fancy I am not very unlike the
letter Z. My Arms are shortened as well as my Legs, and my Fingers as well as my
Arms. In short, I am a living Epitome of humane Misery. This, as near as I can
give it, is my shape. Since I am got so far, I will even tell thee something of
my Humor. Under the Rose be it spoken, Courteous Reader, I do this only to
swell the bulk of my Book, at the Request of the Bookseller, the poor Dog it
seems being afraid that he should be a loser by this Impression, if he did not
give the Courteous Reader enough for his Money. Were it not for this, 'twou'd
be to no purpose this Digression as well as a thousand more. But to our comfort
be it said, ours is not the first Age that People played the fools out of
Complaisance, not to reckon the follies they commit of their own heads.

I was always a little Choleric, a little given to my Guts, and a little Lazy.
I frequently call my Man Son of a Whore and Fool, and a little after call him
Sir. I hate no Man, and could wish all the World did the same by me. I am as
blithe as a bird when I have Money, and should be much more so, were I in
health. I am merry enough in Company. I am content enough when alone. I bear
all my ills pretty patiently. And now as I humbly conceive, the Porch is big
enough for the House, and it is high time for me to conclude.



SCARRON's Comical Romance. PART I.
CHAP. I.
Company of Strollers come^ to the Town of Man's.
Bright Phoebus had already performed above half his Career; and his Chariot
having past the Meridian, and got on the Declivity of the Sky, rolled on
swifter than he desired. Had his Horses been willing to make use of the
sl^pingness of their Way, they might have finished the remainder of the Day in
less than half a quarter of an Hour: But instead of pulling amain, they
curvetted about, snu^^ing a briny Air, which set them a neighing, and made them
sensible that they were near the Sea, where their Father is said to take his
Rest every Night. To speak more like a Man, and in plainer Terms; it was
betwixt five and six of the Clock, when a Cart came into the Marketplace of
Man's. This Cart was drawn by two Yoke of lean Oxen, led by a breeding Mare, who
had a Colt that skipp'd to and from about the Cart, like a silly Creature as he
w^^. The Cart was laden with Trunks, Portmantles, and great Packs of painted
Clothes, that made a sort of Pyramid; on the top, of which ^at a Da^^sel, in a
half-City, half-Country Dress. A young Man, as poor in Clothes, as rich in
M^en, walk^d by the side of the Cart: He had a great Patch on his Face, which
covered one of his Eyes, and half of one Ch^^k^ and carri^d a ^ong
Birding-piece over his Shoulder, (...) several Magpies, Jayes, and Crows, which
made a sort of a (...); at the bottom of which hung a Hen and a Goose, that
looked as they had been taken from the Enemy by way of Plunder. Instead of a
Hat he wore a Nightcap, tied about his Head with Garters of several Colors;
and this Head-dress was without doubt a kind of unfinished Turbant. His Doublet
was a Griset-Coat, girt over with a Leather Thong; which served likewise to
support a Rapier so very long, that it could not be used dexterously without the
help of a Rest. He wore a pair of Breeches tucked up to above the middle of his
Thighs, like those that Players wear when they represent an ancient Hero; and
instead of Shoes he wore Tragic Buskins, which were bespattered with Dirt up
to the Ancles. An old Man, something more regular in his Dress, though in very
ordinary Clothes, walked by his side. He carried a Base-viol over his
Shoulders; and because he stooped a little as he went along, one might have
taken him at a distance for a great Tortoise walking upon his hind-Feet. Some
Critic or other will perhaps find fault with the Comparison, by reason of the
Disproportion between a Tortoise and a Man: But I speak of those great
Tortoises that are found in the Indies; and besides, I make bold to use the
Simile upon my own Authority. Let Us return to our strolling Company. They went
by the Tennis-Court at the Hind; before which were assembled several of the
Chief Men of the Town. The Novelty of their Equipage, and the Noise of the Mob,
who by this time had gathered about the Cart, drew the Eyes of all those
Honorable Burgh-Masters upon our unknown Travelers, Among the rest, a An
Undersheriff.
Lieutenant of the Provost, La Rappiniere by Name, made up to them, and with
the Authority of a Magistrate, asked them, who they were? The young Man, whom I
described before, without offering to pull off his Turbant (because with one of
his Hands he held his Gun, and with the other the Hilt of his Sword, lest it
should beat against his Legs) answered him, That they were Frenchmen by Birth,
and Players by Profession^ That his Stage-Name was Destiny; his old Comrades
Rancour; and the Gentlewomen (who sat roosting like a Hen on the top of their
Baggage) Cave. This odd Name set some of the Company a laughing; whereupon the
young Stroller added, That the Name of Cave ought not to seem more strange to
Men of Wit than those of La Montagne, Valley, Rose, or Thorn. The Conversation
ended with the noise of Blows; and Cursing, and Swearing, which was heard
before the Cart. This Squabble was occasioned by the Servant of the
Tennis-Court falling foul upon the Carter, without saying why, or wherefore,
because his Oxen and his Mare were a little too free with a heap of Hay which
stood before the Door. However the Fray was parted; and the Mistress of the
Tennis-Court, who loved to hear a Play more than to hear a Sermon or Vespers,
out of unheard of Generosity in a Keeper of a Tennis-Court, bid the Carter let
his Cattle eat their Belly-full. He took her at her Word: and whilst the hungry
Beasts were feeding, the Author rested a while, and bethought himself what he
should say in the second Chapter.

CHAP. II.
What sort of Man la Rappiniere was.
THE Sieur la Rappiniere was at that time the Droll or Jester of Man's; for you
must know, that there is not a Town, though never so small, but has its Jester.
The City of Paris has several in each Ward; and I my self might have been the
Jester of mine, had I been willing to it: But every Body knows, that it is a
long time since I have forsaken all the Vanities of this World. To return to
Monsieur la Rappiniere; he soon renewed the Conversation which the Squabble had
interrupted, and asked the young Player, Whether their Compapany consisted only
in Mistress Cave, Monsieur Rancour, and himself? Our Company, answered he, is
as complete as that of the Prince of Orange, or of his Grace the Duke
d'Epernon; but through a Misfortune that befell us at Tours, where our
Rattle-headed Doorkeeper killed one of the Fuziliers of the Intendant of the
Province, we were forced to fly in a hurry, and in the sad Pickle you see us
in. Those Fuziliers of the Intendants, said la Rappiniere, have done as much at
la Flesche; A Pox take them, said the Mistress of the Tennis-Court, it is long
of them we shall have no Plays. Nay, answered the old Stroller, had we but the
Keys of our Trunks, we might entertain the Town for four or five Days before we
reach Alencon, where the rest of our Company are to rendezvous. The Player's
Answer made every Body prick up their Ears: La Rappiniere offered an old Gown
of his Wife's to Cave; and the Tennis-Woman two or three Suits of Clothes,
which were left in pawn, to Destiny and Rancour. But, added some of the
Assistants, there is but three of you. No matter for that, replied Rancour, for
I once acted a Play by my self, and represented the King, the Queen, and the
Ambassador. I used a false Treble Tone when I personated the Queen; I spoke
through the Nose for the Ambassador, and addressed my self to the Crown which I
placed upon a Chair; and as for the King, I resumed my Seat, my Crown, and my
Gravity, and lowered the Key of my Voice into a Base. Now, to convince you, if
you will satisfy our Carter, defray our Charges in the Inn, and lend us what
Clothes you can spare, we will act before Night; else we must beg leave to go
to drink, or rest our selves, for we are come a great way. The Company liked
the Proposal, and that Devil la Rappiniere, who was ever hatching some Mischief
or other, said, there was no occasion for any other Clothes but those of two
young Men of the Town, who were then playing a Set at Tennis, and that Mistress
Cave in her ordinary Dress, might pass for any Thing in a Play. No sooner said
but done; in less than half a quarter of an Hour the Strollers drank three or
four Glasses of Wine apiece, shifted themselves; and the Company, who by this
time had increased into a full Audience, having taken their Places in an upper
Room, a dirty Cloth, instead of a painted Curtain, was drawn up, and
discovered Destiny lying on a Quilt, with a Strawberry Basket on his Head,
instead of a Crown, rubbing his Eyes, like one who wakes out of his Sleep, and
mouthing in the Tone of Mondory, the Part of Herod, which begins thus:
Injurious Phantom, that disturbs my Rest. The Patch which covered one half of
his Face, did not hinder him from showing himself (...) be an excellent Player:
Madam Cave acted to admiration the Parts of Mariana, and Salome; Rancour
pleased every Body in his; and the Play was carrying on to a happy Conclusion,
when the Devil, who never sleeps, interposed, and made the Tragedy end, not
with the Death of Mariana, and Herod's Despair, but with a Thousand Cuffs, and
Boxes on the Ears, as many Kicks, numberless Oaths; and last of all, a Verbal
Process and Information, which was taken by la Rappiniere, the most skilful of
all Men in those Matters.

CHAP. III.
What deplorable Success the Play had.
IN all the Inferior Towns of the Kingdom, there is generally a Tennis-Court,
where all the idle People use to resort, some to play, others only to look on.
It Is in those Places where Cursing and Swearing passes for a Rhetorical
Flourish, and where the Absent are murdered with the Tongue; no Man escapes
Scot-free; there all live in open Defiance, and every Body is admitted to rail,
according to the Talent he has received from the Lord. 'Twas in one of these
Tennis-Courts, if my Memory fails me not, that I left three Comical Persons,
reciting Mariana before an Honorable Company; at which presided Monsieur la
Rappiniere. Now while Herod and Mariana were telling one another of their
Faults, the two young Men, whose Clothes they had so freely borrowed, came into
the Room in their Drawers, and each of 'em his Racket in his Hand, having
neglected to get themselves rubbed, that they might come and hear the Play.
They were not long in the Room before they perceived that Herod and Pherores
had their Clothes on; and the most passionate of the two addressing himself to
the Waiter of the Tennis-Court; Thou Son of a Bitch, said he to him, Why did
thou give my Clothes to that Mountebank? The innocent Waiter, who knew him to
be a brutish sort of a Man, told him in great Humility, That he had no Hand in
it. Who then, Scoundrel? added he. The poor Fellow durst not accuse la
Rappiniere in his Presence; but he, the most insolent of all Men, rising from
his Seat, told him, It Is I; What have you to say to it? That you are a Coxcomb,
replied the other; and at the same time gave him a desperate Blow over the Pate
with his Racket. La Rappiniere was so surpised to be struck first, whereas he
used to be beforehand with others, that he stood motionless, either out of
Admiration, or because he was not yet angry enough, and that 'twas not a small
Provocation that could make him resolve to fight, were it but at Fifty-cuffs.
Nay, perhaps the Quarrel had gone no further, had not his Man, who was more
Choleric than he, fallen foul upon the Aggressor, and dealt him a sound Cuff
on the Chops, and in the middle of his Face, and afterward a great many others
where he could find room for them. La Rappiniere charged him behind, and work't
on him like one that had received the first Provocation: A Relation of his
Adversary invested la Rappinere in the same manner. This Relation was attacked
by one of la Rappinierr's Friends, in order to make a Diversion: This Combatant
was assaulted by another, and this last again by another. In short, the whole
Audience divided into Parties; some cursed and swore; others called Names; all
beat one another. The Tennis-Woman who saw her Goods broken to pieces, rent the
Air with doleful Cries. In all probability they had all been murdered with
Stools, Kicks, and Cuffs, had not some of the Magistrates of the Town (who
walked in the Piazza of the Marketplace, with des Essars, Seneschal of Main)
ran with all speed to the Squabble. Some proposed to throw two or three Pails
full of Water on the Combatants; and perhaps this way might have been
successful; but however they gave over fighting through weariness: Besides two
Capuchins, who out of Charity flung themselves into the Field of Battle,
procured, not a firm Peace, betwixt the contending Parties, but a sort of
Truce; during which a Negotiation was set on foot, without derogating from the
Informations that were taken on both sides, in order to a Trial in due Course
of Law. Destiny, one of the Strolliers, performed Wonders at Boxing; and his
great Actions are talked of to this very Day in the Town of Man's, according to
the faithful Account delivered by the two young Men that raised the Squabble,
whom he particularly engaged, and almost cuff'd to death; besides a great many
others of the Enemy, whom he disabled with the first Blow. He lost his Patch in
the Scuffie, and People took notice that his Face was as fine as his Shape. The
bloody Noses were handsomely washed with clean water: those that had their Bands
torn, put on others instead of them; Cataplasms were applied where need
required; some few Stitches served to darn many a torn Doublet; and the
Houshold-Goods were set in their proper places, tho not so sound and whole as
they were before. In short, a moment after there remained nothing of the Right
but a great Spite and Animosity, which appeared in the Faces of those of both
Parties. The poor Strollers went out a long while after the Combat with la
Rappiniere, who was still for making Speeches. In their way from the
Tennis-Court to the Marketplace they were invested by seven or eight Bullies
with Swords in their hands; la Rappiniere, according to custom, was in a great
fright, and indeed not without a cause, had not Destiny generously thrust
himself between him and a Sword which was going to run him through; however he
could not so well put by the Blow, but that he received a small wound in the
Arm. Thereupon he drew his Sword, and in the twinkling of an Eye, beat two
Swords out of the hands of the Enemy, broke two or three Sculls, battered and
slashed as many Faces and discomfited so well the Gentlemen of the Ambuscade,
that all the Assistants unanimously confessed, they never had seen so valiant a
Champion. This abortive Plot was laid against La Rappiniere, by two Squires,
one of which was married to the Sister of him, who begun the Fight with a great
blow with a Racket, and in all likelihood, La Rappiniere had been spoiled for
ever, but for the valiant Protector, whom Providence raised for him in the
Person of our stout Player. This Benefit melted his Heart of Flint, insomuch,
that he would not suffer the miserable remains of a scattered Company of
Strollers^ to lodge in an Inn; but brought them to his own House, where the
Carter laid down the Strolling Furniture, and returned home to his Village.

CHAP. IV.
Wherein further mention is made of Monsieur La Rappiniere, and of what
happened that Night at his House.
MAdam la Rappiniere received the Company with a great deal of Civility, as
being the most submissive of Wives; she was indifferently handsome, though so very
lean and dry, that she never snuff't a Candle with her Fingers, but they
presently caught fire. I could relate a thousand curious Stories about her,
which I pass by for fear of being redious. The first Compliments were scarce
over, when the two Ladies grew so well acquainted, that they begun to My Dear,
and My Dearest. La Rappiniere, who was as great a Brag as any Barber of 'em
all, did no sooner come into the Room, but he bid somebody go to the Kitchen
and the Larder, to hasten Supper. This was a mere Rodimontade; for besides his
Valet, who likewise dressed his Horses, there was no body in his House, but a
young Maid, and an old lame woman, as crazy as a mangy Dog. His Vanity was
punished by an Accident, that filled him with Confusion; he used to Diet at the
Tavern, at the Expense of Fools and Bubbles, whilst his Wife and his orderly
Fam^ly, were reduc^d to feed on Soop and Cabbage, according to the custom of
that Country; Now, being willing to make a show before his Guests, and ^reat
them nobly, he was going to slip behind his back, some Money into the hands of
his Man, to fetch something for Supper; but through the awkardness either of
the Man, or the Master, the Money fell on the Chair he sat on, and from the
Chair to the Ground. La Rappiniere looked blew upon it; his Wife blushed; the
Man cursed; Cave was uneasy; Rancour perhaps did not mind it, and as for
Destiny, I could not well learn what effect it had upon his Mind. However, the
Money was taken up, and whilst Supper was getting ready, they engaged in
Conversation. La Rappiniere ask't Destiny, why he Disguised his Face with a
Patch? He answered, he had great reason to do it; and as he had other Clothes
on by accident, he likewise designed to make his Face unknown to some Enemies
he had. At last Supper came in, good or bad: La Rappiniere drank so much, that
he made himself fudled; Rancour had his load; Destiny supped like a sober
well-bred Man; Cave like a famished Player; and Madam La Rappiniere like one
who had a mind to lay hold of the Opportunity; that is to say, so very
greedily, that she got a Surfeit. Whilst the Servants were at Supper, and the
Beds making, La Rappiniere teased his Guests with a thousand Stories full of
Vanity. Destiny lay in a little Room by himself; Cave in a Closet with the
Chambermaid; and Rancour with the Valet, I know not where. They all had a
great mind to Sleep, some through weariness, others for having supped too
plentifully, and yet they slept but little; so true it is, that there is
nothing certain in this World. After her first Sleep, Madam la Rapiniere had a
mind to go where Kings are fain to go themselves in Person; her Husband waked
at the same time, and though he had not recovered his Drunkenness, he found
himself alone; he called his Wife, no body answered: Whereupon he grew Jealous,
fell in a Passion, and instantly rose out of his Bed in a Fury. As soon as he
was got out of the Chamber, he heard a stamping of feet before him, and for
some time followed the noise through a little Gallery, that led to Destiny's
Chamber. He found himself so near what he followed, that he trod upon its
heels, and thinking it to be his Wife, he was going to lay hold on her, crying,
you Whore! But his hands could catch at nothing, and his feet stumbling at the
same time, he fell down upon his Nose, and felt something that was pointed
running into his Breast: Thereupon he cried out in a most hideous manner,
Murder, Murder, I am stabbed -- without letting go his Wife, whom he thought,
he held by the Hair, and was struggling under him. His Cries and Oaths, set all
the House in an uproar, and every body ran to his Assistance, the Maid with a
Candle; Rancour and the Valet in their dirty shirts; Cave in a tattered
Petticoat; Destiny with a Sword in his Hand, and Madam la Rappiniere last of
all, who like all the rest, was not a little surpised to see her furious
Husband grapling with a she-goat, which was kept in the House to suckle some
young Puppies, whose Dam happened to die. No Man was ever so much out of
Countenance, as la Rappiniere: His Wife who presently suspected the truth of
the Matter, asked him if he was Mad? He answered without knowing well what he
said, that he had taken the Goat for a Thief; Destiny guessed the business,
every one returned to his Bed, and made what Constructions he thought ^it upon
the Adventure; as for the Goat, she was shut in again with her Puppies.

CHAP V.
Which contains no great Matter.
THE Stroller Rancour, one of the principal Heroes of our Romance, for one
alone will not serve our turn; and since there is nothing more perfect than the
Hero of a Book, half a dozen Heroes, or would be such, will do more credit to
mine than a single one, who might happen to be the least talked of, since all
Human things are subject to the caprice of Fortune. Rancour, I say, was one of
these Misanthropists who hate every body, and do not love even themselves: Nay,
I was told by several creditable Persons, that no Man ever saw him Laugh. He
had a pretty deal of Wit, and an indifferent Talent in making Doggrel Rhimes:
He was not over-stock'd with Honor or Conscience upon any account, and besides
he was as malicious as an old Monkey, and envious as a Dog. He found fault with
all those of his Profession, according to his Opinion; Belleroze was too
affected; Mindory too rough; Floridor wanted Life, and so of the rest; by which
he did insinuate, that he was the only Player without a Fault, whereas he was
suffered in the Company, only upon the score of his being an old Stander. When
the Stage was reduced to Hardy's Plays, he acted the Parts of Nurses in a
Treble-tone, and with a Vizor; but since the Parts of Confidents, Ambassadors
and Bailiffs Setters, when there was occasion to attend a King, Murder any
Body, or fight a Battle; he Sung but scurvily the Tenor in Troies, and was
Jack-pudding in Farces. Upon these great Accomplishments, he had built an
unsufferable Pride which was attended with an unexhausted faculty of Railing
and Slandering, and a quarrelsom Humor, which however was supported by a
little Courage: All these made him to be feared by his Comrades, Destiny only
excepted, with whom he was as tame as a Lamb, and showed himself as reasonable
as his natural Inclination would suffer him. 'Twas once given out, that he was
beaten by Destiny; but that Report did not continue, no more than that about
his having so great an Affection for other People's Goods, that he would
sometimes seize upon 'em Clandestinely: Yet upon the whole, he was the best Man
in the World. Methinks I acquainted you before, how he lay with La Rappiniere's
Man, Doguin by Name: Now whether the Bed was none of the best, or that Doguin
was but an ill Bedfellow, it so happened that he could not sleep a wink all
the Night long. He got up at break of day, (as well as Doguin, who was called
up by his Master) and going by La Rapiniere's Chamber, he went in to wish him
good Morrow; La Rappiniere received his Compliment with the State of a
Country-Provost, and scarce returned any of his Civilities; but as Players are
used to act all manner of Parts, so Rancour was little concerned at it. La
Rappiniere asked him a thousand Questions about the Stage, particularly, how
long Destiny had been one of their Company, adding, that he was a very good
Player: All is not Gold that glisters, replied Rancour: When I played the first
Parts, he Acted those of Pages; how the Devil should he now understand a Trade,
that he never learnt? He has not been long upon the Stage, and Players do not
come up like Mushrooms in one Night. Now he is liked, because he is young; but
if you knew him thoroughly as I do, you would not have half so good an Opinion
of him; Besides, he is as proud, as if he was lineally Descended from Saint
Lewis, and yet he will not tell us who he is, nor whence he comes, no more than a
handsome Phillis who accompanies him, under the name of Sister, and grant Heaven
she be no worse. Such as I am, I saved his Life in Paris, at the expense of two
great Wounds I received with a Sword; and he was so unthankful for my good
Office, that in stead of seeing me carried to a Surgeon, he spent the whole
Night in looking in the Dirt for a certain Jewel enrich't with Diamonds of
Alencon; of which he said, he was robbed by those that set upon us. La
Rappiniere asked Rancour when this Mischance befell him? Upon Twelfth-Day on
the New Bridge, answered Rancour. These last words cast La Rappiniere and his
Man Doguin into a great trouble; they turned pale, and blushed; then blushed,
and turned pale again; and La Rappiniere shifted the Discourse so quickly, and
in so great a Disorder, that Rancour wondered at it. The Hangman of the Town,
and some Archers who came into the Room, interrupted their Conversation, at
which Rancour was highly pleased; for he was sensible that what he had said,
had touched La Rappiniere in a very tender part, though he was not able to
guess what share he might have in the Adventure. In the mean time, Destiny who
had been the Subject of his Encomiums, was in no small Trouble: Rancour found
him with Mistress Cave, wasting their Breath to no purpose, to make an old
Tailor confess, that he did not conceive well, and had workt still worse. The
Matter in dispute was this: At the taking the Playhouse Furniture out of the
Cart, Destiny having found two Doublets and a pair of Breeches much worn out,
he gave them to this old Tailor in order to make out of 'em a more fashionable
Suit, than the Trunk Breeches he had on; now the Tailor instead of making one
of the Doublets serve to mend the other Doublet, and the Breeches, through a
fault of Judgment, unworthy of a Man who had patched old Clothes all his
Lifetime, he mended both the Doublets with the best pieces out of the
Breeches; insomuch, that poor Destiny with so many Doublets, and no Breeches,
was reduced either to keep his Chamber, or to make all the Children run after
him, as they had done before, upon account of his Comical Habit. La
Rappiniere's Generosity repaired the Mistake of the Tailor, who had the botch'd
Doublets for his pains, and Destiny was presented with a suit of Clothes, the
spoil of a High-wayman, whom Rappiniere had caused to be broke upon the Wheel
not long before. The Hangman who happened to be there, and had left those
Clothes in the custody of La Rappiniere's Maid, said very saucily, that they
were his Fees; but La Rappiniere silenced him, by threatening him to turn him
out of his place. The Clothes fitted Destiny to a hair, and so out he went with
La Rappiniere and Rancour: They all dined at a Tavern at the expense of one of
the Burghers, who had business with La Rappiniere; and as for Mistress Cave,
she past her time away in washing her dirty Nightrails, and kept her Landlady
Company. The same day Doguin met two of those young Men whom he had beaten the
day before in the Tennis-Court, and returned home with two great Wounds in his
Guts, and abundance of Cudgel-blows on his Back; and because he was dangerously
ill, Rancour having well Supped, went to the next Inn for a Bed, betogether
with his Comrade Destiny, to attend Monsieur La Rappiniere, who swore he would
have Satisfaction for the Murder of his Man.

CHAP. VI.
The Adventure of the Chamber Pot; what Disturbance Rancour made that Night in
the Inn; The Arrival of part of the Strolling Company; Doguin's Death, and
other memorable Occurrences.
RAncour went into the Inn something more than half drunk: La Rappiniere's Maid
who introduced him, bid the Hostess get a Bed ready for him: Who have we here,
said the Hostess? Faith, had we no other Customers, our House-Rent would be but
ill paid. Hold your Tongue Hussy, said the Husband: Mousieur la Rappiniere does
us too much honor: Quickly let a Bed be got ready for the Gentleman -- Ay
marry, but where shall one get it, said the Hostess; for there was but one
left, and I parted just now with it to a Merchant of Lower-Maine. Thereupon the
Merchant came in, and hearing the occasion of their Dispute, offered one half
of his Bed to Rancour, whether he had Business with La Rappiniere, or because
he was of an obliging Nature; for which Rancour returned him thanks, as far as
his small stock of Civility would let him. The Merchant supped the Host kept
him Company, and Rancour without much Entreaty, put in for a third, and begun
to drink upon a new Score. They discoursed about Taxes, railed against
Excisemen, settled the Nation, and unsettled their own Brains so much, especially
the Innkeeper, that he lugg'd his Purse out of his Pocket, and called for the
Reckoning, having forgot that he was at home; but his Wife and his Maid pulled
him by the Shoulders into his Chamber, and laid him upon a Bed with his Clothes
on; Rancour told the Merchant, that he was troubled with a Strangury, and would
be very sorry if he should incommode him; to which the Merchant replied, that a
Night would soon be over. Now you must take notice, the Bed had no Ruelle, but
was close to the Wall: Rancour went into it first, and the Merchant being gone
after him into the place of Honor, Rancour asked him for the Chamber Pot --
what to do, said the Merchant? Why, to put it by me, to avoid being Troublesome
to you, said Rancour; the Merchant replied, he would give it him whenever he
had occasion for it, to which Rancour seemed unwilling to consent, protesting
he should be extreme sorry to trouble him. The Merchant fell asleep without
returning him an answer, and scarce begun to be in a found sleep, when the
malicious Stroller, (who could have parted with one of his Eyes, so as he might
make his Neighbor lose both his) pulled the Merchant by the Arm, and cried to
him, Sir, Sir; the poor Merchant half a sleep, and gaping and stretching, asked
him what he would have? Pray reach me the Chamber Pot, said Rancour; the
Merchant leaned over the Bed, and having taken the Chamber Pot, gave it to
Rancour, who put himself in a pissing posture; and having used all his
endeavors, or at least seemed to do so, muttered a thousand Oaths, and
complained of his Distemper; he returned the Chamber Pot to the Merchant,
without making a drop of Water. The Merchant set it on the ground again, and
stretching his Mouth as wide as an Oven, said to Rancour, truly Sir, I pity
you, and fell asleep presently. Rancour suffered him to indulge his Drowsiness,
till he snor'd as loud as the Drone of a pair of Organs, and then the Traitor
waked him again, and asked him for the Chamber Pot with as much malice, as he
had done before. The Merchant delivered it into his hands with his usual
kindness; and Rancour laid it to the place through which one pisses, not so
much with a design to leak, as to keep the Merchant awake: He cried out still
louder than before, and was twice as long endeavoring in vain to make Water,
and desiring the Merchant not to give himself the trouble to reach him the
Chamber Pot, for that he would reach it himself: The poor Merchant, who at that
time would have parted with half his Estate to have slept his Belly-full,
answered him gaping, that he might do as he thought fit, and laid the
Chamber Pot in its proper place again: They bid one another good Night, in a
very civil manner, and the poor Merchant would have laid a round Sum, that he
was going to take the best Nap he ever had in his Life. Rancour, who knew well
enough where his Comedy should end, suffered him to fall into a sound sleep,
and then without making conscience to wake a Man that reposed so innocently, he
laid his Elbow in the pit of his Stomach, crushing him down with the whole
weight of his Body, and stretching forth the other Arm out of the Bed, like one
that has a mind to take up something from the ground. The unfortunate Merchant,
almost crushed and stifled to Death, started out of his sleep, (crying out in a
most hideous manner, Zouns, Sir, what do you mean, you have almost killed me --
Rancour with as soft and gentle a Voice as that of the Merchant, was loud and
vehement, answered him: I ask your pardon, I only designed to take the
Chamber Pot -- Udslife, cried the other, I had much rather give it to you, and
not sleep all the Night long, -- you have so hurt me, that I shall feel it as
long as I live. Rancour made him no answer, but fell a pissing so plentifully,
and with such force, that the very noise of the Chamber Pot, had been
sufficient to wake the Merchant: At last he filled the Pot, and returned the
Lord thanks with a villainous Hypocrisy. The good Merchant wished him joy as
well as he could, for his plentiful ejaculation of Urine, which gave him hopes
his sleep would no more be interrupted: When the cursed Rancour (making as if
he would set the Chamber Pot on the ground) let fall both pot and piss on his
Face, his Beard and his Breast, excusing himself only with, Sir, I cry your
mercy? The Merchant returned his Civility no answer; for as soon as he felt
himself drowned in piss, he got out of Bed, roaring like a Madman, and calling
for a Candle; Rancour with a cunning Calmness, told him, truly, it is a great
Mischance! In the mean time the Merchant raised the whole House with his
continual Roaring, and the Innkeeper, his Wife, Maids and Servants being come
to know what the matter was, he told them, they had put him to bed with a
Devil, and desired to have a fire lighted in another Room; they asked him what
ail^d him? but he was in such a Passion, that he gave no answer; and taking his
Clothes in a Fury, went down into the Kitchen to dry himself, and there lay all
Night stretched on a Bench by the Fire side. The Innkeeper asked Rancour what
he had done to him, to which Rancour with a counterfeit ingenuity answered, I
do not know what he can complain of -- He waked out of his sleep, and roused
me, crying out, Murder; -- sure, he has had some ill Dream or other, or is
turned Mad, for besides, he has bepist the Bed. Mine Hostess put her hand upon
it, and said the Gentleman spoke truly, that her Quilt was wet through, and
swore a great Oath, that she would make the Merchant pay for it: They bid
Rancour good Night, and so went their way. As for Rancour, he slept as
peacefully as any honest man might have done, and made himself amends for the
bad Night he had at La Rappiniere's. However he rose earlier than he designed,
being called up by La Rappiniere's Maid, who came running to fetch him to
Doguin who was a Dying, and desired to speak with him before he made his Exit.
He ran to him much perplexed, to know what a dying Man, with whom he got
acquainted but the day before, might have to say to him. But 'twas a mistake of
the Maid; for hearing the dying Wretch call for the Player, she took Rancour
for Destiny; who when Rancour came, had just shut himself in Doguin's Chamber,
being informed by the Priest who heard his Confession, that he had something of
great Importance to communicate to him. He had not been there above a quarter
of an hour, when La Rappiniere came home, having been abroad at break a day
about some Business: He was told at his Arrival, that his man was breathing his
last, the Surgeons not being able to stop his Blood, (by reason one of his
great Veins was broke) and that he desired to see the Player Destiny before he
dyed. And has he seen him! asked La Rappiniere very much disordered -- answer
was made, they were locked in together; at which words he was in a manner
Thunderstruck, and ran in a great Fright, and knocked at Doguin's Chamber Door,
at that very time that Destiny was opening of it to call for help; the sick
Body being taken by a fainting Fit. La Rappiniere with Trouble in his Face,
asked him what his silly Servant had to say to him? I think he is Lightheaded,
replied Destiny coldly; for he ask't me pardon a thousand times, and I cannot
tell that he ever offended me; however, let somebody look to him, for he cannot
live long. Thereupon they made toward the Bed, and at that very instant,
Doguin gave up the Ghost, at which La Rappiniere seemed rather pleased, than
concerned. Those who were acquainted with him, judged the reason of it to be,
because he owed him his Wages: But Destiny alone knew best of any, what he^
ought to think of it. In the mean time two men came into the House, whom our
Stroller knew to be his Comrades, of whom we will speak at large in the
following Chapter.

CHAP. VII.
The Adventure of the Litters.
THE youngest of the two Strollers who came to La Rappipiniere's, was Destiny's
Servant, of whom he learnt, that the rest of the Company were all arrived,
except Mistress Star, who had sprain'd her Foot, three Leagues off Man's. How
came you hither? Who told you we were here? said Destiny to him: The Plague
which is now at Alencon, hindered us from going thither, and stopped us at
Bonnestable, answered the Stroller, Olive by Name; and some Inhabitants of this
Town we met by the way, informed us you Acted here; that you had fought, and
was Wounded; Mistress Star is very much troubled at it, and desires you to send
her a Litter. The Keeper of the next Inn, who was come at the report of
Doguin's Death, said he had a Litter at home, and if they would pay him well,
it should be ready to go by Noon, carried by two strong able Horses. The
Strollers hired the Litter for a Crown, and took Chambers in the Inn for the
whole Company: La Rappiniere undertook to procure a License, to act from the
Deputy Governor; and about Noon, Destiny and his Comrades took their Journey
toward Bonnestable; it being a very hot day, Rancour slept in the Litter,
Olive was mounted on the hinder Horse, and the Innkeepers Man on the other
before; Destiny trudged it on Foot with a Gun over his Shoulder, and his Man
entertained him with what was befallen them from the Castle of Loir, to a
Village near Bonnestable, where Mistress Star had sprain'd one of her Feet as
she lighted off her Horse; when two Men well Mounted, and who hid their Faces
with their Cloaks as they passed by Destiny, rode up to the Litter on that side
where it was uncovered, and finding in it but one Man asleep; he that was
mounted on the best Horse, said to the other; I verily believe, all the Devils
are t^is day broke loose against me, and have turned themselves into Litters,
to plague me. Which said, he clapped Spurs to his Horse, and went his way cross
the field with his Companion after him. Olive called Destiny, and recounted to
him the Adventure, the meaning of which he could not understand, nor indeed,
did he much trouble himself about it. After they had gone a quarter of a League
further, the Leader of the Litter whom the heat of the Sun had stunned, and
made drowsy, brought the Litter into a Quag-mire, where Rancour was like to be
over-turn'd; the Horses broke their Traces, and they were fain to unharness
them, and pull them out of the Mire by Neck and Tail. They gathered the broken
Remnants of their Wreck, and reached the next Village as well as they could.
Now, whilst the shattered Furniture of the Litter was resitting, Rancour,
Olive, and Destiny's Man, took a merry Cup at the gate of an Inn that happened to
be in the Village. Whereupon there came another Litter led by two Men on foot,
which likewise stopped before the Inn. This Litter was scarce arrived, but there
appeared another, a hundred steps behind it. I believe all the Litters in the
Province have agreed to meet here, about some business of Importance, in order
to hold a General Council, said Rancour; and methinks they ought to begin their
Conferences, for it is not probable that any more will come. Nay, Marry, said
the Hostess, here is another that will not stick out, I warrant you -- and in
truth they espied a fourth, which came as from Man's. This made them all laugh
heartily, except Rancour, who never laughed, as I said before. The last Litter
stopped with the rest, and in the memory of Man, so many Litters were never seen
together. If those that looked for Litters, and whom we met a while ago, were
here, they would have their Belly full of them, said the Leader of the first
Litter: I have met with him, said the Second: So have we, said he that
conducted the Strollers Litter; to which he that came last added; that he was
like to be thresh'd by 'em. Why so? asked Destiny. Because, answered he, they
had a design upon a certain Gentlewoman, who sprain'd her Foot, and whom we
carried to Man's: I never saw Men so furious and unreasonable; for they
quarreled with me only because they missed of what they looked for. This made
the Strollers prick up their Ears; and by the Answer of the Litter-Man to two
or three Questions they put to him, they were informed, that the Lady of the
Lord of the Village where Mrs. Star sprain'd her Foot, had given her a Visit,
and taken great care to have her carried safe to Man's. The Conversation
continued a little longer between the Litters; and they learnt of one another,
that they were all searched by the same Men whom the Strollers saw. The first
Litter carried the Parson of Domfront, who came from the Wells of Belles^^, and
went to Man's, in order to get the Physicians of that Place to consult about his
Distemper. The second carried a wounded Officer, who returned from the Army. At
last the Litters parted; those of the Parson of Domfront, and of the Strollers
went together to Man's, and the others where they thought fit. The sick Parson
lighted at the same Inn where the Strollers were quartered, being the place
where he used to lie on that Road. We will leave him to take his rest in his
Room, and in our next Chapter we shall pay a Visit to the Strollers, to see
what was doing in theirs.

CHAP. VIII.
Wherein are contained many things necessary to be known for the Understanding
of this present Book.
THE Strolling Company consisted of Destiny, Olive, and Rancour, who had each a
Servant, who expected to be one Day an Actor in chief. Of those Servants, some
began to speak without blushing, or being dashed out of Countenance: Among the
rest, Destiny's Man acted pretty well, understood what he spoke, and did not
want Wit. Mrs. Star, and Mrs. Cave's Daughter acted the first Parts. Cave acted
the Queen, and the Mother; and sometimes Merry-Andrew's. Wife in a Farc^:
Besides all this, they had a Poet, or an Author; for all the Grocers Shops in
the Kingdom were stored with his Works, both in Verse and Prose. This great Wit
followed the Company, almost against their own Will; but because he was no
Sharer, and that he spent his own Money with the Players they suffered him to
act Under-parts, which he generally murdered. They all perceived well enough,
that he was in love, with one of the two Players; but he was so discreet,
though a little crack-brain'd, that 'twas not yet discovered which of them he
designed to wheedle into compliance, with the fair Hopes of making her
Immortal. He threatened the Company with a great many Plays of his own writing;
but till then he had spared them, and they only knew by Conjecture that he was
about one, called Mar^in Luther, of which they found the first Act; which
however he disowned, although it was written with his own Hand. When our
Strollers arrived, the Women's Chamber was already filled with the most
impertinent Fops and Beaus of the Town, whose eagerness was almost cooled by
the indifferent Reception they met with: They spoke altogether about Plays,
Poetry, Poets and Romances; and there could not have been more noise in the
Room, unless they had been a fighting. The Poet, among the rest, surrounded by
three or four, who, without doubt, were the top Wits of the Town, labored to
persuade 'em, that he had seen Corneille, cracked many a Bottle with St. Amant
and Beys, and lost a good Friend when Rotrou died. Madam Cave, and her Daughter
Angelica set their Goods in order, with as great a Tranquillity, as if no Body
had been in the Room. It Is true, Angelica's fair Hands were now and then
squeezed or kiss'd^; for these Country Gentlemen are ever pulling and haulling;
but a kick on the Shins, a Box on the Ear, or a Biting, according as occasion
required, soon rid her of those hot-spurr'd Lovers: Nor was she rude and
impudent neither, but her free and gay Humor would not let her use much
Ceremony: As for the rest, she had Wit, and was very honest. Mrs. Star was of a
quite different Humor; for there never was a more modest, gentile, and
good-natured Woman in the World, and she strained at that time her Complaisance
so far, that she could not find in her Heart to turn these ogling Fops out of
her Chamber, although she felt a great Pain in her sprain'd Foot, and had great
occasion for Rest. She lay in her Clothes on a Bed, surrounded by four or five
of the whining sighing Beaus: stunned by abundance of Puns and Clenches, which
pass for good Jests in the Country, and often forcing a Smile upon Things that
she did not like. But this is one of the great Plagues of that Profession,
which together with the being obliged to laugh or weep, whether one has a mind
to it or no, takes very much from the Pleasure which Players have, of being
sometimes Emperors and Empresses, and of being called as fine as Angels, though
they be little handsomer than Devils, or addressed to as young Beauties,
although their Hair and Teeth be part of their Furniture. There are a great
many more things to be said upon this Subject, but we must use them sparingly,
and place them in several Places in this Book, for Variety's sake. Let Us return
to Madam Star, beset with Country-Squires, the most troublesome Race of Men, all
great Talkers, most of 'em very impertinent, and amongst whom there were some
newly returned from the University. Among the rest appeared a little Man, who
was a Widower, a Lawyer by Profession, and an Officer, in a small Court of
Judicature in the Neighborhood: Since the Death of his little Wife, he
sometimes threatened the Women to marry again, and sometimes the Clergy of the
Province to turn Priest, nay even a preaching Prelate. He was the greatest
little Fool that ever ran madding since Rollando. He had studied Books all his
Lifetime; and though the chief end of Scholarship be the Knowledge of Truth,
yet he was as great a Liar as a Page, proud and obstinate as a Pedant, and so
bad a Poet as to deserve to be drowned, if the Government would take care to
rid the Kingdom of the troublesome Vermin of Rhiming Fools. As Soon as Destiny
and his Comrades came into the Room, without giving them the time to know who
he was, he offered to read to 'em a Poem of his own making, called The Deeds
and Achievements of Charlemain in four and twenty Books. This Proposal put all
the Assistants into such a frigh^^s made their Hair stand an end; but Destiny,
who in this general Terror preserved a little Judgment, told him smiling, that
'twas not possible for them to give him the hearing before Supper. Well, quoth
he, I will read to you a Story taken out of a Spanish Book^ which was sent me
from Paris, and of which I design to make a regular Play. They shifted the
Discourse three or four times, ^^on purpose to avoid hearing a Story, which
they supposed to be an Imitation of Guy of Warwick, or Tom Thumb. But though they
often interrupted him, yet our little Man did not lose Courage; and with often
beginning his Story, he at last forced them to hear him out; however they did
not repent, because the Story proved to be a good one, and belied the ill
Opinion they had of all that came from Ragotin, for so was called out
Iack-in-a-Box. You will see the said Story in the following Chapter, not such
as Ragotin told it, but such as I had it my self from one of the Hearers.
Therefore, it is not Ragotin that speaks, but my self.

CHAP IX.
The History of the Invisible Mistress.
DON Carlos of Aragon was a young Gentleman of the Family that bore that Name.
He performed Wonder at the Public Game, with which the Viceroy of Naples
entertained the People, upon the Marriage of Philip the Second, Third or Fourth
for I forgot which. The next Day after a Running at the Ring, whereof he
carried the Prize, the Viceroy gave liberty to the Ladies to go about the City
in Disguise and to wear Masks after the French way, for the Convenience of
Strangers, whom the Public Rejoycings had invited thither. Upon that Day Don
Carlos put on his finest Clothes, and with many other Conquerors of Hearts,
repaird to the Chur^^ of Gallantry. Churches are profaned in these Countries,
a^ well as in ours; and the House of God serves for a Meeting Place to the
Beaux and the Cocquets, to the eternal Shame (...) those who have the cursed
Ambition of drawing Customer^ from other Churches to their own. These Abuses
ought to b^ reformed, and there should be Persons appointed to turn Beau^ and
Cocquets out of Churches, as well as to drive away D^ and Bitches. I may be
asked, What makes me concern (...) self about it? Truly you will see more of
this anon. How^ever, let the (...) who is offended at it be satisfied, that all
M^ in this World are Fools as well as Liars, some more some less^ and I my self
perhaps a greater Fool than the rest, though have more Frankness in owning it:
And my Book being but heap of Follies^ I hope every Fool will find his own
Char^^^^ in it, unless he be blinded by Self-love. To return to my Story Don
Carlos was in a Church, with several other Italian and ^nish Gentlemen, viewing
themselves in their fine Feathers, (...) proud Peacocks, when three Ladies in
Masks accosted him (...) midst all these fierce and gay Cupids, and one of
(...) spoke to him thus, or to the same effect: Signior Don Carlos^ there is a
Lady in this City, to whom you are very much ^^lig'd for at all the Justs and
Tournaments, her Wishes we^ still along with you in all those Exercises, whereof
you ca^^ the Prize. What I find most advantageous in what you tell me, answered
Don Carlos, is to have it, from the Mouth of a Lady, who seems to be a Person
of Merit; yet had I so much as hoped that any Lady had been on my side, I would
have taken more care to deserve her Approbation. The unknown Lady reply'd^ he
had given all the Proofs imaginable of his being a most dextrous and
accomplished Gentleman, and that by his Black and White Liveries, he had shown
he was not in love. I never was well acquainted with the meaning of Colors;
answered Don Carlos, but this I know, that if I am not in love, it is not so
much because I am indifferent, as because I am sensible I do not deserve to be
beloved. They said to one another a Thousand fine Things more, which I shall
not relate, because I know nothing of 'em, and that I would be loath to compose
others, lest I should wrong Don Carlos and the unknown Lady, who had a great
deal more Wit than I can pretrend to^ as I was dately informed by a young
Neapolitan, who knew 'em both. In short, the Lady in a Mask declared to Don
Carlos, that 'twas she who had an Inclination for him: He desired to see her
Face; which she refused and told him, That he must not expect it yet; that she
would look for a more proper Opportunity; and that^ to let him know she feared
not to trust her self alone with him, that she would give him a Token. At these
Words she pulled off her Glove, and showed the Spaniard the finest Hand in the
World, and presented him with a Ring; which he received, with so great a
Surprise at the Adventure; that he almost forgot to make a Bow, and thank her
when the went from him. The other Gentlemen, who out of Civility were gone from
him, being come to him again, he told 'em what had happened to him, and showed
them the Ring which was of considerable Value. Every one spoke his Thoughts
about the Adventure; and Don Carlos was deep in love with the unknown Lady^ as
if he had seen her Face. So great is the Power of Wit on those who have their
Share of it. He was eight long Days without hearing from the Lady; but whether
or no he was uneasy at it^ I could never be well informed. In the mean time he
went every Day to divert himself at the House of a Captain of Foot, where
several Men of Quality met to play. One Night, when he had not been, at Play,
and was going home, sooner than ordinary, he was called by his Name out of a
Parlour in a great House. He went near the Window, which was l^^^ic'd, and knew
by the Voice that called him, that 'twas his invisible Mistress, who told him;
Come near, Don Carlos^ I expect you here to decide our Controversy. You are
but a Brag, said Don Carlos, you challenge with Insolence, and yet you hide
your self eight Days together, and then appear only through a Lattice Wind^w.
We shall see one another nearer in time, answered she: It Is not for want of
Courage I have delayed being with you, but I had a mind to know you before I
discover my self; You know that in Duels the Combatants ought to fight with
Arms that are alike: Now if your Heart was not as free as mine, you would fight
with advantage, and therefore I have made Enquiries about you. And what
Information had you, answered Don Carlos; That we are much upon the same Terms,
returned the Invisible Lady. But, said Don Carlos, there is yet a great
inequality; for, added he, you both see me, and know who I am, whereas I
neither see you, nor know who you are: Now think with your self, what I can
judge of your concealing your self? Since People seldom do so when they have a
good Design, it is an easy Matter to impose at first upon a Man that mistrusts
nothing^ but he is not to be cheated twice; if you make use of me only to make
another jealous, I must freely tell you that I am the most unfit Person for it
in the World, and that I am good for nothing besides loving you. Have you now
done with your rash Suspicions, said the Invisible Lady? You may call them rash
if you please, replied Don Carlos; but however they are not unlikely. I would
have you know, said she, that I am sincere; you will find me such in all our
Intercourse; and I expect you should be so too. That Is but reasonable, answered
Don Carlos; but it is just likewise that I should see you, and know who you are.
You shall be satisfied e're it be long, said the Invisible Lady; and in the
mean time hope with Patience; for that is the only way for you to obtain what
you expect from me. Now, that you may justify your Love to your Discretion, I
am willing to let you know, that my Birth is not Inferior to yours; that I
have a Fortune sufficient to make you live with as great Magnificence as any
Prince in the Kingdom; that I am rather Handsome than Ill-favored; and as for
Wit, you have too much of that your self not to discover whether I have any or
no. She had no sooner made an end of her Speech but the withdrew, leaving Don
Carlos with his Mouth open, ready to answer her; so very much in love with a
Person he never saw, and so perplexed about this odd way of Proceeding, which
might prove at last to be a Cheat, that he stood on the same place for above a
Quarter of an Hour, not knowing what to think of this extraordinary Adventure.
He was not ignorant that there were a great many Princesses and Ladies of
Quality in Naples; but he knew likewise, that there were abundance of greedy
Courtezans, eager after Strangers, great Jilts, and the more dangerous, as they
were Handsome. I cannot positively tell whether he had Supped, or went to bed
without Supper.

Neither do I care to imitate the Writers of Romances, who mark with great
exactness all the hours of the Day, and make their Hero's rise betimes, relate
their Adventures by Dinnertime, eat but little at Dinner, then resume their
Story after Dinner, or retire into the thickest part of a Wood, in order to
entertain their own selves, unless when they have something to say to the Rocks
and Trees: As Supper-time, they make them repair at the usual Hour, to the
place where they Diet, there they sigh and look pensive, instead of eating; and
thence they go to build Castles in the Air on some Terrass-walk that looks
toward (the Sea, whilst the Trusty Squire reveals, that his Master is such a
one, Son to such a King; that he is the best Prince alive, and tho he be still
the handsomest of all Mortals, that he was quite another Man before Love had
disfigured him.) To return to my story, Don Carlos repaired the next day to his
Post, where the invisible Lady waited his coming: She asked him if he had not
been much perplexed about their last Conversation, end if he had not doubted
the truth of what she told him. Don Carlos, without answering her question,
desired her to tell him what danger she feared in discovering her self, since
they were upon even Terms; and that the end of their Amors being honorable,
it would have the approbation of every Body? The danger is very great, and you
will have it in time, said the invisible: Once more be satisfied that I am
true, and that in the account I gave you my self, I was rather modest than
vain^ Don Carlos did not press her any further, other Conversation which
continued some time longer, increased the mutual Love they had for each other;
and so they parted, with promise to meet every Day, ^ at the appointed hour and
place. The next day after there was a great Ball at the Viceroy's, where Don
Carlos hoped to know his invisible Charmer; in the mean time, he endeavored to
know at whose House she gave him those favorable Audiences, and was told by
the Neighbors, that the House belonged to an old Lady, Widow to a Spanish
Captain, who had neither Daughters nor Neeces, and lived very retired. He
desired to wait on her, but she sent him word, that since her Husband died, she
admitted of no Visits, when still perplexed him more and more^^ Don Carlos went
in the Evening to the Viceroy's, where you may imagine there was a very fine
and numerous Assembly, and nicely observed all the Ladies, (...) hopes to find
out his unknown Mistress. He engaged in Conversation with several, but was
disappointed in his search. A^ last he ke^^ close to a Marquis's Daughter, of I
know not what Marquisdom, for it is the most dubious thing in the World,
especially at that time, when every body sets up for a Marquess. She was young
and handsome, and her Voice not unlike that of the Person he looked for: But at
the long run^ he found such great disproportion betwixt her Wit and his
Invisible's that he was sorry that in so little time, he had made such progress
with this fine Lady, that without any flattery to himself, he had reason to
believe she did not hate him. They danced several times together, and the Ball
being over, to the small satisfaction of Don Carlos, he took his leave of his
Captive, whom he left full of Pride; for having had to her self in so fine an
Assembly, a Cavelier who was envied by all the Men and esteemed by all the
Women. As soon as he came out of the Ball, he went in great have to his House
to take Arms, and from thence to the fatal Gra^e, which was not far off: His
Lady, who was there already, asked him news of the Ball, although she had been
there her self. He told her very ingenuously, that he had danced with a very
beautiful Person, and entertained her all the time the Ball lasted. She asked
him several questions in relation to her which discovered her jealousy: and as
for Don Carlos, he let her understand that he begun to doubt her Quality, by
reason she was not at the Ball; she having taken notice of it, used all the
charms of her Wit to remove his Suspicio^s, and favored him as far as 'twas
posible, in a Conversation that past with a Grate between; adding withal, that
in a short time she would become visible. Hereupon they parted: Don Carlos very
much in doubt whether he ought to believe her, and she somewhat jealous of the
fine Person, whom he entertained during the Ball. The next day Don Carlos going
to hear Mass at a certain Church, the Name of which I have forgot, offered Holy
Water to two Ladies veiled, who went to take some at the same time with him:
She who appeared in the better Clothes of the two told him, she never accepted
of any Civility, from one with whom she had a quarrel to decide. If you are not
too much in have, answered Don Carlos, you may have Satisfaction this very
Moment. Well, said the unknown Lady^ follow me then into the next Chapel. She
led the way to it, and Don Carlos^ followed (...) very much in doubt whether
she was his unknown Mistress^ for^ though her shape was the same, yet he found
some difference in their Voices, this new Lady speaking something thick^ This
is the substance of what she told him after she had shut ^her self with him in
the Chapel. All the City of N^ples, Signior Don Carlos talks of the high
Reputation you have gained during that little time you have been here, and
every Body looks upon you, as the most accomplished Gentleman in the World: The
only thing that People wonder at is, your not taking notice that there are in
this City some Ladies of Quality and Merit, who have a particular esteem for
you; they have discovered it to you as far as Decency will allow, and though
it is their eager desire to make you sensible of it, yet they had rather you had
not taken notice of it through insensibility, than if you despised their Favor
through indifference. Among the rest, there is one of my Acquaintance who has so
much value for you, as to hazard her own Reputation, to ^ell you, that your
Night-Adventures are discovered; that you rashly engage in an Amor with one
you do not know, and that since your Mistress conceals her self, she must
either be ashamed of her Lover, or afraid of not deserving to be beloved her
self, I question not but the Object of your Contemplative Love, is a Lady of
great Quality and Wit; and that your fancy has framed such a Mistress, as is
worthy of Adoration upon all Accounts: But Signior Don Carlos, believe not your
Imagination at the expense of your Judgment; trust not a Person who conceals
her self, and engage no more in those Night-Conversations. But why should I
disguise my self any longer? I my self am jealous of your Phantom: I cannot
bear you should speak with her, and since I have declared my self so far, I
will so thwart all her Designs, that I shall carry the Prize, to which I have
as much Right as she, since I am not inferior to her either in Beauty Riches^
Quality, or any thing that can bespeak Love: If you are Wise, you will make use
of my Advice^ As ^he was speaking these last Words, the went away without
giving Don Carlos time to answer her. He was going to follow her, but he met at
the Church Gate, a Man of Quality, who engaged him in a tedious Conversation,
and of whom he could not rid himself. ^he reflected the remainder of the day
upon this Adventure, and suspected at first the Lady of the Ball, to be the
veiled Person that appeared last to him: But then calling to mind that the
showed abundance more Wit, than he had found in the other, he was at a loss
what to think of it, and wished almost not to be engaged with his unknown
Mistress, that he might give up himself entirely to this last: But then again,
considering that he knew her no better than his invisible, whose Wit had
charmed him in all the Conversation he had with her, he firmly resolved to be
constant to his first Choice, without minding in the least the Threats of the
last Lady; for he was not to be wrought upon by Fear or Compulsion. That very
Night he failed not to repair to the Grated Window at the usual Hour, where in
the height of the Conversation with his Mistress, he was seized by four strong
Men in Masks, who having Disarmed him, carried him by force into a Coach that
waited for them at the end of the Street. I leave the Reader to think, how many
abusive Names he gave to those Men in Disguise, and how he Reproached them for
attacking him to Disadvantage on his side: Nay, he endeavored to win 'em by
promises, but instead of persuading them, he only made them take more care of
him, and put him out of hopes of being able to show either his Strength or
Courage. In the mean^time the Coach and six Horses drove on a full Trot, and
having got out of the City after an hours Riding, came into a great House, the
Gate of which was kept open in order to receive it. The four Maskers alighted
with Don Carlos, holding him under the Arms like an Ambassador, introduced to
salute the Grand Signior: He was carried up one pair of Stairs in the same
manner, where two Gentlewomen in Masks came to receive him at the door of a
large Room, each a Candlestick in her Hand, and the four Men in Disguise took
their leave of him with a profound Reverence. It Is probable they left him
neither Sword not Pistol, and that he did not forget to thank 'em for their
extraordinary care of his Person: And yet perhaps he never thought on it; not
but that he was a Man of good Breeding, but upon a Surprise, a flip in point of
Civility ought to be forgiven. Neither will I tell you, whether the
Candlesticks the Gentlewomen had in their Hands were Silver; that they were at
least, if not rather Silver-guilt engraven. As for the Room, it was the most
Magnificent in the World, and if you desire it, as well furnished as some
Apartments of our Romances; Namely the Ship of Zelman in Polexander; the Palace
of Ibrahim in the Illustri^us Bassa, or the Room wherein the King of Assyria
received Mandane in the Cyrus, which together with the others I named before,
is certainly a Book that has the best Furniture in the World. Now imagine what
Surprise our Spaniard was in, to find himself in this stately Apartment with
two speechless Gentlewomen in Masks, who Conducted him into another Chamber,
still better furnished than the great Room, and there left him all alone. Had he
been of Don Quixot's Humor, he would have found sufficient Matter to please
his Fancy; and imagined himself to be no less than Espla^dian or Amadis: But
our Spaniard was no more concerned at it, than if he had been in his Inn, save
only that he had a great Regret for his Invisible Lady; and as he kept his
Thoughts continually employed about her, he found that Chamber more Melancholy
than a Prison, which looks never pleasant, but on the outside. He was easily
persuaded, that these who had provided him so fair a Lodging, were none of his
Enemies; and doubted not, but the Lady who spo^e to him the day before in the
Church, was the Conjurer that raised all those Enchantments. He admired within
himself the Fancy of Women, and how soon they put their designs in Execution;
as for him, he resolved to wait patiently the end of this Adventure, and be
Faithful to his invisible Mistress, in spite of all the Threats and Promises he
might receive in his new Lodging. A little while after, Servants in Masks, and
in very good Clothes came to lay the Cloth, and then served up Supper.
Everything belonging to it was Magnificent; Music and Persumes were not
forgotten; and Don Carlos not only gratifyed his Smelling and Hearing, but his
Taste also; for he eat and drank, more than I thought a Man in his condition
could have done! But what is impossible to so great a Courage! I forget to tell
you that he washed his Mouth; for I am informed he took great care of his
Teeth. The Music played yet a while after Supper, and all being withdrawn, Don
Carlos fetched many a turn about the Room, reflecting on all these
Enchantments, or perhaps on something else; then came in two Gentlewomen and a
Dwarf all in Masks, who without asking him whether he had a mind to go to Bed,
spread a Magnificent Toilet, in order to undress him. He complied with them in
every thing. The Gentlewomen turned down the Bed-Cloaths, and then withdrew:
The Dwarf pulled off his Shoes, Stockings, or Boots, and then his other
Clothes; all which being done without exchanging a word, Don Carlos went to
Bed, and slept pretty well for a Man in Love. At break of Day he was waked by
the singing of Birds, that flutt^r'd in an Aviary; the Dwars came to wait upon
him, land brought him the finest Linen in the World, and the best washed and
perfumed: If you think it fit, I shall not mention what he did till Dinner,
(which was at least as good as Supper has been) but pass to the first breaking
of that profound Silence, which had been observed to that very hour. A
Gentlewoman in a Mask began to speak, by asking him if he would be pleased to
see the Mistress of that Enchanted Palace. Don Carlos said, the should be
welcome: And a little while after she came in, attended^ by four Gentlewomen
very richly Dressed. Such are not Cythera's Charms,
When Dressed in Gay and Loose Attire,
She fly^s to a New Lovers Arms,
Upon the Wings of soft desire.
Never had our Spaniard seen a Person of more Majestic M^in^ than this unknown
Urganda. He was so Transported, and Surpised at the same time, that he
stumbled at every Bow and Step he made, as he led her into the next Room,
whither she directed him.

All the fine things he had seen in the other Rooms, I mentioned before, were
nothing in comparison to what he found in this last, which still received a new
brightness from the Lady in a Mask. They walked on the finest Foot-Carpet that
ever was seen, since Foot-Carpets have been in Fashion: There the Spaniard was
placed on an Arm-chair in spite of himself and the Lady sitting by her self, on
I know not how many fine Cushions over against him, she ravished his Ears with
a Voice as sweet as an Harpscical, speaking to him to this effect. I doubt not,
Seignior Don Carlos, but you are much surpised with what has hapn'd to you in
my House, since yesterday; but if all that is not able to move you, yet by it
you may see I am as good as my Word; and from what I have done, you may guess
what I am able to do. Perhaps my Rival both by her Artifice, and the Advantage
she has of having Attack^ you first, has made her self Absolute Mistress of
that Heart, which I pretend to dispute with her: But a Woman is not to be
Discouraged by the first Disappointment; and if my Fortune, which is not to be
despis'd^ with all that goes along with my Person, cannot persuade you to love
me; yet I shall have the Satisfaction of not concealing my self out of Shame or
Deceit, and to choose to be Despised through my Defects, rather than beloved
through my Artifice. As she spoke these last Words, she pulled of her Mask, and
showed Don Carlos the Heavens with all their Glories for if you please, a
Heaven in Miniatu^e: The finest Head in the World, supported by the best shape
he ever admired before ^ in short, (...): Person all over Divine. By the
freshness of her Complexion, one would not have thought her to be above sixteen
years of Age; but by a certain free and Majestic Air, which young: Persons
generally want, she appeared to be near twenty. Don Carlos paused a while
before he answered her, being almost angry with his invisible Lady, who
hindered him from surrendring^: himself (...) to the finest Person he ever saw,
and di^bious what he should say or do: At last, after an inward Conflict, which
lasted so long, as to make the Mistress of the enchanted Palace uneasy, he
took a firm Resolution not to conceal from her his inmost^ Thoughts; which
without any manner of question, was the best thing he ever did in his Life.
This is the answer^ he gave ^her, which some have found a little too blunt.
Madam, I could not but own my self extreme happy in your Esteem, if my S^^^s
would suffer me to love you. I see well enough, that I leave the finest Person
in the Universe, for one who perhaps is only such (...) Fancy; but, Madam,
would you think me worth your Affection, if you found me capable of Infidelity?
And how can I be Faithful, if I love you? Therefore, Madam, pity me, but blame
me not: Or rather let us pity each other, and complain both; you of not
obtaining what you desire, and I of not seeing what I love. He uttered these
words with such a Melancholy Face, that the Lady might easily take notice, he
spoke his true Sentiments. She used all the Arguments she could think of to
persuade him, but he was deaf to her Prayerss and unconcerned at her Tears. She
renewed the Attack several times, but met still with a stout Resistance. At
last she began to Revile and Reproach him, and told him, What Rage and
Jealousy Suggest^
When they possessed a Lovesick Breast^
and there she left him, not to pick straws, but to curse a hundred times his
Misfortune, which proceeded only from being too Happy. A Gentlewoman came a
little while after to acquaint him, that he had the liberty to walk in the
Garden. He Traversed all these fine Apartments, without meeting with any Body,
till he came to the Staircase, at the foot of which he saw ten Men in Masks,
who kept the Door, armed with Pertizans and Carbines. As he was crossing the
Court to go into ^he Garden, one of the Gentlemen of the Guard accosted him
without looking him in the Face, and told him, as tho he feared to be heard:
That an old Gentleman had trusted him with a Letter, which he promised to
deliver into his own hands, though his Life must answer for it, if he should be
discovered; but that a Present of twenty Pistols, and a promise of as many
more, made him run all Hazards. Don Carlos promised to be Secret, and went
strait into the Garden, where he read the following Letter.

You may judge what pain I am in, since I lost you, by that you ought to feel
your self, if you love me as much as I do you. However, my uneasiness is
something abated, since I am informed of the place where you are. It Is the
Princess Porcia who stole you away; she is a Woman that sticks at nothing to
please her self, and you are not the first Rinaldo, of that dangerous Armida.
But I will soon break all her Enchantments, and disingage you from her Arms, to
receive you into mine, which Favor you will deserve, if you are as constant as
I wish you to be.

The Invisible Lady.


Don Carlos was so Transported with Joy, to receive the News from his Lady,
with whom he was really in Love, that he kissed the Letter a hundred times over,
and came back to the Garden Door, to Recompense the Messenger with a fine
Diamond Ring he had on his Finger. He walked a little longer in the Garden,
still wondering at the Princess Porcia, whom he often heard People report to be
a young rich Lady, of the best Families in the Kingdom; and as he was a Man of
strict Virtue, he conceived such an Aversion for her, that he resolved to break
out of his Prison, even at the hazard of his Life. As he came out of the
Garden, he met a Gentlewoman unmaskt, (for from that time forward, every Body
went barefaced in the Palace) who came to ask, if he would be pleased to have
her Mistress eat with him? And I leave you to think whether he answered, she
should, be Welcome. A little while after they served up Supper, or Dinner; for
I have forgot which of the two it ought to be. Porcia appeared more bright and
handsome, I said just now, than Venus Citherea, and it will not be amiss, if for
Variety sake, I say now, than an Angel: She was charming in every respect, all
the time they were at Table; and the Spaniard discovered so much Wit in her,
that he was in a manner sorry, to find so many excellent Qualities, so ill
bestowed on a Person of so high a Degree. He did all he could to appear in good
Humor, and force a pleasing Countenance, although he was continually thinking
upon his unknown Mistress; and burnt with Impatience to return to the
Lattice-window. As soon as the Table was cleared, they were left by themselves,
and because Don Carlos spoke not a word, either out of respect, or only to
oblige the Lady to speak first, she broke silence in these words. I know not
whether I ought to hope something form the Gaiety I Fancy I have discovered in
your Face; and whether mine, which you have seen already, does seem handsome
enough to you, as to make you doubt, whether that of your Invisible Mistress,
has more Charms to Captivate your Heart. I do not conceal what I designed to
present you with, because I would not have you repent the accepting of my
Present; and though a Person who is used to be instructed by others, be apt to
be offended at a Denial; yet I will forgive you, provided you repair your past
Offense, by giving me what I have more right to, than your Invisible: Therefore
tell me your last Resolution, that if in case (...) be not in my behalf, I may
find out new Reasons, strong enoug^ to Combat those, which I think I had to
love you. Don Carlos thought she should have gone on with her Speech, but
fe^^^ng she spoke no more, and that with Eyes fixed to the Groun^^^ she expected
her Doom from his Mouth; he followed his former Resolution of telling her
frankly, that he could never be hers, which he did in these words^ Madam,
before I answer what you would know of me, I must desire you, that with the
same frankness you expect from me, you would be pleased to tell me your
Sentiments, about what I am going to propose to you. Suppose, added he, you had
engaged a Man to love you, and that by all the Favors a Lady can grant without
wronging her Virtue, you had obliged him to swear an Inviolable Fidelity; would
you not account him the basest and most treacherous of Mankind, if he should
fail in his Promise? And were I not that Villain, and that Traitor, if I should
leave for you, a Person who has reason to think I love her? He was going to
frame abundance of Logical Arguments, in order to convince her; but she did not
give him time, and rising abruptly from her Seat, told him: That she plainly
saw the Drift of his Discourse; that she could not but admire his Constancy,
though so much opposite to her own quiet; that she would set him at Liberty, and
that she only desired him to stay till Night, to go back in the same manner he
came. While she was speaking, she held her Hankerchief to her Eyes, as though
she designed to conceal her Tears, and left the Spaniard a little concerned;
but yet so Transported with Joy for being again at Liberty, that he had not
been able to conceal it, had he been the greatest Hypocrite in the World; and I
verily believe, that had the Lady taken notice of it, she would certainly have
scolded at him for it. I know not whether 'twas long before Night came, for as
I told you before I don't trouble my self any more, about marking the Times or
Hours; you must be contented to know that Night came at last, and that he went
into a close Coach, and was set down at his Lodgings, after a pretty long way.
As he was the best Master in the World, so his Servants were like to die with
joy at the sight of him, and almost stifled him with their Embraces; but they
did not enjoy him long; for having provided himself with Arms, and taken two of
his stoutest Men along with him, he presently went to the Grated-Window in such
great have, that those who accompanied him, had much ado to keep pace with
him. He had no sooner given the usual Signal, but his Invisible Deity
communicated her self to him: And they exchanged such soft and tender
Expressions, that I cannot forbear weeping whenever I think on 'em. At last^ the
Lady told him, she was lately Affronted in that House, and had sent for a Coach
in order to leave it; but because it might be a long while a coming, she
desired him to send for his, which might be sooner got ready; and that she
would carry him to a place, where she would no longer conceal her Face from
him. The Spaniard needed no farther Entreaty, but ran like a Madman to his
Men, whom he left at the end of the Street, and sent for his Coach in all have.
The Coach being come, the Invisible Lady kept her Word, and went into it with
Don Carlos. She directed the Coachman which way he should drive, and bid him
stop at a great House, into which the Coach went by the light of several
Flamboys, which were lighted at their Arrival. The Cavalier leading his Lady,
went up stairs to a very large Room, where he was a little uneasy, because she
did not pull off her Mask. At last several Gentlewomen being come to receive
them, each a Candlestick in their Hands, the Lady was Invisible no longer; and
pulling off her Mask, she let Don Carles see, that the Lady at the
Grated-Window, and the Princess Porcia, were but one Person. I will not
endeavor to describe the pleasant Surprise of the Spaniard: The fair
Neapolitan told him, she had stolen him away a second time to know his last
Resolution; that the Lady at the Lattice had made over to her all her
Pretensions, and added a thousand Expressions, no less obliging than ingenious.
Don Carlos threw himself at her Feet, embraced her Kness and devoured as one
may say, her Hands with Kisses: By that means avoiding all the Impertinence and
Nonsense, which People generally speak when they are Transported with Joy. The
Raptures of his Passion being over, he used all his Wit, and Eloquence to extol
the agreeable Caprice of his Mistress, and expressed himself so well to her
Advantage, that he confirmed her, she was not mistaken in her Choice. She told
him, she had been unwilling to trust any Body but her self in a thing, without
which she could never have loved him; and that she would never have bestowed
her self upon a Man less constant than himself. Thereupon the Princess Porcia's
Relations came in, having had notice given them of her Design: And as they were
the chief Men in the Kingdom, they easily obtained a Dispensation from the
Archbishop for their Marriage. The same Night the Ceremony was performed by the
Parson of the Parish, who was an honest Priest, and a good Preacher; and so
'twere needless to ask whether he made a fine Exhorration upon the Subject.
It Is said, they got up late the next day, which I am inclined to believe. The
News was soon spread about, at which the Viceroy, a near Relation of Don
Carlos, was so overjoyed, that the public Rejoycings began anew in Naples,
where to this day they talk of Don Carlos of Arragon, and of his Invisible
Mistress.

CHAP. X.
How Ragotin received a Blow with a Busk on the Fingens.
RAgotin's Story received a general Applause, and he valued himself as much
upon it, as if it had been his own; which swelling his natural Pride, he begun
to treat the Men-Players with Contempt, and then accosting the Women, he took
their Hands without their consent, and offered to feel their Breasts; a piece
of Country Gallantry, which shows more a Satyr than a Gentleman. Mistress Star
contented her self to get her soft, fair Hands from his dirty rough Clutches;
but Mistress Angelica her Companion, gave him a smiling wrap on the Fingers
with her Busk. He left 'em abruptly, without so much as speaking a word,
glowing with Rage and Confusion, and returned to the Man's Company, where every
one spoke as fast as he could, without minding what the rest said. Ragotin
silenced most of 'em, by asking 'em with a Superior Voice, what they thought of
his Novel. A young Man, whose Name I forgot; answered him bluntly, it was no
more his, than any Body's else in the Company, since he had it out of a Book;
Whereupon he pulled one which stuck out of Ragotin's Pocket, who scratched his
Hands to get it from him; but in spite of Ragotin, he put it into another Man's
Hands, from whom Ragotin, endeavored to snatch it, to as little purpose, the
Book having got by this time into a third Man's Hands; in the same manner it
passed to five or six different Hands, which Ragotin could not reach, because
he was the shortest Man in the Company. At last having stretched himself five
or six times in vain, torn half a dozen Cuffs, and scratched as many Hands, and
the Book still traveling about through the middle Region of the Chamber, poor
Ragotin, who saw every Body laugh at his Expense, rushed like a Madman upon
the first Author of his Confusion, and dealt him several blows on his Belly and
his Thighs, not being able to reach higher. The Hands of his Adversary, who had
the Advantage of the Place, fell five or six times so perpendicular, and so
heavy on the top of his Head, that the Crown of his Hat sunk down to his very
Chin; which so shook the seat of his Reason, that the poor little Man did not
know where he was. To complete his Defeat, his Antagonist at parting, gave him
a sound kick on the Head, which after a very sudden Retrogradation, made him
fall on his Breech, at the Women-Players Feet. Now if possible, I would have
you to imagine the Rage and Fury of a little Man, more proud than all the
Barbers in the Kingdom, at a time when he was Cock-a-hoop about his Story; and
that too, before Players, to whom he designed to make Love; as you shall see
anon, though he was yet ignorant, which of 'em had a greater Title to his
Heart. To speak the Truth, his little Body thus tumbled on his Breech, did so
lively represent the Fury of his Soul, by the different Motions of his Arms and
Legs, that though his Face could not be seen, because his whole Head was enchas'd
in his Hat, yet all the Assistants thought fit to join together, and make as it
were a Barrier 'twixt Ragotin and his Adversary, who by this means got away,
whilst the charitable Women-Players raised the poor little Man, roaring like a
Lion in his Hat, which stopped his Eyes and his Mouth, and hindered him from
fetching his Breath. Now the difficulty was how to pull off his Hat; for its
Crown being in form of a Butter-pot, and the Mouth of it narrower than the
Bottom, God knows whether a Head that got it in by force, and whose Nose was so
very large, was able to get out of it the same way. This Misfortune occasioned
a great good; for in all probability his Anger was at the highest, and without
doubt, its Effects had been answerable to it, had not his Hat which suffocated
him, made him consult his own Preservation, rather than to contrive the
Destruction of another. He did not cry for Help, because he had not the use of
his Tongue: But when they perceived that he lifted up in vain his trembling
Hands to his Head, in order to set it at Liberty, and stamped the Floor with
Rage and Indignation, for tearing his Nails to no purpose, they all bent their
Thoughts on his Relief. The first Efforts they made to pull off his Hat, were
so violent, that he thought they were going to pluck his Head from his
Shoulders: At last being almost spent. he made signs with his Fingers to have
his Hat cut with a pair of Cizars. Mistress Cave unclapst those she wore on her
Girdle, and Rancour who was to perform the Operation, having made a show of
making the Incision over against his Face, (which did not a little fright him)
at last he slit his Hat behind his Head, from top to bottom. As soon as he had
given vent to his Face, all the Company fell a laughing to see it so bloated,
as if it was ready to burst, for the vast quantity of Spirits that flushed to
it; and besides, his Nose was Excoriated. However, the Jest had gone no
farther, had not a bungling Tailor advised him to get his Hat Fine-drawn. This
unseasonable Advice so revived his Anger, which was not entirely extinguished,
that he laid hold of one of the Andirons, and threatening to fling it amidst the
Company, put the stoutest of 'em all in such a Fright, that every one ran to
the Door, in order to avoid the impending blow of the Andiron; they pressed so
much upon one another, that not above one was able to go out; and that too by a
Fall, his sparr'd Legs having entangled themselves with those of the rest.
Ragotin fell a laughing in his turn, which gave all the Company fresh Courage;
they returned him his Book, and the Players lent him an old Hat. He fell into a
violent Passion against the Man who used him so scurvily; but being more vain
than Revengeful, he told the Players, with the Air of one who was going to
promise 'em some extraordinary thing; that he had a mind to make a Play out of
his story, and would contrive it so well, that he was sure to get as much
Reputation by that single Piece, as other Poets had gained by several. Destiny
told him, the Story he related was very Entertaining, but not fit for the
Stage. Sure, said Ragotin, I hope you will not pretend to teach me; I would have
you to know, that my Mother was Seamstress to Garnier the Poet, and I my self
have one of his Ink-horns at home, Destiny replied, that Garnier would get no
Reputation by it, if he was to do it himself. But what Difficulty do you find
in it, asked Ragotin. The Difficulty, answered Destiny, is, that it cannot be
brought into a regular Play, without committing a great many Faults, both in
point of Decorum and Judgment. As for that, said Rogatin, a Man of my Parts,
may make new Rules when he pleases. Pray consider, added he, what a New and
Magnificent thing at once it would be, to represent a great Church-Gate on the
Front of the Stage, before which twenty Beaux more or less, with as many
Ladies, should speak a Thousand fine things to one another, would it not Ravish
all the Spectators with Admiration? I am so far of your Opinion, continued he,
that one ought to observe Decorum and good Manners, and therefore I would not
make my Actors speak within the Church. Destiny interrupted him, to ask him
where they could get so many Gentlemen and Ladies? And how do they do in
Colleges, said Ragotin, where they fight pitched Battles? I my self played at La
Flesche, the Overthrow at the Bridge de Se, added he; above a hundred Soldiers
of the Queen Mothers Party appeared on the Stage, besides those of the Kings
Army, which was more Numerous: And I rememeber, that by reason of a great
shower that spoiled the sport, 't was reported, that all the Feathers of the
Country-Gentry, which was borrowed on this Occasion, would never come to
themselves again. Destiny, who took great delight in hearing him say all these
Judicious things, replied, that Colleges had Scholars enough for that purpose,
whereas their Company did never consist in above seven or eight Persons:
Rancour, who, you know, was a malicious Dog, sided with Ragotin, the better to
help to make him ridiculous, and told his Comrade, he was not of his Oplnion:
that he had been a Player before him; that a Church-Gate would be the finest
Scene that ever was seen; and as for the necessary number of Gentlemen and
Ladies, that they might have some, and represent the rest with Pastboard. This
fine Expedient of Pastboard, invented by Rancour, set all the Company a
laughing: Ragotin laughed with the rest, and swore he knew it well enough, but
had a mind to keep it to himself. As for the Coaches, added he, Will it not be
a Novelty in a Play? I formermerly personated Tobiah's Dog, and did it so to
the Life, that the whole Audience was highly pleased with it, taking me to be a
real Dog. As for me, continued he, if we may judge of Things by the Effects
they work upon our Minds, I never saw Piramus and Thisbe acted, but I was less
concerned at Erasmus's Death, than frighted by the roaring of the Lion. Rancour
backed Ragotin's Reasons by others as ridiculous, and by that means ingratiated
himself so far with him, that Ragotin took him to Supper with him. All the
other Impertinents left also the Players at Liberty; who had much rather go to
Supper, than entertain the idle Coxcombs of the Town.

CHAP. XI.
Which contains what you will see, if you will take the Pains to read it.
RAgotin carried Rancour into a Tavern, where he called for the best Things the
House could afford. It Is thought he did not carry him to his own House, because
his Commons were but indifferent; but I will say nothing about it, for fear of
making rash Judgments; neither did I care to enquire into the Truth of the
Business, because I do not think it worth my while, especially having Matters
of far grater Importance to realte. Rancour, who was a Man of great
Discernment, and knew his Men at first sight, no sooner saw a Brace of
Partridges and a Capon served up for two People, but he began to think that
Ragotin had some Design or other, and did not treat him so well, either upon
account of his own Merit, or to repay the Complaisance he had for him, in
maintaining his Story to be a good Subject for a Play. He therefore expected to
hear some new Extravagance from Ragotin, who, however, did not discover his
Thoughts at first, but continued speaking about his Novel. He recited several
Lampoons he had made upon most of his Neighbors, upon some Cuckolds, that were
nameless; and upon some Women: He sung drunken Songs, and showed him abundance
of Acrosticks and Anagrams; which are generally the first things with which
your paltry Rhimers being to plague Men of Sense. Rancour made him a complete
Coxcomb; for he cried up all he heard, with Eyes lifted up to Heaven, and swore
like a losing Gamester, that he never heard any thing so fine: Nay, he was so
transported, that he made a show of pulling off his Hair. He told him now and
then, it is a great Misfortune both for you and us, that you do not leave all
other Business to write for the Stage; for in two or three Years time Corneille
would be no more talked of, than Hardy is now adays. I am, added he, an
absolute Stranger to Flattery; but to encourage you, I must needs own, I no
sooner saw you, but I read in your Face that you were a great Poet; and you may
know of my Comrades what I told 'em about it. I am seldom mistaken: I smell a
Poet at two Miles distance; and therefore as soon as ever I cast my Eyes on
you, I was acquainted with you, as well as if I had brought you up. All this
fulsom Stuff went down with Ragotin as glib as several Glasses of Wine, which
he drank at the same time, and which intoxicated his Brain, as much as
Rancour's Commendations swelled his Vanity. As for Rancour he eat and drank
very briskly, erying out now and then, for God's sake, Monsieur Ragotin,
improve your Talent: Once more let me tell you, you are much to blame, not to
make your Fortune and ours. For my part, I scraul a little Paper as well as
other People, but if I made Verses half so good as these you have been reading
to me, I should not be so hard put to it to keep Life and Soul together, but
would live upon my Income as well as Mondors. Therefore, Monsieur Ragotin, pray
write; and if this next Winter we do not eclipse the Companies of the Hostel de
Bourgoyne, and des Marez, may I never tread the Stage again without breaking
one of my Arms or Legs, I Will say no more, and so let us drink. He was as good as
his Word; and having pet a double Measure into a Glass, he drank Monsieur
Ragotin's Health to Monsieur Ragotin himself, who did him Reason accordingly,
and returned it with the Health of the (Women) Players. This he drunk Cap in
Hand, and in such a Rapture, that as he laid the Glass on the Table, he broke
its Foot, without taking notice on it. and went three or four times to set it
upright, but finding it impossible, he at last flung it over his Head, and
pulled Rancour by the Sleeve, to let him know he had the Honor of breaking a
Glass in drinking the Players Health: It vexed him a little that Rancour did
not laugh at it; but, as I said before, he was rather an envious than a risible
Animal. Rancour ask't him, What he thought of their Women? -- The little Man
blushed without giving him an Answer: But Rancour putting the same Question to
him again, at last, what by his Sturtering, his Blushing, and his broken
Speech, he let Rancour understand he liked one of the Players extremely. But
which of em? said Rancour. The little Man was so disordered for having said so
much, that he answered, I don't know -- Nor I neither, said Rancour. This Reply
cast him into greater Disorder; and, with a bewildered Look, he said, It Is,
it is -- He repeated the same Word five or six times over again; at which the
Stroller growing impatient, I like your choice, said he, she is a very beautiful
Person. This put him quite out of Countenance, insomuch that he could never
tell which he loved most; though it may be he knew nothing of it himself, or
that his Passion was rather Lust than Love. At last Rancour naming Mrs. Star to
him, he said, 'Twas she with whom he was in love: For my part, I verily
believe, that had he named either Angelica, or her Mother Cave, he had forgot
the Blow he had received with a Busk from the one, and the Age of the other,
and given himself, Body and Soul, to the very first that Rancour had named. So
great was the Trouble of Goatish Ragotin. The Stroller made him drink a great
Bumper, which carried off part of his Confusion, and pledged him with another;
which done, he looking about the Room, whispered, as though it were a great
Secret, though there was no Body. Well, your Wound is not mortal, and you have
addressed your self to one who is able to cure you, provided you will be ruled
by him, and keep Counsel, not but your Enterprise is very difficult; for Mrs.
Star is a very Tygress, and her Brother Destiny a Lion: But she does not see
Men every Day like you, and I know what I can do, Let Us drink out our Liquor,
and to morrow will be Day, They drank each a Glass of Wine, which interrupted
their Conversation for a while. After that Ragotin had recounted all his
Accomplishments and Riches, and told Rancour, that a Nephew of his was Clerk to
a Financier; that this Nephew had contracted a great Friendship with the
Partisan de Ralliere, during the time he was at Man's, to settle an
Excise-Office there; and by the means of his Nephew's Interest he endeavored
to give him Hopes that he would procure him such a Pension from the King as his
Players in Ordinary had. He told him likewise, That if any of his Relations had
Children, he would prefer 'em in the Church; because his Niece was married to
the Brother of a certain Miss, kept by the Steward of an Abbot of that
Province, who had good Livings in his Gift. Whilst Ragotin was thus relating
what great Interest he had, who the more he drank the more thirsty he grew, was
still filling both the Glasses, which were emptied in an instant, Ragotin not
daring to refuse any thing from the Hands of a Man from whom he expected such a
great piece of Service. In short, they swill'd till they had both their fill.
Rancour, according to his custom, grew more serious, and Ragotin so dull and
heavy, that he laid his Head down on the Table, and fell asleep. Rancour called
one of the Maids to make a Bed ready for him, because no Body was up at his
Inn. The Maid told him, she had as good make two, for she was sure Monsieur
Ragotin wanted one. In the mean time he slept and snor'd as well as ever he did
in his Life, for all the Noise they made while they were putting clean Sheets
to two of the three Beds that were in the Room: But when the Maid came to wake
him, and acquaint him his Bed was ready, he called her a Thousand Whores, and
threatened to beat her. At last Rancour, having turned him in his Chair toward
the Fire, at which the Sheets were air'd, he rubbed and opened his Eyes, and
suffered himself to be undrest without repining. They got him into his Bed as
well as they could; and Rancour, having first made the Chamber Door fast, went
into his. About an Hour after, Ragotin got up, to what purpose I never could
learn. He rambled a long time about the Room, not knowing where he was; and
having overturned all the Chairs and Tables he met in his Way, and tumbled down
himself several times, without being able to find his Bed again; he went at
last to Rancour's, and pulling his Bed-cloaths made him start out of his Sleep.
Rancour asked him, What he would have? I look for my Bed, said Ragotin -- It Is
on the Left Hand of mine, replied Rancour. The little drunken Man took to the
Right, and thrust himself betwixt the Rug and the Straw-bed of the third Bed,
which had neither Feather-bed, Quilt, nor Sheets, and there he slept all Night
very quietly till next Morning. Rancour got up and dressed himself before
Ragotin waked; and then asked him, Whether; 'twas to do Penance that he left
his Bed to sleep on Straw? Ragotin was positive that he never got up, and that
the Room must be haunted. The Inkeeper hearing this, stood up for the
Reputation of his House, and picking a Quarrel with Ragotin, threatened to sue
him for giving it an ill Name. But I have sufficiently exercised your Patience
with the tedious Story of Ragotin's Debauch, let us return to the Strollers Inn.

CHAP. XII.
A Combat in the Night.
I Am too much a Man of Honor not to advertise the Courteous Reader, that if
he be offended at all the silly Trifles he had already seen in this present
Book, he will do well not to go on with the reading of it; for, upon my
Conscience, he must expect nothing else, although the Book should swell to the
bigness of the Grand Cyrus: And if from what he had read, he doubts what will
follow, perhaps I am in the same Doubt as well as he: for one Chapter draws on
another, and I do with my Book as some do with their Horses they bestride,
having the Bridle on their Neck, and trusting to their good Conduct. But
perhaps I have a fixed Design, and without filling my Books with Examples for
Imitation, I shall instruct with Delight in the same manner as a drunken Man
creates in us an Aversion for Drunkenness, and may sometimes divert us by his
merry Impertinence. Let Us end this Moral Reflection, and return to our
Strollers, whom we left in the Inn. As soon as their Room was cleared, and
Rancour got with Ragotin, the Doorkeeper they left at Tours came into the Inn,
with a Horse laden with Goods, and sat down to Supper with 'em. By this
Relation, and what they learnt from one another, they understood how the
Intendant of the Province could do them no harm, having had much ado to escape
himself from the Hands of the boistrous Mob, with his Fuziliers. Destiny told
his Comrades how he got away with his Turkish Habit, with which he designed to
represent Marret's Soliman; and that being informed that the Plague was at
Alencon, he was come to Man's with Cave and Rancour, in the same Equipage we
have described in the beginning of these most true, though little Heroical
Adventures. Mistress Star acquainted 'em also with the good Offices she
received from a Lady at Tours, whose Name never came to my Knowledge, and how
by her Means she was conducted as far as a Village near Bonnestable, where she
sprain'd her Foot as she alighted off her Horse. She added that hearing the
Company was gone to Man's, she got her self carried thither in a Litter, which
the Lady of that Village lent her with a great deal of Civility. After Supper,
Destiny alone stayed in the Lady's Chamber; Cave loved him as if he had been
her own Son; Mistress Star was no less dear to her; and her Daughter and only
Heir Angelica, loved Destiny and Star, like a Brother and a Sister. She did not
yet exactly know who they were, nor upon what Account they turned Players; but
she had taken notice, that though they called one another Brother and Sister,
yet they were better Friends than near Relations, that Destiny paid to Star the
greatest Respect imaginable; that she was extreme modest and virtuous: and as
Destiny had a great deal of Wit, and seemed to have a liberal Education, so
Mistress Star looked more like a young Lady of Quality, than like a Stroller.
Now Destiny and Star were beloved by Cave and her Daughter^, because they
really deserved their Love both by their good Qualities, and the mutual
Friendship which they naturally had for two Players, who had as much Merit as
any in France, though they never had the good Fortune to tread either of the
two Theaters in Paris, which are the Non plus ultra of French Players. Those
who do not understand these three little Latin Words (which came so pat in my
way, that I could not refuse to place 'em here) may be pleased to ask some
Latinist of their Acquaintance the meaning of 'em. To end the Digression;
Destiny and Star did not scruple to express their mutual Fondness before Cave
and Angelica, and show the extreme Joy they had to see each other after so long
an Absence. They related, as pathetically as ever they could. how uneasy they
were about each other; and Destiny acquainted Mrs. Star, that the last time
they acted at Tours, he thought he spied their inveterate Persecutor amongst
the Crowd of their Auditors, although he had his Cloak about his Face; and that
as he went out of the City, not finding himself able to resist him, if he
should offer to attack him with his Force, he had disguised himself by putting
a great Patch on his Face. He told her afterward, how many Litters they met
with when they went to fetch her, adding, he was much mistaken if their common
Enemy was not the same unknown Man, who searched so nicely all the Litters, as
you have seen in the seventh Chapter. Whilst Destiny was speaking, poor
Mistress Star could not forbear shedding some few Tears: Destiny was sensibly
touched with 'em; and having comforted her as well as he could, he added, that
if she would suffer him to use the same Endeavors in seeking out their Enemy,
as he had used till then in avoiding him, he would soon free her from his
Persecutoins, or lose his Life in the Attempt. These last Words redoubled her
Grief: Destiny had not Courage enough not to grieve also; and Cave and her
Daughter, who were of a tender and compassionate Temper, grieved, either out of
Complaisance, or by Contagion, and I believe they did even weep. I cannot tell
whether Destiny wept, but this I know, that the Women and he were silent a long
while; and in the mean time every one wept as they thought fit. At last Cave
renewed the Conversation which Tears had interrupted, and reproached Destiny
and Star, that though during all the time they had lived together, they might
have seen how much she was their Friend, yet they reposed so little Confidence
in her and her Daughter, that they were still unacquainted with their Birth and
Quality; adding she had not met with Crosses enough in her Life, to be able to
advise unfortunate Persons, such as they seemed to be. To which Destiny
answered, that their not discovering themselves to her, was not out of any
Distrust, but because he thought the recital of their Misfortunes could not but
be very tedious; telling her withal, he would be ready to entertain her with
the Story of their Adventures, whenever she was willing to throw any time away
upon the hearing of it. Cave was glad of this Opportunity of satisfying her
Curiosity; and her Daughter, who had the same eager Desire, being sat near her
on Stat's Bed. Destiny was going to begin his Story, when they heard a great
Noise in the next Chamber. Destiny stood listening a little while; but the Noise
and the Squabble increased instead of ceasing, and some Body cried out, Murder,
Help, Murder -- Destiny with three Leaps got out of the Chamber, at the Expense
of his Doublet, which Cave and Angelica tore as they were going to stop him. He
went into the Chamber from whence the Noise came, which was so dark that he
could not see his own Nose; and where the Fisty-cuffs, Boxes on the Ears, and
several confused Voices of fighting Men and Women, together with the hallow
Noise of naked Feet stamping on the Floor, made an hideous and frightful
Uproar. He ran very rashly amongst the Combatants, and in one Moment received a
Cuff on one side, and a Box on the Ear on the other; which changed his good
Intention of parting those Hobgoblins, into a violent Thirst of of Revenge. He
began to set his Hands a-going. and made a Flourish with his two Arms, by which
many a maimed Chops were abused, as it afterward appeared by his bloody Fists.
the Scuffle lasted so long till he received twenty Cuffs more which he returned
with double the Number. In the heat of the Fight, he felt himself bit at the
Calf of the Leg, and clapping his Hands to it, he met with something hairy,
which he took to be a Dog; but Cave and her Daughter who appeared at the
Chamber Door with a Candle, like the fire of Saint (...) after a Storm, espied
Destiny, and let him see he was amidst seven Persons in their Shirts, who being
in close Conflict before, begun to let one another go, as soon as the light
appeared: This Tranquillity did not last long: The Innkeeper who was one of the
naked Combitants, grappl'd the Poet anew; Olive who was also amongst 'em, was
attacked by the Innkeeper's Man; another of the Combatants, Destiny went to
part em; whereupon the Hostess, who was the Animal that bit him, and whom he
took for a Dog, because she was bareheaded, and had short Hair, flew at his
Face, assisted by two Maids, as naked and bearheaded as her self. The Shreeks
and Cries filled the Air once more, the Cuffs and Boxes made the Room ring
again, and the Fight grew still warmer than before. At last several Persons who
waked at the Noise, came into the Field of Battle, parted the Combatants, and
procured a second Suspension of Arms. Now the question was to know the occasion
of the Quarrel, and what fatal Accident had brought seven naked Persons into
one Room. Olive, who seemed the least concerned of all, said, that the Poet was
gone out of the Room, and that he saw him come back as fast as he could run,
followed by the Innkeeper, who had a mind to beat him; that the Hostess
followed her Husband, and fell foul of the Poet; that as he was going to part
'em, a Servant and two Maids fell upon him; and that the Light happening to go
out at the same time, made the Fight last longer than 'twould have done. Now
'twas the Poet's turn to speak for himself: He said, that he had made two of
the finest Stanza's that ever were written, since Stanza's were in Fashion; and
fearing to lose 'em, he went to the Maid of the Inn for a Candle, which they
scornfully refused to give him; that the Innkeeper called him Rope-dancer,
which he returned by calling him Cuckold. He had no sooner spoke the word, but
the Host who was within reach, gave him a good slap on the Chops; you would
have thought they made a fighting Consort together; for as soon as the box on
the Ear was given, the Inn-keeper's Wife, his Man and his Maids rushed upon the
Strollers, who received 'em with sound Cuffs. This last Encounter was more
fierce and obstinate, that the other two. Destiny having closed with a lusty
Wench, and tucked up her Smock, gave her a Thousand flaps on the Butrocks;
Olive, who saw the Company pleased with it, did the same to the other Maids.
The Innkeeper was busy with the Poet; and the Hostess, the most Furious of
all the Combatants, was seizd by some of the Spectarors, which made her fly
into such a Passion, that she cried out, Theves. Her Cries awaked La
Rappiniere, who lived over against the Inn. He caused the Door to be opened,
and judging by the Noise he heard, that there could be no less than seven or
eight People killed upon the Spot; he parted the Fray in the King's Name; and
having learnt the cause of all the Disturbance, he Exhorted the Poet not to
make any more Verses in the Nightime, and was like to beat the Innkeeper and
his Wife for giving a hundred abusive Names to the Players, whom they called
Jack-puddings and Tumblers, swearing withal, to turn them out of Doors the next
day; but La Rappiniere to whom the Innkeeper owed Money, threatened to Arrest
him, which threatening presently stopped his Mouth. La Rappiniere, went home
again, the rest returned to their Chambers, and Destiny to that of the Players,
where Cave desired him not to defer any longer, to give her the story of his,
and his Sisters Adventures. He told her, he was ready to satisfy her
Curiosity, and begun his Relation in the same manner you shall see in the next
Chapter.

CHAP. XIII.
The History of Destiny and Mistress Star.
I was born in a Village near Paris, and I might make you believe, that I came
of a very Illustrious Family, since no Body can disprove what a stranger says
of himself; but I am too Generous, and too much a lover of Truth, to deny the
meanness of my Extraction. My Father was one of the Topping, and most
Substantial Men in his Village, whom I often heard say, that he was a poor
Gentleman's Son; that he spent his Youth in the Wars, where having got nothing
but dry Blows, and empty Pockets, he betook himself to the Service of a rich
Parisian Lady, in the Quality of her Gentleman Usher; and that having scraped a
Sum of Money in his Place, (because he was also the Steward and Caterer of the
House, and had the knack of emptying his Mistress Purse to fill his own
Pockets) he Married an old Waiting Woman of the Family, who died soon afte^,
and left him all she got in her Service. Being soon weary of his condition of a
Widower, and no less of that of a Servant. he Married a Country-woman, who
furnished his Lady's House with Bread: And it is to this last Marriage I owe my
Birth. My Father was called Gariques; what Country he was of, I never could
learn; and as for my Mother's Name, it signifies nothing to my Story. Let it
suffice, that she was more coverous than my Father, and my Father more covetous
than she, and that they had both a pretty large Conscience. My Father had the
Honor of being the inventer of the piece of Flesh tied with a string to the
Pot-handle, which having boiled a considerable time, may be taken out again,
and serve several times to make Soop. I could tell a hundred more pieces of
Husbandry, which gained him with Justice, the Reputation of a Man of Wit and
Invention; but for fear of being Tedious, I will content my self with relating
only two, which may seem Incredible, though most certainly true. He bought up a
great quantity of Corn, with design to sell it very dear, if the year should
prove bad; but the Harvest being plentiful, and Corn falling in its Price, he
was so possessed by Despair, and the Devil, that he had a mind to hang himself.
One of his Neighbors who happened to be in the Room when he entered upon that
Noble Design, and had hid her self for fear of being seen, (for what reason, I
know not) was not a little Surpised, when she saw him hang on one of the
Joints of the Cieling. She ran to him, crying out, help, help; she ran to cut
the Rope, and by the help of my Mother, who came to the Noise, got it from his
Neck: Perhaps they repented the doing of so good an Action, for he beat 'em
both to Mummy; and made that poor Woman pay for the Rope she had cut, by
stopping some Money he owed her. His other Prowess is no less strange: He
grudged himself whatever he eat, and his Wife being brought to bed of a Boy,
the Fancy took him in the Crown, that she had Milk enough to Nourish both his
Son and himself; and hoped, that by sucking his Wife, he would save Bread, and
live upon a Food of easy Digestion. My Mother's Wit was much inferior to his,
though her Avarice was as great; but though she did not invent things as my
Father did, yet having once conceived 'em, she put 'em in execution more
exactly than he. She therefore tried to nourish both her Son and Husband with
her own Milk, and ventured also to feed upon it her self with so much
Obstinacy, that the little Innocent Creature was starved to Death; and my
Father and Mother so weakened, and so famished, that when they came to eat, they
Surfeited themselves, and fell both Sick upon it. Some time after my Mother
went with Child with me, and having happily brought forth a most unhappy
Creature; my Father went to Paris, to desire his Mistress to stand Godmother to
his Son, with an honest Churchman, residing at his Village where he had a
Benefice. As he was returning home in the Evening, to avoid the heat of this
Day, and passed through a great Strect in the Suburbs, the Houses whereof were
for the most part a building; he saw afar off by the Moonshine, something that
glister'd to his Eyes, as it was crossing of the Strect. He did not think it
worth his while to enquire what it was; but hearing the Groans of one in Pain,
at the same place where what he had seen vanished out of sight, he boldly
entered one of those unfinished Buildings, where he found a Woman sitting on
the Ground. The place she was in, received sufficient Light from the Moon, as
to let my Father perceive that she was very young, and very richly clad, having
a Gown of Silver Tissue, which was the glistering thing my Father saw a Moment
before. You must not question, but my Father, who did not want Resolution, was
less surpised than the young Lady; but she was in a condition, that nothing
worse could happen to her. This Consideration gave her the assurance to speak
first, and tell my Father, that if he was a Christian, he would take pity on
her; that she was in Labor ready to be brought to Bed, and the Maid she sent
for a ^usty Midwife, not returning, she slipped away from her House, without
waking any Body, her Maid having left the Door open, that she might come in
again without making a Noise. She had scarce made an end of this short
Relation, when she was delivered us a Child which my Father received into the
Lappet of his Cloak. He acted the Midwife as well as he could, and the young
Lady conjured him to carry away the little Creature with all speed, to take
care of it; and not to fail two days after, to go to an old Churchman she named
to him, who would give him Money, and all necessary Orders for the Nursing of
the Child. At this word Money, my Father who had a penurious Soul, was going to
display all the Eloquence of a Gentleman Usher, but she would not give him
time; she put into his hands a Ring, for a Token to the Priest he was to go to
from her; caused him to swaddle the young Creature in her Neck-handkerchief,
and sent him away in have, Maugre his unwillingness to leave her in the
condition she was in. I am inclined to believe, she had much ado to get home
again; as for my Father, he returned to his Village, gave the Child to his
Wife, and did not fail two days after, to go to the old Priest, and show him
the Ring. He learnt of him, that the Child's Mother was a young Lady of a very
good Family, and very rich, that she got this Child by a Scotch Lord, who was
gone into Ireland to raise Soldiers for the King's Service; and that this
Foreign Lord had promised her Marriage. Moreover the Priest told him, that by
reason of her precipitate Delivery, she was fallen desperate sick, and being in
that Extremity, she consest all to her Father and Mother, who instead of
Chiding her, endeavored to Comfort her, because she was an only Child; that
the thing was a Secret in the House, and afterward he assured my Father, that
if he would take care of the Child, and keep Council, his Fortune was made.
Thereupon he gave him fifty Crowns, and a bundle of all sorts of things
necessary for a Child My Father returned home after he had well Dined with the
Parson. I was put out to Nurse, and the Stranger kept at home in my stead. A
Month after the Scotch Lord came back, and having found his Mistress so very
ill, that she would not live much longer, he married her one day before she
died, and so was no sooner Husband, than Widower. He came two or three days
after to our Town, with the Parents of his Wife. There they began to weep
afresh, and were like to stif^le the Child with Kisses; my Father had reason to
be thankful to the Scotch Lord for his Generosity, and the Parents of the Child
did not forget him. They returned to Paris very much satisfied with the Care my
Father and Mother took of their Son, whom they would not yet take to Paris with
them, because the Marriage was still kept Secret, for some Reasons which never
came to my Knowledge. As soon as I was able to walk, my Father took me home, to
keep the young Earl of Glaris Company, (for so he was called by his Father's
Name). The Natural Antipathy which is said to have been between Jacob and Esau,
in the very Womb of their Mother, was never greater than that which was between
the young Earl and me. My Father and Mother loved him tenderly, and had an
Aversion for me, though I was the more hopeful Boy of the two: There appeared
nothing but Mean in him: As for me, I seemed to be what I was not, and rather
an Earl's Son than Gariquet's; and if I am at last no more than a wretched
Player, it is undoubtedly, because Fortune had a mind to be revenged upon
Nature, for designing to make me something without her help; or if you please,
because Nature is sometimes willing to favor those whom Fortune is cross to. I
shall pass over in Silence, the Infancy of two young Clowns, (for Glaris was
such by inclination, as much as my self) since our most Memorable Adventures
were nothing but abundance of Fisty-cuffs. In all the Quarrels we had together,
I always got the better of him, except when my Father and Mother sided with
him, which they did so often, and with so much Heat, that my Godfather Monsieur
Saint Sauveur by Name, was highly offended at it, and demanded me of my Father.
He made him a present of me with great Joy, and my Mother had yet less Regret
than he to lose me. Thus I was at my Godfathers well Clad, well Fed; much
Caressed, and never beaten. He spared no Cost to make me learn to Read and
Write; and as soon as I was fit to learn Latin, he obtained of the Lord of the
Village, who was a very civil Gentleman, and very Rich, that I should study
with two of his Sons, under a Learned Man he had from Paris, and to whom he
gave a very good Salary. This Gentleman, the Baron d'Arques by Name, took great
care to have his Sons well brought up. The eldest called Saint Far, was a
handsome Gentleman, but as untractably rough and brutish in his Nature, as ever
any Man was; to make amends, the young Brother was both handsomer than Saint
Far, and had a Vivacity of Mind, and a Greatness of Soul equal to the Beauty of
his Body. In short, I do not think there ever was a more hopeful young
Gentleman than Vervelle, for this was the younger Brother's Name. He honored
me with his Friendship, and as for me, I loved him like a Brother, and ever
respected him as a Master. As for Saint Far, he had none but ill Inclinations,
and I cannot better express the Sentiments he had both for his Brother and me,
than by telling you, that he loved not his Brother more than me, for whom he
had a great indifference; and that he hated me no more than he did his Brother,
whom he loved but little. His Diversions were indifferent from ours, for he
loved nothing but Hunting, and quoted Books of Morality; whereas Vervelle
seldom went out a Hunting, and took great delight in Reading, wherein I agreed
wonderfully with him, as in every thing else, without being put to the trouble
of doing any thing out of Complaisance, as in Duty I ought. The Baron d'Arques
had a large Library of Romances: Our Tutor who had never read any in his
College, who at first forbad us the reading of 'em and had condemned 'em a
hundred times before the Baron d'Arques, to render 'em as odious to him, as he
found 'em Delightful, grew at last so much in Love with 'em himself, that
having devoured both the old and the new ones, he confessed that the reading of
good Romances, was as Instructive as Pleasant, and no less proper to inspire
young People with Noble Sentiments, than the reading of Plutarch. He therefore
encouraged us to read 'em, as earnestly as he had discouraged us before, and
first of all advised us to peruse the Modern; but these were not yet suitable
to our Palate, and till we were fifteen, we were much more delighted by the
reading of Amadis de Gaul, than Astrea; and other fine Romances that have been
made since, by which the French have shown to the World, as by a thousand
things besides; that if they do not invent so much as other Nations, yet they
bring the Inventions of others to a far greater Persection. We therefore
bestowed upon the reading of Romances, the greatest part of the time we had
allowed us for Diversion. As for Saint Far, he called us the Ruyters, and went
abroad every day either to Hunt, or to beat the poor Country Fellows, which he
did with wonderful Succes^. The Inclination I had to do well, gained me the
Favor of the Baron d'Arques, who loved me no less, than if I had been his near
Relation, He would not suffer me to leave his Sons, when he sent 'em to the
Academy, but sent me thither along with 'em; rather as a Companinon, than a
Servant. There we stayed about two year to learn our Exercises, at the end of
which time, a Man of Quality, Related to the Baron d'Arques, raising Soldiers
for the Venetians, Saint Far and Verville persuaded their Father to let 'em go
to Venice with their Kinsman. The good Gentleman desired that I should
accompany 'em still, and Monsieur de Saint Sauveur my Godfather, who loved me
extremely, gave me very gener ously Bills of Exchange for a considerable Sum,
to make use of (...) in case those I had the Honor to accompany, should be
unwilling to bear my Charges. We went the longest way about on purpose to see
Rome, and the other fine Cities of Italy, in each of which we staid a
considerable time, excepting those which are in the Spaniard's Hands. I fell
sick at Rome, and the two Brothers went on their Journey; the Gentleman under
whose Conduct they were, being willing to lay hold on the Opportunity of the
Pope's Galleys, which were putting out to Sea to join the Venetian Army near
the Streights of the Dardanells, where they waited for the Turks. Verville was
extraordinary sorry to leave me, and I almost mad to part from him at a time,
when by my Services I might in some measure have deserved the Love he had for
me. As for Saint Far, I believe he lest me with as much indifference, as if he
had never seen me; and I never thought on him, but only because he was Brother
to Verville, who left me as much Money as he could spare; but whether Saint.
Far was consenting, I cannot tell. Thus I was sick at Rome, having no other
Acquaintance besides my Landlord, a Fleming Apothecary, who took extraordinary
care of me during my Illness, and who, as far as I can judge, had more Skill in
Physic, than the Italian, Doctor, who looked after me, At last I recovered,
and gathered strength enough to go and view the most Remarkable Places in Rome,
where Stranger's find abunda^^ly wherewithal to entertain their Curiosity. I
took a singular delight in veiwing the Vines, (thus are called several Gardins,
finer than the Tuilleri^s in Paris, which Cardinals and other Persons of
Quality keep with much cost in Rome, rather out of Vanity, than for their own
Entertainment, since they never, or at least very seldom, go there themselves,)
One day as I was walking in one of the finest, I saw at the turning of a Wall,
two Women very genteelly dressed, whom two young Frenchmen stopped, and would not
let go, unless the youngest of 'em unvailed her Face. One of those two
Frenchmen who looked like the Master of the other, had even the insolence to
offer to unvail her by force, whilst his Man held the other, who was barefaced
I was not long debating what I should do on this occasion, but told presently
to those rude Men, that I was resolved not to suffer the Violence they offered
to those Women. They were both very much surpised, for I spoke with such
Resolution, as would have daunted 'em, had they had their Swords as well as my
self. The two Women came over to me, and the young Frenchman choosing rather to
be balk'd than beaten, told me as he went away; Sir, for all your Hectoring, we
shall meet you in some place or other, where the Swords shall not be all on one
side. I answered I would not hide my self: His Man followed him, and so I
staid with the two Women. She that had no Vail on, looked to be about five and
Thirty: She returned me thanks in good French, without any Mixture of Italian,
and told me amongst other things, that if all Frenchmen were like me, the
Italian Women would not scruple to live after the French (...). After that, to
reward the Service I had done 'em, she added; that since I hindered that rude
Frenchman from seeing (...) Daughter against her Will, 'twas reasonabled should
see her of her own accord; Therefore, said the, (...) take up your Vail, and
let the Gentleman know that we are not altogther unworthy of the Honor of
being under his Protection. She had scarce done speaking, ^^t her Daughter drew
her Vail, or rather discovered a Sun which dazzled my Eyes. I never beheld so
Beautiful an Object in my Life: she cast three or four times her Eyes on me, as
it were by stealth, and as they still met with mine, the innocent Blushes which
overspread her Face, made her look as handsome as an Angel. I perceived the
Mother was very fond of her, for she seemed to share the Pleasure I had in
looking upon her. Now by reason I was little used too these Adventures; and
that young People are easily dashed out of Countenance in strangs Company, I
made 'em but indifferent Complements when they went away, and gave 'em perhaps
but an ill Opinion of my Wit. I was angry with my self for (...) asking their
Habitation, and that I did not offer to wait upon 'em thither; but 'twas
Preposterous to run after 'em. I went to the Doorkeeper to inquire whether the
knew 'em, but we were (...) long while before we could understand one another,
because he spoke no better French, than I did Italian. At last, rather by
Signs, than otherwise, he gave me to understand that, they were unknown to him,
at least he would not own he knew'em. I returned to my Fleming Apothecary, in a
very different Disposition of Mind from what I was in when I came out; that is
to say, very Amorous, and very much in Pain to know whether that beautiful
Leonora, was a Courtezan or an honest Woman, and if she had as much Wit as her
Mother, who seemed to have a great deal. I abandoned my self to thinking, and
flattered my self-with a Thousand fair Hopes, which entertained me a little
while, but disquieted me much more when I considered the Impossibility of my
Wishes. Having framed a Thousand frivolous Designs, I resolved at last to seek
'em out, not thinking it possible for 'em to remain long invisible in Rome,
(which is not a populous City,) especially to a Man so much in love as I was.
That very Day I looked for 'em wherever I thought it most likely to find 'em,
and returned home more tired and uneasy than I was when I went out. The next
Day I sought 'em still with more diligence, but did nothing but tire and
disquiet my self yet more. By my peeping through the Lattice- Windows, and my
hasty running after all the Women that bore the least Resemblance to my
Leonora, I was taken an Hundred times, both in the Streets and in the Churches,
for the greatest Fool among those Frenchmen who have contributed most in
disparaging their Nation at Rome. It Is Matter of Wonder how I could gather
Strength at a time when I suffered like one in Hell: However my Body recovered,
whilst my sick Mind remained so divided betwixt Honor and Love, which kept me
at Rome, that I often doubted whether I should obey the frequent Letters I
received from Verville, who conjured me by the Ties of our Frienship, to come
to him, without using the Right he had to command me. At last, all my
Endeavors to find out my unknown Ladies, proving ineffectual, I paid my
Landlord, and got my little Eq^ipage ready, in order to depart. The Day before
I was to go, Signior Stephano Vanberge (for so was my Landlord called) told me,
he designed to give me a Dinner at a Mistress's House, and make me confess, he
had not made an ill Choice for a Fleming; adding withal, that he would not
carry me to her before I was to go away, because he was a little jealous. I
promised to wait on him, rather out of Complaisance than Inclination; and
accordingly we went about Dinnertime. The House we went into had neither the
Appearance, nor the Furniture of an Apothecary's Mistress. We traversed a very
fine Parlour; from whence I entered first into a Magnificent Room, where I was
received by Leonora and her Mother. You may imagine how much I was agreeably
surpised. The Mother of that Beautiful Daughter came toward me, to be saluted
after the French way; and I must needs own, that she kissed me, rather than I
her: I was so amazed, that I scarce could see any thing, neither did I hear one
Word of the Compliment she made me. At last I recovered both my Senses and my
Sight, and saw Leonora more Beautiful and Charming than before, but had not the
Assurance to salute her. I was sensible of my Fault as soon as I committed it;
but instead of repairing it, I blushed as much out of Shame, as Leonora did out
of Modesty. Her Mother told me, she designed to return me Thanks before I went
away, for the Pains I had taken to find out their Habitation; and this still
increased my Confusion. She pulled me into a Bedside.
Ruelle, adorned after the French Fashion, where her Daughter did not follow
us, because, I suppose, she did not think it worth her while to join
Conversation with so dull a Fellow as I seemed to be. She staid with Signior
Stephano, whilst with her Mother I acted the Clown to the Life. She was so
civil as to find Matter to keep up the Conversation all alone; which she did
very ingeniously; though nothing can be more difficult, than to show one's Wit
with those that have none at all. For my part I never was such a Blockhead in
my Life; and if she was not tired with me then, she never was so with any Body.
Amongst other things, to which I scarce answered Yes or No, she told me, that
she was a French Woman born, and that Signior, Stephano would inform me of the
Reasons which staid her in Rome. By this time, Dinner being ready, she was fain
to pull me along to the Table, as she had pulled me before to the Ru^lle; for I
was so disordered, that I did not know how to set one Foot before 'tother. I
was the same dull Loggerhead both before and after Dinner; during which, the
only thing I did with Assurance, was to stare upon Leonora. I fancy she was
uneasy at it, and to punish me for it, she never lifted up her Eyes all the
while. Had the Mother been silent, the Dinner had been like a Carthusian Meal;
but she discoursed Sign. Stephano about the Affairs of Rome; at least I fancy
so, for I am not very sure of it. At last we rose from Table, to the great
Comfort of every Body, except my self, whose Distemper grew worse and worse
every Moment. When we went to take our leave, they told me a Thousand obliging
Things, which I only answered with the ordinary Complement we use at the bottom
of a Letter: However I did something more at Parting than I did when I came in;
for I saluted Leonora, and by that means completed my Ruin. Stephano was not
able to get one single Word from me in all our Way home. I locked my self in my
Room, without pulling off either my Cloak or Sword. There I revolved in my Mind
whatever had happened to me. Leonora presented her self to my Fancy more
Beautiful than ever she appeard to my Sight. I remembered how dull and silly I
had been before the Mother and the Daughter; and as often as I thought on it, I
was so ashamed that I could not forbear blushing. I wished to be Rich: I cursed
my mean Extraction; and then I fancied to my self a Thousand lucky Adventures,
advantageous both to my Fortune and my Love. At last, having nothing in my
Thoughts but how to frame a plausible Pretense to stay, and not finding any to
my liking, I grew so desperate, as to wish to fall sick again, to which I had
already no small Disposition. I designed to write to Leonora; but all I could
write did not please me, and so I put into my Pocket the beginning of a Letter,
which perhaps I had not dared to send, had it been finished. Thus having
disquieted my self to little purpose, and not being able to banish Leonora from
my Thoughts, I resolved to go by the Vine where she appeared to me first of
all, to abandon my self entirely to my Passion, and pass by her Door once for
all. This Vine was well seated in one of the remotest Places of the City, in
the middle of several old empty Buildings. As I passed along, pensive and
Melancholy under the Ruins of a Portico, I heard some Body stalk behind me, and
at the same time I felt my self run through under the Reins, I presently faced
about, and instantly drew my Sword; and finding I had to do with the Servant of
the young Frenchman I mentioned before, I was like to return him at least as
good a Pass as he made at me by Treachery: But as I pushed him a good way
without being able to close with him, because he maintained a running Fight,
and endeavored to parry, his Master came out from among the Ruins of the
Portico, and attacking me behind, dealt me a stunning Blow on the Head, and a
great Thrust in the Thigh, which made me fall down. There was no likelihood of
my escaping at so cheap a rate; but because in an ill Action People^ seldom
preserve a Presence of Mind, the Servant wounded his Master in the Right Hand;
and at the same time two Minime Friars of the Trinity of the Mount, who passed
that way, and saw me treacherously assaulted, running to my Help, my Assassins
made their escape, and left me wounded in three several Places. Those good
Friars happened to be Frenchmen, to my great Comfort; for in so remote a Place,
had an Italian seen me in the Condition I was in, he would rather have avoided
then succored me, lest being found doing me a good Office, he were suspected
of being himself my Murderer. Whilst one of those charitable Friars received my
Confession, the other ran to my Lodging, to acquaint my Landlord with my
Disaster: He came instantly to me, and caused me to be carried, half dead, into
my Bed. With so many Wounds, and so much Love, 'twas not long before I fell
into a most violent Fever. My Life was despaired of by all, and I had no Reason
to hope better than the rest. In the mean time my Passion for Leonora was so
far from abating, that it was rather increasing, though my Strength grew weaker
and weaker. Wherefore, not being able to support so heavy a Burden, without
easing my self of it, nor resolve to die, without letting Leonora know, that
'twas only for her sake that I wished to live, I called for a Pen and Ink. They
thought I was Lightheaded; but I was so earnest in protesting that they would
drive me into Despair in case they should deny me, that Signior Stephano, who
had taken notice of my Passion, and was so clear-sighted as to guess at my
Design, gave Orders that I should have all things necessary to write; and as he
knew my Intention, he staid all alone in the Room. I perused again what I had
scribled a little before, with Design to make use of some Thoughts which came
before into my Head about the same Subject, and then I wrote thus to Leonora.

I no sooner saw you, but 'twas out of my Power to forbear loving you, My
Reason did not oppose my Love, but told me, as well as my Eyes, that you were
the most lovely Person in the World; whereas it should have represented to me,
how unworthy I was of your Love. However, that would have served only to
exasperate my Disease with unprofitable Remedies, and after having strugled a
while, I must at last have yielded to the irresistible Necessity of loving you,
which you impose on all that see you. Well, I love you, my charming Leonora,
but with so much Respect, that you ought not to hate me for it, although I have
the Boldness to discover it to you: But how is it possible to die for you,
without boasting of it? And how can you refuse to pardon a Crime, with which
you cannot reproach me long? I own your being the Cause of a Man's Death is a
Recompense not to be merited but by a great Number of Services, and you will
perhaps cnvy me an Happiness, which you procure me without Design. But do not
grudge it me, lovely Leonora, since it is no more in your Power to make me lose
it, and that it is the only Favor I ever received from Fortune, who will never
sufficiently reward your Merit, but by procuring you Adorers as much above me,
as all other Beauties in the World are below yours. Therefore I am not so vain
as to think that you will bestow the least Sentiment of Pity on --

I was not able to make an end of my Letter; my Strength failed me on the
sudden; the Pen fell from my Hand, for my Mind went so fast, that my Body could
not keep pace with it; else that long beginning you have heard, had been but a
small part of my Letter; so much was my Imagination warmed by my Fever and by
my Love. I was a long time in a fainting Fit, without giving the least Sign of
Life; which Signior Stephano perceiving, he opened the Chamber Door to send for
a Priest. In that very Moment Leonora and her Mother came to visit me, having
been informed of my being wounded. Now as they thought this Accident besel me
upon their Account, and therefore that they were the innocent Cause of my
Death, they did not scruple to come to see me in the Condition I was in. My
Trance lasted so long, that they went away before I was come to my self again,
very much afflicted, as one may imagine, and fully persuaded that I would never
recover. They read what I had been writing; and the Mother, more curious than
the Daughter, perused also the Papers I left on the Bed; amongst which there
was a Letter from my Father Garignes. I was a long time struggling betwixt Life
and Death; but at last Youth got the better on it; in a Fortnight's time I was
out of Danger; and in five Weeks I began to walk about the Room. My Landlord
entertained me often about Leonora. He acquainted me with the charitable Visit,
which she and her Mother had given me; at which I was overjoyed: And if I was
a little troubled at their reading my Father's Letter, I was highly pleased
that my own had been read also. As often as I happened to be alone with
Stephano, I could talk of nothing but Leonora. One Day calling to mind what her
Mother told me, that he could inform me who she was, and what Reasons obliged
her to stay in Rome, I desired him to acquaint me with what he knew about it.
He told me, that she was come to Rome with the French Ambassador's Lady; that a
Man of Quality, a near Relation of the Ambassador, was fallen in Love with her;
that in time she loved him too, and that being married clandestinely, she had
the beautiful Leonora by him: He informed me likewise, that that Nobleman was
fallen out with all the Family of the Ambassador upon this Account, which
obliged him to leave Rome and go to Venice with Madam la Boissiere (for this
was her Name) till the time of the Embassy was expired; that having brought her
back to Rome, he furnished her a House, and gave her all Necessaries to live
like a Person of Quality, whilst he staid in France, whither his Father called
him back, and whither he durst not carry his Mistress, or, if you please, his
Wife, well knowing that none of his Relations would approve his Match. I must
confess I could not sometimes forbear wishing that Leonora were not the
Legitimate Daughter of a Person of Quality, that the Blemish of her Birth might
excuse the Meanness of mine; but soon repented so Criminal a Thought, and
wished her Fortune were answerable to her Merit. Though this last Thought cast me
into Despair; for as I loved her more than Life it self, I plainly foresaw that
I could never be happy without enjoying her, nor enjoy her without making her
unhappy. When I began to recover, and that there was no other Remains of my
Distemper, but a great Paleness in my Face, occasioned by the vast quantity of
Blood I lost, my young Masters returned from the Venetian Army, the Plague
which infected all the Levant, not suffering them to signalize their Courage
there any longer. Verville had still the same Affection he ever had for me, and
Saint Far did not yet show he hated me, as he has done since. I recounted to
them all my Adventures, except my falling in Love with Leonora. Both expressed
a great desire of being acquainted with her, which my exaggerating the Merit
both of the Mother and the Daughter increased. A Man ought never to commend the
Person he loves before those who may love her also, since Love enters at the
Ears as well as at the Eyes. This Folly has often been pernicious to those who
were guilty of it, which my own Experience will justify, as you shall see
anon. Saint Far asked me every Day when I designed to carry him to Madam la
Boissiere: One Day, when he was more pressing than ordinary, I answered, I
could not tell whether she would admit of his Visit, because she lived very
retired. Nay, replied he, I now plainly see you are in love with her Daughter;
and adding, he knew how to go to see her without me, in a very blunt manner, I
was so daunted^ that he firmly believed, what he did scarce suspect before.
Afterward he passed an Hundred silly Jests upon me, and dashed me so out of
Countenance, that Verville pitied me. He took me away from his unmannerly
Brother, and carried me to the Place to take the (...) Coach, as Hide-Park.
Course, where I was extremely Melancholy, though Verville, out of a Kindness
extraordinary in a Person of his Age, and so much above me by his Quality, used
all possible Means to divert me. In the mean time the ill-natured Saint Far,
endeavored to satisfy himself, or rather to ruin me. He went strait to Madam
la Boissiere; where they took him at first for me, because he had my Landlord's
Servant with him, who had often accompanied me thither; but had it not been for
that, I believe he had never been admitted. Madam la Boissiere was very much
surpised to see a Man she did not know: She told Saint Far, she could not
imagine upon what score, a Stranger did her the Honor of a Visit. Saint Far
replied very Humbly, that he was the Master of a young Fellow, who was so happy
as to be Wounded in her Service.

Having begun his Compliment with an account which, as I was informed since,
pleased neither the Mother nor the Daughter; and these two Ingenuous Persons,
being unwilling to hazard the Reputation of their Wit, with a Man who at first
dash showed he had so little, the rude Impertinent was little diverred with
them, and they very much tired with him. But what made him almost Mad, was his
being denied the Satisfaction to see Leonora's Face, though he begged her a
Thousand times to draw the Vail she commonly wore, as all unmarryed Ladies do
at Rome. At last this accomplished Courtier being tired with tiring of 'em, rid
'em of his troublesome Visit, and returned to Seignior Stephano's with little
Advantage from the ill Office he had done me. Ever since that time, as it is
ordinary with illnatur'd People to hate those whom they have Injured, he
despised me to that Degree, and Disobliged me so often, that I had a hundred
times forgot the Respect I owed to his Quality, if Verville by his constant
Friendship, and repeated Kindnesses, had not made me amends for his Brother's
Brutality. I was not yet acquainted with the ill Office he had done me, the I
often felt the effects of it; I found indeed, Madam La Boissiere more reserved
to me, than when we were first acquainted, but being still as civil as before,
I did not take notice of my being Troublesome. As for Leonora, she appeared very
thoughtful before her Mother, but when she was not observed by her, methought
she was not so Melancholy, and cast on me more favorable Looks. Destiny was
thus relating his story, and the Actresses listened very attentively, without
showing the least inclination to sleep, when they heard the Clock strike two; (
in the Morning) Mistress Cave put Destiny in mind, that the next day he was to
accompany Monsieur La Rappiniere to a House about two or three Leagues out of
Town, where he promised to give 'em the Diversion of Hunting. This made Destiny
take his leave of the Players, and retire to his own Chamber, where in all
probability he went to Bed: The Players did the same, and the remaining part of
the Night was spent in quiet; the Poe^, as luck would have it, having made no
new Stanzas to disturb the general Repose.

CHAP. XIV.
How the Curate of Domfront was carried away.
THose who have had so much spare time to throw away upon the reading of the
foregoing Chapters, may remember, if they have not forgot it, that the Curate
of Domfront was in one of those Litters, which met four in Company in a little
Village, by an Accident which perhaps had never happened before; tho every one
knows, four Litters may sooner meet together, than four Mountains. This Curate
then, who lodged in the same Inn where our Players quartered, having held a
Consultation of the Physicians of Man's about his Disease, and being told by
those grave Doctors in very Elegant Latin, that he was troubled with the
Gravel, which the poor Man knew but too well already; and likewise having
dispatched some Business which never came to my knowledge; This good Priest, I
say, set out from that Inn about nine a Clock in the Morning, to return to the
Spiritual Conduct of his Flock. One of his Nieces, dressed like a Gentlewoman,
whether she was so or no, placed her self on the forepart of the Litter, at
the good Man's Feet, who was very thick and short. A Peasant, by Name William,
led the Fore-horse by the Bridle, by special, order from the Curate, for fear
the Horse should stumble; and the Curate's Servant, Named Julian, took care to
drive the hinder Horse, which was so restive, that Julian was often obliged to
push him forward with his Shoulders. The Curate's Chamber Pot, which was of
yellow Brass, and glister'd like Gold, as being newly scowr'd in the Inn, hung
on the right side of the Litter, which made it look more Magnificent than the
left side, which was only adorned with a Hat in a Pastboard Case, which the
Curate received from the Paris Messenger, for a Gentleman of his Acquaintance,
who had a House near Domfront. About a League and a half from the Town, the
Litter jogged leisurely on in a hollow way, fenced on both sides with thick
Hedges, as strong as Walls, when three Horsemen seconded by two Men on Foot,
stopped the Venerable Litter. One of them who seemed to be the Captain of those
Highway-men, with a most terrible Voice, said: Death and Furies, the first Man
that offers to speak a word, i will Pistol him, and clapped the Muzle of his Pistol
within two Inches of William, the Country-Fellow's Nose, who led the
Horse-Litter. Another did the like to Julian, and one of the Foot-Pads levelled
his Gun at the Curates Neck, whilst the Curate slept very quietly in his
Litter; and by that means was freed from the terrible Fright which seized his
little peaceful Retinue. These Villainous Fellows drove the Litter with more
have than the dull Horses that carried it, were willing to make. Never was
silence better observed, in so violent an Action: The Curate's Niece was more
dead than alive; William and Julian wept, without daring so much as to open
their Mouths, by reason of the terrible Apparition of Firearms, and the Curate
slept on, as I said before. One of the Horsemen detached himself from the
Main-Body, and went a full Gallop before. In the mean time the Litter reached a
Wood, at the entrance of which, the Forehorse which perhaps was as much
frighted as his Leaders, or else out of spite, because they forced him to go a
quicker pace, than his dull and heavy Constitution would permit him, put his
Foot in a Wheel-tract, and fell floundring so fiercely, that the Curate waked
at the Noise; and his Niece trundled down from the Litter, on the lean Buttocks
of the Jade. The good Man called Julian, who durst not so much as answer him;
he then called his Niece, who was not such a Fool as to open her Mouth; and the
Peasant being as hard-hearted as the rest, the Curate fell into a Passion in
good earnest. Some relate he swore a great Oath, but I can hardly believe such
a thing of a Curate of Lower Main. The Curate's Niece had by this time raised
her self up again from the Horses Buttocks, and sat in her place without daring
to look on her Uncle, and the Horse having with great vigor disengaged his
Feet, went on faster than ever he did, notwithstanding the Curate's screaming
out, with his Reading-desks Voice, stop, stop. His repeated cries scared the
Horses, who run as if the Devil drove 'em, which made the Curate cry still the
louder. Sometimes he called Julian, sometimes William, and oftener than the rest
his Niece, ^o whose Name he added the Epithet of double Whore and Carrion.
However, she might have spoke if she had been willing; for the Man who made her
observe a religious Silence, was gone to meet the Horsemen who rode before,
about forty or fifty yards from the Litter. But the fear of the Carbine, made
her insensible of her Uncle's hard Words, who seeing himself so obstinately
disobeyed, began at last to howl' and cry out, help, help, Murder. Thereupon
the Horsemen who rode before, and whom the Footman had called back, came to
the Litter, and made it stop. One of them said with a terrible Voice to
William? What Foolis that, that makes such a noise in the Litter. Alas, Sir,
answered William, with fear and trembling, you know it better than my self. The
Horseman gave him a found knock on the Teeth with the but end of his Pistol,
and presenting the Muzzle to the Niece, commanded her to unmask, and tell him
who she was. The Curate, who from his Litter beheld all these Passages, and had
a Lawsuit with a Gentleman in his Neighborhood, De Laune by Name, thought
'twas he that had a mind to Murder him. Whereupon he cried out; Monsieur de
Laune, I Summon you before God Almighty, to answer for my Murder if you kill
me: I am a Consecrated Priest, though an unworthy one, and i will have you
Excommunicated like a Cannibal. In the mean time his Niece pulled off her Mask,
and showed to the Horseman a wild staring Face, which he did not know. This
produced an unexpected effect. That passionate Gentleman discharged one of his
Pistols into the Flank of the Horse that carried the Forepart of the Litter,
and with the other shot, one of his Footmen in the Head; saying, let all that
give false Intelligence, have this for their pains. And now it was, that the
Curate's and his Retinues fears began to redouble: He demanded their
Confession, Julian and William fell on their Knees, and the Curate's Niece kept
close to her Uncle, But those who put them in that terrible Fright, were
already gone from 'em, and made the best of their way, as fast as their Horses
could drive, leaving to their Charge, the Body of the Fellow that was shot with
a Pistol. Julian and William got up, still shaking with the remains of their
Fear, and told the Curate and his Niece, that the Troopers were gone. Now they
were fain to unharnes the hindermost Horse, to set the Litter upright; and
William was sent to the next Town to get another Horse. In the mean time the
Curate was at a loss, what to think of these Accidents: He could not imagine,
why they left him without robbing him; nor for what reason, that Horseman
killed one of his own Men; at which, however, the Curate was not so much
offended, as at the loss of his poor murdered Horse, which in all probability,
had never quarreled with that Stranger. Upon the whole Matter, he concluded
that 'twas de Laune, who designed to Murder him, and said, he would have his
Revenge, His Niece maintained, that 'twas not de Laune, whom she knew very
well; but the Curate had a mind it should be he, that he might have the
occasion to indite him for an Assault, hoping to get him Condemned upon the
Deposition of some Knights of the Post, whom he expected to find at G^ron,
where he had some Relations. Julian espying a Company of Men on Horseback
making toward 'em, betook himself to his Heels as fast as he could run: The
Curate's Niece seeing Julian upon the Flight, thought he had some reason for
it, and scamper'd away also which put the Curate entirely beside himself, not
knowing what to make of so many extraordinary Accidents. At last he espied
Horsemen, whom Julian saw before, and which is worse, he saw 'em coming up
directly toward him. This Troop was composed of nine or ten Horsemen, in the
midst of whom there was a Wretch bound Hand and Foot on a little sorry Horse,
with a pale downcast Look, like one that is carried to be hanged. The Curate
began to say his Prayers, recommending himself to God Almighty's Mercy, not
forgetting the Horse that was left alive: But he was very much Surpised, and
Comforted the same time, finding 'twas La Rappiniere with some of his Men. La
Rappiniere asked him what he did there, and whether 'twas he that killed the
Man that lay dead near the Horses side. The Curate told him the whole
Adventure, still affirming, that 'twas de Laune that had Waylaid him, of which
La Rappiniere made a Verbal Process at large. One of his Guard went to the next
Village, to get the dead Body removed, and returned with the Curate's Niece and
Julian, who by this time were recovered from their Fright, and had met William
with a fresh Horse for the Litter. The Curate returned safe and sound to
Domfront, where as long as he lives, he will relate how he was set upon, and
carried away. The dead Horse was eaten up by the Wolves, or Masty Dogs; the
Body of the dead Man was buried I know not where, and La Rappiniere, Destiny,
Rancour, and Olive, La Rappinierr's Guard, and the Prisoner, went back to Man's.
This is the Success of La Rappiniere, and the Strollers Hunting, who catch'r a
Man instead of a Hare.

CHAP XV.
The Operator's or Mountebank's Arrival at the Inn. A Continuation of the
History of Destiny and Star. A Serenade.
YOU may be pleased to remember, that by the foregoing Chapter, one of those
that set upon the Curate of Domfront, had lest his Campanions, and went full
Gallop I know not whether. Now as he was Spurring on a main in a deep and
narrow Way, he spied afar off some Men on Horseback, making directly toward
him, and would have wheeled about to shun 'em, but turning too short, and with
more have than good speed, his Horse started up so suddenly, that he fell down
backwards, and his Rider under him. La Rappiniere and his Fellows observing
this, thought it were very strange, that a Man who came in such post have
toward 'em, should endeavor to avoid them with the like Speed. It gave them
therefore just cause of Suspicion, especially to La Rappiniere, who was very
Susceptible of his own Nature; besides, that his Office obliged him to make the
worst Interpretation of things in dubious Cases. His Suspicion increased to a
high Degree, when coming near that Man, who had one Leg engaged under his
Horse, he took notice that he was not so much dismayed at his Fall, as that it
was with such a Witness: Now considering it could be no prejudice to him to
aggravate his Fright, and knowing how to discharge his Office, as well as any
Provost in France, he drew near him, and told him; What! are you caught in a
Trap, good, honest Man: Well, I Will take care you do not get such another heavy
Fall. This amazed the poor Fellow much more than his Fall had done, and La
Rappiniere and his Harpies saw in his Countenance such visible Signs of a
gulity Conscience, that any other Provost less forward than he, would have
arrested him without any more a doc. He therefore commanded his Men to help to
get him up, and bound Hand and Foot on his own Horse, He soon afterward met
the Curate of Domfront in that Disorder you have read of, with a dead Person
Murdered, and a Horse shot thorough, which confirmed him in his Suspicions; to
which the Prisoner's greater Disorder and change of Color, was no small
Addition. Destiny surveyed him more earnestly than the rest, imagining he knew
him, though where he had seen him, he could not perfectly call to mind. He
scratched his dull Pate all the way he rode, to awake his drowsy Memory; yet
could not remember where he had seen him. At length they Arrived at Man's, where
La Rippiniere committed the supposed Malefactor to Prison, whilst the Strollers
who were to open the stage the day following, retired to their Inn, to get all
things in readiness. They were reconciled to the Innkeeper, and the Poet who
was as generous as any Poet of 'em all, would needs Treat 'em at Supper.
Ragotin who was then in the Inn, and could not refrain coming to it, ever since
he was smitten with Madam Star, was invited by the Poet, who was so much a
Fool, as to invite also those that had been Spectators of the Combat, which
was fought the Night before betwixt the Players and the Innkeepers Family, in
their Shirts and Smocks. A little before Supper begun, the jolly Company was
further incensed by the Arrival of an Operator, and his Retinue; which
consisted of his Wife, an old Blackamore Maid, a Monkey, and two FootMen.
Rancour was of his Acquaintance, of a long standing, and therefore there past
great Civility betwixt 'em: Nor would the Poet, who was easily acquainted with
the People, part with him nor his Wife, before he had prevailed upon 'em by his
high Compliments, which sounded loud, and signified little, only to come and
honor him with his Presence at Supper. Well, Sup they did, where nothing
happened that is Remarkable, only they drank plentifully, and eat in
proportion. Ragotin' fed his Eyes on Madam Star's Face, which intoxicated him
more than the Liquor he swallowed. He spoke but very sparingly all the time
they were at Table, tho the Poet gave him a fair Opportunity of Wrangling,
flatly Condemning Theophilus's Verses, of which Ragotin was a great Admirer.
The She- Players engaged a while with the Operator's Wife, a Spanish Woman,
pretty agreeable. They afterward withdrew to their Chamber, whither Destiny
waited on 'em, to prosecute and end his story, which Cave and her Daughter died
with Impatience to hear. Star in the mean time was studying her Part, and
Destiny having taken a Chair near the Bedside, whereon Cave and her Daughter
sat, went on with his story after this manner.

Hitherto you have found me very Amorous, and much in pain, to know what effect
my Letter had wrought in Leonora's and her Mother's Mind's; you shall see me
more in Love yet, and in the greatest Despair imaginable. I waited every day on
Madam La Boissiere and her Daughter, so blinded with my Passion, that I did not
take notice of the coldness of their Reception, nor did I consider that my too
frequent Visits would become importunate. Madam La Boissiere was weary of my
Company, ever since Saint Far acquainted (...) who I was: Yet she could not
civilly forbid me the House, after what I had suffered on her account. As for
her Daughter, if I may judge by what she has done since, I may say she pitied
me, tho contrary to her Mother's Will, who kept so watchful an Eye upon her,
that we could never have an Opportunity to meet in private. But to speak the
Truth, tho this fair Virgin would have been less cold to me than her Mother,
she durst not show me the least token of her Favor before her Mother; so that
I was on the Rack, and thy assiduous Visits, served only to make me more
hateful to those whom I designed to please. One day Madam de la Boissiere
having received some Letters from France, which obliged her to go abroad as
soon as she had read the Contents of 'em, she sent immediately for a Coach, and
Signior Stephano accompany her, not daring to go alone after the unlucky
Rencounter, wherein I was engaged upon her account. I was my self nearer at
hand, and more fit to be her Squire than the Gentleman she sent for; but she
would not accept of the least Service from a Person, whom she intended to rid
her self of. As luck would have it, Stephano was not to be found; so that she
was compelled to show before me, how uneasy she was, that she had no Body to
go along with her, that I might offer my self; which I did with as much Joy, as
she could have Regret to be necessitated to take me along with her. I Conducted
her to a certain Cardinal, who was then Protector of the French, who by good
fortune gave her Audience, upon the first Motion she made. The Business was
doubtless of great Importance, and no small Difficulty; for she was a long time
with him in a private Grotto, or covered Fountain in the midst of a fine
Garden, whilst all the Cardinal's Followers walked into those parts of the
Garden they had most fancy to. Now was I got into a large Walk of Orange Trees
alone, with the Beautiful Leonora, a Blessing I had often wished before in
vain; and yet more Modest and Faint-hearted, than ever I had been. I cannot
tell whether she took notice of it or not, or whether it was her Goodness which
made her speak first to me in this manner. My Mother, said she, will have just
reason to quarrel with Signior Stephano for failing us to day, and being the
occasion of the trouble we give you to wait here so long. And I am infinitely
obliged to him, replied I, for procuring me, tho without Design, the greatest
Happiness I ever hope to enjoy. I am too far upon the score of Obligation
toward you, said the, to omit any thing that may prove your Advantage;
therefore, pray lot me know where the Happiness consists you mention, as
procured by him, that I may share your Joy, if it be such as will not offend a
Maiden's Ear. I fear, said I, lest you make that Joy cease -- I! answered she;
No, I never was envious of any Man's Prosperity, much less of a Person, who has
ventured his Life on my account. It Is not your Envy that I fear, answered I, --
What other Motive, returned she, can there be to make me oppose your Felicity?
Your Disdain, said I. I shall be much perplexed, added she, till you let me
know what I should Disdain, and which way this Disdain may concern you. I could
soon un^old this Riddle, said I, but I cannot tell whether you will be pleased
to understand it. Do not let me hear it then, replied she; for when we have
such Doubts, it shows the thing is not to be easily understood, or is such as
may Displease, I must confess I have admired a hundred times since, how I was
able to answer her, my Mind being less intent upon what she said, than full of
Fears of her Mother's return, and losing the Opportunity of entertaining her
with my Love. However, at last I mustered all my Assurance, and without
prolonging a Conversation, which did not carry me fast enough to the Point I
aimed at; I told her, without minding her last words; That I had long sought
the Opportunity to speak with her, thereby to confirm what I had presumed to
express in my Letter, which yet I durst not have undertaken, but on the
knowledge that she had seen that Writing. To this I added, a great deal of what
I had Written, and said Moreover, that being upon my Departure to serve the
Pope in the War he was making on some Princes of Italy, and resolved to die
there, since I found my self unworthy to live for her; I would entreat her only
to tell me, what Sentiments she would have entertained for me, had my Fortune
answered the Ambition I had to love her. She told me with a Blush, that my
Death would not be indifferent to her; and therefore, added she, if you are
still of the same obliging Temper toward your Friends, do not let us loose one
who has been so serviceable to us; or at least, if you will needs die, for some
greater reason than what you have just now expressed; yet defer your Death,
till we have seen one another in France, whither my Mother and my self are
suddenly returning. I pressed her to explain more clearly the Sentiments she
had for me, but her Mother was by this time come so near us, that she could not
have satisfied me, if she had intended it. Madam de la Boissiere looked but
coldly upon me, perhaps because I had had an Opportunity to entertain her
Daughter, who likewise seemed to be somewhat uneasy, which made me stay but a
little while with them, after their being returned home. I left 'em highly
pleased with my Adventure, putting the best Interpretation on Leonora's Answer,
which I inferred to be favorable to my Passion. The next day I omitted not to
wait upon them according to my Custom: I was told they were gone abroad, and
the same answer I received for three days together, for I was not Discouraged
by the first or second Denial. In fine, Signior Stephano advised me to go no
more, because Madam' de la Boissiere would not suffer me to see her Daughter;
adding, he took me to be a Man of more Sense, than to Expose my self to a
Refusal. Then he acquainted me with the reason of my Disgrace. Leonora's Mother
had caught her writing a Letter to me, and having severely Reproved her for it,
did afterward give a strict Order, that her People should always deny their
being within, when I came to pay my Visit to 'em: And then I likewise
discovered the ill Office Saint Far had done me, and that ever since that time,
the Mother had been very much displeased with my Visits. As for the Daughter,
Stephano assured me, that my Personal Merit would have made her wave my mean
Birth and Fortune, could she have gained her Mother's Consent; who was too
Haughty and Covetous to be persuaded to it. I shall not trouble you with the
desperate Thoughts this unwelcome News put me into: I was as much concerned at
it, as if I had Injustice done, in being refused by Leonora, tho I never durst
hope to have the least possession in her Heart: I railed against Saint Far, and
had some thoughts of Fighting him; but then considering how much I was obliged
to his Father and Brother, I had no other Refuge but my Tears. I wept like a
Child, and was always uneasy, but most of all in Company. Now came the sad
moment of our Departure, and I was forced to go away without taking my last
Farewell of Leonora. We made a Campaign in the Pope's Armies, where I courted
Death as much as I could; but Fortune disappointed me in this, as she had e're
done in all my other Attempts. I could not meet with Death which I sought for,
but gained Reputation I did not aim at, tho I had been proud of it at any other
time; whereas then I could cherish nothing, but the pleasing remembrance of
Leonora. Verville and Saint Far were recalled to France by the Baron d'Arques,
who received 'em like a Father, who dotes on his Children. My Mother gave me a
very indifferent Reception; and as for my Father, he dwelt at Paris with Count
Glaris, who had chosen him Governor to his Son. The Baron d'Arques, who was
made acquainted with my feats of Arms in the War of Italy, where I had saved
Verville's Life, would needs have me live with him in Quality of a Gentleman,
and Companion. He gave me leave to visit my Father at Paris, where I found less
welcome, than I had done from my Mother. Any other Person in his Station, that
had had a Son so Accomplished as my self would certainly have presented him to
the Scotch Earl, but my Father carried me out of his House in great have, as if
he feared I should Disgrace him: As we went about the Streets, he Reproached my
being too fine and gallant; told me, I seemed proud, and that 'twere better for
me to learn a Trade, than thus to strut it with a Sword on my side. you may
imagine, this Discourse sounded but harsh in a young Man's Ears, that had been
well Educated, and gained some Reputation in the Wars. And who besides had
dared to love a handsome young Lady, and declare his Passion to her. I must
freely own, that the Sentiments of Love and Respect, which a Son own to his
Father, could not make me refrain from looking on him as a very Troublesome old
Man. He led me about through three or four several Streets, with the same
Civility and Caressing Expressions, and then shook me off Abruptly, charging me
not to come near him any more. I was willing enough to obey this last
Injunction, and therefore quitted him, to go and wait upon Monsieur de Saint
Sauvour, who received me like a Father indeed, and blamed my own Parents for
their unnaturalness; promising withal, never to abandon me. The Baron d'Arques
had some Business, which obliged him to go and dwell at Paris. He took his
Lodgings the further end of Saint Germains Suburb, in a very stately House,
that had been lately built with many others, which have rendered that Suburb the
finest part of the City of Paris. Saint Far and Verville made their Court to
the King, went to the At the Ring in Hide-Park.
Park, or a Visiting, as all young Men of Quality are wont to do in that vast
City, which makes the Inhabitants of all other Cities in the Kingdom that never
come there, be accounted Clowns. For my own part, when I waited not on them, I
frequented all the Fencing-Schools to keep my hand in use, or went to the
Playhouse, which is perhaps one reason why I am now a tolerable Actor.
Verville took me aside one day, and told me he was fallen deeply in Love with a
young Lady that dwelt in the same Street. He informed me she had a Brother,
Saldagne by Name, who was as jealous both of her, and another Sister under his
Tuition, as if he had been their Husband. Moreover he told me, he had made no
small progress in his Amors, having persuaded her to give him Entrance by
Night into their Garden, the back Door whereof opened into the Fields, as ours
did likewise. Having made me his Confident, he desired me to Accompany him, and
use all my Rhetoric to gain the Favor of the Woman that was to attend her.
Verville had showed me all along such Friendship, that I could not reasonably
refuse him any thing: So we went out of our Garden Backdoor about ten a Clock
at Night, and were admitted into the Garden where the Mistress and the Maid
waited for us. The poor Madam Saldagne trembled like a Leaf, and durst not
speak; Verville's Courage was little better; the Waiting Woman was as mute as
she; and I who only came to Accompany Verville, spoke not a Word, neither had I
any desire of prating. At last Verville summoned his Courage to his Aid, and
led his Mistress into a close Walk, having first laid a strict Charge upon the
Waiting Woman and my self to play the Centeries part, which we observed so
Religiously, that for a long time we walked together, without speaking one word
to one another. At the end of the Ally we met with the young pair of Lovers:
Verville asked me aloud, whether I had entertained Mistress Maudlin as she
deserved? I replied, I thought she had no reason to Complain. No, in truth,
answered Abigal, for he has not yet spoke one word to me. Verville laughed at
her words, and assured Mistress Maudlin, that I was worth her Conversation,
though I were somewhat Melancholy. Likewise Madam Saldagne said, that her Woman
was not to be Despised, and thereupon those happy Lovers left us again, only
bidding us be sure that no Body came to Surprise 'em I then prepared my self to
be plagued with the Chat of a Waiting Woman, whom I expected would now examine
me about my Wages, what Acquaintance I had among the Chamber-Maids in that
Parish, how many new Catches I could sing, and what Vails I had with my Master.
After this, I imagined she would acquaint me with all the Secrets of Saldagne's
Family, and tell me both his Faults, and his Sisters. For there are few
Servants that meet, without giving one another a full Account of all they know
about their Masters and Mistresses, and finding fault with 'em for neglecting
to make their own Fortune, and prefer their Servants. But I was not a little
Surpised, to find my self in Discourse with a Waiting Woman, that began thus:
I Conjure thee, thou Dumb Spirit, to tell me whether thou art a Serving-Man, or
not, and if thou art a Serving-Man, by what admirable Virtue thou have forborne,
thus long slandering thy Master? I was amazed to hear a Chambermaid talk at
that extraordinary Rate; and so I asked her, by what Authority she took upon
her to Exorcise me? I perceive, said she, thou art a stubborn Spirit, and that
I must repeat my Conjuration. Tell me therefore, Rebellious Spirit, by the
Power God has given me over all proud and self-conceited Serving-Men, tell me
who thou art. I am a poor young fellow, answered I, that would fain be now
asleep in my Bed. I find, replied she, it will be no easy Matter for me to
know who thou art: Yet thus much I clearly discover already, that thou have
little of a Courtier in thee. For, continued she, should thou not have first
broken Silence in an humble Address; then have taken me by the Hand,
entertained me with abundance of Amorous fiddle-faddle, suddenly strugl'd for a
Kiss, attempted to storm my Breast, till you had been beaten off with three or
four Cuffs on the Ear, as many Kicks on the Breech, and Scratches over the
Nose; and then have returned home with Scars of Honor, and the Marks of an
Amorous Adventurer? There are some Maids in Paris, said I, interrupting her,
whose marks I would be proud to bear; but there are others too, whom I shall
dread to look upon, for fear of Dreaming afterward of the Devil. What? thou
think, said she, that I am perhaps one of those Scare-crows. But good Master
Squeamish, do thou not remember the old saying, That in the Dark all Cats are
Gray! True, replied I, but I Will never do that in the Dark which I may repent
when the light appears. But if I be handsome, said she, what then? Then I have
showed you less respect than you deserve, replied I: For if your Beauty be
equal to the Charms of your Wit, you deserve to be served and courted after the
nicest Rules of Gallantry. And could thou serve a Lady according to the
nicest Rules, said she? Better than any Man living, replied I, provided I loved
her. What Is matter for that, said she, so she loved you? Nay, both must join
Issue, where I engage in an Amor, replied I. Truly, said she, if I may judge
of the Master by his Man, then has my Mistress made no indifferent Choice in
Monsieur Verville; and that Waiting-Maid, whom thou should condescend to
love, would have no little Cause to be proud of her self. It Is not enough to
hear me talk, said I, you must see me too -- I believe both may be better let
alone, replied she -- Our Conversation was fain to end here: for Monsieur
Saldagne knocked hard at the Street Door, which they made no great haste to
open, that his Sister might have time to slip up into her Chamber. The poor
Lady and her Woman went away in such haste and disorder, that they did not so
much as bid us adieu when they shut us out to the Garden. Verville would needs
have me go into his Chamber, when we got home. I never saw a Man so much in
Love, and so well pleased: He extolled the Wit of his Mistress, and told me, he
should never be satisfied till I had seen her. In fine, he kept me there all
Night, repeating every thing over and over so often, that I could not get to my
Bed till break of Day. For my own part I admired to have met with so much Wit
in the Conversation of a Waiting Woman; and I must confess, I had a sort of an
itching Desire to know whether she was Handsome or not, tho, the Memory of my
Leonora made me very indifferent toward all the good Faces I saw every Day in
Paris. Verville and I slept till it was Noon: and as soon as he waked, he wrote
to Madam Saldagne, and sent the Letter by his Footman, who had several others,
and was acquainted with her Woman. This Fellow was of Lower Britany, of a very
disagreeable Figure, and a worse Brain. When I saw him going, it came into my
Thoughts, that if the Party, whether Waiting Woman, or Chambermaid, whom I had
entertained, should see him in that rugged Shape, and speak with him a while,
that certainly she would not mistake him for the Person that waited on
Verville. This great Looby did his Message well enough for a looby; having
found Madam Saldagne with her other Sister, named Madam Lery, whom she had
entrusted with Vervilie's Love to her. As he was waiting for an Answer, they
heard Monsieur Saldagne singing on the Stairs. He was coming to his Sister's
Chamber, who hastily conveyed the British Mercury into a Press for Clothes.
However the Brother made no long stay with his Sister, and so the Britan was
set in the open Air. Madam Saldagne locked her self up in her Closet a while to
answer Verville's Letter, and Madam Lery discoursed the Britan, whose
Conversation, I doubt, was not very entertaining. Her Sister, having made an
end of her Letter, released her from our Clown, sending him back with a Billet,
wherein she promised to meet him that Night, at the same Time and Place as
before. As soon as it was Night, you may imagine, that Verville was ready to go
to the Place of Assignation, We were admitted into the Garden, and it fell to
my Lot to cope with the same Person I entertained before, and whom I found so
very witty. She expressed more Wit this second time than she had done at first;
and both her Accent and manner of Speech was so charming, that I confess I
wished she might be as Handsome as she was Ingenious. In the mean time she could
not believe me to be the Britan she had seen before; nor could she apprehend
why I should have so much more Wit by Night than by Day: for having heard the
Fellow relate that Monsieur Saldagne's coming into his Sister's Chamber had put
him into a great Fright, I took it upon my self, and played upon her with it,
assuring her, that I was not then in so much fear for my self, as for Madam
Saldagne. This put it out of all Dispute that I was the same ill-favored
R^gue; and I observed afterward she began indeed to discourse like a
Chambermaid, She then informed me, that Monsieur Saldagne was a terrible Man;
that having lost both Father and Mother in his Youth, being Master of a great
Estate, and having only few of his Kindred, he exercised a great deal of
Tyranny over his Sisters, to make them turn Nuns; using them not only like an
unjust Father, but like a jealous unsupportable Husband. I was about to take my
turn, and tell a Story of the Baron d'Arques and his Sons, when the
Garden-Door, which we had not made fast, was thrown open, and in comes Monsieur
Saldagne, attended by two Footmen, the one carrying a lighted Flamboy in his
Hand. He came from a House which stood in the same Row with his and ours, where
they gamed every Day, and which Saint Far frequented to pass away the time.
They had both played there that Evening, and Saldagne having soon lost his
Money, was coming home by his Garden, contrary to his Custom, and there
surpised us as I told you, finding the Door open. We were at that time all
four of us together in a covered Walk, which gave us opportunity to shun his
and his Men's View The Gentlewoman remained in the Garden, upon pretense of
(...) king the fresh Air; and to give it the better Color, began to sing
though she had little Inclination to it, as you may easily imagine. In the mean
time Verville having scall'd the Wall, by mean of a Vine-Arbour, jumped down on
the other side. But a third Footman of Saldagne's that was but coming in,
seeing him leap, failed not to run and give his Master notice he had seen a Man
leap from the Garden-Wall into the Street. At the same instant I fell down with
a great noise into the Garden, the same Arbor, by means of which, Verville
made his escape, being unfortunately broke down under me. This Noise, together
with the Fellow's Tale, alarmed all those that were in the Garden: Saldagne
runs to the Place from whence the Noise came, Followed by his three Men, and
spying a Man with his Sword drawn, (for as soon as I could get up I put my self
in a posture of defense,) he attacked me at the Head of his Company; but I soon
made him know I was no easy Conquest. The Fellow that carried the Flamboy
advanced farther than the rest, which gave me opportunity to see Saldagne's
Face, whom I presently knew to be the same Frenchman that would have murdered
me at Rome, for having hindered him from being rude to Leonora, as I before
related. He knew me likewise at first sight, and making no doubt but I was come
thither to take my just Revenge, he cried out, You shall not escape me now I
assure you: And then I was hard put to it indeed; besides that I had almost
broken one of my Legs with my Fall. I maintained a running Fight, till I
retreated into a Summer House, whither I saw Verville's Mistress run in before
in a woeful Condition. She staid within it, though she saw me enter, whether she
wanted time or Courage to go out, I know not. For my part, my Resolution
increased, when I considered they could attack me only before at the
Summer-House-Door, which was very narrow. I wounded Saldagne in one of his
Hands, and the boldest of his Footmen in his Arm, which procured me a little
Respite; yet could I not have any Hopes of escaping, believing they would at
last make shorter work with me, and dispatch me with Pistols, having found it
too difficult to be done with Swords. But Verville came to my Relief: He would
by no means go Home without me; and having heard the Bustle and clashing of
Swords, he ventured to bring me off from the Danger he cast me into, or at
least to share it with me. Saldagne, with whom he had already made an
Acquaintane, thought he came to his Aid, as a Friend and Neighbor. He took it
as a great Obligation, and accosting him, said: You see, Sir, how I am set upon
in my own House. Verville, who understood his meaning, immediately replied; He
would be his Servant against any other Man, but that he came to protect this
one against all the World. Saldagne enraged to find himself mistaken, swore
desperately, he did not doubt to make his Party good against two such Traitors
himself; and at the same time charged Verville most furiously, but was repulsed
by him with a great deal of Gallantry. Then I thought it high time to get out
of my Summer House to join with my Friend, and surprising the Lacquey that
carried the Flamboy, I was loath to kill him, and contented my self to give him
a back-stroke over the Pate, which put him into such a Fright, that he ran off
from the Garden into the Fields, crying out, Thieves, Thieves. The other
Footmen fled likewise; and as for Saldagne, I saw him fall in a Hedge at the
same instant that the Light left us, either wounded by Verville or by some
other Accident. We did not think it fit to help him to get up, but minded our
own escape with all the haste we could. Saldagne's Sistor, fearing some
Violence from her rash Brother, stepped to us out of the Summer House, where I
saw her, and begged of us softly, and melting into Tears, that we would take
her along with us. Verville was overjoyed to have his Mistress in his own
Power, under his Protection. We found our Garden-Door half-open as we left it;
nor would we make it fast as yet, lest we should have a new Occasion to go out
again on the sudden. There was in our Garden a pretty Summer House, painted,
and nearly adorned, where they did eat in hot Weather, and which stood at some
distance from the Body of the House. My young Masters and my self did sometimes
practice our Fencing there, and this being the most delightful Place about the
House, the Baron d'Arques, his Sons, and my self, had each of us a Key, that we
might go in at pleasure, and keep out the Servants, lest they should make
havoc of the Books and the Goods that were there. In this place we locked up
our Gentlewoman, whose Grief would receive no Comfort. I told her we would only
leave her a few Moments to consult her Safety and our own, and then return
immediately to her. Verville was a quarter of an Hour before he could wake his
British Footman, who had been fudling himself. As soon as he had got a Candle
lighted, we consulted a while where we should bestow Saldagne's Sister, and
resolved at last to lead her to my Chamber, in the upper part of the House, as
being frequented by no Body but my self and a Servant that belonged to me. We
returned back to the Summer House in the Garden with our Light. Verville gave a
great Shriek at his going in, which very much surpised me: I had not the time
to ask him what ailed him, hearing some Voices just at the Summer House Door,
when I put out the Candle. Verville cried our, Who goes there? His Brother,
Saint Far, answered, It Is I, What the Devil do you do here in the Dark at this
time of Night? I was talking with Garigues, said Verville, because I am not yet
sleepy. I am here for the same Reason, returned Saint Far; therefore pray let
me have the Room a little while to my self in my Turn. We did not trouble him
to ask twice; but I stealing out the Lady as dexterously as I could, and
thrusting my self betwixt her and Saint Far, who went in at the same time,
carried her away to my Chamber, bemoaning her self at a desperate rate; and
then I went down to Verville's Room, where his Man was striking a Light.
Verville then told me, with Grief in his Face, that he must of necessity return
again to Saldagne's: And what will you do with him, said I, kill him outright?
Alas! my poor Garigues, said he, I shall be the most unhappy Man in the World,
if I do not get Madam Saldagne out of her Brother's Hands. What! can she be
there still, and in my Chamber too, replied I? Would to God that were true,
replied he, sighing, I fancy you dream; returned I, No, no, I do not dream; we
have brought away her eldest Sister instead of her, said he; Why, replied I,
were you not both in the Garden together? Nothing more certain, said he; Why
then will you return to her Brother's to endanger your self afresh? since that
Sister you are in pain about is now safe in my Chamber. Ha! Garigues, cries he
again, I knew well enough what I saw: And so do I likewise; and to prove your
Mistake, do but come up and see Madam Saldagne; He told me I was a Madman, and
followed me with the greatest Trouble in the World; But my Astonishment
equaled his Grief, when I found in my Chamber a Gentlewoman I never saw
before, and not the same with her I brought from the other House. Verville was
as much amazed as my self, but more satisfied by far, finding himself with his
Mistress, contrary to Expectation. He then consess'd his own Mistake: But I
could make him no Answer, neither was I able to comprehend by what Enchantment
a Lady whom I had followed all the while, should be transformed to another, in
the time we went from the Summer House to my Chamber. I looked earnestly upon
Verville's Mistress, who certainly was not the same Person we brought from
Saldagne's. Verville perceiving me in a Quandary; What Is the Matter, says he? I
tell you once more, that I my self was mistaken. Nay, said I, it is I that am in
an Error, if Madam Saldagne came hither along with us. With whom could she come
else, replied he? I know not, nor no Body else, said I, unless it be the Lady
her self. Nor can I tell with whom I came my self, said Madam Saldagne, unless
it were with that Gentleman, pointing to me: For, continued she, 'twas not
Monsieur Verville that brought me away from my Brother's; 'twas a Man that came
into the Garden immediately after you went out of it, summoned there, either by
my Brother's Groans, or the Footmens Outcries, which alarmed him, no doubt, and
gave him notice of what had passed. He caused my Brother to be carried into his
Chamber; and my Waiting Woman having informed me of all this, and assured me he
was of my Brother's Acquaintance, and a Neighbor; I went and staid for him in
the Garden, when I conjured him to take me away with him till the next Day,
when I designed to retire to a Lady of my Acquaintance, where I would stay till
my Brother's Fury was over; which, I told him, I had all the Reason in the
World to dread. This Person was so civil as to offer to conduct me whither I
would, and promised to protect me even against my Brother, with the hazard of
his Life. 'Twas under his Conduct I came to this House, where Verville, whose
Voice I knew, spoke to the same Man; and immediately after I was brought up to
this Chamber, where you now see me. This Account of Madam Saldagne, though it did
not clear all my Doubts, yet it helped very much to make me guess how the Thing
was brought about. As for Vervile, he was so intent upon viewing his Mistress,
that he scarce minded what she said. He began to tell her a Thousand sweet
Things, without troubling himself to know which way she came into my Chamber. I
took a Candle, and leaving them together, went back to the Summer House in the
Garden resolving to speak with Saint Far, though he should be as blunt and
captious as he used to be. But I was not a little surpised to find, instead of
him, the same Gentlewoman, whom I was certain I brought my self from
Saldagne's: And what increased my Wonder was, to see her in great Disorder,
like one to whom some Violence had been offered; her Commode torn off, and her
Steenkirk bloody, as well as her Face. Verville, said she to me as soon as I
appeared, approach me not, unless it be to take away my Life, wherein you will
find less Difficulty than in offering Violence a second time to my Honor. And
as Heaven has given me Strength to resist your first Attempts, so I doubt not
but I shall be able to scratch thy Eyes out, if I cannot be the Death of you.
Is this, added she weeping, that passionate Love you professed to my Sister?
Oh! how dear I pay for my Compliance with her Follies! But when we act contrary
to our Duty, it is but just we should undergo what we stand mo^^ in fear of.
But what do you now meditate, pursued she? perceiving my Astonishment; Do you
feel a Remorse of Conscience for your base Action? If so, I can well forget it
with (...) my Heart. Thou art young; and 'twas a great piece of Folly (...) me
to trust my self to the Discretion of one of your Years. Conduct me therefore
to my Brother's again, I do conjure you for as passionate and severe as he is,
I dread him less than I (...) you, who art a brutish Monster, or rather a
mortal Enemy (...) our Family, not satisfied with seducing a young Lady, and
murdering a Gentleman, unless a more wicked Act complete thy Crime. Having
made an end of her Speech, which she uttered with great vehemence, she fell a
weeping so bitterly, that I never saw one so afficted. This, I must confess,
made me forfeit all the little Judgment I was till then Master of, amidst so
much Confusion, and if she had not ceased of her own accord to speak, I never
should have interrupted her, so much was I astonished at the Authority of her
Expostulations. But perceiving she had done speaking; Madam, replied I, neither
am I Verville, nor is he, I can assure you, capable of such a base Action as
that you complain of What! said she, are you not Verville? Did not I see you
engaged with my Brother? Did not a Gentleman come to your Assistance? And did
not you bring me hither on my Entreaty, where you have offered a Rudeness
impious both to my Honor and Youth? She could say no more, so much her Grief
oppressed her Heart. For my own part, I never was so much perplexed, and could
not apprehend how she should both know Verville, and not know him at the same
time. I told her I was an absolute Stranger to the Rudeness she complained of;
and that since Monsieur Saldagne was her Brother, I would conduct her, if she
pleased to the same Place, where her Sister was. These Words were, scarce out
of my Mouth, when I spied Verville and Madam Saldagne coming into the Room
where we were, she being absolutely resolved to go back again to her Brother's;
but how this dangerous Freak came into her Head I know not. The two Sisters
embraced each other as soon as they met, and renewed their flowing Tears, as if
they were contending who should weep most. Verville earnestly entreated them to
return to my Chamber, laying before them the Difficulty of getting into their
House after the great Alarm the whole Family was in; adding withal, the Danger
they run by exposing themselves to their Brother's present Fury; the safety of
the Place they were in, and how near it was to break of Day; which being once
come. they would enquire how all things went at Saldagne's, and accordingly
they might resolve what was most convenient to be done. Verville easily
persuaded them to condescend to this Proposition. Those two Ladies finding now
themselves secure in one another's Presence. We went up to my Chamber; whete
having examined the strange Accidents which perplexed us, we were as apt to
believe, as if our Eyes had been Witness, that Saint Far had certainly
attempted upon Madam Lery's Honor, Verville and my self knowing him capable of
the like and worse Actions. We were not deceived in our Conjectures. Saint Far
had been gaming in that very same House where Saldagne had lost his Money, and
passing by his Garden a little after the Scuffle was over, he met with
Saldagne's Footmen, who related to him what had befallen his Master, whom they
said had been set upon by seven or eight Rogues, thereby to excuse their own
Cowardice, in leaving their Master in the Lurch. Saint Far thought himself
obliged to offer him his Service as a Neighbor, and did not leave him till he
had seen him carried to his Bedchamber; after which Madam Saldagne entreated
him to protect her against her Brother's Fury, and came along with him, as his
Sister did with us. He intended therefore to secure her in the same
Summer House in the Garden where we were, as I said before; and being as much
afraid lest we should see his Lady, as we were careful he should not see ours,
the two Sisters by this Accident meeting together, just as he was coming in,
and we going out, I happened to catch his Lady by the Hand, whilst he laid hold
by a like mistake upon mine; and thus the Ladies were exchanged. Which was the
more easily done, by reason I had put out my Candle, and the Ladies so terribly
dismayed as well as we, that they did not know what they did in the Hurry. As
soon as we had left her in the Summer House, Saint Far finding himself alone
with a very handsome Lady, and having more Instinct than Reason, or, to describe
him in his natural Colors, being indeed a very Brute, he takes advantage of
the Opportunity, never minding the Consequence, or what an irreparable Affront
he offered to a Lady, that had thrown her self into his Arms for Protection.
His Brutality was rewarded as it deserved. Madam de Lery defended her self like
a Lioness, bit him, scratched him, and made him bloody all over. After all
which, he only went up to Bed and slept as soundly as if he had done the best
Action in the World. You wonder perhaps which way Madam Lery happened to be in
the Garden at the time we were surpised by her Brother, since there were none
besides her Sister and her Waiting Woman. This puzzled me as well as you; but at
last I learnt from 'em both, that Madam Saldagne, not daring to trust her
Waiting Woman with the Secret of her Amors, had persuaded her Sister to attend
her in the Garden; and this was the Person I entertained under the Title of
Maudlin. Here my Wonder was at an end, how a Chambermaid should be Mistress of
so much Wit as I found in her Conversation: And Madam de Lery told me, she was
no less puzzled to find me so witty in the Garden by Night, and such a Blockhead
by Day, when she mistook the dull Britan to be the same with me. Ever after
that we entertained Sentiments for one another something above a bare Esteem;
and I dare say she was not less satisfied than I, to find our Conditions more
equal, than if either of us had been a Mercenary Servant. The Day appeared
while we were yet talking together, We left our Ladies in my Chamber, where
they might sleep if they would, whilst Verville and I went to consult, what was
next to be done. For my part, having no Love-fancies to disturb my Breast, as
Verville had, I died almost for want of sleep; but there was no appearance, I
should abandon my Friend with such a load of Business. I had a Footman as
Subtle and Witty, as Verville's Valet de Chamber was dull and Blockish; I gave
him what Instructions I could, and sent him to make Discovery how Affairs stood
at Saldagne's. He performed his Message very discreetly, and brought us this
Account, that Saldagne's Servants reported, the Thieves had desperately wounded
their Master; but as for his Sisters, there was no more mention made of them,
than if there had never been any such alive, whether he little cared for 'em,
or because he gave positive Orders to his Servants not to speak of 'em, to
stifle such disadvantageous Rumors. I see here must be something of a Duel
after all this, said Verville; nay, perhaps something of a Murder, replied I:
Whereupon I acquainted him that Saldagne was the same Hector that intended to
murder me at Rome, and how we came to know one another in the Garden; adding
withal, that if he did but imagine, as there was all the likelihood in the
World, that I lay there in wait to take my Revenge of him; then certainly he
could not at all suspect the intelligence between his Sister and us.

I went to give an account to those fair Ladies of our Discoveries, and in the
mean time, Verville Visited Saint Far, to sound his Sentiments, and discover
the truth of our Suspicions. He soon perceived his Face full of scratches; but
whatever question Verville put to him, he could get no other Answer, save only,
that as he came from the Gaming-house, he found Saldagne's Garden-Door open,
his House in an Uproar, and himself very, much Wounded in the hands of his
Servants, who were carrying him to his Chamber. A very strange Accident, said
Verville, no doubt but his Sisters will take it very much to Heart: They are
very handsome Ladies, and I must go and give 'em a Visit. What Is that to me,
said this Brute; who then fell a Whistling, not minding or giving any answer to
whatever his Brother afterward desired to know. Verville left him, and
returned to my Chamber, where I was employing all my Eloquence, to comfort our
fair Distressed Ladies. They were Disconsolate even to Desperation; and
apprehended the roughest usage from their Brother's Jealousy and Savage
Humor, as being a Man wholly enslaved to his Passions. My Lacquy brought 'em
some Meat from the next Cook, which he continued to do for fifteen Days
together; so long were they concealed in my Chamber; which was above the rest,
and so much out of the common Road and Passage, that no Body disturbed 'em in
the least. They could willingly have put themselves into some Nunnery for
shelter; but after their sad Adventure, they had just reason to fear, their
Brother would have confined 'em longer than they should care for. In the mean
time, Saldagne's Wounds were in a fair way of Curing, and Saint Far, as we
observed, went every day to visit him. Verville stirred not out of my Room,
which was not taken much notice of in the Family, he being wont to pass many
whole Days in it, either Reading, or in Discourse with me. His Love for Madam
Saldagne increased every day, neither did she love him less. Her Eldest Sister
liked me pretty well, nor was she indifferent to me. Not that my Passion for
Leonora was abated; but I had no manner of hopes from her, tho I might have
obtained her, yet should I have made it a matter of Conscience, to render her
unhappy. Upon a certain day, Verville received a Note from Saldagne, wherein he
challenged him to meet him with a Second in the Plain of Grenelle, to decide
their Quarrel by the Sword By the same Note, he desired Verville to bring no
other but my self against him, which made me suspect he intended to take us
both in the same Trap. My suspicion was not altogether groundless, having
already experienced his Treachery; however, Verville would not mind it,
resolving to give him any just Satisfaction, and to offer a Marriage with his
Sister. He sent for a Hackney Coach, tho there were three belonging to the
Family. We went to the place of Assignation, where Saldagne waited for us, and
where Verville was much astonished to find his own Brother, seconding his
Enemy. We omitted neither Submissions nor Entreaties, to bring all things to a
fair Accommodation, but nothing less than Fighting would serve the turn of
those two unjust and irrational Men. I was about to protest to Saint Far, how
much it was against my Will to draw my Sword against him; he told me bluntly,
that he never liked me in his Life, nor could any thing endear me to him, till
he opened a passage or two with his Sword point, for his good will to enter at.
With these words he came fiercely toward me: I only put by his Thrusts for
some time, resolved, if possible to grapple with him, and so Disarm him, tho
with apparent danger of being Wounded my self. Fortune befriended my good
Intention, for he slipped down at my Feet; I gave him time to rise, and that
which should have made him my Friend, increased his Enmity. In fine, having
given me a slight Wound in the Shoulder, he vapour'd like a Bully-huff, and
cried, I think you feel me now. -- My Patience being worn out, I pressed upon
him, and having put him into Disorder, I got so happily within his Sword, that
I seized on the Hilt. The Man you hate so very much, said I, will however give
you your Life, Sir, -- He struggled a while to no purpose, and would not reply
a Word, like an obstinate rash Brute as he was, though I represented to him it
was our Duty to go and part his Brother from Saldagne, who were grappled, and
fowling over one another upon the Ground. But I perceived I must be more rough;
and therefore wrench'd his Hand, and forced away his Sword, which I threw a
great distance from him. I ran immediately to assist Verville, who was closed
with his Antagonist. When I came up to 'em, I saw afar off several Horsemen
galloping toward us; Saldagne was soon after Disarmed, and at the same
instant, I found my self run through the back by Saint Far. I could no longer
Master my Resentment, and so returned him a thrust, that made no little Wound.
The Baron d'Arques his Father, who came in at that Moment, and saw me wound his
Son, did now hate me, as much as he loved me before. He spurred his Horse up
toward me, and gave me a great blow on the Head. Those that came with him,
followed his Example, and jointly set upon me. I defended my self most happily
from so many Enemies, but must needs at last have fallen a Sacrifice to this
Multitude, if Verville, the most generous Friend on Earth, had not thrust
himself betwixt them and me, at the hazard of his own Life. He gave his own
Footman a good cut over the Pate, because he found him more forward than the
rest, to get his Masters Applause. I yielded up my Sword to the Baron, but that
could not appease him; he called me Rascal, ungrateful Villain, and all the
Injurious Names his Anger could suggest him, even so far as to threaten to have
me hanged. I boldly replied, that as much Rascal and ungrateful Villain as I
am, I had given his Eldest Son his Life, nor had I offered to hurt him, till he
had treacherously wounded me. Verville maintained to his Father, I was in the
right; but he said, he would never see my Face again. Saldagne went with the
Baron d'Arques into the Coach, where they had already put Saint Far; and
Verville, who would by no means leave me, took me into another with himself. He
set me down at one of our Princes Houses, where he had many Friends, and
returned to his Father's soon after. Monsieur de Saint Sauveur sent a Coach for
me that very Night, and carried me privately to his own House; where he took as
great care of me, as if I had been his only Son. Verville came to see me the
next day following, and told me, his Father had been informed of the Challenge
by Saldagne's Sisters, whom he happened to find in my Chamber. He afterward
assured me with a great deal of Joy, that the Business was made up by an
Agreement of a Double Marriage to be consummate, as soon as his Brothers Wounds
were healed, which were not in any dangerous place. That it lay in my Power to
be made Friends with Saldagne; and that his Father's Anger was appeased, who
was very sorry he had Misused me. He added, he wished I might soon recover, to
be a sharer of their Joy; but I replied, I could not find in my Heart to stay
in a Country, where they might Reproach me with the meanness of my Birth, as
his Father did; but would soon leave the Kingdom, either to lose my Life in the
Wars, or raise my self by my Sword, to a condition proportionate to the
Sentiments of Honor, his noble Example had inspired me with. I am apt to
believe, he was concerned at my Resolution; but a Man in Love cannot mind any
thing long besides his own Passion. Destiny was thus pursuing his story, when
they heard the Report of a Gun in the Street, and presently after one playing
upon a pair of Organs. This kind of Music never perhaps used at the Gate of an
Inn, called all those People to their Windows, that had been waked with the
Gun. In the mean time the Organs played on, and those who were no strangers to
such Instruments, took notice that the Organs played a Church-Tune. No Body
could apprehend the Design of so devout a Serenade, which however, was not yet
acknowledged for such. But the doubt was soon cleared by two pitiful Voices;
the one of which squeal'd out a Treble part, and the other roared out a
rumbling Base. These two Catter-wauling Voices, were accompanied by the Organs,
and all together made such a horrible Consort, as set all the Dogs a howling
round about. They sung Our Warbling Notes, and Ivory Lute's,
Shall Ravish every Soul, etc.
with the rest of that old Ditty; after these harsh Notes, they overheard a
Person whispering as loud as ever he could, and scolding at the Singer's for
singing so Cuckoo-like, always in one Tune. The poor Choristers replied, they
knew not what the Devil he would have them sing? Sing what you will else, said
he, speaking a little louder, for I will have singing for my Money. Upon this
peremptory Sentence, the Organs changed their Tone, and another plous Anthem
was sung; as devoutly as before. None of the Hearers had yet dared to speak,
for fear of interrupting the Music; when Rincour, who could not for his Life
hold his Tongue on this Occasion, baul'd out aloud: What! do they use to
perform Divine Service here in the Street? One of the Assistants said, they
were singing. Tenebrae in good earnest: It Is a Nightly Procession, adds a third
In fine, every merry Fellow in the, Inn, had his Jest upon the Music; neither
could any one guess, who was the Serenading Fool, nor whom he designed to
Complement. In the mean time the Anthem was carrying on to a Conclusion; when
ten or a dozen Dogs which followed a proud Bitch, ran in betwixt the Musicians
Legs; and because many Rivals cannot be long together without Quarrelling,
after some Grumbling, Snarling, and Grinning of Teeth; they fell together by
the Ears of a sudden, with so much^ Fury and Animosity, that the poor Musicians
to save their Shins, betook themselves to their Heels, leaving the Organs at
the mercy of the Dogs. These immoderate Lovers were so uncivil, in the heat of
their scuffle, as to throw down the Harmonious Machine, with the Frame that
supported it; and I should be loath to Swear, that some of these cursed Dogs
did not lift up a Leg, and pis^ upon the battered Organs, those Creatures being
very Diuretic in their Natures; especially when some Bitch or other of their
Acquaintance, is disposed to proceed to the Multiplication of her Species. The
Consort being thus out of Tune, mine Host ordered the Inn Door to be opened,
intending to secure the Organs, with the Table and Trestle on which it stood,
from farther Mischief. whilst he and his Servants were busy about this
charitable Office, The Organist returned accompanied by three Persons, amongst
whom were a Woman, and a Man mufled up in his Cloak. This Man was the very
Ragotin in Person, who designing to Serenade Madam Star. addressed himself for
that purpose to a little Eunuch, Organist of a Church. 'Twas this Monster,
neither Man nor Woman, that sung the treble Part, and played on the Organs
which his Maid had brought; an overgrown Chorister sung the Base, both for the
sum of two Testers, such was the scarcity of Provisions in the plentiful
Country of Main. As soon as the Innkeeper found out the Author of the
Serenade, he cried aloud, on purpose to be heard by all that were at the
Window: Is it then you, Mosieur Ragotin, that come with your Vespers to my
Door? You had best go to Bed, and not disturb my Guests at this time of Night.
Ragotin replied, that he was mistaken in his Man, and yet spoke it so, as if he
intended to discover what he seemed to deny. In the mean time, the Organist
finding his Instrument much battered, and being a ve^ry Choleric Creature, as
all Beardless Animals are wont to be, ^wore to Ragotin, he would make him pay
for it; Ragotin replied, he did not care a straw. Ay, but I Will make you care,
said ^he Eunuch, I will be paid my Damages. Mine Host and his Servants gave
their Votes for the Organist; but Ragotin made them understand like a parcel of
ignorant Fools as they were, that this was never the Custom in Serenades, and
so went away very proud of his Gallantry. The Musicians laid the Organ on the
back of the Eunuch's Maid, who carried it home to her Masters House. He in a
very melancholy Mood, following her with the Table over his shoulders, and
attended by the Chorister with the two Trestles. The Inn-Doors were locked up
again, Destiny wished the Ladies good Night, and deferred the remainder of his
story to the next Opportunity.

CHAP XVI.
The opening of the Stage, with other things of no less Consequence.
THE next day the Players assembled betimes in the Morning in one of those
Chambers they had at the Inn, in order to Rehearse the Play they were to Act
that Afternoon. Rancour, whom Ragotin had already made a Confident of his
Serenade, which he seemingly made some difficulty to believe, told his
Comrades, that the little Fellow would not fail to be there suddenly, to
receive their Applause for his refined piece of Gallantry. And Maliciously
entreated them, that whenever he hinted it, they would take no notice of it,
but put him off with some other Discourse. Ragotin came into the Room at the
same instant, and having Saluted the Players in General, began to mention his
Serenade to Madam Star, who at that time, proved ^ mere wandering Star to him;
for she still changed place, and never answered his Questions about what time
she went to Bed, and how she had past over the lest Night? This made him leave
her, and Address himself to Madam Angelica, who instead of entertaining him,
studied the Part she had in the Play. He next went to Cave, who would not so
much as look upon him. Every one of the Players in their turn, exactly observed
Rancour'^ Directions, and either answered nothing to Ragotin's Questions or
shifted the Discourse, as often as he begun to mention wh^^ past the last
Night. At length pressed by his Vanity, and imp^tient to suffer his Reputation
to linger any longer, he thus spok^ aloud to them all. Will you give me leave
to speak a great truth to you? You may do as you please, replied some Body Why
then, added he, 'twas I that gave you the last Nights Se^^ren^d^: What! do they
give Serenades with Organs in the Country, said Destiny? But whom did you
intend it for? Was it not, continued he, for the fair Lady that set so many
honest Dogs together by the Ears? No doubt on it, said Olive, for those snarling
Curs would never have disturbed such harmonious Music, had they not been
Monsieur Ragotin's Rivals, and jealous of him. Another of the Company would
needs have his Jest, and said, without doubt he is in his Ladies Favor, and
means nothing but honorable Love, since he Courts her in the open Street. In
short, every one in the Room had a fling at Ragotin, about his Serenade, except
Rancour, who spared him, as having the Honor of being his Confident; and it is
probable, this currish Raillery had still employed the whole Company, if the
Poet, (who, in his kind, was as Vain and Ridiculous a Coxcomb as Ragotin, and
in every thing endeavored to gratify his Pride,) had not taken them off, by
telling them with the tone of a Man of Quality, or rather of a false Pretender
to it: Now you speak of Serenades, I remember that when I was Married, I had
one bestowed on me, which lasted a Fortnight together, and consisted of a
hundred several sorts of Instruments. It ranged all over the Marcts: The
genteelest Ladies in the Place Royal, took it upon their Account; several Beaus
assumed the Honor of it; Nay, and a Man of Quality took such a fit of
Jealousy upon it, that he ordered his Men to fall foul upon those who bestowed
it on me only. But they met with their Match, for these were all my own
Countrymen, as brave Fellows, as ever pissed against a Wall, and most of them
had been Officers of a Regiment I raised, in the late Insurrection of the
Commons in our Parts. Rancour who checked his Bantering Humor in favor of
Ragotin, could not be so civil to the Poet, whom he continually plagued.
Wherefore he took up the Cudgels against this Darling of the Muses, and told
him: Your Serenade, as you describe it, sounded more of Bedlam, or the
Procession of Rams-horns, than any of Gallantry, and so probably importuned the
Person of Quality, to send out his Footmen either to silence, or drive away the
horrid Noise. And what confirms me in my Opinion, is, the Consideration of your
Bride, who died for Age, within six Months after your Hymeneal Solemnity, as
you term it, was over: Nay, but she died of a fit of the Mother, said the Poet,
-- say, rather of a fit of the Grandmother, or Great Grandmother, replied
Rancour: For, added he, in the very beginning of Henry the Fourth's Reign, she
was past having any Fits of the Mother; and to let you know that I am better
acquainted with her, than even you your self, though you tell us daily such
Wonders of her, I will now relate to you a passage of her Life, which never
came to your Knowledge. In the Court of Queen Margaret. -- This beginning of a
History drew all the Company in a Ring about Rancour, whom they knew to be
furnished with malicious Memories against all Human kind. But the Poet who
dreaded him extremely, interrupted him, saying: I lay a hundred Pistoles to the
contrary: Which abrupt Defiance, made the Company so merry, that they laughed
him out of the Room. This was his usual way, by such wagers of considerable
Sums, to maintain his daily Hyperboles, which amounted to the weekly Sum of a
thousand or twelve Hundred Impertinencies, besides the innumerable downright
Lies he vented into the Bargain. Now Rancour was the Comptroller General both
of his Words and Actions, and the Ascendent he had over him was so great, that
I dare compare it to the Genius of Augustus over Anthony; that is to say, like
to like, without putting a brace of Strollers in the Scale, against two famous
Romans. Rancour having thus begun his story, and being interrupted by the Poet,
as I said before, every one earnestly entreated him to pursue it: But he
excused himself, promising to give 'em, another time, a faithful account of the
Poet's whole Life, wherein his Wive's should be likewise interwoven. It was now
high time to rehearse the Play, that was to be acted the same day in a
Neighboring Tennis-Court: Nothing worth Observation happened at the Rehearsal.
After Dinner they acted their Play, and came off with great Applause. Madam
Star charmed the whole Audience with her Beauty; Angelica did not want
Admirers, and both of 'em acted their Parts to the general Satisfaction.
Destiny and his Comrades did wonderfully well, insomuch that many of the
Audience who had often seen Plays acted at Paris, confessed, that the King's
Players could hardly have acted better. Ragotin in his Heart and Mind, ratified
the Donative he had made of his Body and Soul to Madam Star, in presence of
Rancour, who promised him every day to persuade his Mistress to accept it.
Without this Promise, Despair had soon made this little pitiful Lawyer, the
Noble Subject of some great Tragical Story. I cannot tell whether the Men
pleased as well the Ladies of Man's in their Acting, as the Women did the Men.
Nay, if I did know the Truth of it, I should hardly discover it^ but because
the wisest Man is not able at all times to keep hi^ Tongue betwixt his Teeth, I
shall conclude this present Chapter to avoid all further Temptation.

CHAP. XVII.
The ill Success of Ragotin's Civility.
AS soon as Destiny had stripped himself of his old Embroidery, and put on his
ordinary wearing Apparel, La Rappiniere carried him to the common Goals,
because the Man they had taken, that day the Curate of Domfront was set upon,
desired to speak with him. In the mean time the Actresses went home to their
Inn with a great Attendance of Citizens. Ragotin happening to be near Cave, as
she came out of the Tennis-Court, where they had acted, offered her his Hand,
to lead her home, tho he would^ rather have paid that civil Office to his Dear
Star; he did the like to Angelica, so that he was Squire to the right and left.
This double Civility occasioned a treble inconveniency; for Cave, who had the
upper hand, as in all reason she ought, was crowded to the Wall by Ragotin,
that Angelica might not be forced to walk in the Kennel. Besides, this little
Dwarf reaching no higher than their Wastes, pulled down their Hands so much,
that they could scarce keep themselves from tumbling over him. But that which
most troubled them was, his often looking behind him to stare on Madam Star,
who was talking to a Brace of Country Beaux, that would by all means lead her
to her Lodgings against her Will. The poor Actresses endeavored many times to
get loose from their Gentleman Usher, but he held so fast, that they thought
themselves in Fetters. They desired him a hundred times to spare himself that
trouble; he only answered, your Servant, your Servant, (his ordinary
Compliment) and gripped their Hands still harder and harder. Therefore they were
fain to be patient, till they came to their Chamber-stairs, where they hoped to
be set at Liberty; but Ragotin was better bred: And repeating only, your
Servant, your Servant, to all they could say, he endeavored at first to go up
with 'em abreast, which he found impossible: Then Cave turned her back to the
Wall, and crept up side-long, dragging Ragotin after her, who dragged Angelica
in like manner, she dragging nothing, but laughing like a Fool. Now as an
Additional Inconveniency, when they were within four or five steps of their
Chamber, down comes a Servant belonging to the Inn, with a huge sack of Oats of
an excessive Weight, who with much ado, so heavy was his Load, bid them go
down again, for he could not get up again with his Burden. Ragotin would needs
argue the case with him; the Fellow swore bluntly, he would let fall his Sack
upon 'em. This made them go down again much faster than they went up; but
Ragotin would not let go his hold. The Man with the Oats pressed hastily upon
'em, which caused Ragotin to miss a step, so that he hung in the Air, holding
still the Players by the Hand, till he pulled down Cave upon him, who supported
him more than her Daughter, by reason of the Advantage of the Place. Thus she
tumbled down upon him, lighting with her Feet on the Pigmy's Belly and Breast,
and knocked her Head so fiercely against her Daughter's, that they lay all
three tumbling on the Floor. The Fellow thinking they could not easily get up
time enough, and being no longer able to support his Load, let us his Sack down
upon the Stairs, swearing and cursing like an Ostler. The Sack bursts open with
the Fall, and then came in mine Host, who scolded like mad at the Ostler. But
as he was mad at the Fellow; so the Fellow was mad as the Players, and they as
mad at Ragotin, who was as mad as the maddest of 'em all; because Madam Star,
coming not far behind 'em, was Witness of this Disgrace, not much inferior to
the late Adventure of the deep-crown'd Hat; wherein his Head was most
unmercifully (...)llowed up, not to be recovered, till a pair of Cizars broke
the Enchantment. Cave took her great Oath, that Ragotin should never lead her
again, and showed Madam Star, how black and blew he had squeezed her Hands.
Star told her, 'twas a just Judgment upon her, for Robbing her of Monsieur
Ragotin, who had engaged himself to bring her back to her Lodgings after the
Play; adding, she was glad of the Mischance that was befallen, him, (...)
breaking his Word. However, he heard nothing of all this, being all the while
in Dispute with mine Host, who threatened to make him pay the Wast (...) his
Oats, and had already offered to beat his Servant on the same account, who for
that reason beat Ragotin, and called him Pettyfogger. Angelica began to banter
him in her turn, and Reproached him with his Infidelity to Mistress Star: In
fine, Fortune did plainly show how little she was yet concerned in the Promises
made to Ragotin, of making him gain her Affection to that Degree, as would make
him more happy than any Lover in the whole Country of Main. Nay, La Parche and
Leval added to it. The Oats were gathered up again, and the Actresses went up
into their Chamber one by one, without any further Misfortune. Ragotin did not
follow them, nor can I exactly tell, what became of him. Supper-time came, and
to Supper they went: After Supper, every one withdrew to their respective
Affairs, and Destiny locked himself up with the Actresses, in order to pursue
his story.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Continuation of the History of Destiny and Star.
I Made the foregoing Chapter a little of the shortest; perhaps this will prove
somewhat longer; however I am not sure of it; but we shall see. Destiny took
his usual Seat, and resumed his Tale in this manner. I shall finish my Story as
briefly as I can possible, fearing I have tired you too much already with the
Account of my Life and Fortune. Verville having given me a Visit, as I said
before, and not being able to persuade me to return to his Father's: He left me
in all appearance much troubled at the Resolution I had taken, and went home;
where a while after he married Madam Saldagne, as Saint Far did Madam Lery. She
had as much Wit as Saint Far had Dullness; and I wonder how two Persons of such
unequal Talents have lived together in the Matrimonial Society. In the mean
time, I presently recovered, and the generous Monsieur de Saint Sanveur,
approving of my Design of leaving the Kingdom, furnished me with Money for my
Journey; and Verville, who did not forget, though now married presented me with
a good Horse, and a Hundred Pistols. I took my Journey toward Lions to pass
into Italy, with design to go once more to Rome, and after having taken my last
Farewell of Leonora, to repair with speed to Candy, there to put an end to my
wretched Life. At Nevers I lodged at an Inn which stood near the River; and
coming thither very early, and not knowing how to spend my time till Supper
were ready, I went to take a Walk on a great Stone Bridge, which lies cross the
River Loir. There were a couple of Women walking there at the same time; one of
which, that looked as if she were sick, leaned on the others Shoulder, and had
much ado to crawl along. As I past by 'em, I pulled my Hat off to 'em, without
taking notice of their Faces, and continued walking for some time on the said
Bridge, still keeping my Thoughts employed about my Misfortunes, and chiefly
about my Amors. I was well enough clad, as all those ought to be, whose
Quality cannot excuse an indifferent Habit. When I came again near these Women;
I overheard one of 'em say: For my part, I should believe it, had we not heard
he was dead. I cannot tell how I came to look behind me, having no Reason to
think they spoke of me; and yet no Man but my self was the Subject of their
Discourse. I presently found the first Lady was Madam la Boissiere, grown very
pale and wan, who rested upon her Daughter Leonora's Shoulder. Thereupon I made
directly toward them, with more assurance, than I had in Rome, having improved
my self, both as to my Person and Wit, during my stay in Paris. I found 'em so
surpised and amazed, that I verily believe they would have fled from me, had
Madam la Boissiere been able to run; and this surpised me no less. I asked
them what happy Chance brought me to the Presence of two Persons whom I
esteemed above all the World. These Words dispelled their Fears. Madam de la
Bossiere told me, I ought not to wonder to see 'em look upon me with some
Astonishment, since Signior Stephano had showed 'em a Letter from one of those
Gentlemen I waited on at Rome, by which he was informed of my being killed in
the War of Parma; adding, she was overjoyed to find that News false, which had
been so unwelcome to her. I replied, That Death was not the greatest Misfortune
that could befall me, and that I was going to Venice to court it, and, if
possible, spread the Report of my Death with more certainty than before. They
grew sad at my Resolution; and the Mother began to express a great deal of
Tenderness to me; the Cause of which I could not well guess. At last I learnt
from her self the Ground of her Civility. I was now in a Capacity to serve her;
and her present Condition would not allow her to despise and look coldly on me,
as she had done in Rome. They had met with a Misfortune which had put them to
great Streights: For having turned all their Furniture into ready Money, they
left Rome, with a French Maid that had served 'em a long time, and Signior
Stephano's Man, a Fleming like himself, who would needs return to his Native
Country. This Fellow and the Wench, it seems, loved each other enought to
venture a Match; and yet they kept their Amor so private, that no Body ever
discovered it. Madam la Boissiere being come to Rouenne, went by Water thence.
At Nevers she found her self so very ill, that she could go no further. During
her Sickness she was somewhat hard to be pleased, and her Maid more unwilling
to humor her than ever she had been before. One Morning, the Wench and her
Paramour were missing; and, which was more grievous still, the poor Lady's
Money was missing also. Her Grief increased her Distemper, and she was forced
to stay at Nevers till she received Letters from Paris, from whence she
expected a Supply to proceed in her Journey. Madam la Boissiere told me this
sad Adventure in few Words. I led 'em back again to their Inn, which was the
same where I had taken up my Quarters; where after I had brought 'em to their
Chamber, and stood a while with 'em, I retired to my own, leaving 'em to their
Supper. For my own part, I could not eat a Bit, but thought it was at least
five or six Hours while I was at Table. I waited upon 'em as soon as they had
given me notice that I should be welcome. I found the Mother in Bed, and the
Daughter received me with a Countenance as sad as it appeared joyful a Moment
before. The Mother was still more sad than the Daughter, and I grieved for
Company. We star'd a while upon one another without speaking a Word. At last
Madam de la Boissiere showed me a Letter she had newly received from Paris,
which cast both her and her Daughter Leonora into the deepest Affliction in the
World. She expressed the Reason of her Grief with a Flood of Tears, and her
Daughter Leonora wept also most bitterly; which moved me so sensibly, that I
thought I did not express my Sense of it enough, though I proffered 'em all I
could possibly do for their Assistance, with such a Freedom, as put my
Sincerity out of all douht. I am as yet unacquainted with the Cause of your
Grief, said I; But if my Life may any way contribute to your Relief, you may
set your Mind at rest. Tell me therefore, Madam, what I must do to serve you:
Money I have, if you want any; and Courage likewise if you fear any Enemies;
and the Satisfaction of having served you, is the only Recompense I expect for
doing you Service. My Words and my Countenance gave them so full an Assurance
of the reality of my Sentiments, that their Affliction was somewhat abated.
Madam de la Boissiere gave me a Letter to peruse, wherein a Gentlewoman of her
Acquaintance informed her, that a certain Person, who was nameless, but whom I
judged to be Leonora's Father, was commanded to leave the Court, and had
retired himself into Holland. Thus this poor Lady found her self in a strange
Country, without either Money, or the least Hopes of getting any. I made her a
second Proffer of the small Stock I had, which might amount to Five Hundred
Crowns; and told her, I would wait upon her into Holland, or any other Part of
the World she had a mind to go to. In short, I assured her, she had found in me
a Person that would do her all the Service she could expect from a Valet, and
serve and honor her like a dutiful Son. I blushed extremely at this Word of
Son: But I was no more that hateful Man, who was denied Admittance to their
House in Rome, and to whom Leonora was invisible; for now Leonora was much more
civil, and her Mother less severe. At every Offer I made she still replied,
Leonora would be very much obliged to me. All was scor'd upon Leonora's
Account, insomuch that one would have taken her Morher to have been only a
Waiting Woman that spoke in her Mistress's behalf: So true it is, that the
Generality of the World respect People only so far as they are subservient to
their own Interest. I left them very much comforted, and retired my self to my
Chamber the most contented Man that could be. I past the Night very pleasantly,
though waking, which kept me somewhat late in Bed, for 'twas break of Day before
I began to sleep. Leonora appeared to me that Day more nicely dressed than the
Day before; and she could not but observe that I had taken a little more care
of my self. I led her to Mass without her Mother, who was as yet too weak to go
abroad. We dined together, and from that time forward were but one Family.
Madam de la Boissiere very thankfully acknowledged the good Offices I tendered
them, and oftentimes assured me, she would not die in my Debt. I sold my Horse;
and no sooner had the sick Lady recovered her Strength, but we took a
Tilt-boat, and went down the River to Orleance. During the time we were on the
Water, I enjoyed my Leonora's Conversation; nor was so great a Felicity
interrupted by her Mother. I found her Wit as sprightly and charming as her
Looks; nor had she Reason to think mine so dull as she had found it in Rome.
What can I say more? In short, she was as much taken with me, as I was
captivated by her; and you may witness ever since you have seen us together,
how little our reciprocal Affection is diminished -- What! said Angelica,
interrupting him, is then Madam Star that Leonora? Who else? answered Destiny.
At which Madam Star was pleased to say, her Friend had reason to question
whether she were that Lenoora, whom Destiny had made the Heroin of a Romance.
It Is not upon that score I start the Question, replied Angelica, but rather
because we are ever in doubt of what we most desire. Madam Cave said, that for
her part she was confident of this from the beginning, but desired them to wave
that Discourse till Destiny had made an end of his Story; who went on thus. We
arrived at Orleance; where our Entrance was so pleasant, as well deserves a
paticular Relation. A Pack of Scoundrels, who always wait in expectation of
Strangers at the Waterside, to carry home their Goods, crowded into our Boat.
There were at least thirty that offered themselves to take up two or three
little Bundles betwixt 'em, which the weakest of these lazy Rogues might have
carried singly under his Arm. Had I been alone, perhaps I had not been so wise
as to bear calmly with their Insolence. Eight of them seized upon a little
Bundle, not weighing much above twenty Pounds, which they seemed to lift up
from the Ground with much trouble; and having got it betwixt 'em, they held it
aloft above their Heads, upon their Fingers ends. All the Mob that stood by on
the Riverside fell a laughing, and we were fain to do the like. However I
blushed as Red as Scarlet to go thorough the whole Town with such a Retinue:
For the rest of our Goods, which would not have laden one Porter, employed
twenty at least, my very Pistols being carried in State by four lusty Rogues.
The Order of our March at our Entrance into the Town was thus: First eight
Hang-Dogs, either drunk, or such as ought to have been drunk, carried the
little Box behind 'em, as I told you before. Next followed my Pistols and
Holsters, each carried by two Fellows. Madam de la Boissiere, no less vexed at
it than my self, went immediately after: She was sitting in a great
Wicker-Chair, fastened to a couple of Cowl-staves, and carried by four Watermen,
who relieved one another by Turns, and had a hundred impertinent Jests as they
went along. The rest of our Goods came after her, being only a little
Portmantle, and a Bundle covered with Canvas, which seven or eight of these
Rascals tossed from one to another all the way. I brought up the Rear of the
Triumph, leading Leonora by the Hand, who laughed so heartily, that I could not
but be delighted with their Roguery in spite of my self. As we marched along,
the Passengers stood still, gazing upon us; and the Noise they made on this
occasion drew all the People to their Windows and Doors. At last we arrived at
the Suburbs, which is the Road toward Paris, attended with abundance of Mob,
and took up our Lodging at the Sign of the Emperor. I put the Ladies into a
Parlour, and afterward threatened the Rogues so seriously, that they were
contented to take a small Piece of Money for their Pains, the Innkeeper and his
Wise taking my part against 'em. Madam de la Boissiere, whom the Money I had
furnished her withal sooner cured than any Cordials besides could have done,
found her self strong enough to bear the Coach; wherefor I took up three places
in one that was to go the next Morning; and within two Days after we arrived
safe at Paris. As we lighted out of the Coach at the Inn, I made Acquaintance
with Rancour, who came from Orleans in another Coach at the same time as ours.
He heard me enquire for the Inn to which the Calais Coach came, and told me he
was going thither immediately himself, and if we had not hired a Lodging, he
would carry us to a Woman of his Acquaintance who let Lodgings ready furnished,
where we should have a very good Accommodation. We took his Word, And found it
as he told us. This Woman was the Widow of one that had all his Lifetime
belonged to a Playhouse, sometimes as a Doorkeeper, and sometimes as a
Scene-man, and even had tried to act Under-parts, but was hissed of the Stage.
Having scraped some Money together at the Playhouse, he furnished a House, let
Lodgings, took Boarders, and by all this made a shift to get considerably. We
took a couple of Rooms, which were pretty convenient. Madam de la Boissiere
received a Confirmation of the ill News she had touching Leonora's Father, and
heard so much besides, though she concealed it from us, that it made her
relapse into her former Disease. This put off our Journey into Holland for a
while, whither she resolved to go under my Conduct; and Rancour, who was going
into the same Country to a Company of Players, was contented to stay for us,
upon my promising to defray his Charges. Madam de la Boissiere received
frequent Visits from one of her Friends, that waited at the same time with her
upon the Ambassador's Lady at Rome, and had likewise been her Confident, whilst
Leonora's Father made Love to her. This Woman acquainted her with her pretended
Husband's Retirement, and did us several good Turns during the time we staid in
Paris. I went out of Doors as seldom as I could, for fear of being seen by some
of my Acquaintance; nor did I find it a great Trouble to stay within, so long
as I enjoyed my Leonora's Company; whose Favor I gained more and more by my
constant Care of her Mother. Upon this Woman's Persuasion, who, as I told you,
came often to visit us, we went one Day to Saint Clou, to air and refresh our
sick Lady. Our Landlady came in for one amongst us, and Rancour for another. We
took a Boat when we came to the Waterside; afterward we walked in the fairest
Gardens; and having made a small Collation, Rancour conducted the Women toward
the Boat, whilst I staid behind to scan the Reckoning with an unreasonable
Hostess, who kept me longer from 'em than I intended. I got off as cheap as I
could, and hastened to rejoyn my Compapany. But I was not a little astonished to
see the Boat gone a good way from Shore, carrying my Company toward Paris, and
leaving me behind, without any notice, or so much as my Footboy that had my
Sword and Cloak to wait upon me. Standing at the Waterside, very much troubled
at their not waiting for me, I heard a great Uproar in another Tilt-Boat that
lay there, and drawing somewhat near, I perceived two or three Gentlemen, or
Persons that looked like such, who would need fall soul on a Waterman because
he would not follow our Boat. I leaped at a venture into that Boat, just as it
was launching forth, the Waterman fearing he should be roughly handled. But if
I was troubled that my Company had left me at Saint Clou, I was no less
perplexed to find that he that offered this Violence was the same Saldagne,
whom I had so much Reason to hate. At the instant I discovered him, he removed
from the place he sat in, and came just by me. I did not know which way to
look, and hid my Face from him the best I could. But finding him so near, that
it was impossible to conceal my self long, and knowing I had no Sword, I took
the most desperate Resolution that could be, which hatred alone could not have
suggested me, had it not been attended with Jealousy. I seized him by the
Middle at the same time he began to know me, and threw my self into the River
with him. He was not able to keep hold of my Clothes, whether his Gloves
hindered it, or his sudden Surprise. Never was any Man nearer drowning than he.
A great many of the neighboring Boats came in to save us, every one thinking
we had fallen into the Water Accidentally, except Saldagne, who knew the Truth,
but was not in a Condition to discover it so soon, or to pursue me. So I got on
Shore again without much difficulty, having only a thin Sure on, which did not
much hinder my swimming; and thinking it worth my labor to make haste, I got
far enough off from Saint Clou before Saldagne was fished up. As they had not a
little ado to save him, so, I dare say, they could hardly believe his Relation
how I threw him into the Water, when he affirmed I ventured my own drowning to
procure his: For I cannot imagine why he should hide it from 'em. I was forced
to go a great way about to get into Paris, and durst not enter the city till
Night, having no need to dry my Clothes, the heat of the Sun, and my violent
Exercise, having left but little Moisture in them. At length I got to my dear
Leonora, whom I found in great Affliction. Rancour and our Landlady were
overjoyed to see me again, and so was Madam de la Boissiere likewise, who the
better to make her think I was her Son, acted the Part of a distressed Mother:
She excused her self in private to me for their not staying; assuring me the
fright Saldagne put 'em into, hindered them from thinking on me; besides, that
except Rancour, the rest of our Company would have rather embarrast than helped
me, if I had engaged Saldagne. They told me, that at their going from the
Tavern, this Spark followed 'em to the Waterside, where he very uncivilly
pressed Leonora to unmask her self; And her Mother discovering him to be the
same Man that had attempted the like at Rome, she shuffled into the Boat in a
fright, and made the Waterman put from the Shore, without staying for me.
Saldagne in the mean time having a couple of Rakes like himself come to him,
got into the next Boat with his two Comrades, where I found him threatening the
Waterman to make him follow Leonora. This Adventure made me keep more within
Doors than I had done formerly. A little while after Madam de la Boissiere fell
sick, her Melancholy contributing much to her Malady; which made us remain part
of the Winter at Paris. We were informed, that an Italian Prelate, who came
from Spain, was going into Flanders through Perone; and Rancour made Interest
to have us comprehended in the Passport, in Quality of Comedians. One Day, as
we had waited upon this Italian Prelate, who lodged in the Street de Seine, we
supped in a Frolic in the Suburbs of Saint Germains, with some Players of
Rancour's Acquaintance. He and I going over the Pont-neuf afterward very late,
were set upon by five or six Rogues. I made the best defense I could, and to
give Rancour his due, he did as much as any brave Man could do, insomuch that
he saved my Life, though he could not keep me from being seized by these Robbers,
my Sword being unhappily fallen from my Hands. Rancour got very stoutly out of
their Clutches, with the loss of a sorry Cloak only. As for me, I was plundered
of all I had about me, excepting my Doublet and Breeches. And to aggravate my
Misfortune, they rifled me of an enameled Box with Leonora's Father's Picture,
which Madam de la Boissiere had left with me, to try what I could get for some
Diamonds it had round the Case. I found Rancour at the Bridge-foot, wounded in
the Arm and Face, as I was, though lightly, in the Head. Madam de Boissiere was
very much concerned for the loss of the Picture; but the Hopes of seeing the
Original shortly comforted her. In fine; we went from Paris to Perone; from
Perone to Brussels, and from Brussels to the Hague; from whence Leonora's
Father was gone about a Fortnight before over into England, where he intended
to serve the King against the Parliamentarians. Leonora's Mother was so deeply
afflicted at his Departure, that she fell suddenly sick and died. As she was
going to breath her last, she saw me grieve as much as if I had been her own
Son: She recommended her Daughter to me, and made me engage I would not forsake
her, but endeavor to find out her Father, and restore her to his Possession.
Not long after, a Frenchman robbed me of all the rest of my Money, which
reduced both Leonora and me to that Necessity. that we were forced to get into
your Company, who accepted of us by the Recommendation of Rancour. You are
acquainted with the rest of my Adventures, which since that time have been
common with us all, as far as Tours, where I think I saw the Devil Saldagne;
and, if I be not very much mistaden, I believe it will not be long before I
meet him again in these Parts, which I fear less for my own part than for
Leonora's, who would lose a most faithful Servant, if I should miscarry, or be
forced to part from her by my unlucky Stars. Thus Destiny ended his Story; and
after having comforted Madam Star a while, whom the Relation had a little
disordered, by renewing the Remembrance of her Misfortunes, which made her
weep, as if they but newly happened, he took his leave of the Actresses, and
went to Bed.

CHAP. XIX.
Some Reflections which are not amiss. Ragotin's new Disgrace, and other
Things, which you may read if you please.
LOVE, which make the young undertake any Thing, and the old forget every
Thing; Love, which occasioned the Wars of Troy, and many others besides, which
I do not think worth my while to mention here, would needs make it known in the
City of Man's, that he is as much to be dreaded in a pitiful Inn, as in any
Place whatsoever. He was not therefore contented with depriving the Amorous
Ragotin of his Appetite, but inspired (...) Rappiniere with a Thousand
irregular Desires, a Man very susceptible of them, and made Roquebrune languish
for the Operator's Wife, adding a fourth Folly to his Vanity. Bravery and
Poetry; or rather obliging him to commit a double Infidelity: For he had made
his Amorous Addresses a long while before, both to Star and Angelica, who often
advised him to desist, and not throw away his Courtship. But all this is
nothing to what I shall now relate: Love triumphed likewise over the
insensibility and Misanthropy of Rancour, who became enamored of the
Operator's Wife too, and by Consequence a Rival to the Poet Roquebrune, a
Punishment for his Sins, and an Atonement for the cursed Writings he had
published. This Woman's Name was Donna Inizella del Prado, a Native of Malaga,
and her Husband, or reputed such, Signior Ferdinando Ferdinandi, a Gentleman of
Venice, born at Caen in Normandy. There were several other in the Inn besides
the above-named, infected with the same Disease, as dangerously, if not more
than those whose Secrets I have revealed; but they shall be discovered too in
due Time and Place. La Rappiniere fell in Love with Madam Star when she acted
C^imene, and intended then to have declared his Distemper to Rancour, whom he
thought capable of doing any thing for Money. The Heavenly Bard Raquebrune
designed the Conquest of a Spa^ish Lady worthy his Courage. But as for Rancour
I cannot imagine by what Potent Charms this Foreign Lady could inflame with
Love, a Man who hated all the World. This worn-out Stroller, being in Hell
before his time, I mean in Love, before his Death, was still in Bed, when
Ragotin troubled him with his Passion, as it were the Belly-ake, came to desire
him to mind his Business, and take pity on him. Rancour assured him, that ere
that day were over, he would do him a Notable piece of Service with his
Mistress. La Rappiniere entered at the same time Rancour's Chamber, who was
still dressing himself; and having taken him aside, confessed his Infirmity to
him, and vowed, if he could bring him into favor with Madam Star, there was
nothing in his Power but he would do for him, even to the making him one of his
Assistants, and bestowing his Niece in Marriage on him, whom he designed to
make sole Heiress after his Death, because he had no Children of his own.

The cheating Rogue promiss'd him yet more than he had done Ragotin, which put
this Hangman's Purveyor in good Hopes. Roquebr^ne came likewise to consult the
Oracle: He was the most incorrigible presumptuous Coxcomb, that ever came from
the Banks of Garonne, and one who thought every Body believed what he Romanc'd
about his good Family, Riches, Poetry and Valor; insomuch, that he slighted
all the dry Jests and Bobs that Rancour perpetually put upon him, presuming
that what he did, was only for Conversation's sake: And besides, he understood
Raillery as well as any Man alive, and bore it like a Christian Philosopher,
even when it touched to the very quick. He therefore imagined he was admired by
all the Players, nay, even by Rancour himself, who had experience enough to
admire but few things; and was so far from having a good Opinion of this poor
Brother of the Quill, that he made a full inquiry into his Extraction, thereby
to discover whether those Bishops and great Lords, his Countrymen, whom he
quoted ever and anon for his Relations, were the true Branches of that
Genealogick Tree, this Fool of Noble Alliances, and Coats of Arms, together
with many other things, had caused to be drawn in an old Roll of Parchment. He
was very sorry to find Rancour in Company, though he had less need to be
troubled at that, than any one besides, it being his ill Custom, to be ever
whispering in Peoples Ears, and to make a Secret of every thing, sometimes of
nothing However he took Rancour in a Corner, and at first very gravely desired
to know whether the Operator's Wife was a Person of a great deal of Wit, or
not; because he had loved Women of all Nations but the Spaniards, and if she
were worth his Labor, he should not be much the poorer, if he presented h^^
with a hundred Pistols, which he as often mentioned upon every trifling
Occasion, as the great Family from whence he was Descended. Rancour told him,
he was not so well acquainted with Donna Inezilla, as to answer for her Wit,
though he had often met her Husband in the chiefest Cities of the Kingdom,
where he sold his Antidotes; but if he desired so much to be informed about her
Wit, 'twas but joining Conversation with her, since she began to speak Erench
tolerably well. Roquebrune would needs entrust him with his Pedigree in
Parchment, that he might dazzle the Spanish Done with the splendour of his Race;
but Rancour told him, his Pedigree would sooner make him a Knight of Maltha,
than a happy Lover. Whereupon Roquebrune with a smiling Countenance added;
Well, Sir, you know what I am. Yes, yes, replied Rancour, I know well enough
what you are now, and what you will ever be to your dying Day. The Poet went
away as he came, and Rancour, his Rival and Confident at the same time, drew
near to La Rappiniere and Ragotin, who were Rivals also, though unknown to each
other. As for old Rancour, besides that we naturally hate any one that
endeavors to rob us of what we design for our selves, and the general quarrel
he had against all Mankind; besides all this, I say, he ever had a particular
Aversion to the Poet, which this Discovery was not likely to abate. Rancour
therefore absolutely resolved, from that time forward, to do him all the
mischief he could possibly, to which his apish Nature prompted him, and fitted
him for: And not to lose time, he began that very day, by basely borrowing
Money of him, wherewith he new Clothed himself from top to toe, and stocked
himself with Linen. He had before been a sloven all his Lifetime; but Love,
which works far greater Miracles, made him more curious of his Dress in his
Declining Days. He changed his Linen oftener than did become a Stroller, and
began to Wash, Powder, and color his gray Hairs, and Trim himself so
carefully, that his Comrades took notice of it. The Players were that day
bespoken to act a Play, at one of the chiefest Citizens of Man's, who made a
great Treat, and gave a Ball at his Neece's Wedding, whose Guardian he had
been. The Assembly was kept at a very fair Country House of his, about a League
from the City; but whether Eastward, Westward, Northward, or Southward, I know
not. The Decurator belonging to the Strollers, and a Carpenter were sent in the
Morning early to make a Stage. The whole Company of Players followed afterward
in two Coaches, about eleven a Clock, that they might get thither by
Dinnertime. Donna Inezilla the Spanish Lady, made one, at the earnest entreaty
of the Actresses and Rancour. Ragotin being informed of the Business, went to
an Inn at the end of the Suburbs, where he waited the coming of the Coach, and
tied a very fine Steed which he had borrowed, to the Grate of the Parlour that
looked into the Street. He was scarce set down to eat his Dinner, when word was
brought him, the Coach was in sight. He flew to his Horse on the wings of Love,
with a great Sword by his side, and a Carabine dangling at his Breech like a
Bandoleer. He would never confess what his fancy was, to go to a Wedding with
such store of Offensive and Defensive Arms; nor could Rancour his Confident
ever persuade him to discover it. By that time he had untied his Horses Bridle,
the Coaches were so near, that he had not the time to look for a
Mounting-block, that he might appear in State on his Steed like pretty St.
George: And being none of the best Horsemen, and unprepared to show his nimble
Disposition, he did it very aukwardly; for his Horses Legs were as much too
long, as his were too short. However, he stoutly reared himself upon the
Stirrup, and threw his right Leg over the Saddle; but the Girts were loose it
seems, which occasioned a strange Disaster; for this made the Saddle turn
round, while he was bestriding the Steed. Yet all things went hitherto well
enough, but the cursed Carabine which hung on a Belt about his Neck like a
Collar, got so unfortunately betwixt his Legs before he was aware, that his
Breech could not reach the Saddle, which was an old-fashioned one, the Carabine
lying cross it from the Pummel to the Crupper. Thus he was in a very uneasy
Posture, as not being able with the tip of his Feet, so much as to touch the
Stirrups: Thereupon, his Heels being armed with Spurs, kicked the Horses side
in a place he was never used to be pricked in, which made him start more
briskly, than was necessary for a little Rider in that Posture, having nothing
but the Carabine to rest upon. This made him cling his Legs close to the Horses
sides, which made the Horse sling up his hinder Legs, and Ragotin following the
Nature of all heavy Bodies, fell into the Horses Neck, where he got (...)
bruised Nose, the Steed lifting up his Head suddenly at a jet with the Bridle
he gave him very preposterously: Now thinking to repair his Oversight, he let
go the Reins, and gives the Horse his Head, which at that very instant gives a
great lea^ and casts his Rider quite over the Saddle upon the Crupp^^ with the
Carabine still between his Legs. The Horse not being used to carry any thing
behind, makes a Croupade, whi^^ placed Ragotin in the Saddle again. The
unskilful Horse^^^ clapped his Heels close to his sides afresh, and then the
Horse flu^ up his hinder Legs more than at first, which pitched the unf^ tunate
Ragotin just upon the Pummel, where we must leave (...) as on a Pinnacle, to
rest our selves a while; for upon the Hor^^ of a Gentleman, this Description
has cost me more Pains, (...) all the Book besides, and yet I am not well
satisfied with my self.

CHAP. XX.
The shortest in this present Book. Ragotin's fall off his Horse, and something
of the like Nature which happened to Rocquebrune.
WE left Ragotin planted on the Pummel of a Saddle, not knowing how to behave
himself, and much perplexed how he should come off. I scarce believe that the
Defunct Phaeton of unhappy Memory, was more troubled with his Father's four
fiery Steeds, than was at this time our little Lawyer, with this one Horse as
quiet as a Lamb; and that it did not cost him his Life, as it did Phaeton, he
was beholding to Fortune for it, whose Capricies were a fit Subject for me to
Expatiate on, were I not in Conscience obliged to release Ragotin from the
imminent Danger he was in; having besides, many more things to Treat of,
concerning our Strollers, during their Residence at Man's. As soon as the
Disastrous Ragotin felt what an uneasy Cushion he had under the two most
fleshy parts of his Body, on which he used to sit, as all other Rational
Creatures are wont; I mean, as soon as he found how narrow his Seat was, he
quitted the Bridle like a Man of Discretion, and laid hold of the Horse's Mane,
who ran away at full Speed. Thereupon the Carabine went off: Ragotin thought he
was shot thorough the Body, his Horse undoubtedly believed the same, and made
such a foul stumble, that Ragotin lost his Seat; insomuch, that for a time, he
hung by the Horses Mane, with one Foot entangled by the Spur in the
Saddle-cloth; and the other Foot with the rest of his Body, hanging toward the
Earth in expectation of a Fall, as soon as his Spur should break loose;
together with his Sword, Carabine, and Bandeleer. At length the Foot was
disengaged, his Hands let go the Mane, and down he tumbled, tho with more grace
and skill, than he got up. All this happened in sight of the Coaches, that
stopped on purpose to see what would become of him; or rather to have the
pleasure of Laughing at him. He cursed the Horse, who stood stock still, as
soon as he had laid down his Load: But to Comfort him, they took him up into
one of the Coaches in the Poet's Room, who was willing to ride, that he might
flutter about the Coach, and Court Inezilla, who at in the Boot. Ragotin
resigned his Sword and Firearms up to him, which he put on as dexterously, as
any Son of Mars. He lengthned ^^e Stirrups, fitted the Bridle, and without
doubt went to get up more Methodically than Ragotin. But surely there was some
Spell cast upon that unlucky Horse that Day, for the Saddle being too loosely
girted, as before, turned round with him, as it had done with Ragotin; and the
string of his Breeches being broken, the Horse ran a pretty way with him,
whilst he had but one Foot in the stirrup, his other serving the Horse as a
fifth Leg, and his back-parts exposed to the view of all the Assistants, his
Breeches dangling all the way at his Heels. None of the Spectators did Laugh at
Ragotin's Mishap, because they were afraid he would hurt himself; but
Rocquebrune's Accident was attended with loud shouts and laughter from the
Coaches: The Coachmen stopped to laugh their Belly-full, and all together
hollowed at Rocquebrune, which drove him into a House for shelter, leaving the
Horse to his own Discretion, who very wisely walked back again to the Town.
Ragotin knowing he was Responsible for the Beast, alighted out of the Coach and
went after him; then the Poet having cased up his Posteriors, returned into the
Coach much troubled, and very troublesome to the rest, by Ragotin's Martial
Equipage, who had undergone this third disgrace in his Mistresses presence,
with which we shall conclude the twentieth Chapter.

CHAP XXI.
Which perhaps will not be found very Entertaining.
THE Players were very well received by the Master of the House, who was a good
honest Man, and one of the most considerable in those Parts. They had two
Chambers allotted them to lay their Clothes in, and make themselves ready for
the way, which was put off till after Supper. They likewise (...) in private,
and after Dinner, those that had a mind to walk had the choice of a Grove and a
fine Garden. A young Counselor of the Parliament of Rennes, and near Kinsman
to the Ma ster of the House, Accosted our Players, having discovered Destiny to
be a Person of more than Vulgar Judgment, and the Actresses, besides their
great Beauty, to be such as could say more than just the Parts they had learnt
by heart. They Discoursed of things agreeable to their Profession, as Plays,
and Dramatick Writers. This young Counselor said amongst other things, that
there was scarce any Remarkable Subject for the Stage, that had not been blown
upon; that all History was almost exhausted, and that Modern Authors would be
at last constrained to wave those nice Rules of Unity of Times, and stretch it
beyond four and twenty Hours: That the generality did not apprehend what those
severe Rules of the Stage are good for, being rather pleased with Action and
Representation than Recitals; and therefore such Plots might be contrived as
would meet with Applause, without either falling into the Extravagancies of the
Spaniards, or being tied up to the strict Precepts of Aristotle. From Plays,
they began to talk of Romances. The Counselor said, that nothing could be more
Diverting, than our Modern Romances; that the French alone knew how to write
good ones; but however, that the Spaniards had a peculiar Talent to compose
little Stories, which they call Novels; that are more useful, and more probable
Patterns for us to follow, than those imaginary Hero's of Antiquity, who grow
sometimes tedious and troublesome, by being overcivil and virtuous. In short,
that those Examples which may be imitated, are at least as profitable, as such
as do exceed all probability and belief; from all which he concluded, that if a
Man could write as good Novels in French, as those of Michael de Cervantes,
they would soon be as much in Vogue, as ever Heroic Romances have been.
Roquebrune was not of the same Opinion: He said very positively, that there
could be no Pleasure in reading of Romances, unless they contained the
Adventures of Princes, Nay, and of great Princes too, and that for that reason,
Astrea only pleased him here and there. And in what Histories can one find
Kings and Emperors enough to make new Romances, said the Counselor: We must
feign such, replied Roquebrune, as they usually do in fabulous Stories, which
have no Foundation in History. I perceived then, returned the Counselor, that
Don Quixot is very little in your Favor? It Is the silliest Book that ever I
read, replied Roquebrune; though it be cried up by a great many Men of Wit. Have
a care, said Destiny, it be not rather for want of Wit in you, than any Defect
in the Book, that makes you entertain so indifferent an Opinion of it.
Roquebrune, would not have failed to answer Destiny, had he but heard what he
spoke: But he was so taken up with telling his Feats to some Ladies, who were
come near the Players, that he minded him not, and promised that fair Sex, he
would write a Romance in five Parts, every Part to contain five Volumes, which
should eclipse all the Cassandras, Cleopatras, and Cyrus's, though this last have
the Surname of the Grand, as well as the Son of Pepin. In the mean time the
Counselor was telling Destiny and the Actresses, that he had writ some Novels
in imitation of the Spaniards, promising he would communicate 'em to them.
Thereupon Inezella told them, in a kind of French that had more of the Gascon
than of the Spanish, that her first Husband had the Name of a competent Writer
in the Court of Spain, having composed several Novels that were much esteemed;
some of which she had in Manuscript, which in her Opinion, deserved to be
Translated into French. The young Counselor being very curious of such kind of
Compositions, told the Spanish Lady, she would do him a great favor in letting
him have the perusal of 'em; which she very civilly granted; adding withal,
that no Body was better stored with Novels than her self; for as some Women in
their Country, will sometimes try to write both in Verse and Prose, so she had
made it her Pastime, and could entertain 'em with some of her own making.
Roquebrune confidently, according to his Custom, offered to turn 'em into
French. Inezella, who was perhaps the sharpest Spaniard, that ever came over
the Pirenees into France, replied, that it was not only requisite to understand
the French Tongue well, but that he must be equally Master of the Spanish also;
and therefore she could not give him her Novels to Translate, till she was so
well acquainted with the French Tongue, as to be able to judge whether he was
qualified for the Undertaking. Rancour, who had been silent all the while,
said, there was no doubt to be made of his Ability, since he had been Corrector
of a Printing House: He had no sooner popp'd out these words, but he remembered
Roquebrune had lent him Money, which made him pursue his Jest no farther; to
which the other, dashed out of Countenance at Rancour's Words, replied, that he
could not deny but that he had corrected some few sheets, but then 'twas
nothing but what he had published of his own. Madam Star, to shift the
Discourse, told Donna Inezella, that since she knew so many stories, she would
often Importune her to Relate some of 'em. The Spanish Lady replied, she was
ready to give her Satisfaction presently: They took her at her Word, and all
the Company seating themselves round about her, she begun a story, not in the
very same Terms as you will find in the following Chapter; but yet so
intelligibly, as made 'em guess she was Mistress of a great deal of Wit in
Spanish, since she showed so much of it in a Language, to whose Delicacies she
was a perfect stranger.

CHAP. XXII.
The Impostor Outwitted. A Novel.
A young Lady of the City of Toledo, Named Victoria, descended from the Ancient
Family of Portocarrero, had retired her self to a House she had on the Banks of
Tagus, about half a League distant from Toledo, in the absence of her Brother,
who was a Captain of a Troop of Horse in the Low Countries. She became a Widow
at seventeen Years of Age, being Wedded to an old Gentleman that had got a
great Estate in the Indie's, who six Months after his Marriage, perished in a
Storm at Sea, leaving much Wealth to his Wife. This fair Widow after the Death
of her Husband, kept House constantly with her Brother, where she lived in such
Repute, that at the Age of Twenty, all the Mothers proposed her for a Pattern
to their Children, the Husbands to their Wives, and the Lovers to their
Desires, as a Conquest worthy of their Ambition. But as her Retirement cooled
the Love of many, so on the other hand it increased the Esteem the whole World
had for her. In this Country House, she enjoyed at Liberty all the Innocent
Pleasures of a rural Life, when one Morning her Shepherds brought into her
House a couple of Men, whom they found stripped of all their Clothes, and bound
fast to a Tree, where they had been tied the whole Night. They had lent each of
them a scurvy shepherd's Coat to cover themselves withal; and in this fine
Equipage they appeared before the fair Victoria. The poverty of their Habit did
not hide from her the Noble Mien of the younger, who made her a genteel
Complement, and told her he was a Gentleman of Cordove, Don Lopaz of Gongora by
Name; who was Traveling from Sevil to Madrid about Business of great
Importance, and having overstay'd his time at Play, about half a days Journey
from Toledo, where he dined the day before, the Night surpised them; and both
he and his Men falling asleep, expecting a Mule-^^^ver who staid behind, some
Thieves finding them both in that condition, tied them to a Tree, having first
stripped them to their very shirts. Victoria doubted not the Truth of his
Relation, his good Mien speaking in his Favor; and however 'twas a great piece
of Generosity, to relieve a stranger reduced to this sad Extremity. It happened
by good luck, that amongst the Clothes her Brother left in her Custody, there
were some Suits, for the Spaniards never part with their old Clothes, though
they make new ones. They chose the finest, and that which fitted best the
Masters shape; and his Man was also Clothed with what they could find next at
hand. Dinnertime being come, this Stranger whom Victoria invited to her Table,
appeared so Accomplished, and entertained her with so much Wit, that she
thought that the Relief the afforded him, could never have been better
bestowed. They conversed together the remaining part of the Day, and were so
much taken with each other's Perfections, that neither of them slept so quietly
that Night, as they did before. The Stranger would needs send his Man to
Madrid, to fetch him some Money, and buy him Clothes, or at least he pretended
it; but the fair Widow would not suffer him, promising to lend him so much as
would carry him to his Journeys end. He made some Overtures of Love to her the
very same day, and she gave him a favorable Audience. In fine, in a
Fortnight's time, the Opportunity of the Place, the equal Merit of these two
Persons, a great many Oaths and Vows on one side, too much Frankness and
Credulity on the other, a promise of Marriage offered, and their Reciprocal
Faith plighted in the pre^ence of an old Gentlewoman Usher, and Victoria's
Waiting Woman, made her commit a Fault she was thought incapable of, and put
this happy Stranger in Possession of the most Beautiful Lady of Toledo. For
eight days together it was nothing but Love and Dear, Fire and Flame's betwixt
these two Lover's. But now part they must, and Tears succeed: Victoria indeed
had right to stay him, but the Stranger pretended he lost a great deal by not
going; however, that since he had been so happy as to win her Heart, he cared
no more either for his Lawsuit at Madrid, or his Preferment at Court, she then
was eager to have him gone; her Passion having not blinded her Reason so much,
as to prefer the Pleasure of his Society, to his Advancement. She got new
Clothes made for him and his Man at Toledo, furnished him with as much Money as
he desired; and so he set forward on his Journey to Madrid, Mounted on a good
Mule, and his Man on another; the poor Lady full of real Grief at his
Departure, and he was no less Afflicted, or at least pretended to be so, with
the greatest Hypocrisy in the World. The same day he took his Journey, the
Chambermaid making his Bed, found a Picture-case wrapped in a Letter; she carried
it immediately to her Mistress, who found in the Case the Picture of a most
Beautiful young Lady, and reading the Letter, it contained these Words, or
others to the same effect.

Dear Cousin.
Here enclosed, I send you the Picture of the Beautiful Elvira de Sylva, but
when you see her, you will confess how infinitely the Resemblance falls short
of the Original; and how much brighter this Beauty is, than the Painter could
draw her. Her Father Don Pedro de Sylva expects you with Impatience; The
Articles of Marriage betwixt you and Elvira, are drawn up according to your
Wishes, and in my Opinion, very much to your Advantage. All this, I hope, will
be sufficient to hasten your Journey.

Madrid this, etc. Don Antonio de Ribera.


This Letter was directed to Ferdinand de Ribera at Sevil. Now imagine, I
beseech you, Victoria's Astonishment at the reading of this Letter, which in
all probability could be writ to no other but her false Lopez de Gongora. She
now perceived, but too late, that this Stranger, whom she had so highly and so
hastily obliged, had disguised his Name; and by that Counterfeit, she was
assured of his Infidelity and Treachery. The Beauty of the Lady in the Picture,
made her feel all the Torments of Jealousy, and the Articles of Marriage
already drawn up, almost distracted her with Despair. Never was any Mortal
Person more deeply Afficted: Her sighs went near to burst her Heart, and she
shed such a flood of Tears, that her Head aked most intolerably. Miserable,
abandoned Woman that I am, said she to her self (and sometimes also before her
old Gentleman Usher, and Waiting Woman, who were both the Witnesses of her
Marriage.) Have I thus long been so ^^liscreet and Reserved, to commit at last
a most Irreparable Fault? And have I refused so many Men of Quality of my
Acquaintance, who would have thought themselves too happy in my Enjoyment, to
throw my self away upon a stranger, who perhaps laughs at my easy Credulity;
now he has ruined my Fame, and made me for ever Miserable? What will they say
at Toledo? And what will they say in all Spain? Can a young, base, cheating
Pretender, be Discreet? Why did I let him know I loved him, before I was
assured of the sincerity of his Heart? Could he have changed his Name, if he
had meant to keep his flattering Promises? Or can I hope after all this, he
will not Reveal his easy Conquest over me? What will not my Brother be
provoked to do against me, by what I have done against my self? And to what
purpose is he courting Glory and Fame in Flanders, whilst I Disgrace him in
Spain? No, no, Victoria, thou must do any thing to repair this Crime: But
before I proceed to Vengeance, and desperate Remedies, I must try to regain by
my Craft, what I have lost by my Imprudence: It will be then time enough to use
desperate Ways, when I have found all others ineffectual. Victoria had it
seems, a great Spirit, and Presence of Mind, since she could fix on such a good
Resolution in such a Plunge. Her old Gentleman Usher, and her Waiting Woman,
would have given her Advice: But she told 'em, she knew as much as they could
say, and that Action, and not Words, must now do her Business. So the very same
day, a couple of Carts were laden with Household-stuff and Necessaries,
Victoria giving out, amongst her Domestic Servants, that she had pressing
Business concerning her Brother, which called her to Court. She took Coach with
her Squire and Woman, and hastened to Madrid, whither her Goods were appointed
to follow. As soon as she Arrived, she inquired for Don Pedro de Sylva's House,
and being informed where abouts it was, hired one for her self in the same
Street. Her Gentleman-Usher's Name was Rodrigo Santillane, who from his Youth
was bred up by Victoria's Father, which made him love his Mistress, as if she
had been his own Sister. Having much Acquaintance in Madrid, where he had spent
his youthful Days, he soon discovered that Don Pedro de Sylva's Daughter, was
to be Wedded to a Gentleman of Sevil, Named Ferdinand de Ribere, which Match
was made up by a Cousin of his of the same Name, it being so near the
Conclusion, that Don Pedro was already providing Servants for his Daughter. The
very next day Rodrigo Santillane, in a plain and decent Garb, Victoria in the
Habit of a Widow of a mean Condition, and Beatrix her Waiting Woman, who was to
personate his Mother-in-Law, and Rodrigo's Wife, went all together to Don
Pedro's, and desired to speak with him. Don Pedro received them very Civilly,
to whom Rodrigo said with much assurance, that he was a decayed Gentleman of
the Mountains of Toledo, and having one only Daughter by his first Wife, which
was Victoria, whose Husband died not long since at Sevil, finding his own, and
his Daughters Fortune very low, he had brought her to Court to get some good
Service for her; and being informed that he was about settling his Daughter's
Family at her Marriage, he hoped he would not take it unkindly, that he came to
proffer the young Widow's Service to him, she being a Person very fit to be a
Duegna to the Bride; adding, his Daughter's Merit gave him the Confidence to
present her to him, not doubting her Breeding and good Nature, would give her a
little better Title to her Mistresses Favor, than the small Beauty she had to
recommend her. Before I proceed any farther, I must adveri^^^^ those that are
unacquainted with it, that the Ladies in Spai^ keep Duegnas in their Houses,
and those Duegnas are much the same thing as our Governantes or Ladies of
Honor belonging to great Persons: I must add to this, that the Duegnas or
Duegnes in Spain, are severe and troublesome Animals, no less dreadful, than a
Domineering Mother-in-Law. To go on with the story, Rodrigo played his part so
well, and Victoria so Beautiful as she was, appeared so agreeable in her modest
and plain Attire, and had such a promising Look in her Face, that Don Pedro de
Sylva accepted of her immediately to govern his Daughter. He proffered Rodrigo
and his Wife an Employment in his House likewise; but Rodrigo excused himself,
and told him, he had some Reasons not to accept of the Honor he intended him;
but having a House in the same Street, he would be ready to wait upon him at
any time he should command it. Thus was Victoria entertained in Don Pedro's
House, infinitely beloved both by him and his Daughter, and no less envied by
all the other Servants. Don Antonio de Ribera, who had contrived the Match
between his Faithless Cousin, and Don Pedro de Sylva's Daughter, came often to
bring Don Pedro News, that his Kinsman was on his Journey, and had written to
him at his setting forth from Sevil. And yet this Cousin did not appear: This
very much perplexed him, nor could Don Pedro and Elvira, tell what to judge of
it; but Victoria was the most concerned. However, Don Ferdinand was not able to
come so soon: For the very same day he parted from Victoria, Heaven punished
his Treachery. As he Arrived at Illescas, a fierce Dog running out of a House
unawares, affrighted his Mule so terribly, that his Leg was sorely bruised
against a Wall, and he thrown down, and his Knee put out of Joint, which pained
him so much, he could not prosecute his Journey. He was seven or eight days
under the Surgeons Hands, who were none of the most Skillful, and his Ailment
growing worse and worse, he at length acquainted his Cousin with his
Misfortune, desiring him withal to send him a Horse-Litter. The News of his
Fall afflicted 'em no less, than the knowledge of his being so nigh pleased
them. Victoria, who still loved him, was not a little Disquieted. Don Antonio
sent a Letter to convey Don Ferdinand to Madrid, where being Arrived, whilst
they were providing Clothes for him and his Retinue, which was very
Magnificent, he being the Eldest Son of the Family, and wealthy enough, the
Surgeons of Madrid, more Skilful than those at Illescas, cured him perfectly
well. Don Pedro de Sylva, and his Daughter Elvira, had notice given 'em of the
day whereon Don Antonio de Ribera, was to bring his Cousin Don Ferdinand to
them. It is probable the young Elvira did not neglect her self, nor was
Victoria without Concern, She saw her faithless Lover make his Entrance, trickt
up like a Bride^groom; and if he was so Charming in a poor disorderly Habi^
what must he be now in his Wedding-Cloaths? Don Pedro was very well satisfied
with him, and his Daughter must have been very nice, had she not been fully
pleased. All the Servants of the House stared with open Eyes upon their young
Lady's Bridegroom, and every one of the Family, was over-joyed excepting poor
Victoria, whose Heart was oppressed with Grief. Don Ferdinand was charmed with
Elvira's Beauty, and confessed to his Cousin, that she was still more Beautiful
than her Picture. His first Complements express a great deal of Wit, and he
very skilfully avoided those impertinent Fooleries, and starched Nonsense, most
Men are guilty of, in their first Addresses to a Father-in-Law, and a Mistress.
Don Pedro de Sylva locked himself up in a Closet with the two Kinsmen and a
Lawyer, to adjust somewhat that was left unfinished in the Articles. In the mean
time Elvira staid in her Chamber, surrounded with her Women, who all expressed
their Joy at the good Mien, and Noble Air of her Lover: Only Victoria stood
cold and silent, whilst the rest were in their Raptures. Elvira observed this,
and took her aside to tell her, she admired she said nothing of the Happy
Choice her Father had made of a Son-in-Law, who seemed so Deserving: Adding,
that either out of Complaisance or Civility, she ought at least to wish her
Joy. Madam, replied Victoria, your Lover's Mien speaks so much to his
Advantage, it were needless to add my Commendations. The Coldness you have
taken notice of, does not proceed from any indifference; and I were unworthy of
the Favors you have vouchsafed me, should I not share in every thing that
concerns you; and therefore I should be no less Transported with Joy at your
Marriage, than all the rest about you are, were I not so well acquainted with
the Gentleman you are to Wed. My own Husband was an Inhabitant of Sevil, whose
House was not far from your Lover's. He is, I confess, of a good Family, Rich,
Handsome, and I do believe, a Man of Wit. In fine, he is worthy of a Lady, such
as you are. But withal, you desire a Man's entire Affection, which he cannot
bestow on you, because his Heart is divided. I could wave a Discovery, which
may perhaps Displease you: But I should be wanting to my Duty, should I not
Reveal all I know of Don Ferdinand, in a Business which so nearly concerns the
Happiness or Unhappiness of your whole Life. Elvira was amazed at her Duegna's
Words, and entreated her, not to defer any longer the clearing those Doubts she
had started. Victoria replied, that it was neither to be done before her Women,
not in few Words. Elvira pretended she had some Business of Privacy in her
Chamber, where Victoria as soon as they were alone, told her: That Ferdinand de
Ribera was in Love at Sevil, with one Lucretia de Monsalva, a very Beautiful
Lady, though of a very mean Fortune, by whom he had three Children, upon promise
of Marriage; and that during Ribera's Father's Life, it was kept very secret,
after whose Death, Lucretia having claimed his Promise, he grew very
indifferent; whereupon she had left the Business to the Management of two
Gentlewomen, her Relations, which made so much noise in Sevil, that Don
Ferdinand, by his Friends persuasion, absented himself for a time, to shun the
Rage of Lucretia's Kindred, who sought for Blood and Revenge. In this posture
were his Affairs; added she, when I left Sevil, which is about a Month ago, at
which time it was also reported, that Don Ferdinand was going to Madrid to be
Married. Elvira could not forbear asking, whether that Lucretia were a greater
Beauty? Victoria told her, she wanted nothing but a Fortune, and so left her
extreme pensive; and firmly resolved, to give instantly her Father an account
of the Discovery. At the same Moment, she was called to entertain her Lover,
the Business for which he retired into the Closet with her Father, being
concluded. Elvira went to him, whilst Victoria staid in the Withdrawing-Room,
where the same Fellow came to her that attended on him, when she so generously
received them into her House near Toledo. This Servant brought a Packet of
Letters for his Master, which he had taken up at the Post Office from Sevil,
and not knowing Victoria, so much her Widows Weeds Disguised her, he desired to
be admitted to the speech of his Master, to deliver him the Letters. She told
him, it would be a good while before he could conveniently speak with him; but
if he durst trust her with she Packet, she would be sure to give it him as soon
as possibly she could get to him. The Fellow made no scruple in the Case, and
having left the Packet in her Custody, went about his Business Victoria, who
was resolved to leave no stone unturned, goes up to her own Chamber, opens the
Packet, and in a Moment seal^ it up again, together with a Letter of her own,
which she writ in have. In the mean time, the two Kinsmen made an end of their
Visit, and took their Leave. Elvira spying the Letters in her Governant's
Hands, asked what it was? Victoria coldly answered, that Don Ferdinand's
Servant had left some Letters with her, to deliver to his Master, which she was
going to send after him, not being in the way when he went out. Elvira said, it
would give 'em some further Light about the Discovery she had made. This being
what she desired, Victoria breaks open the ^eal a second time. Elvira looked
upon all the Letters, and fixing her Eye upon one which seemed to be writ by a
Woman, Addressed to Don Ferdinand de Ribera at Madrid, she read these following
Lines.

Your Absence, and the News I hear of your Marriage at Court, will soon deprive
you of a Person that valued you above her own Life, unless you suddenly return,
and ^^ke good your Promise; which you can neither defer any longer, nor deny
me; without a manifest Indifference, or Breach of Faith. If what I hear be
true, that you regard your Vows and Promises so little, which you have made
both to me and our Children, I advise you to take care of your Life; which my
Relations are resolved to take for your Treachery, whenever you ungrateful
Usage shall prompt me to call upon 'em for my just Revenge, since you enjoy it
now only at my Request.

From Sevil. Lucretia de Monsalva.


Elvira having read this Letter, was persuaded of the Truth of what her
Governante had told her. Moreover she showed it to her Father, who could not
but admire, that a Gentleman of his Quality should be so base, as to be
Treacherous to a Lady of equal Birth with him, after he had so many Children by
her. Thereupon he went to a Gentleman of Sevil for further Information, being a
Friend of his, and one that had before given him an account of Ferdinand's
Wealth and Circumstances. He was scarce gone out of Doors, when Don Ferdinand
came to inquire for his Packet, attended with his Servant, who told him, his
Mistresse's Governante had promised to deliver them into his Hands. He found
Elvira alone in the Parlour, and told her, that though the Engagement which was
between her and him, might excuse two Visits in one day; yet he only came for
the Letters his Man had left with her Duegns. Elvira freely told him, that she
had taken then from her, and had the Curiosity to break them open; no doubting
but a Man of his years, had some Amorous Engagement in so great a City as
Sevil; and though her Curiosity yielded her but little Satisfaction, yet she
had met with the Caution in Recompense; how dangerous it was for People to be
Married together, before they were thoroughly acquainted with each other;
adding, she would not debar him (...) longer of the Pleasure of perusing his
Letters. At these (...) she restored him his Paquet, with the Counterfeit
Letter, (...) making him a slight Courtesy, left him without waiting (...) his
Answer. Don Ferdinand was strangely Surpised at his ^^^tresses Discourse. He
perused the supposed Letter, and ^^^ceiv'd it was a Trick to hinder his
Marriage. He addressed himself to Victoria, who remained in the outward Room,
and told her without taking much notice of her Face, that either some Rival, or
malicious Person had contrived that Letter to abuse him. I a Wife in Sevil!
cried he with Amazement: I Children! if this be not the most impudent Imposture
that ever was set on (...), I Will forfeit my Head -- Victoria told him he might
possibly be innocent; but however Elvira in Discretion could do no less than
make a farther enquiry into the Truth of it; and therefore the Marriage would
certainly be put off, till her Father Don Pedro could be convinced by a
Gentleman of Sevil, his Friend, (whom he was gone to seek on purpose;) that
this was only a pretended Intrigue. With all my Heart, answered he; and if
there be but a Lady of the Name of Lucretia de Monsalva in all Sevil, let me
forfeit the Honor and Reputation of a Gentleman: And let me entreat you, added
he, to let me know, if you are so far in your Lady's Favor as I suppose you to
be, that I may bespeak your good Offices on this Occasion. Truly answered
Victoria, I believe, without Vanity, that she will not do a thing upon any
Body's Account, that she has refused to do on mine: But withal, I know her
Humor is such, that she is not easily appeased, when she thinks her self
disobliged: And as all the hopes of mending my Fortune depend on the Kindness
she has for me, I shall never offer to contradict her out of Complaisance to
you, nor hazard her Displeasure by endeavoring to work her out of the ill
Opinion she has of your Sincerity. I am but poor, added she, and not to get any
thing were to lose a great deal: If what she had promised to give me in case I
marry a second time, should fail, I might live a Widow all the rest of my Days,
though I am yet young enough, and not so deformed but that some body or other
may like me. But it is an old Saying, and a true one, That without Money -- She
was thus going on with a true Governante's tedious Tale; for to act^her Part to
the Life, she must talk a great deal: But Don Ferdinand interrupring her, said:
Do me but one piece of Service I shall require of you, and I will put you above
the Hopes of your Mistress's Reward: And, added he, to convince you that my
Promises are not empty Words, give me Pen, Ink and Paper, and you shall have
what you will under my Hand. Jesu! Signior, says the feigned Governante, a
Gentleman's Word is as good as his Bond -- But to obey you (I will fetch you
what you desire. She returned again with Materials enough to have drawn a Bond
of a Million of Gold, and Don Ferdinand was so Gallant, or at least had such a
Months mind to Elvira, that he signs her a Blank, leaving her to fill it as she
pleased, thereby to engage her to serve him with greater Zeal. This raised
Victoria up to the Clouds: She promised Wonders to Don Ferdinand, and told him
she wished her self the unhappiest of all her Sex, if she did not act in this
Business, as if she her self was a Party concerned. And in this she spoke a
great Truth. Don Ferdinand left her full of Hopes; and Rodrigo San^illane, who
went for her Father, being come to visit h^^, to learn how her Design advanced,
she gave him an Account of all, and showed him the Blank Paper subscri^^d; for
which he gave Thanks to Heaven with her, finding all things seemed to
contribute to her Happiness. To lose no time, he went home to the House that
Victoria had hired, not far from Don Pedro's, as I before related, where he had
filled up the Blank Don Ferdinand had given (with a Promise of Marriage
attested with Witnesses, and dated about the same time that Victoria received
this faithless Man into her Country House. He was as skilful a Penman as any
in Spain, and had studied Don Ferdinand's Hand so well in a Copy of Verses of
his own Writing, which he left to Victoria, that Don Ferdinand himself would
have been mistaken in the Forgery, and thought it to be his own Hand. Don Pedro
de Sylva, could not meet with the Gentleman he sought to be informed about Don
Ferdinand's Amors, but left a Note at his House, and came back to his own;
where that same Night Elvira unbosom'd her Secrets to her Governante, and vowed
she would sooner disobey her Father, than ever to marry Don Ferdinand, confessing
withal, that she was pre-ingaged to one Don Diego de Maradas a long while
before, and had in all reason complied enough with her Father's Commands and
her own Duty, by putting a Constraint on her own Inclinations, to satisfy him;
but since Heaven had ordered it so, that Don Ferdinand's Treachery was
discovered, she thought, by refusing him, she did obey the Decrees of Heaven,
which seemed to allot her another Husband. You may imagine Victoria fortified
Elvira in these good Resolutions, and spoke quite contrary to Don Ferdinand's
Expectations. Don Diego de Maradas, said then Elvira to her, i^ much
dissatisfied with me, for having forsaken hi^ Obedience to my Father; but the
least inviting Look from me will bring him back, were he at as great a distance
from me, as Don Ferdinand is from his Lucretia. Write to him, Madam, and I shall
willingly be your Messenger. Elvira was overjoyed to find he Governante so
favorable to her Designs. She commanded to Coach to be made ready for
Victoria, who immedia^ely went a way with a Billet-doux for Don Diego; and
being alighted at he^ Father Santillane's, she sent the Coach back again,
telling the Coachman, she would walk it whither she designed to go. (...) nest
santillane showed her the Promise of Marriage he had draw up; and she
immediately wrote two little Notes, one to (...) Diego de Maradas, the other to
Don Pedro de Sylva, her Lad^^ Father; wherein she entreated 'em to repair to
her House about Business, with the Direction where she dwelt, and subscribed
her self, Victoria Portocarrero. Whilst they were carrying these Notes,
Victoria strips off her Black Weeds, put on very rich Clothes, pulls out her
Locks, (which I have been told were of the finest Hair that could be) and
dressed her Head as nicely as if she was going to Court. Don Diego de Maradas
came in a while after, to know what Concern a Lady, to whom he was a perfect
Stranger, might have with him. She received him very civilly; and they were
scarce set down, when it was told her, that Don Pedro de Sylva was come to wait
upon her. She entreated Don Diego to conceal himself in her Alcove, assuring
him, it concerned him very much to hear the Discourse she should have with Don
Pedro. He easily complied with the Desire of a Lady of so much Beauty, and so
good Mien, and Don Pedro was admitted into Victoria's Chamber, not knowing her,
so much had her Headdress and rich Attire changed her Face, and heightened her
Majestic Air. She desired him to place himself in a Chair, whence Don Diego
could easily hear all they said, and then began in these Words: I think, Sir, I
ought in the first place to inform you who I am, because in all probability you
are impatient to know it. I am of the Family of the Portocarrero's, born in the
City of Toledo, where I was married at the Age of Sixteen, and became a Widow
about six Months after. My Father was a Knight of the Order of St. James, and
my Brother of the Order of Callatra^^ Don Pedro interrupted her, to let her
know her Father was his intimate Friend. What you tell me, rejoices me
extremely; answered Victoria, for I shall have occasion for a great many
Friends in the Affairs I design to acquaint you with. After this he informed
Don Pedro of all that passed between her and Don Ferdinand, and put into his
Hands the Promise of Marriage counterfeited by Santillane. He had no sooner
read it, but she went on thus: You know, Sir, what Honor obliges Persons of my
Quality to do in these Cases: For though Justice should be partially denied me,
yet have my Friends so much Power and Credit, that they would prosecute my
Interest to the highest. I thought Sir, it became me to let you know my
Pretensions, that you might put a stop to the Match you had designed for your
Daughter. She deserves better than to be thrown away upon a faithless Man; and
I believe you are so discreet, as not to be obstinate in giving her a Husband,
whom another has right to dispute with her. Were he a Grandee of Spain, replied
Don Pedro, I would have nothing to do with him if he were unjust and false; I
shall therefore not only deny him my Daughter, but my House; And as for your
self, Madam, both my Friends and Interest are at your Service. I had notice
given me before, that he was a Man that followed his Pleasure, even at the
Expense of his Reputation; and being of that Humor, though you had no Title to
him, he never should have my Daughter, who. I hope in God, shall not want a
Husband in the Court of Spain. Don Pedro took his leave of Victoria, seeing she
had no more to say to him; and then Victoria called Don Diego out of the
Alcove, where he overheard all the Conversation she had with her Mistress's
Father. This spared her the Labor of repeating her Story: She delivered
Elvira's Letter to him, which transported him with Joy; and lest he should be
in Pain to know how she came by it, she entrusted him with her Metamorphosis
into a Duegna, knowing he was as much concerned as her self to keep it socret.
Don Diego, before he left Victoria, wrote an Answer to his Mistress's Letter,
wherein the infinite Joy he expressed for his revived Hopes, plainly discovered
the real Affliction he had been in ever since he thought them quite lost. He
parted from the fair Widow, who presently put on her Governantes Habit, and
returned to Don Pedro's. In the interim Don Ferdinand de Ribera was gone to
wait upon his Mistress, and had taken his Cousin Don Antonio along with him to
endeavor to set all that to rights again, which had been charged against him
by Victoria's feigned Letter. Don Pedro found'em with his Daughter, who knew
not what to answer, when they both desired no better Justification, than only a
due Enquiry, whether there ever were in Sevil such a Lady as Lucretia de
Monsalvo. They repeated the same Plea to Don Pedro, to clear Don Ferdinand; to
which he answered: That if that Engagement with the Lady of Sevil was a
Supposition, it was so much the easier defeated; but that he came from a Lady
of Toledo, named Victoria Porto-ca^^ero, to whom Don Ferdinand had promised
Marriage, and to whom he was still more engaged, having been so generously
assisted by her, when a mere Stranger to her; which he could no^ deny, since
she had under his Hand and Seal a Promise of Marriage from him; adding, a
Person of Honor ought not to court a Wife at Madrid, whilst he had one already
at Toledo: At these Words he showed the two Cousins the Promise of Marriage in
due Form. Don Antonio knew his Cousin's Writing and Don Ferdinand mistaking it,
though he were confident he had never given any, was quite confounded at the
sight of it. The Father and the Mother withdrew, after they had coldly bid them
adieu. Don Antonio quarreled with his Cousin for employing him in this Treaty,
when he had another on foot before. They took Coach together, where Don Antonio
having made him confess his unhandsom Proceeding with Victoria, reproached him
a Thousand times with the Heinousness of the Fact, and represe^^ed to him the
evil Consequence that was like to attend it. He told him, he must not think of
getting a Wife, not only at Madrid, but in any part of Spain; and that he were
happy if he could get off by marrying Victoria, without forfeiting his Life
with his Honor, Victoria's Brother being a Person not used to put up so foul a
Business without full Stisfaction. It was Don Ferdinand's Part to be silent,
whilst his Cousin continued his Reproaches. His Conscience sufficiently accused
him of Treachery and Falsehood against a Lady that had so highly obliged him;
but this Promise of Marriage almost distracted him, not knowing by what strange
Enchantment they had made him grant it. Victoria being come back to Don Pedro's
in her Widow's Weeds, delivered Don Diego's Letter to Elvira, who told her how
the two Kinsmen had been there to justify themselves; but that Don Ferdinand
was charged with other-guess Practices, than his Amors with the Lady of Sevil;
she afterward related what Victoria knew better than her self; though she
pretended to admire and detest Don Ferdinand's Baseness. That same Day Elvira
was invited to a Play at one of her Relations. Victoria, whose Thoughts still
ran upon her own Affairs, hoped, if Elvira would follow her Counsel, that this
Play would prove favorable to her Design. She told her young Lady, that if she
had a mind to meet her Lover Don Diego, there was nothing more easy, her
Father's House being the most convenient that could be; and that since the Play
was not to begin till Midnight, she might go out a little earlier, and have
time enough to speak with Don Diego, and then go to her Relations. Elvira, who
really loved Don Diego; and had consented to marry Don Ferdinand, only out of
Respect to her Father's Command, showed no Reluctance to do whatever Victoria
propounded. Wherefore they took Coach as soon as ever Don Pedro was gone to
Bed; and went to Victoria's House. Santillone, as Master of the Family, and
Beatrix, who personated the Mother-in-Law, welcomed them very civilly. Elvira
wrote a Billet to Don Diego, which was delivered immediately; whilst Victoria
dispatched another privately away to Don Ferdinand in Elvira's Name; to let him
know it was in his Power to complete the March, on which his extraordinary
Merit engaged her to adventure, as not desiring to make her self unhappy for
ever by losing him, only to please a Father's crabbed suspicious Humor. In the
same Note she gave him such particular Directions to find the House, that it
was impossible he should miss of it: Which Note was carried a little while
after that other from Elvira, to Don Diego. Victoria wrote a third likewise,
which Santillane carried himself to Don Pedro de Syl^^a, and by which she
informed him, as a trusty Governante, that his Daughter, instead of going to
the Play, would needs stop at her Father's House, and had sent for Don
Ferdinand to consummate her Marriage with him; which she believing to be
against his Consent, she though her self bound to give him notice of it, that
he might know he was not at all mistaken in the good Opinion he entertained of
her Honesty, when he chose her to be his Daughter's Governante. Santillane
likewise told Don Pedro, his Daughter had charged him not to come thither by
any means without bringing an Algouazil along with him, which is an Officer
much like a Commissary in Paris. Don Pedro being in Bed, hastened to put on his
Clothes in a great Passion. But whilst he is dressing himself, and sending for
a Commissary, let us go back and see what they are doing at Victoria's. By good
Fortune the Notes came safe to the Brace of Lovers Hands. Don Diego, who had
received his first, came likewise first to the Assignation. Victoria met him at
the Door, and conducted him into a Chamber, where she left him with Elvira. I
will not trouble you with the Relation of all the Endearments which passed
betwixt these young Lovers; and if I would, Don Ferdinand's knocking at the
Door gives me not time enough. Victoria lets him in her self, after having
magnified the great Service she did him on this Occasion; for which the Amorous
Spark returned her a Thousand Thanks, promising he would yet do more for her
than all his former Promises engaged him to. She leads him into a Chamber,
where she desired him to stay a while for Elvira, who was coming, and so locked
him in without any Light; telling him, his Mistress would needs have it thus;
but that 'twould not be long before he should be visible again; adding, a young
Lady's Modesty would not suffer her to bear, without blushing, the Sight of him
for whom she did so bold an Action. This done, Victoria, with all the haste she
could, attired her self as well and as nicely as the short time would admit.
She goes into the Chamber where Don Ferdinand was, who had not the least
Suspicion but that she was Elvira, being no less young than she, and having
Perfumes about her, according to the Spanish Fashion, as would have made a
Chambermaid pass for a Woman of Qual^ty. Thereupon Don Pedro, the Algouazil,
and Santillane arrive. They enter the Chamber where Elvira was in private with
her Lover; at which they both were not a little surpised. Don Pedro was
blinded by the first Transports of his Passion, that he was ready to run the
Person through the Body with his Sword, whom he, took for Don Ferdinand. The
Commissary discovering it was not he but Don Diego, held back his Arm, bidding
him have a care what he did, since it was not Don Ferdinand de Ribera that was
with his Daughter, but Don Diego de Maradas, a Person of as great Quality and
Riches as he. Don Pedro at this behaved himself like a discreet Gentleman, and
raised up his Daughter, who had cast her self upon her Knees at his Feet. He
wisely considered, that if he should cross her Inclination, by opposing this
Match, he would create both her and himself a great deal of Trouble; and
besides, that he could not pitch upon a better Son-in-Law, if he had had the
choosing of him himself. Santillane desired Don Pedro, the Algouazil, and all
those that were with 'em in the Room to follow him, and led them to the Chamber
where Don Ferdinand was shut up with Victoria. They commanded the Door to be
opened in the King's Name: Don Ferdinand letting them in, and seeing Don Pedro,
attended with the Commissary, told them, with a great deal of Confidence, that
he was with his Wife Elvira de Sylva. Don Pedro answered, he was mistaken, his
Daughter being married to another; and as for you, added he, you cannot deny
but Victoria Porto-carrero is your lawful Wife. Victoria then undiscovered her
self to her faithless Gallant, who remained full of Confusion. She expostulated
his Ingratitude; to which his Silence was his only Plea, as well as to the
Commissary, when he told him he could do no less than carry him away to Prison.
In short, his Romorse of Conscience, and fear of Imprisonment, together with
Don Pedro's Exhortations, who minded him of his Honor and Reputation, joined
to Victoria's Tears and Beauty, nothing inferior to Elvira's, and above all the
rest, some Sparks of Generosity still remaining in his Heart, notwithstanding
his Debaucheries and Follies of Youth, made him yield to Reason and Justice,
and Victoria's bright Charms. He tenderly embraced her, she being likely to
swoon in his Arms, which no doubt but his warm Kisses preserved her from. Don
Pedro, Don Diego, and Fair Elvira shared in Victoria's Happiness, and
Santillane and Beatrix were ready to die for Joy. Don Pedro very much commended
Don Ferdinand for thus nobly repairing the Wrongs he had committed. The two
young Ladies embraced each other with as great Testimonies of Love, as if they
had hugged their own Husbands. Don Diego de Maradas made a Thousand
Protestations of his Obedience to his Father-in-Law, or he that should be so in
a short time, Don Pedro, before he went home with his Daughter, made them
promise that they should all come and dine the next Day at his House, where for
fifteen Days following, he would endeavor by solemn Rejoycings, to dispel the
Thoughts of their past Troubles. The Algouazil was invited too, who promised to
be there: Don Pedro took him along with him; and Don Ferdinand remained with
Victoria, who now had as much Reason to bless her good Fortune, as she formerly
had to curse it.

CHAP. XXIII.
An unexpected Misfortune, which prevented the Acting of the Play.
INezilla recounted her Story with admirable Grace: Roqu^brune was so pleased
with it, that he caught up her Hand, and kissed it whether she would or no. She
told him in Spanish, That Great Men and Fools have the liberty to do any thing;
for which Rancour gave her Thanks in his Heart. This Spanish Lady's Face began
to break, yet there were many fine Remains of her former Beauty to be seen. But
had she been less handsome, her Wit made her to be preferred to a younger
Person. All those that heard the Story agreed in this, that she had made it
very entertaining in a Language she was but yet a Novice in, being oftentimes
obliged to intermix Spanish and Italian with it to express her Meaning. Madam
(...) told her, that instead of begging Excuse for putting her to the trouble
of speaking so long, she expected her Thanks for giving her so fair an
Occcasion to show her extraordinary Wit. The rest of the Afternoon was spent in
Conversation the Garden being full of Ladies, and many Citizens of Note till
Supper-time. They supped after the way of Man's; that is to say, they made very
good Cheer; which being over, every one took their Places to see the Play: But
Madam Cave and her Daughter were missing. They sent to seek them out; and it
was half an Hour before any Tidings came. At last they heard a great noise
without the Hall; and presently after in comes Madam Cave, with dishevelled
Hair, her Face bloody and bruised, crying out, like a distracted Creatute, that
her Daughter was stolen away. Her Sobs and Sighs did so interrupt her Speech,
that it was a long time before she could make 'em understand how a couple of
Strangers, being through a Backdoor got into the Garden, where she and her
Daughter were rehearsing their Parts, one of 'em seized upon her, whose Eyes
she would almost scratcht out of his Head, seeing two others take away her Daughter
by force; the same Villain having put her into that sad Condition they saw, and
afterward, mounting on Horseback, followed his Comrades, one of whom held
Angelica before him, She told 'em likewise, that she pursued 'em as far as she
could, crying out, a Rape; but finding no Body was within hearing, she hasted
back again to the House to beg their Assistance.

With these last words, she shed such a Flood of Tears, as moved all the
Beholders with Pity. Destiny, got presently on the back of a Horse, on which
Rogatin was just Arrived from Man's, (but whether or no it was the same that
threw him in the Morning. I cannot justly tell.) Many other young Men mounted
the Horses they could lay their Hands on, and rode after Destiny, who was got a
good way before 'em. Rancour and Olive marched on Foot, with their Swords in
their Hands, in the Rear of the Horse; and Roquebrune staid with Star and
Inezilla, who were endeavoring to Comfort Cave as well as they could. Some
found fault with him, for not going along with the rest, ascribing it to want
of Courage; but others more favorable, have commended his Discretion, for
staying with the Women. In the mean time, the Guests were reduced to change
their Comedy for Dancing, and having no Fiddlers, because they expected a Play,
they trip'd about, by the singing of some of the Company. Poor Cave found her
self ^o Disordered, that she went to Bed in one of their Dressing-Chambers:
Star took as much care of her, as if she had been her own Mother, and Inezilla
was very Officious likewise. The Indisposed Woman desired they would leave her
alone, and so Roquebrune leads the two Ladies into the Hall, where was the rest
of the Company. They were hardly set down, but one of the House-Maids came and
told Star that Cave desired to speak with her; she promised the Poet and
Spanish Lady to return immediately to ^^em, and went to Cave^ It Is probable
that if Roquebrune had any Wit in him, he made use of that Opportunity, to
acquaint the fair Inezilla with his Necessities. However, as soon as Cave saw
Star she desired her to make the Door fast, and come to her Bedside. Star
having seated her self as she desired, the first thing she did, was to Weep
afresh, and then she laid hold of her Hands, bathing 'em with her Tears; and
Groaning and Sobbing in a lamentable manner. Star endeavored to comfort her,
giving her hopes, her Daughter would soon be recovered again, her Ravishers
being persued by so many People. I wish she may never return, said she: Weeping
still more and more, I wish she might never be found, repeated she again, and
that this were all my Grief: But I must blame her most; Nay, I must have her;
and curse the hour I brought her into the World. Look here I said she, putting
a Paper into Star's Hands: Look and satisfy your self, what a fine Companion
you had, and read in this Letter the Sentence of my Death, and my Child's
Infamy. Cave sell a Weeping again and Star perused the following Note, which
you may read if you think fit.

You ought not to doubt the Truth of what I have often told you^ of my Quality
and Fortune, since there is no probability that I should deceive a Person, to
whom I cannot Recommend my self, but by my Sincerity. This, fair Angelica, is
the only way by which I can Merit your Favor. And therefore you may safely
promise to grant my Request which I cannot, nor shall not desire to obtain,
till I have convinced (...) of my Reality.

As soon as she had perused this Letter, Cave asked her, if she knew that Hand?
As well as my own, replied Star: It is Le^^der's my Brother's Servant, that
writes all our Parts. This is the Traitor that will break my Heart, said the
poor Woman, see if he have not contrived it fairly, added she, giving another
Letter of the same Leander's Writing into Madam Star's Hands, which you may
read as follows, Word for Word.

It rests only in you to compl^^^ my Happiness by continuing in the same
Resolution, you were in two days since. My Father's Tenant, who is used to
supply me with Money, has sent me a hundred Pistols, and a brace of good
Horses, which will be more than enough to carry us both into England; and being
there, I am much deceived, if a Father, who loves his only Son more than his
own Life, do not quickly condescend to all his desires, to make him return
again.

Well, said Cave, what think you now of your Companion, and your Brother's
Servant? What think you of that Girl, I had bred up with so much Care; and that
young Fellow, whose Wit and Discretion we so often admired? My greatest Wonder
is, that they were never observed to speak to one another; and that my
Daughter's sprightly Humor, seemed not in the least to incline her to Love:
And yet she is in Love, my Dearest, Star, and so desperately, that it argues as
much of Madness, as of Affection. I found her this very day writing to her
Leander, in such passionate Expressions, that if I had not Surpised her my
self, I could never have believed it. You never heard her speak such Language
yet: Ah! had I not torn her Letters in my Fury, you would be convinced that at
Sixteen years old, she knows as much, as those who have practiced Cocquetry all
their Lives-time. I carried her aside into the Grove, whence she was taken from
me, to chide her for the ill return she made me, for all the Pains and Trouble
I have endured on her Account. I will acquaint you with my Sufferings, added
she, and then judge you, whether ever any Daughter were more obliged to love
her Mother. Star knew not what to answer to these just Complaints; and besides,
'twas Wisdom to let her Affliction take its course. But, continued (...) if he
were so fond of the Daughter, why should he abuse the Mother ^ For one of his,
Company, who laid hold on me, beat me unmercifully; Nay, struck me several
times, after I had done struggling with him And if this unlucky Fellow be so
Rich as he brags, why does he Spirit away my Child like a Thief? Cave thus
bemoaned her self for a long while, Star still comforting her as well as she
could. The Master of the House came to know how she did and to acquaint her
that there was a Coach ready at her Service, if the desired to return to Man's:
But she begged the Liberty to remain there that Night, to which he readily
Condescended. Star staid there also to keep her Company, and some Ladies of
Man's took Inezilla into a Coach with 'em, she being unwilling to be longer from
her Husband. Roquebrune, who could civilly leave the two Actresses, was very
sorry he could not wait upon Inezilla; but we cannot have every thing we desire
in this World.

The End of the first Part.
SCARRON'S Comical Romance. PART. II.
CHAP. I.
Which is but an Introduction to the rest.
THE Radiant Sun shone perpendicularly upon our Antipodes, and lent no more
Light to his Sister, than she ^ad need of, to guide (...) Steps in a very dark
Night. A ^rofound Silence o'er-spread all the Earth, unless it be those ^laces
where Crickets, Owls, or Serenading-Fops were found. ^n short, all Nature lay
hushed in Sleep, (or at least, all Na^^re ought to have been a-sleep) except
some Poets, who had ^^abbed Verses to turn into Measure and Rhyme; some of those
^^fortunate Lovers, whom we call Damned Souls, and all o^^er Animals both
reasonable and unreasonable, who that ^ight had any thing to do. 'Twere
needless to tell you, that ^^stiny was one of those that did not Sleep, no more
than the ^avishers of Mistress Angelica, whom he pursued as fast as he ^^^ld
Gallop a Horse, whose Way was often obscured by the ^^fficious Clouds, which
robbed the Earth of the feeble Light the Moon. Destiny had a tender Love for
Mistress Cave, ^he because she deserved it, and that he was sure of her
Af^^ctions; (...) her Daughter less dear to him, for his ^^striss Star being
necessitated to follow the Stage, he could not have found in all the strolling
Companies of the Kingdom, two Women more Virtuous than They. Not but that some
of that Profession are Virtuous, but according to the general Opinion of the
World, who perhaps may be mistaken, they are more light of Virtue, than of old
Embroidery or Paint. To go on with our proper Business: Our Generous Stroller
galloped after those Ravishers, with more Swiftness and Animosity than the
Lapithae after the Centaurs. He went first of all through a long Walk, into
which opened the Garden-door, at which Angelica was carried away, and having
galloped a little while, he struck at a venture into a little hollow Lane, as
are most Lanes in Main. This Lane was also full of Wheel-tracts and Stones,
and though 'twas Moonshine, yet the Darkness was such, that Destiny could not
persuade his Steed to go faster than a broken Pace. He was inwardly Cursing
this crabbed Way, when he felt either a Man or a Devil Leaping on Horseback
behind him, and Clasping his Hands about his Neck. Destiny was terribly
Frighted, and his Horse so much Startled, that he had thrown off his Rider, had
not the Phantom who invested him within his Arms, kept him firm on the Saddle.
His Horse rode away with him, like a Horse in a Fright, and Destiny put him on
with his Spurs, not knowing what he did, very much dissatisfied, to feel two
naked Arms about his Neck, and next his Cheek a cold Face, which blew in time
with the cadence of the galloping Nag. The Race proved long, because the Lane
was not a short one; At last, at the entrance into a Heath, the Horse abated
his impetuous Course, and Destiny his Fear; for Custom brings us by degrees to
bear with the most intolerable Evils. The Moon now shone with a clearer Light,
on purpose to let him see, that he had a great Man stark Naked behind him, and
a very homely Face next his. He did not ask who he was, (wheter out of good
Manners I cannot tell) but still kept his Horse on the Gallop, though by this
time he began to Breath short and thick, and when he least expected it, the
Hind-Rider dropped on the Ground, and fell a Laughing. Destiny put on his Horse
a^ main, and looking behind him, he saw his Phantom running as fast as he could
drive toward the Place from whence he came. Destiny confessed since, that no Man
can be more Frightde than he was at that time. About a Hundred Steps farther he
came to a great Road, that led him to a Hamlet, where he found all the Dogs
awake, which made him believe that those he pursued might have gone that way.
In order to b^ better informed, he did all he could to rouse the Inhabitan^^ of
three or four Houses that stood on the (...) could no^ prevail to be heard, but
was insulted and barked at by the Dogs. At last, hearing a Child cry in the
last House he met with; he caused the Door to be opened with severe Threats;
and learnt of a Woman, trembling in her Smock, that some Troopers were gone
through their Town, carrying with them a Woman who wept like a Child, and that
they had much ado to still her noise. He told the same Woman the Adventure he
had with the Naked-man, and she informed him, that he was a Peasant of their
Village who was run Mad, and roved up and down. What this Woman told him about
those Troopers who went through that Town, encouraged him to go farther, and
made him request his Steed to mend his Pace. I will not recount how often he
Stumbled, and was Frighted at his own Shadow: It Is enough to inform you, that
Destiny lost his Way through a Wood, and Riding sometimes in the Dark, and
sometimes in the Moonshine, he at last met with Break of Day near a Country
Farm, where he thought ^it to let his Horse Feed, and where we will leave him,

CHAP. II.
Of Boots.
WHilst Destiny grop'd his Way in the dark, in his pursuit of those who had
Stolen away Angelica, Rancour, and Olive, who did not take that Rape so much
to Heart, did not run so fast as he after the Ravishers; and besides, you must
consider they were on Foot, therefore they did not go far, and having found in
the next Village, an Inn that was open, they went in, and asked for a Bed. The
House being almost full; they were shown a Room, where lay one, (either a
Gentleman or a Plebian) who had Supped in the Inn, and being upon Business
which required haste, (but which never came to my Knowledge) reckoned to be
gone at Break of Day. The Arrival of our Strollers did not favor his Design of
getting betimes on Horseback; for they waked him ^ut of his first Sleep, for
which perhaps he curst'em in his Heart, but the sight of two Men that looked
like something; was undoubtedly the Reason why he did not complain aloud.
R^ncour, who had an accostin Behavior, first begged his Pardon for their
interrupting his Repose, and then asked him from whence he came? He told them
he came from Anjon, and was going into Normandy, about a Business that required
haste. Rancour went on with his Questions while he was undressing himself, and
the Sheets airing: But as they were all impertinent, and of no use to either,
especially to the poor man whom they had waked, he was desired to forbear, and
suffer him to go to sleep. Rancour begged heartily his Pardon, and at the same
time Self-love banishing out of his Breast the Love of his Neighbor, he
resolved to appropriate to himself a Pair of new Boots, which the Ostlers-boy
brought into the Room, after having cleaned them. Olive, who at that time had
only a mind to a sound Sleep, went into Bed, whilst Rancour sat by the Fire,
not so much to see the Faggot they had lighted, burnt out, as to satisfy his
Noble Ambition, of having a new Pair of Boots at another Man's Expense. Now
as soon as he thought that the Man whom he was going to rob, was fast asleep, he
took his Boots which stood at his Beds-feet, and having put them on without
Stockins, not forgetting the Spurs, he went thus Booted and Spurred, into Bed
to Olive. It Is probable he lay as near the side of the Bed as he could, lest
his armed Legs should touch the naked ones of his Bed-fellovv, who would
undoubtedly have raised a Noise about this new Way of Lying betwixt two Sheets,
and by that means make his Plot miscarry. The remaining part of the Night was
pretty quiet: Rancour Slept, or at least dissembled Sleep: The Cocks crew; Day
came, and the Man who lay in the same Room with our Strollers, ordered a Fire
to be kindled, and began to Dress himself. When he went to put on his Boots, a
Maid offered him Rancour's old ones, which he flung down with Contempt; the
Maid obstinately maintained they were his, whereupon he fell into a great
Passion, and made a devilish Noise. The Innkeeper came up into the Room, and
Swore upon the Faith of an Honest Innkeeper, that there were no other Boots
besides his own, not only in his House, but also in all the Village, the Parson
himself never going on Horseback. Thereupon he began to entertain him with the
good Qualities of the Parson, and tell him how he came by his Living, and how
long he was in Possession of it. The Innkeepers idle Talk, made him lose all
Patience. Now Rancour and Olive, who waked at the Noise, took cognizance of the
Business; and Rancour exaggerated the enormity and hainousness of the Fact, and
told the Innkeeper, that 'twas a very Foul thing. I care no more for a Pair of
new Boots, than for an old Pair of Shoes, (said the poor Bootless Man to
Rancour, were it not that I am upon a Business of great Importance, for a Man
of Quality, whom I Would choose to serve before my own Father, and if I could Buy
other Boots, I Would give any Price for 'em, were they never so bad. Rancour who
sat on the Bed, shrugg'd up now and then his Shoulders, and answered him
nothing, keeping his Eyes still fixed on the Innkeeper and his Maid, who looked
for the Boots to no purpose) and the Wretch that lost them, who in the mean
time did fret like a Mad man, and perhaps designed to Hang himself, when
Rancour out of an unexampled and unwonted Generosity, said aloud, and thrusting
himself into the Bed, like one who is almost dead for want of Sleep; Zounds,
Sir, don't keep such a Noise about your Boots, but rather take mine, upon
Condition you let us Sleep, which is no more than what you desired of me last
Night. The unfortunate Man, who now ceased to be so since he found a Pair of
Boots, had much ado to believe his own Ears. He mustered a great deal of
Nonsense to return him Thanks, which he uttered with so passionate a Tone, that
Rancour feared lest he should come at last and embracc him a bed. Wherefore he
cried out in a Passion, and Swearing most learnedly: Zounds, Sir, what a
troublesome Man you are, both when you lose your Boots, and when you thank
those that furnish you again. Once more, take mine in God's Name, and all I ask
for 'em, is, that you let me Sleep, or else give me my Boots back again, and
make as much Noise as you please. He begun to open his Mouth in order to reply,
when Rancour cried out, Good God! let me Sleep, or let me have my Boots. The
Innkeeper, who by this time had a great Respect for Rancour, from this
Imperious way of speaking, thrust his Guest out of the Chamber, well knowing he
would have the last, like one who was highly thankful for a Pair or Boots so
generously given: However he was fain to leave the Room, and go into the
Kitchen to put on his Boots, at which time Rancour began to Sleep with more
Tranquillity than he had done in the Night, his sleepy Faculty not being
disturbed either by this wakeful Desire of Stealing a Pair of Boots, or the
Fear of being taken in the very Fact. As for Olive, who had made a better use
of the Night, he got up betimes, called for some Wine, and fell a Drinking,
which was the best thing he could do. Rancour slept till Eleven of the Clock,
and as he was Dressing himself, Ragotin came into the Room. He had been that
Morning visiting the Actresses at their Toilet, and Mistress Star having told
him she had but little Reason to think him one of her Friends, since he did not
go after her Companion as well as the rest, he promised not to return to Man's
before he had learnt News of her: But not finding a Horse, either for Love or
Money, he could never have kept his Promise, had not his Miller lent him his
Mule, which he mounted without Boots, and so arrived (as I said before) at the
Village where the two Strollers had lain. Rancour had a strange ready Wit; and
so he no sooner saw Ragotin in Shoes, but he thought Fortune favored him with
an opportunity of concealing his Theft, which he was much in pain how to do.
Wherefore he presently desired him to lend him his Shoes, and to take his
Boots, which being new, did hurt one of his Feet. Ragotin accepted his Proposal
with much joy, for as he was Riding on his Mule, the Tongue of the
Stirrup-buckle had torn his Stockins, which made him heartily wish for a Pair
of Boots. Now to acknowledge the Favor in some measure, he paid for the
Players Dinner, as well as for his own and his Mule's. And because since his
late Fall, (when his Carabine went off betwixt his Legs) he made an Oath never
to get upon the Back of any Saddle-Beast, without taking care of his Safety, he
therefore made use of a jossingblock; but yet with all this Precaution, he had
much ado to get into the Pack-saddle. His Brain was too full of Quicksilver to
be judicious; a sign of which was his turning up the Tops of his Boots up to
his Waste, which hindered him from having the free use of his Hams, that were
none of the most vigorous in the Province, However Ragotin, mounted on his
Mule, and the Strollers on Foot, set forward on their Journery, and followed
the next Road they came at. As they were going along. Ragotin opened his Mind
to the Strollers, and told them his Design of turning Player, and acting in
their Company, protesting withal, that though he did not doubt but in a short
time he would prove the best Actor in the Kingdom, yet he did not expect any
profit from his Profession, and that he only did it out of Curiosity, and to
let the World know, that he was fit for any thing he had a mind to undertake.
Rancour and Olive fortified him in his noble Design, and what with Commending
and Encouraging of him, they put him into so good a Humor, that from his high
Station, he began to recite Verses out of Theophilus's Piramus and T^isbe
Certain Peasants who attended a laden Cart, and were going the same way,
hearing him speak with the Emphasis of Enthusiast, thought he could do no less
than preach the Word ^ the Lord; and as long as he rehearsed his Heroicks. they
walked Cap in Hand, and respected him like a Highway Preacher.

CHAP. III.
The History of Cave.
THE two Women-Strollers, whom we left in the House, from whence Angelica was
stolen away, had no better Nights rest than Destiny. Mistress Star went into
the same Bed with Mistress Cave; both not to leave her alone with her Despair,
and to endeavor with gentle Persuasions to alleviate her Affliction. At last
finding that so just a Grief did not want Reasons to defend it self, she used
no Arguments to oppose it; only to make a Diversion she began to complain of
her hard Fate, as much as her Bedfellow did of hers, and thus cunningly engaged
her to relate her Adventures, the more easily, because at that juncture Cave
would not allow any Body to be more unfortunate than her self. She therefore
wiped off those Tears that trickled down her Cheeks in abundance, and fetching
a sound and deep Sigh, that she might not have the trouble to sigh again so
soon; she thus began to tell her Story. I was born a Player, Daughter to a
Player, of whom I never heard that he had any Relations but Players. My Mother
was Daughter to a Merchant of Marseilles, who bestowed her in Marriage to my
Father, as a recompense for venturing his Life, to defend his, against a
Gally-Officer (as much in Love with my Mother, as he was hated by her) who had
attacked him to his disadvantage. This was an extraordinary good Fortune for my
Father; for without being put to the trouble of Suing, and Wooing, he married a
Wife Young, Beautiful and Richer than a Stroller could ever pretend to. His
Father-in-Law endeavored to persuade him to leave his Profession, and betake
himself to the business of a Merchant, as the most profitable and creditable of
the two. But my Mother, who was a great lover of Plays, hindered him from
leaving the Stage; though to give him his due, he was inclined to follow his
Wife's Fathers Advice, as one that knew much better than she, that a Player's
Life is not so happy as it appears to be. My Father left Marseilles soon after
his Marriage, carried away my Mother to make her first Campaign, she being more
impatient than he, and in a little time made an excellent Player of her. She
proved with Child the first Year of her Marriage and was brought to Bed of me
behind the Scenes; a Year after I had a Brother whom I loved dearly, and by
whom I was much beloved. Our Company was made up of our Family, and of three
Players, one of which had a Wife who acted under Parts. Upon a Holy Day we went
through a small Town in Perigord; my Mother, the other Player and I, on the
Cart that carried our Baggage, and our Men on Foot to Guard us, when our little
Caravan was attacked by seven or eight ugly Fellows, so very drunk, that
meaning only to fright us with shooting off a Gun, I felt their Shot all over
me, and my Mother received a dangerous Wound in the Arm. They seized my Father
and two of his Companions before they were able to defend themselves, and beat
them unmercifully. My Brother, and the youngest of our Men fled away, and ever
since I could never hear of my Brother. The Inhabitants of the Town joined
themselves to those who offered us this outrageous Violence, and caused our
Cart to go back. This eager Mobb ran fiercely like People who have got a great
Booty, and are willing to secure it, and made such noise that they did not hear
one another speak, After an Hours March they carried us into a Castle, which we
had no sooner entered but we heard several People cry out with great Joy, that
the Gypsies were taken; by that we found their Mistake, which gave us a little
Comfort. the Mare that drew our Cart fell down dead with weariness, having been
hard put to it, and soundly beaten. The Player to whom the Mare belonged, and
of whom the Company hired her, fell a roaring in as lamentable a manner as if
her Husband had been dying: At the same time my Mother felt such violent Pain
in her Arm, that she fainted away, which made me roar so loud, that my Cries
drowned those of the Player, upon account of her Mare. The noise we made,
together with the hallowing of the rude Rabble, and of the Drunken Scoundrels
who brought us thither, caused the Lord of the Castle to come out of a Parlour
attended with four or five ill-look'd Fellows in Red-Coats or Cloaks. His first
Question was, Where, where are the thieving Gypsies? Which put us in a terrible
Fright; but seeing none but fair Faces among us, he then asked my Father who he
was, and had no sooner heard that we were a wretched Company of Players, but
with an impetuous Passion, at which we all wondered, and Swearing in as furious
a manner as ever I heard a Man Swear, he charged with his Sword those who had
seized us, and caused them to disappear in a Moment, some of them Wounded, and
the rest in a terrible Fright. The Mobb being thus dispersed, he commanded my
Father and his Companions to be untied, the Women to be carried into a Room,
and our Goods to be laid up safe. Some Chamber-Maids came to wait upon us and
got a Bed ready for my Mother, who found her self very ill of her Wound in her
Arm. Soon after, a Man that looked like a Steward came to express his Masters
concern for the rude usage we had received. He told us that the Scoundrels who
made so unlucky a Mistake, sneaked away most of 'em soundly beaten, or lame,
and that a Surgeon was sent for from the next Town ^o dress my Mothers Arm;
afterward he asked us very earnestly, Whether they had taken any thing from
us, and advised us to view our Goods, and see if there were any thing wanting.
At Night they brought us our Supper into our Room; the Surgeon came, my Mothers
Wound was dressed, and she went to Bed in a violent Feavour. The next Day the
Lord of the Castle sent for the Players, enquired of them how my Mother did,
and told them he would not suffer her to go out of his House before she was
perfectly recovered. He was so obliging as to send Men up and down the Country
to enquire after my Brother and the young Player, with whom he fled away, but
they could not be found; which Misfortune increased my Mothers Fever, A
Phisician and a Surgeon (more skillful than he who dressed her Wound first) were
sent for from of a Neighboring Town, and in a short time our good usage in the
Castle made us forget the Violence we had suffered. The Lord at whose House we
were entertained, was a very rich Man, more feared than loved through all the
Country; as violent in all his Actions as a Governor of a Frontier Town, and
one who had the reputation to be as brave as Hercules. His Name was the Baron
de Sigognac; at this present time he could be no less than a Marquess, but in
those Days he was only a petty Tyrant of Perigord. A Company of Gypsies who had
lain in his Lordship, stole away some Horses out of a Park where he kept Mares
for breed, at a Leagues distance from his Castle, and the Men that were sent to
pursue them mistook us for 'em, to our cost. My Mother being now perfectly
well, my Father and his Companions to express their Gratitude for their kind
Entertainment, as far as poor Strollers were able, offered to Act in the Castle
as long as the Baron de Sigognac would desire it. An overgrown Page, at least
Four and twenty Years of Age; who was undoubtedly the Dean of all the Pages in
the Kingdom, and a sort of Gentleman Waiter, studied the parts of my Brother,
and of the Player with whom he ran away. And now busy Fame ^roclaim'd through
all the Country that a Company of Strol^rs were to act a Play at the Baron de
Sigognac's; abundance of Perigordine Gentry were invited to the Show, and when
the Page was perfect in his Part, which he found so difficult to learn, that
they were fain to cut and reduce it to two Lines, we acted Garnier's Roger and
Bradamante. The Assembly was very fine; the Room well lighted; the Stage
convenient, and the Scenes adapted to the Subject. We all endeavored to do our
best, and we acted with Applause. My Mother in the Habit of an Amazon appeared
as beautiful as an Angel, and though her late Indisposition made her look a
little pale, yet the brightness of her Complexion obscured all the Lights in
the Room. Though I have great Reason to be very Melancholy, yet I cannot forbear
Laughing whenever I think how ridiculosly the Page acted his Part; neither must
my ill Humor rob you of this pleasant Passage; perhaps you may not find it
such, but I can assure you that it made all the Company laugh very heartily,
and that I have laughed at it since, whether it be really laughable, or because
I am one of those who laugh at a very small Matter. He acted the Page of the
Duke of Aymon, and had but two Lines to speak in all the Play, when the old Man
reprimanded his Daughter Bradamante for refusing to marry the Emperors Son,
(because she was in Love with Roger) the Page says to his Master.

Monsieur, rentrons dedans, je crains que vous tombiez,
Vous n'etez pas trop bien assure sur vos PIEDS.
This great Oaf of a Page, though his Part was easy enough to remember, yet
murdered the second Verse, and said very aukwardly, and trembling like a
Malefactor.

Monsieur, rentrons dedans, je crains que vous tombiez;
Vous n'etes pas trop bien assure sur vos IAMBES.
This false Rhyme surpised every Body; he that acted Aymon's Part burst out
a-laughing, and was not able to represent an Angry old Man. All the Assistants
laughed as well as he; and I my self, who was then peeping through the Hangings
to see and be seen, laughed also to that degree that I was ready to drop down.
The Master of the House, who was one of those Melancholy Persons who laugh but
seldom, and never at a small Matter, found his Page's want of Memory, and his
awkward way of reciting Verses so laughable a Subject, that he was like to
burst by endeavoring to preserve his Gravity; but at last he was fain to laugh
as well as the rest; and his Men told us since, that they never knew him so
well pleased in all their Lives. Now as he was a Man of great Authority in that
Country, there was not one Person in the whole Audience that did not laugh as
much as he, or perhaps more, either out of Complaisance, or a natural
Inclination. I am very much afraid, added Cave, I have now done like those who
tell People, I Will tell you a Story that will make you die with Laughing. and
who seldom or never are as good as their Word: For I must confess I raised your
Expectation too high about the silliness of my Page. Not at all, answered Star,
I have found it such as you made me expect it; it is true the thing may have
seemed more ridiculous to those that saw it, than it will to those who shall
hear it related, the aukwardness of the Page contributing much to make it such;
and besides, the Time, the Place, and the natural Inclination we have to laugh
for Company's sake, are all Advantages it cannot have now. Cave made no further
Apology, and resuming her Story where she had left off: After, continued she,
that both the Actors and the Audience had laughed as much as their risible
Faculty would let them, the Baron de Sigognao ordered his Page to come again on
the Stage, in order to mend his Fault, or rather to make new Sport for the
Company: But the Page, (the greatest Looby that ever I saw) refused to obey the
positive Commands of the severest Master in in the World. The Baron took his
denial as he was prompted by his hasty Temper, that is to say, very ill, and
his Resentment, which ought to have been small, had he been ruled by Reason,
proved afterward the fatal Cause of the greatest Misfortune that could befall
us. Our Tragedy was honored with the Applause of the whole Audience; and the
Farce was still better received than the Tragedy, as it generally happens every
where, except in Paris. The Baron de Sigognac, and the rest of the Gentlemen
his Neighbors, were so well pleased with it, that they desired to see us act
again. All the Gentlemen clubb'd to make a Present to our Company, every one
according to his Generosity; the Baron showed them the way, and the Play was
given out for the next Holy Day. We played a whole Month before this
Perigordine Gentry; during which time, we were Treated and Caressed both by Men
and Women, and besides, our Company was presented with some old Clothes half
worn out. The Baron entertained us at his own Table; his Servants were extreme
officious in waiting upon us, and told us often how much they were obliged to
us for their Masters good Humor, whom they found quite altered since Plays had
Civilized his rough Manners. The Page alone looked upon us as People who had
blasted his Reputation for ever; and the Line he had spoiled, and which every
Body in the House, to the very Scullion, repeated to him ever and anon, was a
cruel Stab to him, of which he at last resolved to be revenged upon some body
of our Company. Upon a certain Day, when the Baron de Sigognac had assembled
his Neighbors and Tenants, to rid his Woods of a great number of Wolves that
Harbored there, and by which the Country was very much annoyed; my Father and
his Fellow-Strollers accompanied him each with his Gun, as did also his
Servants. The unlucky Page went along with them, and having found the
opportunity he looked for, to put his ill Design against us in Execution, he no
sooner espied my Father, and his Comrades separated from the rest, and giving
one another Powder and Shot to load their Guns; but he let his Piecefly at them
from behind a Tree, and Shot my unhappy Father with two Bullets: His Comrades
were so busy in supporting him, that they never thought at first to pursue the
Murderer, who made the best of his Way, and since ran the Country. Two Days
after my Father dyed of his Wounds: My Mother resented her loss to that Degree,
that it almost broke her Heart; she fell Sick again, and I was as much afficted
as 'twas possible for a Girl of my Years. My Mother's illness proving a
lingering Disease; the Men and the Women that belonged to our Company, took
their Leaves of the Baron de Sigognac, and went to seek their Fortune with some
other Strollers. My Mother lay sick for above two Months, but she recovered at
last, having during that time received such Tokens of Generosity and Kindness
from the Baron de Sigognac, as were little to be expected from a Man who had
the Reputation of being the greatest Tyrant that ever made himself feared, in a
Country, where every Squire pretends to huff and domineer, His Servants who
never found any Humanity or Civility in him before, wondered to see him Converse
with us, in the most kind and obliging manner. One might have thought he was in
Love with my Mother, though he seldom spoke to her, and never came into our Room,
(where we used to take our Meals, since my Fathers Death) only he often sent to
know how she did: However, the Country did talk as if he was great with her, as
we have since been informed. But my Mother, considering she could not with
Decency stay any longer in the House of a Man of his Quality, had already
designed to leave it, and retire to her Fathers at Marseilles. She therefore
acquainted the Baron with it; returned him Thanks for all his kind Usage to us,
and desired him to add a new Favor to all those we had received from him,
which was, to lend us Saddle-horses for her self and me, till we came to a
certain Town, and a Cart to carry our little Baggage, which she designed to
Sell to the first Man that would give her any thing for it. The Baron was much
surpised at my Mothers Design, Nor was she in a less surprise than he, finding
he would neither grant nor deny her Request. The next Day, the Curate of one of
the Churches within his Lordship, came to Visit us in our Chamber, accompanied
by his Neice, a good-natured and agreeable Girl, with whom I was intimately
acquainted. She and I went out to fetch a Walk in the Garden of the Castle, and
left her Uncle alone with my Mother: The Curate had a long Conversation with
her, and did not leave her till Supper-time. As I came back, I found her
Melancholy and full of Thoughts; and asked her three or four times what the
matter was, but could get no answer from her, only she fell a Weeping, and so I
Wept for Company, not knowing why nor wherefore. At last, she bid me shut her
Chamber Door, and told me, (Weeping still more than before) that the Curate had
informed her, that the Baron de Sigognac was desperately in Love with her, and
assured her besides, that he had so great a Respect for her, that he never
durst declare (by himself or others) his Passion to her, without offering her
Marriage at the same time. Here she stopped, being almost suffocated with Sighs
and Sobs: I asked her once again, What ailed her? What! Daughter, said she to
me, have I not said enough to let you understand that I am the most wretched
Woman in the World? I told her I did not think it so great a Misfortune for a
Player to become a Lady of Quality. Alas! Dear Child, said she, you speak like
a young Girl that knows nothing of the World. What, (added she) if he should
deceive the Curate in order to deceive me? If he does not design to Marry me,
as he would persuade me he does, have I not Reason to fear all manner of
Violence, from a Man so much a Slave to his Passions? And if he really designs
to Marry me. and I consent to it, What Woman in the World can be more Miserable
than my self, when his Fancy is over? How great is his Hate like to prove, if
ever he should repent his Loving me? No, no, my Daughter, Fortune is not so
favorable to me, as thou imaginest: Nay, rather she designs to aggravate my
load of Woe; for having deprived me of a Husband whom I loved, and by whom I
was beloved, she ^ow would force one upon me, who perhaps will hate me, and
oblige me to hate him too. Her Grief, which I thought unreasonable, increased
to that degree, that she was like to be stifled with it, whilst I helped her to
undress her self. I comforted her as well as I could, and endeavored to
combat her Affliction, with all the Arguments a Girl of my Years was able to
frame, not forgetting to tell her, that the obliging and respectful Behavior,
which the roughest of all Men had ever shown in conversing with us, seemed to
be a good Omen, and especially his want of Assurance in discovering his Passion
to a Woman, whose Profession is rather apt to embolden a Man in his Addresses,
than inspire him with awful Respect. My Mother suffered me to speak all I
thought fit, went to Bed very much afflicted, and cherished her Grief all Night
long, instead of Sleeping. I endeavored for the sake of good Manners, to
resist Sleep, but at last I was fain to yield, and so I Slept for us both; she
got up early in the Morning, and when I awaked I found her ready Dressed, and her
Mind pretty well composed. I was in great Pain to know what Resolution she had
taken, for to tell you Truth, I flattered my self with my Mothers future
Greatness, in case the Baron was Sincere and Honorable in his Addresses, and
my Mother willing to grant his Suit. The Thoughts of hearing my Mother called
My Lady Baroness, filled my Mind with Delight, and Ambition began to inflame my
youthful Breast --

Cave was thus recounting her Story, and Star listening to her with great
Attention, when they heard something tread in their Chamber, which startled
them the more, because they remembered they had made the Door fast with the
Bolt. The Noise continued, and so they cried, Who Is there. No answer was made,
but a moment after, Cave saw at the Beds-feet, (the Curtains being open) the
Figure of a Person whom she heard Sigh, and who leaning on the Bed, rested on
her Feet. She sat up, to view nearer the thing that began to Fright her, and
fully resolved to speak to it, she reached her Head out of the Bed, when the
thing disappeared. The being in Company with any Body gives often an Assurance,
but sometimes our Fears are never the less for being shared with another. Cave
was frighted because she had seen nothing, and Star, because she saw her
Companion frighted. They both thrust themselves into the Bed, covered their
Heads with the Bed-cloathes, and lay close together, not daring almost speak to
one another for Fear, At last Cave said to Star, that her poor Daughter must be
Dead, and that 'twas her Ghost that came to sigh by her, Star was perhaps going
to Reply, when they heard the Thing walk again in the Room. Star thrusts her
self deeper into the Bed than she had done before; but Cave emboldened by the
thought that it was her Daughters Ghost, she sat up again in the Bed, and
seeing the same thing appear, sighing as before, and leaning on her Feet,
reached her Hand and felt a very rough one, which made her give a hideous
shriek, and struck her down with the fright. At the same time they heard a
barking in the Room, as when a Dog is afraid of any thing that he meets in the
Night. Cave had once more Courage enough to look what it was, and then she saw
a great Greyhound that barked at her. She threatened him with a loud Voice, at
which time he retired barking toward one corner of the Room, where he vanished
out of fight. The Courageous Player rose out of her Bed, and by the Moonshine
which came through the Windows, she discovered in that corner of the Room,
where the Phantom and the Greyhound had disappeared, a little Door which
opened into a little pair of Back-Stairs. By that she easily imagined that a
Greyhound belonging to the House was crept through that Door into their Room;
and that having a Mind to lay himself on their Bed, but not daring to do it
without the consent of those who were in it, he had sighed like a Dog, and the
Bed being high, as are all old Beds, he had leaned his Forelegs on her Feet,
and afterward crept under the Bed, when Cave first reached her Head cut of it:
However the belief of a Ghost being in the Room, had so possessed Star's frighted
Soul, that 'twas a long time before she could persuade her that 'twas but a
Greyhound. As afflicted as Cave was, she jeered her Companion about her
Cowardice, and reserved the continuation of her Story to another time, when
they should not want Sleep so much as they did then. 'Twas now break of Day,
they fell asleep, and got up about Ten of the Clock, when Word was brought them,
that the Coach which was to carry them to Man's was ready to set out as soon as
they pleased.

CHAP. IV.
Destiny meets with Leander.
DEstiny, in the mean time, went from Town to Town, still enquiring after those
he pursued, but could learn no News, nor Tidings from 'em. Thus he rambled up
and down till Two or Three a Clock in the Afternoon, when Hunger and his Horses
weariness obliged him to return to a great Village which he left a little while
before. Here he found a pretty good Inn, because it stood upon the Road, and
did not forget to ask them whether they had heard of a Company of Horsemen who
stole away a young Woman. There Is above a Gentleman who can give you an account
of 'em, said the Surgeon of that Village, who happened to be there; for, added
he, I believe he has been a quarrelling with 'em, and has got many a Wound for
his Pains. I just now applied to him an Anodyne and resolutive Cataplasm on a
livid Tumor he has on the Vertebrae of the Neck, and dressed a great cut he
received in the Occiput. I would have let him Blood, because he is full of
Contusions, but he would not let me, though he has great occasion for it. He must
needs have got a heavy fall, or else have been beaten unmercifully. This
Country Surgeon took such delight in mustering the learned Terms of his Art,
that though Destiny was gone from him, and no Body left to give him the
hearing, he still went on with his Discourse till he was fetched away to let a
Woman Blood. who was dyi^g of an Apoplexy. In the mean time Destiny went up to
the Chamber of the Person of whom the Surgeon had spoke to him, where he
found a young Man well clad, with his Head bound and lying upon a Bed to take
his Rest. He was meditating a Complement to excuse his Intruding into his
Chamber, before he knevv whether he was vvilling to admit of his Visit; but
he was not a little surpised when at the first Words he spoke, the other
rose from his Bed, ran to embrace him, discovering himself to be his Servant
Leander, who was gone from him without taking his leave, four or five Days
before, and whom Cave suspected to be the Ravisher of her Daughter. Destiny
was at a stand, not knovving in what sort of Tone he should speak to him, by
reason he savv him look like a Gentleman, both in his Person and Dress. Whilst
he was vievving of him, Leander had time to compose himself, for he seemed
something disordered at first: I am ashamed, (said he to Destiny) I dealt not
so frankly and sincerely with you, as I should have done with one whom I value
so much as I do you; but you must excuse an unexperienced young Man, who before
he was well acquainted with you, thought you to be of the same Make, as are
generally those of your Profession, and who upon that Score durst not trust you
with a Secret, on which depends the Happiness of his Life. Destiny told him, he
could not imagine in what particular he had distrusted him, unless (...) would
let him know it. I have a great many things bendes to tell you, if so be you
are not acquainted with 'em already, answered Leander, but first of all let me
know what brought you hither? Destiny told him how Angelica was Stolen away;
that he pursued her Ravishers, and was informed as he came into the Inn, that
he had met with one, that could give him an account of them. It Is true I met
with 'em, (replied Leander with a sigh) and that I did as much against 'em, as
a single Man can do against many; but my Sword happening to break in the Body
of the first Man I wounded, I could neither rescue Mistress Angelica nor die in
her Defense, though I was fully resolved to do either. They left me in the
Condition you see me in, and thinking they had killed me with a Backstroke I
received on the Head, (but which did only stun me for a while) they went on
their way in great haste. This is all I know about Mistress Angelica, but we
shall hear more from a Servant who is to meet me here, and whom I sent to
follow 'em at a distance after he helped me to mount my Horse, which they left
me, because I suppose they did not think him worth Stealing. Destiny asked him
why he went from him without giving him Warning? From whence he came? and Who
he was? Not doubting but he concealed his Name and Condition from him. Leander
confessed there was some such thing, and having laid himself down, because the
Blows he received gave him a cruel Pain, Destiny sat on the Beds Feet, and then
Leander recounted what you shall read in the following Chapter.

CHAP. V.
The History of Leander.
I Am a Gentleman, of a Family pretty well known in the Province; and hope to
be worth, one Day, at least Four thousand Crowns a Year, provided my Father be
pleased to Die; for though it is now fourscore Years since (...) Plagues all those
who have any dependence upon him, yet he is so well in Health, that I have more
reason to fear he will never Die, than to hope to inherit three fine Lordships,
which make up all his Estate. He designs to make me a Counselor in the
Parliament of Brittany, though against my Inclination, and it is for that purpose
he sent me to School betimes. I was at the College of La Fleche, when your
Company came there to Act: there I saw Mistress Angelica, and fell in Love with
her to that degree, that I could mind nothing else. Nay, I went farther, for I
had the Assurance to acquaint her with my Passion, at which she was not
offended; I Writ to her, she received my Letter, and did not look more coldly
than before upon me, the next time I saw her. Afterward Mistress Cave being
fallen Sick and obliged to keep her Chamber whilst you were at La Fleche, her
Daughter and I had frequent Opportunities of Discoursing together, which she
would have prevented had she not been ill; for you know how severe and reserved
she is for a Woman of a Profession, which seems to dispense with those that
follow it, for not being over nice or scrupulous. From the first Moment I fe^^
in Love I never went to School more, nor mist a Play^ The Jesuits endeavored
to bring me back to my Dur^^ but having chosen the most charming Mistress in
the Worl^^ I refused to obey those troublesome Masters. Your Serva^^ was killed
at the Playhouse Door, by the Scholars of Bri^tany, who made that Year a great
Disturbance at La Flec^^ because they were very numerous, and that Wine happen
to be cheap; which was in some measure, the Reason (...) you went from La
Fleche to Angiers. I did not speak Angelica to bid her Farewell, because her
Mother never (...) sight of her; all I could do, was to appear before her as
(...) went away, with Despair in my Face, and Tears in my Ey^^ A pitying
melancholy Look which she cast on me, was (...) to break my Heart. I locked my
self in my Room; We bitterly the remaining part of the Day, and all the Night:
and the very next Morning changing Clothes with my Man, (who is about my Size)
I left him at La Fleche to sell my Schoolboys Equipage, and gave him a Letter
for a Tenant of my Fathers, who supplies me with Money whenever I ask him for
it, with orders to come to me at Angiers. I began my Journey thither after you,
and overtook you at Duretail, where several Gentlemen who Hunted the Stag,
obliged you to stay seven or eight Days. There I offered my Service to you, and
you entertained me as your Man, either because you was loath to be without one,
or because my Face and Mien, which you seemed to like, engaged you to hire me.
My Hair which I cut very short, hindered me from being known again by those who
had often seen me with Angelica: Besides, my Man's bad Coat, which I put on to
disguise my self, made me look quite another Man, from what I looked in my own
Clothes, which were finer than a School-boy's generally are. However Mistress
Angelica knew me at first sight, and owned to me since, that she did not doubt,
but the Passion I had for her was very violent, since I abandoned all to follow
her. She had the Generosity to dissuade me from it: And to recall my wandering
Reason. She made me feel those Rigours, which would have cooled a Man less
Amorous than my self, but by my constant Love, I insensibly engaged her, to
Love me as much as I did her. As you have the Soul of a Man of Quality, (of
such a Man of Quality I mean, as is truly Noble) 'twas not long before you
found out that I had not the Inclinations of a Servant; I soon gained your
favor, and the esteem of all the Gentlemen of your Company; nay Rancour
himself did not hate me, though he has the Reputation amongst you, to love no
body. I shall not waste much time in relating to you all the fine Things, which
two Persons equally in Love may say to one another, as often as they happen to
be together, you know it well enough by your own Experience. I will only tell
you, that Mistress Cave suspecting our private Correspondence, or, rather
having certain Proofs of it, charged her Daughter never to speak to me; that
her Daughter did not obey her; and that having surpised her Writing to me, she
used her so roughly, both before People and in private, that since that time, I
found no great difficulty in persuading her to consent to be stolen away. I
fear not to make this plain Confession to you, knowing you to be as Generous as
any Man, and at least as Amorous as my self. Destiny blushed at these last
Words of Leander, who went on with his Discourse, and told Destiny, that he
left the Company, in order to put his Design in Execution; that one of his
Fathers Tenants promised him to furnish him with a Sum of Money, and that he
hoped to receive some at St. Maloes, from a Merchants Son, his intimate Friend,
who was lately come to his Estate, by the death of his Parents. He added, that
by the assistance of this Friend, he hoped to go easily over into England, and
from thence to make his Peace with his Father, without exposing to his Anger,
either Mistress Angelica or her Mother, whom in all probability he would
prosecute, with all the advantage that a Man of Wealth and Quality may take
over two poor Players. Destiny^ made Leander sensible, that by reason of his
Youth and Quality, his Father would certainly have Indicted Mrs. Cave for a
Rape. He did not endeavor to make him forget his Mistress; for he was
sensible, that Persons in Love, are not capable to follow any Counsels but what
are suggested by their Passion, and are more to be pitied than to be blamed;
but he highly disapproved his Design of going over into England; and
represented to him what People might think of two young Strangers in a foreign
Country; the Hazards and Fatigue of a Sea-voyage; the difficulty of being
supplied with Money, in case he should want, and lastly, the Attempts to which
they would be exposed by Mistress Angelica's Beauty, and the Youth of both.
Leander did not endeavor to defend a bad Cause: He asked once more Destiny's
Pardon, for having concealed himself so long from him; and Destiny promised him
to use all the Interest he had with Mistress Cave, to incline her to be
favorable to him. Moreover he told him, that if he was fully resolved never to
marry any Woman but Mistress Angelica, he ought not to leave their Company,
adding, that in the mean time his Father might die, or his Passion abate, or
perhaps, be quite extinguished -- Oh! never, never, cried Leander. Well then,
(said Destiny) to secure your Mistrisses Heart, your best way is never to lose
Sight of her. Be a Player with us, for you are not the only Man that treads the
Stage, when he could follow a better Employment. Write to your Father; make him
believe you are in the Army, and try to get Money from him; in the mean time I
will converse with you as if you were my own Brother, and by that means
endeavor to make you forget the indifferent Usage you received from me, whilst
I was unacquainted with your Quality and Merit. Leander would have thrown
himself at his Feet, if the violent Pain he felt all over his Body from his
Bruises, would have let him: However, he returned him Thanks in so obliging a
manner, and made him such hearty Protestations of Friendship, that from that
moment he had as great an esteem for him as one Gentleman can have for another.
They Discoursed afterward, which Way they should go in Search of Angelica; but
a great Noise interrupted their Conversation, and caused Destiny to go down
into the Kitchen, where was transacting what you shall hear in the next Chapter.

CHAP. VI.
A bloody Fight at Cuffs: The Death of the Innkeeper, and other memorable
Occurrences.
TWO Men, one of which was in Black like a Country Schoolmaster, and the other
in Gray, who looked like a Catch-pole, laid hold of one another by the Hair and
the Beard, and now and then Box'd one another in a most cruel manner. Both were
indeed what their Habits and their Looks showed 'em to be: He in Black, the
Schoolmaster of the Town, Brother to the Curate; and the other in Gray, a
Bailiff of the same Town, and Brother to the Innkeeper. This Innkeeper was
then in a Chamber next to the Kitchen, ready to give up the Ghost; being Sick
of a violent Fever, which so disordered his Senses, that he broke his Head
against the Wall; and this Wound joined to his Distemper, brought him so low,
that when his Frenzy left him, he was fain to part with Life, which perhaps he
regretted less than his ill-gotten Money. He had been a long time a Soldier,
and was at last come home, laden with Years, and so light of Honesty, that he
might be said to have less of it than Money, although he was extraordinary Poor.
But because Women are very often caught by those very things they ought least
to be caught by; his twisted Hair, longer than any Peasants in Town, his
Cursing and Swearing like a true Son of Mars, a bristling Feather which he wore
on his Hat upon Holy Days, when the Weather was Fair, and a rusty, long Sword
that flap'd against the old Boots he had on, although he never bestrid a Horse,
all these I say, gained him the Heart of an old Woman that kept an Inn. She had
been Courted by the richest Tenants in the Country, not so much on account of
her Beauty, as because she got an Estate with her first Husband, by exacting
upon People, and cheating in the Measure, both of Wine and Oats; yet she
courageously resisted all the Assaults of her Woers, but at last, an oldbeaten
Soldier triumphed over an old Hostess. This Tayern-Nymph had the least Face,
and the biggest Belly of any Woman in Main, the which Province abound^ in
Big-bellyed People. I leave it to the Naturalists to find out the Reason of it,
as well as of the Fat of the Capons of that Country. To return to this short
Big-Woman, whom I fancy to see as often as^ I think on her, She married her
Warrior, without acquainting her Relations with it, and having lived to a
crazy old Age, and undergone great Hardships with him, she had the Satisfaction
to see him Die of a broken Scull, which she looked as a just Judgment upon him,
for his repeated Attemps of breaking hers. When Destiny came into the Kitchen,
mine Hostess and her Maid, helped the old Curate of the Town to part the
Combatants, who grappled one another like two Ships in a Sea Fight; but the
Threats of Destiny, and his Magisterial way of speaking brought about what the
Curate's Exhortations could not perform, and the two mortal Enemies let go
their hold, spitting half of their bloody Teeth out of their Mouths, bleeding
at their Noses, and their Hands full of Hair both from their Head and Beard.
The Curate being an Honest, Well-bred Man, returned Destiny Thanks very
civilly; Destiny to do him farther Pleasure, caused those two Persons to
embrace in a very friendly manner, who a moment before endeavored to strangle
one another. During the Reconcilement, the Innkeeper ended his obscure Life,
without giving notice of it to his Friends; insomuch, that when they entered his
Room, after the conclusion of the Peace, they found there was no more to be
done than to Bury him. The Curate prayed over the dead Body, and did it very
well, for he was short. His Vicar came to relieve him, and in the mean time,
the Widow bethought her self to roar and cry, which she did with a great deal
of Ostentation and Vanity. The Brother of the Deceased dissembled being
sorrowful, or was so indeed; and the Men and Women-Servants performed the^^
Parts as well as he. The Curate followed Destiny into h^^ Chamber, offering to
serve him to the utmost of his Power as well as Leander; and in requital, they
Invited him (...) eat a Bit with em. Destiny who had eaten nothing yet a that
Day, and had used a great deal of Exercise, fell to with a greedy Appetite;
Leander fed more upon amorous Thoughts than upon Victuals; and the Curate
talked more than he did eat. He told them a Hundred pleasant Stories, about the
Avarice of the Deceased; and acquainted 'em with the comical Quarrels which
this reigning Passion had often caused him to have, both with his Wife and his
Neighbors. Among the rest, he related to them, how he took once a Journey to
Laval with his Wife: Now as they came back, the Horse that carried them both,
having lost two of his Shoes, he left his Wife holding the Horse by the Bridle,
at the Foot of a Tree, and went back as far as Laval, to look for his Horse's
Shoes: but he got nothing but his Labor for his Pains, whilst his Wife lost
almost all Patience with waiting for him; (for they were come two Leagues from
Laval) and began to be in great Pain about him, when she espied him coming
barefoot, with his Boots and Hose in his Hands. She was not a little surpised
at this novelty, but she durst not ask him the reason of it, for by obeying his
Officers in the Wars, he had made himself capable to domineer at home. Neither
did she dare to contradict him, when she was commanded to pull of her Stockins;
or so much as ask him why she did it, only she thought 'twas out of Devotion.
He caused his Wife to lead his Horse by the Bridle, whilst he walked behind to
drive him: Thus the Man and the Wife, without Shoes or Stockins, and the unshod
Horse, after a tedious and troublesome March, came home at last, late in the
Night, all three very much tired; both the Innkeeper and his Wife, with their
Feet so galled and so sore, that they could not Walk for almost a Fortnight
after. He never was more pleased with any thing he had done before, and when
ever he thought on it, he told his Wife laughing, that if they had not come
Barefoot from Laval, they had been at a great Expense for Shoes, both for
themselves and their Horse. Destiny and Leander did not much take notice of the
Story, though the Curate told it as a good one, either because they did not find
it so pleasant as he said it was, or because they were not then in Humor to
laugh. The Curate who was a great Talker, was not contented with this, but had
still a mind to proceed to another, and told Destiny that what they heard was
nothing in comparison of what he had to tell 'em, about the Innkeepers
preparing himself for Death. It Is now four or five Days, continued he, since he
knew he was past recovery; and yet he never was more sparing: he grudged
himself all the new-laid Eggs he cat during his Illness; had a mind to know to
a Farthing the charge of his Burial, and even would have bated something of my
Fees, the Day I heard his Confession; in short, to end as he began, two Hours
before he died, he ordered his Wife, in my Hearing, to bury him in an old Sheet
which he knew was somewhere about the House, and which had above a Hundred
holes in it. His Wife represented to him how undecent it would be for him to be
Buried in it; but he grew obstinate, and would have no other. His Wife could
not find in her Heart to consent to it, and because she saw him unable to beat
her, she maintained her Opinion with more assurance than she ever did, without
breaking in upon the Duty which an honest Wife owes her Husband, whether he be
cross or no. At last she asked how he could pretend to appear in the Valley of
Iosaphat, and in what pickle he would rise from the Dead? The Sick Man fell
into a Passion, and swearing as he used to do when he was in Health, Zounds,
cried he, I never intend to rise again. I had as much ado to forbear laughing,
as to make him understand that he had offended God by thus falling into a
Passion, and much more by what he had said to his Wife, which was a piece of
Propha^^^ (...) and Impiety. He made an act of Contrition for it, though
something against the Grain, and not without a Promise on our side, that he
should be Buried in no other Sheet but what he had pitched upon. My Brother who
burst out a laughing when he heard him so loudly and plainly renounce his
Resurrection, could not forbear laughing at it still, as often as he thought on
it again; this the Brother of the deceased took exception at, and from Words
advancing to Blows, my Brother and he, both equally sturdy and Passionate, had
laid hold of one another, and perhaps would be still cuffing and fighting, if
you had not parted them. Thus the Curate made an end of his Relation; having
all the while addressed himself to Destiny, because Leander did not give him
much Attention. He took his leave of the Strollers with repeated offers of
Service; and Destiny endeavored to adminster some drops of Comfort to the
afflicted Leander, and bid him hope the best. As bruised as the poor Youth was,
he now and then looked out at the Window to see if his Man came, as if his
looking would make him come the sooner. But when People wait with Impatience
for any Body, the wisest Men are foolish enough to look toward the Place from
whence they expect him; which Reflection shall be the close of my Sixth Chapter.

CHAP. VII.
Ragotin's Panick Fear, attended with Disasters; the Adventure of the Dead
Body; a shower of Cuffs, and other surprising Accidents worthy to have a place
in this true Story.
LEander, as I said before, was looking out at the Window toward the Place
from whence his Man was to come, when turning his Head to the other side, he
saw little Ragotin just arriving, booted up to his Waste, mounted on a little
Mule, and accompanied by Rancour and Olive, holding his Stirrup-Leathers, one
on one side, and the other on the other, like two great Footmen that walk by the
side of a new Sheriffs Horse on a Lord Mayor's Day. They heard from Town to
Town which way Destiny went, and with often enquiring after him, found him out
at last. Destiny went down Stairs to meet 'em, and carried them up into his
Chamber. They did not know at first young Leander, his looks being changed with
his Clothes; yet least they should find out who he was, Destiny ordered him to
go down and fee that Supper was got ready, with the same Authority with which
he used to speak to him; and because the Strollers, who by that began to know
him again, wondered at his being so fine, Destiny answered for him, and told
them that an Uncle he had in the lower Main, equipped him from Head to Foot
just as they saw him, and besides, had given him Money to make him leave the
Stage, which he refused to do, and so came away from him without taking his
Leave. Destiny and the rest asked one another News about what they all looked
for, but were not the wiser for it. Ragotin assured Destiny that he left the
Women in good Health, though much afflicted for Mistress Angelica's Rape. At
last, Night being come, they went to Supper, the new Comers drunk hard, and the
rest like sober Men. Ragotin began to be Merry, challenged every Body to Drink,
like a Tavern-huff as he was; broke many a silly Jest, and fell a singing in
spite of the Company: But no Body caring to be his Second, and the Hostess's
Brother-in-Law having learnedly represented, that it did not look well for them
to make a Debauch so near a dead Corpse, Ragotin made less noise, but drunk a
great deal more Wine. Afterward they went to Bed, Destiny and Leander in the
Room they had already taken, and Ragotin, Rancour, and Olive in a little Room
next to the Kitchen, and by the Chamber where lay the Corpse of the Deceased.
The Hostess took up her Quarters in an upper Room, near that of Destiny and
Leander, both to avoid the ghastly sight of a dead Husband, and to receive the
Consolatory Visits of her Friends, who came to her in great numbers; for she
was one of the topping Women of the Village, and was as much beloved by every
Body as her Husband was hated. All things were in a profound Silence in the
Inn; the Dogs were asleep, since they did not bark; all the other Animals slept
also, or ought to do it, and this Tranquillity lasted till between two and
three a Clock in the Morning, when on a sudden Ragotin cried out as loud as he
could bawl, that Rancour was Dead. Now all at once, he waked Olive, roused
Destiny and Leander, and got them to come down into the Kitchen in order to
Weep, or at least to see Rancour, who, he said, died suddenly by his side.
Destiny and Leander followed him, and the first thing they saw as they entered
the Room, was Rancour walking up and down like a Man in good Health, which is
no such easy matter after sudden Death. Ragotin who went in first of all, no
sooner espied him, but he flew back as if he had been going to tread on a
Serpent, or step off a Precipice: He gave a great shriek; turned pale as Death,
and knocked so fierely Destiny and Leander, as he flew out of the Room, that he
was like to throw 'em on the Ground. Whilst his Fear made him run as far as the
Garden that belonged to the Inn, where he was like to catch Cold, Destiny and
Leander asked Rancour the Particulars of his Death. Rancour answered he could
not give so good an account of it as Ragotion, adding, that he was a little
cracked Brained. In the mean time Olive was splitting his Sides with laughing,
Rancour stood Speechless and unconcerned, as he used to do upon such Occasions,
and neither of them would discover what they knew of the Matter. Leander made
after Ragotin, and found him lurking behind a Tree, trembling with Fear more
than with Cold, though he was naked in his Shirt. His Fancy was so full of Dead
Rancour, that he presently took Leander for his Ghost: and was going to run
away as he advanced toward him: Thereupon arrived Destiny, whom he took for
another Ghost, both asked him several Questions, but could get no answer from
him; at last they took him under the Arms, in order to carry him back to his
Chamber; but as they were stepping out of the Garden, and Rancour advancing to
come into it. Ragotin disengaged himself from those that held him, and looking
behind him with wild staring Eyes, thrust himself into a Thicket of
Rose-Bushes, where he entangled himself from Head to Foot, and was not able to
get out time enough to avoid the encounter of Rancour, who called him a Madman
a thousand times, and told him he must be shut up. They all three pulled him
out of the Rose-bushes; Rancour gave him a sound flap on the Breech, to let him
feel he was not Dead, and at last our frighted little Man was carried back into
his Room, and put to Bed again. But he scarce was got into it, when a great
noise of Female Voices, which they heard in the next Room, put them at a stand
to know what the Matter was; these were not the Complaints of an afflicted
Woman alone, but the hideous cries of several Women together, as when they are
in a fright. Destiny went into the Room, where he found four or five Women with
the Hostess, who looked under the Beds, and in the Chimny, and were terribly
frighted. He asked them what the matter was? and the Hostess half howling, half
speaking, told him: they did not know what was become of her poor Husbands
Corpse. She had scarce uttered these Words but she began to howl, all the other
Women, as if it was a howling Consort, answered her in a Chorus, and all
together made so great and so lamentable a noise, that every Body in the Inn
came into that Room, and all the Neighbors and goers by into the Inn. In the
mean time an arch Pilferer of a Cat, seized upon a Pigeon, which an unwary Maid
had left half larded on the Kitchen-dresser, and retiring with her Prey into
Ragotin's Chamber, hid her self under the Bed where he lay with Rancour. The
Maid followed Puss with a Faggot-stick in her Hand, and looking under the Bed
to know what was become of her Pigeon, she cried out as loud as she could, that
she had fourd her Master, which she repeated so often, that the Hostess and the
rest of the Women came to her. The Maid fell about her Mistresses Neck, and
told her she had found her Master with such a Transport of Joy, that the poor
Widow was afraid her Husband was come to Life again, for they took notice that
she turned as pale as a Malefactor that receives Sentence. At last the Maid bad
'em look under the Bed, where they espied the Corpse they were so much in pain
about. Although it was very heavy, the greatest difficulty was not to get it from
thence, as to know who had put it there; however they carried it into its
Chamber where they began to dress it for Burial. The Players withdrew up Stairs
to Destiny's Room, who all this while did not know what to make of all those
strange Accidents. As for Leander his Head ran upon nothing but his dear
Angelica, which made him as sullen and pensive, as Ragotin was sorry that
Rancour was not Dead; by whose Raillery he was so mortified, that he had not a
Word to say, contrary to his Custom of speaking continually, and intruding into
all Conversations right or wrong. Rancour and Olive were so little surprised,
both at Ragotin's Panick Terror, and the Transmigration of a dead Corpse from
one Room to another without any humane assistance, at least that any Body knew
of that Destiny began to suspect they had no small share in the Prodigy. In the
mean time they were debating the Case in the Kitchen, in order to know the
truth of the Matter. One of the Plough Servants, who came from the Field to eat
his Dinner, hearing one of the Maids relate in a great fright, that her Masters
Corpse was got up of its self and walked, told her that as he went through the
Kitchen at break of Day, he saw two Men in their Shirts, who carried it on
their Shoulders into the Room where 'twas found. The Brother of the Deceased
heard what the Fellow said, and highly resented so foul an Action; the Widow
and her Friends were presently made acquainted with it; all were very much
offended at it. and with one Voice concluded that those Men must certainly be
Sorcerers, and that they designed to do some Wicked thing or other with the
Corpse. Whilst they were passing this untoward Judgment upon Rancour, he came
into the Kitchen, to bid 'em carry up something to Breakfast into their
Chamber. The Brother of the Deceased asked him, Why he carried his Brothers
Body into his Room? But Rancour was so far from returning him an Answer, that
he did not so much as exchange a Look with him. The Widow put the same Qestion
to him; he showed her the same indifference, which the good Dame did not him;
For she flew in his Face as furious as a Lioness bereft of her Whelps, (I fear
the Simile is a little too Magnificent^) Her Brother-in-law gave a sound Cuff
to Rancour; the Hostess's Friends did not spare him; the Maids put in for their
Share, as did also the Men. But a single Man could not afford room for the
Blows of so many Strikers, who rather hindered one another; Rancour alone
against so many, and by consequence so many against him, was not daunted by
the number of his Enemies, and making Virtue of a Necessity, he began to use
all the strength and Activity that God Almighty put into his Hands, leaving the
rest to Fortune. Never was an unequal Fight so obstinately maintained; for
Rancour preserving his Judgment amidst the greatest Dangers, made use of his
Policy as well as his Strength, dealt his Blovvs with Prudence, and improved
'em to the best Advantage. He gave many a Box, which not falling full upon the
first Cheek it met in its way, but sliding as it were, reached a second, and
sometimes a third Cheek, because he generally whirled about when he was going
to strike, so that with one single blow he often extracted three different
Sounds, out of three different Chops. At the noise of the Combatants, Olive
came down into the Kitchen, and had sacre time to discern his Comrade amongst
all those that belabored him, before he felt himself more fiercely attackt
even than Rancour, whose Valor and vigorous Resistance began to strike his
Foes with terror; therefore two or three of those whom Rancour abused most,
fell foul upon Olive only perhaps to get their Revenge. The noise increased,
and at the same time the Hostels received such a great Cuff on her little
Pigs-Eyes that she saw a Hundred thousand Lights (this is a certain number for
an uncertain one) and was entirely disabled. She howled and roared more
fiercely, and perhaps more heartily than she did about her Husbands Death. Her
howling brought all the Neighbors to her House, and Destiny and Leander into
the Kitchen; though these came with a Spirit of Peace, yet they presently made
War upon 'em, without saying why nor wherefore; they did not want Cuffs and
Boxes, neither were they so uncivil as to suffer those to want them, who were
so bountiful to them. The Hostess, her Friends, and her Maids, cried out
Thieves, and were now bare Spectators of the Fight, some with Eyes black and
blue, others with bloody Noses, others again with broken Chops, and all of 'em
with their Head-Cloths torn in pieces. The Neighbors espoused the Quarrel of
the Hostess, against those she called Thieves; and 'tvvould require a better
Pen than mine can pretend to be, to discribe the noble Cuffs that were given
and received on both sides. Ar last Animosity and Fury had so possessed their
Breasts, that they began to seize on the Spits, and all Movables that one may
fling at another Head, when the Curate came into the Kitchen, and endeavored
to make the Battle cease. To speak the Truth, although they all had a great
Respect for his Character, he had much ado to part the Combatants, if their
weariness had not inclined them to his Advice. Thus all acts of Hostility
ceased on both sides, but the noise continued as before; for every one
pretended to be heard first, the Women especially before the Men with their
false treble Voices, the poor good Man was fain to stop his Ears and run to the
Door. This silenced the most obstreperous: Whereupon he faced about, entered
the Field of Battle, and commanded the Inn-keepr's Brother to speak: He first
of all complained of the dead Corpse being carried from one Room to another, and
had exaggerated the Enormity of the Fact, had he had less Blood to spit out of
his Mouth, besides the bleeding at his Nose, which he could not stop. Rancour
and Olive pleaded Guilty to the Indictment, protesting withal, that they had
not done it with any ill Intent, but only to fright one of their Comrades, as
they really did. The Curate blamed'em very much for it, and showed 'em the ill
Consequence of such an Action, which was carrying a Jest too far. However being
a Man of Parts, and of great Interest among his Parishioners, he found no
difficulty in adjusting the Quarrel, and so all parted upon even Terms. But
wild Discord with her hissing Snakes instead of Hair, had not yet completed
all the Mischief she designed to do in that House, for now there was heard in
the upper Room. such Roaring, as little differs from that of a Hog when he is
going to be killed, and yet he that roared at this rate, was no other than
Ragotin, The Curate, the Strollers, and several others ran to him, and found
him sunk up to the Neck into a great Wooden-chest, where the Hostess kept her
Linen; and what was yet more grievous to the poor entrapp'd Ragotin, the Lid
of the Trunk which was thick and heavy, was fallen upon his Legs, and squeezed
'em so, that it grieved ones Heart to see it. A lusty Chambermaid, who stood
near the Trunk when they entered the Room, and looked very much concerned, was
suspected of having put Ragotin in so ill a Place. This was the Truth of the
business; and she was so proud of what she had done, that whilst she was making
one of the Beds, she did not vouchsafe to mind how they could get Ragotin out
of the Trunk, nor so much as answer those who asked her the occasion of the
Noise they heard. In the mean time the little Man was got out of his Trap, and
had no sooner the use of his Feet but he ran to his Sword. They hindered him
from laying hold of it, but could not keep him from closing with the tall Maid,
whom he could not hinder from giving him such a fierce Blow on the Pate, that
all the vast Seat of his narrow Reason was shaken with it. This made him start
three Steps backward, but it had been but a Spring toward a Leap, had not
Olive held him by the Breeches, as he was going to shoot like a Serpent against
his dreadful Adversary. The Effort he made, (though to no purpose) was so
violent, that the Waste-band of his Breeches was broken, as was likewise the
Silence of the Company, who all fell a Laughing. The Curate forgot his Gravity,
and the Innkeepers Brother his Affliction. Ragotin alone was not disposed to
Laugh, and turned his Anger against Olive, who being offended at it, trussed
him up, and carried him, (Brandishing his Legs) on the Bed which the Maid was
making, where with the Strength of a Hercules, he pulled down his Breeches,
(whose Wasteband was already broken) and then lifting up his Hands, and letting
them fall quick and amain on his Thighs, and Places adjacent, in the twinkling
of an Eye, made them look as red as Scarlet. Bold Ragotin flung himself with
great Courage from the Bed on the Ground, but this venturous Action was not
attended with the success it deserved. His Foot got into a Chamber Pot, which
to his great Misfortune was left ^n the Bedside, and went in so deep, that not
being able to get it out by the help of the other Foot, he durst not step from
the Bedside where he was, for fear of making yet more Sport for the Company,
and bringing their Raillery upon him, which he bore more impatiently than any
Man. Every body wondered to see him so quiet, after, so great an Emotion.
Rancour suspected there was something more than ordinary; and having caused him
to come out from the Bedside, half willing, half not, all the Company
perceived where the Shoe wrung him, and no body could forbear Laughing at the
Pewter-Foot our Dwarf had made to himself. We shall leave him treading the
Metal with Pride and Contempt, that we may go and Welcome a new Company which
came at the same time into the Inn.

CHAP. VIII.
What became of Ragotin's Foot.
HAD Ragotin by his own Strength, and without the help of his Friends, been
able to unpot his Foot, I mean, to get out of that scurvy Pot, it had so
unluckily got into, his Anger would have lasted, at least all the remainder of
the Day: But he was fain to abate somewhat of his natural Pride, and be
submissive; humbly beseeching Destiny and Ranrcur to procure the Liberty of his
Foot, right or left, for it never came to my Knowledge which of the two it was.
He did not address himself to Olive, because of what past betwixt 'em: But
nevertheless, Olive came to his Aid, without entreaty, and both his Comrades
and he, used their endeavors to relieve him. The repeated Efforts the little
Man made to get his Foot out of the Pot, had caused it to swell, and those
which Destiny and Olive used swelled it yet a great deal more. Rancour put his
Hand to it first of all, but so aukwardly, or rather maliciously, that Ragotin
thought he had a mind to make him Lame for ever. He desired him very earnestly
to let it alone, as also his Comrades, and laid himself down upon a Bed, till
the Smith they had sent for, came to File the Pot off his Foot. The remaining
part of the Day past pretty quietly in the Inn, though somewhat melancholily
letwixt Destiny and Leander, the one being very much in Pain about his Man, who
did not come to bring him News of his Mistress, according to Promise; and the
other not finding it in his Heart to be merry without his dear Mistress Star;
and besides, he was concerned at the Rape of Angelica, and pityed poor Leander,
in whose Face he saw all the Marks of deep Affliction. Rancour and Olive soon
made a Match with some of the Inhabitants of the Village, who were at Bowls;
and Ragotin, the Operation on his Foot being over, composed himself to rest,
whether he was really sleepy, or because he was ashamed to appear in public,
after his unlucky Adventures, The Corpse of the Innkeeper was carried to his
long home, and mine Hostess, notwithstanding the pious Thoughts which her
Husband's Death ought to have suggested to her, exacted upon two English Men,
who went from Brittany to Paris, with as much Barbarity, as if she had been a
Dutch-Inn-keeper. The Sun was just now set, when Destiny and Leander, who could
not stir from their Window, espied a Coach with four Horses, attended by three
Men on Horseback, and four Footmen. Soon after, a Maid came to desire 'em to
resign their Chamber to the new Company, and so Ragotin was obliged to show
himself, although he had a mind to keep his Chamber, and followed Destiny and
Leander into that, where the Day before he fancied he had seen Rancour die.
Destiny was known in the Kitchen by one of the Gentlemen of the Coach, who was
the same Counselor of the Parliament of Rennes, with whom he got acquainted at
the Wedding, so fatal to poor Cave. This Briton Senator, inquired of Destiny
about Angelica, and expressed a concern that she was not found. His Name was la
Garouffiere, which makes me believe he was rather Angevin than Briton, for we
see as few Briton Names begin with Gar, as we see many Angevin ones ending in
lere; Norman, in Ville; Picard, in Cour; and of the People living near the
River Garonne, in ac. To return to Monsieur la Garouffiere, he (...) of Wit, as
I said before, and did not think himself (...) a Country-Wit neither, because
when his attendance was not required at Rennes, he generally came to Paris to
spend a Sum of Money in the Public Houses, and put on black Clothes when the
Court went into Mourning. Which being duly verified and recorded, ought to be
as good as a Patent if not of Nobility, at least of Gentility; besides, he was
a Wit by the same Reason that most People pretend to have their share in
ingenious Diversions, as well those that have skill in 'em, as the Proud,
brutish and Ignorant Coxcombs, who pass their rash Censure upon Verse and
Prose, though at the same time they think it a dishonor to write well, and would
upon occasion reproach a Man for making Books, as for Counterfeiting the King's
Coin. However, Strollers are the better for these Pretenders, and are the more
caressed in all the Towns in which they Act: For being the Parrots of the
Poets, and some among 'em who have Wit, writing sometimes Plays, either out of
their own stock, or what they borrow from several others, People are in a
manner ambitious of knowing them or being in their Company. In our Days the
World has done justice to their Profession, and has a greater esteem for 'em
than formerly: And to speak the Truth, Plays in themselves are a most innocent
Diversion, and may be as Instructive as entertaming. They are now adays, at
least at Paris, purged from their former Licentiousness; and 'twere to be
wished that the Play Houses were as well cleared from Pick-Pockers, Pages,
Footmen, Whores, Orange-Wenches, and such other Vermin, who haunt those
Places rather to Steal a Purse, or pick up a Cull, than to hear the silly Jests
of Farces: But now Farces are in a manner exploded, and I am sure there are
many private Assemblies where they laugh heartily at low and smut^y
Equivocations, at which the Front Boxes would be offended at the At much as to
say the Theater Royal in London:
Hostel de Bourgogne: But here let us make an end of be Digression. Monsieur la
Garouffiere was over joy'd to find Destiny in the Inn, and made him promise to
Sup with the Company of the Coach, which consisted in the Bridegroom of Man's
and his Bride, whom he carried to her own Country of Laval, the Bridegroom's
Mother, a Gentleman of that Province; ^ Advocate of the Council, and Monsieur
de la Garouffiere; ^ related to one another, and whom Destiny saw at the Weding
where Angelica was stolen away. Add to all those I amed before, a Chambermaid
or Waiting Woman, and you find that the Coach was pretty well crammed; not
(...) that Madam Bouvillon (for so was the Bridegroom's (...) called) was one
of the biggest Women in France, though per^^^^ the shortest, and I am credibly
informed, that one Year w^^^^ another, she wore The French has it Thirty
hundred weight, but I fancy Thirty (...) sufficient to describe a Woman
menstrously Fat.
thirty Stone of Flesh, besides all other he^^^ and solid Matters which enter
the Composition of a huma^ Body. By this Description you will easily believe
that (...) was very Juicy, as all short Women are. Supper was served up:
Destiny appeared at Table with that good Mien which was inseparable from him,
and which at that time was not in the least altered by dirty Linen, Leander
having furnished him with a clean Shirt and Cravat. He spoke but little,
according to his Custom; yet had he spoke as much as the re^^ who all talked
very much, he would not perhaps have said so many impertinent things as They.
La Garouffiere helped him to a bit of every thing that was good on the Table;
Madam Bouvillon did as much, in Emulation of la Garouffiere and with so little
Consideration, that in one Moment all the Dishes were empty, and Destiny's
Plate so full of Wings an^ Legs of Fowls, that I have often wondr'd since, how
the could raise by chance such a high Piramid of Meat en^ narrow a Basis as the
bottom of a Plate. La Garouffiere (...) not mind what he did, so very busy he
was about talking (...) Poetry to Destiny, to bespeak his good Opinion of his
o^^, W^t Madam Bouvillon, who had also a Project in her Head, (...) tinued her
good Offices to the Player, and finding no (...) Pullets to Carve, was reduced
to help him to some (...) slices of a Leg of Mutton. He was at a loss what to
(...) with 'em, and looked for a place where to put two Sli^ he had in both his
Hands, when the Country Gentleman, (...) was unwilling to hold his Tongue to
the prejudice of (...) Stomach, asked Destiny with a Smile, whether he could
(...) all the Meat he had on his Plate? Destiny cast his Eyes up^ it, and was
not a little surpised to see almost level with (...) Chin, the heap of carved
Pullets with which la Gar^^^ and Bouvillon had erected a Trophy to his Merit.
He blu^^^ ar it, and could not forbear laughing; Bouvillon was da^ out of
Countenance; la Garouffiere laughed heartily, and (...) all the Company in so
good a Humor, that they (...) out into laughter four or five several times.
The Serv^^ began where their Masters left off, and laughed in their (...) (...)
the Bride found so Comical, that breaking out into (...) as she was going to
Drink, she spurted the grearest part of the Wine, which was in her Glass, on
her Mother-in-Law, and her Husband's Face, and distributed the rest either on
the Table, or the Clothes of those that sat at it. They all began to laugh
again, except Bouvillon, who colored at it, and cast an angry Look upon her
poor Daughter-in-law, which palled a little their Joy. At last they made an end
of laughing, because it is not possible to laugh for ever; Madam Bouvillon and
her Son wiped off the Wine which trickled down their Eyes and Cheeks, and the
young Bride asked their pardon, having still much ado to forbear laughing.
Destiny laid his Plate on the middle of the Table, and every one took his own
share out of it. They talked of nothing else during all the Supper, and
Raillery good or bad was carried on to a high pitch, though the serious Air,
which Madam Bouvillon put on preposterously, did in some measure disturb the
Mirth of the Company. As Soon as Supper was over, and the Cloth taken away, the
Ladies retired to their Chamber, the Advocare and the Country Squire called for
Cards, and went to Pickett; la Garouffiere and Destiny, who were none of those
that know not what to do when they do not Play, had together a very ingenious
Conversation, and perhaps the best that ever was held in an Inn of lower Main.
La Garouffiere spoke with Desing, of all he thought most remote from the
knowledge of a Player, whose Wit and Judgment have generally narrower Limits
than his Memory; but Destiny discoursed of every thing like a Man of great
skill, and who understands the World. Among the rest, with all the nicety of
Discerment imaginable, he distinguished those Women who have a great deal of
Wit, and never use it but when there is occasion for it, from those who use it
only to be thought Witty. Likewise those Women who endeavor to imitate silly
Buffoons, that can laugh at, and even use themselves, licentious Allusions and
paltry Equivocations, in a Word, that set up for the Jesters of their Parish,
from those who make up the most lovely and agreeable Part of the ^eau-Monde,
and are of the choicest Companies. He spoke also of those Women who write as
well as those Men, that make it their Profession, and who do not publish the
Productions of their Brain, only out of a principle of Modesty. La Garouffiere
who was an accomplished Gentleman, and knew how to discern a Man of nice
Breeding, wondered how a Stroller ^ould be so well acquainted with true
Politeness and civil Conversation. Whilst he admires him within himself, and
that the Advocate and the Gentleman, who by this t^^^ had given over Playing,
upon a dispute about a faced Card, yawn'd and gaped frequently, which probably
proceeded from an Inclination to sleep, three Beds were got ready for 'em in
the Chamber where they Sup't, and Destiny retired to that of his Comrades,
where he lay with Leander.

CHAP. IX.
Another Disaster which befell Ragotin.
RAncour and Ragotin lay in the same Bed; as for Olive, he spent part of the
Night in stitching up again, and darning his Clothes, which he tore in several
Places, when he grappl'd with Passionate Ragotin. Those who were particularly
acquainted with this Dwarf of Man's, took notice that when he cuffed with any
Body, which he did often, he ever tore or unstitcht the Cloths of his
Adversary, either totally, or in part. This was his surest stroke, and whoever
was to fight a pitched Battle at Cuffs with him, might have barred tearing of
Cloths, as People bar pushing at the Face in Fencing. Rancour asked him as they
were going to Bed, if he was well, for he thought he looked very ill, to which
Ragotin answered^ he never was better in all his Life. 'Twas not long before
they fell a sleep; and Ragotin may thank the respect which Rancour paid to the
honorable Company that came to the Inn, whose Repose he would not disturb;
otherwise the little Man had had but a sorry Night. In the mean time Olive was
busy about his Clothes, and having put them in good repair, he took Ragotin's
Clothes, and with the Dexterity of a nice Tailor, made both the Doublet and
Breeches straiter, and laid them again in their Places; and now having past the
greatest part of the Night in sowing and unsowing, he went into Bed with
Ragotin and Rancour. They got up betimes, as it is usual in all Inns, where the
noise begins with the Day, Rancour told Ragotin he looked very ill; Olive told
him the same, he began to believe 'em, and finding at the same time his Clothes
above four Inches too strait, he did not Question but that he was swo^n by so
much, during that little time he was a sleep, and was not a little frighted at
this sudden swelling. Rancour and Olive still continued to tell him how ill he
looked, and Destiny and Leander, whom they acquainted with the Plot, told him he
was strangely altered. Poor Ragotin was very much concerned, and wept at it:
Destiny could not forbear smiling, which made the little Man very angry. He
went into the Kitchen, where every Body told him of his ill Looks; the like did
the Company that belonged to the Coach, who having a great way to go, got up
betimes. They invited the Strollers to Breaskfast with 'em, and all drunk Sick
Ragotin's Health, who instead of thanking them for it, went out grumbling at
'em, and in a heavy taking repaired to the Surgeon of the Town, to whom he gave
an account of his swelling. The Surgeon made a long Deseant upon the Cause and
Effect of his Disease, which he understood no better than Algebra, and for
above a quarter of an Hour entertained him with the obscure Terms of his Art,
little to the Purpose, as if he had discoursed about Prester-Iohn. Ragotin grew
impatient, and asked him, Swearing to admiration for a little Man, whether he
had nothing else to say to him. The Surgeon would have gone on in his
Reasonings, but Ragotin threatened to beat him, and had certainly done it, had
not the Surgeon humbled himself before his angry Patient, from whom he drew
twelve Ounces of Blood, and Cup'd him on the Shoulders at a venture. The
Operation was just done when Leander came to tell Ragotin that if he would
promise not to be angry, he would acquaint him with a piece of Roguery they had
done him. He promised more than Leander desired, and swore as he hoped to be
saved to be as good as his Promise. Leander told him he desired to have Witness
to his Oath, and carried him back to the Inn, where in the presence of all,
both Masters and Servants, he made him swear a new, and then told him somebody
had made his Clothes straiter. At first Ragotin redden'd for shame, and then
turning pale with Anger and Indignation, he was going to break his dreadful and
solemn Oath, when seven or eight Persons at once began to preach to him with
such vehemence, that tho he swore like Mad, yet he could not be heard. He
ceased to bluster; but the rest did not give over to round him in the Ears,
which they continued doing so long, that the Poor Man was like to lose his
Hearing for it. At last he came off better than was expected, for he fell a
Singing, as loud as ever he could, what Songs came first into his Mouth, which
changed the great noise of confu'd Voices into repeated peals of Laughing,
which from the Masters were echoed by the Servants, and passed from the Place
of Action, to all the Places in the Inn, where different businesses called
different Persons. Whilst the noise of so many People laughing together
diminishes by degrees, and is lost in the Air, somewhat like the sound of
distant Echoes, the faithful Chronologer shall make an end of this present
Chapter, under the gracious favor of the Reader, whether Courteous or
uncourteous, or such as God Almighty made him.

CHAP. X.
How Madam Bouvillon could not resist a certain Temptation, and besides, how
she got a Bunch in her Forehead.
THE Coach that was to go a great Journey the next Morning, got ready betimes
for that purpose; the seven (...) were to go in it, crowded together as close
as possible. At the time appointed it went out, but had not gone above ten Yar^
before the Axel-tree broke. This made the Coach man to cur^^ his Misfortune,
and the Passengers to curse him, as if he co^^ have warranted the strength of
his Wood. Now were (...) People to be drawn forth one by one, and obliged to
retur^ to the Inn from whence they came; but this did not vex th^^ so much as
when they heard that there was no Coach-mak^ to be met with, nearer than at a
large Town three Leag^^ off. Hereupon they immediately called a Council, but
(...) to no Resolutions, plainly perceiving that their Caravan (...) not likely
to be fit for Action till the next Day. Madam Bouvillon who had preserved to
her self a great Authority (...) her Son, by reason that the whole Estate of
the Family ca^ by her, commanded him in the mean time to take one of (...)
Servants Horses, and mount his Wife on another, and to (...) Visit an old Uncle
of hers, who was then Curate of the (...) Town whence the Coachmaker was to
come. The Lord (...) this Town likewise was a Relation to the Councellor, and
(...) over an Acquaintance of the Advocate and Gentleman, (...) therefore they
also resolved to take a Vagary to the same pla^^ and on the same Account. For
this end their Landlady was (...) furnish them with Horses, which she did, but
at very gr^^ Rates. Madam Bouvillon being thus left alone, either bee^^ she was
tired, or that she feigned to be so, or else by reason (...) no Horse was able
to carry her weight, sent her Servant (...) Destiny to desire him to come and
Dine with her, and (...) Dinner was getting ready she spent her time in
Dressing. First she Curled and Powdered, then put on a laced Apron and
Nightraile, and afterward took to pieces a Point de Venise Cravat of her Sons
to make her a Commode. After this she opened her Daughter-in-Laws Trunk, and
took thence her Wedding Gown and put it on: In a Word, being thus trickt up and
adorned, she seemed like to any little Venus in a Cloud, though that somewhat of
the fattest. Now, notwithstanding all these preparations of hers, Destiny had
no doubt much rather have Dined with his Companions; but then how could he have
obeyed the Commands of his very humble Servant Madam Bouvillon? He therefore
not knowing how to get free, was forced to comply; but was not a little
surpised when he saw his Paramour so youthfully dressed. She received him with a
smiling Countenance, took him by the Hands to have him wash them, and squeezed
him after a manner that meant something more than ordinary. He for his part was
less Sollicitous of his Invitation than of the occasion of it, and therefore
often neglected Eating, which gave her opportunity to press it. He knew not
what to say to her, being naturally no great Speaker; but she plentifully
supplied that defect by her never ceasing Clack. She was but too ingenious to
suffer any chalm in Conversation for want of something to say. When a Woman
that talks much, meers with a Man that says little and does not answer her, she
always talks the more, for judging of her Friend by her self, and perceiving
that he has not Reparteed to what she advanced, she presently believes he has
not been pleased with what was said; and therefore to mend the Matter, proceeds
to say a great deal more, which commonly proves as Impertinent as her first
Discourse was Ridiculous. The only way that I can propose to deal with such
Women as these, is to talk as much, if not more than they, for thereby if they
cannot be silenced, their Voices may at least be drowned. As for the matchless
Bouvillon, she was the most immoderate Talker of nothing, that ever was known,
and she not only talked to her self while she was in private, but would answer
her self likewise. The silent disposition of Destiny giving her an Opportunity,
she determined to divert him with some large Relation or other. The Subjects
she chose to speak of, was the Intrigues of Laval, the Town where she lived;
but she never happened to blame any Person or Action but she always took thence
an occasion to commend her self, protesting at every fling of Satyr on her
Neighbor, that though she was guilty of many Faults, yet in that Particular he
was Innocent. Though Destiny was extremely mortified at the beginning of her
Discourse, and made no Answer, yet he afterward found himself obliged for
quietness sake, to smile now and then, and sometimes to cry out, Oh! That Is
Pleasant^ or That Is strange! both which he often spoke Mal a propos. As Soon as
Destiny had done eating, the Voider was brought, and the Table cleared. Then
Madam Bouvillon clapping her self down at the Feet of the Bed, pulled him down
by her, and her Servant, (letting the Waiters of the Inn go out first) leaving
her likewise, drew the Door after her, and shut it: This Madam Bouvillon
perceiving, and thinking that Destiny had also observed it, said to him, See
this Foolish Jade has shut the Door after her. To which he replied. If you
please, Madam, I Will go and open (...) No, said she, stopping him, let it alone;
but you know, continued she, when two Persons are locked up together, as they
have an opportunity to do what they please, People will judge of them as they
think fit. It Is not on such Reputations as yours, Madam, replied Destiny for
People to pass rash Judgments. However, Sir, quoth Bouvillon, one cannot have
too much caution against Slander. Well, Madam, replied Destiny, but People will
not Talk without Grounds, and sure they can have none when they reflect upon
the Inequality of our Conditions. Will you please therefore, Madam, continued
he, that I go open the Door. By no means, Sir, quoth she, going to bolt it, and
adding withal. For as long as People think it shut, it is better it were really
so, that no Body may come in upon us without our consent. Having said this, and
performed the Office of a Friend for her self, she turned toward Destiny,
giving him to understand by her large fiery Cheeks, and little sparkling Eyes,
what Sport she had a mind to be at; then she proceeded to take off her
Hankerchief from her Neck, and thereby discovered to her Lover at least ten
Pound of exuberant Flesh, that is to say near the third part of her Bosom, the
rest being distributed in two equal Portions under her Arm-pitts: This ill
Intention of hers causing her to Blush, (which sometimes the most Impudent will
do) her Neck was grown as red as her Face, and both together might be well
taken at any distance for a Scarlet Caps which Country Men use, that Button
about their Neck.
Riding Cap. All this made Destiny to blush too, but it was with Shame, when
I Will give you leave to guess what might be the cause of Madam Bouvillons Then
she began to complain that she had something that troubled her in her Back, and
moving her self about in her Harness, as if she had Irch'd, she begged of
Destiny to thrust his Hand down her Back to scratch her. This the Youth
immediately obeyed her in, trembling all the while, but whilst he was (...) in
pleasing her behind, she diverted her self with him before, handling his sides
through his Wast-coat, and asking him often, If he was not ticklish too? Whilst
these Lovers were thus pleasing each other, Ragotin came to the Door, and
knocked and bawled like to any Madman, calling out aloud to Destiny to open to
him. This Destiny going immediately to perform, drew his Hand all sweaty out
from Bouvillons Back, and oftering to go between her and the Table, as the
shortest cut, chanced to trip against a Nail in the Floor, which brought him
down with his Head against a Bench in that violent manner, that he lay sometime
for Dead. Madam Bouvillon in the mean time caught up her Handkercheif, and
having thrown it over her Shoulders, made all the haste she could to open the
Door, which having done, and Ragotin pushing against it with all his force at
the same time, gave the poor Lady so cruel a blow on the Face, that it almost
flatted her Nose, and also raised a bump on her Forehead, of the bigness of
ones Fist. This made her to cry out, she was dead, but which, though the little
Rascal heard, he nevertheless made no excuse for, but leaping and bounding
about the Room like Mad, bauled out Mrs. Angelica 's found! Mrs. Angelica 's
found! This he did the louder to provoke Destiny's Anger, who was all this
while calling for Madam Bouvillons Maid to come and help her Mistress, which
she nevertheless could not possibly hear, by reason of the Noise which Ragotin
made. At length the Servant came, and brought Water and a clean Napkin, when
between her and Destiny there was quickly some small reparation made for the
damage done by the Door. But however, great was Destiny's Impatience to know
what more Nevvs Ragotin brought; he notvvithstanding would not leave Madam
Bouvillon till her Face was vvash'd and anointed, and her Forehead bound up
with a bandage. At last he offered to be gone, but that calling Ragotin a
Thousand Rogues for the Mischief he had done on the one side, while Ragotin
drevv him after him on the other, to give him a farther account of his Message.

CHAP. XI^.
Of things that will divert, it may be, the least of the whole Book.
IT IS true Madam Angelica was found again, and brought away by Leander's
Servant. This Servant had but too much Wit to let any Body know that Leander
was his Master, and Madam Angelica endeavored to^ disguise that by Policy
which Olive and Rancour had done before bluntly. Leander enquired of Madam
Angelica and his Servant, whom he made to pass for one of his Friends, Where
and How he had found her, and which Questions he happened to ask just as
Ragotin entered leading in Destiny in Triumph, or rather dragging him after him,
because he could not go so fast as he would have him. At first sight Destiny
and Angelica embraced with reciprocal Testimonies of Love and Friendship, and
with that tenderness which Lovers long absent are wont to do on an unexpected
Interview Leander and she Carress'd only with their Eyes, leaving farther
remonstrances of Kindness to a private Meeting. In the mean time Leander's
Servant began his Story, after the following manner, treating his Master all
the while like his Friend. After I had left you, quoth he, Addressing himself
to Leander, I pursued the Ravishers of Angelica, according as you had desired
me, till Sunset, when, and not before, I lost sight of them. Next Morning I
was not a little surpised to find the Lady I looked after at the entrance of a
Wood alone, on foot, and all dissolved in Tears. Hereupon having acquainted her
that I was your Friend, and that it was at your Request that I had gone in
quest of her. She seemed to be somewhat comforted, and ^beg'd of me to conduct
her to Man's, or at least to carry her to Leander, if I knew where to find him.
Now, Madam, continued he, turning to Angelica, It must be your part to relate
the rest, for you know you were so afflicted on the Road, that I did not care
to ask you any Questions. Those that were least curious of all the Company, had
yet a mind to learn from Madam Angelica's own Mouth the account of so strange
an Adventure; for strange it might well seem to them, that a young Lady should
be carried away with such Violence, and be afterward surrendered, or rather
abandoned without the least force. In order to this Relation Madam Angelica
first desired they would help her to a Bed; but which they not being able to
do, by reason that the Inn was full, the honest Curate obliged her with a
Chamber in his Sisters House, which was next Door. Now Angelica had not so
great occasion for a Bed to sleep on as to rest her self upon; therefore
Destiny and Leander, with the rest of the Company, were admitted to her
Bedside as soon as she was laid. Although she would have been glad that Destiny
should have had an Opinion of her Constancy, yet could not she well look upon
him without Blushing. The observing of this made him pity her Confusion
extremely, and in order to divert her from doing her self any diskindness, he
immediately put her upon relating that part of the Adventure which Leander's
Servant could not. This request of his, she forthwith proceeded to gratify, as
follows. You may imagine, quoth she, my Mother and I were not a little
surpised when while we were walking together in the Park that adjoins to our
House, we saw all of a sudden a little Door open which looks toward the
Country, and five or six Men enter thereat, who immediately soiz'd upon me,
without regarding my Mother, and carried me away half dead with fear to their
Horses. My Mother, whom ye all know to be one of the most resolute Women in the
World, fell furiously upon the first of those she overtook, and reduced him to
that Condition, that he could not possibly get out of her Hands till he had
called one of his Companions to his assistance. The Person that rescued him,
who was so base as to beat my Mother, as I heard him afterward brag on the
Road, was it seems the Author of this enterprise. He nevertheless came not near
me all that Night, during which we marched like to Persons pursued by an Enemy,
and that through the most by-Roads; for otherwise the noise I made might have
been sufficient to have allarum'd some body to my Relies. They so managed the
Matter, that we met with but one little Village in our way; the Inhabitants
thereof I soon raised with my shrill Notes, but who nevertheless were not
numerous enough to rescue me. The Morning came, and then my Ravisher approached
me; but had no sooner seen me than he flew from me in great Passion, and
afterward assembled a Council of his Companions, which lasted about half an
Hour. My Ravisher after that seemed to be enraged as much as I was grieved, and
often swear to make the Devil to do among his Companions. Their ^umultous
Assembly being at an end, I could by no means come to know what Resolves they
had agreed on. We were put on our March again; and from that time forward, I
had less respect paid me than before. They quarreled with me as often as they
saw me uneasy, and Cursed me, as if I had been some great Offender. They
carried me away as you might perceive, speaking to Leander, with a Players
Habit on, but which they hid by throwing one of their Cloaks over me. They met
a Man upon the Road, of whom they endeavored to inform themselves of some
Matters. I was surpised to see it was Leander, and I believe he was no less
astonished to see me; for he knew me as soon as ever I discovered my Habit, as
well as by my Face. He may inform you if he pleases what he did. For my part,
seeing so many Swords drawn upon him, I fainted away in the Arms of him that
held me upon the Horse, and when I came to my self, I found we were again upon
our March but saw Leander no more till now. Hereupon I began to redouble my
Cries; but my Ravishers, whereof there was one Wounded, little regarding me,
took their way cross the Country, and Yesterday Night stopped at a little
Village, where they lay and passed for Soldiers. This Morning at the entrance
of a Wood they met a Man with a young Gentlewoman on Horseback; her they
immediately unmasked, and having so done, it seems knew her, when taking her
from her Guardian, and bestowing on him a few blows of a Cudgel, they rid away
with her, as they had done with me; she making as great, if not greater
Lamentations than I had done. When I heard her Voice. I fancied I knew her, but
could not be positive. After we had got about Fifty Paces into the Wood,. the
Man that seemed to have the Command of the rest, rid up to the Person that
carried me, and cried to him, set down that slabbering Milksop you have behind
you, and let her shift for her self. Herein he was immediately obeyed, and I
was all of a sudden left alone upon the Ground. The dread I had to be thus
alone would have certainly been the Death of me, had not this Gentleman here,
meaning Leanders Servant, who brought me hither followed me at a distance, and
found me in that Condition. The rest he has acquainted you with. But, continued
she, addressing her self to Destiny, I believe that same Lady which was
preferred to me might be your Sister, my Companion; and the reason I have for
it, is not only the resemblance of her Voice with that I heard, but likewise
the Man that carried her I dare be positive was the Servant you took last.
What Is that you tell me? quoth Destiny somewhat disturbed, I tell you my
Thoughts, replied Angelica, but I may be deceived, one Person may be like
another; yet still I fear it was she. I fear so too, replied Destiny, with his
Countenance all changed, for I have some reas^^ to apprehend a certain Person
in this Province for an Enemy, that would do me such a good turn. But how came
she at the entrance of a Wood, continued he, when Ragotin left her yesterday at
Man's? I Will go send away one of my Friends thither presently, pursued he, to
know the Truth, while I stay behind to determine a Resolution suitable to the
News he brings. As he had just done speaking he heard some body call him out of
the Street, and stepping to the Window, perceived it was Monsieur de la
Garouffiere, who was just then returned from his Visit and who told him he had
something of Importance to communicate to him. He went down to wait on him, and
thereby left Leander and Angelica together, to enjoy each other after so
tedious an Absence, and to pour out their Sighs and Vows into one another
Bosoms. I fancy 'twould have been no small Pleasure, either to have seen or
heard them; but still their greatest Happiness was to have been alone. During
this, Destiny demanded of la Garouffiere what he had to say to him. Do you know
a certain Gentleman called Verville, quoth Garouffiere, and is he one of your
Friends? He is the only Person that I have been most obliged to in the World,
replied Destiny, and whom I honor most, and who I ^elieve has the like
kindness and respect for me. I believe it, answered Garouffiere, for I met him
to Day at the Gentleman's, where I dined, and all his Discourse was of you. He
asked me a Hundred Questions concerning you, without my being able to satisfy
him in any, and if I had not promised to send you to him, he would certainly
have come hither to wait on you before now, although he has a great deal of
business upon his Hands where he is. Destiny thanked him heartily for his kind
Information, and having learnt farther from him, where his Friend Verville was
to be found resolved to go to him that Minute, hoping to learn from him some
News of his Enemy Saldagne, whom he knew very well to be the Author of the
carrying away of Angelica, and provided she were not mistaken, in the Voice she
heard. of the ravishing of his dear Star likewise. He desired his Companions
therefore to return immediately to Man's, and to Congratulate Mrs. Cave in his
Name, for the News of the finding of her Daughter, and moreover desired of them
^^ther to send a Man on purpose, or else some one of them to come back
speedily, and bring him Word how his dear dear Madam Star did, providing he
could hear any News of (...) there. He informed himself farther of Garonffiere,
which was the way to the Town where Verville was to be found. After which
having made the Curate to promise that his Sister should take care of Angelica,
till such time as he sent for her from Man's, He took Leanders Horse, and got
about Night to the Town where Verville was. He did not think it proper (...) go
to look after Verville himself for fear he should meet with saldagne, at his
first coming whom he knew to be thereabouts, (...) therefore going to a litte
Hedge-Inn hardby, he sent the Boy to Verville to let him know that the
Gentleman who^^ he had desired to see, was there waiting for him. Verville
came, and throwing his Arms about Destiny's Neck, continued for some time
embracing him, being scarce able to show the Love and Tenderness he had for
him. Let us leave them in each others Arms for a while, as Persons that thought
they should never see one another again, and proceed to the following Chapter.

CHAP. XII.
Which perhaps will entertain its Reader as little as the foregoing.
VErville and Destiny gave an account to each other of all matters concerning
them, which they were seperately ignorant of. Verville tells Destiny of the
wondrous Brutality of his Brother St. Far, and of the great Patience of his
Wife in bearing with him. Thence he takes an occasion to extol his own
Happiness in having so good a Woman to his, and afterward tells him News of
the Baron D'Arques his Father, and of Monsieur de St. Sauveur. Destiny on his
part relates all his Adventures, not concealing the least, and Verville farther
acquaints him, that Saldagne still continued to live thereabouts as ill a Life
as ever, and promised him withal, that if Madam Star were to be found in his
Custody, he would do all that lay in his Power to recover her out of his Hands,
at the hazard both of his own Life and those of his Friends which he could
Command. He farther tells him, that he had no place to retire to but his
Father's, and another Gentleman's in the Country, who was as bad as he, and
besides, who had little or no Estate to maintain himself, and therefore could
not be able to entertain another long. He must therefore, continued he, come to
our House speedily, if he will remain in our Province. My Father bears with him
it is true, on account of some Relation; but my Brother St. Far cates no more
for him, whatever Friendship has been formerly between them. I would advise you
therefore, proceeded he, to come along with me to my Fathers to Morrow, and I
will place you so that you shall observe all that he does, and notwithstanding
be seen by (...) but those you have a mind to see. This Advice of (...) Friend
Verville's Destiny liked very well, and resolved to follow it; but Verville
being to go to Supper that Night with the Lord of the Town, an old Man his
Relation, who had designed him for his Heir, it could not be put in execution
till the next Morning. Destiny for his part Supped only on what he could find
in the Inn, and went to Bed betimes that he might not make his Friend wait for
him the next Day, for that they had designed to be on their Journey by Sun
rising. At the Hour appointed they set forth, and as they rid along for three
Leagues together, entertained each other with those Particulars that they had
not time to speak of before. As Soon as they were got to their Journeys end,
Verville placed Destiny in the House of a Servant of his, whom he had married
not long before to a Woman in that Town, and who lived very prettily, not far
off from the Baron D'Arques his Father. He gave particular orders that he
should be kept private, and promised that he would return to him in a very
short time. It was not above two Hours before he did return accordingly; but
acquainted Destiny at first dash, that he had bad News to tell him. Hereupon
Destiny began to grow pale and to tremble, but Verville soon removed the cause
thereof, by the following Relation. I was no sooner alighted. quoth he to
Destiny. but I saw your Friend Saldagne carried between four Men into a Ground
Chamber, and that by reason of a fall he had got from his Horse, which had so
bruiz'd him, that he was not able to walk. At the first sight of me he told me
he had occasion to speak with me, and desired me to come to his Chamber after
that the Surgeon, that was then present, had done dressing of his Leg, which
was extremely shattered by his fall. I came accordingly, and as soon as we were
alone, he began thus. I must, says he, confess all my Faults to you, though you
are the least indulgent of any of my Censurers, your Prudence being a continual
terror to my Folly. He afterward owned to me, that he had carried away a Woman
Player, for whom he had had a kindness all his Life long, and would tell me the
Particulars thereof, which he believed I would be surpised at. He told me
consequently that the Gentleman I was speaking of before, who had been used to
entertain him, having been obliged to leave the Province on account of siding
with a Brother of his, who had been found to have made bad Salt, he was forced
to bring his Booty to my Fathers House, and that he had desired of his Sister,
my Wife, that she would conceal her in her Appartment, for fear this action of
this should come to my Fathers knowledge, which he said, he ^dreaded. He
afterward conjured me to lend him one of my Servants, because his own were
great Blockheads, that might conduct her safe to an House of his in Brittany,
whither he said he would follow as soon as ever he could well mount a Horse. He
asked me farther, if I could not procure him a Man or two more to accompany my
Servant, for well he knew how difficult a thing it would be for three Men to
carry off a Woman so far without her consent. I made him believe it was an easy
matter, the better to serve you. Now, continued Verville to Destiny, his
Servants are altogether Strangers to you, and mine is a very cunning Fellow and
Faithful to me, therefore I will cause him to tell Saldagne that he will take
along with him a stout Fellow an Acquaintance of his to his Assistance; and
this same Fellow I design shall be you. Therefore, pursued he, your Mistress
must be acquainted with this, and this very Night that they think to get a
great way by the help of the Moon, she must feign her self sick at the first
Village; then will they be obliged to stop; my Servane shall make Saldagnes Men
drunk. She shall afterward seem to recover, and then proceeding on in their
Iourny, it will be an easy matter for my Men to impose on the Drunkards, and to
make them believe that you come behind with their Charge, when it shall be so
contrived that you shall go a quite contrary way, and so carry your dear Star
clear off. Destiny found a great deal of masterly Contrivance in this Proposal
of Vervilles, and whose Man, whom they had just then sent for, entered the
Chamber much at the same time. They consulted together what they had to do, and
agreed on all Points. Afterward Verville retired with Destiny the rest of the
Day, being unwilling to part with him so quickly after so long absence, though he
nevertheless hoped to see him again at Bourbon whither he was to go. At length
Night came and Destiny went with Verville's Servant to the place appointed.
Saldagnes two Men failed not to be there likewise when Verville by Saldagnes
order consigned into their Hands the Charge of Madam Star. You cannot imagine
what Joy enflamed these two Lovers Hearts at this enterview, but speak they
must not, and look languishingly they dare not, so that their Passion might be
well termed inexpressible. They had not gone above half a League before Madam
Star began to complain. Her Attendants exhorted her to take Courage till she
came to a Town about two Leagues off, where they gave her hopes she should
rest. Her Malady increased at every Step, and Vervilles Man and Destiny did all
that in them lay to prevent Saldagnes Servants from mistrusting the reality of
her Sickness so near to the place they set out from. At last they arrived at
the Town, and immediately went to the Inn (whereof there was but one in all
the Place, which they happily found full of Guests and Drunkards. Madam Star
continued to grunt, and feigned Sickness better by candlelight than she had
done before. She called for a Bed and lay down thereon in her Clothes,
requiring her Guards but to leave her for an Hour only, and she did not
question but by that time she should be sit to get on Horseback again. They
left her, and Saldagnes Servants left all other Matters to the management of
Vervilles Man, who had their Masters Orders. For their parts they thought they
had no more to do than to make much of themselves, and in order thereto, struck
in with a jolly Company of roaring Boys, who were placed round a Table, and who
pelted one another with Healths as thick as Hail-shot flies from the Mouth of a
Demi-Culvetih. Vervilles Man would sometimes step in and take his Glass to
renew the Fight when there was like to be any Cessation. His reason for often
slinching, was because he had the care of the Lady; but the truth on it was, he
had a mind to get an opportunity to mount her and Destiny, and to send them
away, which he soon after did by By-roads; but therein va^ied from the
Stratagem his Master had laid, as you may have observed before. After he had so
done, he returned to his Drunkards, amusing them with flim flam Stories, and
telling them the Lady was for the present gone to sleep, but that she would
soon awake, and then they would be jogging onwards of their Journey. He told
them likewise, that Destiny was gone into the Stable to look after the Horses,
but would return presently. He then put about the Glass, and toasted several
Healths, all which Saldagnes Men took in Bumpers, till at last their Heads grew
so heavy, that they could not possibly lift them from the Table. It was
therefore they were fore'd to be carried out, and thrown upon a lump of Straw
in a Barn, for Beds they were not to be suffered to lie upon, for ^ear they
should have spoiled the Sheets. Vervilles Man feigned himself Drunk. likewise,
but which he really was not, by reason he had often balked his Glass. In the
Morning he waked betimes, and going sorrowfully to his Companions in the Barn,
he told them their Charge was flown, but that he had sent his Friend Destiny
after her, who he hoped would o^ertake and bring her back. However he thought
it both ^heirs and his Duty to mount immediately, and assist in the ^ursuit,
and therefore bid them to rise instantly and prepare to ^e gone. It was at
least an Hour before he could make them ^mprehend what he said, and I Will assure
you 'twas near eight Days after before they were wholly Sober. As all the Inn
(...) Drunk that Night, even from the Hostess to the Scullion-Wench no Body
took the least notice when Destiny and his dear Star went away; and I believe
they scarce remembered next Day whether they had seen any such People there or
not. Whilst Matters passed thus, and Vervilles Man pressed his sluggish
Companions to be gone; Destiny had gained Ground apace with his dear Fellow
Traveller, not doubting in the least but that his Friend behind had taken care,
whenever they got out, to lead his Pursuers a contrary way. The Moon shone out
very bright, and the Road they had to go was extremely good, which led them to
a Town whither we will bring them in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XIII.
A bad Action committed by the Sieur de la Rappiniere, and a farther Account of
Madam Star's and Destiny's Travells.
DEstiny as he rode along, had a great desire to know o^ his dear Star how she
came to the Wood where Saldagne seized her, but this, though he would have
willingly been satisfied in, yet still had he more regard to their safeties,
and therefore spent all his time in spurring and switching his own^ and his
Mistresses Beast forwards. At length the two Love^ had leisure to entertain
each other, which they did, with all the Expressions and Demonstrations of Love
and Affection imaginable. Then proceeded Madam Star, to tell Destiny how many
good turns she had done her Mother Mrs. Cave, an^ how extremely she belived she
would be Afficted at he^ Absence. As for my part, continued she, you may well
imagin^ that I had as great need of Consolation as she, for as soon as you^
Valet had brought me a Horse from you, and withal, acquainted (...) that you
had found the Ravishers of Angelica, but were wounde^ I --, I wounded! quoth
Destiny interrupting her, I never we yet, no nor in the least danger of being
so, neither did I ever send (...) any Horse. There must be some Mystery in
this, continud (...) which I have not comprehended yet. I wondered indeed what
(...) you ask me so often how I did, and whether the going so fast (...) not
incomode me; but now all is out. You rejoice and (...) me at once, answered
Madam Star, with this Relation. Y^ Wounds caused me a great deal of disquiet
it is true, and now what you tell me enclines me to believe that your Servant
has been gained over to our Enemies, out of some ill design they have projected
against us. He has rather been debauched, replied Destiny, by some that are too
much our Friends. I have no professed Enemy, continued he, but Saldagne, and it
is unlikely that he should have seduced my Servant, because I know he beat him
at the time that he met with you. How came you to know that, said Star, for I
don't remember I ever told it you? You shall know, replied Destiny, as soon as
ever you have made me acquainted with the manner of your coming from Man's. I
can acquaint you with no more, quoth Star, than what I have told you already.
The Day after, proceeded she, that my Mother Mrs. Cave and I came to Man's, your
Servant brought me a Horse from you, and told me with Tears in his Eyes, that
you had been Wounded by the Ravishers of Angelica, and that therefore you
desired I would make all the haste I could to you. I got on Horseback
presently, for that purpose, although it was very late. I lay about 5 Leagues
from Man's, at a place whose name I have forgot, and next Day at the entrance of
a VVood, we were stopped by Persons I did not know. I saw your Servant beaten and
was extremely concerned at it, but could not hinder it. I saw likewise a Woman
suddenly thrown off from a Horse, and whom I afterward knew to be my
Companion, but the great fright I was then in, joined with the extraordinary
concern I had for your safety, made me to take little notice of it. They
mounted me in the place of her they had pulled off. We traveled till Night,
and afterward having gone a great deal more Ground, for the most part cross
the Country, we arrived at a sort of Gentleman's House, where I observed they
would not receive us. It was there that I first knew Saldagne, the sight of
whom caused me immediately to despair. We after that traveled a great way
farther, and at length I was secretly conveyed into the House where your Friend
found me. As Madam Star had just ended the Relation of her Adventures, the Day
began to appear, whereby they perceived they were in the high-wood that leads
to Man's. They forthwith whipped their Horses forwards, more vigorously than they
had hitherto done, to reach a Town they saw before them. Destiny desired
earnestly to catch his Servant and thereby to discover what other Enemy he had
in that Country besides his professed one Saldagne; but there was no likely hood
that he would suffer himself to light into his Clutches, after the ill trick he
had played him. He learnt from his dear Star all that she knew concerning her
Companion Angelica; and while they were thus amusing each other with Questions
and Answers, their Horses started all of a sudden; at the sight of a Man that
lay at his full length under a Hedge. Destiny's. Horse almost leaped from under
him, but Madam Star's was so frighted, that he quite threw her off, violently
upon the Ground. After Destiny had recovered himself, he went to see how his
Love fared, but he could scarce alight to assist her his Horse so snaffled and
pranch'd, and tripp'd. At last he made shift to leap off his Back, and found to
his great Joy that his dear Star had got no hurt. After which, the Horses being
somewhat come to themselves, he went up to observe the cause of their fright,
and found it was a Man, whom he took either to be dead or asleep. Upon a nearer
view he saw he was both, for he was dead Drunk; although his snoring showed him
to be alive, yet Destiny had no small trouble to awake him. At length by often
pulling and tearing him about, he opened his Eyes, and thereby discovered
himself to his Master to be his Servant, whom he had longed so much to find,
The Rogue as Drunk as he was, nevertheless knew his Master, and by the fear he
seemed to have of him, betrayed his being Author of what he before doubted of.
Destiny immediately asked him several Questions successively, without waiting
for Answers till he had done. As first, Why he had told Madam Star that he was
Wounded? Why he carried her away from Man's? And whither he designed to have
carried her? By whose order he had the Horse? and the like. To all which
Questions, he nevertheless, could not get a Word in Answer, either because the
Rascal his Man was ^^o drunk to have the use of his Tongue, or else by reason
he feigned himself to be so. This made Destiny to fly into a great Passion,
insomuch that having struck him two or three Blows with the flat of his Sword,
he took a Halter and tied his Hands fast behind him, and fastened the other e^^
to the Crupper of his Horse, intending to make him march in that manner to his
Journies end. After which he mounted Star upon her Horse again, and having
snatched a good Cudgel out of the Hedge, got up himself to proceed on his
Journey, his Man walking all the way by his side, like a Greyhound in a slip.
The Town which Destiny saw before him, happened to be the same that he had
parted from two Days before, where he had met Monsieur de la Garouffiere, and
where his Company still remained, by reason of a grievous Colera Morbus that
Madam Bouvillon had had ever since. When Destiny arrived he found neither
Rancour, Olive nor Ragotin, they having all returned to Man's the Day before. As
for Leander he had never quitted in the least his dear Angelica. I need not
tell you after what manner she received Madam Star; it may be easily guest at
what Caresses two such Lovers would lavish away upon each other, after so many
dangers escaped on either side. Destiny immediately informed Monsieur de la
Garouffiere of the success of his Expedition, and a little after, his Man being
brought in, who was not yet unbound, he proceeds to ask him the same Questions
as before; but to which nevertheless the Rascal stood mute, as he had formerly
done. This Obstinacy of his, caused his Master to order a Hand-Vice to be
fetched from the Gun-smiths, wherewith to squeeze his Thumbs, and make him
confess by those means. At the fight of the Engine the Rogue immediately fell a
trembling and falling down on his Knees, begged heartily for Pardon, Confessing
at the same time, that la Rappiniere had set him on to do what he had done, and
that he had moreover promised him for Recompense to take him into his Service.
He farther owned that la Rappiniere was then at a House about two Leagues off,
which he had usurpt upon a poor Widow. Destiny continued talking in private for
some time with Mon^^eur de la Garouffiere, who soon after sent a Footman to let
la Rappiniere know that he would speak with him about an Affair of Consequence.
This Councellor of Rennes had it seems a great Influence over the Provost of
Man's. He had formerly ^revented his being broke on the Wheel in Britany, and
had likewise always made it his Business to protect him whenever he came to be
accused of any Crime, and that not because he thought him Innocent, being
satisfied that ho had ^een Guilty of various Offenses, but by reason that he
had ^arried a Relation of his. The Servant that was sent to la^appiniere, found
him just then getting on Horseback to go (...) Man's, but no sooner had he heard
that la Garouffiere had (...) for him, but he put off that Journey to go wait
on him. (...) the mean time la Garouffiere who had some pretense to wit, ^ew
but of a Scrutore several Copies of Verses, of diverse kinds, (...) which he
read to Destiny, and afterward showed him, to pass ^^ay the time, the
following Novel Translated from the ^mish.

CHAP. XIV.
The Judge in her own Cause, a Novel.
IT was in Africa, among the Rocks by the Sea side, and not distant from the
famous City of Fez above half an Hours Journey, that Prince Muley Son to the
King of Morocco, after having strayed from his Companions while he was Hunting,
happened to be left alone. The Sky was without the least Cloud, the Sea calm,
and the Moon and Stars shone out so bright, that they in a manner Rivaled the
Sun: In a Word, all these agreeable accidents met together, made one of those
Nights, which in hot Countries, like this, are far more pleasant than what we
call the finest Days in our Northern Regions. The Moorish Prince Galloping
along the Shore, diverted himself with beholding the exceeding brightness of
the Moon and Stars, and which communicated their Splendor to the Water,
wherein they were also to be seen as in a Mirror. As he was thus amusing
himself, he heard several doleful Shrieks hard by which his curiosity enclining
him to know the occasion of, he spurred forwards his Horse, which if you please
shall be (...) Barbary Courser, and rid to the place whence he thought the
Noise came. He there discovered a Woman defending her sel^ with all her might
against a Man that endeavored to bin^ her Hands, whilst another Woman at the
same time was (...) gling with her to stop her Mouth with a piece of Linne^ The
coming of the young Prince prevented all farther (...) lence from being offered
her, and occasioned an in volun^^ Truce on the Assualters sides. Muley at his
first arrival (...) manded of the assaulted Woman What made her to (...) And of
the others What they were going to do? But (...) of an Answer, the Man that was
the Aggressor stepped up to him with his drawn Scymeter, and launched at him such
a terible stroke, as would have undoubtedly Wounded him (...) dangerously had
he not dexterously avoided it by the ^^^^^ness of his Horse. Villain, cried
Muley, to him, turning (...) Horses Head, How durst you Assaidt the Prince of
Fez? I (...) not well know you to be he, replied the Moor, but since you happen
to be so, it is because you are my Prince that I will eith^ have your Life or
loose my own. With that, he immediately upon him, with that fury, that the
Prince as Valiant as was, thought less of Chastizing his Subjects Insolence
than defending his own Life. The two Women at the same time were at Fisticuffs,
and she that a Moment before had been almost overpowered, was now become
courageous, and kept her Adversary from flying, hoping that her Champion would
get the Victory. Despair ever augments Courage, and oftentimes gives it to
those whose natural Timidity made them incapable of having it before. Although
the Valor and Conduct of this Prince were incomparably greater than those of
his Adversary, yet did the self-Conviction of this Moor, together with the
dread of Punishment, so animate his Spirits, and direct his Arm, that the
Combat remained for some time doubtful: But at last Heaven, that always is
ready to protect those it raises above others, caused the Princes Attendants to
come near that way, who being allarum'd at the noise of the Combatants, and the
cries of the Women, immediately rid Post to see what was the matter, and
arrived just at the time, when their Master by a lusty blow, had brought his
Enemy to the Ground. They presently knew their Lord, and therefore run with
great Fury to have dispatched his vanquished Adversary; but the Prince calling
out to them, bid them to forbear killing him, and ordered them, only to tie him
to a Horses Tail, it being his Intentions to have him reserved for a more
exemplary Punishment, Two of the Horsemen took up the two Women behind them,
and with this Equipage Muley and his Company returned to Fez much about
Daybreak. This young Prince commanded in Fez as absolutely as if he had been
already King. Soon after his arrival, he commanded the Moor, whose name was
Amet, and Son to one of the richest Merchants in Fez, to be brought before him;
the two Women were ordered to be brought likewise; but they were known to no
Body, by reason of the Custom of concealing that Sex, which is observed here
stricter than in any other Parts. She of the two whom the Prince had relieved,
surpised both him and the Court with her Beauty; it being so great, that all
Africa had not the like to boast of, and withal so Majestic, that even a
Slaves Habit, which she wore, could not obscure it. The other Woman was
clothed like to those of this Country, which are of some Quality, and who
likewise had Beauty, but which could not stand in competition with that of the
other, and had it been possible the paleness of her Cheeks alone, occasioned by
her Fear, would have lost her the Victory, when the other would have rather
received advantage by a guiltless Blush and a fearless Mind. The Moor appeared
before Muley with Guilt in his Countenance, keeping his Eyes all the while fixed
upon the Ground. The Prince commanded him to confess his Crime, if he would not
die in Torments. I know those that are prepared for me, answered he boldly, all
which, and greater, I have deserved; yet still, had I thought it would have
been for my Advantage, even the greatest could be inflicted on me, would not
have been able to have extorted the least Confession from me. But since I know
that nothing can avail to save my Life, seeing I would have been the Instrument
of your Death, Know, great Prince, that the qnger I have conceived against my
self for not having killed you, torments me more than the utmost of Tortures
can do. As for these two Spanish Women here, added he, they have both been my
Slaves; whereof one who knew best how to play her Cards, has married my Brother
Zaide, when the other, more obstinate, would never yet change her Religion, nor
except the frequent Proffers of Love which I have made her. Here he stopped, and
would give no farther account either of them or himself, notwithstanding the
great Meanaces made him. This caused Muley to have him immediately thrown into
a Dungeon loaded with Irons; the Renegado, Wife of Zaide, was ordered to
another Prison. But the fair Slave the Prince commanded to be conducted to a
Moors House named Zulema, a Man of Quality, and by birth a Spaniard, but who
had left that Country, because he would not be forced to turn Christian. He was
of the illustrious Family of Zegris, heretofore so renowned in Grenada, and his
Wife Zaraide, likewise of the same Lineage, was reputed to be the finest Woman,
whether for Beauty or Wit; in all Fez. She was at first charmed with the Beauty
and Conversation of this fair Christian Slave, and therefore, if she had been
capable of being Comforted, she might have found sufficient Consolation in her
Caresses; but on the contrary, as if she had forsworn all manner of Comforts,
she always desired to be alone, thereby to give the better vent to her Grief;
for when she was in Zoraides Company, she underwent no small torture by
retaining her Sighs and her Tears. All this while Prince Muley was very
desirous of having an account of her Adventures. He had made his Mind already
known to Zulema, and who being a Person from whom he could conceal nothing; he
had likewise acquainted him that he had a sort of Love for this fair Christian,
and which he would before have let her known had not he apprehended from her
great Afflictions some unknown Rival in Spain, who might be too luckily
prepossessed of her Favor. Zulema having received this hint from his Lord,
immediately gave Orders to his Wife to get what particulars she could out of
this fair Christian concerning her Life, but especially how she came to be a
Slave to Amet. Zoraide was as desirous as the Prince of knowing these
Particulars, and therefore was not long before she set about it; she had little
reason to think she should be refused, because she had been so wonderfully
Civil to her. Agreeable to her Wishes the fair Spaniard answered her, that she
would satisfy her Curiosity whenever she pleased; but having nothing but
Misfortunes to acquaint her with, she feared she would find her Relation
somewhat tiresom. You will be convinced, replied Zoraide, that is cannot be so,
when you see the attention I shall give to it, and by the concern that I shall
infallibly show for your bad Portune. I dare say you will be apt to believe you
could entrust your Secrets with no truer Friend. This said, they threw their
Arms over each other Necks, and embraced so heartily, as if they never dosigned
to quit that Posture. Afterward the fair Slave wiping her Eyes. which shed
Tears abundantly at the remembrance of her Misfortunes, began her Story in the
following manner. I am, said she, a Spaniard by Birth, was born at Valencia and
my name is Sophia. I was Educated with that Care and Charge as would become a
rich Father and Mother to bestow on the first Fruits of their Marriage. I had a
Brother younger than I by a year. He was lovely as may be, and loved me dearly,
as I loved him; our mutual Friendship was so great, that we were never easy
when we were asunder, and therefore our Parents took care that we should seldom
be so. We learnt together all those Exercises that are usually taught Youth of
either Sex, and thence it came to pass, to the surprise of every Body, that I
was equally skillful with him in the Manege as he was with me in the Arts of
the Needle. This extraordinary sort of Education of ours caused a Gentleman our
Neighbor to desire of my Father that his Children might be bred along with us.
His Request was granted, and having only a Son and Daughter, about the Age of
us, it gave occasion to the Town of Valencia to think that there would one Day
be a Counter Marriage between us. Don Carlos and Lucy, were the Names of these
two young Companions of ours. The former was handsome, and loved me dearly,
which I reciprocally returned. Our Parents observed it, but were so far from
either disliking or opposing it, that they rather encouraged and approved it,
and I believe would certainly have soon married us together, had not they
thought us too young. At length our delusive Happiness was stifled by the Death
of my Brother; a violent Feavour carried him off in eight Days, and from his
Death sprung the first cause of my Misfortunes. Lucy was so affected with it,
that she obstinately re'solv'd to turn Nun. I had brought my self even to
Deaths door for Grief, and Don Carlos likewise had so great a share of Concern,
that he gave his Parents little hopes to believe he would survive it, so much
the loss of my Brother, the danger I was in, and the Resolutions of his Sister
had wrought upon him. At last, thanks to our Youth, we all recovered, and Time
in some measure moderated our Afflictions. The Father of Don Carlos died not
long after, and left him both Rich and out of Debt. His Riches furnished him
with Ability to gratify his gallant Humor, and his Gallantry flattered my
Vanity, exposed his Love to public knowledge, and augmented mine. Don Carlos
was often found at my Parents Feet, conjuriug them not to defer his Happiness
any longer, and my Father was inclinable to hearken to his Request, for fear
his profuse Courtship might in time diminish his Fortune; he gave him Hopes
therefore, that he should speedily be his Son-in-law. This raised Don Carlos to
so high a pitch, that he lavisht out his Love at an extraordinary rate, and
which would have been alone sufficient to have convinced me of his Sincerity,
had I not had so many preceding Proofs of his Passion. To add to his other
profuseness, he presented me with a Ball, and invited all the Town of Valencia
to it. But to his Misfortune as well as mine, thither came among the rest, a
Neapolitan Count, whom some Affairs of Importance had brought into Spain: This
Count it seems, took so great a fancy to me, that he must needs be in Love with
me, and in order to gratific his Passion, was not long before he demanded me in
Marriage, after having been informed of the quality of my Father, in the
Kingdom of Valencia. My Father was so dazzled with the Title of this Stranger,
that he immediately consented to all he asked, and from that very Hour, forbid
Don Carlos to pretend any more to me. He likewise strictly enjoined me to
receive no more of his Visits, and moreover Commanded me for the future to look
upon the Italian Count as a Person that was to marry me at his return from
Madrid, whither he was then going, and would come back in a short time. I
dissembled my dislike for the present to my Fathers Proposals, but when I was
alone Don Carlos would sincerely come into my Mind, whom I thought the most
aimable Man in the World, while I could not find with my utmost endeavors the
least thing agreeable, nay, scarce tolerable, in his Rival; so that it was
equally impossible for me to Love the one and to forget the other. I had
recourse upon this occasion to Tears, but sound those a feeble remedy against
so great a Malady as mine. While I was in this Condition, Don Carlos entered the
Room, but that without his usual Custom of asking leave. He found me all in
Tears, which made him to lose the Power of witholding his own, however great
had been his Resolutions not to betray the Sentiments of his Heart till he had
dived into the utmost of mine. He threw himself at my Feet, and taking me by
the Hand, which he all bathed with his Tears, Sophy, said he to me, What must I
loose you then? Must a Stranger who has scarce the Honor to be known to you,
be notwithstanding preferred to me? Shall he possess you Sophy, and will you
consent to it? You whom I have loved so dearly, and who have always endeavored
to make me believe that you loved me likewise? Shall your Father pretend to
dispose of you, when he has already given you me? Your Father, the most unjust
Man living! If you were a Person, continued he, whose Merit could be valued, my
Fidelity alone would be able to purchase you. But, pursued he, since you are
inestimable, I beg you to believe that if I have had the ambition to aspire to
you, I shall not want the Courage to revenge my self on him whom you causeless
prefer to me. But however, added he sighing, If it be your pleasure that my
Rival should live happy in your Favor, I will forego all attempts upon him,
and only Revenge your unkindness upon my self by some cruel and sudden Death.
Don Carlos, answered I, will you join with an unjust Father, and a hated Lover
to torment me, and do you impute that to me for a Crime, which is only a
Misfortune common to us both? Pity me, added I, instead of accusing me, and
bethink of means to preserve me yours, rather than reproach me with a Fault I
am no ways Guilty of. I believe I may have better reason to reflect on you for
not having sufficiently loved me, since I find you have not yet sufficiently
known me. But we have no time to lose in vain Words, continued I, carry me
whither you please, for you shall always find me disposed to follow you. At
these Words, Don Carlos, was more transported with Joy than he had been before
depressed with Grief; and therefore having begged my Pardon for the injustice he
had done me, he proposed to fetch me away the Night following. For this purpose
he spent all that Day in ordering his Affairs. He got together a good Sum of
Money, and hired a Barcelona Vessel which would be ready to put to Sea at what
time he desired: For my part, young as I was, I had Wit to manage the Secret so
well, that no Body ever so much as mistrusted us. I got all my Mothers Jewels,
and scraped up what Money I could get. At the Hour appointed Carlos's his Page
Claudio, waited for me at the Gate. He told me that his Master had sent him to
conduct me on Board, and that he could not come himself, for Reasons he would
satisfy me in when he saw me. At the same time came a Slave that belonged to
Don Carlos, and who was likewise very well known to me, to accompany me. We got
easily out of the City, by means of the good contrivance we had laid, and were
not gone far before we saw a Vessel riding in the Harbor, whose Boat waited
for us on the Shore. The Seamen told me that my dear Don Carlos would come
immediately, and that I had no more to do but to go into the Boat. I was
carried in by the Slave, but had no sooner been set down, than I perceived the
Seamen forcing in Claudio, whom I observed to be unwilling to enter. This
increased my concern for the absence of Carlos, and thereupon I immediately
demanded of the Slave where he was. He surlily answered, that wherever he was
he was no more for me. Having said this he left me, and in a little while
after, I heard Claudio above upbraiding the Slave after this manner. Is it thus
Traitor Amet that you perform your Promise, to rid me of a Rival, and leave me
with my Love? To which the Slave replied, Imprudent Claudia! am I obliged to
keep my Word with you, when yuu have not scrupled to betray your Master, and
how could I expect you would be true to me, and not send the Guards out after
me to take my dear Sophy from me, whom I love more than my Life, when I have
observed how Villanously you have served both him and her? These Words spoken
to a Woman whom I took always for a Man. and concerning matters which I knew
nothing of, raised so fierce a discorder in me, that I fell dead for the
present, in the Arms of the perfidious Moor. By that time my Fit was over, our
Vessel had got a good way to Sea. You cannot imagine when I came to my self,
what a confusion I was in, for then I plainly perceived I was in the Hands of
Moors, and Enemies to our Faith. I knew that the Slave Amet had all sort of
Authority, and that his Brother Zaide was Captain of the Vessel. Amet no sooner
saw me in a condition to hear him, but he made me a short declaration of his
Love, professing he had had a kindness for me a long time, and that his Passion
was the cause of his carrying me away. Moreover that he designed to carry me to
Fez, where it should be my own fault if I were not as happy, if not happier,
than I could have been in Spain. And lastly, he had the Impudence to urge to
me, that he did not doubt but in a short time I would have no reason to regret
the loss of Don Carlos. I had scarce patience to hear him out, before I flew
upon him with all the Vigor and Courage that my Fit had left me, and by an
Address which I told you before I had learnt from my Education snatching his
Scymitar out of the Scabbard, I was going to punish his Perjury with the loss
of his Life, had not his Brother Zaide timely stepped in and provented me. I was
presently Disarmed, for having once missed my blow I could not possibly defend
my self against so great a number of Enemies. Amet, whom my unexpected Attempt
had frightened, commanded all but me to go out of the Room, and afterward
followed himself. He left me in such a condition as you may imagine after so
cruel a reverse had happened to my Fortune. I spent all that Night in Tears,
and the Day following I nothing but greived and took on. Time that generally
alleviates other Peoples Misfortunes, had no effect upon mine. The second Day
was as Uncomfortable to me as the first, or rather more tormenting, for when I
reflected upon the never seeing Don Carlos more, how could I propose to my self
any future Consolation? Amet always found me so terrible whenever he offered to
accost me, that he came no more near me. From time to time they brought me
Victuals to eat, but which I refused with that obstinacy, as made the Moor to
fear that he had brought me away to no purpose. In the mean time the Ship had
passed the Streights, and was not far off the Coasts of Fez; when Claudio
entering the Room, as soon as I perceived him, I began with him after this
manner. Villain, said I, you have betrayed me, and what could induce you to so
base an Action after you had been so well used both by me and Don Carlos? you
were too well beloved, answered he, and since I loved Don Carlos likewise, what
ill have I done in endeavoring to ^id my self of a Rival? But if I have
betrayed you, added he, Amet has also betrayed me, and I shall have as great
reason to lament as you, if I do not think of some way not to remain alone
miserable. 'Explain these Riddles, replied I, and learn me who you are, that I
may know of what Sex I have you for my Enemy? Sophy, then continued he, I am of
^he same Sex with you, and like you have been in Love with Don Carlos; but if
our love has been equal, its success has been different; he always loved you,
and was ever in^linable ^o believe that you returned his Passion, whilst me, he
neither loved nor could think I loved him so dearly as I did, by reason that he
never knew who I was. I am of Valencia ^^ke you, and was not born so low but
Don Carlos might have married me without disparagement; but his Mind was all
set upon you, and you were the only Object of his Vows and Wishes. It was not
but I endeavored to make my Eyes save the labor of my Tongue, and take the
shameful Confession of my Love upon them. I always laid my self in his way and
used all those little Artifices that he would have done to Captivate me, had it
been his own Case. I might have often disposed of my self in Marriage to
Advantage, had not the hopes I had of one Day winning him over always prevented
my Fortune; Insomuch that instead of being discouraged at his repulse, I found
them a means to love him the more. At length, being resolved to neglect nothin
that might serve to bring him about, I put my self into Man's Apparel, and cut
my Hair, and so disguised caused my self to be presented to Don Carlos for a
Page by an old Woman, who told him that my Father was a poor Gentleman, that
lived upon the Mountains of Toledo. My Face and Mien it seems pleased your
Lover so well, that he presently resolved to take me. He was as well satisfied
with my Wit as pleased with my Voice and manner of Singing, as likewise with my
skill in playing on all sorts of Instruments that Persons of Quality are wont
to divert themselves with. He believed he had met with Qualifications in me
that were not to be commonly found in Pages; and I gave him so many Proofs of
my Fidelity and Discretion that he treated me more like his Friend and
Confident than Servant. This you are able to tostific better than any Person
breathing; and you know besides, how often you have commended me to Carlos,
both behind my Back and to my Face, and likewise done me several other good
Offices with him, but I was mad to think that I must be indebted for all these
to a Rival, and that at the same time that they rendered me more agreeable to
Don Carlos, they made you more Hateful to the unfortunate Claudia, (for so is
my true Name.) In the mean time your Marriage advanced and my Hopes went back;
but as soon as it was concluded they went utterly lost. The Italian Count who
became about that time in Love with you. and whose Quality and Estate gained as
much upon your Father, as his bad Mien and Conditions lost him in your Esteem,
gave me nevertheless the Pleasure to see you disturbed and which caused me to
flatter my self with those Foolish hopes which change always offer^ to the
unhappy. At last your Father preferred the Stranger whom you loved not, to Don
Carlos, whom you loved, and I had then the satisfaction to see one that made me
unfortunate unfortunate himself, and my Rival that I hated, yet more unhappy.
My Pleasure was only augmented when I confider'd that I lost nothing in him,
because he never was mine, but that you were deprived of all in losing him, by
reason that he was all yours. But this imaginery Happiness of mine, or to call
it better, unfinished Hope, lasted not long. I learnt from Don Carlos, that you
were resolved to go away with him, and I was employed for that purpose to hire
s Ship to carry you to Barcelona from whence you were to go, either to France
or Italy, I cannot tell which. All the force I had hitherto made use of to
support me in my Misfortunes, forsook me at this Moment, I could now bear
against the torrent of my unhappy Fate no longer, and therefore was forced to
yield to it. My Griefs upon this occasion were so great that they made me
downright Sick, and caused me to keep my Bed. One Day as I was lamenting my
hard Usage to my self, and speaking louder than ordinary, out of a Confidence
that I was not overheard, the Moor Amet appeared before me, who after he had
suffered me to recover out of the surprise he had occasioned in me. Addressed
himself to me in these Words. I have known you Claudia, even before the time
that you disguised your Sex to become Page to Don Carlos, and if I have all
this while concealed that knowledge from you, it was because I had a Design to
bring about as well as you. I have overheard you enter into Resolutions of
Despair. You have a mind to discover your self to your Master for a young Woman
that dies for Love of him, and afterward to kill your self in his Presence,
whereby you think to incline his Pity, where you cannot otherwise engage his
Heart. Poor Girl! What advantage will thou get by killing thy self, but
assuring the possession of Carlos the firmer to thy Rival? I have beter Advice
to give thee, if thou have Courage enough to take it. Deprive thy Lover of
Sophia; the means of accomplishing it are easy; and though it requires a good
deal of Resolution, yet has it occasion for no more than thou have already had
to Habit thy self like a Man, and thereby to hazard thy Honor to content thy
Love. Hearken to me then with attention, continued the Moor, and I will reveal
to thee a Secret which I have never yet discovered to any Person, and if the
Proposal I am about to make thee be disapproved. thou art at liberty either to
receive or reject it. I am of Fez, pursued he, and a Man of Quality in my own
Country. My Misfortunes made me a Slave to Don Carlos, and the Beauty of Sophia
made me the like to her. I have told you a great deal of matter in few Words.
Consider your own Unhappiness without remedy if you suffer your Lover to carry
off your Mistress to Barcelona It is both yours and my Interest to prevent it,
therefore let us lay hold on the occasion that offers. I have bargained for my
Ransom, and have paid it. A Galliot from Africa waits for me in the Road, not
far off that which Don Carlos has provided for the Execution of his Design. He
has put it off for a Day longer, therefore let us interpose our Project to
carry her away before him, in the aforesaid Galliot. In order to accomplish
which, do you go immediately to Sophia, as from your Master, and let her know
that he requires that she should depart this Night. For this purpose bring her
away forthwith to my Vessel, and I will carry her to Africa; whereby you will
remain behind alone, to possess your Lover, and who it is very likely will be
inclined to favor your Passion, when he understands what you are, how well you
love him, and moreover, that the recovery of his Sophia is impracticable. At
these last Words of Claudias, continues Sophia, I became all of a sudden so
oppressed with Grief, that I fainted away, and had scarce the least sign of
Life left. The cries that Claudia made for help, who it may be now repented of
what she had told me, brought Amet and his Brother into the Room. They made use
of all the means that were proper to recover me, when coming at length to my
self, I heard Claudia still persisting to reproach Amet with his Treachery.
Infidel, said she to him, How could you have the baseness both to betray me,
and to bring this Lady to the deplorable Condition you see her in? Or, How
could you have the Heart to make me Guilty of Treachery to the Man I loved so
dearly? How dare you report your self to be Nobly born, when you are one of the
very worst of Men? Peace Fool! replied Amet, and do not accuse me of a Crime to
which you your self were Accessory. I have told you before, that one that could
betray a Master like yours, well deserves to be betrayed her self. I have
proposed to carry you along with me, both to secure my own Life, and to prolong
that of my dear Sophia, for I could easily guess what Tortures she must
necessarily have undergone had you remined behind with her Lover discovered.
The noise the Seamen made at their entrance into the Port of Sally, and the
thundering of the Cannon, as well from the Vessel as the Castle, interrupted any
farther Reproaches between Amet and Claudia, and at the same time deliverd me
from the sight of those two odious Objects. We landed, Claudia and I havaing
our Faces all covered with Vails, and were lodged in a House of a Friends of
the perfidious Amets. The next Day we were put into a close Chariot and carried
in that manner to Fez, where if Amet was overjoyed at the sight of his
Relations and Friends' I was no less afflicted and tormented at my Fate. As for
Claudia, she was resolved to make her self easy, for she quickly turned
Mohammedan, and married in a little time to Zaide, Brother of the faithless
Amet, This wicked Woman em^loy'd all her cunning to persuade me to change my
Religion likewise, and to marry with Amet, as she had done with Zaide, but I
thank Heaven, I still persisted in my Constancy, both to my first Faith, and my
first Love. This caused Amet and his Friends to use me with all manner of ill
treatment; but at last I was inclinable to believe that Claudia was not quite
so bad as she seemed. In public she Persecuted me indeed as much or rather
more than the rest, but in private she woul'd ever now and then do me a good
turn. One Day when all the other Women were gone to the public Baths, which
you know it is a custom amongst you Mahometans to do so many times a Week,
Claudia came to me in my Chamber, and with a sorrowful Countenance accosted me
in the following manner. Fair Sophia, said she, whatever occasion I have
hitherto has to bear you ill Will is now an end, by reason of my despair ever
to possess him who loved me too little, because he loved you too much. I
condemn my self incessantly for having been the means of making you miserable;
but more especially for having abandoned my God, out of the fear of Men, ^he
least of which Remorses is sufficient to make me undertake something unusual to
my Sex. I can no longer live so remote from Spain, and that especially among
Infidels, with whom I can neither expect Health while I live, nor Salvation
when I come to die. You may judge of my sincere Repentance by ^he Secret I am
going to trust you with, which makes you Mi^^riss of my Life, by putting it in
your Power to revenge the ^ll Offices I have been forced to do you, whenever
you please. The Secret is this, Having procured about Fifty Christian Slave^,
^or the most part Spaniards, I engaged them to Secrecy, and fur^^sh'd them with
Money sufficeint to hire a Bark, wherewith (...) Transport us to Spain. Now you
have nothing to do but (...) follow my Fortune, either to save your self, if
the Fates so ^ermit, or else to perish with me rather than to live miserably
among Infidels. Determine then quickly, Sophia, continued she, that you mean to
do, and since we are alonge, let us presently (...) upon deliberating on the
most important Action of our ^ives, Hearing this Proposal of Claudia's I
immediately threw my self at her Feet, and judging of her Sincerity by my own,
I made her all manner of acknowledgements both in Words and Actions. Pursuant
to our Project, we set a Time and Place for our flight, and which last, was to
be behind some Roch by the Seaside, where she told me the Vessel lay waiting
for us. On the Day appointed we set out, happily as I thought, because we got
so easily out of the House and City. I admired the goodness of Heaven in
favoring our escape with such Facility, and more than once offered up my
Thanks in Acknowledgment. But however, the end of my Misfortunes was not so
near as I thought. What Claudia acted was only by order of the perfidious Amet,
than whom she yet more perfidiously led me to this abandoned Place, for no
other reason than to expose me to the Lust of that wicked Moor, who durst not
attempt any Violence on me in his Fathers House, who though a Mohammedan, was
Morally Honest. I followed Innocently her that thus guided me to Ruin, and
thought I could never make her sufficient Acknowledgment for obliging me with
(...) fair a prospect of my Liberty. We walked a good roun^^ pace till we came
among those Rocks, where she still persisted to tell me that her Slaves lay
attending for her, when all of (...) sudden, hearing a noise, and looking
behind me, I perceive^ the treacherous Amet coming toward us full drive, with
(...) drawn Scymitar in his Hand. Infamous Slaves, cried he aloud is it thus
that ye convey away your selves from your Maste^ Service? I was just going to
answer him when Claudia (...) my Arms behind, and Amet throwing away his
^^^mitar, and joining with her, to do the like to me (...) they both
endeavored together to bind me with (...) which they had provided for that
Purpose. Having (...) Art and Strength than Women commonly have, I resisted
(...) some time the Attempts of these two barbarous People; (...) at length
finding my Efforts over power'd, I had no other ^^^medy than to have recourse
to my Cries, which I hoped wo^^^ induce some charitable Traveller to come to my
Relief^ was just upon the brink of Despair as Prince Muley (...) You have heard
how he saved my Honor, and I might (...) my Life, since I should infallibly
have died of Grief, had (...) succeeded in his brutish Designs upon me. Here,
Sophy ^^^ed the tedious Relation of her Adventures, and the Frie^ Zoraide
exhorted her to rely upon the Prince's Generosity, (...) she doubted not would
afford her speedy Means to retur^^ Spain. The same Day Zoraide went and
acquainted her ^^^^band with every particular she had heard from Sophy, of^^^
which, he consequently soon informed his Master Muley. (...) though what had been
told him concerning the Fortune of the Christian, did not at all flatter his
Passion; yet was Muley^^ vertheless pleased to hear she was pre-engag'd in
Affect^^ that he might thereby avoid the baseness of tempting her. He highly
valued her for her Virtue, and was disposed by his own to encourage and assist
her in the Continuance of it; hereupon he dispatched Zoraide to let her know,
that he would send her back to Spain as soon as ever she pleased; but not caring
to trust to the frailty of his Nature, he had at the same time resolved to keep
as much out of her sight as he could. Sophy for her part was employed in
thinking how to make her return as secure as possible. She doubted if she
should meet a Christian Ship, which was nevertheless very difficult for her to
do, by reason that few or none traded hither, whether she should not find as
bad Men on Board it as she had done before among the Moors. Sincerity is seldom
observed on Board Vessels, and good Faith minded as little among Seamen as
amongst Soldiers. Wherever Innocence and Beauty are met together Impudence will
always take an occasion to Invade them. Whilst she was thus debating with her
self, Zoraide advised her to take the Habit of a Man, and the rather, because
her Shape was proper for that purpose: She told her also that it was Muley's
Pleasure that she should do so, and who not being able to find a Man in Fez
with whom he could safely entrust her, had provided a Companion for her of her
own Sex, who was to be disguised likewise, whereby they might both easily avoid
the Insolence of the Seamen and Passengers, if any were that way inclined. This
Moorish Prince had formerly purchaz'd a Prize of a Corsair of Barbary. It was a
Ship that had belonged to the Governor of Oran, which was carrying a Spanish
Gentleman with his whole Family into Spain, and whom the Governor had sent
thither a Prisoner out of some disgust. Muley had been informed that this
Christian was a great Hunter, and as that Exercise was one of the choicest of
his Diversions, he was resolved to keep him to himself; but for fear to make
him uneasy, he ordered that he should not be separated from his Wife, his Son
and Daughter. In two Years time that he lived in Fez, in Muley's Service, he
had taught that Prince to Shoot admirably well, and that either sitting or
flying. He had moreover instructed him in several other ways of Hunting unknown
before to the Moors, By these means in a short time he gained so far upon the
Princes Favor, and became so Serviceable to him in all his Diversions, that
when a Ransom was offered for him, he would by no means consent to part with
him, but rather made it his daily endeavor to oblige him, and make him forget
Spain. Notwithstanding this kindness of the Prince, the regret he had to be out
of his own Country, and the unlikelihood of ever returning again, brought so
deep a Melancholy upon him, that it soon ended his Days. His Wife likewise
languish'd on the same account and lived not long after her Husband. When Muley
saw how fatal his Favors to these Strangers had been, he began to be touched
with Remorse and was exceeding sorry that he had not complied with their
Desires; but since it was now too late, he resolved to reward the good Services
of his Sportsman to his Children, and for that purpose, immediately sent for
them into his Presence. The Daughter, whose name was Dorothy, was about the
same Age with Sophy, and had both Wit and Beauty. Her Brother named Sancho, was
younger, being not above Fifteen; both were made choice of by Muley to
accompany Sophy to Spain. The Affair for some time was kept Secret; three
Spanish Habits for Men were ordered to be got ready in the mean time. At length
Muley displayed his Magnificence in a great quantity of precious Stones, which
he gave to Sophy. To Dorothy and Sancho likewise he made several noble
Presents, which together with what their Father had left them, and which had
been all obtained from the Liberality of this Prince, made them to be
considerably Rich. About the same time Charles V. made War upon Africa, and had
besieged the City of Tunis. He had sent an Ambassador to Muley, to treat about
the Ransom of certain Spaniards of Quality, who had been Shipwrack'd on the
Coasts of Morocco. It was to this Ambassador that Muley recommended Sophy,
under the name of a Man of Quality, called Don Fernando, Dorothy and her
Brother were said to be his Attendants, one passing for his Gentleman, and the
other for his Page. Sophy and Zoraide could not part without the greatest
reluctance. They shed abundance of Tears, and gave each other unquestonable
Proofs of a Reciprocal Affection. Zoraide as a farther token of her Love and
Esteem, presented the fair Christian with a Necklace of Pearl, of that great
value that she would by no means have excepted it, had not Zulema, who loved
her no less than his Wife, acquainted her that they should take it very
unkindly if she refused what they tendered only as a Pledge of their
Friendship. Zoraide made Sophy promise to let them know from time to time how
she did, either by the way of Tangier, Oran, or the other Places which the
Emperor then possessed in Africa. The Christian Ambassador embarked at Sal^y,
carrying along with him Sophy, whom from henceforward we must call Don
Fernando. Before he proceeded on his Voyage to Spain, he was to go to wait on
the Emperor at his Camp before Tunis. Our Spanish Lady in Masquerade was to be
presented to him for a Gentleman of Andalousia, who had been a long time a
Slave to the Prince of Morocco She had no such great Reason to be in Love with
her Life as to fear to hazard it in the Wars, and therefore since she had took
upon her the Character of a Cavalier, she was obliged to go upon all Actions
that Honor called her to. For this purpose she placed her self among the
Volunteers, resolving to lose no occasion to signalize her self, and which she
often did to that degree, that her Valor came at length to the Emperor's Ear.
She happened to be in one Action, above the rest, wherein the Emperor was
unhorsed, and the Christians like to be beaten. This our Valiant Amazon
perceiving, by a Performance scarce to be believed, she immediately remounted
the Emperor, and laid about her with that Conduct and Vigor, that she almost
opposed the whole Force of the Enemy, till such time as the routed Army had
rallied, and were come up to her Relief. This wonderful Action of hers, did not
go without its reward. The Emperor in recompense presented to the unknown Don
Fernando, a Commandery of great Revenue, as likewise a Regiment of Horse, which
had belonged to a Spanish Colonel killed in the late Fight; he also gave him
the Equipage of a Man of Quality, and from that very time none were so much
esteemed of in the Army as this Valiant Lady. All the actions of a Man were
natural to her. Her Countenance was so good, and made her appear to be so
Young; her Courage and Conduct were so far beyond her Years; her Wit was so
charming and Entertaining, that there was not one Man of Quality, or Officer in
the whole Army, but who either sought her Friendship and Acquaintance, or
humbly declined aspiring to it as unworthy. It must not be wondered at then,
since all the World spoke so much for her, and yet more her renowned Actions,
if she came to be so much in favor with her Prince. About this time diverse
Recruits of Men and Ammunition arrived from Spain. The Emperor would have them
all drawn up by themselves, that he might have a view of them, with the
principal Officers of the Army, amongst whom was our Female Warrior. Among
these new come Soldiers she fancied she had espied Don Carlos, and as it
happened she was not deceived. This made her to be uneasy all the remainder of
that Day. She sent out often to look after him, but could not find him, by
reason he had changed his Name. When Night came, she could not sleep a wink,
and therefore rise by Daybreak to go in search of her dear Lover, who had cost
her so many Tears. At length she found him, but was not known by him, by reason
she was grown taller, and had besides her Complexion much altered by the
scorching heats of Africa. She made him believe she took him for another of her
Acquaintance, and began to ask him News from Seville, as likewise concerning an
imaginary Person that came first into her Head. He told her he knew no such
Person, was never at Seville, and that he was born and lived in Valencia. You
are nevertheless much like a Person that I knew and had a great esteem for,
replied Sophy, and therefore you must give me leave to be ranked in the number
of your Frieds. With all my Hear, answered Don Carlos, and for the same reason
you urge, I must beg the like Liberty from you as you have done of me, for you
no less resemble a Person I loved long since, and do still love; you have the
same Visage and Voice, but you are not of the same Sex, and certainly you
cannot be of the same Humor, added he sighing. At these last Words of Carlos,
Sophy could not forbear blushing, which he nevertheless took no notice of, by
reason that he then had his Eyes over charged with Tears, which hindered his
observing her change of Countenance. This extraordinary Tenderness of Carlos
moved her so extremely that she was ready to discover her self, to prevent
which at that time, she desired him to come visit her in her Tent, and bid him
to enquire for Don Fernando. At the hearing of this name Don Carlos began
immediately to be afraid, well knowing what Honors the Emperor had done that
Person, and fearing he might not have showed him sufficient Respect. He met
with little difficulty in finding the Tent, for it was but what every body
could direct him to. He was there received with all the civility that a private
Gentleman could expect from a general Officer. He again discovered the
Countenance of Sophy in that of Don Fernando, but was more amazingly surpised
at the resemblance of their Voices, which immediately sunk into his Soul, and
brought to his Remembrance the Idea of the Person in the World that he loved
best. Sophy yet unknown to her Lover, made him to Dine with her, and after
Dinner commanding her Domestics to retire, and giving Orders that she would be
seen by no more Visiters, she caused him to tell her over again that he was of
Valencia, and afterward occasioned him to relate all the Adventures that had
happened between him and her, which to be sure she knew as well as he, from
their first Acquaintance to the time of his Contrivance for carrying her away.
Would you believe, quoth Don Carlos, that a Woman of her Quality, who had
received so many Proofs of my Love, and returned me reciprocally as many of
hers, could yet be so void of Sense or Honor to prefer a young Page, who had
little or nothing to boast of, to his Master? But are you sure of what you say?
replied Sophy; Chance often controuls our Designs, and oftener takes pleasure
to confound our reasoning with Events the least expected. Your Mistress may
have been forced to leave you, continued she and is, it may be, more
Unfortunate than Blamable. Would to God, answered Don Carlos, that I could in
the least doubt of her Guilt! All the Misfortunes which I have hitherto
undergone on her account would be easy to me, could I but believe her still
Faithful. But alas! she is only so to the Traitor Claudio, and pretended an
Affection to Don Carlos but to ruin him. It seems to me, replied Sophy, that
you could but have little kindness for her, since you can thus condemn her
unheard. Can I have greater Proofs of her Baseness, cried Don Carlos, than
appears by a Letter she sent her Father the Night she went off; whereby I
suppose she thought to take away all suspicion of her going away with the Page.
But to the end you may be the better Judge of it, added he, I have the Letter
to show; then he read the Letter, which was in the following Words.

The Letter.
YOU ought not, Sir, to forbid my loving Don Carlos, since you had once
commanded me to do it. A Desert so great as he has to pretend to, must needs
Captivate the wariest Heart; and where so much Worth and Merit reigns, Interest
must not think to get place. I fly then away with him whom you have thought fit
I should Love from my Youth upwards, and without whom it is as impossible for
me to live, as it would be not to greive my self to Death in the Arms of a
Stranger I hate, although he were yet Richer than he boasts himself to be. Our
Crime therefore, if any, deserves at least your Pardon, which if you are
disposed to afford us, we will return as willingly to receive as we have shown
Disposition to retreat from the unjust Violence you would do us.

SOPHIA.


You may imagine, proceeded Carlos, what a Hurricane this raised in the old
Peoples Breasts. They hoped I was either yet in Valencia concealed with their
Daughter, or else that I was not far off from it, They kept their loss a Secret
to every body but the Viceroy, who was their Relation. I was surpised to find
the Constable and his Mirmidons enter my Chamber at Daybreak, rudely asking me
for Sophy, and whom I having demanded the same Question of, they immediately
hurried me away in a violent manner to Prison. I was Questioned, and yet could
say nothing in my Defense concerning Sophy's Letter; it thereby appeared that I
was to carry her away, but it was likewise manifest that my Page disappeared
also. Sophy's Relations made all imaginable search after her, and my Friends
did what they could to find whither the Page had carried her, which they were
certain he must have done somewhither. At length it being found impossible to
meet with either one or the other, which was the only thing that could have
cleared my Innocence, I was accused by my Enemies of Murdering both. Hereupon I
had notice given me that I must soon come to my Trial, and that if I escaped it
was more than any Body expected. I knew the home-Proofs they had against me,
and hoped only for a Miracle from Heaven to acquit me; but at last Despair got
the upper-hand, and my Hopes consequently vanished. I resolved therefore, not
caring to trust my deliverance to the course of Justice, to join with some
Highway-Men, my Fellow Prisoners, in the execution of a design they had laid to
procure it for us all. Accordingly we one Night forced the Gates of our Prison,
and by the assistance of our Friends, got to the Mountains that were nearest
Valencia, before the Viceroy could possibly be informed of our Escapes. We
here continued a long time Masters of the Roads. My Sophy's Infidelity, and her
Parents merciless Prosecution, together with the loss of my Estate and
Reputation, made me so desperate, that I cared not at what rate I hazarded my
Life, and therefore in all cases of resistance I behaved my self with so great
Resolution, that my Companions thought fit to choose me for their Captain. I
continued in this Post so succesful for some time, that our Troop became
formidable even to the Kingdoms of Arragon and Valencia, which Countries we
were so bold as to put under Contribution. I herein make you acquainted,
continued Carlos to Sophy, with a Secret that concerns my Life, but the Honor
you have done me of your Friendship, and the Opinion I have of your Integrity,
makes me not to doubt in the least of my security. At length, proceeded he, I
was weary of this wicked course of Life, and forsook my Companions at a time
when they least expected it. I made my way for Barcelona, where I listed a
private Trooper in the Recruits that were just then raising for Africa. I had
hitherto had no grreat reason to be in love with Life, and therefore having
made so ill use of it as to infest my Country. I thought I could not do better
than to employ the remainder of my Days in its Service, and more especially
seeing the kindness I have received at your Hands, has been the only Comfort I
have had since I have been made the most miserable of Men, by the most
ungrateful Woman in the World. The unknown Sophy, hereupon took the part of
Sophy unjustly accused, and omitted nothing to persuade her Lover against
passing rash Judgments on his Mistress, before he was thoroughly informed of her
Crime. She told the unfortunate Gentleman moreover, that she was very sensible
of his Misfortunes, and would do all that lay in her power to alleviate them;
and to give him a better Proof of her good Will, than what lay in Words, she
desired of him to come and be with her, and that as soon as occasion served, she
would employ all her own and her Friends Interest with the Emperor, to get him
delivered from the Prosecution of Sophy's Parents, as likewise from that of the
Viceroy of Valencia. Don Carlos was not at all moved with what the Counterfeit
Don Fernando could say to him concerning the justification of Sophy, but to
accept of the offers of his Table and House he was. The same Day this faithful
Lover spoke to Don Carlos's Captain to permit him to come and serve under him,
I should have said, her. Now was our Lover under the command of his Mistress,
whom he took to be either dead or Faithless. He was very easy from the beginning
under this new Commander, and would often wonder how he came to be so much in
her Favor in so short a time. He was at once her Intendant, Secretary,
Gentleman and Confident. The other Domestics paid not a greater respect even
to Don Fernando himself than they did to him, and he would no doubt have been
exceeding happy had not the lost Sophy the treacherous Sophy, come so often
into his Mind. Whatever kindness Sophy had for him, she always took a great
deal of Pleasure to see him grieved, not doubting but it was upon her account.
At last she had justified Sophy so often, and sometimes with that heat, that
Don Carlos came to suspect that she had either been formerly her Lover, or was
so still. These Wars in Africa ended, as you may read in the History. These
Emperor afterward made them in Germany, Italy, Flanders, and other Places.
Our experienced She-Warriour, under the name of Fernando, still kept up, or
rather increased her Reputation for Courage and Conduct, though the last of these
qualities be seldom to be met with in a Person so young as this valiant Lady's
Sex made her to appear. The Emperor was obliged to go into Flanders, and for
that purpose demanded leave of the King of France to pass through his
Dominions. The great King that then reigned in that Country, had a Mind to
excel in Generosity a Mortal Enemy, who had always surmounted him in Fortune,
though he had not made the best use of it. Charles V. was received in Paris with
as great Magnificence as if he had been King himself. The brave Don Fernando
was one of the small number of Persons of Quality that attended him, and it is
more than likely, that if he had continued long at that Court, this fair
Spanish Lady, being taken for a Man, would have enamored all the French
Ladies, and raised Jealousy in the most accomplished of Courtiers. While this
happened, the Viceroy of Valencia died in Spain. Don Fernando through his
great Merit and Interest with the Emperor, doubted not but he should quickly
obtain that charge, and as he thought, so it soon after fell out, for he had no
sooner asked than he had it given him, without the least opposition from any
Competitor. This his good success he immediately thought fitting to acquaint
Don Carlos with, and at the same time gave him reason to hope, that as soon as
he was gotten into possession of his new Employment, he would not only
reconcile him with Sophy's Relations, and procure him Pardon of the Emperor,
for having been chief of the Vandoleros, Highway-men, but likewise undertake to
restore him to his Lands and Estate. Don Carlos might very well have received
comfort from these Promises of his Friend, had not his Love made him incapable
of it. The Emperor soon after arrived in Spain, and went directly to Madrid,
while Don Fernando made what have he could to his new Government. From the very
Day after his arrival in Valencia, Sophy's Friends continually pestered him
with Petitions against Don Carlos, who at the same time was both his Steward
and Secretary. The Viceroy promised to do them speedy Justice, but at the same
time let Carlos privately know, that he would not fail to protect his
Innocence. The Cause was quickly prepared for Hearing, and in five or six Days
time both Parties were ready to go to Trial. The Prosecutor demanded of the
Viceroy that the supposed Criminal might be sent to Prison, but which Don
Fernando would not nevertheless consent to, giving instead thereof, his Word,
that he should not stir out of his House till the Day assigned for the Trial
came. The Night before that fatal Day which kept the whole City of Valencia in
suspense, Don Carlos desired a private Audience of the Viceroy, and which
being granted, he threw himself at his Feet, and broke out into the following
Words. 'To Morrow my Lord, quoth he, you will be able to let the World know
that I am Innocent; and although some of the Witnesses that you have already
heard in my Defense, clear me absolutely of the Crime; yet I do here presume to
Swear once more to your Highness, as Religiously as I would do before God at
the sacred Altar, That I not only have not carried away Sophy, as my
Adversaries maliciously allege against me, but likewise did not lay Eyes on
her from the Day before she was so carried away, and have never heard the least
News of her since. I own I was to have carried her away, continued he, had not
a Misfortune too obscure for me to unriddle prevented me in that Design.
Enough, Don Carlos, replied the Viceroy, go to Bed and take your rest; I am
both your Master and Friend, and perhaps am better informed of your Innocence
than you can imagine. You are come along with me from Africa under my
Protection, and I will not fail to defend and clear you against all your
Enemies in this matter. Don Carlos after having returned his most-hearty Thanks
to so obliging a Master, went to Bed, but could not sleep for thinking on what
was to ensue. He got up by Daybreak, and dressing himself more gallant than
ordinary, went to wait on the Viceroy at his Levee; but I should mistake if I
told you that he entered the Chamber before she was dressed. The before mentiond
Dorothy that came with her disguised from Fez, still continued to be her
Confidente and Companion, and did those Offices for her, which if another had
done, she must have quickly been discovered. Don Carlos therefore gained not
admittance till Dorothy had set open the Door, as well to him as any Body else.
The Viceroy no sooner perceived him than he began to reproach him with rising
so early, alleging that his not sleeping was no great token of his innocence.
To which Don Carlos, being a little disturbed, replied, that the fear of being
Convicted did not so much hinder him from sleeping, as the hopes he had of soon
seeing himself delivered by the Justice his Highness would do him. 'But you are
mighty Spruce and Gallant, quoth the Viceroy; Nay, seem indifferent even on
the Day that you are to be tried for your Life. I know not what to think of the
Crime you are accused of. As often as we discourse of Sophy, you seem more
negligent and unconcerned than I, who am no party, nor ever have been suspected
to have been beloved by her, nor to have made away with her and possibly the
young Claudia likewise, as you have been. You say you have loved her, continued
the Viceroy, and yet you survive the loss of her, and endeavor nothing so
much as to get your self acquitted, that you may forget her, and live at ease;
you that ought rather to hate Life, and destroy those very Charms that have
rendered you so aimable to her. Ah! inconstant Don Carlos, proceeded he, It may
well be suspected that you have some other Love to supply the place of Soply
you have been so much obliged to. At these Words Don Carlos in a great agony
was going to Answer, but which the Viceroy not thinking fit to hear,
interrupted him in, and with a severe Countenance said to him, Hold your Peace,
and reserve that Eloquence which you are about to make use of here for your
Judges. As for my part I shall give little Ear to it, and I will not for the
sake of one of my Servants, let the Emperor have reason to have an ill Opinion
of my Justice. In the mean time, continued he, turning toward his Guards, let
some one of you secure his Person. I should indeed be very imprudent, added he,
to believe that one who had broke Prison would not seek to avoid Justice by his
flight. This said, Don Carlos's Sword was immediately seized, which raised a
great deal of Pity in the standers by, to observe what a sudden change of
Fortune he had undergone. While the poor Gentleman was repenting of confiding
too much in great Men's Favors, his Judges entered the Chamber, and took their
places after the Viceroy had seated himself. The Italian Count who yet
continued at Valencia, together with Sophy's Father and Mother, appeared
against him, and produced their Witnesses, whilst Carlos was almost ready to
despair of his Cause, and had scarce the Courage to Answer. They alleged the
Letters that he had formerly writ to Sophy, and proved his Hand; they he had
formerly writ to Sophy's Servants with him, and lastly they produced against
him the Letter which she had written to her Father the Night before the Day on
which they pretended he had carried her away. Carlos caused his Servants to be
heard likewise, who Swore that they saw their Master go to Bed; but then he
might have risen again afterward, which they could give no account of. In his
Defense he said, That it was not likely that he should carry her away to live
separate from her, and much less that he would Murder one whom he had always
loved so dearly. But all this availed him not, for Sentence was just going to
be pronounced against him when the Viceroy commanding him to be brought nearer
him, said to him, Unfortunate Don Carlos! you may well think from all the
tokens of Friendship I have showed you, that if I had in the least suspected
you had been guilty of the Crime you were accused of, I would never have
brought you to Valencia. But now, after what has been so plainly proved against
you, I am more than obliged to Condemn you if I would not begin the Execution
of my Office by Injustice. You may easily be convinced of my concern for you by
the Tears that unavoidably come into my Eyes. If your Prosecutors were not of
that Quality they are of, I might be inclinable to think they were biased by
Malice, but as they are, there are no Exceptions to be made to them, and
therefore if Sophia does not appear suddenly her self to release you, I am to
give you notice that you must prepare for Death. Carlos despairing at these
Words to be saved, threw himself at the Viceroys Feet, and after some time,
said to him, You may remember, my Lord, that all the while I have had the
Honor to serve your Highness both in Africa and here, as often as you have
engaged me in the tedious recital of my Misfortunes, I have always told them
after the same manner, and you may likewise be assured that what I have told
you, that have been so good a Master to me, I would scorn to deny afterward
before any Judge. I have all along told your Highness the Truth as I would have
done to my God, and therefore I shall not stick to repeat what I have so often
professed, that I not only ever have, but also ever shall to my Lives end Love
and adore Sophy. What say you? Interrupted the Viceroy, with Concern in his
Countenance) do you pretend to adore her? I do, replied Don Carlos, not a
little surpised at the manner of the Question, and have not only promiss'd to
marry her, but likewise to carry her off to Barcelona. But if I have carried
her away, or know where she is at present, may I be put to the cruellest of
Deaths. As for dying, continued he, I know it is impossible for me now to
escape it, but I shall nevertheless dye innocent, if it be not a Crime to have
loved so faithfully, so Persidious and Inconstant a Woman. But cried the
Viceroy, with a stern Countenance, What is become of this Woman and your Page?
Are they mounted up to Heaven? Are they concealed in the Earth? Or whether are
they gone? The Page, answered Don Carlos, was a spruce Gallant, and she a fine
Lady; he was a Man and she a Woman. Ah Traitor! replied the Viceroy, now you
discover your base Suspicions, and the small esteem you entertained for the
unfortunatd Sophy. Cursed be that Woman continued he, that confides in the
Promises of Men, and suffers her self to be abused by too easy a Belief.
Neither was Sophy a Woman of common Virtue, added he, nor your Page Claudio a
Man. Sophy was a constant Maid, and your Page a ruined Woman that had been in
Love with you, and consequently stole away and betrayed her as a Rival to her,
I am Sophy, unjust and ungrateful Lover! Proceeded he, I am Sophy who have
undergone incredible Hazards and Hardships on the account of a Man that
deserves not to be so well beloved, since he could think me guilty of the very
worst of Treacheries. Sophy found it not in her power to say any more. Her
Father immediately knew her, and caught her up into his Arms, her Mother
Swoon'd away on one side, and her Lover Don Carlos on the other. She soon
disengaged herself from her Fathers embraces, to run to the two that were
fainted away, and who coming quickly to themselves, she was in doubt which to
embrace first. Her Mother all bedewed her Cheeks with Tears, and she returned
the like. She embraced her Dear, Don Carlos, with all the Passion imaginable,
and who was like to have swoon'd away again with the excess of it. He
nevertheless held her fast, and not yet daring to approach her Lips, he
endeavored to satisfy himself on her Hands, both which be kissed above a
thousand and a thousand times Sophy was scarce able to withstand all the
Kindnesses and Complements made her. The Italian Count on his part going to
profer his, still insisted on his former Pretensions to her, as being promised
him both by her Father and Mother; this Don Carlos hearing, and having at the
same time one of her Hands greedily kissing at his Mouth, he instantly quitted
it, and laying his Hand on his Sword, which had been just then brought him, he
put himself into a posture enough to have frighted an Army, and swore that
rather than suffer himself to be deprived of his dear Sophy, provided she would
still continue to Love him, he would hew down the City of Valencia, and bury
its Inhabitants in its Ruins. She on her part declared she would have no other
Husband but her dear Carlos, and therefore conjured both her Father and Mother
either to resolve to approve of him, or to expect to see their only Daughter
speedily Cloistered up in a Convent. Her Parents hereupon soon gave her liberty
to make choice of what Husband she pleased, which the Italian Count perceiving
he immediately took Post and rid away for Italy. Sophy afterward gave an
account of all her Adventures, which being so very extraordinary, were admired
at by every body. A Courier was soon after dispatched to carry the News of this
wonderful Discovery to the Emperor, who thereupon sent Orders that Don Carlos,
after he had married Sophy, should be invested with the Vice-Royship of
Valencia; and moreover as a recompense for all the great Services his Lady had
performed under the name of Don Fernando, he gave to this happy Lover a
Principality, which his Heirs enjoy to this Day. The City of Valencia was at
the charge of the Wedding, which was performed with all the Magnificence and
Splendor imaginable, and Dorothy who had resumed her Female Habit much about
the same time with Sophy, was married not long after her to a near Relation of
Don Carlor's.

CHAP. XV.
A matchless piece of Impudence in the Sieur de la Rappiniere.
THE Councellor of Rennes had just done reading his Novel, when la Rappiniere
arrived at the Inn. He entered the Room boldly, where he had been told Monsieur
de la Garrouffiere was, but as soon as he perceived Destiny standing in a
corner, both he and his Man that came along with him began visibly to change
their Countenances. La Garrouffiere after having shut the Door, demanded of the
bold la Rappiniere if he could not guess upon what account he was sent for, Is
it not upon account of a Comedian, replied the Villain laughing, whom I had a
mind to have my share of? How do you mean your share, answered la Garouffiere
with a serious Countenance, Does it become a Judge as you are to talk after
that rate? And did you ever yet condemn a Person to be hanged that deserved it
more than your self? La Rappiniere continued to turn the thing to Ridicule, and
would needs make it pass for the Act of a good Companion. But the Senator urged
it so home to him, and after so severe a manner, that he at last forced him to
confess that it was an ill Action, and for which he immediately made some
trifling Excuses to Destiny, who notwithstanding could scarce forbear calling
him to an account for offending him so basely, after he had been obliged to him
for his Life, as you may find he had been in the beginning of these Comical
Adventures. But Destiny had another Quarrel to debate with this wicked Provost
of greater Consequence, which he had communicated to Monsieur de la
Garrouffiere, and who had promised to make him give him satisfaction. Whatever
Pains I have taken to dive into la Rappiniere, I could never yet discover
whether he were more wicked toward God, or toward Man; more unjust to his
Neighbor, or more vicious in himself. I know only this to be true, that never
any Man had more Vices heaped up together, nor in a more eminent Degree than
he. He confessed he had had a Design to carry away Madam Star as boldly as if he
had reason to boast of a good Action, and farther, he impudently told the
Councellor and the Comedian, that he never in the least doubted of the success
of that enterprise, For, continued he, addressing himself to Destiny, I had
gained over your Man, and your Sister, thinking you were Wounded, was so
conveniently caught in the Trap, in expectation to find you not above two
Leagues from the place where I waited for her, that I had certainly had her,
had not the Sot that Conducted her suffered some Devil or other to take her
from him, whereby I lost a good Horse, and he got a good beating. Destiny at
the hearing of this, at first grew pale with Anger, but then presently blushed
with Shame to hear a Villain tell him that with indifferency which he ought to
have done with the greatest reluctance and regret. La Garrouffiere was greatly
offended likewise, and was not less Angry with so dangerous a Man. I cannot
imagine, said ^he to him, how you could have the Impudence to tell us the
particulars of so base an Action with so much unconcern; for which Monsieur
Destiny would have nevertheless rewarded you had not I interposed and hindered
him. But I would advise you, continued he, to restore to him the Box of
Diamonds you stole from him at Paris, when you were a Pick Pocket Rascal, or he
may yet do it. Doguin who was at that time your Accomplice, and since your
Servant, confessed to him on his Deathbed, that you had it; and I declare to
you, added he, that if you do not speedily let him have it again, I will for
the future prove as dangerous an Enemy to you, as I have hitherto been a
serviceable Friend. La Rappiniere at these Words stood as if he had been
Thunderstruck, and had not power to deny any longer, according to his usual
Custom, what he had done. He owned therefore, stammering like one that was
confounded, that he had the Box at Man's, and Swore horribly to return it upon
Demand. The use he made of Oaths was out of Policy to conceal the Truth, for
though it was true that he had the Box, yet had he it not at Man's, but carried it
always about him, with design to have presented it to Madam Star, in case she
rejected his Amor. This he afterward confessed in private to Monsieur de la
Garrouffiere, thinking thereby to regain his Favor, and into whose Hands he
put the Box and Picture to dispose of as he thought fit. The Picture was that
of Madam Stars Father, set round with Diamonds, whose Face it seems so much
resembled hers, that she might be easily known to her Father by it. Destiny at
the receipt of the Picture, knew not how to thank Monsieur de la Garrouffiere
sufficiently for it. When this Box was taken away from Destiny, he was not so
much concerned on his own account, as on that of Madam Stars Mother, who had a
long time kept it as a Pledge of her Husbands Love. You may easily guess then
what an excess of Joy the recovery of it raised in them both. He for his part
went immediately to acquaint his dear Star with the News, and whom he found
where he had left her in the Curate of the Town's Sister's House, and in
Company with Angelica and Leander. They consulted together about their return
to Man's, and resolved upon it for the next Day. Monsieur de la Garrouffiere
proffered them a Coach, which they would by no means accept of. The Men and
Women-Players Supped with Monsieur de la Garrouffiere and his Company that
Night. They afterward went to Bed betimes, and next Morning by break of Day
Destiny and Leander took each of them their Mistrisses behind them, and posted
away to Man's, whither Ragotin, Rancour and Olive, had been gone before.
Monsieur de la Garrouffiere proffered a great deal of Service to Destiny, on
account of Madam Bouvillon, who had feigned herself Sicker than she was, on
purpose that she might not be obliged to take leave of that Comedian, whom she
for the present was not at all pleased with.

CHAP. XVI.
Ragotin's Misfortune.
THE two Comedians that returned to Man's with Ragotin, were led out of their
way by that little Rascal, who would needs treat them at a small Country House
of his, which had been built proportionable to his size. Although an exact
Historian now would think himself obliged to tell all the most important
Particulars of this Man's Life, and the Places wherein they happened, yet shall
not I be very certain in what part of our Hemisphere this little Hovel of
Ragotin's stood, whither he was carrying his Brethren that were to be, being
not yet admitted of their Strolling Order. It shall suffice then to inform
you, that it was on this side the Ganges, and not very far off from Sille le
Guillaume. When he had got thither he found his House filled with a Company of
Gypsies, who in spite of his Tenant had got into possession thereof, and that
under pretense of their Captains Wife's being ready to lie in, when their
truest reason was that they might have an opportunity to eat Poultry gratis, at
a Farm so much out of the Road. At his first coming Ragotin began to be
extremely angry, as little Men soonest are, and threatened the Gypsies with the
Provost of Man's, to whom he said he was allied by having married a Portail.
Then began he to read his Auditors a long Lecture on the Validity of Relation
without being able at the same time to forbear immoderate Swearing, which he
often intermixed with his Discourse. He threatened them likewise to complain to
Provost la Rappinieres Lieutenant, whose name alone was enough to make them
tremble. But the Gypsie-Captain raised his Passion beyond all Patience when he
began to Complement him, and to tell him, That if he had before been acquainted
with his Quality, he should never have presumed to have set Foot so rashly
within his Castle, so the waggish Varlet called this little House, which was
only fortified with a withered Hedge; he added moreover, That his Lady would
soon be delivered, and then he would march away his Troop with Bag and Bagage,
but first would satisie his Tenant for the Damage he and his Men together with
their Horses had done him. Ragotin was at his Wits end to find that he could
not reasonably pick a quarrel with this Fellow, and that especially when he
plainly perceived himself abused by the many apish Cringes made him:
Nevertheless, at last his Choler was raised by the Phlegmatic Gypsy, but then
it was just at a time when Rancour and the Captains Brother began to recollect
being formerly acquainted, and who consequently embracing, soon soddered up the
difference that was about to have proceeded to Ragotins Disadvantage. Rancour
then earnestly begged of his Companion to be quiet, which he was inclinable to
hearken to, and would have proffered of himself had not his natural Pride
pushed him on beyond his Ability. In the mean time the Gypsie-Lady was brought
to Bed of a brave Boy; great was the Joy in the little Troop upon this
occasion, and the Captain thereof, as a token of his being reconciled to
Ragotin, invited both him and his Company to Supper, having already prepared a
Fricassee for their Entertainment. They sat down to Table, and had besides the
Fricassee some Partridges and Hares, which the Gypsies had taken with their
Dogs, two young Turkies, and as many Pigs, which they had stolen, a
Westphalia-Ham and several Neats-Tengues, which they had got by Stratagem; and
lastly, they had a Hare-pye, borrowed of a Baker, the Crust of which was
voraciously devoured by five or six young Gypsies that stood at their Mothers
Elbows. Add to all these another Fricassee of Pigeons which Ragotin gave them,
and you must confess they had Cheer enough. The Guests, besides the Comedians,
were to the number of Nine, all good Dancers, and yet better Thieves. They
began their Healths with that of the King and Princes, and afterward proceeded
to remember those honest Noblemen that suffered them to harbor within their
Jurisdictions. The Captain proposed to the Comedians to drink to the Memory of
the deceased Charles Dodo, who was Uncle to the Lying-in-Lady, and who had been
hanged during the Siege of Rochel, by the Treachery of one Captian la Grave.
Every one began to curse that Captain as a false Brother, and at the same time
railed heartily at all Provosts. Ragotin's Wine in the mean while went about
plentifully, but which had nevertheless this Quality in it, that it occasioned
no Quarrels among the Guests, who even to the Manhater Rancour, were so
extremely pleased with one another, that they Complimented, and Slobber'd, and
Kissed like so many Beaux. Ragotin for his part was resolved not to bring a
Scandal on his House by flinching, and therefore sucked up his Tipple like to
any Sponge. Having drank all Night one would have thought they should have been
sit for Sleep by Sunrising; but it so happened that the same Wine that made
them so good Friends the Night before, had now inspired them with a Spirit of
Separation. They resolved to part therefore, and the Gypsies packing up their
Awls, not forgetting to him something here and there from their Host the
Tenant, went one way, while the jolly Landlord mounting his Mule likewise rod
another, and who being now as serious as he was before transported, took his
Journey directly toward Man's, not minding in the least whether Rancour or
Olive followed him or not, being wholly taken up with blowing a Pipe of Tobacco
that had been smoked out above an Hour before. He had not been gone above half
a League, still sucking his empty Pipe, which afforded him not one whiff of
Smoke, before the fumes of the Wine began to seize his Crown-Office, and
con^^quently soon caused him to tumble out of his Saddle. As Soon as the Master
was off, the Mule thought she had nothing to do but to return from whence she
came, and therefore instantly ^^sted back to her Stable, while the poor
Ragotin, after having ^ndifferently unburden'd his surcharged Stomach, fell
into a profound Sleep in the middle of the Highway. He had not ^lept long,
snoring however like a cracked Organ-Pipe, before a naked Man, something
resembling the Picture of our first father, but extremely Hairy, Dirty and
Nasty, came up to him, and began presently to strip off his Clothes. This wild
Man took more than ordinary pains in drawing off Ragotin's new Boots, which I
have told you somewhere before, in this true History, that his Friend Rancour
claimed as his, which one would have thought might have been sufficient to have
awaked him, had not he, as the saying is, been dead Drunk; but as he was, all
this Force had no other effect upon him, than to drag him bare-Breech'd two or
three Rods together, from the place where he first lay. Being thus unmercifully
used, a Knife by chance fell out of the Sleepers Pocket, which the wild Fellow
immediately seizing, as if he would have flead the scarce animate Carcass, sell
to ripping up his Clothes, Shirt, Boots and Stockings, with whatever else he
could not easily get off, and packing them up upon his Back, fled away with
them as swiftly as a Wolf would have done with a Lamb. Leave we this Man to run
away with his Spoil, he being the same that had formerly so terribly frighted
Destiny, while he was in pursuit of Angelica, and let us return to assist
Ragotin, who yet continued asleep, though he ought by all means to be waked.
Although his naked Body had been for some time exposed to the scorching Sun, and
endured the stinging Assaults of several sorts of Insects, yet was it not
possible to wake him, till some Peasants came by rattling with a Cart. They no
sooner perceived him but they all cried out, There he is, and afterward coming
up softly to him, as if they had been unwilling to disturb him they made sure
of his Legs and Arms, and binding them fast with good strong Cords, they took
him up, so hampered, and canted him into their Cart, which they immediatelye
drove away with as much expedition as a Lover would do a Coach with a stolien
Heiress in it. Ragotin was as ye^ so damnably Drunk, that neither the violence
offered him, nor the excessive joulting of his Caravan could possibly awake
him, when the Pealants all of a sudden driving on heedlesly, with a great deal
of precipitation, overthrew at length both him and the Cart in a huge Slough of
Mire and Water. The sudden cold^^ he there felt, together with his bruizing by
the Stones, or som^^ such like thing, as his fall, soon forced him to be
sensible o^^ what a condition he was in, and the being in that Condition^^
almost made him to run Mad. He found himself bound bod^^ Hand and Foot, and
wallowing like David's Sow in the Mir^^ he felt his Head ache, as well upon
account of his Drunkennes^^ as fall; and lastly, he could not but extremely
wonder to (...) four Country Fellows lifting him up out of the Water, whi^^ as
many were employed in dragging the Cart out of the (...) This Adventure so
exceedingly scared him, that he spoke (...) (...) word, though he was naturally a
great Talker, and had (...) ^o much occasion as now, and a Moment after he
cou^^ no^ possibly have been heard had he spoke never so much, (...) the
Carrers untying his Legs only, without giving any reaso^^ or observing any
farther Civility to him, immediately (...) to drive their Cart back to the
place from whence they (...) as violently as they had done it thither. The
discreet Read may perhaps have a desire to know what these Fellows would have
had with Ragotin, and how they came to do nothing to him, but which I could not
pretend to satisfy them in, had it not come to my knowledge by Chance. A
Priest of the lower Main, a little Melancholly-Mad, having been brought up to
Paris by a suit at Law, during the time that his Cause was preparing for a
Hearing, would needs spend his time in Printing some whimsical Fancies of his
on the Revelations. He was so exceeding fertile in Chimeras, and always so fond
of his last Productions, that he still blotted out the former; whereby his
Printers were forced to Correct the same Sheet at least twenty times over. This
made them so Mad, that for every Sheet he was obliged to look out for a new
Printer, till a last he happened on the Person that Printed this present
Romance, wherein he chanced to light upon some Leaves which mentioned this same
Adventure I have told you. This Priest knew more of the Story than I who writ
it, having it seems been informed from the Peasants own Mouths who had carried
away Ragotin, What had been the occasion of their so doing, which I could not
possibly have come to the knowledge of. He saw at first wherein my Relation was
defective, and acquainted my Printer therewith, who was extremely surpised at
the Information, thinking with others, that my Romance had only been a fabulous
Story of my own Invention. Supposing it might be of some service to me to put
me in the right, my Printer desired him that he would come and give me a Visit,
which he readily consented to. Then did I learn from this faithful Mansean that
the Peasants who had bound Ragotin while a sleep, were some of the nearest
Relations to the poor Madman that run about the Country, who had frighted
Destiny in the Night, and stripped Ragotin in the Daytime. They had, it seems,
resolved among themselves to coop up their Kinsman whenever they met him, and
had made several attempts upon him for that purpose, but he still beat them and
got from them, being a stout rugged Fellow. Some Persons of a Neighboring
Village having espied Ragotin lying Naked in the Sun, took him for the Mad
fellow lying a sleep, but daring not to come near him for fear of a beating,
they gave notice to the Country Fellows his Relations, who venturing to seize
on him with all the caution before mentioned, took him without knowing who he
was, and discovering afterward their Mistake, set his Feet at liberty, but not
his Hands, for fear he might attempt something against them. These Memoirs I
had from this Priest pleased me extremely; and I must own, did me no ordinary
Service, but in return I thought I made him sufficient recompense by advising
him not to procced any farther in the publishing of his Ridiculous Visionary
Comment. Some Readers perhaps will condemn me for having inserted this needless
Circumstance, and others it may be, at the same time, commend me for my
Sincerity. Return we now to Ragotin, his Body all besmeared and bruised, his
Mouth dry and gaping like to the parcht Earth; his Head heavy and dull, and his
Arms pinioned behind his Back. He got up as well as he could, and having cast
his Eyes round him as far as he could see, and perceiving neither House nor Man
near him, he beat it on the Hoof, taking to the nearest Road he could find, and
all the way racking his Brains to find out the cause of his Disaster. Having
his Hands tied behind him he was not a little incommoded by several obstinate
Flies, that chose to fix on those parts of his Body, which by reason of his
being bound, he could not possibly reach, therefore he sound himself frequently
obliged to lie all along upon the Ground, whereby either to rub off or crush
the troublelom Vermin. At last he came to a hollow way, having a thick
Quick-set Hedge on either side, and wherein a little purling Stream run down to
a Neighboring River. This gave him occasion to rejoice, hoping now to get
clear of his Mud and Dirt, which hung in great plenty about him. Coming near
the Ford he saw a Coach which had been just then overturned and out of which
the Coachman and another Fellow were hawling five or six Nuns that had been
well drenched in the Water. This piece of Charity he perceived to be performed
at the earnest Exhortations of a venerable Prelate, who stood hard by looking
on. Among these Nuns was the old Abbess of Estival, who was coming from Man's,
whither an Affair of Importance had called her. The Abbess and Nuns were no
sooner drawn out of the Coach, but they perceived at a distance Ragotin's naked
figure marching toward them, whereat they were extremely asfrighted, and much
more Father Giflot the discreet Director of the Abbey. He caused the devout
Sisters to turn their Faces hastily about, that they might not desile their
Eyes with so great Impurities, and at the same time calling out aloud to
Ragotin commanded him not to approach any nearer at his peril. Ragotin
nevertheless kept onwards of his way, till at last coming to a long Plank that
had been laid a'cross the River for People to walk over, he was met in the
middle thereof by Father Giflot, followed by the Coachman and Peasant, who all
doubted at first whether they were not best to exorcise him, his shape seeming
to them Diabolical. At length the Father took Courage, and demanded of him Who
he was? Whence he came? How he came to be Naked? And lastly, What made him to
have his Hands tied behind him? All which Questions he asked with a great deal
of Gravity and Decorum, which notwithstanding Ragotin answered very saucily,
requiring of the Priest, What he had to do to ask him so many Questions, and
afterward pressing to go forwards upon the Plank, he pushed the reverend
Father so rudely, that he tumbled him over Head and Ears into the Water; the
good Priest drew in after him the Coachman, and he in like manner the Country
Man, all which Ragotin perceiving, and being pleased at, immediately set up a
great laughter. He afterward held his way on toward the Nuns, who covered
their Faces with their Veils, and would by no means be seen by him. Ragotin for
his part was indifferent whether he saw their Faces or not, and consequently
went onward of his way, thinking speedily to get quit of his Adventure, which
nevertheless Father Gistot did not intend he should. He pursued him therefore
close with the Countryman and Coachman for his Seconds, which last being
naturally the most Choleric of the three, and besides put out of Humor by the
Abbesses Scolding at him, detached his Body from the rest, and coming up to
Ragotin revenged himself with his Whip on his Hide, for the Water he had
bestowed on his. Ragotin durst not abide a second Charge, and therefore
immediately put himself into a posture to fly. He sled then like a Dog with a
Bottle to his Tail, while the incensed Coachman, not satisfied with a lash or
two, gave him half a score more to increase his speed, leaving at every stroke
the Characters of his Wrath, imprinted in Blood upon his Breech, Giflot though
almost out of Breath with running so swistly, had yet still enough left to cry
out Whip him, whip him soundly, which animated the Coachman to redouble his
Stripes, and poor Ragotin to increase his speed, till at last a Mill presented
it self in his way as an Asylum to save him. He ran in there with the
Executioner close at his Heels, and finding the Door of a little Back-yard
open, he entered in thereat in great haste, but which he had no sooner done,
than he was caught by the Buttocks by a Mastiff Dog. He thereupon began to
shriek out most dolefully, and flying to an adjoining Garden, with great
precipitation, he happened to tumble down five or six Hives of Bees that stood
just at his entrance. This proved much the worst of all his Misfortunes, for
these little winged Enemies with their pointed Stings assailing a naked Body
that had no Arms to defend it, tormented and Blister'd him most cruelly. He
hereupon bawled out so loud that the Dog that had bitten him was scared away
for fear. The same cause drove away the Coachman and Father Gislot, which last
having given his Revenge too great a loose, and kept his Charity too strait
laced, began to repent of his Cruelty, and hastened immediately to call the
Master and his Man to the assistance of the poor Fellow, who was thus worried
in the Garden. The Miller made no great haste, but nevertheless came at last,
when snatching up Ragotin from among his venomous Enemies, though he might be a
little displeased at the overthrow of his Hives, yet had he nevertheless more
Charity than the Priest, and began at first sight to pity him. He then
proceeded to demand of him What the Devil made him to thrust himself while
naked, and his Hands tied, among his Stocks of Bees? But though Ragotin was going
to answer him, yet could he not, by reason of the excessive Pains he felt all
over his Body. A Bears Cub but newly Whelpt, and never licked into form, could
not be so shapeless as our Ragotin was in his Humane figure, after having been
stung by these merciless Creatures, being swelled excessively, even from Head
to Foot. The Millers Wife as pitious as most good Women are, got a Bed provided
for him and laid him into it. Father Giflot, the Coachman and Peasant, returned
back to the Abbess of Estival, who with her Nuns being re-embark'd in their
Coach, set forwards on their Journey under Convoy of the reverend Father
mounted on a Mare. It happened that the aforesaid Mill belonged either to du
Rignon or his Son-in-Law Bagottiere I cannot say whether. This du Rignon it
seems was a Relation of Ragotin's, which when the Miller and his Wife came to
know, they took more than ordinary care of him, and caused a Surgeon of a
Neighboring Town to come and Cure him, which he happily performed in a short
time. As Soon as he was well able to Walk, he returned to Man's, where his Joy
for Rancour and Olive's having found his Mule and brought it home along with
them, soon made him forget his fall out of the Cart, the Coachmans lashes, his
bitting by the Mastiff, and his being stung by the Bees.

CHAP. XVII.
Some Passages between the little Ragotin and the great Baguenodiere.
DEstiny and Star, Leander and Angelica, two brace of noble and real Lovers,
arrived at the Capital City of Maine, without meeting any the least Misfortune
by the way. Destiny soon reinstated Angelica in her Mothers Favor, to whom he
had given so plausible an Account and Character of Leander's Amors and
Condition, that Mrs. Cave began now to approve the young Man's Passion, as much
as she had before opposed it. The poor Company of Strollers had had no great
reason to brag of theri gettings at Man's had not a Man of Quality that loved
Plays extremely, made them amends for the losses they had sustained by the
Citizens. The greatest part of this Person's Estate lying in Maine, he had
taken a House at Man's, whither he often invited as well Courtiers as Country
Gentry, among whom were sometimes the greatest Wits, and often times Poets of
the first rank to all which he approved himself a kind of Modern Mecaenas. His
chiefest delight was in Comedy, and therefore he not only cherished the
Composers thereof, but likewise invited every Year the best Comedians in the
Kingdom to come to Man's. This Nobleman happened to come thither much about the
same time that these poor Strollers were going thence on account of the
thinness of their Audiences, but he desired them by all means to continue there
a Fortnight longer; and the better to incline them to it, he presented them
with a Hundred Pistols, promising to give them as many more at their departure.
He was glad of this occasion to divert several Persons of Quality of both Sexes
that he had brought along with him to Man's, and who were to make some short
stay there at his Request. This Lord, whom I will call here the Marquess
d'Orse, was a great Hunter and had brought all his Hunting Equipage to Man's,
which in every respect was the finest to be met with in France. The Downs and
Forests of the Country of Maine made it to be one of the best places for those
Sports in the whole Kingdom, and that either for Deer or Hares, and it being
now the Season for such like Divertisements the City of Man's was full of
Huntsmen, which the approaching Festival had drawn thither, most of them with
their Wives, who were extremely ravished at the sight of the Court Gallantry,
thinking they should now have matter sufficient to furnish them with Chat for
the longest Winters Evening. It is not the least ambition of the Country People
to be able to relate sometimes and brag, that at such a time, and in such and
such a place, they have seen such and such Courtiers, whom they salute only
with their Sir-names, and mention without any addition of Title; for Example,
one will tell you he lost his Money to Roquelaure, Crequi won so much, Coaquin
hunted a Stag in Touraine, and the like. But if you suffer them to enter either
upon Politics or War, they will never cease talking till they have drained the
Subject as dry as they were at first empty. But let us here put an end to out
Digression. Man's was then filled with Nobility and Gentry of all sorts. The
Inns were crowded with Guests, and the greatest part of the principal Citizens
who lodged such Courtiers or Country Gentry as were of their Friends, had in a
short time their best Linen foul'd, and their Family Provisions exhausted. The
Strollers quickly opened their Shop, resolving to let their Customers have
lumping Penny-worths, since they had been so well paid beforehand. The
Citizens of both Sexes prepared for the Diversion, and the Town and
Country-Ladies were overjoyed to behold every Day the Court-Madams, from whom
they learned to dress alamode, or at least better than they were wont to do,
which though it occasioned expense to their Husbands, yet was it of exceeding
benefit to their Tailors, who by these means had many an old Gown to alter.
They had a Ball every Night, where several wretched Dancers moved awkwardly in
Courants, and many young Citizens trip'd it about in Holland Drawers, and waxed
Slippers. Madam Star and Madam Angelica fired the Hearts of most of the young
Men that saw them, and raised Envy in the greatest part of the Women. Iuezilla
who danced a Saraband at the request of the Players, was admired, and
Roquebrune was just ready to die with Love at the sight of it. Ragotin likewise
confessed to Rancour, that if he did not quickly bring him into Favor with
Star, France would soon have reason to lament the loss of him. Rancour
presently gave him hopes, and as a more particular Testimony of his Friendship
than ordinary, desired of him to lend him twenty or thirty Francs. Ragotin
turned pale at this surprising request, and not only repented of but was also
ready to renounce his Love. However, at length that domineering Passion
prevailing in him, he made up the Sum demanded, of different kinds of Money,
and out of several Pockets, and gave them with a sorrowful Countenance to
Rancour, who engaged at the same time, that in less than twenty four Hours he
should be sure to hear himself talked of. That Day was Acted Sir Noisy Parrot,
a Play as merry as he that writ it had cause to be sad. The Audience was
numerous; the Comedy indifferently well Played, and every body was well enough
pleased execpt the unfortunate Ragotin. He through some occasion or other came
to the House late, and therefore must crowd in where he could get a seat. His
ill Fortune had placed him just behind a Country Gentleman of the largest size,
who had a great loose Coat on, which not a little increased his bulk. Besides
his spreading Haunches, Chine and Shoulders, he was of a Stature so much taller
than other Men, that although he sat down, Ragotin who was but one row off him,
thought he stood a tip-toe, and therefore cried out incessantly to him to sit
down like the rest, not believing that one who sat on the same Bench could be
so much taller than any of his Companions. The Gentleman whose name was la
Baguenodiere, knew not for some time that Ragotin had spoke to him, till at
length being called by the title of the Gentleman with the Green Feather,
whereof indeed he had a very flaunting one in his Hat, but that none of the
cleanest nor finest, he turned his Head about and saw the little Impertinent,
who thereupon bid him somewhat roughly to sit down. This, nevertheless la
Baguenodiere was so little moved at, that he turned his Face again very gravely
toward the Stage, as if nothing had been said to him; hereat Ragotin began to
call to him again to sit down, but which he took as little notice of as before,
only turning about and looking upon him, and then returning to his former
posture. This at last so vexed Ragotin that he bawled out to him again a third
time, which notwithstanding la Baguenodiere regarded as little as formerly.
During all the time the Play lasted Ragotin still treated him after the like
manner in great Fury, and la Baguenodiere as often looked upon him with the
same unconcern, without speaking a Word to him, which was sufficient to have
enflamed the most Phlegmatic Man in the World. One might have compared la
Baguenodiere in this Adventure to a large Mastiff, and Ragotin to a little Cur
that runs barking at him by his side, which provokes the great Dog so little,
that in contempt of him he only steps aside, and lifting up his Leg, pisses
against the Wall. At lenght the whole Company began to take notice of what had
passed between the largest and the least Man among them, and every one presumed
to smile at it, just at the time that Ragotin began to Swear and rave through
Impatience, while la Baguenodiere returned him only a cold and indifferent
Glance. This Baguenodiere was at the same time the largest Man and the greatest
Brute in the World, I should have said Clown. He demanded with his accustomed
Gravity of the two Gentlemen that sat next to him what they laughed at, to
which they instantly replied very ingenuously, that it was at him and Ragotin,
whereby it seems they thought rather to have tickled than displeased him.
However it so happened that it disgusted him, and made him to reply in a great
rage, Then you are a couple of Sots, which Affront he cast in their Teeth with
so great Indignation, and such a sower look, that they presently perceived he
was piqu'd, and therefore thought themselves obliged in requital for his
Compliment to give him, each of them, a good sound Box o'th Ear. La
Baguenodiere hereupon having his Arms hampered in his Coat, could do nothing to
them again at first but hunch them to and fro with his Elbows, which the two
Gentlemen that were Brothers, and naturally very brisk, taking the advantage
of, before he could well disengage himself, gave him half a dozen more swinging
cuffs on the Chaps, which they happened to deliver with such an equal Measure
of Time, that those who heard the sound without seeing the Blows given, thought
verily they had been so many singly Claps. At last Baguenodiere got his Arms
free from under his cumbersom Coat, but being so close pressed by the two
active Brothers, who box'd him most unmercifully all the while, he had not room
to move those carnal Weapons of his in. He found himself therefore obliged to
retreat, which going to do forwards. Pardon the Incongruity of the Expression,
his Enemies having secured him behind and on either side, he chanced to fall on
a Man below him, and by the weight of his Body, tumbled both him and his Seat
down upon the unfortunate Ragotin, who I should have told you, not finding
himself able to prevail with the Country Gentleman to let him see over him, had
got a seat a little under him, who was thereby forced down upon another, that
beat him backwards upon another, and so onwards to the last Man or Woman, no
matter which, that sat below, whereby all these Tumblers in this condition
looked just like so many Ninepins that had been dexterously tip'd by a skilful
touch of one. The noise of the Persons tumbling, the crushed Legs, the frighted
Maids, the crying Children, the babbling Women, and in a Word, of those that
laughed, of others that lamented, and lastly of such as either clapped their
Hands or hissed, made such a confuss'd din, as one would have thought could
have happened no where but at the Valley of Iehosaphat. Never did such a
trifling cause occasion so many great Accidents before; but that in my opinion,
which was the most wonderful, was that there happened not to be one Sword
drawn, though the Scuffle first began among those that wore them, and whereof
there were above a Hundred in the Company. I was equally surpised at
Baguenodieres stupidness, who could Cuff and be Cuffed, and receive Assaults
and make them, as if he had been about the most indifferent thing in Nature. It
was farther observed as another instance of his dullness or sullenness, call it
which you please, that he had not once opened his Mouth all that Afternoon,
except when he uttered those unmannerly Words, which brought such a shower of
Cuffs about his Ears: neither did he afterward speak one more all that Night,
so well was this huge Man's Phlegm and Taciturnity proportioned to his bulk. This
grand Confusion of Seats and Persons huddled together, was no small time
putting in order, which while some were busy about, and others charitably
interposing between the three Combatants, who by this time were got to
Fisticuffs again, a sudden howling was heard as proceeding from underground.
Who could this now be but Ragotin? For Fortune when she has once begun to
persecute any poor Wretch, seldom leaves tormenting him till she has undone
him. It seems the Seat which this little Imp sat upon was placed on a Plank
that lay over a Drain belonging to the Tennis-Court, which drain is commonly in
the middle, just under the Line. It was an ordinary receptacle for the
Rainwater, or any filth that was swept away, and this Plank served as a lid to
cover it. But as time consumes all things, so had it rotted this to that degree
that Ragotin's weight being greatly increased by those that fell upon him, in
the late hurly-burly, it presently gave way under him, and he immediately
falling in had the Misfortune to have another Man of a considerable bulk fall
upon him, whose Leg, which by the way, was both Booted and Spurred, slipping
into the hole where Ragotins whole Body lay, the Spur so pricked this poor
Creatures Throat that it obliged him to howl after a most frightful manner. A
Stander-by observing the Accident, and giving the Man his Hand to lift him out,
Ragotin perceiving the Foot leaving him, gave it so terrible a nip with his
Teeth, even through the Boot, that the Man letting go his hold dropped down
again, thinking verily he had been bit by a Serpent. He likewise gave so
frightful a shriek at the same time, that the Fellow who was helping him out
run away for fear. The same Person recovering himself soon after, lent him his
Hand again, and then at one lusty pull he brought both him and Ragotin out at
once, who it seems had the wit to hold by the Man's Coat. The little Man no
sooner saw the light again, than he begun to threaten every body with his Nods
and Looks, but more especially those whom he observed to laugh at him. He
afterward thrust himself among the Crowd that were now going out, meditating
all along upon something that should prove as honorable for him to perform, as
fatal to his Adversary Baguenodiere. I never came to know whether this last
Person and the two Brothers ever accomodated their difference or not, however
they happened to fall out, but this I heard, that they never afterward
Assaulted each other. This was what disturbed the first Play that our Comedians
acted before the illustrious Company then assembled at Man's.

CHAP. XVIII.
Which has no occasion for a Title.
NEXT was represented Nicomedes, a Play written by the incomparable Monsieur de
Corneille. This Comedy is admirable in my Judgment, being the only one of his
that has most of its Authors own in it. In it he has sufficiently displayed the
richness of his Genius, and given all its Persons bold and shining Characters,
but that quite different from each other. While this was playing there happened
to be no disturbance, and which it may be, fell out by reason that Ragotin was
absent. Scarce a Day passed wherein he did not meet with some broil or other,
to which his peevish Pride and rash Presumption exposed him as much as his ill
Fortune, which scarce till now had given him the least respit. The little Man
had spent his Afternoon with Inezilla's Husband, the Operator Ferdinando, a
Norman by Birth, but who called himself a Venetian, and who, as I have already
told you, professed Chemistry, though to speak freely of him, he was a great Quack,
or rather a great Cheat. Rancour to rid himself of the tedious Importunities of
Ragotin, to whom he stood engaged to make Madam Star love him, had it seems
inclined this little Fellow to believe that this Operator was a great Magician,
and could by his Art force the wisest Woman in the World to run after a Man in
her Smock if he so pleased, but that he did not care to practice much that way,
except for a particular Friend, whose discretion he was well satisfied in, by
reason he had formerly undergone some trouble by being overperswaded by some
great Lords at Court. He counseled Ragotin therefore to do his utmost to gain
his Friendship, which he nevertheless told him was no easy matter to do, the
Operator being a Man of Parts, and would consequently esteem only such as were
so likewise, but then where he once took a fancy to a Man he kept nothing a
secret from him. One need only to praise or commend a proud Fellow to get what
one will out of him when it is quite otherwise with the Meek and Humble, for
they are not so easily imposed upon. Rancour then persuaded Ragotin to what he
pleased, and he went immediately and persuaded the Operator that he was a great
Magician. I shall not need to repeat all he said to him; it suffices that the
Operator being prepared by Rancour before hand for that purpose, acted his part
so well, that he denied his Profession, only that his Bubble might be the more
enclinable to believe it. Ragotin then, as I have said before, staid the whole
Afternoon with him; but by reason the Operator had then a Chemical Preparation
in Hand, he would by no means satisfy him in any thing that Day, and which
occasioned our impertinent Mansean to have but an ill Night of it after he went
from him. Next Morning betimes he got to the Operators Chamber before he was
up, which Inezilla took very ill, she not being then so youthful as to come out
of her Bed as fresh as a Rose, and for that reason always required some Hours
in private, before she could be ready for a public View. She therefore
immediately slipped into her Closset, her she Black-moor soon following her with
Loves Ammunition, and left her Husband and Ragotin to discourse the matter at
Liberty. Ferdinando then began to open his Magazine of Miracles and
Performances, but would nevertheless Promise to perform nothing for him,
Ragotin would therefore needs incline him to it by Demonstrations of his
Bounty, and consequently invited both him and his Wife to Dinner. The Men and
Women-Players were invited likewise, I shall not give you any particulars of
their Entertainment, I would only have you to take notice that they were very
Merry and fed heartily. After Dinner Inezilla was desired by Destiny and the
other Comedians to read some little Spanish Novel or other to them, which she
had either Composed herself, or Translated by help of the divine Roquebrune,
who had sworn by Apollo and the Nine Muses, that in six Months time he would
teach her all the Graces and Perfections of the French Tongue. Inezilla was so
obliging that she did not require much entreaty, and therefore while Ragotin
was taken up in consulting the Magician Ferdinando, she Read the follovving
Novel, with a most Charming Voice, and Judicious Accent.

CHAP. XIX.
The Two Rival Brothers, a Novel.
DOrethea and Feliciana de Monsalva were two the most aimable Ladies in all
Seville, but though they had not been such, their Fortunes and Quality were so
very considerable, that those alone had been sufficient to have engaged any
Gentleman to Court them, that had Inclinations to be well Married. Don Manuel
their Father had not yet declared himself in favor of any Person, and
Dorethea, who as his eldest Daughter ought to have been first (...), had like
her Sister so well managed her Looks and Actions, that the most confident
pretenders to her had yet reason sufficient to doubt whether their Addresses
would be well or ill received. However these fair Sisters never went to Mass
without a great crowd of Lovers after them, exceeding Sparkishly tricked up,
and they never came near the Holy Water but there were Hands of all sorts and
sizes ready to dip with them, out of a peculiar kind of Devotion. Whenever they
happened but to lift off their Eyes from their Prayer-Books, they immediately
became the Center of I know not how many wishful Glances; and they could not
make the least step in the Church but they had presently abundance of Curtsies
to return to the great number of Beaux that bowed to them on all sides. But
however troublesome where the Civilities paid to them in Public, the frequent
Serenades under their Windows made them considerable amends, and rendered that
restraint supportable, which they were obliged to undergo by the Custom of
their Country. Hardly a Night. passed but they were regaled with some Music or
other, and often in the Day time there was running at the Ring, and Tilting
just under their Windows, which looked toward the Marketplace, most proper
for those Exercises. One Day among the rest, a Stranger begot the admiration of
the Spectators by his wonderful Address, beyond the ability of any of the
Gentry of the City, who was likewise observed by the two Sisters to be a very
complete Cavalier. Diverse Persons of Seville, who had been formerly his
Acquaintance in Flanders, where he commanded a Regiment of Horse, invited him
to run at the Ring with them, which he accoringly performed in a Soldiers
Habit. Some Days after, there happened the Consecration of a Bishop at Seville.
The Stranger, who went by the name of Don Sancho de Sylva, would needs be at
the Ceremony, and consequently appeared in the Church, together with the
greatest Gallants of the City. The fair Sisters came thither likewise, with
many other Ladies disguised, after the mode of the Place, with Mantles of thick
Stuff, and Hats with Plumes of Feathers in them. Don Sancho by chance had
placed himself between the two Sisters and another Lady whom he accosted; but
she desiring him civilly to desist, and leave a place next her for a Friend she
expected, he obeyed her, and turned toward Dorothea de Montsalva, who sat
nearer to him than her Sister, and who had observed all that passed betwixt him
and the Lady. I was in hopes Madam, quoth he, addressing himself to Dorothea,
that the Lady here, to whom I have just made my Applications, would not have
refused me her Conversation, upon the account of my being a Stranger, but she
has justly rewarded my presumption in thinking I had any thing tolerable to
offer. I nevertheless beseech you, Madam, continued he, to show more Pity and
Generosity to a Gentleman who has a mind to experience the Bounty of the Ladies
of Seville. You give me a much greater cause to treat you ill than you have
done this Lady, replied Dorothea, since you offer me only what she had before
refused; but that you may have no real reason to complain of our Ladies of this
Country, I consent to converse with you as long as this Ceremony lasts, to
convince you that I have no Assignation to attend. That is what does not a
little surprise me, replied Don Sancho, being so wonderfully beauteous as you
are, and which makes me enclinable to believe, that either you are very
formidable, the Gallants of this Town very faint-Hearted, or else, that the
Person, whose place I now usurp, is absent. And do you believe then Sir, quoth
Dorothea, that I am so little skilled in the Art of Love, that I could not
refrain from appearing in public without my Gallant if I had any? For the
future you would do well not to entertain such unbecoming Opinions of those you
are wholly unacquainted with. You may be convinced, Madam, replied Don Sancho,
that I have a better Opinion of you than you imagine, if you would but allow me
to adore you suitable to my Inclinations. Our first Motions are always
fallacious, answered Dorothea, and besides there are no small difficulties to
be encountered in the performing of what you propound. There are none so great,
replied Don Sancho, but I would endeavor to surmount them all, to gain the
Honor of your Esteem. That is not the work of a few Days, Repartee'd Dorothea;
you don't consider perhaps, Sir, that you do but travel through Seville, and it
may be, are ignorant that I should not well like to be beloved only en passant.
But grant me, Madam, what I humbly request, replied Don Sancho, and I will be
bound to continue in Seville as long as I live. Now you speak like your self,
Replied Dorothea, and I cannot but wonder, continued she, that a Person that
was able to say so many fine things, should not before this have provided
himself of a Mistress to exhaust his Gallantry upon. Is it, added she, that he
never yet thought any of them worth his trouble? It is rather, replied Don
Sancho, our of a distrust he has of his Abilities. Answer me precisely, Sir,
continued Dorothea, to what I shall now demand of you, which is this? Which
among all your Ladies it is, that would be soonest able to keep you in Seville
were it her request? I have told you already Madam, replied Don Sancho, that
you might if you so pleased the soonest of any. You never saw me before, Sir,
quoth Dovothea, therefore pray let some other happy Lady be the Person. I must
acknowledge then, answered Don Sancho, since you command it of me, that had
Dorothea de Montsalva, as great a stock of Wit as I have discovered in you, I
should think that Man happy whose Merit and Services she could Smile upon.
There are many Ladies in Seville, replied Dorothea, that not only equal but
excel her. But, added she, Have you ever yet heard that among all the crowd of
her Admirers she ever favored one more than another? As I found my self very
far from deserving her Favor, answered Don Sancho, I never troubled my self to
enquire into the good Fortune of others. Why should you not think your self as
deserving as another? demanded Dorothea, Women's Humors are for the most part
unaccountable, added she, and it often happens that the first Assault of a
Stranger has better success with them than the continued Siege of a constant
Votary. You have got a very pretty way to get rid of me, quoth Don Sancho, for
I plainly perceive by your Discourse that the Services of a new comer would not
at all be acceptable to you, in the prejudice of some more happy Person you
have long been engaged to. Don't let that enter into your Head, replied
Dorothea, but believe rather that I am not so easy as to be cajolled with the
bare pretense of a Passion from one that never saw me in his Life. If that be
only wanting, Madam, to complete my Happiness, replied Don Sancho, conceal your
self no longer from a Stranger that has been already so charmed with your Wit.
You would not be so much with my Face, answered Dorothea, if you saw it. Ah!
you cannot choose but be most lovely, replied Don Sancho, since you so freely
Confess that you are not so, nay now I have greater cause than ever, to believe
that you are weary of my Company, since either that I seem troublesome, or
because every corner of your Heart has been already taken up by others. It were
unjust therefore, continued he, that your goodness should be any longer
trespassed upon by my Boldness, and which I had discontinu'd before, had not I
had a mind to convince you that I had more honorable Designs, when I made you
the faithful tenders of my Life and Freedom, than to make you my Pastime and
Diversion. And to show you, replied Dorothea, that I do not think that time
lost which I have spent in hearing you, I will be contented to continue with
you so much longer as may suffice to let me know who you are. It cannot be my
Crime then to satisfy you, answered Don Sancho, and therefore I shall proceed
to do it. Know then most aimable and unknown Lady, added he, that my name is
Sylva, which I had from my Mother; that my Father is Governor of Quitto in
Peru; that I am Traveling this way by his Orders; and that I have before spent
some part of my Life in Flanders, where I have by Services attained to the
chiefest Commands in the Army; and lastly, had confirmed upon me a Commandery
of the Order of St. Iago. This in few Words, continued he, is a faithful
account of what I am, but what I would be all my Life long rests only in your
Power to give me leave to express in a place less public than this. That shall
be as soon as possibly, replied Dorothea, But in the mean time to prevent your
Desires of knowing more of me at present, unless you mean to run the hazard of
not knowing me at all, know that I am of Quality, and that my Face not so
homely as to frighten you. This said, Don Sancho took his leave with a most
profound Bow, and went up to a Company of Gentlemen that were then discoursing
together in a knot. Some sullen Ladies now, who are ever censuring others
Conducts and Magnifying their own; who take upon themselves the Arbitration of
what is good or ill, tho one might lay odds in a Wager on their Virtues, as not
easy to be made appear, and who fancy that for a little brutish Coyness, and
pretended religious Squeamishness, they have a title to Supererogation in point
of Honor, tho^ the wantonness of their past Youth has left mor Scandal than
ever their crabbed Wrinkles will be able to give good Examples. These Mumping
Madams, I say so short sighted is to their own Faults, will perhaps be apt to
affirm that Madam Dorothea had too Indiscreetly managed herself in the late
Rencounter, and that not only in receiving Addresses so kindly from a Person
she never saw before, but likewise in suffering him to make Love to her at all;
and farther, that if any young Lady whom they had the Government of should have
done as much, she should not have long continued above Ground. But let these
Novice-Ladies learn from me, that every Country has its peculiar Customs and
Manners, and that though in England and France, where the Women and Maids walk
about at Liberty, they are or ought to be offended at the least declaration of
Love made them by a stranger; yet in Spain it is quite otherwise, for there the
Women being all Cloistered up like Nuns, are glad of every occasion of Loves
being tendered them, although it were from one that had not the least thing worthy
of them in him. Nay, the Women there go farther, for they commonly make the
first Overtures, and are first taken, by reason that they are last to be seen,
having only an opportunity to see the Men through their Veils, and that only at
Church, in the Walks, from their Balconies, or through their Grates. Dorothea
made her Sister Feliciana acquainted with the Conversation she had with Don
Sancho, and moreover frankly owned to her as her Confidente, that she thought
him the most agreeable Cavalier in all Seville. Her Sister very much approved
of her Design upon his Liberty. The two fair Ladies entertained each other for
some time on the Advantages and Privileges that Men had above Women. They urged
that Women were never to be married but at the pleasure of their Parents, which
did not always suit with their Inclinations, when Men were at Liberty to pick
and choose where they pleased, and marry when they pleased. As for my part, said
Dorothea to her Sister, Love shall never make me^ do any thing contrary to my
Duty, and I am resolved continued she never to marry any Man but who shall
singly posse^ all those good Qualities, which are only to be found dispersed
among diverse others; and, added she farther, I would rather choose to be shut up
in a Convent than to marry a Man I could not like. Feliciana told her that was
her Resolution too, and they both together confirmed each other in their
Opinions, with all the reasoning that their Ingenuity could furnish them (...)
Dorothea found it a little difficult to perform her promise (...) Don Sancho,
which she had given him to make her-self know to him, and consequently
acquainted her Sister with the (...) plexity she was in. But Feliciana, who was
happy in findi^ out expedients, put her Sister in mind of a Lady that was
Relation of theirs, and more than that, an intimate Friend, all Relations are
not so, who she was certain would serve her faithfully in any Affair that
concerned her Happiness so much as this did. You know, says this good Sister to
her, that Mariana, who has been a long while Serviceable to us, is married to a
Surgeon, and lives in a House belonging to our Kinswoman, and adjoining to
hers, which two Houses have a Door of Communication betwixt them. Now,
conrinu'd she, these Houses stand in a By-part of the Town, and though it may be
observed that we go oftener to visit our Relation than ordinary, yet it will not
be taken notice of that Don Sancho goes to a Surgeons; besides, he may take the
opportunity of the Night, or else go disguised to avoid Discovery. Whilst
Dorothea was contriving this Intrigue by the help of her Sister, and
instructing her Kinswoman and Mariana in what they had to do, Don Sancho's
Thoughts were wholly taken up about his unknown Lady. He could not satisfy
himself whether she had made those Promises of farther Discovery to abuse him
or not, or whether he did not see her every Day though Disguised, either at
Church, in her Window, or else where receiving the Adoration of her Gallants.
Whilst he was thus in doubt, and one Morning dressing himself in order to look
after her, a Veiled Lady came to the Door to ask for him. Being admitted, she
delivered him the following Billet.

The Billet.
Sir,
I Should have sooner let you heard from me had it been in my Power. But if the
Desires you have shown to be acquainted with me be not yet wholly vanished, be
pleased to accompany the Bearer, about the dusk of the Evening, to a place
where she shall conduct you, and where it is probable you may find

Your humble Servant.


You may better imagine, than I express, the Joy that Don Sancho conceived at
this News. He embraced the Ambassadress with all possible acknowledgments, and
moreover presented her with a Gold Chain, which she after a modest refusal
accepted. She appointed him a remote place to meet her in without Attendants in
the Evening, and so departed, leaving him the best satisfied, though at the same
time the most impatient Man in the World. At length Night came, and she failed
not to be at the place of Assignation richly Habited and Perfumed. He was
conducted by her first into an ill-favored little House, and afterward into a
very fair Apartment, where he found three Ladies veiled. He presently
distinguished his unknown Mistress from the rest by her Shape and Stature, and
therefore immediately Addressed himself to her, entreating her to pull of her
Veil. She made no great difficulty to comply with his Request, and therefore
both she and her Sister forthwith discovered themselves to the happy Don
Sancho, to be the two Beautiful Ladies Dorothea and Feliciana de Montsalva. You
may now perceive I told you true, said Dorothea to him throwing off her Veil,
when I assured you that a Stranget might sometimes obtain more kindness from us
Women in a Minute, than the most importunate of our Lovers could do by many
Years Courtship. And, continued she, you would be the most ungrateful Person of
your Sex, did you either not highly esteem the Favor I have done you, or
mis-interpret it to my disadvantage. I shall ever value what I receive from
you, replied Don Sancho Passionately, as if it came from Hea, ven, and you may
be able to guess by the Care I shall take to preserve to my self the Favor you
have done me, that if I ever am so unhappy as to let it be known, it will
rather be the effect of my Misfortune than Crime.

They said, in short, without control,
All what such Lovers use to say,
When Love is Master of the Soul.
The Mistress of the House and Feliciana, who had been before Instructed what
they had to do, were retired to a convenient distance from the two Lovers,
whereby they gave them an opportunity to exchange their mutual Affections with
greater Ardency than they had time to do at their first meeting, as likewise to
appoint another Assignation to inflame them yet more if possible. Dorothea
promised Don Sancho to give him as many Meetings as she could conveniently, for
which he returned her all the acknowledgments he was capable of making. The two
other Ladies entertained each other apart for some time; but at length Mariana
thought her self obliged to acquaint the Lovers that it was time to separate,
at which Dorothea was presently concerned, and Don Sancho visibly changed
Countenance; but however part they must. The gallant Cavalier wrote the next
Day to his fair Mistress, and had an Answer suitable to his Wishes; but I
cannot pretend to give you a sight of their Letters, by reason that none of
them ever came to my Hands. What I can satisfy you in is, that they met often
in the same place, and after the same manner, and at length arrived to that
fervency of Affection, that without Murdering themselves like Pyramus and
Thysbe, they might well be said to be as passionate Lovers. It is a common
saying, That Love, Fire and Money, cannot lie concealed. Dorothea, who had the
gallant Stranger continually in her Mind, could not forbear talking of him
frequently, taking all occasions to set him so much above all other Gentlemen
of Seville, that at last some Ladies who had concealed Affections as well as
she, and who observed her continually crying up Don Sancho, not only took
notice of, but were piqu'd at it. Her Sister Feliciana had often advised her to
be more cautious, and above a Hundred times in Company, when she was even
transported in his Praise would often tread upon her Toes, till she had almost
crippled her, to desist. At last through her Indiscretion, her Intrigue came to
one of her Admirers knowledge, by means of a Lady a Friend of his. He had
reason enough to believe her in Love with Don Sancho, since from the time that
Stranger first appeared in the City neither he nor any of her other Humble
Servants could obtain the least favorable look from her. This Rival of Don
Sancho's was Rich, of a good Family, and very well received by Don Manuel, who
nevertheless had not yet pressed his Daughter to Marry him, because as often as
he had talked any thing to her tending that way, she had always conjured him
not to Marry her so young. This Gentleman, I begin to recollect his Name was
Don Diego, had a mind to be fully assured of what he had yet but suspected. He
had one of those Valets de Chamber which we call Spruce Fellows, who wear as
good Linen as their Masters, and sometimes that of their Masters, and who
bring up Fashions among the inferior Servants, and are as much or rather more
envied by the Waiting-Women than beloved. This Fellows name was Gusman, who
having a small tincture of Poetry composed those sorts of Sonnets as Madrid,
which London and Paris we call Ballads. He was accustomed to Sing them to his
Guittar, but that never plain and downright, but always attended with the
ridiculous Gestures of his Head and Body. He moreover danced the Sarabande, was
never without Castagnets, would more than once have got to be a Player, had he
not been as often refused; and to make up the Composition of his Character, was
something inclinable to the Bully; but to tell you the truth, 'twas that of the
most sneaking kind. All these noble Talents, added to a little Eloquence his
Memory had furnished him with, from his Master's Table-talk, made him to be the
Idol, if I may so speak, of all those Servant Maids that had best Opinions of
themselves. Don Diego commanded him to cast an Ogle or two upon Isabella, a
young Wench that waited on the two Ladies Dorothea and Feliciana de Montsalva.
He forthwith obeyed his Master's Commands, and Isabella was almost as soon
caught in the Trap as it was set for her, believing her self not a little happy
to be beloved by Gusman, whom she in a short time loved again, as he in a
little while after did her really, though his first Intentions were only to
impose on her by his Master's Orders, and for his ends. As the Love of Gusman
was a thing much coveted amongst the Servant Maids of that City, so was
Isabella's Fortune as great as the most ambitious Valet de Chamber could expect
to be raised to. She was very well beloved by her Mistrisses, from whom she
received many Favors, and was besides in expectation of a Fortune, to be given
her by her Father an honest Tradesman, Gusman then thinking seriously on the
matter, resolved to be her Husband, as she on her part did to be his Wife, and
therefore having only taken one another Words, they lived together as such.
Isabella was not a little displeased to observe than Mariana the Surgeons Wife,
at whose House Dorothea and Do^ Sancho had their private Meetings, still
continued to be their Confidente in a Business, whence she knew must come a
great deal of Profit to her. She had found out the Gold Chain which Sancho had
given her, and besides, discovered many other Presents he had made her, and
moreover imagined that then might have been several more which she knew nothing
of^^^ This caused her to hate Mariana to Death, and which incline^^ me to
believe that this young Lass was not a little Me^^ ^^nary. It is no wonder then
if at the first request her dea^ Gusman made her to tell him truly, whether her
Mistress Dorothea were in Love or not; she confessed the whole secret to hi^ on
whom she had bestowed her Heart. She informed him therefore of as much as she
knew of the Intrigue between the two Lovers, and concluded all with railing at
Mariana for depr^^ing her of her Vails, which she said, was due to her as
Servant of the House. Gusman desired of her farther to let him know the Day and
Hour when the Lovers were next to meet, which she soon after did, and he
consequently acquainted his Master with not only that, but likewise with all
the rest that he had learned from the treacherous Isabella. Don Diego hereupon
habited himself like a Beggar, and taking his Post just at Mariana's Door the
Night that his Man had informed him the Rendesvouz was to be, he saw his Rival
enter there, and some time after a Coach stopping before Dorothea's Cousin's
House, he observed both his Mistress and her Sister to come out thereof and go
in there, which you may imagine left him in no small rage, well knowing what
secret Communication there was between the two Houses. He Plotted therefore
from that very Minute to rid himself of so formidable a Rival as Don Sancho
might prove. The surest way to take him off he thought was by Assassins, and
consequently forthwith hired two for that end. With these he watched for him
diverse Nights together, and at last met him, and set on him with the assistance
of his two Bullies, both like himself well Armed. Don Sancho no sooner
perceived their Intentions than he put himself in a posture of Defense, being
also indifferently well provided for that purpose, for over and above his Sword
and Poniard he had two Pistols ready charged and stuck in his Girdle. Don Diego
was more forward to engage than his Companions, who were only led to it by the
thoughts of Gain. Don Sancho at first gave Ground, out of Policy, till he had
drawn his Assailants to a convenient distance from the House where Dorothea
was. But length fearing he might receive prejudice if he still continued on the
Defensive part, and perceiving Don Diego to press more vigorously than ordinary
upon him, he let fly one of his Pistols at him, and brought him to the Ground
half Dead, but nevertheless crying out and bawling for a Priest as if he were
Mad. At the bare hearing the report of a Pistol the Bullies immediately troop'd
off. Don Sancho retired to his Lodgings, and the Neighbors coming out of their
Houses to see what was the matter, found the Wounded Man just expiring, who
nevertheless had so much Life left as to accuse Don Sancho of his Murder. This
our Cavaliere had soon notice of, by means of his Friends, who told him
moreover, that although the Law could not reach him, yet would not Don Diego's
Relations let his Death be unrevenged, but rather seek all opportunities to
Murder him wherever they could meet him to Advantage. Don Sancho hearing this,
thought it his best way to retire to a Convent, where he knew he might be safe,
which he immediately did, and from thence sent his dear Dorothea an account of
his Safety, ordering his Affairs so in the mean time, that he might be be ready
to leave Seville at the shortest warning. Whilst matters past thus, the
Magistrates of the City were doing their best to find Don Sancho out but to no
purpose. After the heat of the Search was a little over, and every body was of
opinion that he was clear got off, Dorothea and her Sister, under pretense of
Devotion, were carried by their Cousin to the same Monastery whither Sancho was
retired. There the two Lovers had another Meeting in the Chapel, where they
mutually promised eternal Constancy and Fidelity to each other, and at parting
uttered so many moving Expressions, that Feliciana, her Kinswoman, and the good
Monk that attended them wept exceedingly, and which they were always afterward
enclinable to do whenever the remembrance of this Interview came into their
Minds. Don Sancho soon after got from Seville in Disguize, leaving Letters
behind him with his Fathers Factor to be transmitted to the Indies by the first
opportunity. By these Letters he gave his Father an account of what had
befallen him, and which had obliged him to leave Seville to retire to Naples
for the saving of his Life. He arrived there safe in a little time, and was
received very kindly by the Viceroy to whom he had the Honor to have formerly
belonged Notwithstanding the great Favors showed him, he nevertheless led but
an uneasy Life in Naples for above a Year or more and that because he had
heard no News all that while of his dear Dorothea. Some small time after the
Viceroy equipped six Galleys to go out a Cruizing after the Algerines. Don
Sancho's Courage would not suffer him to neglect so fair an occasion to show it
self, and therefore he was resolved to engage in this Enterprise. The Admiral
that commanded received him on Board his Gally, and lodged him in his own
Cabin, being not a little proud that he had a Person of his Quality and Merit
to accompany him. These six Neapolitan Galleys ^net eight Algerines almost
within sight of Messina, and were not long before they engaged them. After a
dubious Fight the Christians took three of the Turks and sunk two. The
Neapolitan Admiral happened to be grappled with the Turkish Admiral, which
being better Manned than the rest, had made a much greater resistance. The Sea
in the mean time grew rugged, and the Storm increased so fast, that at length
both Christians and Turks had more regard to their own safeties that to
endeavor each others ruin. They as it were consented then mutually to
withdraw their Grappling-Irons, and disengage themselves from one another, and
which happened much about the time that Don Sancho being over-bold had thrown
himself into the Turkish Admiral, without being so happy as to have any body to
follow him. Seeing himself thus alone, and more than that, in the Power of his
Enemies, he preferred Death to Slavery, and immediately flung himself into the
Sea, hoping only to escape Drowning by his excellent Swimming. But the bad
Weather proving so extraordinary, it hindered him from being discovered by the
Christian Galleys, although the Admiral having been an Eyewitness of his Action,
and being extremely concerned at the loss of him, which he looked upon as
unavoidable, had tacked about toward the place where he saw him leap in. Don
Sancho in the mean time cut the Waves with his Skilful Arms, and after having
Swom a while to the Leeward, whither both the Wind and the Tide carried him, he
by luck met with a Plank which had been torn from the sides of one of the
Turkish Galleys by the Cannon. This he looked upon as a Present sent him from
Heaven, and which he immediately made use of with that success, that in a short
time he got a Shore on the Coast of Scicily, which was not above a League and
half from the place where the Battle was fought. He landed without any
prejudice done him by the Rocks; and after having returned thanks to Heaven for
^his preservation, he walked forward as far as his Weakness would suffer him.
At last making shift to get up a little Hill, ^he perceived from the top a
Neighboring Hovel, whither he immediately went, and found it Inhabited by
Fishermen, who approved themselves to him the most charitable People in the
World. The over-heating himself in the Fight, and afterward ^renching himself
in the Water, together with the wet Clothes he was forced to wear, brought so
violent a Fever upon him, that he was obliged for some time to keep his Bed,
but whereof he in a short time recovered, without doing any thing more than
living regularly. During his Illness, he did all that in him lay to make the
World believe he was Dead, ^hereby as well to abate his Enemies Don Diego's
Relations Ma^^ice to him, as to make trial of his Dorothea's Constancy. Whilst
he was in Flanders he had contracted an extraordinary Friendship with a
Sicilian Marquess of the Family of Montal^^^o whose name was Fabio. He desired
one of the Fishermen ^o make enquiry whether he was then at Messina, where he
knew he lived. Being informed that he was, he went immediately thither in a
Fishers Habit, and arrived at the Marquesses House about Night. The Marquess
was extremely overjoyed at the sight of a Friend whom he had given over for
soft, Don Sancho gave him an account how he came to be saved and moreover told
him his Adventure at Seville without concealing from him the violent Passion he
had for Dorothea. The Marquess proffered his service to go for him into Spain,
and to carry off Dorothea, and bring her to Sicily, provided she would but
consent to the doing of it. Don Sancho would by no means put his Friend to so
dangerous a trial of his Friendship as to go alone on his account, and
therefore proposed to go along with him. Sanchez, Don Sancho's Man, had been so
afflicted for the loss of his Master, that when the Galleys came into the Port
of Messina to refresh themselves, he entered into a Convent, resolving to pass
there the remainder of his Days. Fabio who had been the cause of his being
admitted, sent to the Superior to release him again, and which was the readier
complied with, by reason he had not yet received the Habit of the Order.
Sanchez was overjoyed at the sight of his dear Master, and as soon shook off
all thoughts of returning to the Monastery again. His Master not long after
sent him into Spain to prepare his way for him, and in the mean time charged
him to send him News of his dear Dorothea, who like others had been possessed
with the belief of his Death. This Report had spread it self even to the
Indies, and which had caused his Father to die with regret, leaving four
hundred Thousand Crowns to another Son on Condition, that if his Brother Sancho
appeared again, he should refund to him a Moiety. Don Sancho's Brothers name
was Iuan de Peralta, the same with his Fathers. His Father being dead he
embarked for Spain, and arrived at Seville about a Year after the before
mentioned Misfortune had befell his Brother. Having a quite different Name it
was easy for him to conceal that they were Brothers, and which he thought very
necessary for him to do since he was obliged to reside for some time in that
City where Sancho had left so many Enemies. He happened soon after to have a
sight of the fair Dorothea, and like his Brother, became quickly enamored of
her, though not with the same success. This fair afflicted Lady could Love
nothing after her dear Sancho. All that Don Iuan de Peralta could do to please
her, proved only tiresom to her, and she moreover utterly refused the be^.
Matches in Seville, which her Father Don Manuel had propose^ to her. About this
time Sanchez came to Seville, and observing his Master's Orders, immediately
set himself about enquiring into Dorothea's Behavior. He learnt from a common
Report about the City, that a very wealthy Person lately com^^ from the Indies,
had fallen desperately in Love with her, and who omitted nothing to set forth
his Gallantry and Affection^^ This he soon informed his Master of, but made the
Story much worse than it was told him, and his Master believed it to be yet
worse than he related it. The Marquess Fabio and Don Sancho embarked not long
after at Messina, on Board the Galleys that were then returning to Spain, and
arrived safe in a short time at St. Lucar, where they immediately took Post for
Seville. It was Night before they got thither, when they went forthwith to the
Lodgings which Sanchez had assigned them. They kept all the next Day close in
their Chambers, and, at Night took a Walk toward Don Manuel's House. They
there heard Instruments of several kinds running under Dorothea's Window, and
afterward an excellent Consort: when that was over a single Voice, accompained
only with a Theorbo, complained for some time of the Cruelties of a Tygress in
an Angels form^ Don Sancho was so provoked at this, that he certainly had
trussed up the Serenaders, had not the Marquess Fabio prevented it by
representing to him that he could have done no more if Dorothea had appeared in
the Balcony to encourage his Rival; but since she had not, he ought to believe
that the Words that were Sung were rather Complaints of a dissatisfied Lover,
than thanks for any Favors received. The Serenaders retired after they had
performed their Task, and Don Sancho and the Marquess retired also to their
Lodgings. Dorothea began to be importuned more and more every Day by her Indian
Lover. Her Father Don Manuel was extremely desirous to have her speedily
Married, and therefore she feared that if Don Iuan de Peralta being Rich and of
so good a Family as he really was, should offer himself to him for his
Son-in-Law, he would easily be preferred to all others, and she consequently
more pressed by her Father to Marry than she had hitherto been. The Day after
the Serenade Dorothea spent wholly in her Sisters Company, often telling her,
That she could no longer suffer the Gallantries of the Indian, and farther,
that she could not but wonder how he could make his Courting of her so public,
before he had obtained her Fathers leave to Court her. It is a thing that
extremely surprises me likewise, replied Feliciana, and if I were in your
place, the first opportunity that offered, I would treat him so ill, that he
should ever after be out of Hopes either of saying or doing any thing to please
me. For my part, continued she, I cannot discover any Charms in him to please a
Woman. He has not that Air which is to be acquired only at Court, and the great
Expenses he is at here has nothing of the Polite, and plainly shows him to be a
Stranger. She proceeded afterward to finish a very disadvantageous Character
of Don Iuan de Peralta, not remembering that at his first appearing in Seville
she had confessed to her Sister that she liked him, and that as often as she had
had occasion to speak of him she had always done it with some sort of concern.
Dorothea observing her Sister so altered, or at least that she seemed to be so,
from the Opinion she had formerly entertained of this Cavalier, presently
suspected that she loved him as much as she pretended to dislike him. She
therefore to clear her doubts told Feliciana that she had no manner of aversion
for Don Iuan's Person, but rather a respect, by reason that she found so much
of Sancho's likeness in his Face. Her only reason for slighting him was because
she could Love no Man after Don Sancho, and she added farther, since she could
not hope to be his Wife she was resolved never to be one to any other, but
determined to spend the remainder of her Days in a Convent. Although you were
resolved upon such a strange Undertaking, which I don't believe, replied
Feliciana, yet you might spare me the trouble of hearing of it. Never doubt it,
dear Sister, answered Dorothea, for it is but too true, and it is as certain
that you will speedily be the richest Fortune in Seville. It is therefore,
continued she, that I would see Don Iuan once more, to incline him, since he is
not like to have me, to have the same Love and Respect for you. But, proceeded
she farther, when I do see him, I shall withal, desire him to importune me no
more with his Addresses, since I find they are so very displeasing to you. And
let me tell you, added she further, that I know no Person in Seville to whom
you could be happier Married than to him. If I said he displeased me, replied
Feliciana, I must own it was rather through Complaisance to you than any
aversion I had for him. Confess rather, dear Sister, quoth Dorothea, that you
Love him, and apprehend me for a Rival. At these Words Feliciana began to
blush, and was extremely out of Countenance. She proceeded to defend herself
against her Sisters Accusation, but which served rather to condemn than acquit
her. At last she found she was obliged to confess that she loved Don Iuan,
which she would nevertheless not have done had she believed it in her power to
have concealed it, Dorothea was so far from disapproving her Sisters Passion',
that she encouraged her in it, by promising to serve her to her Power. Soon
after Isabella, who had broke off all Communication with her Friend Gusman,
ever since the accident that befell Don Sancho, had orders from Dorothea to go
immediately and find out Don Iuan, and to tell him that she and her Sister
desired his Company about Midnight in the Garden, when her Father would
certainly be a Bed. She likewise bad her to carry him the Key of the
Garden-Gate. Isabella who had been gained over by Don Iuan, and consequently
had made it her business to procure him her Mistrisses esteem, though without
success, was extremely surpised at this sudden change, but at the same time
not a little glad that she was to carry him so good News, who had so often
obliged her, though she brought him none but bad. She made what have she could
therefore to his Lodgings, but found him not inclinable to credit her Message,
till she showed him the fatal Key. At the same time she put the Key into his
Hands, he put a perfumed Purse with 50 Pistoles in it into hers, which she
received with no less Joy than she had occasioned him by her coming. As
ill-luck would have it, the same Night that Don Iuan was to have admittance
into Dorothea's Fathers Garden, Don Sancho and his Friend the Marquess happened
to take their rounds that way. They were in the Street where Dorothea lived
about Eleven a Clock, when all of a sudden four Men well Armed came up to them,
and star'd them full in the Face. Don Sancho thinking his Rival might be among
them, forthwith told them surlily, That the Post which they had taken up there
he had occasion for, to dispatch a certain Affair in, and therefore required
them to be gone and give him Liberty for that purpose. To which they
immediately replied, that they would do it with all their Hearts, but that the
place was as proper for them to execute a Design they had in Hand, which he
must give them leave to do before he could find any room there. This answer so
nettled Don Sancho that it was only a Word and a Blow with him, for he
immediately set upon them with that Vigor that he soon put them into disorder,
and his Friend the Marquess charging them at the same time, they were driven to
the end of the Street before they knew where they were. There Don Sancho
received a slight Wound, but in return gave his Enemy so home a thrust that he
was some time in getting his Sword out of his Body, and whom he left for dead.
In the mean time the Marquess was pursuing those that fled, which they quickly
did ^^soon as they saw their Comrade fall. Don Sancho at last saw several
Lights coming toward him at a distance, which suspecting to be the Watch, as
it really was, he began to think of his escape. He retired therefore in some
confusion through all the blind Allys he could find, and which at length
bringing him into a large open Street, he met full-but with ^n old Gentleman
that was then lighting a long with a Lan^^trn, and who had drawn his Sword at
the hearing of Don Sancho running toward him. This old Cavalier was Don
Manuel, who had been playing a game at Cards at a Neighbors House, and was now
returning home after his usual Custom through a little Gate of the Garden,
which was near the place where Sancho met him. At the first approach of our
Adventurer Don Manuel cried out, Who goes there? A Man answered Sancho, whose
business it is to make the best of his way, if you do not stop him. It may be,
Sir, concontinu'd Don Manuel, some Accident may have obliged you to search in
such haste for a Sanctuary, if so, my House is near at Hand, and may, if it
please you to accept it, be of Service to you It Is true, replied Don Sancho, I
am in quest of a Sanctuary to screen me from a Pursuit which I fear is made
after me, and since you have been so generous as to offer a Stranger the
Protection of your House, he will trust himself wholly in your Hands, and never
forget both the Kindness and Honor you will do him. Hereupon Don Manual
immediately opened the Door with a Key he had always about him, and put him in
a Grove of Laurels, whilst he went into his House to seek for a better
convenience for him. Don Sancho had not been long in the Grove before a Woman
came to him and Cried, Come away Sir, my Mistress Dorothea waits for you. At
the hearing of that dear Name, Don Sancho began immediately to think that he
was in his Mistresses Garden, and that the Old Gentleman who had brought him in
might be her Father. He likewise suspected, with reason enough, that Dorothea
had made some Rival of his an Assignation, and that this was the time of their
Rendevezouz: He therefore followed Isabella but that more tormented with
Jealousy, than the fears of a Pursuit. In the interim Don Iuan came at the Hour
appointed, and with the Key which had been given him, opened the Garden-door,
and went and hid himself in the Grove of Laurels, whence Don Sancho was but
just gone. A Moment after he perceived a Man to come directly up to him^ which
at first gave him so much surprise, that he though^ good to put himself into a
posture of Defense; but observing it to be Don Manuel, he endeavored only to
conceal himself. Don Manuel soon finding him out, said to him, Come come,
follow me, and I will put you in a place where you n^^ not fear being
discovered. Don Iuan guessed by what he ha^ heard, that Don Manuel had saved
some Person or other tha^ fled from Justice; but nevertheless thought himself
obliged (...) follow him, though he was not the Man he took him for. A^ he went
along he returned him a thousand Thanks for his Civility; but you may imagine
was not inwardly a little displeased at him, for disappointing him of his
Amorous Intrigss Don Manuel conducted him into a Chamber, where he left him
while he went to prepare a Bed for him in another adjoinin^ Room. There we must
leave him likewise in no smal^ trouble and perplexity, and return to speak of
his Brother Don Sancho de S^lva. Him Isabella carried into a Ground-Chamber
which looked out into the Garden, and where Dorothea and Feliciana staid
waiting for Don Iuan de Peralta, the one as a Lover who was studying to say
something to please him, and the other as one that could not Love him, and
designed there to tell him so. At Don Sancho's entering the Room the fair
Sisters were wonderfully surpised. Dorothea immediately swoon'd away at the
fright, and would have certainly dropped down on the Floor had not her Sister
held her up in her Chair. Don Sancho stood like a Statue: Isabella was ready to
die with fear, believing that Sancho's Ghost was come to revenge the wrongs her
Mistress had done him while alive. Feliciana, though extremely frighted likewise,
was nevertheless so employed about recovering her Sister, that she did not so
much mind it as she would have otherwise done. At last Dorothea came to her
self, and then Don Sancho spoke to her after the following manner, If the
Report spread abroad of my Death did not in some measure excuse your
Inconstancy, ungrateful Dorothea, quoth he, I should not have now Breath enough
left wherewith to reproach your Infidelity. But 'twas I that occasioned that
Report, to be forgotten of my Enemies, and not by you, who have so often
promised to Love none but me, and yet, who have now so soon, nay, so
treacherously broke that Promise. I might well revenge my self, now I have an
opportunity, continued he, and complain so loud, that I might a wake your
Father, and he consequently rise and find your Lover, whom you have hid in his
House. But Fool that I am! I am yet afraid to displease you, and torment my
self more with the thoughts that I must love you no longer, than with those
that so plainly suggest to me that you love another. Go on, faithless Fair one!
Go on, proceeded he, enjoy your happy Lover; be aprehensive of no danger in
this new Amor; be assured that will rid you speedily of the Man that has it in
his power (...) reproach you of Treachery all your Life long; nay, of (...) you
have betrayed even at a time that he has exposed (...) Life to come to worship
you. At these Words Don San^^^ would have been gone, but Dorothea held him, and
was go^^^ to justify her self just at the time that Isabella came running (...)
the Chamber to tell her Don Manuel was coming. Don (...) had only time to step
behind the Door before the old ^^^tleman came in, He began immediately to
repremand his ^^ghters for being up so late, and afterward went out of
Chamber, which he had no sooner done but Don Sancho out likewise, and getting
into the Garden hid himself as before among the Laurels, expecting an
opportunity when he might get away. Don Manuels business in his Daughters
Chamber was to light a Candle, wherewith to go to the Garden-Gate, where the
Constable and Watch were knocking like Mad for admittance, having been told,
that one of the Persons that made the fray in the Streets was got in there. Don
Manuel made but little difficulty to suffer them to enter and search his House,
as believing that they would not open his Chamber wherein he had hid the
Gentleman he protected, Don Sancho perceiving it was impossible for him to
escape being found, amidst the great number of the Watchmen and Mob that were
spread all over the Garden, came out of his own accord from the Lawrel-Grove,
and going up to Don Manuel, who was not a little surpised to see him,
whispered him in his Ear, That a Cavalier of honor should always keep his
Word, and ought never to abandon one that he had once thought fitting to take
into his Protection. Hereupon Don Manuel desired the Constable, who was one of
his Friends, to leave Don Sancho in his Custody, which request was readily
granted him, being a Man of Quality, and the rather, because the Wounded Person
was not yet Dead. After this the Constable and Watch retired, and Don Manuel
having discovered Don Sancho, and finding by his Answers that he was really the
Person he had admitted into his Garden, he did not doubt but the other must
have been some Love-adventurer intended to have been introduced to his
Daughters by Isabella. To be the better convinced of the Truth, he desired Don
Sancho to go into a Chamber and not to stir thence till he came to him again,
which Sancho promised he would. In the mean time Don Manuel went to Don Iuan de
Peralta to whom he feigned that his Servant had come into the Garden at the
same time with the Watch, and desired to speak with him. Don Iuan knew very
well that his Servant was Sick a Bed, and therefore could not well come to him;
besides, he had had no Orders from him so to do, and moreover knew not where he
was; all this together made him extremely concerned at what Don Manuel had said
to him: Nevertheless, that he might not discover himself through the want of a
ready Answer, he immediately replied to Don Manuel, at random, If you please,
Sir, let him be ordered to attend me at my Lodgings. Don Manuel then presently
discovered him to be the young Indian Gentleman that had mad^ such a noise for
some time in Seville, and having been alread^ informed of his Quality and
Estate, resolved not to suffer hi^ to go out of his House till he had married
her of his Daughters whom he could best fancy. He discoursed some time with
him, to be better satisfied in those matters which kept him still in suspense.
Isabella saw them talking together from the other Door, and immediately went
and told her Mistress of it. Don Manuel soon perceived her, and thought she was
coming to bring a Message from one of his Daughters to Don Iuan, and therefore
left him, to run after her, and intercept her Design. Just as he overtook her
the Light that was in the Chamber was burnt out. Whilst he was groping after
her, being in the Dark, Isabella got clear of him, and went and told Dorothea
and Feliciana that Don Sancho was in their Father's Chamber, and that she saw
them talking together. The two Sisters immediately run thither. Dorothea for
her part was not afraid of meeting her dear Don Sancho with her Father, being
resolved to confess how much she loved and was beloved by him, as likewise for
what end she had made that Assignation with Don Iuan. She happened to come into
her Father's Chamber just at the same instant that Don Iuan was stealing out,
whom she taking for Don Sancho, caught by the Arm, and spoke to him thus, Why,
cruel Don Sancho, do thou thus fly from me, and wherefore will thou not hear
my Vindication against the unjust Aspersions thou have cast upon me? I confess
you could not have reproached me sufficiently, had I but been guilty of what
you have some sort of reason to believe me. But you know there are many
Falsities which sometimes have as great resemblance of Truth as Truth it self,
which is ever best discovered by Time. Allow me therefore so much as may serve
to unravel this Confusion, wherein yours and my Misfortune, and perhaps that of
diverse others, has involved us. Help me to justify my self, and let not thy
Passion which hurries thee on to condemn me, provoke thee to pronounce an
unjust Sentence before a due Conviction. You may perhaps have heard, continued
she, that a certain Cavalier Loves me, but did you ever hear that I returned
his Love? You may likewise have seen him here, and it is most true that I have
sent for him, but when you shall also know for what reason, I am pretty well
assured you will repent of your cruel Usage to me, and be inclinable to own
that I could give you no greater proof of my Fidelity. Why is he not now in thy
Presence, this Spark that importunes me so frequently with his Passion, that I
might have an opportunity to ask him before thee, whether I ever gave him leave
to profess he loved me, or if he ever had any reason to believe I had read his
Letters? But my Misfortune is such, added she sighing, that as often as I would
have shunned him, he has appeared before me, but now I have occasion for him to
clear my Innocence he is absent. Don Iuan had so much patience as to hear all
she could say without giving her the least Interruption, and that chiefly that
he might thereby discover what she had all along before kept a Secret from him.
At last, just as he was going to reproach her with baseness, Don Sancho, who
had been groping from Room to Room to find the way into the Garden, and still
missing it, at length came so near as to hear Dorothea talking with Don Iuan,
whom he knowing by her Voice, approached them as softly as he could, but was
notwithstanding soon discovered by Don Iuan and the two Sisters. At the same
Moment Don Manuel came into the Chamber with Lights carried before him by two
Servants. Hereupon the two Rival Brothers presently star'd each other in the
Face, looking fiercely, and laying their Hands upon their Swords. Don Manuel
stepped in between them to prevent any mischief, and immediately commanded his
eldest Daughter to make choice of one of them, who as her Husband might be
authorized to chastize the other. Don Iuan then began to speak, and told Don
Manuel that for his part he resigned up all Pretentions to the Cavalier that
was before him, but that not through fear. Don Sancho said the same thing,
adding moreover, that since Don Iuan had been introduced into Don Manuel's
House by his Daughter, it was probable that she both loved him and was beloved
by him, and therefore for his part, he would die a thousand Deaths before he
would marry one with the least scruple upon her. Then Dorothea throwing herself
at her Father's Feet, conjured him to hear her. She related to him all that had
passed between Don Sancho de Sylva and her, to the time of his killing of Don
Diego on her account. She afterward informed him how Don Iuan de Peralta had
made love to her, and what designs she had to disabuse him, and to propose her
Sister to him in Marriage; and to conclude all, she told him that if she could
not persuade Don Sancho to believe her innocent, she was resolved next Day to
shut her self up in a Nunnery, thence never to set Foot out again as long as
she lived^ By this relation the two Brothers came to the knowledge of each
other. Don Sancho was forthwith reconciled to Dorothea, whom he demanded in
Marriage of her Father. Don Iuan likewise begged Don Manuel's consent to have
his Daughter Feliciana, and both were accepted by him for hi^ Son-in-Law with
so great satisfaction as is not to be expressed. As soon as Day appeared, Don
Sancho sent for hi^ Friend the Marquess Fabio, who soon came to partake of hi^
Joy that was then in agitation. Don Sancho's Marriage was kept secret till such
time as Don Manuel and the Marquess had ha^ an oppportunity to persuade the
Cousin and Heir of Don Diego to forget the cause of his Kinsman's Death, and to
lay aside all Enmity to Don Sancho. During this Negotiation the Marquess Fabi^
fell in Love with this Gentleman's Sister, and consequently desired her of her
Brother in Marriage. His request was granted with a great deal of readiness;
the Gentleman being presently sensible what advantage such a Match must be to
his Family. The three Marriages were solemnized in one Day, and every thing
succeeded so well that there was no disagreements between either of the Parties
for a long while after, which you must confess is not a little to be wondered
at.

CHAP. XX.
After what manner Ragotin's Sleep came to be disturbed.
THE agreeable Inezilla concluded the reading of her Novel, which made her
Auditory sorry it was no longer. Whilst she was reading it, Ragotin, who
instead of hearing her had busied himself in asking her Husband Questions about
Magic, was fallen asleep in a low Chair where he sat, and which the Operator
was likewise in his. Ragotin's sleep was not altogether voluntary, for if he
could possibly have kept down the Vapors of the Meat, which he had eaten in
great quantity, he would not have been so rude as not to have heark^ed
attentively to Inezilla's Novel. He did not sleep therefore soundly, but would
ever now and then see-saw his Head down to his Knees, and then raise himself up
again half awake, and afterward start, and then drop down, in like manner as
drowsy Sinners are wont to do at Conventicles, when the good Man proves tedious
as well as dull. There hap^en'd to be a Ram bred up in the Inn, which roguy
Boys that went up and down the Yard had been accustomed to present their Heads
to, but holding their Hands stretched out before at the same time, to keep him
from doing them any harm. (...) these Boys this Ram would run with all his
Might, as these Creatures are naturally given to do. This Animal had his free
(...) all over the Inn, and came often times into the Chambers, and it seems
was in that of the Operator when Inezilla read the Novel. He observing Ragotin
nodding to and fro, with his Hat dropped off, took him for a Champion that had
purposely presented himself to try his Courage with him, and therefore drawing
back four or five Paces, as good Jumpers are wont to do, he ran full speed like
a Horse in his full Carrier, with his horny Head against Ragotin's bald Pate,
which no doubt he would have shattered as much as a Piss-pot could have been,
when thrown upon the Stones, from the top of a high Tower, had it not been
Ragotin's peculiar Fortune that the Assault was made while he had his Head up,
so that he received no other damage than a superficial Graze on the Cheek by
one of the Ram's Horns. All the Company was so extremely surpised at this
Action, that they remained for some time astonished, which nevertheless could
not hinder them from laughing. This gave the Ram an opportunity, having been
used to make his course more than once, to have another run, which it seems, he
performed so inconsiderately, that he run only against his Knees, and therefore
only wounded his Hands, which had each of them a Horn to stand the brunt of.
Ragotin finding his Face to bleed and smart, though he was a little stunned, yet
began to recover himself, and having opened his Eyes, which he did not do till
the second shock, he soon discovered the Author of his Misfortune, which he had
no sooner done, but he fell to belabouring of him about the Head, till the
hardness of his Horns made him to withdraw his Hands, which finding to be all
over bruiz'd, as well by buffetting as sustaining, he flew into a great rage,
threatening revenge to all the Company if they did not desist from laughing at
him. He afterward would have gone out of the Inn in a great fury, had not his
Host stop^ him to pay the Reckoning, which you may imagine he was as unwilling
to do, as he would have been willing to have put up his Damage and Affronts,
could he but have got off Scotfree.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS IN THE Second PART.
Chap. Page I. WHich serves only as an Introduction to the rest. 145 II. Of the
Boots. 147 III. The History of Mrs. Cave. 151 IV. How Destiny found Leander.
160 V. Leander's History. 162 VI. A Cuffing Battle. The Death of mine Host, and
other memorable Matters. 165 VII. Ragotin's Panick Fear, followed by several
Mishaps. The Adventure of the dead Body. A shower of Cuffs, Boxes, and other
surprising Accidents, worthy to have a place allotted them in this true
History. 169 VIII. What became of Ragotin's Foot. 175 IX. Another of Ragotin's
Misfortunes. 180 X. How Madam Bouvillon could not resist a certain Temptation,
and besides, how she got a bunch in her Forehead. 182 XI. Of what perhaps will
entertain the least of the whole Book. 186 XII. Which it may be will be as
little diverting as the foregoing. 190 XIII. An unhandsom Action of the Sieur,
de la Rappiniere. 194 XIV. The Judge in her own Cause, a Novel. 198 XV. A
matchless piece of Impudence in the Sieur de la Rappiniere. 223 XVI. Ragotin's
Misfortune. 225 XVII. Some Passages between the little Ragotin and the great
Baguenodiere. 233 XVIII. Which has no occasion for a Title. 238 XIX. Of the Two
Rival Brother's, a Novel. 240 XX. How Ragotin's Sleep came to be disturbed. 261
THE Comical ROMANCE.
PART. III.
CHAP. I.
Which may serve for an Introduction to this Third Part.
IN the last Chapter of the Second Part of this Romance, you have had little
Ragotin all bloody with the several repeated buttings he received from the Ram,
whilst he slept in a low Chair in the Comedians Chamber, and which occasioned
him to go out thence in a great fury. But he had received so deep a Wound from
Madam Stars Eyes, and was withal so desirous of knowing the issue of the
Operator's Scheme, that he could only afford himself time to wash his Face and
Hands before he returned. As he was just entering the Inn again, his Brain was
so disturbed, what with the Blows, and what with the Darts, that he mistook an
Advocate then walking by to the Hall, for Ferdinando the Operator. He therefore
accosted him very civilly, and began with him after this manner, Sir, I am
happy in meeting you so luckily; I have long desired this opportunity, and I
was just going to your Lodgings, in great have, to have a farther account from
you of what concerns either my Life or Death. I don't doubt but you have
employed the utmost of your Art, in Schemes, to serve me all the time you
slept, and I desire you to believe I would by no means be ungrateful in my
Acknowledgements. Tell me then I beseech you dear Doctor; continued he, will
this little charming, shining Star suffer me to share any of her Influence? The
Advocate, who understood not a tittle of all the fine Words had been spoken to
him, and taking them for Railery, was not long before he interrupted him.
Monsieur, Ragotin, quoth he, if it had been a little later I should verily have
thought you had been drunk, but notwithstanding, I cannot help believing that
you are either a Madman or a Fool. To whom for God sake do you think you are
talking, added he, and what the Devil makes you talk to me of Schemes, and the
Influences of Stars? Do you take me either for an Astrologer or a Magician?
Prithee consider a little Monsieur Ragotin, proceeded he, Don't you know me?
Ah! Sir, replied Ragotin, How unkind you are, I thought I had too well informed
you of my Malady, to have been refused a Remedy. Alas! I could not --. He was
just proceeding with another tedious Harangue, when the Advocate left him in a
great Passion, telling him at parting, That he was a great Sot for a little
Man. Ragotin would have followed him, but that he at length perceived his
Mistake, and therefore was glad to retire with shame. He had so great regard to
his Reputation, as to keep this a Secret; and I Will assure you, I had never come
to know it had not the Advocate one Day told it me, among others of his
Friends, to divert us. The little Fool afterward turned into the Inn, and went
directly to the Comedians Apartment, which he had no sooner entered, but he
heard a Proposition made by Mrs. Cave and Destiny, to quit Man's, and retire to
some other Post. This vexed him so heartily, that he was like to have dropped
down from his height on the Floor, and which he might have safely done, since
he had no great way to fall. But what concerned him most was, that the time of
their departure was to be the next Morning, when they were to bid adieu to the
good Town of Man's, and particularly to its Inhabitants, who had been their
constant Auditors for some time. They purposed to take their way to Alencon
after the old rate, having been assured that the Pestilence was not there, as
they had been before informed. I say they took their way after the old rate,
for these sort of People have a constant rule of Traveling, in like manner as
the Sun has in the Zodiac. The Journies they had made and were to make in this
Country, were first from Tours to Angers, from Angers to la Fleche, from la
Fleche to Man's, from Man's to Alencon, from Alencon to Argentin or Laval, no
matter which, according to the Road they have a mind to take, either to Paris
or Britany, both being alike to them, and indifferent to us in the composition
of this Romance. This resolution being made by all the Men and Women Players
unanimously, they proposed to play one of their best Plays, before they left
Man's, to the end they might leave their Audience there in good Humor. What
this Play was, never came to my Knowledge. That which obliged them to go away
so suddenly, was by reason that the Marquess d'O^se, on whose account they had
staid so long, was commanded instantly to Court, insomuch that being like to
have no Benefactor left after he was gone, and the Mansean Audience diminishing
every Day, they purposed to go where they might be better used. Ragotin would
needs be endeavoring to oppose this Resolution of theirs, for which purpose,
he gave a great many bad Reasons, whereof he had always store at command, but
which were little or nothing regarded. This vexed the little Man extremely,
insomuch that he begged of the Company not to go presently out of the Province
of Maine, but to take first the Tennis-Court, which was in the Suburbs of
Montfort, and afterward they might go to Laval in Maine likewise, whence they
might easily come into Britany, according to their promise made to Monsieur de
la Garrouffiere. This Opinion of Ragotin's Destiny would by no means agree to,
affirming that if they took his Advice, they should make no Work on it, the
pitiful Tennis-Court mentioned by him being a great way out of the Town, and
more than that, on the other side of the River, which would be the reason that
none of the better sort of People would come near them; when the great
Tennis-Court, in the Sheep-Market of Alencon, was just in the middle of the
Town, and moreover, surrounded with all the best Houses, and therefore it were
better to give something more for such a place, than any thing for the
despicable Tennis-Court at Montfort, whose good Market was the only reason that
Ragotin had to speak for it. This last Proposition was agreed to by the whole
Company, and therefore they immediately ordered a Wagon to be got ready for
their Baggage, and Horses for their Women. The care of procuring these was left
to Leander, who having a great many Intrigues in Man's, was the likeliest Man to
have the best Acquaintance there. Next Day, before they set out, they presented
a Comedy, Tragedy, Tragi-Comedy or Pastoral, I know not whether, but which had
the success that you may imagine. The Players were admired by every Body, and
Destiny performed wonders, especially in his manner of taking leave of the
Audience; for he expressed his Acknowledgments and Unwillingness to leave them
with that tenderness and force, that he charmed them to that degree, that as I
am informed, some among them wept. Ragotin was so concerned that his proposal
had not been followed, that he remained for some time like a Dolt, sitting in
his Chair, even after the rest of the Company was gone, and where I believe he
had sat till now, had not the Market of the Tennis-Court let him know that no
body was left, which he had nevertheless no small trouble to make him
comprehend. Being at last prevailed upon to be gone, he rise from his Chair and
went home, where he resolved to go find out his Company the next Morning, and
discover to them what shall be related in the following Chapter.

CHAP. II.
Where you will find Ragotin's Design.
THE Criers of Aqua Vitae had not yet waked those that were in a profound
sleep, when Ragotin being already dressed, was going to propose to the Strolling
Company his Inclinations to be admitted amongst them. He went then to the
Players Lodgings, whom he found neither up nor awake, and happened to have the
Discretion to leave them as he found them. Nevertheless he could not help
entering one Chamber, where he found Olive abed with Rancour. This last he
desired to get up, and walk with him to la Cousture, a fine Abbey in the Suburbs
of the same Name, and thence to go to Breakfast at the great golden Star, where
he had ordered a Collation to be prepared for them. Rancour, who was one of
those who love to eat at other Men's costs, was almost as soon got ready as the
proposition was made him, and which you may be easily inclined to believe, if
you consider that these sort of People are accustomed to dress and undress
behind the Scenes, to Act different Parts, which will admit of but little
delay. Ragotin and Rancour then marched on toward the Abbey of la Cousture; but
we must suppose that they called at some Church by the way to say a short
Prayer, for Ragotin's Thoughts that he had in his Head would not admit of a
long one. He nevertheless acquainted Rancour with nothing of the matter for
fear it might have kept him from his Breakfast, which he knew he had a greater
Inclination for than to give Ear to any thing he could tell. (...) They came to
the Inn, where being entered the little Man (...) to fly in a great Passion
because the petits patez he had ordered were not yet got ready. To which the
Hostess answered, without rising off from the seat where she sat; Truly
Monsieur Ragotin, I know not how you could expect that I should divine when you
would come; but since you are now here, the Patez shall not be long after you:
Pray walk into the Hall, where you will find a Cloth laid, and a Westphalia Ham
to stay your Stomach. This she spoke after a grave Hostess-like manner, and
which inclined Rancour to be on her side, who turning to Ragotin, cried, Sir,
pray let us comply with my Hostesses Proposal, and take a Glass or two while
our Breakfast is getting ready. They sat down to Table, which in a very short
time after was covered, and they Breakfasted after the Mode of Man's, that is to
say, very heartily. They Drank the same, and put about several Healths, among
which the Reader may imagine Madam Stars was not forgot. Little Ragotin tossed up
above a dozen Glasses successfully, sometimes sitting and sometimes standing
with his Hat in his Hand. But at last he would needs drink his Mistresses
Health on his Knees and bare-headed, which made him to look just for all the
World as if he had been doing Penance at the Door of some Church. It was then
that he earnestly reminded Rancour of his Promise to assist him in the Conquest
of Madam Star's Heart. Whereupon Rancour half angry, or at least feigning to be
so, answered him a little roughly. I thought Monsieur Ragotin you had known
that I was a Man that never embarked without Ammunition, I mean engaged in any
thing that I were not able to bring about. Be satisfied I will omit no
Opportunity to serve you. I tell you so again, and have ways in my Head whereby
to compass it. But I see one great Obstacle in our way, and that is our sudden
departure from hence; the only method therefore that I can advise you in, to
bring about your Ends, is to be resolved to be admitted amongst us. You have
all the Qualifications for it that can be desired. You have a good Mien, a
strong Voice, a good Tone, and a better Memory: and in a Word, you seem to have
nothing about you that looks Country. You appear to have lived all your Life
time at Court, having so much the Air of it, that you might be known for a
Courtier above a Mile off. You need not, proceeded he, to Act above a dozen
times before you will be able to out-start all our young Pretenders, who must
resign up the chief Parts to you, and then leave the rest to me. As for the
present, quoth he, you will have but a tough bit of her; you must manage her with
Policy, wherewith I know you to have sufficient, but however a little
Instruction may not be amiss. I would advise you therefore not to let her know
your design at your first entrance into our Company, for that would certainly
be the way to lose her, but rather to keep her in suspense till you have a
convenient opportunity to make your Addresses, and after you have sufficiently
won upon her by your Conversation, which I dare promise you will soon do. The
little Man had been so attentive to Rancour's discourse, that he was almost
ravished into an Ecstasy, imagining that he had already, as we say, the Wolf by
the Ears, when coming to himself all of a sudden, as it were out of an
Apoplexy, he started from the place where he sat and went to the other side of
the Table to embrace Rancour, whom he thanked heartily for his Council, and
begged of him to continue his Friend in this Affair, protesting at the same
time that his only Design in inviting him to Breakfast was to have declared his
Mind to him concerning his being admitted of his Society, and which he resolved
forthwith to be. After this they reckoned with their Landlady, and Ragotin paid
all. When they were out of Doors they took their course directly toward the
Scrollers Lodgings, which was not far off from where they had been. They found
the Women up and dressed; but Rancour had no sooner opened Rogotin's design to
them than he was interrupted by a Messenger from Leander's Father, who sent his
Son Word by him that he was Sick to Death, and desired to see him before he
paid that Debt to Nature, which all Men must. This obliged all the Company to
lay their Heads together and consult how they should bear against an Accident
so unexpected. Leander took Angelica aside and told her that his time was now
come to live Happy if she would but contribute toward it, otherwise he must be
unfortunate though Rich, and Poor though he had a good Income. She promised him all
the Favors that lay in her Power, and particularly those you will meet with in
the next Chapter.

CHAP. III.
Leander's Project and Harangue, together with Ragotin's Admission among the
Strollers.
THE Jesuits of la Fleche, not having been able to make Leander continue his
Studys, and perceiving his Inclinations ran high to be a Player, presently
concluded that he must be in Love with some Actress or other, and which they
were altogether confirmed in, when after the departure of the Company they
found he had followed them to Anvers. They therefore thought themselves obliged
to acquaint his Father therewith by a Messenger on purpose, which they soon
after did, and who arrived just as a Letter was delivered the old Gentleman
from Leander, whereby he gave his Father to understand that he designed for the
Wars, and therefore desired a sum of Money to accoutre himself. This Stratagem
had been laid between Destiny and him, when he first discovered his Quality to
him at the Inn where he was Wounded. His Father soon discovering the Cheat,
flew into an excessive Passion, which together with his great Age, threw him
into a Distemper that quickly concluded his Life. Perceiving his end to
approach he called one of his Tenants to him, and commanded him immediately to
go find out his Son, which he told him he was most likely to do among the
Strollers. This the Farmer knew as well as he, having been the Man that had
furnished Leander with Money from the time that he had left the College, so
that understanding that there was a Company of Strollers at Man's, he made all
the haste he could thither, and found his young Landlord as you have heard in
the foregoing Chapter. Ragotin was desired by the Company to leave them for
some time to confer with the Tenant newly arrived, which you may imagine he was
very unwilling to do, yet at last he retired into an adjoining Chamber, where
he waited with great impatience till their Business was over. They had no
sooner got him out of the Room but Leander brought in his Father's Tenant, who
immediately related the bad Condition the old Gentleman was in, as likewise his
earnest desire to see his Son before he died. Thereupon Leander immediately
craved leave to comply with his Father's dying Request, which was judged
reasonable to be granted by the whole Company. It was then that Destiny
revealed the Secret of Leanders Quality, which he had all along kept private,
and which he did not come to the knowledge of till after the ravishing of Madam
Angelica, as you may have read in the Second Part of this true History. He
thought it now high time to let it be known, as well to disabuse Mrs. Cave, who
could not get it out of her Head but that Leander was either the Principal or
Accessory in the carrying off her Daughter, as to oblige him who had done him
the Honor to be his Serving-Man, and would have continued so had he not found
himself obliged to tell who he was, while he was in quest of Madam Angelica. He
was moreover so far from consenting to the carrying away of Angelica, that
having met with her Ravishers he had hazarded his Life in her Assistance, but
that not having been able to resist so many People, he had been dangerously
Wounded, and left for dead upon the place. All the Company then immediately
asked his Pardon for not having treated him according to his Quality, which
they thought themselves the more excusable for by not having any knowledge of
the Matter. Madam Star added farther, that she had always suspected something
from the great store of Wit and Merit she had observed in him, and which she
was afterward confirmed in, especially when she saw her Mother Mrs. Caves
Letters from him; nevertheless she did not know what to think when she saw him
so employed in her Brothers Service. Then began Mrs. Cave to speak, Addressing
her self to Leander after the following manner. Truly, Sir, after I had in some
measure discovered your Quality, by the Letters you writ to my Daughter, I had
no small reason to distrust your Sincerity, being not enclinable to believe
that a Person who was to have so good an Estate after his Fathers death, would
ever condeshend to marry a poor Stroller. But, continued she, I thank God the
time is at length come that you are to be made happy in plentiful Possessions,
and I am to be delivered from a future possibility of being any more imposed
upon by your false Pretentions. Leander being extremely surpised at these
Words, quickly replied, All that you say, Madam, I am likely to possess, would
not render me a jot happy, if I were not assured at the same time of the
Possession of your Daughter Angelica. Without her I renounce all the Fortune
which Nature and my Father's Death shall cast upon me, and I declare to you,
before all this good Company, that I go with so much willingness to enter upon
my Succession, upon no greater account than to return speedily to perform my
Promise to Marry your Daughter, which I here once more confirm, and will
speedily accomplish, providing both she and you will do me the Honor to afford
your Consents. And if so added he, I would not have you to think, that I design
to carry her to my own Home; that is not at all in my Intentions, for I have
found so much Pleasure in a Strolling Life, that I could never be persuaded to
quit so many worthy Companions that have so largely contributed toward it.
After this obliging Declaration, both the Actors and Actresses speaking
altogether, returned him their most humble Acknowledgments, averring at the
same time, that Mrs. Cave and her Daughter would not be a little to blame if
they refused so advantageous a proffer. Angelica for her part, said no more
than became one that was at her Mother's disposal, only she bid Leander at
parting to Hope, if he continued in the same mind at his return. After all the
mutual Endearments and Tears that commonly pass between parting Friends, it was
agreed that Leander should go the next Morning upon one of the Horses that had
been hired; but which he refused, choosing rather that of his Tenant, which he
thought would carry him better, and would leave the Hackny for his Companion.
But we forget all this while, quoth Destiny, that Monsieur Ragotin is waiting
without to speak with us. Is there none among us, added he, that knows what he
would have? Hereupon Rancour, who had been silent for some time, opened his
Mouth, to let them know that he knew, and that that very Morning he had treated
him with a Breakfast to procure himself an opportunity to acquaint him that he
had a mind to be admitted of the Company, without pretending to any share in
the Profits, having sufficient of his own, and which he would rather choose to
spend in seeing the World than to live altogether at Man's, as he had been
advised to do. Hereat Roquebrune presently advanced to give his Opinion that he
ought not to be admitted, and that for these Reasons, Because, said he, two
Poets under one Roof never agree, it being with them as with Women, where there
are more than one there are too many. Besides, quoth he, Ragotin' s shape would
never suffer him to be an Ornament to the Stage, but would rather disgrace it:
For, added he, What Parts could he propose to Act? As for the principal ones
Monsieur Destiny would not permit him to undertake them, and for the second
best they belong to Olive. And then for a Nurse or a Confidente, continued he,
he must not pretend to either of them, his Person being altogether as deformed
in a disguize as out of one. Therefore, concluded he, it is my Opinion in few
Words, that be ought by no means to be received. And it is mine, replied
Rancour, that he ought by all means to be received, for where there is occasion
to represent a Dwarf none can be so propper, and then for a Monster, as that in
Andromeda, it was better to have a natural one at Hand, than (...) be at the
trouble to contrive one that would be only Artificial. He added farther, that
as for speaking a Part he could assure them he would be like another Orpheus,
that drew every thing after him. For, proceeded he, whilst Olive and I were
seeking after Madam Angelica, we overtook him riding upon an Ass no bigger than
himself, and repeating the Adventures of Pyramus and Thysbe, with so good an
Emphasis, that several Rusticks that were then going the same way, came up with
him, and gave so constant attention with their Hats off, that they would not
leave him till they came to the Inn where we all baited. If then, continued he,
he could gain so far upon these Rusticks what will he be able to do when he
comes to speak before Men of Sense? This Relation made every body to laugh, and
the Company was thereupon resolved to hear Ragotin speak for himself. He was
sent for in, and after about a dozen low Congees he began his Harangue in the
following manner. Illustrious Personages, and August Senate of Parnassus, quoth
he, fancying himself, no doubt, speaking at the Bar of the Presidents Court in
Man's, where he had been admitted Advocate but a little before, It is a common
saying, That evil Company corrupts good Manners, and on the contrary, good must
needs improve them. This Exordium, so well begun, made the Company believe that
he was about to preach a Sermon, therefore they turned their Heads one way, and
the other, and could hardly forbear Laughing. Some Critics perhaps may think
much of the Word Sermon; but why might not Ragotin be thought capable of
performing such a Task, when he had several times sung Ballads to the Organs?
But however, he proceeded. I find my self so destitute of Virtues, that I
desire to be admitted of your Illustrious Society for improvement: You are the
Muses Interpreters, the living Echoes of their dear Darlings, and your Merits
are so well known throughout all France, that you are admired even beyond the
Poles. As for you Ladies, quoth he to the Women, you charm all^ those that do
but look upon you; and it is impossible to be within the hearing of your
harmonious Voices, but one must needs be ravished into Ecstasy. In fine, said
he, you are ^eer Angels of Flesh and Blood; and all the Poets have thought
themselves happy in Celebrating your Praises. And for you Gentlemen, continued
he, no Alexander nor Caesar ever equaled the Valor of Monsieur Destiny, nor of
the other Heroes his Companions, and therefore you must not wonder if I am
ambitious of increasing your number by one, which will be easy for you to
suffer me to do, if you can but consent to it, I promise you moreover proceeded
he, that I will be no manner of charge to ye, neither will I pretend to any
share in the profits of our Performances, but all along continue your most
Humble and most Obedient Servant. Ragotin having thus ended his Harangue, he
was desired to withdraw for a Minute, that the subject of what he had said
might be considered. He withdrew, and the Company was just going to proceed
according to Form, when the Poet Roquebrune threw himself in again to make a
second opposition to Ragotin's Preferment, but he was presently thrust out by
Rancour, who had pushed him more violently but that he had regard to his new
Suit which was bought with the Money he had lent him. At length it was agreed
that Ragotin should be admitted amongst them for the diversion of the Company.
He was thereupon called in, the accustomed Ceremonies passed, was enrolled in
the Register, took an Oath of Fidelity, had the Word given by which the
Strollers knew one another; and after all, supped with the whole Caravan.

CHAP. IV.
Of Leander's Departure; The Strollers going for Alenson, and Ragotin's
Misfortune.
AFter Supper every Body would be Congratulating Ragotin for the Honor he had
received, and which made him to swell so enormously, that he burst the
Waste-band of his Breeches in two Places. In the mean time Leander took
occasion to entertain his dear Angelica with Love Storys, and to whom he
reiterated his design to Marry her, which he pronounced with so much softness
and tenderness that she could answer him only with Tears, whereof she shed
abundance. I know not whether these proceeded from her Joy at the fair Promises
he made her, or through her concern for his so sudden departure; however it
was, it is certain they exchanged several mutual Endearments, which were not in
the least interrupted by Mrs. Cave. But at length Night drawing on a pace,
(...) was convenient they should both retreat. Leander took leave of the
Company and went to Bed. Next Morning he got up ^^^^times, and set out with his
Fathers Tenant, with that Ex^^dition that he quickly arrived at his Journies
end, where he found the old Gentleman very ill, who nevertheless told him he
was glad to see him. He likewise expressed to him as far as he was able, the
great Grief his absence had caused him, as also that he was now come seasonably
to receive his last Blessing together with his Estate, although he had been
advised to disinherit him for the ill courses he had taken. The rest of
Leander's Affairs we shall learn at his return. The Actors and Actresses being
got ready dressed, they took care to pack up their Baggage as fast as they could,
that they might be ready to depart in good time. At length all was prepared and
nothing was wanting, except a Horse for one of the Women, which they had before
provided, but were disappointed in. They therefore had desired Olive to take
care to get another just as Ragotin entered the Room, who hearing their
proposition told them there was no occasion, by reason he had one that would
carry double, and if they pleased either Madam Star or Angelica should ride
behind him. This he urged the rather, because he told them it was impossible
that they should reach Alencon in one Day, being above 10 Leagues off; but
being obliged to make two of it, his Horse would serve well enough for the
purpose he proposed. Whilst he was thus recommending his Contrivance, Madam
Star interrupted him, affirming she could not ride double; this vexed the
little Man extremely, but which he was a little after the better satisfied
with, when Angelica told him she would. They Breakfasted all together that
Morning, and the Operator and his Wife were invited; but whilst the Collation
was getting ready, Ragotin took an occasion to talk farther with Signior
Ferdinando, to whom he made the same Speech that he had done before to the
Advocate, whom he had taken for him, to which the Magician answered, that he
had tried all that lay within the compass of his Art to serve him but without
effect, which made him inclinable to believe that Madam Star knew more of
Magic than he; that her Cha^^^ were more powerful; and in a Word, that she
must needs (...) a dangerous Person, not fit to be conversed with. Ragotin
would have replied to these Reflections on his Mistress, (...) that he was
called upon to wash his Hands, and sit down (...) Table, which they all did at
the same time. Inezilla prot^^^ed to all the Company, and chiefly the Women,
that both (...) and her Husband were extremely concerned at their so spe^^^^
leaving them, and would willingly have waited on them (...) Alencon, to have
had their Conversation longer, had they (...) been obliged to mount their Stage
and act their Farces, whi^^ her Husband chose rather to do at Man's when they
were (...) than to incommode them by doing it in the same Town (...) whither
they were going, it being certain that the People would sooner run after them
where they paid nothing, than go to see a Play where they must pay. The Company
thanked both the Husband and Wife for their Civilities and returned them a
thousand Acknowledgments for their good Will. The Women wept, and a great many
Compliments passed between both Parties, only the Poet, who upon other
occasions would have talked as much as four, upon this spoke not one Word, the
parting with Inezilla being so cruel a Thunder-stroke to him, that though he
fancied himself all over covered with Laurel, the common Preservative against
Thunder, yet could he not secure his Carcass. The Wagon being loaded, and
ready to set out, Mrs. Cave took her place as she had done formerly, in the
beginning of this Romance, Madam Star mounted upon a Horse which Destiny led,
and Angelica got up behind Ragotin, who took care to avoid the same accident in
mounting as had before befallen him. All the rest went on Foot in the same
order as they came to Man's. When they were got to a little Wood about a League
from the Town, a Stag that was then Hunting by the Marquess of Lavardin's
Servants, happened to cross the Road, which Ragotin's Horse that went before
perceiving, was extremely affrighted at, which obliging Ragotin to quit his
Stirrups, he at the same time clapped his Hand on the Carabine he had by his
side, and thinking to kill the Stag, he happened to touch the Trigger before he
had well mounted the Piece, whereby, being greatly charged, the Carabine
recoiled, and threw him off, and striking at the same instant against
Angelica's side forced her off likewise, but who received little or no harm. As
for Ragotin, it was his Misfortune to fall against the slump of a Tree, which
was about a Foot out of the Ground, whereby he got a bump on his left Temple,
which by a Bandage with a piece of Silver instead of Lead was soon cured. This
Accident caused a great deal of Laughter in the Company, after they saw there
was no more harm done, but which they would otherwise have forborne. The little
Man nevertheless was extremely enraged at their making a jest of his
Misfortune. Being remounted, together with Angelica, he would needs charge his
Carabine again, but which she would by no means suffer him to do. They then
proceeded on their Journey, and at last came to a little Inn where they were to
bait. The Actors for their parts must take an Afternoons Luncheon, and the
Actresses proposed to lie on the Bed, as well to repose themselves (...) to
observe how lustily their Companions Eat and Drank. The briskest Drinkers were
Rancour and Ragotin, who were so ^^^^tly engaged to Angelica's Health, which
they thought no body had observed, that she was forced to call out to the
latter to bid him drink less and take more care of his charge for the future.
This caused a Cessation of Arms, or rather of Glasses between the two
Combatants. After some time the Reckoning was paid, and the Horses brought out,
and they all set forwards on their Journey. The Weather was fine, and the Road
good, which permitted them to arrive betimes at a Town called Vivain. They
there went to the Sign of the Cock, being the best Inn in the Town. The
Hostess, who was none of the best Natured Women in the Province of Maine, made
a great deal of difficulty to receive them, telling them that she had no Bed
room. Her Company it seems was a general Receiver, an Excise man, and four or
five Pedlers. Rancour thinking to give a cast of his Office, told his Landlady
that they desired only a Chamber for the Women, and as for the Men they would
pig in any where. This calm dealing somewhat abated the Pride of our
Lady-Hostess. She admitted them therefore, and they did not unload their
Wagon, but locked it up in a Stable which they found at the bottom of the
Yard. The Women had a Chamber assigned them, where the Company all Supped
together. After Supper the Men retired, leaving the Women to go to Bed in two
Beds, viz. Madam Star in one, and Mrs. Cave and her Daughter Angelica in the
other. You may imagine they did not forget to take the Key in the inside of the
Door, as did not likewise the two Receivers, who had ordered their Portmantues
top full of Money to be brought into their Chambers. But the unwary Pedlers
were not so cautious, for they took not that care, but admitted Rancour and
Olive to lie in the same Room where they had their Packs. There were three Bed
in the Room, whereof the Pedlers had two, and Rancour and Olive the other one.
Rancour slept not a wink all Night, watching for an opportunity to put his
design in execution when the Pedlers were a sleep. At last he got up, thinking
they were fast, and going softly toward the Packs, he was interrupted by one
of the Pedlers, who being overtaken with (...) Looseness, was forced to rise to
ease his Belly. This made Rancour to return in some haste to his Bed. In the
mean time the Peddler who had been used to lodge in this Inn, and knew all the
ways out and in, went to a Door that opened into a little Gallery, at the end
whereof was the House of Office. Th^^ he did not to incommode the venerable
Comedians with a (...) smell. When he had done he went to return from whence
(...) came; but instead of going the right way, he descended (...) the other
side, and went by a private Door into the Receivers Chamber, where approaching
the first Bed he met, and believing it his own, he heard an unknown Voice
demand of him Who was there? This caused him to turn, without saying a Word, to
the other Bed, where he heard the same thing, but spoke with a more angry
Accent. This last Person called out at the same time for a Candle, affirming
there was some body in his Room. Hereupon the Host made the Servant to rise
immediately, and see what was the matter; but before she could possibly strike
a light, the Peddler had got out of the Room, and was coming into his own
Chamber, but before he came, Rancour that had heard all the difference between
him and his Neighbors, for there was was only a thin Partition between them,
resolved to lose no time, and therefore having dexterously untied the Cords of
one of the Packs, he took out thence two pieces of Linen, which having done,
he fastened the Cords again as artificially as if they had never been opened;
for he knew perfectly well that Secret, known only to those of his Fraternity,
as well as he did their Marks and Ciphers. He was just going to attack another
of the Packs when the Peddler entered the Chamber, who hearing him walk about
demanded Who was there? Rancour who never wanted an Excuse at a pinch, after
having thrust the two pieces of Linen into his own Bed, told him that the Maid
had forgot to set him a Chamber Pot, and that therefore he was looking for the
Window to piss out at; whereupon the Peddler, who was not yet got into Bed,
replied, Stay, Sir, if you please, I Will go open it for you, for I know better
where it is than you do? This having not only said but done, he immediately
leaped into Bed, and left Rancour to piss out at the Window, which he did as
copiously as when he bedewed the Merchant of lower Maine, while he lay with him
in an Inn at Man's, as you may find that he did in the Tenth Chapter of the
First part of this Romance. He afterward went directly to his Bed, without
shutting the Window. The Peddler cried out to him that he ought not to have left
it open, and he cried out to the Peddler that he might shut it if he pleased,
for as for his part he should not trouble his Head about it any more, having
scarce been able to find the way to his Bed when it was shut. The Peddler
fearing Rancour had a mind to make a Squabble of it, rise without any more ado
and shut the Window, and afterward grop'd his way out to Bed again. All this
while the Host and Hostess were bawling like Mad at their Maid to light the
Candle, which she was endeavoring to, but as the Proverb has it, The more
haste the less speed, this sorry Wench had been above an Hour blowing the
Small-coal before she could raise a spark of Fire. This caused her Master
Mistress to Curse her at no common rate, and the Receivers began to be more and
more enraged to find they could not get a Candle, when they had called for it
so often. At length it was lighted, and the Host, and Hostess, and Servant went
together into the Receivers Room, where finding no body, they told them they
had done ill to alarm all the Family for no reason. But they on the contrary
maintained that they had both seen and heard a Man in their Chamber, and more
than that, had talked with him. The Host hearing this, went into the Strollers
Chamber, and demanded of them and the Pedlers, whether any of them had been in
their Neighbors Room? They all answered, No, none of us had been out of Bed
except that Monsieur yonder, meaning Rancour, who was forced to rise to piss
out at the Window, your Maid not having set him a Chamber Pot. Hereat the Host
presently fell on the Servant for her neglect, and afterward went to the
Receivers again, telling them they must needs have Dreamt that some body was in
their Room, since not a Soul had been stirring that way as he could hear of.
After this he left them, wishing them to go to sleep again, it not being yet
Day. As Soon as it was well light Rancour got up, and demanding the Key of the
Stable, went to hide the purchase he had got in the Wagon.

CHAP. V.
What happened to the Strollers between Vivain and Alencon, together with
another of Ragotin's Misfortunes.
ALL the Heroes and Heroines of this Strolling Company got out betimes, and
took the high Road to Alencon, and in a little while arrived safe at Bourg le
Roy, the King's Town, called by the Vulgar Boulerey. Here they Dined, and staid
for sometime, during which, they debated whether they should go by Arsonnay, a
Village about a League from Alencon, or whether they should take to the other
side to avoid Ba^^^^ a Road where in the hottest Summer there is Dirt, and
wherein the Horses often plunge up to their Bellies. Being not able to conclude
the matter amongst themselves, they consulted the Waggoner, who told them his
Horses would carry them through the worst of Quagmires, they being the very
best for Draft of any in Man's. Also that they had not above half a Mile of bad
way, whereas if they went by the Common of St. Pater, they would find the Roads
dirtier, and longer continue so. He remembered them likewise, that the Horses
and Wagon only would go in the Dirt, and that the Foot People might step over
into the Fields and walk there secure. At length they pitched upon the former
Road, and Madam Star desired the Waggoner to let her know when they came to the
Dirt, because she chose rather to go on Foot in good way, than to ride on
Horseback through a Bog. Of the same mind were Angelica and Mrs. Cave, who had
some apprehensions that the Wagon might overturn, When they were just about
entering into this bad way, Angelica slipped off from Ragotin's Horse's Crupper,
Destiny set down Madam Star, and some others of the Company handed Mrs. Cave
out of the Wagon. Hereupon Roquebrune whipped up upon Stars Horse, and followed
Ragotin, who went just after the Wagon. When they were got into the very worst
place of all the Road, and where there was only room for the Wagon to pass
safe, they met about twenty Carriers Horses, driven by five or six Country
Fellows, who bawled out like Mad to the Waggoner to stop, but which he little
regarded, requiring the same thing of them in a much higher Tone, and alleging
that he could turn on neither side without inevitable plunging into the Bog.
the Carriers thinking to get the better by their expedition trotted briskly up
to him, and bawled out so loud that the Waggoners Horses took fright and broke
their Traces, throwing themselves at the same time into the Bog, whilst the
Waggoner endeavoring to keep his Wagon from following them, weighed one of
the Wheels too much on the other side, which finding no firm Ground to support
it overthrevv the whole Machine in the Mud. Hereat Ragotin being extremly
incensed against the Carriers, for having been the occasion of this Accident,
thundered out Anathemas against them like one possessed, and thinking to come
at them on the right side, where he savv the way open, he rid furiously
against them with his Carabine Cocked; but he had no sooner entered the Mud
than he stuck so fast, that he was fa^ not only to disengage his Legs from out
of his Stirrups, but likewise to quit his Saddle, and leap off into the Bog,
where he presently sunk so deep that he was up to his Armpits, and had been
quickly to his Chin if he had not extended his Arms. This unexpected Accident
caused all the Passengers that traveled in the Fields to stop and lend their
assistance. Poet Roquebrune likewise, who had hitherto out braved all the
Assaults of Fortune, was now glad to retire to a dry place. The Carriers
perceiving so many Men for their Enemies, all armed with Fusces, thought it but
prudence to retire as fast as they could, and take to another Road. In the mean
time it was judged highly necessary to remedy the disorder that had happened as
soon as possible, and therefore they proposed to begin with Monsieur Ragotin
and his Horse, who were both in no small danger of being Suffocated. Olive and
Rancour were the two first that ventured to assist them; but the nearer they
approached them the deeper they sunk in the Mud, insomuch that having tried
several places, and found them all the same, Rancour, who had always an
Expedient at Hand in Cases of Necessity, proposed without laughing to draw
Ragotin out of the danger, wherein he was, by one of the Cart Ropes, one end to
be fastened to his Neck and the other to the Horses, who were then got out into
the dry Road. This Proposition made all the Company to laugh except Ragotin,
who was not a little afraid of its being executed upon him, nevertheless, at
last the Waggoner, who had run a great hazard in getting out the Horses, did
the same for him, insomuch that seizing him fast by the Collar, he at several
pulls drew him out of his hole, and dragged him into the Fields where his
Company were waiting for him, who could not forbear laughing to see him in that
pickle. This done, the Waggoner returned to bring out the Horse, who beginning
to exert himself, by the help of a little whipping flounc'd about the Mud, and
at length got quite out. Last of all Olive, Rancour, and the Waggoner, being
all-over bemir'd with Dirt, joined to get out the Wagon, which they soon
performed by their united Endeavors, and loaded it again with the Baggage. The
Horses were put in again into their Traces, and Ragotin remounted his Courser,
though that with some difficulty, his Girts being all broken. Angelica would by
no means get up behind him again, for fear of spoiling her Clothes. Mrs. Cave
and Madam Star chose to walk on Foot likewise, all whom Destiny accompanied to
the Sign of the Green Oaks, which was the only Inn to be met with between Man's
and the Suburbs of Montfort. Here they staid, not caring to enter the Town in
the Condition they were in. After those that had took the most pains had drank
to refresh themselves, they spent the rest of the Day in drying their Clothes,
having taken fresh to put on out of their Trunks, which variety had been
presented them by the Gentry of Man's. The Actresses supped but lightly, having
lost their Stomachs by the great fatigue they had undergone in Walking, and
which inclined them to go soon to Bed. The Actors not only Eat but Drank
heartily before they would go to Bed. They were in about their first sleep,
being near Eleven a Clock at Night, when a company of Men came and knocked at
the Gate of the Inn, asking for Beds. The Host answered them his Lodgings were
full, and besides, that it was an unseasonable time o'Night for them to require
any. Notwithstanding this Answer they knocked the more, and threatened to break
down the Gate unless it were speedily opened to them. Destiny, who had always
carried Saldaigne in his Mind, thought that this must needs be he, who was come
to carry Star away by force; but having looked out of the Window, he perceived
by the help of the Moon, that then shone very bright, a Man among them with his
Hands tied behind him, which having whispered to his Companions who were all
ready prepared to receive Saldaigne; Ragotin cried out it was Monsieur de la
Rappiniere, who had got some Highway Man into his Custody, for that he was in
quest of one. They afterward were confirmed in this Opinion, when they heard
them from without command the Host in the King's Name to open the Gates. But
why the Devil, quoth Rancour, could they not have carried their Prisoner to
Man's, or to the Viscounty of Beaumont, or at worst, Why could they not go to
Fresnay? At all which places there are Prisons, when there is none here. There
must, proceeded he, be some Mystery in this. The Host thought himself however
obliged to open to la Rappiniere, who entered with Ten Archers and a Prisoner
bound after the manner I have told you. This Prisoner was in a merry Humor,
and could not forbear laughing, especially as often as he looked upon la
Rappiniere, which he often did steadfastly, and which was the reason that he
was not carried to Man's. Now you must know la Rappiniere, having had notice
that there were several Robberies committed, and Houses broken open and
pillaged, set himself diligently about looking after the Rogues. As it
happened, whilst he and his Archers were hunting about for them near the Forest
of Persaine, they saw a Man come out of the Wood, who perceiving a company of
Horsemen, returned with haste in again, which caused la Rappiniere to believe
that he must needs be one of those he looked after. Having caught him they were
extremely surpised that he answered only confusedly, and yet at the same time
laughed in la Rappiniere's Face, who the more he looked upon him the more he
fancied he had seen him somewhere, but could not remember where. The reason of
his not being able to recollect himself was, that at the time of their
Acquaintance short Hair and long Beards were worn, but this Man had long Hair
and no Beard, and moreover wore different Clothes from what he did when they
were acquainted. All this entirely disguised him from la Rappiniere's
Knowledge. La Rappiniere when he went to Bed, which he did after he had well
supped, committed him to the Custody of two of the Archers, who tied him to an
old fashioned Bench in the Kitchen, and so went to sleep in their Chairs,
leaving him to do the like if he pleased on the Pavement. Next Morning Destiny
was up first in the House, who going into the Kitchen, saw the Archers asleep
in their Chairs, and a Man with his Hands tied behind him, fastened to a Bench,
and lying along awake upon the Stones, who making a sign to him, to come near
him, he was not a little surpised, when the Prisoner asked him If he did not
remember that he was once robbed on the Pont-neuf at Paris, and lost among
other things a small Picture in a Box? I was then, continued he, with the Sieur
la Rappiniere, who being at that time our Captain, forced me to attack you. You
know all that passed besides. I have learned, proceeded he, that you have been
informed of all by Doguin, on his Deathbed, and I have likewise understood
that la Rappiniere has restored you your Box, nevertheless, you have now a fair
opportunity to revenge your self on him. As for my part, added he, should they
carry me to Man's, as I do not know but they may, I should be surely hanged
there; but then, concluded he, it is also in yours and my Power to make him
dance the same Dance. It is but joining your Evidence with mine, and you may
guess how a Jury of Man's would deal by him. Destiny having heard this left the
Prisoner, and waited for la Rappiniere's rising. Being come down Stairs he met
him in an Entry, and taking him aside, acquainted him with all that the
Highway-Man had told him, adding withal, that he might well see he was not
revengeful, since he declined taking advantage of what he had heard, and
instead thereof, advised him to be gone, and leave the Criminal to shift for
himself. La Rappiniere would have staid till the Actresses were stirring, had
not Destiny frankly told him that Madam Star could not behold him without the
most just Indignation imaginable. He insinuated to him moreover, that if the
Vnder-Baily of Alencon should come any ways to hear of his Crime, he would
certainly send quickly to seize him. This he himself was likewise inclinable to
believe, and therefore having first unloos'd the Prisoner, and set him at
Liberty, he mounted on Horseback, together with his Archers, pretending to them
that he had been mistaken in the Man, and went his way without paying his
Reckoning, according to custom, and likewise without returning Destiny thanks;
but which last Omission was wholly to be attributed to the Disorder and
Confusion he was in. After he was gone, Destiny called up Roquebrune, Olive and
the Decorator, and they went together into the Town, to the great Tennis-Court,
where they found six Gentlemen playing a Party. They presently went to enquire
for the Master of the Court, and those that were in the Gallery knowing they
were Players, acquainted the six Gentlemen therewith, and that there was
amongst them one of a better Mien than ordinary. The Gentlemen after a little
while finished their party, and went up Stairs to be rubbed and dried, whilst
Destiny came into the Court, and discoursed the Master. At length the Gentlemen
came down again half dressed and saluted Destiny, asking him several Questions
concerning his Company, particularly how many they were? Whether there was any
good Actors among them? If they had good Clothes? And whether their Women were
handsome? All which Questions Destiny answered to their Satisfaction, in return
for which Civility, they ofter'd him all the Service they were capable of doing
him, and having desired the Master to help them on with the rest of their
Clothes, they told Destiny they would gladly drink with him, if he would but
have patience till they were quite dressed. Destiny accepted their proffer, being
glad to get as many Friends as he could to assist him, in case Saldaigne should
pursue him, which he was yet under an apprehension of. In the mean time the
Hire of the Tennis-Court was agreed on, and the Decorator was dispatched to the
Joiner, to give him orders to fit up a Playhouse according to his Model. The
Gentlemen being at length dressed, Destiny Addressed himself to them with so
graceful a Mien, and so much good Sense, that they soon conceived a more than
ordinary kindness for him. They demanded of him where his Company lay, and
having understood from him that it was at the Green Oaks in the Suburbs, they
proposed to him to go and drink a Glass, and eat a bit with him and his Friends
where he pleased. A place was named, and they met altogether except the Women,
where they Breakfasted heartily. You may imagine their discourse was chiefly
about Acting and Plays. They afterward went altogether to the Women's Lodgings,
whom they found just setting down to Dinner, which was the reason that the
Gentlemen staid but little with them; but nevertheless long enough to offer
them all the Service and Protection imaginable, which was much in their Power
to perform being the very top Gentry of the Town, After Dinner their Strolling
Baggage was carried to the Golden Cup; being the Lodging Destiny had taken for
them, and after a little while their Theater being ready, they began to Act, in
which Exercise we will leave them to show they were no Novices, and return to
see what became of Saldaigne after his fall.

CHAP. VI.
Saldaigne's Death.
YOU have seen in the Twelfth Chapter of the Second Part of this Romance how
Saldaigne kept his Bed in the Baron d'Arque's House in Verville's Appartment,
on account of a fall, as likewise, how his Servants had got so unmercifully
drunk in a Country Inn, not above two Leagues off from the said House, and
where Verville's Man had no small trouble to make them comprehend that the Lady
they had in charge was escaped, and that the Man his Master had sent along with
them followed her on another Horse. After they had a little rubbed their Eyes,
and yawn'd three or four times a piece, as also stretched out their Arms as
often to adjust their Chinebones, they put themselves into a posture of
pursuit. Verville's Man nevertheless led them a quite contrary way from what
the Lovers had taken, and that by his Masters Orders, so that having wandered
about for two or three Days in a Fruitless search, they at last returned to
their Master Saldaigne, who was not yet either out of his Bed or Cured of his
fall, and related to him that the Lady had got from them, but that the Person
whom Monsieur Verville procured them was gone after her. Saldaigne was like to
run Mad at the first hearing of this News, and soon gave his Servants to
understand, that it was well for them that he was confined to his Bed, for had
he been able to stand, or to lift but one Leg from out of the Sheets, he would
have made them sensible by innumerable Bastinado's, that their intolerable
Negligence was not to be excused by Words. He flew into that violent Passion,
and thundered out so many Curses against them, that he quite baffled the
Surgeon's Art, and brought the Fever again upon him, so that when he came at
Night to dress him, he apprehended a Gangreen in his Thigh, from the great
Inflammation his Disorder had occasioned there. He also observed a kind of
livid Color on the part, which being a farther bad Symptom, caused him to go
immediately and find out Verville, to whom he related the whole unfortunate
Accident. Verville seemed much astonished at the relation, and wondered how the
occasion of such an Accident could happen, which he nevertheless knew well
enough, having been informed of all before by his Servant. He notwithstanding
pretended a great deal of Ignorance, and went immediately to visit Saldaigne,
till having inquired the cause of his Alteration, and hearing it from his own
Mouth, he at length redoubled his Grief by confessing to him that he had been
the contriver of what had befallen him, and that rather to have done him a
Service than Diskindness, which had been never in his Thoughts. For said he to
him, You may remember that no body would entertain this Woman when you run away
with her, and I declare to you, that though I did suffer your Wife, my Sister, to
lodge her within my Fathers House, yet it was only with design to procure an
opportunity to restore her to her Brother and Friends. Tell me I beseech you,
proceeded he, what do you think would have become of you, if Information had
been given in against you, and you had been taken up for a Rape? Could you have
procured your Pardon think you, and don't you yet know that the King never
passes by Crimes of that nature? You fancied perhaps, added he, that the
meanness of her known Birth, and the baseness of her Profession would in great
measure have got you excused; but do not slatter your self in that, for I would
have you to know, that she is the Daughter both of a Gentleman and Gentlewoman,
and therefore your hopes would fail you there. Besides, continued he, though all
the efforts of Justice should not be able to hurt you, yet remember that she
has a Brother who would surely be revenged on you for debauching his Sister. He
is a Man of Courage you know, and you have experienced it in diverse
Rencounters, therefore one would think that single Consideration should incline
you rather to value than persecute him as you have long done. It Is high time
now to cease that vain Pursuit, or you may quickly come to repent of not having
done it. This Discourse that one would have thought might have both inclined
Saldaigne to have reflected and repented, served rather to increase his
Resentments, and make him entertain strange resolutions, which though he
dissembled for the present to Verville, yet he endeavored afterward to put in
practice. He made what have he could to get cured, and as soon as he found
himself in a Condition to mount a Horse, he took leave of Verville, and at the
same time posted toward Man's, thinking to have found the Company of Strollers
there, but having been informed that they were gone thence to Alencon, he
forthwith resolved to follow them thither. Passing by Vivain he baited his Men,
and three Cutthroats that he carried along with him at the Cock, where the
Strollers had lodged. He was no sooner come into the Yard but he heard a great
noise. Upon enquiring into the Matter it appeared to be the Pedlers, who having
been going to a Fair at Beaumont had on the Road discovered the Theft committed
on them by Rancour, and were returned to complain to their Hostess, requiring
satisfaction, but who told them she thought her self not obliged to make it
them, by reason that they did not entrust her with their Packs, but had had
them carried into their Chamber. That Is true, quoth the Pedlers, but why the
Devil did you put us to lodge in the same Room with those Iugglers, those
Mountebanks, for no doubt it was some of them that robbed us? Well, replied the
Hostess, but did ye find any of your Packs slit or torn, or the Cords unloos'd?
Neither of all three, answered the Pedlers, and that is that which most
surprises us, for we found the Cords tied after the same manner as we had left
them in. How then would you have me to repair your loss, quoth the Hostess, get
you about your business for a Company of Impudent Rogues? The Pedlers were just
a going to reply when Saldaigne Swore that if they did not cease their bawling
he would beat them most unmercifully. The poor Pedlers thereupon seeing so many
lusty Fellows all disguised, thought it but prudence to hold their Peace,
however waited for an opportunity when they were gone to renew their dispute
with the Hostess. After Saldaigne and his Men and Horses had refreshed
themselves a little, they set forward for Alencon, where they arrived very
late. Saldaigne for his part could not sleep a wink all Night, and that for
thinking on the manner of revenging himself on Destiny for taking his Booty
from him, and as his Inclinations had been always brutal, so were the
Resolutions he came to. Next Day he resolved to go to the P^ay, which was
Pompey the Great of Corncille, and sent one of his Companions before to take
places for four. As for himself he came muffled up his Cloak to avoid
discovery, but the rest were in Querpo, being not known. All the time the Play
was acting he was as much tormented as the Audience was pleased, for all
admired at the admirable action of Madam Star, who represented Cleopatra. When
the Play was ended, Saldaigne and his Friends staid behind all the Company,
being resolved to attack Destiny before they went away. But how luckily were
they prevented, for this Company of Strollers had gained so far both upon the
Nobless and all the best Citizens of Alencon of either Sex, that they never
came to the Theater, or returned thence, without a great number to attend them.
The same Night a young Widow-Lady, by name Ville Fleur, invited the Actresses
to Supper in Saldaigne's hearing, which they out of Modesty declined accepting
of, but being pressed thereto with a great deal of obliging Compulsion, they at
length consented, and promised to come. After which they retired likewise, but
accompanied as the Men, with a great number of Persons of the best Note. Among
the rest were those Gentlemen that Destiny found at the Tennis-Court when he
first came to hire it. This second defeat almost made Saldaigne despair, till
at length he resolved on one of the most villainous Actions that could be
thought on by Man, and that was to carry off Star when she came out of Madam
Ville Fleur's House, and to Stab all those that opposed him, under covert of
the Night. The three Actresses went to wait on the Lady according to their
Promise, and great numbers of Gallants came likewise to wait on them. Now
Saldaigne imagined it as easy to carry off Star at this Juncture, as he had
found it to be before, when she was conducted on Horseback by Destiny's Man. He
took therefore one of the strongest Horses he had, and putting him into the
Hands of one of his Men he placed him at one of the Doors of Madam Ville
Fleur's House, which opened into a narrow Street near the Palace, believing
that upon some slight pretense or other he might get her out of the House, and
then he would mount her on Horseback, and carry her whither he pleased. Whilst
he was thus feeding his Fancy with vain Chimera's, and imagined his Booty
already in his possession, and Ecclesiastic who loved good Company, and had
scraped some small Acquaintance with our Strollers, happened to be going that
Night to Officiate his Vespers at Madam Ville Fleur's, and who perceiving a
Lackey, whose Livery he did not know, to stand at her Door, began to enquire of
him, Who he was, what he did there, and whether his Master was in the House? To
all these Questions the Fellow answered so confusedly that the Priest had just
reason to believe him a Rogue. He went therefore up into the Room, where all
the Company was, and gave them account of what he had observed, telling them
moreover, that he feared that there was an Ambuscade laid for some body or
other, for that he had heard several People walking about in the darker part of
the narrow Street. Destiny had taken notice that one of the Audience had hid
his Face in his Cloak, and having his Enemy Saldaigne always in his Thoughts,
did not doubt but that must have been he; nevertheless he concealed his
Imaginations, and thought it sufficient for the present only to Guard the Women
to Madam Ville-fleur's House, where they were to sit up all Night, with as much
Company as they could get; but when he came to understand from the
Ecclesiastic what I have before told you, he immediately concluded that
Saldaigne was once more contriving to carry off his dear Star. This caused him
and his Company to enter into an immediate Consultation what they had best to
do. At last they concluded they would wait the event, and if no body appeared
among them before they broke up, they would go away with as much caution as
they could. Whilst they had just determined what to do, an unknown Person
entered the Room, and inquired for Madam Star. Upon her coming to him, he
informed her that a Lady of her Acquaintance desired to speak a Word with her
in the Street, and begged she would only come down for a Moment. Every body
then presently knew that this was the Method Saldaigne had proposed to himself
to procure the possession of his Mistress by, and therefore immediately got
themselves into a posture to receive him. It was not thought sit that any of
the Actresses should be suffered to go down, and therefore they borrowed one of
Madam Ville-fleurs Chamber-Maids for that purpose. She was no sooner come into
the Street but Saldaigne seized her, and offered to mount her upon his Horse;
but he was not a little surpised when he perceived himself surrounded on all
sides with armed Men, whereof some had come by the great Door round the
Marketplace, and the others by the lesser Door. Hereupon Saldaigne, who had
always had no more Consideration than his Horse, and scarce so much, let fly a
Pistol among them, and slightly wounded one of the Actors before he well knew
whether they were come as his Friends or his Enemies. This rash attempt had
half a dozen Shot immediately returned, whereof one enterd his Head, and two
others his Body. His Companions who were out upon the Scout hearing a noise of
several discharges, instead of coming up to assist their Friend, fled
incontinently, as such rascally Bullies commonly do where they find any
resistance. A light was forthwith called for, to view the wounded Man who was
fallen on the Ground; but no body knew him except the Strollers, who assured
the Company that it was Saldaigne. He was thought to be dead, though he really
was not, and which occasioned the Bystanders to lend his Lackey their
assistance to throw him athwart his Horse. Being carried after this manner to
his Lodging, when he came there his Host presently discovered some signs of
Life in him, and consequently did all that lay in their power to recover him,
which notwithstanding proved ineffectual, for he died the next Day after. Being
dead his Corpse was carried into his own Country, where he was received with
feigned Sorrow by his Sisters and their Husbands, both lamenting outwardly for
their loss, but inwardly they were not a little glad of his Death. And I dare
be bold to say, that Madam St. Far his Wife, wished him no better Fate. In the
mean time Justice was fain to bestir her Stumps a little in quest of the
Murderers, but no body being found, nor any body making a complaint; besides,
the Persons that could be most suspected being of the best Gentry of the Town,
the Prosecution was let fall. The Actresses were conducted to their Lodgings,
where they learnt the next Day that Saldaigne was dead, which caused them to
rejoice exceedingly, being thereby out of danger of any future Disturbance,
meeting every where with Friends, except in him and his Adherents.

CHAP. VII
The sequel of Mrs. Caves History.
THE Day after Saldaignes Death Destiny and Olive went to return their hearty
Thanks to the Ecclesiastic, who was at that time Prior of St. Lewis, for
having delivered them from a Plague that they could never otherwise have got
rid of. This Priory was a title rather Honorary than Beneficial, belonging to a
little Church situate in an Island made by the River Sartha, and between the
two Bridges of Alencon. You must not wonder if both the Actors and Actresses of
this Company of Strollers received a benefit from a Priest, since you might
have perceived throughout the whole Comical Adventures of this famous History,
how many Services and good Offices have been done them by Curates. This Prior,
who before had had but a slender Acquaintance with our Strollers, by this
signal token of Kindness had contracted so great a Friendship with them, that
they interchangeably visited and Eat together almost every Day. Now one Day
while Monsieur the Prior was in the Strollers Chamber, which by the by, you
must take notice was on a Friday, when they did not Act, Destiny and Madam Star
entreated Mrs. Cave to proceed with the account of her Life. She for her part
was at first a little loath to comply with their request, till at length being
prevailed upon, and having cough'd three or four times, spit as often, and as
some will have it, gravely wiped her Mouth with her Handkerchief, she just
began to get her self into a readiness to speak, when the Prior was offering to
begone, believing it seems, that she might have something to deliver which she
would not have every body know. He was notwithstanding stopped by all the
Company, and unanimously desired by them to stay, they assuring him that they
would be exceeding glad to have him take part of their Adventures. And I dare
say, quoth Star to him, being a Woman of a ready Wit, you your self have had a
share of some in your time, for you don't by any means seem to me to be a
Person that has always worn a Cassock. These Words confounded the Prior a
little at first, but who afterward coming to himself, he frankly owned that he
had had Adventures in his time, which possibly might not prove unacceptable in
a Romance, in the room of many fabulous Stories it is commonly stuffed with. To
which Star briskly replied, that she was very well satisfied they would be
entertaining, and therefore immediately engaged him in the Relating of some of
them the first opportunity they should have. Her request he promised to
gratify, and then Mrs. Cave proceeded with her Account after the following
manner. The Dog that frighted us prevented what I was then going to say, and
what ye shall now hear. The Proposal the Baron of Sig^gnac caused to be made to
my Mother, by the good Curate, that he would marry her, Afflicted her no less
than it pleased me, as I have already told you; but what increased her
Affliction was, that she could not propose a way to herself how she might get
out of his House. To do it alone she thought would be to little purpose, since
she could not think to get far before he would certainly send and overtake her,
and perhaps abuse her to boot. Moreover we thereby ran a risque of losing our
Baggage, which was the only thing we had left to subsist on. At length Fortune
offered us an opportunity to escape the most plausible that could be, which was
this, This Baron who had always hitherto been of a morose inflexible Temper,
was all of a sudden changed from his insensible Brutality to the sof^est of
Passions, Love, and that to so great excess, that he became even Sick with the
violence of it; nay more, Sick to Death. At the beginning of his illness my
Mother would needs be frequently offering her Service, but she no sooner came
near his Bed than he always began to rave. This my Mother perceiving, and being
a Woman of no common contrivance, she immediately applied herself to his
Servants, telling them that she observed her Daughter and she were rather an
hindrance to their Lord's recovery than a help, and therefore desired of them
to procure us Horses for our selves, and a Wagon for our Baggage, and she
would be gone. This the Servants would by no means hearken to, till at length
the Curate coming, and having understood the Baron was raving, resolved
forthwith to deliver him from the occasion thereof, and immediately setting
about it he soon provided us with all those necessaries we required. Next
Morning we loaded the Cart with our Equipage, and after having taken leave of
the Servants, but especally of the obliging Curate, we set forth and arrived at
Night at a little Town of Perigord, whose name I have forgot, but which I
nevertheless remember to be the same place from whence a Surgeon had been
fetched to my Mother, when she was wounded by the Baron of Sigognac's Servants,
who took us for Gypsies. We alighted and went to an Inn, where we were
immediately discovered for what we were; for the Chambermaid no sooner saw us
but she cried out aloud to her Companions, Courage my Hearts! we shall quickly
have Play acted here, since the rest of the Company are arrived, This gave us
to understand that there were some Strollers in the Town, which we were
heartily glad of, being in hopes that we might have the good Fortune to join
with them, and so get our Lifelihoods, and wherein, as it happened, we were not
deceived, for the Morning following, after we had just discharged our Wagon
and Horses, two Actors who had heard of our arrival came to see us, who
acquainted us that one of their Companions with his Wife having quitted their
Company, we if we pleased might have their places, which if we would but
condescend to accept of he promised himself that they might perform wonders. My
Mother who was always very obliging accepted their proffer, and it was agreed
that she should have the chief Parts, another Woman that was among them the
second, and I such as they should assign me, or think me capable of, for I was
but then thirteen or fourteen Years of Age at farthest. We continued acting
here about fifteen Days, this Town being no sufficient to maintain us any
longer. My Mother pressed heartily to be gone, and to leave this Country,
having a dread upon her that as soon as the Baron were recovered he might make
search after us, and give us some Affront. We consequently set out and rid near
40 Leagues before we pitched upon any place where to Act. The Master of the
Company, whose name was Belle fleur, talked of Marriage to my Mother, but which
she absolutely refused, conjuring him at the same time not to trouble himself
with making love to her, since she began to be somewhat old, and moreover had
entered into a Vow never to marry again. Belle-fleur hearing this my Mothers
resolution, troubled her with no more of his Addresses. We rubbed on three or
four Years with success. At length I began to grow up, and my Mother became so
crazy that she could not well Act her Parts, wherefore the Company having a
tolerable Opinion of my Performance, I was substituted in her place.
Belle-fleur who found he could not have my Mother, demanded me of her for his
Wife, but which favor she again denied him, having a mind to take the first
opportunity to retire to Marseilles. But falling afterward sick at Troyes in
Champagne, and fearing to leave me behind her unmarried in case she should die,
she Communicated to me Belle-fleurs request. Present necessity obliged me to
accept of the proffer, though he was old enough to be my Father, yet considering
that he was a very Honest Man, I was the easier induced to consent to marry
him. My Mother then had the satisfaction to see me Married before she died,
which happened in a few Days after. I was concerned as much as a good Daughter
ought to be, which nevertheless wore away in a little time. I began then to
apply my self altogether to my Business again, and in a short time became with
Child. The Day of my lying down being come, I brought into the World this
Daughter Angelica you see here, who cost me so many Tears, and is like to cost
a great many more if I continue much longer in this World. As she was going to
proceed with her Relation, Destiny interrupted her, telling her she might
promise herself a great deal of Satisfaction for the future instead of
Disquiet, since that so rich a Gentleman as Leander desired her Daughter for
his Wife. Whilst Mrs. Cavi was about to finish her Account, Leander entered the
Room and Saluted all the Company: He was all dressed in black, and attended by
three Footmen in Black likewise, which presently gave every body reason to
conceive that his Father was dead in earnest. The Prior left the Company and
went his way; and it is here that I conclude this Chapter.

CHAP. VIII.
The end of Mrs. Caves History.
AFter Leander had finished his Compliments upon his Arrival, Destiny told him,
that he must desire leave, both to Condole him for the loss of his Father, and
to Congratulate him on account of the great Estate he had left him. Leander
thanked him for both, but as for his Father's Death, he told him, that he had
long expected it with Impatience. Nevertheless, added he, I do not intend to
forsake my Profession, which has been always so pleasant to me, however, must
desire that my appearing on the Stage may be dispensed with, till such time as
we are got farther off from the Place of my Nativity. This Request was
forthwith granted by all. After which, Madam Star desired to know of Leander
what Title she must salute him by for the future. His answer was, That his
Father's Title was Baron of Roche-pierre, which he had a right to use if he
pleased, but that having resolved to continue among them, he determined to be
called by no other Name than that of Leander, being the same under which he had
been so happy as to be thought acceptable to his dear Angelica. This Name
therefore, quoth he, I am resolved to carry along with me to my Grave, as well
for the reason just foregoing, as to convince ye all, that I am indispensably
disposed to perform punctually what I promised to the Company at my departure
hence. At these words Embraces were renewed, many Sighs breathed forth, some
Tears shed, and all in general approved of the generous Resolution of Leander,
who approaching Angelica, bestowed a thousand endearing Protestations on her,
all which she returned with so much Wit and good Nature, that he was more and
more confirmed in his Resolution. I would willingly have given you the
particulars of their entertaining each other, but that I am not in Love as they
were. Leander told the Company farther, that he had regulated all his Affairs,
and put new Tenants into most of his Farms, who having paid Fines amounting in
all to near 6000 Livres, he had brought the same along with him, to the end
that in case the Company wanted Money, he might supply them. He received
abundance of Thanks for this Noble Offer. Then Ragotin, who had hardly appeared
in the two foregoing Chapters, came forward, and desired that since Monsieur
Leander had been pleased to declare that he would not Act whilst the Players
continued in this Country, that he might have his Parts, which he Promised he
would perform to all the advantage imaginable. Whereupon, Roquebrune, who had
always been his Opposite, rose up, and said, That he humbly conceived,
Leander's Parts belonged rather to him, than to such a Whipper-Snapper as he.
This word made all the Company to laugh; after which Destiny acquainted the two
Candidates, that their several Merits should be considered, and Justice be
speedily done them. Then Mrs. Cave was desired to go on with her History, but
first the Prior of St. Lewis was to be sent for, to the end that having heard
hers, he might be the better able to Relate his own. Great attention was given,
and she began again thus.

As I remember I left off at my Lying in of Angelica. I have already told you,
the two Strollers came to desire us to join with them, but did not tell you,
that those two were Olive and another who left ye afterward, in whose room
came our Poet Roquebrune. But to come to the greatest of my Misfortunes, I must
tell you, that one Day as we were Acting the Liar of Monsieur Corneille, in a
certain Town of Flanders, a Footman that had been keeping a Place for his Lady
that was not yet come, left it and went a Drunkening, whereby another Lady got
the Place. Soon after, the Lady to whom the Place belonged came, and finding it
taken up, very civilly told the other Lady, that that Place belonged to her,
and therefore desired her to let her have it. The other answered, that if she
had a place there, she might take it if she pleased, but for her part she would
not move an Inch from where she sat. Words thus arise, and from thence they
came to Blows. The Ladies Cussed one another heartily, which would have
signified little, had not the Men interposed, who instead of parting the Fray,
increased it, taking to either Party, and raising Factions against one another.
This was principally caused by the Ladies Relations, who both got what Friends
they could on their Side. Then was there nothing to be heard but squeeking and
clashing of Swords, all which we only looked upon from the Stage, till at
length my Husband who at that time Played the Part of Dorante, seeing so many
Swords drawn, and not caring to look on, leapt in among them with his Sword
drawn likewise, and endeavored to appease the Tumult, when a certain Person
from one of the Parties, taking him no doubt for his Enemy, gave him such a
home Thrust, as paid him notably for his meddling. This was given unperceived
by my Husband, for had he seen it, he would no doubt have Parry'd it he being
not a little skilled in Fencing. This thrust nevertheless pierced his Heart,
whereof he immediately fell dead to the Ground, which occasioned all the
Audience quickly to shift for themselves. I then threw my self off from the
Stage into the Pit, and went to assist my wounded Husband, but to my great
Grief, found him stark Dead. Angelica, who then might have been about thirteen
or fourteen Years of Age, came down immediately to me, together with the rest
of the Company, who all joined with me in my just Complaints, for the loss of
so good a Husband. I Buried him the best I could, after that the Coroner had
set upon him, who demanded of me if I would have his Warrant to take up the
Murderer. I answered, I should be willing to have Justice done upon him, but
feared I had not where withal sufficient to Prosecute him, and so declined it.
We quickly forsook this Town, and went a Strolling on farther, being obliged to
Act for our Maintenance, but our Company was now by no means good, having lost
its principal Actor. I was for a long time so grieved at my Husband's Death,
that I could not give my Mind to get up my Parts, but herein Angelica always
supplied me from her Memory, when we were on any Scene together. At length we
came to a Town in Holland, where you know that you Mr. Destiny, your Sister
Star, and Rancour, came to us, and offered to join us if we so pleased, and
whereof we were not a little glad, being almost quite broke before. The rest of
my Adventures have been common to us all, and whereof you know as much already
as I can pretend to tell you, and that from Tours, where our Porter killed one
of the Intendant's Officers, even to this City of Alencon, where we now are.
Here Mrs. Cave ended her History, shedding a great many Tears, which Madam Star
did likewise, comforting her all she was able, for the great Misfortunes she
had undergone, but withal remembered her, that she had the less reason to be
concerned now, since she was so near to an Alliance with so worthy a Gentleman
as Leander. Mrs. Cave sobb'd so violently that she could not find a time to
answer her, neither can I to continue this Chapter any farther, and therefore
conclude it.

CHAP. IX.
How Rancour undeceived Ragotin concerning Madam Star; together with the
Arrival of a Coach full of Gentry, and some other comical Adventures of
Ragotin's.
THE Play went on prosperously, and one or other was Acted every Day, with
great Satisfaction to the Audience, which consisted of the better sort, and was
generally very numerous, amongst whom nevertheless happened no disorder, by
reason that Ragotin was kept behind the Scenes, having no Parts yet given him,
but which he grumbled at, though he had been promised some when occasion served.
He made his complaints almost every Day to Rancour, whom he put a great
confidence in, though by the way, he was one of the very worst of Men. As he
plagued him one Day above the rest, Rancour said to him. Monsieur Ragotin,
disturb your self no more about this matter, for I must tell you, there is a
great deal of difference between the Bar and the Stage: If a Man have not a
more than ordinary Assurance, he will be easily put out on the Stage, besides,
the speaking of Verse requires no common Capacity, and is more difficult to do
than you may fancy. You must observe nicely the Pointing of Verse, and when you
speak it on the Stage, run one Verse into another, that it may seem Prose, and
consequently be Natural and easy? You must not sing it out, and stop at the
Cesures, or at the end of a Verse, as the Vulgar do, but Pronounce it always
with a good Grace, and a becoming Action. I would have you therefore, continued
he, to wait a little longer, before you come on the Stage, and in the mean time
you may Act in some private Masquerade or Farce, to bring your hand in. You may
there play the Part of a second Zani, or Merry- Andrew, and I think we have a
Habit within, that will be very fit for you, having formerly belonged to a
little Boy called Godenot, who had sometimes represented that Person. But,
added he, we must first speak to Monsieur Destiny, and Madam Star about it.
This they did the same Day, and it was ordered, that next Morning Ragotin
should represent the said Person. He was instructed by Rancour in what he was
to say, who as you may have observed in the first Part of this Romance, was
altogether inclinable to Farce. The Plot of what they played was an Intrigue
which Rancour unravelled in favor of Destiny. As Rancour was preparing himself
to begin, Ragotin appeared upon the Stage, to whom the former spoke thus.
Little Boy, my pretty Godenot. quoth he, whether art thou going in such haste?
Then addressing himself to the Company, after having chuck'd Ragotin under the
Chin and felt for his Beard, Gentlemen, said he, I have always hitherto thought
that Ovid's Metamorphosis of Pismires inta Pigmies, who had at that time War
with the Cranes, was only a Fable, but now I find it to be true, for certainly
this is one of the race, or else that little Man revived, concerning whom,
about Seven or Eight Years since, there was a Song made to this affect.

The SONG.
MY Mother would needs have me Wed,
But a Pigmy, alas! is the Man,
For call him a Husband who can,
That scarce takes up a Foot of the Bed,
Yet still this of him may be said,
That if he be not, he be not a Man,
He is, he is, he is, he is, he is as much as he can.
At the end of every Verse Rancour turned and winded Ragotin about as if he had
been a Poppet, making him to appear in so many ridiculous Postures, as made the
Company to laugh heartily. The rest of the Song I have left out as superfluous
to our Romance.

After that Rancour had ended his Song, he showed Ragotin to the Company,
telling them that he was risen again from the Dead, and to make what he said
appear, he took off his Masque and exposed him barefaced, which caused him not
only to blush for shame, but likewise to redden with Anger. He nevertheless was
fain to bear it; but however, to revenge himself, he told Rancour that he was a
downright Blockhead for making his Song with such old fashioned Rhimes, But,
quoth Rancour, I think you are a greater Blockhead for a little Man, since you
could not distinguish betwixt an old Song and a new me, this having been made
above a hundred Years ago. Also, continued he, it is with Rhiming as with
Language, Custom must regulate all; for since, as Monsieur Rogula has it who
reformed the French Tongue, we cannot give a reason why we pronounce so and so,
no more ought our Ancestors to do why they Writ after this manner; and whereas
whatever is most ancient is always most valued, so ought my Song to be for the
same Reason, While Ragotin was going to answer, Destiny entered complaining of
the long stay his Man Rancour had made, and whom having found in a hot dispute
with Ragotin, he immediately demanded of them the cause of their Dispute, but
which he could nevertheless never come to know, since they answered him both at
a time, and so loud that they made him stark Mad. His Passion being thus
raised, he thrust Ragotin against Rancour with great Indignation, and whom
Rancour returned again against him with like fury, till at last they had tossed
him about from one to the other so long, that he fell down on his Face, and
afterward marched away on all four under the Curtains. This the Audience all
rise up to see, protesting that this mute Action was worth all the rest of
their Farce, which they could not proceed any farther with, by reason that the
Actors had quite laughed themselves into confusion. Notwithstanding this
Affront, Ragotin still Solicited Rancour to bring him in Favor with Madam
Star, and the better to incline him to do it, he often treated him, which was
very welcome to Rancour, who did not scruple to feed heartily at the little
Man's cost. But as he was wounded with the same Dart he had not the Heart to
speak either for Ragotin or himself. One Day above the rest Ragotin pressed him
so close that he found himself obliged to tell him, Monsieur Ragotin, This Star
no doubt is of the nature of those in the Firmament, which the Astrologers name
wandering, for I have no sooner at any time begun to open your Passion to her,
but she twinkles and leaves me without an Answer. Yet how should she Answer me,
quoth he, if she will not hear me. But I believe I have discovered the occasion
of her Indifference, proceeded he, and which no question may surprise you; but
a Man that has a mind to be satisfied in any thing must be prepared against all
Events. This Monsieur Destiny, whom she calls her Brother, I fancy not to be at
all so, for I surpised them the other Day Caressing after that manner as such
near Relations are not wont to do, and therefore I am rather enclinable to
believe that he is her Gallant, and I am more deceived than ordinary, if on the
same Day that Leander and Angelica Marry they do not Marry too: Otherwise I
should think her the most indiscreet Woman in the World, added he, to slight
your generous proffer: You that are a Man of Quality and Merit, without taking
notice of your graceful Mien. I tell you this, continued he, that you may have
the more reason to remove her from your Heart, since you will not otherwise
fail to torment your self like one of the damned. The little Man, both Poet and
Advocate, was so confounded at this discourse, that he had nothing left to say,
but immediately quitted Rancour, shaking his Head and crying after his wonted
manner, Serviteur, Serviteur, etc. Afterward Ragotin resolved with himself to
go to Beaumont le Vicomte, a little Town about five Leagues distant from
Alencon, where there was a Market kept every Monday. The reason of his going he
told the Company was to receive a certain Sum of Money that was owing him in
that Town by a Merchant. But how will you do to go, quoth Rancour to him, since
your Horse has been lately pricked in Shooing, and is lame? he will never be
able to carry you so far. It may be not, answered Ragotin, and therefore I Will
hire one that shall, and if I cannot meet with one to my purpose, I can at last
walk on Foot, it is not so far. I don't question, added he, but I shall meet
with some Company that will go from hence. He sought after, but could not find
a Hackney to be let, which induced him to enquire of a Peddler that lived next
Door to his Lodging if he were not disposed to go, and finding he was, he
desired the favor of him for a Companion, which the Peddler agreed to be, in
case that he would be gone by one a Clock in the Morning, when the Moon would
be just up, which he with little difficulty consented to. Now a little before
they set out, a poor Nail-Smith was gone toward the said Market to dispose of
his Nails, which he was accustomed to make every Week ready for Mondays on
purpose. This Nail-Smith being upon the Road on Foot, with his Wallet upon his
Back, and hearing no noise of Travelers, either before or behind him, thought
that he had been got out too early; besides, he was a little afraid when he
considered he was to pass under several Gibbets where Men's quarters hung, which
obliged him to step aside out of the Road, and to go lie down upon a Bank,
where he fell asleep. Some little time after Ragotin and the Peddler came by,
but who said not a Word to each other, the little Man's thoughts being wholly
taken up with Reflections on what Rancour had told him. When they came near to
the Gibbets, Ragotin asked the Peddler if he would not count the Persons that
were Hanged. The Peddler answered with all his Heart. Then they went forwards
into the middle of them, and began to Count, but at length having met with one
that was dropped down, and was very stiff and dry, Ragotin who had always
thoughts worthy of himself, asked his Companion to assist to help him up, and
set him against one of the Posts, the which they easily performed by help of
their Staves. This done, they counted fourteen Hanged, besides this last, and
so went on on their Journey. They had not gone far, before Ragotin had a Maggot
come in his Head, to turn about and call to the dead Person to come after him,
which he did in these^ Words; So ho! you, will you come along with us? The
Nail-Smith, who it seems did not sleep very sound, hearing of this, rise up
presently from his Post, thinking some Fellow Travelers had desired his
Company, and cried, With all my Heart, I come, I come, and immediately began to
follow them. The Peddler and Ragotin thinking verily it had been the dead Corpse
that came toward them, ran away as hard as they could drive, whereat the
Nail-Smith began to fun likewise, crying all the way, Stay, stay, I come, I
come. As the Nail-smith ran, his Nails that he had on his Back made a great
noise, which inclined Ragotin and the Peddler the more to believe that it was
the Corpse that they had set up against the Gibber, or else the Ghost of some
other Person that dragged Chains after him; for the Vulgar are of Opinion that
there is never a Ghost that appears, but he has a Chain fastened to him. This
belief made them to tremble so much that they could not run any farther, and
their Legs not being able to support them longer, they dropped down. This gave
the Nail-smith opportunity to come up with them, whom they at first were
miserably afrighted at, but he having bid them good Morrow, and telling them
they had given him a great deal of Trouble to overtake them, they began to come
to themselves, and saw he was no Ghost. They then joined Companies, and
continued their Journey prosperously to Beaumont, where Ragotin did what he had
to do, and returned next Morning to Alencon, where he found his Friends just
risen from Dinner, to whom having related the Story of his Adventure, they
Laughed so heartily, that they were almost ready to burst. The Women for their
parts were so extremely tickled, that they Haw-haw'd out so loud, that they
were heard cross the way, and which it is probable they would have continued
much longer, had they not been interrupted by the Arrival of a Coach full of
Country Gentry. This Coach belonged to one Monsieur de la Fresnay, who was
about to Marry his Daughter, and was come to Alencon to entreat the Strollers
to come and Act a Play at her Wedding. This Lady, who was none of the Wisest of
her Sex, desired them that they would Act the Sylvius of Mairet. This the
Actresses were hardly able to forbear laughing at, telling her that if her
Ladyship would have that, she must procure them a Book, for they had not one by
them; the Lady answered, she would lend them one, adding withal, that she had
all the Pastorals Bound up together in one Volume, viz. those of Racan, being
the Fair Fisherwoman, the Love-Hater, Plocidon, the Mercer, etc. together with
several others whose Titles she had forgot. Such Plays as these, quoth she to
them, are proper for you Strollers that Act always in the Country, and cannot
perhaps go to the expense of such sumptuous Habits, as the Death of Cinna,
Heradius, Rodogune, and the like would require. Moreover, the Verse in
Pastorals savours not so much of Bombast, as that of Heroic Poems. Besides,
Pastorals are of a nature more conformable to the Simplicity of our first
Parents, who wore nothing but Fig Leaves even after they had sinned. Her Father
and Mother were all the while harkening to their Daughters Discourse with great
attention and wonder, imagining that the greatest Orators of the Kingdom could
not be able to utter any thing beyond it. After this, the Strollers desired
time to prepare themselves, and had eight Days given them. The Company parted
after Dinner, just as the Prior of St. Lewis happened to come in. Madam Star told
him he had done well to come, having saved Olive the trouble of looking after
him. The Actresses seated themselves upon the Bed, and the Actors in Chairs.
The Door was shut, and the Porter had Orders to send away every Body that came
to speak with them. After silence was proclaimed, the Prior began his History
as you may find in the following Chapter, if you will take the pains but to read
it.

CHAP. X.
The History of the Prior of St. Lewis, and the Arrival of Monsieur Verville.
THE beginning of this History, quoth the Prior, cannot but be a little
tedious, since it consists chiefly of Genealogy. Nevertheless, this sort of
beginning is necessary too to introduce a perfect understanding of the matter in
Dispute. I shall not endeavor to disguize my Condition, since I am in my own
Country. In another it may be I might have passed for what I really was not,
which nevertheless I have never yet done. I have always been very sincere in
this Point. I am then, a Native of this City, the Wives of my two great
Grandfathers were Gentlewomen, and had a de tackt to their Sir-names. But as
you know, the eldest Sons going away with the greatest part of the Estate,
leave but little for the younger Children, who according to Custom, are either
obliged to go into Orders, or else to Marry some inferior Person or other,
suitable to their Condition, providing she be Rich and Honest, pursuant to the
Proverb which has been a long time current in this Country; More Money and less
Honor. So that my two Grand-mothers were Married to two rich Tradesmen, the
one a Woolen-draper, and the other a Linnen-draper. My Father's Father had four
Sons, whereof my Father was not the eldest. My Mothers Father had two Sons and
two Daughters, whereof she was one, and Married to the second Son of the
Woolen-draper, who had left off his Trade to follow Petty-fogging, whereby he
fooled away most of his Estate, which was the Reason that he left me but
little. My Father had formerly thrived very much by his Trade, and Married a
very rich Woman for his first Wife, who dyed without Children. He was pretty
well advanced in Years when he Married my Mother, which she consented to rather
out of Duty than Inclination, insomuch that there was more of Aversion on her
side than Love, which no doubt was the reason that they were thirteen Years
Married before they had the least hopes of having any Children. At last my
Mother was big, and when the time of her Lying-in was come, she brought me into
the World with a great deal of Pain, having been four full Days in Labor. My
Father, who was at that time employed in prosecuting a Man that had killed his
Brother, was overjoyed, when at his return the Women gave him joy of a Son. He
treated them all as well as he could, and made some of them drunk, having given
them strong White Wind, on the Lees instead of Perry, which he has many a time
after told me, and whereat we have laughed heartily. Two Days after my Birth I
was Baptized. My Name signifies little to be mentioned. I had for Godfather the
Lord of the Place, a very rich Man, and my Father's Neighbor, who having
understood by the Lady, his Wife, that my Mother was with Child, after so many
Years Marriage, desired he might hold what God sent her to the Font. What he
desired was readily granted; my Mother having no more Children than me, bred me
with all the care imaginable, and perhaps a little too nicely for one of her
Quality. As I came to grow up it was observed I would be no Fool, which
occasioned me to be mightily beloved by every body, especially by my Godfather,
who had but one only Daughter, that had been married to a Gentleman a Relation
of my Mothers. She had two Sons one elder by a year than I, and one younger by
a Year, but both who were as backward in Parts as I were forward, which
occasioned my Godfather to send for me always when he had any of the better
sort of Company, (which you must know he often had, being accustomed to treat
all the Princes and great Lords that passed by our Town) to divert them, which
by Dancing, Singing and Prattling I did. For this purpose I was always kept in a
better Garb than ordinary, and I had surely made my Fortune with him had not
Death taken him away suddenly as he was on a Journey to Paris. I nevertheless
was not so sensible then of his Death as I have been since. My Mother sent me
to Study, and I profited extremely; but when she understood my Inclinations ran
toward the Church, she took me from the College and brought me into the World,
notwithstanding her Vow to devote her first fruits to God, if he should please
to give her any. She proved quite contrary to other Mothers who do all they can
to prevent their Childrens falling into ill Courses, for she was continually
feeding me with Money, Sundays and Holy days especially, to go a Gaming, or to
the Tavern. Nevertheless having some discretion of my own, all my Liberties and
Abilities amounted only to making merry sometimes with my Neighbors. I had
contracted a more than ordinary Friendship with a young Lad, Son to a certain
Officer belonging to Lewis XIII's Queen- Dowager, who had likewise two
Daughters. He lived in that fine Park, which as you may have heard was one of
the greatest Delights of the ancient Dukes of Alencon. His House there had been
given him by the aforesaid Queen Dowager, his Royal Mistress, who had an
Appennage upon that Duchy. We led a pleasant Life in this Park, but that,
still like Children, never thinking of what was to come. This Officer of the
Queens was called Monsieur du Fresne, who had a Brother an Officer likewise,
who belonged to the King. This Brother required du Fresne to send his Son to
him, which he could by no means refuse to do. Before his Son went for the Court
he came to take leave of me, and I must own the parting with him raised the
first Grief that ever I felt. We lamented our Separation reciprocally, but I
had much greater Reason two Months after, when I heard from his Mother the News
of his Death. I showed as much concern for the loss of him as I was capable of
showing, and went immediately to join with his Sisters in their Grief for him,
which was exceeding great. But as Time lessens all things, when this sad
remembrance was a little over, Madam du Fresne came and desired my Mother that
I might teach her younger Daughter a little to write, whose name was
Mademoiselle du Lys, to distinguish her from her elder Sister, who bore the
Name of the Family. The reason of her troubling me, she said, was because her
Writing-Master had been newly gone, and though there were several others in the
Town, yet none would teach abroad, and truly she thought her Daughters quality
too great to go to School. She excused her self very much for this Liberty she
had taken, but withal intimated to my Mother that this Familiarity might end
in something more important, meaning a Marriage, which was soon after agreed on
privately between my Mother and her. My Mother had no sooner proposed this
Employment to me but I readily accepted it, and went immediately after Dinner
to wait on my Scholar, finding a secret Spring within, that moved me more than
ordinary, though I knew not at that time what it was. I had not been above eight
Days in this Exercise, but the young Lady my Scholar, who was much handsomer
than her Sister, began to be very Familiar with me, and called me in Raillery
her little Master. It was then that I began to find something in my Heart that
I had been but little acquainted with before, and the young Lady, for ought I
could perceive by her, felt the same. We were from that time inseparable, and
were never so well pleased as when we were left alone together, which happened
not seldom. This sort of Conversation lasted about six Months before we
declared the Sentiments of our Hearts, but nevertheless our Eyes spoke
sufficiently all the while. One Day I had a mind to try to make a Copy of
Verses in her Praise, to see how she would receive them; but having never made
an attempt of that Nature before, I was afraid I should not succeed.
Notwithstanding I immediately set my self about reading the best
Romance-Writers and Poets I could find, having rejected those of the Melesines,
Robert the Devil, Aymons Four Sons, the fair Maguelonne, John of Paris, etc.
which are trifling Compositions, and only fit for Children to read. At last
looking by Chance into Marot's Works, I met with a Roundelay very proper for my
purpose. This I immediately Transcribed Word for Word, and which is as follows.
A Roundelay.
YOur Face and Tongue so charming prove,
That I both gaze and hear;
And whilst your Looks invite to Love,
Your Chains am glad to wear:
But since you make of me a Slave,
And use me at your Pleasure,
Why may not I my Mistress have
to Occupy my leisure?


I gave her these Verses, which she read with a great deal of Pleasure, as I
could perceive by her Countenance. After having read them she thrust them into
her Bosom, whence they not long after fell upon the Ground, and were taken up
by her elder Sister, contrary to her Knowledge, but which she afterward came
to know, by means of a Lackey. She thereupon asked her Sister for them, and
perceiving she made some difficulty to let her have them, she flevv into a
great Passion, and went and complained to her Mother, who forthwith ordered
her Sister to give them her, which she presently did. This sort of proceeding
gave me a great deal of hopes, when a serious Reflection on my Condition made
me to despair again. Now whilst we thus pleased each other with our
Fancies, my Father and Mother being pretty well advanced in Years, determined
to marry me, and one Day made me acquainted with their Intentions. My Mother
discovered to my Father the Project she had laid with Madam du Fresne, but he
being a Man of more Sense than ordinary, absolutely rejected it, saying that
that young Ladies Quality was too great for me, and besides, that she had too
little Money to support it, well knowing that she would expect to be maintained
according to it. But as I was the only Son of my Father, who was tolerably
Rich, as likewise Heir to an Uncle, who had no Children, by the Custom of
Normandy, many Families looked upon me as worthy of their Alliance, and
consequently made me stand Godfather to diverse Children, with several young
Ladies of the best Quality in our Neighborhood, those being the common means
to promote Marriages, which nevertheless had no effect upon me, having been
before entirely devoted to my dear du Lys. I was notwithstanding so continually
Persecuted by my Parents to Marry some other, that to avoid their
Importunities, I resolved to go to the Wars, although I was not then above 16 or
17 Years of Age. New Levies being made in this City to go to Denmark, under the
Command of the Count of Montgomery. I Listed my self privately with three
others, younger Brothers my Neighbors. We set out in pretty good Equipage, and
my Father and Mother were so extremely concerned, that the latter was almost
like to die with Grief. How du Lys bore my so sudden Departure, I could not
tell as then, but which I understood afterward from her self. We Embarked at
Havre-de Grace, and Sailed very successfully till we came within sight of the
Sound, but then arose so furious a Tempest, that the like was scarce ever known
before. Our Ships were soon separated from each other, and that which I was in,
Commanded by the Count himself, was driven very luckily to the Mouth of the
Thames, where by the help of a Reflux we quickly got up to London, the Capital
City of England. There we staid about 6 Weeks, during which time I had
opportunity to survey the Rarities of that superbe City, and above all, the
shining Court of its King, who was then Charles, I. of that Name. The Count of
Montgomery returned afterward to his Seat Port-Orson in Normandy, whither I
did not care to go, and therefore desired of him to permit me to go for Paris,
which he did. I Embarked then on board a Vessel bound for Roan, where I not
long after arrived safe, and from thence went in a Boat up to Paris. There met
with a near Kinsman of mine, who was the King's Wax-Chandler. ^ begged of him to
make use of his Interest to get me into ^ the Guards. He promised he would, and
did it, but he was ^ fain to be my Surety, for at that time none was to be
admitted without one. I was received into Monsieur de ^ Rauderies Company. My
Cosen lent me Money to Equi^ my self, for in my Sea-voyage I had spoiled all
my Cloath^ I thus became equal to many Cadets of good Familys, wh^ carried
Maskets as well as I. About that time the Princes and great Lords of France
rise against their King, and amongst them Monsieur the Duke of Orleans, but his
Majesty through the Policy of the Great Cardinal Richelieu, brok^ all their
Measures, but that not without taking a Journey (...) to Britany with a gallant
Army. We arrived at Nant^ where the first Person made an Example of, was the
Coun^ of Calais, who had his Head struck off there. This raised a Terror in
all the others, insomuch that they su'd to his Majesty for Peace, which being
granted them, the King returned to Paris. In our way we stopped at Man's, where my
Father came to see me, old as he was, having been before acquainted by my
Cosen, that I was in the King's Guards, and begged of my Captain to Discharge
me, which he with some difficulty, or rather, for some consideration did. We
then returned to this City, where it was agreed, that the only way to keep me
at home, was to Marry me, A Surgeon's Wife that was Neighbor to a Cosen
German of mine, hearing this, brought along with her the Under-Baily's
Daughter, of a Town about three Leagues off, under pretense of Devotion, being
Lent-time, but her true Reason was, to entrap me if possible. Having seen her
but once, I was desired to do it again at my Cousen's House, which I did, and
after about an Hours Conversation with her, she went her way, when all the
Company told me, that she was a Mistress for me, to which I bluntly replied,
that I did not like her. My reason was not because she was not Rich and
Handsome, being both in Perfection, but because all the Beauty in the World
could have no power upon me, as long as my dear du Lys was in my Thoughts. I
had an Uncle, my Mothers Brother, of a severe Temper, who coming one Night to
our House, after having rallied me extremely for the slights I had put upon the
Under-Baily's Daughter, told me I must resolve to go and Visit her at her own
House, in the Easter Holydays, there being those of a much greater Quality than
I, who would be proud of such a Match. I answered neither one way nor other,
but when the Holy Days came, I was forced to go thither with my said Cosen the
Surgeon's Wife, and a Son of hers. When we came, we were very Courteously
received and treated for three Days together. We were also carried to all the
said Under-Baily's Farms, at every one of which we were handsomely entertained.
We went likewise to a large Village, about a League off this Gentleman's House,
to pay a Visit to the Curate of the Place, who was a Brother to this Ladies
Mother, and who gave us a very civil Reception. At last we returned home as we
came, that is, as to what concerned me, as little in Love as before. It was
nevertheless resolved, that in a Fortnights time our Marriage should be
concluded, which term being expired. I was compelled to return to the Baily's
House, together with three Cousin Germans, two Advocates, and an Attorney of
this Jurisdiction, but as good Luck would have it, they could agree upon
nothing, wherefore the Business was put off till May next. But that Saying is
certainly true. That Man proposes, and God disposes; For a little before the
said proposed Time, my Mother fell sick, and my Father 4 Days afterward, both
whose Maladies ended in Death, the former dying on Tuesday, and the latter on
the Thursday following. Although I Was very sick my self, yet I made shift to go
Visit my aforesaid severe Uncle, who was extremely ill likewise, and who dyed
in less than a Fortnights time. Sometime after all this, the Baily's Daughter
was proposed to me anew, but which I would hear nothing of, having now no
Parents left to force me. My Heart was altogether in the aforesaid Park, where
I frequently walked, but never half so often as I had done in Imagination. One
Morning when I thought no body had been stirring in the Sieur du Fresne's
House, I walked leisurely before it, and was not a little surpised, when I saw
du Lys Singing at the Window an old Song, which had for its upholding, Ah! Why
is he from me, the Man that I love?

This obliged me to draw nearer to her, and to make her a very low Bow, which I
accompanied with this or the like Expression. I could wish with all my Heart
Madam, that you had the satisfaction you so much desire, and were it in my
Power to contribute toward it, I would always do it, with as servent a
Passion, as I have ever showed to approve my self your most humble Servant. She
returned my Salutation, answered me not a Word, but continuing to Sing on, she
changed the Burden of her Song to, Ha! see him before me, the Man that I love.

You may imagine, this was not heard by one that was Deaf, and having been a
little in the Wars, I had Courage enough to reply, though not in Verse. I should
have just Reason to believe you Sincere, Madam, If you would but oblige me so
far, as to open the Door. At the same time she called to the Lackey, spoken of
before, and bid him to open the Door to me. I went in, and was received not
only by her, but likewise by her Father and Mother, and elder Sister, with all
the Civility and good Will imaginable. Her Mother asked me why I was so great a
Stranger, and why they had not seen me as frequently as they were wont? My
Mourning, she told me, was no just excuse, since I must be allowed to divert my
self now as well as before, and in a Word, she gave me to understand that I
should always be extremely welcome to her House. My Answer was only to show the
little Merit I had to pretend to, and which I expressed in some few ill-order'd
Words as I have done before. But at length all concluded with a Breakfast of
Milk, which you know in this Country passes for a good Treat. And which is
notwithstanding none of the worst, Sir, quoth Madam Star, But pray go on. When
I was taking leave to be gone, the Mother asked me if I would not give my self
the trouble to accompany her and her Daughter to see an old Relation of theirs
that lived about two Leagues off, I answered, that she did me wrong to ask me
the Question, when an absolute Command would have been much more obliging to
me. The Journey was pitched upon for next Day. The time came, and the Mother
got up upon a little Mule they had in the House, the elder Sister rid her
Fathers Horse, and I carried behind me my dear du Lys. What discourse we had
upon the Road I Will give you leave to guess, for as for my part I have forgot
it. All that I am able to tell you is, that du Lys and I often stole from the
Company, and went to recreate our selves in an adjoining Grove, which had a
little River that ran through the midst of it, upon whose Banks we had the
pleasure both to hear the warbling of the Birds, and the purling of the Stream,
to which we added our mutual Endearments, and many innocent Caresses which
passed between us. It was there that we entered into a Resolution to divert our
selves considerably at the approaching Carnevale. Some time after this Journey,
while I was making of Syder in the Suburbs that are called la Bar, and which
join to du Lys's Father's Park, she came running to me, whereby I presently
guessed that she had something more than ordinary to tell me. After having chid
me a little for finding me in that Condition, she took me aside and told me
that the Gentleman whose Daughter was at Monsieur de Planche-Planete's
Brother-in-Laws, had brought another Gentlem^n a his Friend to make Love to
her, and whereof she though (...) to get an opportunity to come and tell me. It
is not (...) she. that I distrust my power of refusing him, but beca^^ I had
rather you should find out some means to send him (...). To this I replied, Go
you and make much of him, that (...) not be gone before I come, and I Will assure
you be shall (...) be there by to Morrow this time. She then left me extremely
well pleased, and I immediately put off my Syder to my Servants management, and
went directly home; where taking a clean Shirt, and another suit of Clothes, I
hasted to find out my Companions, for you must know there were 15 of us young
Fellows, who had each a Mistress and were all jointly engaged to cut any Man's
Throat that should offer but to interfere with either. I acquainted them with
what I have already told you, and all concluded that this Gallant, who was a
Gentleman of Lower-Maine, must be found out and be forced to return from whence
he came. We went then forthwith to his Lodging, where he was at Supper with the
other Gentleman his Introducer. We did not stick to tell him down right that he
must speedily be gone, and that there was nothing to be got for him in that
Country. Then the Introducer replied and told us, that we did not know what
they were come about, and that when we did, we would not be so much concerned
at it. Then I stepped up, and clapping my Hand to my Sword, said, If I have her
Heart, I have it, and if you do not quit her this Minute, I Will quickly send
your Souls a Wool-gathering. One of them replied, that the contest was not
equal, and that if I were alone I durst not have said so much. To which I
answered, You are two, and here is a Gentleman and I, taking one of my
Comrades, that will presently go and dispute the matter with you farther. The
Gentlemen accepted the Challenge, and we were all going out when the Master of
the House, and a Son of his, prevented us, persuading the Gentlemen that their
best way was to be gone, and not to stand disputing with us, whom they were
positive they would get nothing by. They took their Advice, and we never heard
a Word of them after. Next Morning I went to wait on my dear du Lys, telling
her all that had passed, wherewith she seemed very well satisfied, and gave me
abundance of Thanks for delivering her from her Lover. The Winter now
approaching, the Nights began to be long, and which we passed away at Questions
and Commands, and such like sorts of Plays, but which being every Night
repeated at length grew tedious, and therefore I determined to give a Ball. I
conferred with du Lys, about it, and she consented to it; I asked her Fathers
leave, and he granted it me. The following Sunday we Danced all Day, and which
we continued to do often, till at length there came so many People that du Lys
desired me to give it over, and think o^ some other Diversion. We then resolved
to get up a Comedy and Act it, which we not long after did accordingly. Here
Madam Star interupted the Prior, saying, Sir, since you are upon Comedy, pray
give me leave to ask you if this History of yours be much longer, for it begins
to grow late, and Supper time approaches. Ah! Madam, quoth the Prior, there is
twice as much of it to come yet. Then it was thought necessary to put it off to
another time, that the Actors might have time to dress for the Play, and had it
not been for which reason, Monsieur Vervilles arrival would have interrupted
it, who got easily into the Chamber, by reason that the Porter was asleep. His
coming surpised the Company extremely. He very courteously embraced them all,
and chiefly Monsieur Destiny, whom he hugged closely more than once. Afterward
he began to tell them the occasion of his Journey, which you shall have in the
following Chapter, although it be very short.

CHAP. XI.
Resolutions of Destiny's Marrying with Star, and Leander with Angelica.
THE Prior of St. Lewis would have been gone but Destiny stopped him, telling him
that Supper would be ready speedily, and he should keep Monsieur Verville
Company, whom they had entreated to Sup with them. The Hostess was called up
and ordered to get something extraordinary. Clean Linen was laid, good Cheer
made, many Healths drank, and a great deal talked. After Cloth was taken
away, Destiny desired to know of Verville the occasion of his coming into
those Parts. He ansvver'd that it was not on account of his Brother-in-Lavv
Saldaigne's Death, which his Sisters lamented no less than he, but by reason
of a business of importance, which he had to Negotiate at Rennes in Britany,
so that being that way bound, he could do no less than turn a little out of
the Road to visit so good a Friend as him. Destiny thanked him heartily for the
Honor he had done him, and afterward informed him of all the ill Designs
that Saldaigne, had had against him, which you may have seen in the VI Chapter
of this Third Part, as likewise with the manner of his Death. Verville shrug'd
up his Shoulders at this Relation, saying, he had deservedly met with what he
so industriously sought after. After Supper Verville took Acquaintance with the
Prior, whom Destiny recommended to him for a very worthy Gentleman. Having sat
up a little with them the Prior retired, when Verville took Destiny aside and
demanded of him what made Leander in Mourning, and how he came to have so many
Lackeys after him all in Black likewise. He satisfied him quickly in his
Demands, and moreover acquainted him that he was returned with a design to
Marry Madam Angelica. And you, quoth Verville, When do you design to Marry?
Methinks it is high time to let the World know who you are, which cannot be
done without a Marriage, adding withal, that if his Business did not call him
suddenly away, he would stay to see both his and Leander's Marriage Solemnized.
Destiny answered it was necessary for him to know Madam Star's Mind before he
declared himself. Hereupon Star was presently called, and the Marriage proposed
to her, whereto she readily answered, that she ever would be ruled by the
advice of her Friends. At last it was agreed that when Verville had funish'd
his Affairs at Rennes, he should return by Alencon, and then all matters should
be concluded. The same was concluded between the Company and Mrs Cave
concerning her Daughters Match with Leander. Then Verville took his leave of
the good Company and went to Bed. Next Morning he set forth for Britany
betimes, and arrived not long after at Rennes, where he immediately went to
wait on Monsieur de la Garrouffiere, who after the accustomed Compliments had
passed between them, told him there was a company of Strollers in that Town,
one of which had a great resemblance of Mrs. Cave. This caused him to go next
Day to the Play, where having seen the Person mentioned to him, he was
forthwith inclined to believe that he must needs be a Relation of Caves, he was
so like her. After the Play was over he went upon the Stage, and inquired of
him what Country he was of, whence he came, how long he had been a Player, and
by what means he got into the Company? To all which Questions he answered so
directly that it was no hard matter for Verville to find that he was Mrs. Caves
Brother, who had been lost when his Father was killed at Perigord by the Baron
of Sigognac's Page. This he frankly owned, adding withal, that he had never
been able to meet with his Sister since. Then Verville let him know that she
was at that time in a Company of Strollers at Alencon; that she had met with
many Misfortunes, but that now she was like to have large amends made her by a
Gentleman of 12000 Livres a Year, being to be suddenly Married to an only
Daughter of hers, and farther, that this Gentleman was now along with them, and
acted among them. He also acquainted him that the Marriage was to be
Consummated at his return to Alencon, and that it was very necessary for him to
go along with him, both to see his Sister, and to wish his Niece Joy. The
Stroller was extremely pleased at this News, and promised to be going with him
as soon as he pleased, but we must leave him for a while, packing up his Awls,
and return before him to Alencon. The Prior of St. Lewis came, the same Day
that Verville went away, to acquaint the Strollers that the Bishop of Sees had
sent to speak with him, to Comunicate some matter of Importance to him, and
that he was very sorry that he had not then leisure to perform his promise to
them, but that however there would be no time lost, for while he was at Sees
they might go to Fresnaye to act Sylvia at the Wedding of the Lords Daughter,
and that at his return he would certain finishly what he had begun. He went
forthwith, and the Strollers immediately set themselves about preparing for
their departure likewise.

CHAP. XII.
What happened in the Journey to Fresnaye, as likewise another Misfortune of
Ragotin's.
THE Night before the Wedding a Coach and several Saddle-Horses were sent for
the Strollers. The Actresses went in the Coach, together with Destiny, Leander,
and Olive. The others rid on the Horses, and (...) mounted his own Nag, which
he still kept^ because he could not sell him, and who was now cured of his
Lameness. He would have fain persuaded Star (...) to have got up behind him,
giving for (...) that they might ride much easier than in the Coach ^ which
(...) People together, but neither of them would accept of his Proffer. To go
from Alencon to Fresnaye, it was necessary for to pass thro^ the Forest of
Persaine, which was in the Province of Maine. They had not gone above a Mile
into this Forest, before Ragotin called out to the Coachman to stop, alleging
that he saw a Troop of Horsemen coming toward them. It was not thought
necessary to stop, but every one nevertheless would be upon his Guard. When he
came near the Horsemen, Ragotin gave notice that it was la Rappiniere with his
Archers. Hereat Madam Star began immediately to look Pale, which Destiny
perceiving, told her she had no reason to fear any Insult being offered to her
there, by reason that la Rappiniere would never pretend to any such thing, in
the Presence both of his Archers and Monsieur de la Fresnayes Servants, whose
House they were also near. La Rappiniere knew well that it was the
Strolling-Company that were coming toward him, and therefore advancing to the
Coach-side with his accustomed Impudence he saluted the Actresses, but to whom
he made very coarse Compliments, which they returned cold enough to have put
any one out of Countenance, that had not so much Brass in his Forehead as la
Rappiniere had. He told them that he was looking after Robbers that had robbed
some Tradesmen near Balon, and that he was informed they were coming that way.
Whilst he was thus talking to the Strollers, one of the Archer's Horses that
was a little wanton, leapt upon Ragotin's Horse's Neck, which he going backward
to avoid, happened among a parcel of dead Trees, whereof one pointing directly
toward him, took him under his Wastcoat, and hung him from his Saddle, which
he being willing to disengage himself from, spurred his Horse lustily, and
thereby remained like a Scarecrow trussed up in the Air, for his Horse no
sooner felt his Favors than he left him, crying that he was killed, run through
and I know not what. The Standers-by laughed so heartily to see him hanging in
th^^ Posture, that they had no manner of regard to assisting of him. Indeed
they called once or twice to the Footmen to unloose him but they ran away on
the other side laughing. In the mean time his Horse was run quite away, and
would not suffer himself to be stopped. At length, after every body had laughed
their Belly full the Coachman, who was a strong lusty Fellow, step^ down from
his Seat, and approaching Ragotin, lifted him ^ff from hi^ Tenter-hook, and
took him down. The Co^^^y gathered about him, and made him believe that he was^
^^^unded, but that they could not get him Cured till they (...) to the next
Village, where there was a good Surgeon, ^^refore that in the mean time, they
must apply some gre^^^^ ^^^ves to him to keep the Wound from festering, which
they immediately did. They afterward put him into the Coach in Olives room,
who came out. Whilst this passed, the Footmen and Olive went after his Horse
that would not be stopped, and notwithstanding his being got a great way, brought
him back again to his Master. This done, la Rappiniere left the Company, and
they continued onwards of their Journey toward the Gentleman's House, where
they soon after arrived, and sent thence for a Surgeon, who they privately
instructed what he was to do. He seemed to Probe the imaginary Wound that
Ragotin had, whom they had put to Bed. He likewise pretended to Tent it, and
afterward Bound it up, telling his Patient, that if it had been never so
little on the other side, he had been no longer a Man of this World. He then
ordered him a strict Diet, and so left him to his repose. The little Man was so
imaginarily Afflicted at this Accident, that he could not believe but he was
desperately wounded. He therefore did not think fit to rise to assist at the
Ball which was given after Supper. This Ball was furnished with Music from
Man's, the Musicians of Alencon being gone to a Wedding at Argenton. Several
Country-dances went about, and the Strollers Danced diverse French ones.
Destiny and Star performed a Saraband together, which was admired by all the
Company, consisting as well of Country Gentry as Peasants. the next Day the
Strollers played the Pastoral which the Bride had desired. Ragotin caused
himself to be carried to the sight on it in a Chair, with his Nightcap on.
Afterward they made good Cheer, and the next Morning after Breakfast, having
been well paid, they set out for Alencon again. As soon as the Coach was
brought out, they did what they could to disabuse Ragotin concerning his
imaginary Wound, but all to no purpose, for he still persisted that the felt
the Pain on it. They nevertheless put him into the Coach, and arrived safe at
Alencon. The next Day they would not Act the Actresses being desirous of a
little respite. The same Day the Prior of St. Lewis returned from Sees, who
going to visit our Company, Madam Star told him that he could never meet a
better opportunity than now to finish his History. He required no farther
entreaty, but proceeded as you may find in the follovving Chapter.

CHAP. XIII.
The continuation and conclusion of the Prior of St. Lewis's History.
IF the beginning of this History, quoth the Prior, where you have met with
nothing but Joy and Contentment, has been tiresome to you, the rest you are
about to hear, I fear will be much more. This consists of nothing but the
revers of Fortune, and Despair, and Grief, for past Pleasures. To begin then
where I left off: You must know, that after our Comrades and I had got up our
Parts, and rehearsed several times, we Played perfect on Sunday Night, in
Monsieur du Fresne's House, the rumor of which being got abroad in the
Neighborhood, so many People crowded thither, although we took all the care we
could to keep the Park-Gates shut, that we found no small difficulty to get to
the Stage, which we had raised for us in a midling sort of a Hall. This Place
being not near large enough for our Audience, two Thirds of the Company were
forced to stand without, whom to get rid of, we promised them that on Sunday
following, we would Play again in the Town, and in a more spacious Room. We
performed our Parts indifferent well for Beginners, only one among us who was
to Act the Secretary of King Darius, the Death of that Monarch being the
Subject of our Play, acquitted himself of ill, that altho'd he had not above
two lengths to speak, which he performed well enough at our Rehearsal, yet when
he came to Act in earnest, he was so fainthearted, that we were forced to
thrust him on upon the Stage, where he spoke so extremely ill, that made all
the Audience to laugh. The Tragedy being ended, I began the Ball with du Lys,
which lasted till Midnight. We took a great deal of Pleasure in this Exercise,
and without saying ought to any Body, we quickly got up another Play, I
nevertheless did not omit to make my ordinary Visits in the mean time. One Day
as we were sitting together by the Fireside, a young Gentleman happened to come
in, to whom we gave place. After we had discoursed a little while, he put his
Hand in his Pocket, and pulled out a Picture in Wax in Relievo. very well done,
and which he said was the Picture of his Mistress. After all the Ladies had
^een it round, it came to my turn to look on it. When I had considered it a
little, I found that it was made for du Lys to whom I fancied this Gallant
pretended. I therefore without any more ado, threw the Box, Picture and all
into the Fire, where the little Bustum melted immediately; and when the Owner
thereof would have snatched it out, I threatened to throw him out at the Window.
Monsieur du Fresne, who loved me as much at that time, as he hated me
afterward, swore he would force that Intruder to make more ha^^e out than he
had done in, and going to perform his Oath, the young Spark skip'd over every
bodies Head, and ran out in Confusion. I followed him without any body in the
Company being able to hinder me, and having overtaken him, told him, that if
he took any thing amiss, we two had each of us a Sword by our Sides, and were
in a convenient Place to decide the Difference. But his Answer was, that he had
nothing to say to me, and so went his way. The Sunday following, we Acted the
Play we had done before, according to our Promise, in a great Hall belonging to
a Neighbor, by which means we had fifteen Days to Study the other Play. I
designed to adorn it with some Enterludes of Dancing, and for that purpose,
chose out six of my Companions that Danced the best, and made the seventh my
self. This Interlude consisted of Shepherds and Shepherdesses, that were
desperately in love with each other. In the first Entry Cupid appeared, and in
the others the Shepherds and Shepherdesses, all dressed in white, and their
Habits all beset with narrow Blue-ribbond Knots, which was the Color du Lys
delighted in, and which I have worn ever since, although for some reasons I will
tell you hereafter, I afterward added some Bows of Fillemot. These Shepherds
and Shepherdesses, made their Entrys two by two, and when they were all
together, they formed the Letters of du Lys's Name; Love let fly a Dart at each
Shepherd, and threw Flames at the Shepherdesses, all which bowed the Knee in
Token of Submission. I had composed some Verses to be Sung in this Interlude,
and which we performed, but the great length of time has made me to forget
them, and if I had remembered them, I should never have durst repeated them
before you that are so good Judges. We having kept the Acting of our second
Play secret, we were not so embarrass'd with Company as we had been before. The
Play was The Amors of Sacripantus King of Circassia with Angelica: The Story
taken from Ariosto. We performed the Interlude likewise, and I would have begun
as we were wont to do after the Play, but Monsieur du Fresne opposed it,
alleging we must needs be too much tired, and therefore dismissed us. We
resolved however private we had done it now, to make the representation of this
Play more public, and which we afterward performed before every Body, in my
Godfather's Hall, on Shrove-Sunday, and in the Day time Du Lys desired if I
intended to have the Ball that Night, that I would begin it with a young Lady a
Neighbor of hers, who was then dressed in blue Taffeta as well as she, which I
did. Whilst we were dancing there arise a Whispering among the Company, some
whereof cried out aloud, He Is mistaken, he is deceived, which made both du Lys
and I laugh, which the other Lady perceiving, cried, The People are in the
right, for you have taken one for the other. To which I answered abruptly,
Pardon me, Madam, I know what I do. At Night I Masqu'd my self with three of my
Comrades, and carried a Flambeau to prevent my being known. In this Equipage we
went into the Park, and afterward to the House. My three Companions entered
only, and I stood at the Door. Du Lys observing the three Masks, presently
found that I was not among them, when coming to the Door she immediately
discovered me, and spoke to me these obliging Words. Disguize your self after
what manner you please, for I shall always know you. After-having put out the
Flambeau. I came up to the Table where there was a Box and Dice set. I took up
the Box and began to rattle it, whereupon du Lys asked me who I would be at? I
made her a sign I would be at her. She replied, How much will you throw at? I
pointed to a knot of Ribbons and Coral Braclet which she wore on her Left Arm.
Her Mother would by no means have her venture that, but she burst out a
laughing, saying she was not afraid of venturing of it. I threw and won, and
afterward made my Fair Adversary a present of my Winnings. The same did my
Companions to the elder Sister, and the other Ladies that were come to pass
their Evening there. After this we took our leaves; but as we were going out,
du Lys came behind me, and untying the Ribbonds that held my Mask on, it
immediately fell, whereat I turning about, she said to me, Thus People are to
be used that go away before their time. I was a little ashamed, but
nevertheless very glad to have any Opportunity to talk farther with her. The
others unmasked likewise, and we went in again, and spent that Night very
agreeably. The last Night of the Carnevale I gave the Ball again, when we were
fain to take up with the lesser Company of Musicians, the greater being
pre-engag'd by other Gentry. During Lent we were forced to lay aside Diversions
a little, to give way for Devotion, and I can assure you for our parts, du Lys
and I never wanted a Sermon. The Feast of Easter approaching, young Madam du
Fresne asked me laughing if I would carry her and her Sister to St. Pater, a
Village about a quarter of a League off from the Suburbs of Montfort, whither
People are wont to go out of Devotion on Easter-Mundays, and where one meets
all the Beau-Monde. I answered that I would willingly wait on them both
thither, or any whither else. The Day when we were to go being come, as I was
going out of our House to fetch the Ladies, I met a young fellow a Neighbor of
mine, who asking me whither I was going in such haste, I told him that I was
going to the Park to wait on the young Ladies there to St. Pater. To which he
replied that I might save my self the labor, for to his certain Knowledge
their Mother would not permit them to go along with me. This News stund me so
much that I had not a Word to answer, but going into my House I set my self
about thinking what might be the occasion of so sudden an alteration. After
having reflected on it a good while, I could guess at nothing but my little
Merit and mean Condition. This considered, I could not but exclaim extremely
against their Carriage to me, since they had been well enough pleased with me
as long as I diverted them with Balls, Enterludes, Plays, and Serenades, which
I frequently did to my no small charge, but now that those ceased they slighted
me. The anger I conceived made me resolve to go to the Assembly at St. Pater
without them, whilst they it seems were waiting for me in the Park. The time
being past that I promised to come, du Lys and her Sister, with some other
Ladies their Neighbors, went without me. After having paid their Devotion in
the Church, they came out into the Churchyard, and seated themselves on the
Wall under a great shady Elm. Some time after I passed by, but that at a
distance. Du Fresne made a sign to me to come near them, which I took no notice
of, making as if I did not see them. Some Neighbors that were with me told me
some Lady becken'd to me, but I seemed not to hear them likewise, and going on
cried at the same time, Come lets go and drink a Bottle at the Four Winds,
which we did. I were no sooner got home to my House but a Widow who had been
formerly our Confidente, came to speak with me, telling me briskly that she
wondered how I could neglect doing my self the Honor of waiting on the young
Ladies du Fresne to St. Pater; acquainting me moreover, that du Lys was very
much concerned at the disappointment, and that I must endeavor speedily by
some means or other to make a compensation for my Fault. I was extremely both
surpised and pleased to hear this, and having let her know all the Reason I
had, which I have acquainted you with before, I went along with her to the
Park-Gate where the Ladies were. I left her to make my Excuse, for I could
not pretend to do it my self, being so extremely troubled that I could not
know what I said. Then the Mother, addressing her self to me, told me that I
ought not to have been so credulous to believe what People said, and that she
believed what had been told (...) was done by some body that envied me, and
lastly, she assured me that I should always be unfeignedly vvelcome to her
House, and vvhither we immediately went. I had then the Honor to give my
Hand once more to du Lys, who assured me she had been extremely concerned at
my Carriage, especially when I seemed not to take notice of the Sign her
Sister made me at St. Pater. I asked her Pardon humbly, but made her but
confuss'd excuses, being not yet entirely come to my self. I would have been
revenged on the young Man that imposed upon me, had not du Lys entreated me not
so much as to think of it; adding, that I ought to be satisfied with finding
the contrary of what he had told me. I obeyed her in this, as I did in every
thing always after. We past our time the most agreeably that could be, and we
experienced what is commonly said of Lovers, that their Language is chiefly
that of the Eyes. One Sunday after Vespers we gave each other to understand by
this mure Language that we would after Supper go up the River, and have only
such Persons with us as we could best fancy. For this purpose I sent presently
to hire a Boat, and immediately after went my self with the Companions I had
pitched upon, to the Park-Gate, where the Ladies waited for us; but as ill-Luck
would have it, three young Men that were not of our Company, were at that
juncture talking with them. They did what they could to shake them off, but
which they perceiving seemed the more desirous to stay. This was the reason
that when we came up to the Gate we thought fitting to pass by, contenting our
selves only with tipping them the Wink to follow us^ which they soon after did,
but with the young Fellows along with them, which we perceiving immediately
entered our Boat, and landed near one of the Gates of the City, where we met
the Si^ar du Fresne, who forthwith demanded of me where I had left his
Daughters? I not knowing presently wha^ Answer to make told him frankly, that I
had not had the Honor to see them all that Night. Having heard this, he took
his leave, bidding us good Night, and went toward his Park, at the Gate
whereof he overtook his Daughters, whom asking where and with whom they had
been, du Lys pertly answered with such a one, naming me. At that the Father
reached her a sound Box o'th'Ear, together with you Lie at the end on it; for,
continued he, had he been with you though it were much later, I should never have
asked you the Question. Next Day the aforesaid Widow came again to let me know
what had happened the Night foregoing, and to acquaint me that du Lys was
extremely Angry with me, not only at the box o'th'Ear she had received on my
account, but also at my disappointing of her, she intending to have got quickly
rid of those Impertinent young Fellows. I excused my self as well as I could,
and declined going near her for four Days together. But one Day, as she and her
Sister sat with some other young Ladies on a Bench before a Shop in a Street
next to the City Gate which I was going out at to the Suburbs, I passed by
them, moving my Hat a little, but without looking much upon them, or saying any
thing to them. The other Ladies immediately asked what was the meaning of my so
cold Deportment, which they scarce took to be Civil? Du Lys gave them no
Answer, but her elder Sister told them that she did not know the Reason, and
that if they had a mind to be satisfied in it, they must know it from my self.
Adding moreover, Come let us go place our selves a little nearer the Gate, that
he may not be able to get by us as he comes back without taking more notice. I
quickly returned, when this good Sister catching me hold by the Cloak, and
pulling me to her, said to me, How comes it Haughty Sir, that you can pass by
your Mistress without taking any notice? and at the same time pulled me down by
her, but when I turned to embrace her, and tell her the reason, she slung away
like a Mad thing. I staid a little longer with them and after went my ways. I
resolved then not to go near my Mistress for some Days longer, and which I
performed, but which seemed as so many Ages to me, till at length one Morning I
met Madam du Fresne, who stopping me asked me what had made me so great a
stranger to her House? I answered that it was the ill-humour of her younger
Daughter, whereupon she immediately promised to make up the difference betwixt
us, and bid me meet her within an Hour at her House. I was not a little
impatient till I had obeyed her and herefore went at the time appointed to
Madam du Fresnes House, As I was going up into her Chamber according to her
Direction, I met du Lys coming down, who perceiving me, made so much haste by
me, that I could not stop her. I afterward went into the Chamber, where I
found her Sister, who began immediately to Simper, whereupon I told her how
briskly her Sister had gone by me, but she assured me that that was all
seigned, and that to her Knowledge, she had gone a Hundred times to the Window,
to look whether she could see me, and farther, that she was now gone but into
the Garden, whither I might go after her if I pleased. I took the hint, and
went to the Garden-door, but found it locked, whereupon I begged of her to open
it, but she would not, which her Sister hearing from the top of the Stairs,
came down and opened it for me, by a Trick she had got. I went in, but du Lys
ran from me as if she had been Mad. I followed and overtook her, and catching
her by one of her Sleeves, pulled her down upon a Camomil-bank, clapping my
self at the same time down by her; I made her all the Excuses that I was
capable of doing, but she continued inexorable, at length I acquainted her,
that my Passion was not to be fooled with, and that therefore i^ she did not
quickly think fit to let me know her Mind Despair might drive me to the doing
of something, which she might repent having been the Cause of. This never
theless wrought nothing upon her, the which perceiving, drevv my Svvord out
of the Scabbard, and presenting it ^ her naked, desired that she would be
pleased to thrust it through m^ Heart, telling her at the same time, that it was
altogether impossible for me to survive a deprivation of her Favour^ She
thereupon rise to be gone, informing me, that she ha^ never yet killed any
body, and that when she was so disposed, I should not be the first Person.
Then I stopped her, a^ begged she would stay and see me do it my self; to which
she answered coldly, that I might do as I pleased, for (...) should nor go
about to hinder me. At that, I clapped (...) Point to my Breast, and put my self
into a Posture to (...) upon it, which she observing, immediately grew pale,
(...) kicked away the Hilt from the Ground, so that the sw^^^ fell down,
assuring me withal, that that Action had extremely frighted her, and begged that
I would let her see (...) more such Sights. I answered I were willing to obey
(...) providing she would be less unkind to me for the fut^^^ which she
promised to be. We afterward embraced so (...) iugly, that I could have
vvisht' to have had a Quarrel (...) her every Day of my Life, to occasion so
charming a (...) conciliation. Whilst we remained in these Transports, her
Mother entered the Garden, and told us, she would have come sooner, but that
she imagined we had no need of her interposing to reconcile us.

One Day, as the Sieur du Fresne, his Wife, du Lys and I were Walking together
in the Park, this good Mother told me aside, that she had been a faithful
Advocate in my behalf. She might easily speak this without her Husbands hearing
of it, since he was very deaf. We both thanked her however, rather by Gesture
than Words. A little after, Monsieur du Fresne took me aside, and told me, that
his Wife and he had agreed to give me their younger Daughter in Marriage,
before he went to Court to wait his Quarter in his turn, and therefore desired
I would put my self to no more Charges in Serenades or the like. I returned him
my Acknowledgments, but after a confused manner, being more than ordinarily
Transported at so unexpected a Happiness. But I well remember, I told him, that
I should never have dared to have asked his Daughter in Marriage, as well
considering my small Merit, as the inequality of our Conditions. To which he
answered, that as for Merit, he was well satisfied that I had sufficient, and
for Quality, every body knew I had that would very well supply it, meaning I
suppose, my Estate. I don't remember what reply I gave, but this I know well,
that he invited me to Supper that Night, and where it was concluded, that the
Sunday following, we should have a Meeting of our Friends to finish the
Nuptials. He acquainted me likewise, what Portion he designed to give with his
Daughter, but as for that I told him I had sufficient for us both, and
therefore required her Person only. Then I thought my self the most happy Man
in the World: But alas! That Happiness did not last long, for the Night before
the Day that we were to be Married, as du Lys and I were sitting upon a
Grass-plat, we perceived at a distance, a Councellor of the Presidial-Court,
coming to pay a Visit to the Sieur du Fresne his Kinsman, whereat both she and
I conceived the same thought at a time, and began to be both concerned, though we
knew not well at what, which nevertheless, the event of what we feared made but
too perspicuous. For next Day, when I went to meet the Company at du Fresne's
House, according to Agreement, I found du Lys at the Court-gate crying. Upon
asking her what she ailed, I could obtain no answer, whereupon I entered into
the House, and found her Sister in the same Condition. I asked her likewise,
what was the meaning of so many Tears? She answered sobbing, that I would know
but too soon. Then I went up into the Chamber, and found the Mother, but she no
sooner saw me, than she went out, without scarce speaking a Word to me, for
Tears, Sobbs, and Sighs had so disturbed her, that all she could do, was to
look pitifully upon me, and cry, Ah poor young Man! I resolved to know the
Cause of this sudden Change, and therefore immediately went to Monsieur du
Fresne's Chamber, where I found him sitting in an Elbow-chair. At my coming in,
he told me bluntly, that he had altered his Mind, and would not now Marry his
younger Daughter before his elder, and though he did Marry her, it should be sure
not to be before his return from Court. I answered upon these two Heads, first,
That his elder Daughter would not at all be displeased, to have her younger
Sister Married before her, providing it were to me, since she had always loved
me as her Brother, and more than once professed as much. And secondly, I
acquainted him that I would willingly stay for her ten Years, instead of three
Months that he should be from home. At last, he told me in plain Terms, that I
must think no more of his Daughter, and so turned from me. Having heard this, I
immediately determined to go home and kill my self. But as I was drawing forth
my Sword for that purpose, the aforesaid Widow, that had formerly been our
Confidence, came in upon me where I was, and prevented me in that Design, by
telling me that she came from du Lys, and that she desired me by her, not to
afflict my self, but have Patience, and Matters might perhaps change to my
advantage. She farther informed me from her, that I had her Mother and Sister
sure to my Interest, and above all herself, whose Kindness and Constancy to me
was unalterable. She likewise told me, that the Sisters had resolved as soon as
their Father was gone, that they would give me an opportunity to continue my
Visits as before. Though this Discourse was extremely pleasing to me, yet could
it not altogether comfort me, for I afterward fell into so deep a Melancholy,
that Despair suggested to me, to consult the Devil about my Fate. Hereupon, a
little before Monsieur du Fresne's Departure, I went to a large Copse, about
half a League from the Town, where it was the Vulgar Report, that evil Spirits
inhabited, and where it is certain the Fairies, who are no doubt the Devil's
Imps, had formerly been. I went a great way into this Copse, and when I thought
I was far enough, I began to call upon, and invoke the Spirits to Assist me in
this worst of Misfortunes; but after I had Prayed and Bawled for some time to
no purpose, and only heard the Birds warble, which I interpreted to be their
concern for my Misfortune, I returned home to my House, not at all satisfied,
when throwing my self upon the Bed, I was immediately seized with such a wild
Frenzy, that I even lost my Speech, insomuch, that 'twas thought I could never
have escaped Death. Du Lys was ill at the same time, and much after the same
manner, which has inclined me to believe ever since, that there is something in
Sympathy more than ordinary, for as the Cause of our Sickness was the same, so
was its effect, which we understood by our Doctor and Apothecary, having both
the same, but as for our Surgeon's they were several. I grew well a little
before du Lys, which made me to go, or I might rather say, be carried to see
her. When I came to her House, I found her a Bed, and her Father gone to Court.
She no sooner saw me, but she seemed to recover, which made me desire her to
rise, but she was no sooner got out of Bed, than she fainted away in my Arms.
This made me extremely sorry that I had desired so unreasonable a thing of her,
and therefore I had her immediately put to Bed again, where after some time, I
left her to recover by Sleep, which perhaps she would not have done had I staid
with her. Not long after, we were both entirely recovered, and passed our time
very pleasantly, all the while her Father continued absent, till at last
returning again, he was informed by some secret Enemies of ours, that I had
kept his Daughter company ever since he had been from home. This made him to
rave extremely, and to forbid his Wife and Daughters seeing me any more, which
I learnt afterward by our Confidente, as likewise, that they had
notwithstanding engaged in a Resolution to see me often, and informed me of the
means by this Widow. The first was, that I should observe when this unkind
Father came into the City, when I might go to his House, and continue there
till his return, which was well enough known by his Knock. Then were I to step
behind the Tapistry, and afterward, while either a Man or Maid, or one of his
Daughters took off his Cloak, I might easily slip out behind him, which he
could never hear, by reason as I have told you before, that he was Deaf. This
contrivance I frequently made use of, but which being at length discovered, I
was forced to have recourse to another, which was to meet my Mistress and
Friends in our Confidentes Garden, which I did several times, but at last that
Plot was discovered likewise. We then made use of the Churches for that
purpose, but which also came to be known: So that at last, we had nothing to
rely upon but common Chance, which now and then afforded us a Meeting in one or
other of the Walks of the Park, but then we were fain to use a great deal of
caution to prevent being seen. One Day after I had been with du Lys a
considerable while, for we dived to the very bottom of our Misfortunes, and
took all the Measures imaginable to furmount them, I would needs accompany her
to the lower-Court-Gate, where being just come, we perceived at a distance her
Father coming directly toward us from the Town. To fly was to no purpose, for
he had already seen us. She then immediately entreated me to think of some
Invention to excuse us: I put off that task upon her, alleging she had the
more subtle Capacity. In the mean time the old Gentleman got up with us, and
whilst he was going to scold, she told him that I having understood that he had
some Rings and other Jewels by him, for he had Jewellers always at Work for
him, being as Covetous as he was Deaf, I was come to know if he would please to
furnish me with some to present a young Lady at Man's whom I was going to Marry.
He was easily inclined to credit my pretense, and carrying me up Stairs he
showed me several, whereof I chose two, one a small Diamond, and the other a
Rose of Emeralds. We presently agreed on the price, which I paid him down on
the Spot. This expedient gained me a continuance of my Visits for some time
till at length beginning to grow jealous of the Cheat, he demanded of his
Daughter why I did not make more haste to Man's. She thereupon advised me to go
thither for a little time, which I did. This City is one of the pleasantest in
the whole Kingdom, as ye know very well, and where there is the most Quality,
which induced me to make plenty of Acquaintance. I lodged at the Green Oaks,
where also lay at the same time an Operator, who kept a Stage to sell his
Physic on, but that only till such time as he could get a Company of Strollers
together to Act, that being his principal design. He had already got several
Persons of Quality, and among others a Counts Son, whose Name I shall beg leave
to conceal; a young Lawyer of Man's, who had formerly belonged to a Company,
together with a Brother of his, and an old Comedian, who was a great Proficient
in Farce. He besides expected a young Lady from Laval, who had promised him to
run away from her Father for that purpose. With this Man I got acquainted, and
one Day for want of better discourse I made him acquainted with all my
Misfortunes, whereupon he persuaded me to engage with him in his Design, and
that might prove a means to make me forget my hard usage. I readily accepted
his offer, and would have certainly engaged in it had but the Lady that was
expected come. But it seems her Parents had been acquainted of her Intentions,
and consequently took care to prevent them, which obliged me to quit the
Undertaking. But Love notwithstanding furnished me with a Stratagem to renew my
Conversation with du Lys without Suspicion, and that was to carry the Lawyer
beforementioned, and another young Man of my Acquaintance, to both whom I had
discovered my Design, along with me to Alencon. They soon after appeared in
this City, one under the title of a Brother, and the other a Cousin German of
an imaginary Mistress of mine. I carried them to the Sieur du Fresne's House,
whom I had before desired to pass for my Relation, which he condescended to do.
He did not fail likewise to say a great many fine things in my Favor, assuring
them that they had pitchd upon a very deserving Person to make an Alliance
with, after which he invited us to Supper. My Mistresses Health was drunk and
du Lys pledged it. After my Friends had continued about four or five Days in
this City they returned to Man's, but I staid after them, and had a freer access
than ever to my Mistress. At last Monsieur du Fresne asked me why I delayed so
long to conclude my Marriage, which made me to apprehend that my Stratagem
might be at length discovered, and then I should shamefully be driven out of
the House as before. This made me to enter into the most barbarous Resolution
that ever Man in Despair conceived, and which was to kill du Lys to prevent
another ever having the Possession of her. For this purpose I got a Poniard,
and going to her desired her to take a Walk out with me, which she granted. I
thereupon led her before she was aware into a brambly part of the Park quite
out of any Pathway. There I discovered to her the cruel design Despair had
suggested to me to preserve her to my self, and at the same time drew the naked
Poniard out of my Pocket. She looked so charmingly upon me, and spoke so many
soft things to divert my Intentions, that she at length found it no difficult
matter to disarm me. She seized the Poniard then, and throwing it into the
Bushes told me she must be gone, and that she should not care to trust her self
any more with me alone. She was going to tell me farther, that she never had
deserved this usage at my Hands, when I interrupted her, desiring she would
afford me a meeting next Day at her Confidentes. She promised, and accordingly
came. I Saluted her and we lamented our common Misfortune together, and after a
great deal of Discourse she advised me to go to Paris, (...) promised that though
I staid away Ten Years she (...) entertain no Body else in the mean time, which
nevertheless she did not keep. When I was about to take leave of her, which you
may imagine I could not do without a great many Tears, she said she thought it
necessary that her Mother and Sister should be of the Secret, and therefore the
Widow was immediately to call them whilst I continu^e alone with her. It was
then that we opened our Minds to each other more than we had hitherto done, and
at length she told me, that if I had Thoughts of carrying her away, she would
willingly consent to it, and follow me wheresoever I went, and that if any were
sent out after us, and should overtake us, she would pretend to be with Child
by me. However my Love was so Honorable toward her, that I would by no means
consent to any hazard of her Reputation on my account, but leave the event of
all things to Fortune. In the interim her Mother and Sister were come, and we
broke our Resolutions to them, which caused fresh Tears and Embraces on all
sides. In short I took my leave of them in order to my Journey to Paris. Before
I set out I writ a Letter to du Lys, the Contents whereof I have forgot, but
you may imagine I omitted nothing therein that might serve to raise her
Compassion, and my Confidente that carried it assured me that she could not
read it for Weeping, and much less return me an Answer. I have forborne telling
the several other Adventures that happened during our Amor, that I might not
trespass too far on your Patience. Such as the jealousy du Lys conceived at a
Cousin-German of hers that came to see her, and lived at her Fathers for three
Months together, as also on account of the Gentleman's Daughter that brought
the Gallant whom I sent away packing. Together with several Rencountres I had
by Night for her sake, in two whereof I was Wounded, once in the Arm, and
another time in the Thigh. But to end all Digressions, I must even let you know
that I departed at last for Paris, where I arrived safe, and continued about a
Year. But not being able to maintain my self there equal to what I had done in
this City, as well by reason of the excessive dearness of Provisions, as by
having diminished my Fortune by the expenses I were at on account of du Lys, as
you have heard before I was fain to put my self to one of the King's
Secretaries, who had been married to his Predecessors Widow. Though this Lady
conferred many Favors upon me yet I was always so blind as not to perceive
them, though some of them were so open that most of the Family took notice of
them. One Day after I had bought some Holland for Neckbands and Wristbands to
my Shirts, and given them to some of the Maid Servants to make, my Mistress
came and observed them, when asking who they were for, and understanding they
were mine, she bid them finish them as soon as they could, but leave the Lace
for her to put on. Afterward whilst she was Working upon them, I by chance
entered the Chamber when she called to me, and told me she was at Work for me,
which surprised me so much that I could only return her Thanks and so went out.
But one Morning to my greater wonder, whilst I was Writing in my Chamber, which
was not very far from hers, she sent for me by one of the Lackeys. Whilst I was
going to her I heard her rave like Mad against one of her Chamber Maids, and
her Waiting-Gentlewoman in these Words, Get ye out of my Chamber ye Blunderers,
ye Buffleheads, you know not how to do any thing as ye should do. When they
went out I came in, whereupon, after having Rallied them a little longer, she
bid me shut the Door and come and help dress her, and particularly to take the
clean Smock from the Toilet and put it on for her. At the same time she stripped
off her foul one, and exposed her self naked to my sight. I was so greatly
ashamed at this Action of hers, that I told her that I should be less
Serviceable to her that way than her Maids, and therefore desired her to send
for them again, which she was nevertheless obliged to do by the sudden arrival
of her Husband. I had no reason to doubt of her Intentions, but as I was young
and timorous, I was apprehensive of some unlucky Accident, and therefore
resolved to ask speedily to be gone from her Service, which I did soon after,
whereto the Husband answered nothing but retired, and the Wife sullenly turned
her Chair toward the Fire and bid the Butler clear the Table. After this, I
went down to Supper with the Steward, and being at Table, a Niece of my Ladys,
of about twelve Years old, came to me from her Aunt, to know whether I had the
courage to eat before I went. I forgot what answer I sent her, but I well
remember that she immediately fell sick and was forced to keep her Bed. Next
Morning betimes she sent for me to go for a Physician. When I came near her
Bedside, she caught me by the Hand, and told me plainly, that I had been the
occasion of her Illness. This augmented my former Apprehensions, and therefore
the same Day I Listed my self in the Troops that were then raising at Paris,
for the Duke of Mantua, and departed without saying ought to any Body. Our
Captain came not along with us, leaving the command of his Company to his
Lieutenant, who was a common Robber, as likewise were the two Sergeants, for
they Plundered wherever they came, and were at last Hanged by the Provost of
Troyes in Champagne, but who spared one of the Sergeants, on account of his
being Brother to one of the Duke of Orleans's Valet de Chambres. We hereby
remained without a Leader, whereupon the Soldiers with common Consent pitched
upon me to Command the Company, which consisted of Fourscore Men. I took this
Post upon me, with that Authority as if I had really been the Captain. I drew
out my Company, and Mustered them, and Distributed the Arms amongst them, which
I received at St. Reine in Burgundy. at length we filled off to Embrun in
Dauphiny, where our Captain came to us, expecting scarce to find a Man in his
Company, but when he perceived all I had done, and that I had preserved Sixty
eight of the Men, having lost only twelve in our March, he hugged me heartily,
and gave me the Colors and his Table. The Army was one of the finest that ever
went out of France, but which had the ill Success you may have heard of, merely
through the bad Intelligence between the Generals. After its Defeat, I staid at
Grenoble, to avoid the Barbarity of the Peasants of Burgundy and Champagne, who
murdered all that fled in such great numbers, that it introduced the Plague in
those two Provinces, and which afterward likewise spread it self throughout
the whole Kingdom. Having staid some time at Grenoble, where I got a great deal
of Acquaintance, I resolved to go for this City where I was Born, but
traveling out of the High-road, for the reason above mentioned, I came at
length to a small Town, called St. Patrick. where the Lady of the Manors Son
was raising a Company of Foot, to go to the Siege of Montauban. I Listed under
him, and he having discovered something more than ordinary in my Countenance,
after having demanded of me who I was, and being told the Truth by me, he
desired me to accept of the Tutelage of a young Brother of his, to whom he had
given the Colors, and which I readily did. We departed then for Noeiis in
Provence, being the Place of Rendezouz for the Regiment, but before we had been
there three Days, our Captain's Steward robbed his Master and fled. He gave
Orders to have him persu'd, but which proved to no purpose. He then desired me
to take the Keys of his Coffers, which I did not keep long, by reason he was
commanded from the Regiment, to wait on the great Cardinal Richelieu, who then
headed the Army for the Siege of Montauban, and other rebellious Towns of
Guyenne and Languedoc. He nevertheless carried me along with him, and we found
his Eminence in the Town of Albi, whence we waited on him to the aforesaid
rebellious City, but which continued not long so, after this great States-man's
setting down before it. During this March we had a great number of Adventures,
which I don't think fit to bring you acquainted with, for fear of proving
tiresome, having but too just reason to believe that I have been so too much
already -- To this Star replied, that he would deprive them of a great deal of
Pleasure, if he did not continue his Adventures to the end. He went on then,
after the following manner -- I got a great acquaintance in this Illustrious
Cardinal's House, and that chiefly with the Pages, whereof there were eighteen
of Normandy, who all made extreme much of me, as did likewise the rest of his
Eminences Servants. As soon as the Town was yielded up, our Regiment was
Disbanded, and we returned to St. Patrick. The Lady of the Manor had a Suit at
Law with her eldest Son, and was going to Grenoble to Prosecute it. As soon as
we were got home, we were desired to accompany her thither, but which I had no
manner of Mind to do, having determined to go as I told you before: We were
however prevailed upon to comply with her request, which I have not since
repented of; for whilst we were at Grenoble soliciting the Suit, the late King
of France Lewis XIII happened to pass by that way into Italy, when I had the
Honor to meet in his Retinue, with all the great Lords of this Country, and
amongst the rest, the Governor of this City, who being well acqainted with
Monsieur de St. Patrice, after having offered me what Money I wanted,
recommended me heartily to him, so that I had then no reason to complain. I met
likewise five young Men of this City, three whereof were Gentlemen, who had
been my intimate Acquaintance. I treated them the best that I could, both at
our House and at the Tavern. One Day as we were coming from Breakfast at an
Inn, in the Suburbs of St. Laurence, which is on the other side of the Water,
we happened to stop upon the Bridge to see the Boats pass, when one of the Five
told me seriously, that he very much wonder^^ why I had not inquired of them
after du Lys. I told him I durst not, for fear of hearing that which would not
please me. They replied, I had done well to slight her that had broke her Word
to me. I thought I should have dyed at this News, but however I must know more
to the same purpose, for they immediately acquainted me farther, that my
Departure for Italy was no sooner heard of, than du Lys was Married by her
Parents to a young Man, whom they named to me, and to whom I had the most
aversion of any of her Pretenders. Then I began to break out and rail against
her, in all the ill Language that Jealousy could suggest to me; I called her
Tygress, Traitress and the like, for that she could suffer herself to be
Married, when she knew I was so near, and would certainly require an account
both from him and her. I then took a Purse out of my Pocket which she had given
me, and wherein I kept a Bracelet of hers, and a blue Ribbon, and putting a
Stone into it to make it sink, I threw it in a great Passion into the River,
speaking these Words at the same time: So may I blot her out of my Memory, as I
abandon this Purse to the Pleasure of the Waves. These Gentlemen were not a
little surpised at my Proceeding, and therefore told me that they were
extremely sorry that they had let me know so much, which nevertheless I would
have come to the knowledge of some way or other. They added moreover to comfort
me, that what du Lys had done was wholly by compulsion, for they perfectly
perceived an aversion in her to the Person, and which was demonstrable enough,
in that she languish'd all the time she was Married to him, and died not long
after. This News increased my Grief, and comforted me at the same time. I took
leave of these Gentlemen, and went home, but so altered, that young Madam St.
Patrice, the good Ladies Daughter observed it, and asked me what I ailed. I
gave her no answer but at length upon pressing me farther, I told her the Story
of my whole Adventures, together with the News I had just heard. This good
Natured young thing, was extremely concerned at the Relation, which might be
perceived by her crying, and went immediately and told it to her Mother and
Brothers, who all assured me they commiserated my Misfortunes, and would do all
that lay in their Power to redress them, but that in the mean time I must be
comforted and have Patience. The Suit betwixt the Mother and the Son, ended by
an Arbitration, and so we returned. I then began to think of settling in the
World. The House where I was, would have been sufficient to have afforded me a
Character, had I been disposed to Marry, but tho'several good Matches were
offered me, yet would I accept of none. Then I returned to my former design of
being a Capuchine, and required the Habit, but I met with so many obstacles in
this intention which would be but redious for you to hear, that I quitted that
design likewise. About this time the King commanded the Arrierban of the Gentry
of Dauphiny to go to Casal. Monsieur de St. Patrice desired me to go along with
him, which I could not well refuse. We departed and arrived there, and you know
what was the success of it. The Siege was raised, the Town given up, and Peace
concluded through the Mediation of Mazarine. This was the first step he made to
the Cardinalship, and to that prodigious Grandeur which he arrived to
afterward in the Government of France. We returned to St. Patrice where I
still persisted in becoming a Recluse, but divine Providence ordered it
otherwise. One Day Monsieur de St. Patrick perceiving my Resolution, told me he
would advise me to take Orders as a secular Priest. I replied I had not
Capacity: he answered there was those that had less. I resolved then upon it,
and took Orders upon an allowance of a Hundred Livres a Year that Madam St.
Patrice gave me. I said my first Mass in our Parish Church, and upon which
occasion my Patroness treated about Thirty Priests and several Gentry of the
Neighborhood. I lived with too rich People to want Preferment, for in six
Months time I got a considerable Priory, and two other small Benefices. Some
Years after I had a very large Priory and a very good Curateship given me, for
I had taken a great deal of pains in my Study, and was arrived to that
perfection in Preaching that I could mount the Pulpit before the best Auditory,
and even in presence of any Bishop. I managed my Revenues with discretion, and
in a short time got together a considerable Sum of Money, wherewith I retired
into this City, where I think my self extremely happy in meeting with so good
Company, as likewise in having done them some small Service. Rather, quoth
Star, the greatest that could be done for any Body. She was going to say more
when Ragotin started up and said he would write a Comedy upon this Story, which
would afford a more than ordinary Decoration of the Stage: For Example, a fine
Park with a great Wood, and a River with Lovers Walking and Fighting, and a
Priest saying his first Mass in it, What could be finer? This made all the
Company laugh, when Roquebrune who had all along contradicted him told him. You
will never be able to do any thing in the Matter. You know nothing of the Rules
of the Stage; besides you must change the Scene, and continue three or four
Years upon it. Then the Prior said, Gentlemen, pray don't dispute upon this
point, for I have taken care of it my self already. You may remember that
Monsieur du Hardy never observed Rules so strictly, no more than some others of
our late Poets have done, such as the Author of St. Eustace, etc. Monsieur
Corneille likewise would not have been so nice in that particular had not
Monsieur Scudery been so severe on his Cid. But for the most part these are
such Faults as the better sort of Judges term beautiful ones. I must tell you,
quoth the Prior, I have Composed a Play on the Subject of my Adventures my
self, and have called it Fidelity preserved after Hope lost. I have also taken
for my Device a withered Tree with only a few blasted Leaves on it, and a
Spaniel-Dog lying at the Root of it with this Motto out of his Mouth, Deprived
of Hope yet always Faithful. My Play has been acted several times. The Title
you have chose for it, quoth Star, is as much a propos as your Device and
Motto, for your Mistress has proved false to you, yet you continue constant to
her, resolving never to Marry any other. The Conversation ended by the arrival
of Monsieur Verville and Monsieur de la Garrouffiere, and here ends this
Chapter, which no doubt has been tedious as well in regard of its length as
Subject.

CHAP. XIV.
Verville's return, accompanied by Monsieur de la Garrouffiere. The Actors and
Actresses Marriages; together with an Adventure of Ragotin's.
ALL the Company were extremely surpised to see Monsieur de la Garrouffiere.
As for Verville's return it had been long expected with impatience, and that
chiefly by the two Couples that were to be Married. The Company demanded of la
Garrouffiere what News he had brought. He answered none but that Monsieur
Verville having communicated an Affair of Importance to him he was glad of the
occasion to come and see them again, and to offer them a continuance of his
Services. Hereupon Verville made a sign to him that that matter was to be
talked of in private, and to break off the discourse he presently presented the
Prior of St. Lewis to him, who he told him was his particular Friend, and
moreover a Man of Worth. Then Star told them he had just concluded a Story the
most entertaining that could be imagined, which caused these two new arrived
Gentlemen to profess their concern for not having come before to have had their
share of it. Then Verville went into another Room, whither Destiny soon
followed him, when after they had continued there for some time, they called in
Star and Angelica, and afterward Leander and Mrs. Cave, whom Monsieur de la
Garrouffiere followed without invitation. When they were altogether Monsieur
Verville told them that he had acquainted Monsieur la Garrouffiere with the
Design of their Inter-Marriages, whilst he was at Rennes, and that he had
presently resolved to go home by Alencon, to assist at the Weddings. The two
Couples gave him a great deal of Thanks, and returned him their Acknowledgments
of the Honor he had done them. But now I think on it, quoth Monsieur Verville
to la Garrouffiere, had not we best have the Man up that waits below. I think
so, replied la Garrouffiere, if the Company were willing. They answered any
Friend of his or Monsieur Vervilles would be welcome at any time to them. The
Man was thereupon sent for up. As soon as he entered the Room Mrs. Cave looked
steadfastly upon him, and began to be moved, though she knew not for what. She was
asked if she knew that Man? She answered she could not remember she had ever
seen him. Then she was desired to take more notice of his Face, which she did,
and began to find so many of her own Features in him that she cried out, It is
not my Brother sure? Whereupon he immediately went to her, and embracing her,
told her that he was her Brother whom variety of Misfortunes had kept so long
from the sight of her. He afterward Saluted his Neice and the rest of the
Company, and then assisted at the secret Conference, where it was concluded
that the two Marriages should be speedily Solemnized. All the difficulty at
last was what Priest should Marry them. Then the Prior who had been called in
to the Conference stepped up, and said he would talk about that with the Parsons
of the two Parishes in the City, and of that of the Suburbs of Montfort, and if
they made any difficulty about it, he would return to Sees and obtain leave of
that Bishop, and providing he would not grant it, he would go and procure it
from the Bishop of Man's, who was his intimate Acquaintance, and within whose
Diocese his small concern lay. The Company was very well pleased with his
Proposal, and desired him to take that trouble upon him. Then was a Notary
privately sent for, and the Marriage Contracts drawn. I don't tell you the
Particulars of them, because they never came to my knowledge, but certain it
is, that the Parties were soon after Married accordingly. Monsieur Verville,
Monsieur de la Garrouffiere and the Prior of St. Lewis were the Witnesses to
the Contracts. This last went immediately to discourse the aforesaid Parsons,
but neither of them would Marry them, alleging several reasons that the Prior
perhaps was unable to answer for want of Capacity. This made him resolve
according to his promise to go to Sees. For this purpose he took Leanders Horse
and one of his Servants, and went to wait on the Bishop of that Diocese who was
very unwilling to grant his Request. The Prior urged that these People were
truly of no Diocese, being here to Day and gone to Morrow, and yet they could
not be reputed Vagabonds, as the three Parsons would needs have them to be, by
reason that they had the Kings License, and by consequence were Subjects of
that Diocese wherever they happened to come. Also that those Persons for whom
he required a License were at present in the Diocese of Alencon, over which his
Lordship had Jurisdiction, and that therefore he humbly requested the favor of
a License for them, they being very honest People. Hereupon the Bishop gave the
Prior liberty to have them Married in what Church he pleased. He would have
called his Secretary to have drawn up the License in Form, but the Prior told
him that a Word or two under his own Hand would be sufficient. Next Day our
Solicitor returned to Alencon, where he found the betroath'd Parties making all
manner of Preparations for their Nuptials. The other Strollers who had not been
admitted of the secret wondered what all that Provision meant, but especially
Ragotin who was most concerned to know it. What obliged them to keep it so
secret related wholly to Destiny, for as for Leander and Angelica, ever body
knew they were to be Married. Another Reason likewise was their fear of not
obtaining a License; but no sooner were they secure of one than they made the
matter public, and having read the Marriage Contracts before all the Company,
they proceeded to appoint a Day for the Solemnization. This was a cruel blow to
poor Ragotin whom Rancour whispered in the Ear, Did not I tell you what this
would come to? I had always mistrusted it. Hereupon the poor little Man fell
into a deep Melancholy, which inclined him to that Despair which you may read
of in the last Chapter of this Romance. He became so disordered that while he
was walking one Holy Day before the great Church of Notre-dame, at the time of
the Ringing of the Bells, he fancied that they were made to Ring the following
Words on purpose to affront him, Thi^-Mor-ning- Ra-go-tine
got-Drunk-by-too-much-Wine:
Go-Home, Go-Home.


This made him to go immediately into the Belfry and rattle the Sexton, telling
him he ly'd, for that he had not drunk so much as he imagined. But, quoth he, I
should not have been angry if you had made your Bells to cry The-Mu-ti-neer-
Des-ti-ny
has-got-thy-dear- Star-from-thee,
Ra-gotin-Ra-gotin.
for then I should have rejoiced to have found inanimate Bodies sensible of my
wrongs. But to call me Drunkard, a name I never deserved! I will be revenged of
you and your Bells if possible. Having said this, and crowded on his Hat fast
to his Head, he mounted up a pair of winding Stairs which he thought went up to
the place where they were Ringing, but which were indeed the Stairs belonging
to the Organ. When he began to perceive that this was not the Belfry
Staircase, he was somewhat troubled; nevertheless going on forwards, he at
length met with a little low Door which went under the Tiles. Here he crept in;
and whereas other People would have been forced to creep on, by reason of the
low pitch of the place, ^he nevertheless afterward had room to walk upright,
when ^t last coming to another Door that opened into the Ringing-Room he went
in and found several Persons at it Ding-dong with that eagerness that they
never looked behind them. At his first entrance he saluted the Fellow that
stood next him with all the injurious Language he could think of, calling him
^illain, Rascal, Sot, Puppy, Blockhead, Clown, and what not, which
notwithstanding the noise of the Bells hindered that ^erson or any of the rest
from hearing. At this Ragotin, be^eving himself not only affronted but
despised, went up to ^he said Fellow and gave him a good lusty thump on the
^ack with his Fist. The Fellow feeling himself struck, turned about of a sudden
and cried, What little T -- (...) this? -- I wonder who sent thee hither to
strike me. Ragetin was about to have given him the Reason for what he had done,
when the Ringer holding his Bell-rope with one Hand, and catching him by the
Arm with the other twirl'd him about, and at the same time gave him such a kick
in the A -- e that he sent him headlong down a pair of Stairs into the
Chim^-room. He tumbled so violently, with his Face foremost against some of the
Clock-work, that his Nose gus^^d out with Blood, besides the many other parts
of his Body that were extremely Bruiz'd. This made him to roar like a Bull; but
perceiving no Remedy, and fearing to go up again to the Ringer, he ran down
Stairs as fast as he could drive to complain to the Lieutenant Criminal who
lived hard by. This Magistrate seeing Ragotin in that pickle, was easily
inclined to believe what he told him, but after having heard the reason
likewise, from the Sexton that followed him to his House, he could not forbear
laughing immoderately, though he pitied him at the same time, well knowing that
the little Man must needs have his Brain out of order to be guilty of such
extravagancies. Nevertheless to content him what he could, (...) told him he
would do him Justice, and consequently sent (...) Footman for the Ringer, who
being come, he demanded (...) him why he had abused that little Gentleman there
with hi^ Bells. To which he answered, that he knew not how (...) could abuse
him, since he and his Companions Rung only after their common rate
Or-le-ans-Bois-gen-cy,
No-tre-dame-de- Cle-ri:
Ven-dosme-Ven-dosme.
But that indeed after he had once struck him first he did ki^^ him, which
happening to be toward the top of the Stairs, (...) could not help his falling
to the bottom. The Lieutena^^^ Criminal hereupon bid the Ringer for the future
be mo^^ cautious how he bestowed his Favors of that kind, and advised Ragotin
to be wiser hereafter than to trust to his Imagination, since it had so
palpably deceived him. Ragotin, (...) finding it likely to have any farther
Justice done him in (...) Case, went home as well satisfied as he could, when
the A^^^ors perceiving his Face Bruiz'd and Bloody in many plac^^ inquired of
him what had been the occasion, but he wou^^^ by no means tell them, yet they
soon after came to know (...) by others, which caused them, together with
Monsieur Verville and Monsieur Garrouffiere to laugh heartily at him. The
Wedding Day being at length come, the Prior of St. Lewis told the Parties to be
Married, that he had made choice of his own Church to Marry them in, whither
they went soon after, with as little noise as they could, and were Married
after a very pious Exhortation. The Business being thus done, they returned to
their Lodgings, where they Dined, after which they did not know how to pass
their time till Supper. As for Plays, Enterludes, and Balls, they had been so
familiar to them, that they were not at all entertaining, and therefore they
proposed to hear some Novel read. Verville said for his part he knew none. If
Ragotin had not been Melancholy, he had been the properest Person to relate
one, but he was dumb. Then Rancour was spoke to to tell that of the Poet
Roquebrune, which he had promised the Company he would do when occasion served,
and none could happen better than now. His answer was, that he was not at all
in Humor, and besides, that he did not care to bespatter his Friend Roquebrune
with Aspersions, since he had better deserved of him of late then he had
formerly done. At length Monsieur de la Garrouffiere told the Company, that if
they would accept of what he could entertain them with, he would tell them some
Adventures which he had been an Eyewitness of, and which you will find in the
following Chapter.

CHAP. XV.
The two Jealous Ladies, a Novel.
MY Father, who was a Councellor of the Parliament of Rennes, said Monsieur de
la Garrouffiere, and who designed me for his Successor, as I am, sent me to the
College to qualify me for that purpose. But whilst I continued in my own
Country he fancyed I profited but little, and therefore he resolved to send me
to la Fleche, where you know the Jesuits have their best College throughout
all France. It was in this little Town that what I am about to tell you
happened, and moreover at the same time that I Studied there. -- There were two
Gentlemen, the most accomplished in all that Place, who although they were a
little advanced in Years, were nevertheless not Married, as it often happens
amongst Persons of any Quality, who according to the Proverb, Between whom we
would have, and whom we would not, we remain a long time unmarried. This Saying
was nevertheless crossed at last by these two well Bred Gentlemen. One of
these, who was called Monsieur de Fons-blanche, Married a Daughter of the
Family of Chateau-d'un, who were a meaner sort of Gentry, but very Rich. The
other whose Name was Monsieur du Lac, Married a Lady from the City of
Chartres, who was not Rich, but nevertheless exceeding Beautiful, and of so
good a Family, that she was related to several Dukes, and Peers, and Mareshals
of France. These two Gentlemen, who could share the Town betwixt them,
were always good Friends till after their Marriage, when their two Ladies
looking enviously on each other, they quickly occasioned a Rupture betvveen the
Husbands. Madam de Fons-blanche, was nor, it is true, Handsome in Countenance,
but she had nevertheless a graceful Mein, was well shaped, had a great deal
of Wit, and was very obliging. Madam du Lac, as Beautiful as she was, yet
vvanted Address; she had Wit indeed a great deal, but so ill Managed, that she
thereby rather rendered herself avoidable than acceptable. These two Ladies
were of the Humor of most Women now a days, who never think they live
great, unless they have a Score or two of Beaux after them. This caused them
to employ all the Art they had in making Conquests, but herein du Lac succeeded
much better than Fons-blanche, for she had subdued all the Youth of the Town,
I mean among the Quality, for she would by no means suffer any others to speak
to her. This Pride and Affectation, occasioned a great many Murmurings against
her, which at length broke out into open detraction, but nothing harmed her,
for it is thought it rather contributed to, than hindered her procuring new
Lovers. Fons-blanche was not so desirous of having a great number of Sparks.
She nevertheless had some, which she managed with a great deal of Address, and
whereof there was one, a very handsome young Fellovv, who had as much Wit as
she, and was one of the bravest Youths of his time. This Spark was her
greatest Favorite, but at length his diligence caused him to be suspected by
the Neighbors, and Slander began to talk loud. It was here the Rupture began
between the two Ladies, who before, had Visited each other very civilly, but
nevertheless with a little jealous Envy. Du Lac began at last to slander Fons
Blanch openly; to spy into her Actions, and do all that lay in her power to
ruin her Reputation, especially about the aforesaid Gentleman, whose Name was
Monsieur du Val-Rochet. This soon came to Fons-blanche's Ears, who was
extremely nettled at it, and said, that if she had Lovers, it was not by Scores
as du Las had, who every Day gained new Conquests by her Impostures. Du Lac
hearing this, quickly returned her the like Reflections. Whence you may
imagine, that these two Women lived together in a Town like a Brace of Demons.
Some charitable People did all they could to reconcile them, but which proved
in vain, for they could never be prevailed upon so much as to see each other.
Du Lac thought, that the only way to offend Fons-blanche to the quick, would be
to get away her Lover du Val-Rochet from her. She then caused Monsieur de
Fons-blanche, to be acquainted underhand, that he was no sooner out of Doors,
which he was often, either a Hunting or a Visiting his Neighbors, but that du
Val-Rochet lay with his Wife; and farther, that several Persons of Credit were
ready to testify, that they had seen him come naked out of her Bed. Monsieur
de Fons-blanche, who had never yet had any suspicion of his Wife, was
nevertheless inclinable to reflect a little upon what he had heard, and in
confusion, desired his Lady to oblige him so far, as to entertain du
Val-Rochet's Visits no longer. She seemed all Obedience, but nevertheless
insinuated so many Reasons why she might safely admit him, that he gave her
Liberty, and suffered her to Act as before. Du Lac perceiving that this
Contrivance of hers had not had its desired effect, resolved to get some
opportunity to talk with Val-Rochet herself. She was both Fair and Subtle, two
Qualifications that were sufficient to surprise the waryest Heart, although it
had been never so much engaged. De Fons-blanche was extremely concerned, at
being like to lose her Lover, but much more when she heard, that Val-Rochet had
spoke unhandsomely of her. This Grief of hers was augmented by her Husband's
Death, which happened a little while after. She went into close Mourning it is
true, but Jealousy got the Ascendant of her outward concern. Her Husband had
been scarce Buried 15 Days, but she had a secret Conference with Val Rochet. I
know not the Subject of their Discourse, but the Event makes me pretty well
able to guess at it, for in little more than a Week after, their Marriage was
made public, so that in less than a Months time, (...) had two Husbands, a
Living and a dead. This seems to me, to have been the most violent effect of
Jealousy immaginable, for to deprive du Lac of her Lover, she both forfeited
her Modesty by Marrying so soon, and forgave the unpardonable Affront
Val-Rochet had offered her. Du Lac was almost ready to run Mad when she first
heard this News, and resolved forthwith to have him Assassinated as he went on
a Journey to Britany, but which he having been acquainted with, she was
prevented in that Design. Then she entered upon the strangest thought that ever
Jealousy could suggest, and that was, to set her Husband and Val-Rochet
together by the Ears, which she brought about by her pernicious Artifices. They
quarreled diverse times, and at length came to a Duel, which du Lac encouraged
her Husband in, being none of the wisest Men in the World, that du Val-Rochet
might have an opportunity to kill him, which she fancyed no hard matter, and
then she proposed to Hang him out of the way for his pains. But as Fortune
would have it, it happened quite otherwise, for Val Rochet trusting to his skill
in Fencing, seemed to despise du Lac, thinking he durst not make a Thrust at
him, but herein he was extremely deceived, for whilst he put himself out of
guard, du Lac made a home Thrust at him, and run him through the Body, whereof he
instantly dyed. This done, du Lac went home to his House, and acquainted his
Wife therewith, who was not only surpised but concerned at so unexpected an
Accident. He after this fled away privately to a Relation of his Wives, who as
I have told you before, had several Persons of Quality to her Kindred, who
labored incessantly to obtain her Husbands Pardon from the King. Madam
Fons-blanche was not a little astonished when she was first told that her
Husband was killed, but coming afterward to herself, she was advised to Bury
him quickly and privately, to prevent his Body being Arrested by the Bailiffs.
Thus in less than six Weeks time, Fons-blanche had been a Widow twice. Du Lac
not long after obtained his Pardon, which was confirmed by the Parliament of
Paris, notwithstanding all the opposition the deceased Person's Widow could
make. This made her to entertain a wilder Design than Madam du Lac had done
before, and that was to Stab du Lac as he walked in the Marketplace with some
of his Friends. For this purpose she provided herself of a Poniard, and
marching up to him, attackt him so furiously, that before he could get himself
into a Posture of Defense, or have any of his Friends turn about to help him,
she had Stabbed him mortally in two Places, whereof he died three Days after.
His Wife immediately got this Virago seized and clapped up in Prison. Her Trial
came on, and she was Condemned to Die, but her Execution was respited, by
reason of her being with Child, nevertheless, not long after the Stench of the
Prison did the Work of the Hangman, for she dyed of a Disease caused thereby,
after having been first delivered before her time, and her Child being Baptized
died likewise soon after. Madam du Lac began afterward to reflect on what she
had been the occasion of, and therefore forthwith resolved to turn Nun, which
she did, after having put her Affairs in order, in the Nunnery of Almeneche, in
the Diocese of Sees, where she now continues, if she be not yet dead of her
Austerities which she voluntarily inflicted on her self.

The Actors and Actresses countinu'd their Attention, even while Monsieur de la
Garrouffiere had done speaking, so well they liked the Story he had entertained
them with. Roquebrune starting up all of a sudden, told the Company, after his
usual way, that this was a rare Subject for a Grave Poem, and he would make an
excellent Tragedy of it, which he would reduce to Dramatick Rules. The Company
took little notice of what he said, but all admired at the wondrous Courage of
the Women, who being pushed on by Jealousy, did not boggle at the most
hazardous Attempts. Then it was Disputed, whether Jealousy were a Passion or
not, and all concluded, that whatsoever it was, it ruined the Noblest of
Passions Love. There was a good while yet to Supper, when all the Company
agreed to go and Walk in the Park, which they did, and afterward sat
themselves down on the Grass. Then Destiny said, he thought nothing so pleasant
as Novels. which Leander confirming, offered to relate another concerning a
Neighbor's Daughter of his, which was accepted, and after three or four times
Coughing, he began as follows.

CHAP. XVI.
The Capricious Lady, a Novel.
THere lived in a small Town of Britany called Vitray an ancient Gentleman who
had been Married a great while to a very virtuous Lady without having any
Children by her. Amongst other Houshold-Servants he had a Steward and a
Housekeeper, through whose Hands most matters relating to the Family passed.
These two Persons, as most Servants do sooner or later, made Love, and
promiss'd each other Marriage. They had so well played their Parts in their
several Stations, that both the good old Gentleman and his Lady died not long
after very much encumbered. As for the two Servants they became Rich and
Married, having little or no regard to their Masters Misfortune. Some Years
afterward a certain ill Accident fell out that caused the Steward to fly his
Country, and which to do the more securely, he listed himself in a Troop of
Horse, leaving his Wife without Children. She having waited for his return
about two Years and hearing nothing of him, caused a Report to be spread abroad
that he was Dead, and accordingly went into Mourning for him. When this was a
little over, she was sought after by several Persons in Marriage, and among the
rest by a rich Merchant who married her, and at the Years end had a Child by
her, who might be about four Years old when her Mothers first Husband returned
home to his House. To tell you which was the most surpised, the two Husbands
or the Wife, is not in my Power, but certain it is, that the first Husbands
occasion of going away still continuing against him, he was easily prevailed
upon by the other Husband to take a small sum of Money to be gone again. It Is
true he every now and then returned secretly for a little Subsistence from his
Wife, which was not refused him. In the mean time the Daughter, whose Name was
Margaret, grew up, and being Rich, though she was not handsome, did not want for
Sparks to Court her. Among the rest was a rich Merchants Son, who did not mind
his Fathers Business, but loved to frequent Gentries Company, where he often
met with his Mistress Margaret, who was received among them on account of her
Riches. This young Man, whose Name was Monsieur de St. Germain, had a good
Countenance and Courage enough to engage him often in Duels, which at that time
were very frequent. He Danced very gracefully, Gam'd with all the better sort
of Company, and was always well dressed. In the many meetings he had with this
young Lass, he took all opportunities to let her know what a kindness he had
for her, and how desirous he was to be her Husband. This she seemed to approve
of well enough, and consequently invited him to come and see her at home, which
he did by permission of her Father and Mother, who extremely favored the
Match. But afterward, when he was about to ask her of her Parents, he would by
no means do it till he had her consent likewise, not believing when she had
yielded so far in other things she would oppose him in that, but to his great
surprise, upon putting the Question to her, he found her to repulse him
furiously, both in Words and Actions. Hereupon he went his way, and forbore
visiting her for five or six Days, hoping that thereby he might in some measure
abate his Passion, but to his disappointment he found that it had taken too
deep root to be so easily removed, insomuch that he was quickly forced to go
see her again. He had no sooner entered her House but she went out of it among
her Companions in the Neighborhood, and whither he followed her, after having
had a promise from her Father and Mother to do their endeavors to make her
more sociable. This nevertheless they durst not attempt to do with rigor, she
being their Darling and only Daughter, and therefore they chose rather to
represent to her mildly what Injustice she did the young Man, to use him so
ill, after having once professed to love him. To this she gave no Answer, and
notwithstanding all was said, continued still in her ill Humor, for whenever
he offered to come near her she would change her place. Then he would follow
her, but she always flew from him. One Day as she was getting away he caught
her by the Sleeve; she told him he rumpled it, and that if he offered to come
near her any more she would give him a box o'th'Ear. In a Word, the more he
followed her the more she avoided him. When she was at the Ball, and he would
have danced with her, she affronted. him, telling him she was out of order, and
at the same time danced with another. She at length arrived to that pitch of
Ill Nature that she occasioned him Quarrels, and he above four times accepted
Challenges upon her account, in all which Duels he nevertheless came off safe,
which she seemed to be very sorry for. All this ill usage did but inflame his
Passion the more, like as Oil thrown upon the Fire, insomuch that his Visits
were made the more frequently for his being discouraged. One Day above the rest
he fancied his Perseverance had wrought an alteration in her, for that she
suffered him to come near her, and seemed to hearken attentively to what he
said to her. His Language was this, Why do you thus fly from me, Insensible
Fair one! that cannot live without you? If I have not Merit sufficient to
deserve you, yet consider at least the excess of my Passion, and the many
Indignities I have born from you with Patience. Very well, answered she, you
may flatter your self with that Fancy if you please, but I would have you to
know that the best way for you to win upon me, is to get as far out of my sight
as you can, and because you cannot well do it as long as you continue in this
Town, I command you, which if you have that respect you pretend for me you will
obey me in, to list your self in the Troops that are now raising, and after you
have made a few Campagnes it may be you may find me more kind. This small
pittance of Hope which I afford you ought to incline you to obey me, but if you
will not do it lose me for ever. Then she drew off a Ring from her Finger and
gave it him, saying Keep this Ring to put you in mind of me, but remember that
I forbid you to come any more though to take your leave of me. This said, she
suffered him to take a parting Kiss of her, and then went into an adjoining
Chamber locking her self in. Then this wretched Lover went to take leave of her
Father and Mother, who pitied him extremely, promising to continue always his
Friends, and next Day he listed in a Troop of Horse that was raising to go to
the Siege of Rochelle. His Mistress having enjoined him not to see her again,
till after his return, he durst not pretend to attempt it; but however the
Night before his Departure he gave her a Serenade under her Window with this
Complaint at the end of it, which he Sung to the Melancholy strains of his
Lute.

The Words of the Serenade.
IRis Inexorable Fair!
Whom neither Love nor Friendships sway,
Will you not pity my Despair,
Rather than Innocence betray?
Will you for ever cruel prove,
And must I think your Heart of Stone;
Will you not yet consent to Love,
But suffer me to be undone?
Alas! Fair Nymph, at length I yield
To Fate, and take my last Adieu.
Never was Lover surer killed,
Nor Mistress less concerned than you.
When I am Dead some Friend of mine
Shall rip up this unhappy Breast,
And to your Power my Heart resign,
But leave to Earth and Worms the rest.
The capricious Creature at the sound of this Serenade got out of her Bed, and
opening the Shutters of the Window peeped through the Glass, and set up so hearty
a Laugh as might well make the poor Lover think that he was not like to succeed
in his Design. Just as he was about to express his Mind farther, she clapped to
the Shutter, crying out to him aloud, Keep your Promise, Sir, for your own
sake, and it may be I may not be worse than mine. With this Answer poor St.
Germain retired, and a few Days afterward set out with his Troop for the Siege
of Rochelle. This Town as you may have heard, held out very obstinately for
some time, till at length it was forced to surrender upon Discretion. Then it
was that the Troop wherein St. Germain rid was disbanded, and returned to
Vitray. He no sooner arrived but he went to wait on his unkind Mistress
Margaret, who permitted him it is true to Salute her, but afterward told him
that he had returned too soon, and that she was not yet disposed to receive
him, and therefore desired him to be gone again. His Answer was in these
mournful Words, You are certainly the most cruel Person of your Sex, and I
plainly perceive that you desire nothing more than the Death of him that has
approved himself the most faithful Lover in the World. You have put me four
times upon single Trials of my Courage, and I have always had Honorable
Escapes. You then would have me hazard my Life in the Army, and I have come off
safe there, even where many a less unhappy Wretch than I has met his end. But
since I find you so ardently covet my Ruin, I will go seek my Fate in so many
places that it shall be out of Fortunes Power to afford me any Escape; but it
may be you will not be able to forbear repenting of having occasioned this,
since my Death shall be of that kind as will not only surprise but incline you
to pity me. Adieu! then, added he, most Cruel of your Sex, Adieu for ever!
Having uttered these Words, he was rising to be gone, but which she would not
suffer till she had told him that she did not by any means desire his Death,
and that what she had done to engage him in Duels was only to be the better
convinced of his Courage, that he might be the more worthy of her. And lastly
she let him know that she was not yet disposed to receive his Addresses, but
that time, for ought she knew, might make an alteration upon her to his
Advantage. With these Words she left him and retired. The small Hopes she gave
him put him upon a Stratagem which was like to have spoiled all, and that was
to make her Jealous. He considered with himself that since she had showed some
good Will toward him, she would not fail to be Jealous if she really loved
him. He therefore sought out a Comrade of his that had a Mistress that loved
him as much as his slighted him. He desired him to give him leave to make his
Addresses to her and he to do the like to his, that he might observe how she
would take it. His Comrade would by no means grant his request till he had his
Mistresses consent, which nevertheless soon after demanding, he easily
obtained. The first time that these two Ladies came together, which I should
have told you they did almost every Day, the two Lovers made their exchange
according to Agreement, St. Germain stepping up to and Courting his Comrades
Mistress, whilst his Comrade did the like to the Haughty Margaret, who received
him but very coldly. But as soon as she perceived her former Spark and his
Mistress laughed, she began to fly out into a great Passion, well knowing then
that this exchange had been concerted on Agreement, and therefore immediately
flung out of the Company with Tears in her Eyes. This caused the obliging
Mistress to go after her and endeavor to appease her, telling her that this
Stratagem of her Lovers was only to know her Mind the better, and not to
circumvent or affront her, and therefore earnestly entreated her to take no
farther notice of it, but rather to favor the constant Addresses of so sincere
a Lover as St. Germain had long been to her. All this notwithstanding gained
little upon the humoursom Margaret; whereupon the unfortunate St. Germain was
driven to so fierce a despair that for the future he fought nothing so much as
to show the violence of his Love by some rash Action, which he hoped might
procure his Death. This Resolution one Night, not long after, he had an
occasion to put in Practice, for whilst he and Seven of his Comrades were
coming out of a Tavern half Drunk, and with their Swords by their sides, they
chanced to meet three or four Gentlemen, amongst whom was a Captain of Horse.
With these they began to dispute the Wall, and which they obtained by being the
greater number, but the Gentlemen returning immediately after with four or five
more of their Company, they pursued these Persons that had so greatly Affronted
them, and overtook them in the High Street, when St. Germain being the
foremost, and having been the forwardest in the Affront, the Captain
discovering him to be a Trooper by his Hat, stepped up to him and gave him such a
lusty blow with a Back-Sword that he cut through his Hat and cleft part of his
Scull. Having done this, and thinking themselves sufficiently revenged, the
Captain and his Companions marched off, leaving St. Germain for dead in the
Arms of his Friends. He had little or no Pulse left, and less Motion, insomuch
that they immediately carried him home, and sent for several Surgeons, who
found Life yet remaining in him. These dressed his Wound, stitched up his Scull
and then bound it up. The noise of this Contest had at first alarmed the
Neighborhood; but they were much more surpised when they heard a Man had been
so dangerously wounded. The thing was talked about from one to the other after a
different manner, but however all concluded that St. Germain was a Dead Man.
This Report quickly got to his cruel Mistresses House, who though undrest, yet
immediately ran to see him, and whom she found in the condition I have told
you. As soon as she saw Death begin to show its self in his Face she fell down
in a Swoon, and it was found no easy matter to recover her. When she came to
her self the Neighbors began to accuse her of being the Cause of this
disaster, and that if she had not been so unkind to him he would never have
been so desperately rash, this being but the result of what he had frequently
threatened. Then began she to tear her Hair, wring her Hands, and do all that
Mad People are wont to do. She afterward proceeded to serve him with that
diligence that all the time of his Illness she would neither undress her self
nor lie down on the Bed, not permit any of his Sisters to do any thing about
him. After he came to himself, and began to know People, it was judged
necessary that she should absent herself, which she was nevertheless with great
difficulty prevailed on to do. He at length was cured, and when he came to be
perfectly well he was Married to his capricious Mistress Margaret, to the
satisfaction of every body, but much more of himself. After Leander had
finished this Novel, the Company returned to the Town, where having well
Supped, Danced and the like, they put the new married Couples to Bed. These
Weddings had been kept so secret that they had no Visitors for two Days after,
but on the third Day they were so embarras'd with them that they had not
leisure left them to Study their Parts. After a little time they all continued
their Exercise as before except Ragotin, who was fallen into a perfect Despair,
as you will find in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XVII.
Ragotin's Despair and Death, with the end of the Comical Romance.
RAncour perceiving, that he as well as Ragotin had no more hopes left of
succeeding in his Love to Star, got up betimes, and went to the little Man,
whom he found likewise risen and Writing at the Table. Upon his enquiry what he
was doing, he told him he was writing his own Epitaph. How! quoth Rancour, Do
People use to make their Epitaphs before they are Dead? But what surprises me
most of all, continued he, is that you make it your self. Yes, I have made it
my self, answered Ragotin, and will show it you. He thereupon opened a Paper,
which was folded, and read these Verses.

Ragotin's EPITAPH.
HEre th'unlucky Ragotin lies,
Who lived a Slave to fair Stars Eyes,
Yet Destiny him of her deprived;
Which made him take a Journey strait
To the other World, compelled by Fate,
For needs must where the Devil driv'd.
For her a Stroller he became,
And here with Life concludes the same.
This is fine indeed, quoth Rancour, but you will never have the satisfaction
to read it on your Tomb, for it is the common Opinion that dead People neither
see nor understand any thing of what we do that survive them. Ah! answered
Ragotin, you have partly been the cause of my Misfortunes, for you always gave
me hopes I should succeed, and yet I am very well assured you all along knew
the contrary. Then Rancour protested to him that he knew nothing certainly of
it, but confessed that he had always suspected it as he had told him before,
when he had advised him to stifle his Passion, she being the proudest Woman in
the World. But methinks, added he, her Profession of a Stroller, which you know
is none of the most Honorable Employments, might have something abated her
Self-conceit, yet it has always so happened that these sort of Women take much
more upon them than belongs to them. But at length, continued he, I must
discover something to you that I have kept a secret till now, and that is, That
I was as much in Love with Madam Star as you, and I know not how a Person that
had so much Conversation as I had with her could have well avoided it; but now
that I find my self out of hopes as well as you, I am resolved to leave the
Company especially since Mrs. Caves Brother is come into it, who can Act all
those Parts that I did, and therefore I believe they will be the more willing
to part with me. I will then go to Rennes where the other Company is, and
whereinto I do not question but I shall be received, because that they at
present want an Actor, Then, quoth Ragotin to him, since you were in Love with
the same Person I do not know how you should speak to her for me. But Rancour
Swore like a Devil that he was a Man of Honor, and had done all that in him
lay to promote his Interest, but said he could never prevail to be heard. Well
then quoth Ragotin, you have resolved to quit the Company, and si^^ have I
likewise, but I have determined withal to make a larger leap and forsake the
World too. Rancour made no Reflections (...) his Epitaph, thinking he meant
only his retiring to a Convent^ and therefore took no care to prevent his doing
himself any harm. As for the Epitaph he never spoke of it to any body but the
Poet Roquebrune, to whom at his request he gave a Copy. When Ragotin was alone
he began to think what method he should make use of to rid himself out of the
World. He took a Pistol and charged it with a brace of Bullets to shoot himself
through the Head, but then he was afraid that way would make too much noise.
Then he took the point of his Sword and put it against his Breast, but as soon
as he (...) it prick it made him Sick, and therefore that method was rejected.
At last he went down into the Stable, where whilst the Hostlers were at
Breakfast, he took one of the Halters that he found lying there, and fastened
one end of it to the Rack, and put the other with a Noose about his Neck, but
when he was about to let himself swing, he found he had not the Heart to do it,
and therefore waited till somebody came in when he was resolved upon it. At
length a Gentleman came and then he let go the hold of his Hands, but still
kept one Foot bearing on the Manger. However he might have been strangled had
he continued so hanging for any while. The Boy that went to put up the
Gentleman's Horse seeing Ragotin hang in that manner, thought verily he had
been dead, and therefore he began to bawl out like Mad for help. All the Family
came down, and seeing a Man hanged, immediately took the Rope from his Neck,
and brought him to him self, which you may imagine was not very easy to do.
Then he was asked what made him enter upon so strange a Resolution, but no
answer could be got from him Afterward Rancour took Madam Star aside, whom I
might have called by the name of Destiny, but being so near to the end of this
Romance it will be scarce worth while, and told her the occasion as he believed
of this strange Underdertaking. She seemed much surpised at it, but was much
more when she heard this wicked Man tell her that he was still in the same mind
to make away with himself, but would not attempt it any more by a Halter. To
this Star answered not one Word, whereupon Ragotin took his leave and departed.
Some little time after he made known to the Company a design he had to
accompany Monsieur Verville to Man's. The Company was willing enough to part
with him as long as he had a Companion, but would not have cared to trust him
alone. Next Morning they set out betimes, after that Monsieur Verville had made
a thousand Protestations of continued Friendship to the Actors and Actresses,
but especially to Destiny, whom he embraced, professing the great Joy he had to
see his designs accomplished. Ragotin made a long Harangue by way of
Compliment, but which was so confused that I don't think fit to insert it. When
they were ready to go Verville inquired if the Horses had drank. The Hostler
told him it was too soon in the Morning, but he might let them do it on the
Road if he pleased. Then having taken leave of Monsieur de la Garrouffiere,
they mounted and (...) forwards. Monsieur de la Garrouffiere mounted likewise
to go Home, whom the new Married Couples returned abundance of Acknowledgments
to, for coming so far to honor their Nuptials with his presence. After a
hundred Protestations of Service on both sides, he set out, and Rancour
followed him, who notwithstanding his Insensibiliiy could not forbear Weeping.
Destiny wept also, calling to mind the many Services Rancour had done him,
especially that upon the Pont-neus at Paris, when he was there set upon and
Robbed by la Rappiniere and his Followers. As Soon as Verville and Ragotin were
got to a River they immediately went therein to water their Horses, but it was
Ragotin's peculiar ill Fortune to light on a place where the Bank had been cut
down, which causing his Horse to stumble, he threw the little Man violently
over his Head into the River, which was exceeding deep in that part above
others. Poor Ragotin knew not how to Swim, and though he had, his Equipage of
Carabine, Basket-hilt Sword, and Cloak, would have sunk him in spite of his
Teeth. One of Verville's Men immediately rode after Ragotin's Horse to catch
him, whilst another stripped himself and leaped in after the Master to save him,
but found him Dead. Then Company was called, and the Body taken out and laid on
the Grass. Next the Strollers were sent for, who mightily Condol'd poor
Ragotin's Fate; which having done, they took him and Buried him in St.
Catharines Chapel, which is not very far from this River. This dismal event
nevertheless verified the Proverb, That he that was born to be Hanged would
never be Drowned. Ragotin experienced the revers, for he could not strangle
himself and so might be Drowned. Thus ended the Life and Adventures of this
little Comical Advocate, who shall be remembered by the Inhabitants of Man's and
Alencon as long as they have any taste for Strolling, or relish for Stage Plays.
Roquebrune seeing Ragotin in his Grave, said that his Epitaph must be altered
after the following manner.

HEre th'unlucky Ragotin lies,
Who lived a Slave to fair Star's Eyes,
Yet Destiny him of her deprived;
Which made him strait resolve to float,
To the other World without a Boat;
For needs must where the Devil driv'd.
For her a Stroller he became,
And here with Life he ends the same.
The Actors and Actresses returned Home to their Lodgings, and continued their
Exercise with their ordinary Applause.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE Third PART.
Chap. Page. I. WHich may serve for an Introduction to the Third Part. 265 II.
Where you will find Ragotin's Design. 268 III. Leander's Project and Harangue,
together with Ragotin's being admitted among the Strollers. 271 IV. Of
Leander's departure; the Strollers going for Alencon, and Ragotin's Misfortune.
275 V. What happened to the Strollers between Vivain and Alencon, together with
another Misfortune of Ragotin's. 280 VI. Of Saldaigne's Death. 286 VII. The
sequel of Mrs. Caves History. 291 VIII. The end of Mrs. Caves History. 295 IX.
How Rancour undeceived Ragotin concerning Madam Star; together with the arrival
of a Coachful of Gentry, and some other Comical Adventures of Ragotin's. 298 X.
The History of the Prior of St. Lewis, and the arrival of Monsieur Verville.
303 XI. Resolutions of Destiny's Marrying with Star, and Leander with Angelica.
313 XII. What happened in the Journey to Fresnaye, as likewise another
Misfortune of Ragotin's. 315 XIII. The continuation and conclusion of the Prior
of St. Lewis's History. 318 XIV. Verville's return, accompanied by Monsieur de
la Garrouffiere. The Actors and Actresses Marriages; together with an Adventure
of Ragotin's. 336 XV. The two Jealous Ladies, a Novel. 341 XVI. The Capricious
Lady, a Novel. 346 XVII. Ragotin's Despair and Death, with the end of the
Comical Romance. 353
FINIS.
SCARON's Novels.
NOVEL I.
Avarice Chastis'd: OR, THE Miser Punished.
It Is not quite a thousand years ago since a pretty Younker, who was full as
ambitious as poor, and had a greater itch upon him to be thought a Gentleman
than a Rational Creature, left the Mountains of Navarre, and came in company
with his Father to find that at Madrid which was not to be got in his own
Country, I mean wealth and riches, that are sooner ^cquired at Court than any
other place, and indeed are sel^om acquired there but by importunity and
asking. He had ^he Credit, I cannot inform you how it came about, to be
^eceived as a Page by a certain Prince, which quality in Spain is not so happy,
as that of a Lacquey in France, and ^ot much more honorable. When he first put
on his Live^y, he was about twelve years old, and from that moment might be
called the thriftiest Page in the World, and the ^east given to spending. All
his worldly stock, not to reckon ^is expectations, that were very big,
consisted in a wretched Bed set up in a Garret, which he had hired in that
quar^er of the Town where his Master lived; and there he ^igged every night
with his venerable Father, who may be said to be rich in Gray hairs, because by
procuring him the charity of well-disposed persons, they helped to maintain him.
At last the old Gentleman troop't off, at which his unrighteous Son rejoiced,
fancying himself already enriched, by that which his Father did not spend. From
that hour he enjoined himself so severe and strict a sort of life, and
practiced so wonderful a frugality, that he spent not a farthing of that little
money his Master gave him to keep body and soul together. It is true, he did
this at the expense of his Belly, which often grumbled at him for it, and of
all his acquaintance. Don Marcos (for that was our Hero's name) was of a
stature below the common pitch, and for want of due repairing the decays of his
little carcass, he became in a short time as slender as a Lath, and as dry as a
Deal-board. When he waited on his Master at Table, he never took off a Plate
with any Meat in it, but he dexterously whipped the best part into his pocket;
and because it could not so well contain Soops, and other liquids, he made
money of a great number of Torches ends, which he had kept together with great
industry, and bought him a pair of Tin Pockets; by the help of which he soon
began to perform miracles for the advancement of his fortune. Misers are for
the most part careful and vigilant, and these two good qualities, joined to the
furious passion which Don Marcos had to become rich, made his Master take such
a fancy to him, that he was resolved never to part with so excellent a Page.
For this reason he made him wear a Livery till he was thirty years old. But at
last this Phoenix of a Servant being obliged to undergo the Tonsor^s hands too
often, to clear him of his ungodly beard, his Master metamorphos'd our Page
into a Gentleman, and thus made him that which Heaven never designed him to be.
And now you must know his revenues were augmented by the addition of several
Reals aday; but instead of augmenting his expenses, our Spark shut his purse so
much the closer, as his new employ, one would have thought, might have obliged
him the more to open it. He had heard stories told him of some of his own
profession, who for want of a Valet would call up your fellows that cry Brandy
about the streets in a morning, to make their Beds, and sweep their Chambers,
under pretense of buying some of their Liquor, and of others, who in the winter
got themselves undrest at night by your Cryers of gray pease or Link-boys: but
as this was not to be done without some sort of injustice, and our Don Marcos
made a conscience of wronging any one but himself, he thought it much better to
shift as well as he could without a Valet. He never burnt an inch of Candle in
his Chamber, but what he stole, and to manage it with more Economy, he began
to unbutton himself in the Street at the very place where he lighted it, put it
out as soon as he got to his Lodgings. and so tumbled into bed in the dark. But
still finding that there was a cheaper way of going to bed than this, his busy
inventing Genius set him upon making a hole in the Wall, which divided his Room
from that of his neighbor, who no sooner lighted his Candle, but our Don
immediately opened his hole, and by that means received light enough to do any
thing he had occasion for. Being not able to dispense with himself from wearing
a Tilter at his Breech, by reason of his noble descent, which required it of
him, he clapped a Lath into a Scabboard, wore it one day on the right, and the
next on the left side, in order to use his Breeches to some sort of Symmetry,
and because his trusty Whinyard would wear them out the less, being equally
divided between the right and the left. At break of day he stood at the
Street-door, begging a Gods name a cup of Water of every Tankard-bearer that
passed by, and thus furnished himself with water enough to serve him several
days. He would often come into the common Hall, where his Masters other
Servants used to take their repasts, and whatever he saw them eat, he was sure
to commend it to the Skies, to give him some sort of a privilege to taste it.
He never laid out a farthing in Wine, yet drank more or less every day, either
by sipping some of that which was publicly cried about the Streets, or
stopping Porters that were carrying it to the Taverns, whom he would ask to
give him a taste of their Wine, that if he liked it, he might know where to
send for it. Once upon a time, riding to Madrid upon a Mule, he so dexterously
cheated the eyes of his Innkeepers, that he fed trusty Dapple with the Straw of
the Beds, where he lay; but the very first day of his journey, being weary of
paying for his Servants dinner, who was the first he ever had, he pretended
that he could not drink his Landlords Wine, and sent the poor fellow to find
out better, a full league at least from the Inn where he then was. The Servant
accordingly beat the hoof thither, relying upon his Masters Honor, who fairly
gave him the slip, and so the wretch was forced to beg all the way to Madrid.
In short, Don Marcos was the living picture of avarice and filching, and was so
well known to be the most co^etous Devil in Spain, that at Madrid he advanced
himself unto a Proverb, and they called a pinching miser a Don Marcos. His
master and all his friends told a thousand merry stories of him, and even
before his own face, because he understood raillery to perfection, and would
stand a jest as well as a managed Horse will stand fire. 'Twas an usual saying
with him, that no woman could be handsome if she loved to take, not ugly if she
gave money, and that a wise man ought never to go to Bed, unless for the
satisfaction of his Conscience, he had turned the penny in the day time. His
excellent Theory, seconded by a most exact practice, had brought him together,
by that time he was forty years old, above 10000 Crowns in Silver, a prodigious
sum for a Grandees Gentleman to get, but especially in Spain. But what may not
a man save in the compass of many years, who steals all that he can from
himself and other people? Don Marcos having the reputation to be rich, without
being a Debauchee or Gamester, was soon courted in marriage by abundance of
women, that love the money more than the man, whose number in all parts of the
world are great. Among the rest that offered to carry the marriage yoke with
him, he met a woman whose name was Isidora, who passed for a Widow, although in
truth she had never been married, and appeared much younger than she was, by
patching and painting and tricking herself, in all which mysteries she was
skilled to admiration. The world judged of her wealth by her way of living,
which was expensive enough for a Woman of her condition; and people who
frequently guels at random, and love to magnify matters, gave her at least
three thousand Livres a year, and some ten thousand Crowns in Plate and Jewels,
and the like convenient movables. The fellow that proposed her for a Wife to
Don Marcos, was a notable sharper, one that trucked in all sorts of
merchandise, but his principal subsistence was selling of Maidenheads, and
making of Matches. He spoke in such advantageous terms of Isidora to Don
Marcos, that he set him upon the tenter-hooks to see this miracle, (a curiosity
he had never expressed for any woman before) and so effectually persuaded our
unthinking Cully, that she was rich, and the Widow of a certain Cavalier,
descended from one of the best Families in Andalusia, that from that very
instant he had an itch to be married to her. The same day this proposal was
made to him, our Marriage-pimp, whose name was Gamara, came to call upon Don
Marcos, to introduce him into Isidora's Company. Our covetous Hunks was
ravished to see the neatness and magnificence of the House into which Gamara
conducted him, but he was much more so, when this Master of the Ceremonies
assured him that it belonged to Isidora. He was perfectly transported at the
richness of the Furniture, the Alcoves, and Rooms of State, and a profusion of
sweet Seems, that rather seemed proper for a Lady of the highest quality, than
for one that was to be the Wife of a Grandee's Gentleman and no better; then as
for the Mistress of this enchanted Castle, he took her for a Goddess. Don
Marcos found her busy at work between a Damosel and a Chambermaid, both so
beautiful and pretty, that whatever aversion he had to expensive living, and a
great number of Servants, he resolved to marry Isidora, if it were only for the
vanity to be Master of two such charming Creatures. Whatever Isidora said to
him was uttered so discreetly, that it not only pleased, but perfectly ravished
Don Marcos, and what contributed to make an entire conquest of his heart, was a
collation as nice as neatly served in, where the clean Linen and the Silver
Plate were all of a piece with the other rich Movables of the person that gave
it. There sat down at this Entertainment, a young Gentleman very well dressed and
well made, whom Isidora pretended to be her Nephew. His name was Angustine, but
his good Aunt called him Augustinet, although the pretty Baby was above twenty
years old. Isidora and Augustinet strove who should make Don Marcos most
welcome, and during the repast helped him to all the choicest bits; and while
our trusty Miser laid about him like a Harpy, and crammed his half-starv'd Guts
with Victuals enough to last him eight days, his ears were charmed by the
melodious voice of the Damosel Marcella, who sung two or three passionate airs
to her Harpsicord. Don Marcos lost no time, but fell on like a Devil, it being
at another's expense, and the Collation ended with the day, whose light was
supplied by that of four large Candles in Silver Sconces, of admirable
workmanship and weight, which Don Marcos at that moment designed within himself
to reform into one single Lamp, so soon as he was married to Isidora.
Augustinet took a Guittar and played several Sarabands and Tunes, to which that
cunning Jilt Marcella, and Inez the Chambermaid danced admirably well,
striking their Castanietta's exactly to the time of the Guittar. The discreet
Gamara whispered Don Marcos in the ear, that Isidora never sat up late, but
went early to Bed, which hint our civil Gentleman took immediately, and rising
from his Seat, made her a thousand Compliments and Protestations of Love, more
than he had ever done to any Female before, wished her and the little
Augustinet a good night, and left them at liberty by themselves to talk of him
what they thought. Don Marcos, who was up to the ears in love with Isidora, but
much more with her Money, protested to Gamara, who accompanied him to his
Lodgings, that the charming Widow had entirely gained his affections, and that
he would give one of his Fingers with all his Soul, that he were already
married to her, because he never saw a woman more made to his mind than she,
although in sober truth he confessed, that after Marriage he would retrench
somewhat of that endless ostentation and luxury. She lives more like a Princess
than the Wife of a private man, cries the prudent Don Marcos to the dislembling
Gamara; and she does not consider, continued he, that the movables she has,
being t^rned into money, and this money being joined to mine, we may be able to
purchase a pretty handsome Estate, which by Gods blessing, and my own industry,
may make a considerable Fortune for the Children Providence shall give us. And
if our Marriage is without issue, since Isidora has a Nephew, we will leave him
all we have, provided I like his behavior, and find him no way addicted to ill
Husbandry. Don Marcos entertained Gamara with these Discourses, or something of
the like nature, when he found himself before his own door. Gamara took leave
of him, after he had given him his word that next morning he should conclude
his Marriage with Isidora, because, says he, affairs of this nature are as soon
broke off by delays, as by the death of either of the parties. Don Marcos
embraced his worthy Marriage-jobber, who went to give Isidora an account in
what disposition of mind he left her Lover. In the mean time our Amorous
Coxcomb takes an end of a Candle out of his Pocket, fixes it to the point of
his Sword, and having lighted it at a lamp, which burnt before the public
Crucifix hard by, not without dropping a few hearty Ejaculations for good
success in his affair, he opened the door of the House where he lodged, and
repaired to his wretched bed, rather to think of his Amor than to sleep.
Gamara came to visit him the next morning, and brought him the agreeable news
that his business was done with Isidora, who wholly left it to his discretion
to appoint the day of Marriage. Our besotted Lover told Gamara that he was upon
thorns till it was over, and that if he were to be married that very day, it
would not be so soon as he wished. Gamara replied, that it lay solely in his
own power to conclude it when he pleased, and Don Marcos embracing him,
conjured him to use all his diligence to get the contract dispatched that very
day. He appointed Gamara to give him the meeting after Dinner, while he went to
his Master's Levee, and waited on him at Table. Both of 'em met exactly at the
time of assignation, and then immediately went to Isidora's house, who received
them much better than the day before. Marcella sung, Inez danced, Augustinet
played upon the Guittar, and Isidora the principal Actress of this Farce gave
her Spouse that was to be a noble repast, for which she knew well enough how to
make herself full amends afterward. Gamara brought a Notary, who perhaps was a
counterfeit one. The Articles of Marriage were signed and sealed. It was
proposed to Don Marcos to play a Game at Primera to pass away the time. Heavens
bless me, cried the astonished Don Marcos, I serve a Master who would not let
me live a quarter of an hour with him, if he knew I was a Gamester; but God be
praised, I don't so much as know the Cards. How much does it delight me,
replies Isidora, to hear Signior Don Marcos talk after this manner? I daily
preach the same Doctrine to my Nephew Augustinet, but your young Fellows are
not a farthing the better for all the good advice that is given them. Go,
foolish obstinate Boy, says she to Augustinet, go and bid Marcella and Inez
make an end of their Dinner, and come and divert us with their Castanietta's.
While Augustinet went to call up the Maids, Don Marcos stroking his whiskers
with admirable gravity, thus carried on the Discourse. If Augustinet, says he,
has a mind to keep in my favor, he must renounce gaming and staying out late a
nights. If he will keep good hours, I am content with all my heart that he should
lie in my house, but I Will have my windows ba^red, and my doors locked and
bolted before I go to bed: not that I am in the least jealous in my temper, for
I think nothing can be more impertinent, equally when a man has a virtuous
wife, as I am going to have; but houses, where there is any thing to lose,
cannot be too well secured against Thieves, and for my part I should run
distracted, if a Villain of a Thief, without any other trouble than that of
carrying off what he found, should rob me in an instant of what my great
industry had been scraping together so many years; and therefore, continues Don
Marcos, I forbid him gaming and rambling a nights, or the Devil shall roast me
alive, and I will renounce the name of Don Marcos. The Choleric Gentleman
uttered these last words with so much vehemence and passion, that it cost
Isidora abundance of fair Speeches to put him in a good humor again. She
conjured Don Marcos not to trouble himself about the matter, assuring him that
Augustinet would not fail to answer his expectation in all points, because he
was the most tractable and the best-conditioned Boy that ever was known. The
coming in of Augustinet and the Dancers, put a stop to this discourse, so they
spent the greatest part of the night in Dancing and Singing, Don Marcos being
loath to give himself the trouble to walk to his Lodgings so late, would by all
means have persuaded Isidora to give her consent, that they might live from
that time forward like Man and Wife together, at least that she would suffer
him to lie at her House that night. But our Widow putting on a severe
countenance, protested aloud, that ever since the unhappy day, on which her
Widdowhood commenced, no man living had set his Leg within her chaste Bed,
which she reserved for her Lord and Master, nor should do so, till the rites of
the Church were performed; adding, that in her present circumstances her
reputation would not suffer her to let any man, but only her Nephew Augustinet,
lie in her house. Don Marcos returned her his humble thanks, notwithstanding
his amorous impatience. He wished her a good repose, returned to his own
lodging, accompanied by Gamara, took his end of a candle out of his pocket,
fixed it to the point of his Sword, lighted it at the Lamp of the Crucifix: in
short, he did every thing as he had done the night before, so punctual was he
in every respect, unless i^ were that he omitted to say his Prayers, because he
though^ his affair as good as concluded, and so did not want the assistance of
Heaven to further it. The bans were soon published, there coming a cluster of
Holidays together: in fine^ this Marriage, so much desired on both sides, was
celebrated with more expense and formality, than one would have expected from
so fordid a Miser, who for fear of touching his six thousand Crowns, had
borrowed money of his friends to defray the charges of the day. The chief
Servants belonging to his Master were invited to the Wedding, who al^ concurred
in commending the happy choice he had made. The Dinner was sumptuous and noble,
tho provided at th^^ expense of Don Marcos, this being the first time he (...)
bled in his pocket; and to do him justice, out of his exce^^ of love he had
bespoke very fine Wedding Clothes for Isidora and himself. All the Guests
departed in good time, and Don Marcos with his own hands locked the doors,
barred the gates, not so much to secure his Wife, as to secure the Coffer
wherein his Money lay, which he ordered to be set near the Nuptial Bed. In
short, the married couple went to bed; and while Don Marcos, not finding all
that he expected to find, began even then perhaps to repent of his marriage,
Marcella and Inez were grumbling together at their Masters humor, and blamed
their Mistress for being so hasty to be married. Inez swore by her maker that
she would sooner choose to be a Lay Sister in a Convent, than endure to live in
a house that was shut up at nine. And what would you say were you in my case,
says Marcella to Inez; for you have the pleasure of going sometimes to Market
to buy things for the family; whereas I, who am my Lady's Waiting Woman
forsooth, must never peep abroad, but live a solitary life with the chaste Wife
of a jealous Husband; and as for the Serenades we used to hear so often, under
our Windows, I expect to hear them no more than the Music of the Spheres. Yet
for all this, replies Inez, we have not so much reason to complain as poor
Augustinet. He has spent the best part of his youth in waiting upon his Aunt,
who has disposed of her self as you see; she has set a formal pedagogue over
his head, who will reproach him a hundred times a day with every bit he eats,
and with his fine Clothes, which God knows whether he came honestly by. You
tell me news, says Marcella, that I never heard before, and I don't wonder that
our Mistress has made so foolish a bargain, when her Nephew ad honores, is
forced to pass his time with us. If I would have believed his fair promises, I
might easily have carried off the young Spark from his Aunt, but she has kept
me from my Childhood, and I ought in conscience to be faithful to those, whose
Bread I eat. To tell you the truth, continued Inez, I have no aversion to the
poor Boy, and I must own to you, that I have often pitied him, to see him sad
and melancholy by himself, while other people are making merry, and diverting
themselves. In this manner did these Servants entertain one another, and reason
upon their Mistress's Marriage. The good Inez soon fell asleep, but the
virtuous Marcella had other things to mind. No sooner did she find her
Bedfellow fast, but she steals out of bed, dresses herself, and packs up in one
bundle the Wedding-Cloaths of Isidora, with some of Don Marcos's things, which
she had dexterously conveyed out of their Chamber, before the provident Master
had locked the doors. When this was over, away she marches, and because she had
no design to return, she left open the doors of the Apartment, which Isidora
hired in that house. Inez awaked not long after, and missing her companion, had
the curiosity to enquire what was become of her. She listened at Augustinet's
door, not without some little suspicion, and spice of jealousy; but hearing
not the least noise there, she examined every place where she thought it
probable to find her, but missed of her aim, and sees the doors left wide open.
She immediately ran upstairs, and rapt at the Chamber door of the new married
couple as hard as she could drive, whom she strangely alarmed by this noise.
She told them that Marcella was gone, that she had left the doors open, and
that she was afraid she had carried off some things, which she never designed
to restore. Don Marcos leapt out of his bed like a mad man, ran to his Clothes,
but found them gone as well as Isidora's, and to his inexpressible
mortification, saw his dear Spouse of so different a figure from what had
charmed him, that he thought he should have sunk through the floor. The
unfortunate Lady being awakened so on the sudden, took no notice that her Tower
was not upon her head. She saw it lying on the ground near the bed, and was
going to take it up; but alas! we do nothing orderly when we go rashly to work,
and in confusion. She put the back part of it before; and her Visage, which had
not received its usual refreshing so early in the morning, the gloss of her
paint and washes being gone, appeared so ghastly to Don Marcos, that he fancied
he saw a Spectre. If he cast his eyes upon her, he beheld a terrible monster,
and if he carried his sight elsewhere, he found his Clothes were missing.
Isidora, who was in a strange disorder, perceived some of her Teeth hanging in
the large, long, and well-peopled Mustachio's of her Husband, and went about in
this consternation to recover them; but the poor Man, whom she had so dismally
affrighted, not being able to imagine that she stretched out her hands so near
his face, with any other design, than to strangle him, or pluck out his eyes,
retired some paces backward, and avoided her approaches with so much address,
that not being able to come up to him, she was forced at last to tell him, that
some of her Teeth were lodged in his Whiskers. Don Marcos directed his hands
thither, and finding his Wives Teeth, which formerly belonged to some Elephant,
a native of Afric, or the East Indies, dangling in his Beard, he flung them at
her with a great deal of indignation. She gathered them up, as likewise those
that were scattered in the Bed, and up and down the Chamber, and retired to a
little Closet with this precious treasure, her Painting-brush and some other
necessaries she had placed upon her Toilette. In the mean time Don Marcos,
after he had heartily renounced his Maker, sat him down in a Chair, where he
made sorrowful reflections upon his being married to an old Beldame, whom he
found by the venerable Snow, which sixty long winters had shed upon her bald
skull, to be at least twenty years older than himself, and yet was not so old
neither, but that he might expect to be plagued with her twenty years more.
Augustinet, who upon this noise had got up in have, came half dressed into the
room, and endeavored all that lay his power to appease the worthy husband of
his Aunt by Adoption: But the poor man did nothing but sigh, and beat his
thighs with his hand, and sometimes his face. He then bethought himself of a
fine Gold chain, which he had borrowed to set himself off on the day of
marriage, but to complete his vexation, there was nothing but the remembrance
of it left him, for Marcella had taken care to secure it among the other things
she carried off. He looked for it at first with some tranquillity, but as
carefully as might be, but after he had wearied himself to no purpose in
looking for it all over the Chamber, he found that it was lost, and his labor
likewise, and then certainly no despair could equal his. He gave such terrible
groans, that they disturbed all the neighborhood where he lived. Upon these
doleful cries, Isidora bolted out of her Closet, and appeared so much renewed,
and so beautiful, that the poor man thought this was the third time they had
changed his Wife. He looked upon her with admiration, and did not express
himself angrily to her. At last he took out of one of his Trunks the Clothes he
wore every day, dressed himself, and attended by Augustinet inquired in every
street after the perfidious Marcella. They looked for her in vain till the hour
of dinner, which was made up of what they had left the day before. Don Marcos
and Isidora quarreled with one another, like people that had a desire to dine,
and dined like people that had as good a stomach to quarrel. However, Isidora
sometimes endeavored to bring back Don Marcos to his peaceable humor,
speaking to him in as submissive and humble terms as she could think of; and
Augustinet used his best entreaties to reconcile them to each other; but the
loss of the Gold Chain was more to Don Marcos than a stab with a Dagger through
his body. They were ready to rise from Table, where they had done little else
but quarrel, while Augustinet all alone by himself employed his teeth to the
best purpose, when there came into the room two men from the Steward of the
Admiral of Castile, who desired the Lady Isidora to send him the Silver Plate
he had lent her only for fifteen days, and she had kept above twenty. Isidora
could not tell what other answer to make him, but that she would go and fetch
it. Don Marcos pretended that the Plate belonged to him, and he was resolved to
keep it. One of the men stayed still in the Chamber, lest they should remove
that which they made such a difficulty to restore, while the other went to find
out the Master of the House, who came, and reproached Isidora with her unjust
dealing, took no notice of the opposition Don Marcos made, and in spite of all
that he said to him, moved off with the Plate, and left the husband and wife
quarrelling with one another about this new disaster. Their dispute, or to
speak more properly, their quarrel was in a manner concluded, when a
Pawn-broker, accompanied with his Porters and followers, came into the room,
and told Isidora that since he was informed she was married to a man of bulk
and substance, he was come to fetch the movables she had hired of him, and the
Money due for the loan of them, unless she was minded to buy them. Here Don
Marcos lost all his patience, he called the Broker Saucy Rogue and Rascal, and
threatened to be labor him lustily. The Broker told him he valued not his big
words, that every honest man ought to restore what did not belong to him, and
fell foul upon Isidora with unmannerly language, who was nor wanting on her
side to give him as good as he brought. He struck her, she returned the blow,
and the floor was in a minute covered with the counterfeit Teeth and Hair of
Isidora; with the Cloak, Hat and Gloves of Don Marcos, who interposed to defend
the virtuous Rib of his side. While the Combatants were gathering up their
things that were fallen on the ground, while the Broker removed the movables,
and paid himself as honest Brokers use to do, and all of them together made a
noise as if Hell were broke loose, the Landlord of the House, who lodged in an
Apartment above, came down into Isidora's room, and acquainted her, that if
they designed to make such a noise as that every day, they must even go seek
out another Lodging. It Is you, you impertinent Puppy, that must seek on another
Lodging, replies Don Marcos, whose anger had made him as pale as a Ghost. Upon
this the Landlord answered him with a box on the ear, and our angry Don was
looking for his Sword or Poniard, out Marcella had carried them off; Isidora
and Augustinet interposed in the scuffle, and with much ado appeased the Master
of the House, but not Don Marcos, who beat his Head against the Walls, calling
Isidora a hundred times Cheat, and Strumpet, and Thief. Isidora with tears in
her eyes answered him, that a poor woman ought not to be blamed for setting her
brains to work to get a man of such merit as Don Marcos was, and therefore he
had more reason to admire her for her wit, than to beat her as he did; adding,
that even in point^ of honor, a man ought never to lay hands on his Wife. Don
Marcos swearing most heroically, protested that his Money was his honor, and
that he was resolved to be unmarry'd, whatever it cost him. To this the meek
Isidora replied with a world of humility, that she would still be his loving
Wife, that their Marriage had been celebrated in the usual forms, and 'twas
impossible to dissolve it, for which reason she advised him to sit still and be
patient. When this point was pretty well over, the next question was, where
they should take another Lodging, since this was too hot for 'em. Don Marcos
and Augustinet walked out to find one, and in this interval Isidora enjoyed a
little breathing time, and with the trusty Inez, comforted herself for the ill
humor of her Husband, so long as she saw his Trunks full of Money still in the
Chamber. Don Marcos took a convenient Lodging in his Master's Neighborhood,
and sent Augustinet home to sup with his Aunt, not being able, as he said, to
bring himself as yet to eat with such an impudent Cheat. Toward the evening he
came home as surly as a baited Bear, and as fierce as a Tiger. Isidora
endeavored by all her arts to soften him into a better temper, and next
morning had the boldness to desire him to go to his new Lodging and stay there
to receive the movables, that Augustinet and Inez were going to carry to a
Cart, which they had newly hired. Don Marcos accordingly went thither, and
while he expected their coming, the ungrateful Isidora, the knavish Augustinet,
and the jilting Inez, with all expedition conveyed the whole substance of this
unfortunate man into a Cart, drawn by lusty able mules, went into it
themselves, quitted Madrid, and took the Road to Barcelona. Don Marcos who had
exhausted all his patience, in waiting for their coming, went back to his
former Lodging, found the doors shut up, and was inform^d by the Neighbors,
that they had removed from thence with their Goods several hours ago. Upon this
he returned to the place from whence he came, but did not find what he
expected. Immediately he went back to the old place, suspecting the misfortune
that had happened to him, he breaks open the Chamber door, where he could see
nothing but a few wretched wooden Platters, an old rusty pair of Tongues, a
battered pair of Bellows, the broken leg of a crippled Andiron, and such like
precious Ware, which they had left behind them, as not thinking it worth their
while to encumber the Cart with them. And now he was convinced into what
treacherous hands he had fallen; he tears off his Beard and his Hair, he
buffe^s his Eyes, he bites his Fingers till the Blood came; nay, he was sorely
tempted to kill himself, but his hour was not yet come. The most unfortunate
men sometimes flatter themselves with vain hopes. Thus he went to find out the
Fugitives in all the Inns of madrid, but could hear no tale or tidings of them.
Isidora was not such a fool as to employ a Cart by which she might be betrayed,
but had hired one in an Inn near Madrid, and to secure herself from being
pursued, had articled beforehand with the Owner, that he should stay no longer
in the City than was sufficient to take her up, her Company, and her Goods.
More tired and weary than a Dog that has cours'd a Hare and mist her, our poor
Gentleman was returning home, after he had inquired at all the Inns in the City
and Suburbs, when by mere accident he popt upon Marcella head to head. He
caught hold of her by the throat, and cried out to her, And have I met thee,
thou traitorous baggage, I will keep thee fast, till thou have restored every
farthing thou have stole from me. Oh! good Heavens, says this subtle
Dissembler, without changing countenance for the matter, how did I always
mistrust that this would fall upon me. Hear me, dear Master, for the love of
the Blessed Virgin, hear me, before you ruin my reputation. I am a woman of
virtue and honesty, I thank my good God for it; and should you disgrace me
never so little before my neighbors here, it would be my utter undoing, for I am
upon the point of Marriage. Let us step to yonder corner, and if your Lordship
will give me the hearing, I will tell you what is become of your Chain and
Clothes. I knew well enough that the blame would be laid upon me for what has
happened, and told my Mistress so beforehand, when she forced me to do what I
did, but she was Mistress, and I a poor Servant. Well! how wretched is the
condition of those that serve, and what pains do they take to get a sorry
livelihood. Don Marcos had little malice in his nature; the tears and eloquence
of this dissembling Cockatrice inclined him to listen to her, and even to
believe whatever she told him. He walked with her therefore under a Porch
belonging to a great House, where she informed him, that Isidora was an old
battered Strumpet, who in her time had ruined several persons that were smitten
with her, but had saved nothing out of all her gettings, by reason of her
profuse and riotous living. She likewise told him, what she had learned from
Inez, that Augustinet was not Nephew to Isidora, but a sort of a Bravo, the
Bastard of another Whore, and that she caused him to pass for her Nephew, only
to give her some authority among women of her own profession, and to revenge
her quarrels. She acquainted him that it was he to whom she had given the Gold
Chain and the Clothes that were stolen, and that it was by his order that she
went away in the night, without taking leave, that so only she might be
suspected of so wicked an action. Marcella told all these fine Stories to Don
Marcos, not at all regarding what might be the consequence, either to get clear
out of his hands, or perhaps to keep up a good old custom long ago observed
among Servants, which is to lie boldly, and tell their Masters all that they
don't know, as well as all they know. She cocluded her discourse with an
exhortation to him to be patient, giving him hopes that his things might be
restored to him, when he least expected it. And perhaps never, replies Don
Marcos very discreetly; there is little likelihood that a Traytress, who has
robbed me of my goods, and is gone off with them, will ever return to restore
them to me. He afterward told Marcella all that had befallen him with Isidora,
ever since she was gone. Is it possible she should have so little conscience
with her? says that wheedling Devil Marcella. Ah! dear Master 'twas not without
good reason that I pitty'd your hard usage, but I durst not say any thing to
you of it: for that very evening you were robbed, taking the boldness to tell
my Mistress, that she ought not to touch your Gold-chain, she beat me black and
blue God-knows, and called me all the Whores in the Creation. But thus the case
happened, says Don Marcos, fetching a deep sigh, and the worst of it is, that I
see no remedy to help me. Hold a little, cries Marcella interrupting him, I know
a cunning man, a friend of mine, who will shortly be my husband, I trust in
Heaven, and he will tell you where you may find these people, as plainly as if
he saw them. He Is an admirable man, that is certain, and can make the Devil
fetch and carry for him like a Greyhound. The credulous Don Marcos conjured
her to let him see this Son of Art. Marcella promised him to do it, and told
him she would certainly meet him the next day in that very place. Don Marcos
accordingly came thither, nor was Marcella forgetful of the appointment,
telling our unfortunate Spark, that the Magician she had talked to him about,
had already begun his operations to help him to his stolen goods, but that he
wanted a certain quantity of Amber, Musk, and other Perfumes, wherewith he was
to make a fumigation for the Demons whom he intended to invoke, who were all
of the first order, and of the best families in Hell. Don Marcos, without
deliberating farther on the matter, carries Marcella to a Perfumers shop, buys
as much of those scents as she told him would be necessary, nay, and presented
her with some Essences and Oils she begged of him, so much did he fancy himself
obliged to her for helping him to a Magician. The wicked Marcella carried him
to a house of a very scurvy aspect, where in a low room, or rather a nasty
Dog-hole, he was received by a man in a Cassock, whose beard reached down to
his girdle, and who received him with a world of gravity. This villainous
Impostor, on whom Don Marcos looked with a great deal of respect and fear, two
qualities that generally go together, lighted two black Wax Candles, and gave
them to the affrighted Don Marcos to hold one in each hand. He ordered him to
sit down upon a little low Stool, and exhorted him, but his exhortations came
too late, not to be afraid. After this, he asked him several questions about
his age, his way of living, and about the goods that were stolen from him; and
having looked a while in a Mirror, and read half a score lines in a Book, he
told Don Marcos, who was ready to expire with fear, that he very well knew
where his things were, and described them one after another so exactly to him,
that Don Marcos let the Candles drop out of his hands, to hug and embrace him.
The serious Magician blamed him extremely for his impatience, and told him that
the operations of his infallible Art demanded a great deal of circumspection
and care; giving him to understand, that for actions less hardy and indiscreet,
the Demons had sorely buffeted, nay, and strangled some persons. At these
words Don Marcos looked as pale as a Criminal after Sentence, and taking the
Candles again in his hands, sat down on his stool. The Conjurer then called for
his Perfumes that Don Marcos had bought, and the perfidious Marcella gave them
to him. Hitherto she had been a spectatress of the Ceremony, but now he
commanded her to quit the room, because, says he, the Devils don't like the
company of Women. Marcella at her going out made a profound reverence, and the
Magician drawing near a little pan of Coals, made as if he threw Don Marcos's
perfumes upon the lighted Charcoal, but indeed threw a noisome composition into
it, which cast so thick and dismal a smoke, that the Magician, who imprudently
leaned over the pan, had like to been suffocated. He cough'd several times to
expectorate the steams he had sucked in, and that with so much violence, that
his long venerable Beard, which was not of the growth of his chin, and had been
ill-fastened on, fell down, and discovered him to Don Marcos to be the
pernicious Gamara. Don Marcos caught hold of him by the throat, griped and
squeezed him like any Hercules, crying out Theif in a shrill, terrible voice.
As it happened, the Magistrate was going down the Street at that time, who
entered the House, from whence such dismal cries proceeded, that they alarmed
all the Neighborhood; for you must know, that Gamara, whom Don Marcos all this
while held by the throat, roared out as loud as he could do for the heart of
him. The first person the Officers seized, was Marcella, and breaking open the
door of this Magical Apartment, they found Don Marcos and Gamara very lovingly
griping and tugging one another about the room. The Provost knew Gamara at
first sight, whom he had been hunting after a good while, and had ordered to be
apprehended for a Pick-pocket, a Cockbawd, and above all a notorious Thief. He
hurried him away to Prison with Don Marcos and Marcella, took an Inventory of
all the Goods in the House, and saw them carefully locked up. Don Marcos was
enlarged upon his Master's security, that he should appear next day.
Accordingly he came as Evidence against Gamara and Marcella, who were plainly
convicted to have robbed him of his Goods, that were found safe and untoucht,
among several other things that had been set down in the Inventory, some of
which he had stole, and the rest were pawned to him, for he was a Jew by
Religion, and consequently an Usurer by Profession. When he was apprehended, he
was just upon the point of Marrying Marcella, who was to bring him by way of
Portion, besides the things she had stolen from Don Marcos, a dexterity in
stealing, not inferior to his own, a pliant wit, capable of learning any thing
that could be shown her; nay, even of surpassing it: and lastly, a wholesome,
juicy, young Body, considering it had been so often bought and sold, and had
endured so many heavy shocks and fatigues in the Mansions of Fornication. The
case appeared so plain on Don Marcos's side, who was supported by the Credit of
his Master, that he had his own Goods immediately restored to him. Gamara was
sent to the Galleys for the remainder of his life; Marcella was soundly whipped
and banished, and all people thought that the Jew and his Wife elect, were too
favorably dealt with. As for Don Marcos, he was not so well pleased to have
his things again, and be revenged on Gamara and Marcella, as vexed that this
great Impostor did not prove a Magician. The loss of his ten thousand Crowns
had almost turned his Brain. He went every day to enquire at all the Inns of
Madrid, and at last met with two Muleteers lately returned from Barcelona, who
told him, that about four or five days journey from Madrid they had met a Cart
upon the Road laden with Goods, and two women and a man riding behind, and that
they had been forced to make an halt at an Inn, because two of the Fellow's
Mules were killed with being over-laboured. They described this man and the two
women to him, and the marks they gave them so fitted Isidora, Inez, and
Augustinet, that without farther deliberation he disguised himself in the habit
of a Pilgrim, and having obtained of his Master Letters of recommendation to
the Viceroy of Catalonia, and from the Justice a Decree for his Fugitive Wife,
he took the Road to Barcelona, sometimes beating it upon the hoof, sometimes on
Horseback, and arrived there in few days. He went toward the Harbor to take a
Lodging there, and the first thing that greeted his sight was his own Coffers,
that were carrying to a Boat, with Augustinet, Isidora and Inez attending them,
which was to convey them to the Vessel that expected them in the Road, wherein
they designed to imbark for Naples. Don Marcos followed his Enemies, and threw
himself like a Lion into the Longboat. They did not know him by reason of his
huge slapping Pilgrims Hat, that eclipsed his little Countenance, but took him
to be some Pilgrim going to Loretto, as the Seamen took him to be one of
Augustinet's Company. Don Marcos was in the strangest perplexities of mind that
can be imagined, not so much for what would become of himself, as what would
become of his dear Trunks. All, this while the Longboat made the best of her
way to the Merchantman, and sailed so swift, or rather Don Marcos was so
puzzled with what his brains were hammering, that he found himself directly
under the Vessel, when he thought himself at a great distance from it. The
Sailors now begun to heave up the Trunks, which awakened Don Marcos out of his
contemplations, who always kep his eye upon the dearest of his Trunks, wherein
his money was lodged. A Seaman at last came to take up this very individual
Trunk to fasten it to the rest with a thick Cord that was let down from the
Vessel in a Pully. And now it was that Don Marcos forgot himself, he saw his
Trunk tied up just by him and did not stir; but at last seeing it mount up in
the air, he caught hold of it with both hands, by one of the iron rings that
served to lift it up from the ground, being resolved not to part with it. And
perhaps he had accomplished his ends, for what will not a covetous Wretch do to
preserve his Pelf? But by ill fortune this Trunk parted from the rest, and
falling plumb upon the head of our unlucky Gentleman, who for all that would
not quit his hold, beat him down to the bottom of the Sea, or if you please to
the regions of Erebus. Isidora, Inez, and Augustinet knew him just at the very
minute he sunk down with their dear Trunk, the loss of which troubled them
infinitely more, than any apprehensions from the revengeful Don Marcos.
Augustinet enraged at the loss of his Money, and not able to master his
passion, struck the Seaman, who had tied the Trunks so carelessly with all his
force. The Tar in requital gave him a heartier blow, which threw him into the
Sea. As he fell overboard, he took the unfortunate Isidora with him, who held
her self by nothing, and thus accompanied her beloved Augustinet, who against
his inclination accompanied Don Marcos. Inez embarked in the Vessel with the
rest of the Goods, which she spent in a short time at Naples, and after she had
for a long while exercised the laudable profession of a Whore, she went off
like a Whore, that is to say, she died in an Hospital.

NOVEL II.
The Useless Precaution.
A Gentleman of Granada, whose true name I don't think fit to discover, but
will call him Don Pedro de Castile, Arragon, or Toledo, or what you please,
Courteous Reader, since after all one name costs a man no more than another:
And it is for this reason perhaps that the Spaniards, not content with their own
names, bestow upon themselves the most magnificent ones they can think of, and
sometimes tack two or three together, that are as long as a Welsh Pedigree: but
to quit this digression, the abovementioned Don Pedro at the age of twenty
found himself without Father and Mother, and exceeding rich; which
circumstances, when they meet in the same person, very often help to spoil him,
if he is born with no great stock of brains; but if it is otherwise, put him in
a capacity of making what figure he pleases. During the year of mourning he
discreetly abstained from most of those diversions, to which young Gentlemen of
his age are addicted, and wholly employed his time in taking an exact survey of
his Esta^e, and settling his affairs. He was well made as to his person, had
abundance of Wit, and behaving himself, young as he was, with the prudence and
circumspection of an old man, there was not a fortune in all Granada which he
might not justly pretend to, nor a Father that thought so well of his Daughter,
but would be glad with all his heart to accept him for a Son-in-law. Among
several handsome Ladie^, who at that time disputed the Empire of hearts in
Granada, there was one that had charms enough to conquer that of Don Pedro. Her
name was Seraphina, beautiful as an Angel, young, rich, and of a good family;
and although her fortune was not altogether so great as that of Don Pedro, yet
every thing considered, there was no such mighty difference between them. He
did not question but that at the first proposal of Marriage he made to her
Parents, he should find them ready to comply with him: however, he rather chose
to owe his success to his merit, and resolv^d to court her in the gallantest
way, that he might make himself master of her affections, before he was of her
person: His design was generous and noble, if fortune, that often delights to
break the measures of the wisest Politicians, had not rais^d him a Rival, who
had already taken possession of the Town he designed to invest, before he had
so much as made his approaches. It Is to no purpose to tell you his name, but he
was very near Don Pedro's age, perhaps he was likewise as handsome as he, but
all Historians are ageeed that he was much more beloved. Don Pedro was soon
sensible that he had a Competitor to remove, but this did not much alarm him,
knowing few were able to dispute Estates with him. He gave Consorts of Music in
his Mistress's street, while his happy Rival had the pleasure to hear them in
her Chamber, and perhaps was revelling in her arms, while our poor Lover was
cooling his heels, and making melancholy reflections below. But at last Don
Pedro was weary of throwing away so much Powder in the Mines, that is to say,
of making all this bustle and courtship, without advancing his affairs.
However, his love did not slacken upon his ill success, but made him so
impatient, that he thought fit to lay aside his first design of winning his
Mistress's heart before he demanded her of her friends. In short, he asked
their consent, which they granted him upon the spot, without deliberating
further on the matter, being extremely pleased to be asked that which they so
earnestly desired, and indeed could hardly hope for. They acquainted Seraphina
with the good fortune that was offered her, and prepar^d her to give Don Pedro
a kind reception, and marry him in a short time. She was troubled at this news,
that ought to have given her all the satisfaction in the world; and not able to
conceal her surprise from them, she dissembled the occasion of it, pretending
that it grieved her to part from persons so dear to her as they were. She
managed this point so dexterously, that they wept out of mere tenderness, and
much commended the sweetness of her temper. She conjured them to put off her
Marriage four or five months, representing to them, that she had been a long
time indisposed, as her looks sufficiently discovered, and that by her good
will she wou^d not marry, till she was perfectly recovered of her illness, that
so she might come more agreeable to her Husband, and not give him any occasion
to be disgusted with her in the beginning of his marriage; and consequently to
repent of his choice. It Is true indeed, she had looked somewhat sickly of late,
which made her Friends well enough satisfied with her request, and they took
care to acquaint Don Pedro with it; who for his part was so far from taking it
ill, that he liked her the better for giving so good a proof of her discretion.
In the mean time the Articles of Marriage were proposed, examined, and agreed
on. However, Don Pedro did not think himself excused from omitting any of his
usual Gallantries, which every man is obliged to observe, that courts his
Mistress in the common forms. He entertained her often with Letters, and did
not miss a day to write to her. She returned him such answers that were at
least very civil, if they were not altogether so passionate as his own: but she
would receive none of his visits in the day time, excusing herself upon her
indisposition, and at night appeared very rarely at the Window, which made Don
Pedro exceedingly admire her reserved temper. He thought too well of his own
merit to doubt the success of his Courtship, and questioned not to be beloved
by his Mistress, when she came to know him better, although she had even an
aversion for him, now he was a stranger to her. Hitherto his affairs went well
enough, but at last it so happened that he could not get a sight of his
Mistress for four or five days following. He was extremely afflicted at it, or
at least pretended to be so. He composed several Verses upon the occasion, I
mean, he either hired or bought them, and had them sung under her Window. But
tho he omitted nothing that the most zealous Lovers could practice, yet all the
favor he could obtain was only to speak with her Maid, who informed him that
her Lady was more indisposed than ever. Upon this his Poetic Faculty was
strangely perplexed, or at least the Gentleman-Poet whom he employed: for upon
the strictest search I find that versifying was never his talent. He caused an
Air to be made upon Aminta's being sick, or Phyllis or Chloris, no matter
whether: and besides his offensive and defensive Arms, taking a Guitarr with
him, which we must suppose to be the best in the whole City, he walked
furiously in this Equipage toward his Mistress's quarter, either to make her
weep out of pure compassion, or else to set all the Dogs in the neighborhood a
barking, in order to complete the Consort. Any one, I believe, would say a
hundred to one that our Gentleman must do one of the two, or perhaps both; but
alas he neither did one nor the other: Within fifty paces of the thrice happy
Mansion of his Divinity, he saw the door open, and a woman go out, who had much
of the air and shape of his invisible Angel. He could not imagine why a woman
alone, and so late at night, should so resolutely turn up into a large spacious
House, lately destroyed by fire. To inform himself better, he walked round the
ruins, which one might enter at several places, that he might get nearer the
person whom he dogged. He believed that this might be his Mistress, who had
made an assignation with his Rival to meet her in this strange place, not
daring to do it at home, and not thinking fit to communicate this business to a
third person, which it so much concerned her to keep secret; and he resolved
within himself, that in case what he now only suspected, happened to prove
true, to kill his Rival upon the spot, and to revenge himself upon Seraphina,
by giving her the most opprobrious Language he could think of. So he crept
along as softly as he could, till he came to a place, from whence he could
plainly see her, for it was she, sitting upon the ground, and groaning so
piteously, as if she was going to give up the Ghost; and, in short, after most
severe pangs delivered of a small squawling Creature, which we may suppose did
not give her altogether so much pain in the begetting. She was no sooner safely
delivered, but her Courage giving her strength enough, she returned the same
way she came, without troubling her head what would become of the poor Brat,
that she had brought into the world: I will leave you to judge how great Don
Pedro's surprise was. He now found out the true reason of his Mistress's
indisposition: His head almost turned round to think what a Precipice he had
escaped, and he thanked Heaven most devoutly for preserving him from the
danger; but being generous in his temper, he scorned to revenge himself upon
the faithless Seraphina, by exposing the Honor of her Family; neither in his
just resentment would he suffer the innocent Babe to perish, which he saw lying
at his Feet, exposed to the first dog that had the luck to find it. He wrapped it
up in his Cloak, for want of something else, and making all the haste he could,
he called upon a discreet woman of his acquaintance, to whom he recommended the
Child, putting it at the same time into her hands, and gave her Money to buy it
all necessaries. This discreet woman finding herself nobly paid, acquitted
herself very well in her charge: Next day the Infant had a Nurse, was baptized,
and named Laura, for you must know she was a Female.

In the mean time Don Pedro went to a Relation, in whom he mightily confided,
and told her he had altered his design of marrying, into that of traveling. He
desired her to manage his Estate for him in his absence, and to receive into
her house an Infant, which he said belonged to him, to spare nothing in her
education; and for certain reasons, which he would acquaint her with at some
other time, to send her to a Convent as soon as she was three years old; and
above all, to take particular care that she should know as little as might be
of the affairs of this world. He furnished her with necessary Instruments to
look after his Estate, provided himself with Money and Jewels, took a faithful
and trusty Servant, but before his departure (...) Granada writ a Letter to
Seraphina. She received it just at the time as she had acquainted her friends
that her illness should retard her Marriage no longer: But Don Pedro's Letter,
which gave her to understand that he knew what had so lately befallen her, put
other thoughts into her head. She devoted herself to a Religious life, and soon
after retired to a Convent, with a full resolution never to stir out of it, and
could not be induced to alter her mind by all the entreaties and tears of her
Parents, who used all the arguments they could think of to dissuade her from
this resolution; which appeared so much the stranger to them, as they could not
divine the occasion of it. Let us leave them to weep for their Daughter's
turning Nun, who on her part wept heartily for her sins. Let us leave her
little Daughter Laura to grow in bulk and beauty, and return to find Don Pedro
on the Road to Sevil, who could not drive this late adventure out of his head,
and was as much disgusted at Marriage, as once he was desirous to taste the
pleasures of it. He is afraid of all Women, and not considering that there are
both good and bad of that as well as of our own Sex, he concluded within
himself that a wise man ought to be diffident of all women, and particularly of
the witty more than the foolish; being, it seems, of the opinion of those
worthy Gentlemen, who think that a woman knows more than comes to her share, if
she knows a jot more than stewing Prunes, preserving Fruits, dressing her
Husband's Dinner, and mending his Stockings. Tainted with these heretical
doctrines, he arrived at Sevil, and went directly to the house of Don Iuan the
Lord knows what, a man of wealth and quality, who was his relation and friend,
and would not suffer him to lodge any where else but with him. The magnificence
of Sevil gave him a desire to make a longer stay there than he designed at
first; and his Cousin Don Iuan, to make his stay agreeable to him, showed him
all the most remarkable curiosities of the place. One day as they rode on
Horseback through one of the principal Streets of the City, they saw in a
Coach, that was driving toward a stately House, a young Lady in a Widows
habit, but so beautiful and charming, that Don Pedro was exceedingly surprised,
and set his Cousin a laughing by the many vehement exclamations and oaths he
made, that he had never seen any thing so lovely in his life. This Angel of a
Widow restored the whole Female Sex to his good opinion, whom the unhappy
Sepaphtna had rendered odious to him. He desired Don Iuan to go back through
the same Street, and frankly owned to him, that he wanted little of being
wounded to the heart. Your business is done, replies the other, and I am very
much mistaken if the little God has not shot his Arrow so deep, that there is
no plucking it out, but heart and all must come together. Alas! says the
amorous Don Pedro, I will conceal nothing from you: How happy should I reckon
my self, if I could pass my days with so charming a Lady. You must go this way
then, replied Don Iuan, and traveling so fast as you do, you may in a few
minutes arrive at the place, where you expect to find so much happiness. Not
but that such an Enterprise, continued he, will give you difficulty enough.
Elvira is a woman of condition, and very rich, her Beauty is such as you have
beheld it, neither is her Virtue inferior to her Beauty, and during the two
years of her Widowhood, the best matches in Andalusia have not given her the
least inclination to change her state; but a man so well made as yourself, may
perhaps succeed where others have failed. She is related to my Wife, and
sometimes I make her a visit. If you please I will propose your design to her,
and I have good hopes to succeed in my Negotiation, because I see her in her
Balcony, which is no small favor, let me tell you, in so nice and reserved a
Lady. She might have shut her Lattices and Windows, and so have balked our
expectation. These words were no sooner out of his mouth, but our two Cavaliers
made each of them a reverence after the Spanish mode, which gave them no little
trouble before they came to an end of it. Especially Don Pedro made his so
profoundly, and with that contortion of his Body, that he had like to have
tumbled from his Horse. The Lady in the Balcony returned them a handsome
Courtsie: Upon which Don Pedro and his Companion bowed again. And when the
bright Charmer did leave the Balcony,
One spurred on his Horse, the other gaped like a Tony.
Alas! My dear Cousin, says Don Pedro to Don Iuan, what probability is there
that a Stranger will be able to gain that heart, which has defended itself
against all the men of quality and merit in Sevil. However, continues he, since
my despair would otherwise give me my deaths wound, I had as good receive it
from her refusal and contempt. Therefore let me conjure you to speak to her as
soon as you can, and don't so much enlarge upon my Estate and Quality, as upon
the violence of my passion. Don Pedro could not talk of any thing but his love,
and Don Iuan was sensible that he could not oblige him more effectually, than
by taking the first opportunity to make this overture to Elvira. He accordingly
did so, and not without success. The Charming Widow received the proposal he
made for his Friend so well, that she confessed to him that she did not dislike
him. But she withal acquainted him, that having obliged herself by a vow to
stay three full years, from the death of her first Husband till she took a
second, nothing in the world should prevail with her to break it. She added,
that because she had resolved to pay this respect to the memory of her late
Spouse, she had hitherto refused all the offers that had been made her; but
that if Don Pedro had courage and constancy enough to serve her a whole year,
in which time they might know one another temper much better, she gave him her
word to choose no other Husband but him. Don Iuan came to give Don Pedro an
account of his Nego^iation, and made him the most satisfied, and most
passionate of all men living. He was not in the least deterred by the long time
he was to stay, and resolved to employ it in all the refined Gallantry of a
nice Lover. He bought him a Coach and Horses, made his House and his Liveries
as sumptuous as might be, set all the Embroiderers and Tailors of Sevil at
work, and the Musicians into the bargain. He offered to regale Elvira, but she
wou^d not suffer it. Her Servants were nothing near so difficult, and accepted
his Presents as heartily as he gave them. In a short time he was more Master of
Elvira's Domestics than Elvira herself, whom her Damsels persuaded to appear
in the Balcony, even when she had no mind to it, as often as Don Pedro exerted
his Lungs in the Street, for I have been told he sung to admiration. Don Pedro
had now spent six tedious months in courting Elvira, without being able to
obtain a private conversation with her all this while, which daily increased
his esteem and love for her. At last, by dint of prayers and presents, a
Damosel bolder than the rest, or rather more covetous, promised to introduce
him one night into her Mistress's Apartment, and place him in a corner, where
he might see her undress herself before she went to bed, take two or three
turns in her Chamber in her Shift to cool herself, and sing and play upon her
Lute, which she did to a miracle. Don Pedro gave this trusty Maid a better
reward than he promised her, and when night came, our Granada-Adventurer,
following the Maid's instruction, slipped into Elvira's house, stole up to her
Apartment, and there from a Gallery, which was over against the Chamber Door,
he saw her lying upon a Couch reading a Book of Devotion, whether with much
attention is more than I am able to tell you, all the while her Maids undrest
her. She had only a light Gown on, and was ready to go to bed, when Don Pedro's
Pensionary Damosel, who designed to give him as much reason to be satisfied
with her, as she was with him, entreated her Mistress to sing. Her companions
joined in the same petition, but Elvira deny^d them a good while, telling them
she was very melancholy, nay, and assuring them that she had occasion to be so.
But the Damosel, whom Don Pedro's presents had gained, putting a Lute into her
Mistress^s hand, Elvira was so complaisant as to sing, which she did in so
charming and graceful a manner, that Don Pedro was within an ace of throwing
himself at her heavenly feet, and there acting the ravish^d Lover. The Song was
soon over, and then she went to bed. The Maids retired to their own Apartments,
and Don Pedro, who made the best of his way to the street, was strangely
surpised to find the great Gate locked. He had nothing left him to do but to
stay there till day, which would soon appear. He sat upon the side of a Well,
which was in a corner of the Court, being strangely perplexed lest he should be
discovered, and incur his Mistress's displeasure for so bold an attempt. He had
not been here long, but he made a thousand attempts, and wished as often to no
purpose that he was safe in the street, when he heard a door open in Elvira's
Apartment. He immediately turned his head toward the place whence the noise
came, and was strangely surpised to see the beautiful Widow come into the
Court, whom he thought to be fast asleep. By the light of a Wax-Taper, which
she carried in a little Silver Candlestick, he saw that her Night-dress was
nicely adjusted, her Breasts open and unguarded, a fine Necklace of Pearl about
her Neck, and that over her Smock, which had more Lace than Linen about it,
she wore nothing but a rich Simarre. She carried in her hand a great Viol full
of Jelly, Comfits, and Conserves; and in this surprising equipage she apper'd
so charming, that Don Pedro had like to have preferred the pleasure of
discovering himself to her, to all the ill effects which so bold a presumption
might have drawn upon him. But he was wise in his love, and hid himself behind
the Well, tho he kept his eyes upon his Mistress all the while, flattering
himself sometimes that it was he she came to look for. She walked directly
toward the Stable, Don Pedro followed her at some distance, and saw her go
into a little room. At first he was of opinion that his pious and charitable
Mistress went to visit one of her Domestics that was sick, 'tho without doing
any wrong to her Charity, she might have left that affair to any of her Women.
He crept behind a Horse, that stood not far from the Chamber Door, and from
thence observing his dear Widow, he saw her put the Candlestick and Glass-Viol,
and in short all she carried in her Ivory hands upon a little Table; and in a
sorry Bed, which in a manner took up all the Room, ^he beheld a sick Negro, who
seemed to be about thirty years old, but so deformed and ghastly, that he was
frighted at the sight of him. His face was as meagre as that of a Skeleton, and
the poor fellow had much difficulty to fetch his breath. Don Pedro admired the
unparalleled goodness of the beautiful Elvira, who took off all the Negro's
Blankets, and having made his Bed, sat down by the sick wretch, and put her
hand upon his forehead, that was all over in a cold sweat. The Negro cast a
dismal look upon the charitable Angel, that came to comfort him, and seemed to
pity him with her eyes full of tears. Don Pedro could not tell what to think of
so unexampled a strain of Charity, and after he had first admired it, he began
to alter his opinion, and concluded it was carried too far. But as yet he had
seen nothing. The charming Widow first broke the silence, and weeping at such a
rate as if it were to be her last, she asked the Black how he found himself? My
dear Antonio, says she to him, in a voice interrupted with frequent sobs, art
thou then resolved to die, and will thou make me die too for company? Thou do
not speak to me, my Life, my Jewel. Take courage, if thou would have me live,
and eat a little of this Jelly for my sake: Thou will not so much as afford me
one kind look, cruel creature; me, I say, that love thee, me that adore thee:
Kiss me, my dear Angel, kiss me, and get well, if thou would not have me to
attend thee in thy death, after I have so passionately loved thee in thy life.
As she spoke these tender words, she joined her Angel's face to the diabolical
visage of the Moor, which she moistened with her tears. I fancy that any man
that had seen so odd a sight, would have thought he had seen an Angel caress a
Devil. As for Don Pedro, he began to think the beautiful Elvira as ugly as her
Negro; who, at last casting his eyes upon his importunate Lover, whom he did
scarce vouchsafe to look upon before, and with his lean bony hand turning away
her face from his, he thus spoke to her in a low feeble tone: What would you
have me do, Madam? Will you not let me die in quiet? Is it not enough that you
have brought me to the condition I am in, but must you force me, now I am just
dying, to throw away the little snuff of life that is left me, to satisfy your
libidinous appetite. Take a Husband, and expect no more drudgery from me: I
will see you no more, nor eat any thing you have brought me, but am resolved to
die, since I am good for nothing else. When he had said this, he sunk down in
his bed, and the unfortunate Elvira could not draw the least word from him, in
answer to all the tender things she spoke, whether he was already dead, or
refused to speak to one, whom he believed the cause of his death. Elvira wept
like a Church-Spout when it rains, and afflicted at the sad condition wherein
she left her beloved Negro, but much more at his unkindness, took back with her
every thing she had brought, and walked toward her Chamber, but with so
sorrowful and sad an air, that it was her great misfortune that her future
Cuckold did not see her in that pickle. In the mean time Don Pedro hid himself
in the obscurest part of the Stable, so confounded that he was not half a
quarter so much, when she was witness to Seraphina's happy delivery. He saw
this monstrous Hypocrite go back the same way she came, afflicting herself like
any Widow at the Funeral of her dear Husband; and some time after he heard the
great Gate open, and got into the street, not at all caring whether he was seen
or no, since he thought it not worth while to have any regard for such a
woman's reputation as Elvira. However, he treated her like a Gentleman of
Honor, and did not discover what he had seen to his friend. The next day he
happen^d to pass by Elvira's Gate at the very instant the Moor was carried out
to be buried: Her Women told him that their Mistress was sick; and for four or
five days following, as he passed to and fro before her Windows, she was not to
be seen there according to her custom, so inconsolable had the death of her
lovely African made her. Don Pedro was mighty desirous to know how she fared.
One day as he was discoursing with Don Iuan, one of Elvira's Slaves delivered
him a Letter from his Mistress. He opened it with impatience, and read what
follows.

LETTER.
TWo persons, who are minded to marry, don't need a third to put them in mind
of it. You would persuade me that you don't dislike me, and I must own, that
you please me well enough to grant you this moment, what I did not promise you
till the year was ended. You may make your self, as soon as you please, Master
of my Person and Estate; and I request you to believe, that although I cannot
deliberately embark in such an affair as this, yet your merit and my love will
render it easy to me, and make me break through all difficulties whatsoever.

Elvira.


Don Pedro read over this Letter twice or thrice, and could hardly believe he
was awake. He bethought himself that this was the second time he had run the
danger of being married as ill as any man in Spain, and thanked Heaven with all
his heart that delivered him from two such imminent misfortunes, by discovering
to him two secrets of so great importance. As the Negro^s death had put Elvira
upon this sudden resolution to be married, Don Pedro as suddenly resolved to
get out of her sight as soon as he could. He told Don Iuan that it nearly
concern^d his life and honor to leave Sevil within an hour, and that he would
only take one Servant with him, that he had brought from Granada; he desired
him to sell his Coach and Horses, and to pay his Servants with the Money, and
conjured him not to ask the reason of so sudden an alteration, and a Journey so
hurried, promising to write to him the very first Town he stopped at. He writ to
Elvira, while they went to hire two Mules for him; he gave his Letter to the
Slave, and when the Mules came, took the road to Madrid; being confirmed more
than ever in his first opinion, and resolving to stand upon his guard against
all witty women, nay, even to detest them. While he jogged gently on, full of
these virtuous resolutions, Elvira opened his Letter, and read the following
lines.

LETTER.
AS violently in love as I am with you, yet I always prefer the care of
preserving your honor to the pleasure of possessing you. Thus you could not
but observe with what discretion I always manag^d my Gallantry. I am somewhat
scrupulous in my own nature, and therefore cannot in Conscience ask you to
marry me so soon, since you are a Widow of but a day's standing. You owe more
than that comes to, Madam, to the memory of the poor Negro defunct, and you
cannot take less than a year to lament the loss of a person, who did you so
considerable services. In the mean while you and I shall have time enough to
consider what we have to do.

Don Pedro.


Elvira had like to have run distracted when she read this Letter, and it
touched her more to the quick than even the ^oss of her Guinea Lover: but
considering that Don Pedro had left Sevil, and another Gallant, that had all
the qualifi^ations to please her, offering at the same time to marry her, she
took him to supply the Negro's room. Not but that she could have found Negroes
enough to have done her business, ^ut some body had told her, that there was a
difference in Negroes, as well as other folks, and that every thing is not
therefore the Devil because it is black. In the mean time Don Pedro and his
trusty Mule got to Madrid, and ^he went ^mmediately to an Unkle's house, who
received him very courteously. This Uncle of his was a rich Cavalier, that had
an only Son, that was betrothed to a young Cousin that was an only Daughter
likewise, and who being but ten years ^ld, past her time in a Convent, till she
came to be of age to marry him. His name was Don Rodrigo, and he possessed ^ll
the good qualities that can make a man amiable. Don Pedro entered into a
stricter league of friendship with him, ^han men usually do with a Relation,
tho they love him ^ever so well; for they are not always our Relations whom
(...) love best. Don Rodrigo seemed to be disturbed in his ^ind, and Don Pedro
perceiving it, related all his adventures to him, that he might oblige him by
this confidence to communicate his to him, and if he had any occasion for his
service, to let him see, that he was much more his Friend than his Relation.
After this, he told him, that he had observed that somewhat sat uneasy upon
him, and therefore he begged him to let him know what it was; otherwise he must
believe that his friendship was not so hearty as his. Don Rodrigo desired
nothing more, hoping to receive some relief in his inquietude, when he had once
communicated it. He therefore acquaints Don Pedro that he was passionately in
love with a Damosel of Madrid, who was promised to a Kinsman, whom she expected
every hour from the Indies, but had never seen, just as he was engaged to a
Cousin, and waited till she was of age, of whom he had but little knowledge.
This conformity of Adventures, said he to Don Pedro, has very much contributed
to increase the affection we have for one another, although at the same time it
keeps us both in our duty, whenever our passion advises us to prefer our
satisfaction to those engagements, wherein the interests of our Families have
linked us. Hitherto my love has made as fair a progress with her as I could
wish, tho I have not as yet been able to compass my desires, which she puts off
till her Husband's arrival, when her Marriage may secure both of us from any
ill consequences that may follow upon an Assignation, when we may probably do
something else than discourse and talk. I will say nothing to you of the beauty
of Virginia, since it is impossible to say too much of it, and because I should
be apt to say so much of it that you would not believe me. However, this I am
certain of, that when you have seen her, and her Cousin Violanta who lives with
her, you will readily own, that all Spain cannot show any thing more beautiful
than this incomparable pair; and when you have conversed a few moments with
them, I will leave you to tell me, whether you ever saw wittier Women in your
life. It Is this that makes me pity you, says Don Pedro to him. And why so,
replied Don Rodrigo? Because a woman of Wit cries he, will most infallibly jilt
you either sooner o^ later. You cannot but know, continues he, by the recital ^
have made you of my own adventures, what has happened to my self, and I
seriously protest to you, that if I cou'^ hope to find a woman as foolish as I
know some of 'em are witty, I would employ all arts to gain her, and prefer he^
even to Wisdom itself, if she would choose me for her Gallant. You are much in
the wrong, replies Don Rodrigo, (...) I never met a man of tolerable sense in
my life, but (...) soon weary of a woman's company if she was a Fool. Indeed
it is not reasonable, that whilst our eyes, our hands, and in short all our body
finds something to divert it, our soul, which is the noblest part of the
composition, should be forced to endure a tiresome insipid conversation, as
that of all persons must certainly be, that have no wit to support it. Let us
not carry this dispute as far as it will go, cries Don Pedro to him, for a man
may say too many things upon so copious a subject. Only let me see this miracle
of a woman, and her Cousin as soon as you can, that if I don't dislike her, I
may have something to amuse my self with during my stay in Madrid. I don't
believe you will find your account in it, cries Rodrigo. And why so? replies Don
Pedro. Because, says the other, she is the only woman in the world who is least
a Fool. I will however suit my self to the time, says Don Pedro. To tell you
the truth, answers Don Rodrigo, I don't know in what manner Madam Virginia will
receive us. For these eight days last past she has used me most unmercifully;
she has sent me back all my Letters without so much as opening them, and in
short has given me to understand that she will never admit a visit from me,
because she saw me some time ago talking with a young Lady at Church, in whose
company she had seen me the same day at the Playhouse; and this is the reason
why I have been of late so melancholy. It signifies nothing, says Don Pedro,
let us go and see them, and take my word for it, you will sooner reconcile
matters, by justifying your self to her face, than by writing her a Cart-load
of whining Letters. Thus our two Gentlemen-Cousins went to visit the two
Lady-Cousins, and the beautiful Virginia gave Don Rodrigo leave to clear
himself, which was easily done. Don Pedro thought both of them to be the
handsomest women he had ever seen, not excepting either the imprudent
Seraphina, or the hypocritical Elvira. Violanta, who had dressed herself that day
in her finest Clothes, because she was to sit for her Picture, charmed Don
Pedro so effectually, that he immediately broke the vow he had made, never to
love any one but a Fool. On his side he did not displease Violanta, and said so
many pretty engaging things to her upon the occasion of her Picture, that she
was no less satisfied with his Wit than his Gallantry; and here I am obliged to
make a short digression, and acquaint those that knew it not before, that your
mi^hty retailers of Compliments and fine expressions, generally deal in whipped
Cream, and are justly accused of bombast by men of Wit and Sense. If this small
advice had been considered by the public, they would have found it no less
useful than a Receipt against Flies in the Summer, and stinking breaths all the
year round. Don Pedro, who had solemnly swore by his Maker, that he would marry
none but a Fool, was now fully convinced, that Oaths made by Gamesters and
Lovers, signify just nothing. He was so ravished with Violanta's Wit, no less
than her Beauty, that finding he could obtain no other favors from her, but
such as she might grant without any prejudice to her honor, he resolved to
marry her, if she did not forbid the Banes. He frequently gave her an occasion
to explain her mind upon this article, but either she did not, or would not
understand him, whether it was because she loved her liberty, or had an
aversion to Matrimony. Thus all things went smoothly on between these four
young Lovers, and they only waited for the critical minute. One day that they
had spruced themselves up like Castor and Pollux, and made no question to be
Masters at least of all the Outworks they attacked, a Servant Maid, whose
appearance boded worse luck than that of an Owl, came to acquaint the two
Cousins, that the Indian Husband of the fair Castilian was arrived at Madrid,
without sending her any advice of his coming from Sevil, where he landed: that
the two Cousins concluded from thence that he had a mind to surprise them, and
therefore desired our Lovers to fortify themselves with patience, till such
time as Virginia had found out the humor of her Indian Spark; and that they
would not only forbear to visit them, but even to walk before their Windows,
till they received new orders. So all their tricking and powdering of
themselves that morning was thrown away, and the next two days they had no more
mind to dress, than a Criminal condemned to be hanged. They learnt, among the
other news of the Town, that the Indian and Virginia were married in private,
that he was very jealous in his own temper, that he was a man of experience,
having seen forty years; in fine, that he had so ordered his family, and kept
so strict a watch over all Virginia's actions, that her Gallants, if she had
any, must never expect to see her so much as at her Window. The new orders,
which had been promised them, did not come, and they were impatient with
expecting them. They daily walked through the street, where their ^^^^^esse^
liv^d, and took their usual turns before the House, (...)hou^ seeing any but
unknown faces go in or out, and w(...)t being, able to meet with the least
Servant or Maid of (...) acquaintance. They saw the Husband go into his H(...)
day, accompanied by his Brother, who was hand (...) well made, and so young,
that he was still at the College. This increased their ill humor: They went
out early in the morning, and came not home till it was very late, and lost
both their time and their labor. At last, upon a certain Holyday, they saw
Violanta's Maid going to Mass by break of day; they stopped her at the
Church Porch, and by the never-failing Rhetoric of Money, Don Rodrigo persuaded
her to carry the following (...) to her (...).

Your forgetting me does not more disoblige me, than my jealousy torments me,
since it is without remedy, now you are under the Government of a Husband.
However, you are not totally freed as yet from my importunities, although you have
discarded me from your remembrance. The last favor I have to beg of you, is,
to inform me whether I have any reason still to hope, or whether I must prepare
to dye.

They followed Violanta's Maid at a distance. She delivered the Letter
according to her promise, and making a sign to them to draw near, she dropped the
following Answer from the Window into the Street.

A jealous man so newly married is never out of his Wive's Company, and watches
all her motions. He talks of taking a journey to Valladolid shortly without me;
I will then justify myself, and pay my debts.

This Billet, which they kissed a hundred times, by the same token that they
strove which should outdo the other, gave them fresh encouragement, and made
them easy enough for a few days. But at last, hearing no news from their cruel
Mistresses, they began after their old laudable custom to walk to and fro a
hundred times a day before their Windows; they passed whole nights in the
street, but could not see a soul stir out of the house, no more than if it had
not been inhabited. One day, as these despairing Lovers happened to be at
Church, they had the good luck to see our young Bride come toward them. Don
Rodrigo kneeled down by her, under the nose of an old Gentleman Usher that had
Squir'd her to Church. He made his complaints to her in a few words, she
excused herself in like manner, and at last told Don Rodrigo that her Husband
was not to go to Valladolid, although he daily talked of it; that she was
^mpatient to have a private conversation with him, and that she only knew one
way of bringing it about, which wholly depended upon Don Pedro. My husband,
says she, sleeps as sound as if he took Opium every night, and we have not
exchanged a word with one another these four or five days, by reason of a small
quarrel between us, which is not yet made up. I had prevailed with my Cousin
Violanta to take my place, but she is unhappily sick, and since none are privy
to our love but she and Don Pedro, and I would not for all the world have it
communicated to more, you^ must even get him, (if you think he loves you well
enough to venture it,) to supply her room, and go to bed to my Husband. This
attempt seems to be somewhat dangerous at first sight; but if you consider that
my good man and I are at odds, as I have already told you, and that he does not
easily wake, I don't question bu^ it will succeed to our expectation, and this
is all I can do for you. This happy Love-Stratagem, which Don Rodrigo so
earnestly desired to know, cooled him in a minute when he heard it. He not only
doubted whether his Cousin would take upon him to act this dangerous part, but
he likewise doubted whether he ought so much as propose it to him. His Mistress
continued inflexible in her resolution, and as she took her leave of him she
protested to him, that in case the Proposal she had made him was not well
received, and executed in the manner she directed him, he had nothing more to
hope from her, nay, that she gave him full leave to banish her out of his
remembrance, although at another time she would as soon consent to her own death.
Neither the time nor place would permit Don Rodrigo to talk any longer with his
Mistress. She went home, and Don Rodrigo repaired to his companion, who could
not get a word out of him, so much confounded he was at the unhappy Dilemma
wherein he found himself, either to make so unreasonable a request to his
friend, or to live without enjoying that happiness, which is always more
esteemed before possession than after it. At last, shutting themselves up in
their Chamber, Don Rodrigo, after he had for a while refused to declare his
grievance, opened the abovementioned proposal to Don Pedro, gilding the Pill
as well as he bou'd, to make it go down the better with him. At first Don Pedro
thought that he had a mind to banter him, but his Cousin protesting the
contrary in a very serious air, and confirming it by so many Oaths, that he
could no longer doubt of it, he must needs turn the thing into raillery, and
told him he was exceedingly obliged to his Mistress, for designing him such
good fortune with so lovely a Bedfellow, and that it was undoubtedly the
effect of Violanta's gratitude, who, not being in a condition to reward his
services, because she was sick, and being pressed to pay her debts, turned it
over to her Cousin's Husband, with whom he should certainly pass the night very
agreeably. He talked much to the same purpose, and jested a long while,
sometimes well, and sometimes but indifferently. But Don Rodrigo was not in a
humor to be merry, and he appeared so dejected and melancholy to his Cousin,
that he heartily pitied him, and was afraid that his despair would carry him to
some dangerous resolutions. Don Pedro was bold in his temper, a great lover of
Intrigues, and no man so ready as he to engage in any extravagant adventure: he
loved Don Rodrigo tenderly, so that all this joined together made him resolve
to supply the room of the beautiful Virginia, whatever her jealous Husband
might do to him being therefore fully determined upon the matter, he embraced
his Cousin, and put fresh life into him, when he assured him that he would
hazard all that he might enjoy his beloved Mistress. You will not, added he, be
so much obliged to me as you think: I consider it as an honorable action,
wherein I pretend to get as much reputation, as if I should signalize my self
at a breach. Word was sent to Virginia that her proposal was accepted; she
appointed that very evening to put it in execution: The two Cousins went to her
house, and were introduced with as little noise as was possible. Don Pedro was
obliged by the fair Lady of the Enchanted Castle to undress himself before her,
being resolved that her orders should not be transgressed in the least. Don
Pedro having nothing on now but his shirt, was conducted by her with all the
care and circumspection imaginable to the fatal room, and opening the Curtains,
the softly put the bold Don Pedro between the sheets, who perhaps at that very
moment repented for having gone so far, and one may swear did not throw himself
into the middle of the Bed. She went away, locked the Chamber door, which put
Don Pedro into cruel apprehensions, and repaired to Don Rodrigo, to whom I
suppose she paid, like a woman of honor, all that she owed him, or at least as
much as he demanded of her. In the mean time Don Pedro was in different
circumstances from those of his Cousin, who threw himself into the arms of his
charming Mistress, while our too charitable and adventurous Friend, feared
nothing so much as the embraces of a detestable man, whom to his great sorrow
he was like to find a very uncomfortable Bedfellow. He then began to consider,
but it was somewhat of the latest, to what hazards his foolish rashness had
carried him. He blamed himself, he called himself Fool a thousand times in his
thoughts, and was sensible that to transgress thus against any Husband, was an
unpardonable crime, tho even he himself were to be judge. These melancholy
reflections were disturbed, and his just fears increased, by a great villainous
arm which his Companion in bed threw over him, drawing nearer (...) nearer to
him still, and pronouncing some inarticulate words, as people do when they are
asleep, and making as if he was going to embrace his Wife. Don Pedro was
torribly (...), and removed this arm, that lay heavier on hi^ tha^ the greatest
burden, as gently as he could, for fear of awaking him, and when he had done
this, with all the^ recaution o^ one in that danger, he crept to the Bedside,
with (...) his body out of the bed, so that he had like to have (...) upon the
floor, cursing his Stars and his own folly, for exposing himself to such
dangers, to serve the passion of two indiscreet Lovers. He had scarce begun to
breathe a little, when his troublesome Bedfellow laid his Leg over his, and
this last action, as well as the former, had like to have made him dye with
fear. In short, the one still drawing nearer, and the other getting off as far
as he could, the day appeared just at the time when the unfortunate Don Pedro
was no longer able to keep his ground against a man, who still drove him
farther. He arose as softly as might be, and went to open the door, which he
found locked, a greater misfortune than any had yet befallen him. As he was
endeavoring in vain to open it, it flew open all on the sudden, and had like
to have broke his Nose. Virginia came boldly into the Chamber, and asked him
aloud, Whither he was going in such haste? Don Pedro conjured her in a low
voice not to make such a noise, and asked her whether she had not lost her
senses, to venture the waking of her Husband thus, and desired her to let him
go. How, go! says the Lady aloud to him, I am resolved my Husband shall see
whom he has lain with to night, that he may know what his jealous^e has brought
him to, and what I am capable of doing. When she had said this, as bold as a
Lyoness, she took Don Pedro by the arm, who was so confounded, that he had not
strength enough to get loose from her, opened the Window-Shutters, without
quitting her hold, and pulling him to the Bedside, drew the Curtains, and
cried out aloud, See, jeal^us master of mine, see whom you have lain with to
night. Don Pedro turn^d his eyes toward the terrible Bed, and instead of an
ugly fellow with a beard, he beheld his charming Violanta, who had lain by his
side all night, and not the jealous Husband of Virginia, who had gone into the
Country about eight days before. The two pretty Cousins pelted him with their
raillery; never did man of wit make so lame ^ defense, or say so little for
himself. Violanta, who was naturally gay, and rallied with a grace, had like to
have made her Cousin dye with laughing, when she pleasantly exaggerated to her
what bodily fears she put poor Don Pedro in, as often as she made as if she
were awake, and drew nearer to him. It was a long time before Don Pedro could
recover out of this confusion, and set his countenance in order. At last
Virginia took compassion of him, and left him alone with her Cousin, with whom
we may suppose he had affairs of great importance to settle, because he was
shut up with her till noon. From this happy hour, all the while the Husband
stayed in the Country, the two Gentlemen-Cousins and the two
Gentlewomen-Cousins met frequently together, and made the best use of their
time. When the Husband came to Town again, Rodrigo was the less happy of the
two, for Don Pedro, by the charitable assistance of the Servants, whom his
presents had brought over to his side, made a shift for two or three months to
pass most of the nights with Violanta, who was mistress of her own actions, and
ever since the marriage of her Cousin lodg^d in a separate building, which had
a door into another street. He became so passionately in love with her, that he
earnestly desired to marry her; but whenever he made any such proposal to her
she turned off the discourse so dexterously, that he could not positively tell
whether she did it out of design, or because she did not listen to him. In
short, as there is nothing permanent in this transitory world, Violanta began
to slacken in her passion, and grew cold by little and little, so that Don
Pedro could not forbear to complain of it, and not knowing how to account for
this alteration otherwise, accus^d her of infidelity, and reproached her with
having some other Gallant more happy than himself. Instead of mending matters
by this procedure he utterly ruined them, and made himself so insupportable to
Violanta, that she not only refused to see him a nights, but likewise to admit
his visits in the day time. This treatment did not in the least discourage him;
he gained by virtue of his Money one of her Maids, who was so treacherous as to
inform him, that her Mistress was passionately in love with her Cousin's
Brother-in-law, who had just left the College; that he was a very handsome
youth, and no less in love with Violanta, than Violanta was with him. To
complete her perfidious treachery, this ill-condition'd Devil advised him to
pretend himself sick, to acquaint her Mistress with his illness, and complain
of her for being the cause of it, which was likely enough; and in short to
f^ign it so well, that her Mistress (...) (...) that had no aversion to
pleasure. She informed herself particularly of the Gallantry of Naples, desired
to know whether the women there were allowed any ^iberty, and whether the
Italian Gallants carried on their amors as bravely as those of Spain. At last
Don Pedro confirmed himself by the questions she put to him, that if she did
not go to the bottom of an Intrigue, 'twas not for want of good will. She made
him dine with her, to the mutual satisfaction of both. Our Granada Adventurer
would have taken his leave of her after dinner, but she would not suffer it,
and told him, that since the Duke her Husband wou^d not come home that day, she
desired him to be her Guest; adding obligingly, that pers^ns of merit were very
rare in Catalonia; and therefore when she had the happiness to meet them, no
wonder she coveted to enjoy their conversation as long as she could. She led
him into a large Closet, very cool and refreshing, adorned with fine Pictures,
China, and other rich furniture. It wanted not, since we are obliged to be
particular, a noble Alcove, embroidered Cushions, and a convenient Couch, with
a rich Satin Quilt thrown over it. Here our Traveller recounted to her all his
adventures ^at Granada, Sevil, and Madrid, together with those of Italy, which
are not as yet arrived to my knowledge. The Duchess listened very attentively
to them; at last he told her that he was resolved to marry, if he could find a
woman fool enough, from whom he should have no reason to apprehend any of those
ill offices, which witty women are able to do their Husbands. I have an estate,
continues he, that is far from being contemptible, and tho the woman I marry
does not bring me a farthing, provided she has been well educated, and is not
deformed, I shall make no scruple to choose her; although, to deal ingenuously
with you, I would much sooner choose a woman that is deformed, provided she is
fool enough, than one that is handsome, and is not so. You are certainly wrong
in your notious, replies the Duchess; but what do you mean by being well
educated? I mean a woman of virtue, answered our Traveller; And how is it
possible for a Fool, to be a woman of virtue, cries the Duchess, if she
neither knows what virtue is, nor is capable of being taught it? Besides how
can a Fool love you, that has not sense enough to know your merit? She will
trespass against her duty, without knowing what she does, whereas a woman of
Wit, although she should dist^ust her honor, will know how to avoid those
occasion^ where she may run any danger of losing it. They argued along while
Pro and Con upon this subject; our Don maintaining that all the knowledge
required in a woman was to love her Husband, to be faithful to him, and
carefully look after her Family affairs and Children; and the Duchess
endeavoring to convince him that a Fool was not capable of doing it, nay, that
tho she was beautiful, she would certainly disgust him at last. They gave one
another several proofs of their Wit, and the good opinion they had of one
another soon improved into esteem, nay, and something better than that. Our
Spaniard did not only differ from the Duke in age, wit, and person, but was one
of the handsomest bestshaped men in the World, and if he appeared as such to
the Duchess, he thought her the loveliest woman he had ever beheld. He was as
bold as a Lion, and never found himself alone with a woman, but he presented
his service to her. If she accepted it, he did his best to acquit himself, and
if she took snuff at it, he would fall you down upon his Marrowbones, and
calling himself the horridst Sinner in the world, ask pardon so ingeniously,
and with so much Hypocrisy, that the Lady must needs pardon his transgression,
or perhaps by way of atonement make him trangress again. I could never have
imagined, says he to the charming Duchess, that any one was able to make me
throw up an opinion, the truth of which so many experiments have confirmed to
me, but it was never yet opposed by so extraordinary a person as your self,
whose Soul, without being beholden to her beauty, which however is not to be
matched in the Universe, may acquire her as large an Empire as she pleases,
over all those that have wit enough to discover, that she has a greater share
of it than all her Sex put together. You have cured me of an error, added he,
but you leave me troubled with an illness, which is so much the more dangerous
and hard to cure, as I am pleased to have it, and by suffering it gratify the
noblest ambition that a mortal is capable of. I cannot positively tell you, how
many other Hyperboles he shot against the Dutches^es virtue, and whether he did
not speak abundance of pathetical impertinences, for upon such occasions as
this, a man is most terribly given to be impertinent. Neither do I know in what
manner the Duchess received a declaration of love, which her Gallant delivered
in due form, I mean whether she seemed to like it by an answer suitable to the
occasion, or whether by answering nothing, she made good the old Proverb,
Silence gives consent. But this is certain, that a Maid of hers, who died of
the Kings Evil in France, often owned before several credible Gentlemen, that
the closet door was shut for some two hours upon them, that they were together
till Supper time, and although this Maid, whom I suppose to have been an
Andalusian, had never told me this, yet I know full well, that opportunity
makes a Thief. The night came, that favorable Goddess to stolen love, but
neither was Don Pedro, nor the Duchess the better for it, for partly out of
good manners, and partly not to give the Servants an occasion to guess, who
generally guess beyond the truth, to which they have a natural Antipathy, they
called for Candles, which were almost eclipsed by the brighter eyes Heaven had
bestowed upon the Duchess, and which at that moment twinkled prettier than any
pair of Stars in the Firmament. The vermillion of her Cheeks was double to what
it used to be, which made her appear brighter than the Sun on a fine Summers
day to Don Pedro, whose visage too was a little inclined to Scarlet. Thus they
merrily past away the time in exchanging glances with one another, when a
Servant came to acquaint the Duchess, that his Grace her Husband was below in
the Court. All that she could do in this surprise, was to shut up the thrice
astonished Don Pedro in a large gilt cup-board, where she kept her perfumed
waters, and putting the Key in her pocket, to throw herself upon the Bed. The
Duke, who was at least threescore years old came into his Wive's Closet, and
found her as gay and fresh as a Rose upon the stalk. He told her, that he had
received a Letter from the King, which obliged him to return sooner than he
thought. He was very hungry, and ordered the Servants to bring whatever they
had ready in the House, into the same Closet, and the Duchess, who had no
great Stomach to eat, while her Traveller, perhaps wished himself ten foot
under ground, took a chair near the Table. She was exceeding cheerful and
brisk, and of a gayety, that bestowed new youth upon her old Husband, so much
did it revive his Spirits. It was a customary thing for her to lay extravagant
wagers with him, but especially when she wanted money, which her good man took
a pleasure to loose to her, being perfectly charmed with so agreeable a Wife.
He never fancied her more beautiful than then; she told him a hundred merry
stories, by the same token, that our Duke had like to have choked himself with
laughing at 'em, for eating heartily and laughing heartily at the same time, a
bit of meat happened to go down the wrong way, but Heaven be praised, it did
him no harm. At last the Duchess, who was of a humor to turn every thing into
merriment, had a mind to divert herself at the expense of her gallant in the
Sweating-tub: Says she to the Duke, methinks it is a long while since we laid a
wager last, now I would fain lay a hundred Pistoles, that I have occasion for,
upon the first subject, that offers itself. The Duke told her he was ready, and
that he would leave it to her, to propose any subject. The Duchess proposed
several to him, which she knew he would not accept, and at last asked him,
whether he would lay a wager, that he could reckon up all the things in a
Family that are made of Iron. The Duke took her at her word, tho he thought it
a very foolish thing to lay a wager on, and calling for Paper and Ink, so soon
as the Cloth was removed, and his Chaplain had said Grace, (for the Duke you
must know kept a good decorum in his family) he writ down the names of all the
Iron utensils he could think of, but it fell out luckily for the Duchess, that
he forgot to mention a Key. She got him to read over what he had written two or
three times, and when he had done so, asked him if he was satisfied with it,
and whether he had any thing to add? She then folded the paper, telling him she
would examine it at her leisure, and that she would relate to him one of the
prettiest adventures he had ever heard. A little after you were gone out upon
your sport, I was, continues she, looking out of one of our windows that faces
the high Road, when I saw a man of an extraordinary mien mounted on a Mule, who
prickd and spurred his Beast to make all the haste he could. I had the
curiosity to know whither he was going in so much haste, and dispatched one of
my Pages to tell him I would speak with him. To be plain with you, I never in
all my life saw a man better made, or more likely to make even a woman of
virtue dispense with a conjugal vow. I asked him whence he came, and who he
was? he answered me so genteely, and with so much wit, that I was desirous to
have more of his Conversation. So I engaged him to stay with me the remainder
of the day, and to acquaint me with all his Adventures, which must certainly be
very curious and entertaining, as I imagined. He performed it to my
expectation, and I must frankly own to you, that I was never better diverted
with any History in my life, and I am resolved, says she, to divert your grace
with it likewise. Then she recounted to the Duke all that had happened to Don
Pedro at Granada, Sevil, and Madrid, and her good man, who was as merry a
Wight, as it is possible for a Duke to be, fell a laughing, as if he would have
burst his hoops, which made the Duchess and some of his chief Servants, whom
he allowed to be familiar with him, join in this merry consort After this she
acquainted him, with all that had befallen our Granada-Gentleman in Italy,
which was very pleasant as I have been told, for I could never inform my self
what the particulars were. All I know is, that the Duke laughed as heartily at
them, and that Don Pedro himself could not forbear laughing in the Chest. In
short, after she had very well diverted herself by making her Husband laugh,
and all the company, and Don Pedro into the bargain, who till now had had his
share in the Mirth, she told her Husband that our Traveller, after he had
recounted all his adventures to her, was so hardy as to make love to her, and
did it with so much address, that she could not find in her heart to be angry
with him for carrying his Gallantry so far, who could not but perceive that he
was by no means displeasing to her. But why should I multiply words in vain,
continued the Duchess, a Gentleman so well made as he is may attempt any thing
without danger. We passed the greatest part of the day together, to our mutual
satisfaction, and we had done so still, but that you came home when I little
expected you. Not to mince matters, your return both afflicted and surpised
me. My lovely Stranger seemed to be in a greater consternation than my self, so
I hastily shut him up in my Chest of perfumed Waters, from whence he must needs
hear me, if he is not already dead with fear. But knowing what an ascendant I
have over you, and being in my own temper incapable of dissembling even those
very things, where my too great freedom may do me harm, I was resolved to
divert you at the expense of this poor Gentleman, whom I will draw out of his
hole, so soon as you are gone to your own apartment, and leave him to pursue
his Journey to Granada, where he is going, as he tells us, to find out a woman,
who is Fool enough it seems to deserve to be his Wife. The Duchess gave such
an air of probability to this true story, that the Duke quitted his good
humor, and turned serious all on the sudden. He looked pale, he was afraid
that what his Wife had told him was true, and could not forbear asking for the
Key^ of the Chest, wherein, as she pretended, the Stranger was shut up. She
changed the discourse, and by that means increased his suspicion and his fears.
He asked her once more for the Keys of the Chest, which she refused him. He was
resolved to have them, and arose from his seat in a passion. Very well, Sir,
very well, said the Duchess to him, before you ask me for the Keys in such
haste, pray be pleased cooly and calmly to read over your Catalogue; you have
forgot to set down Keys in it, you cannot deny but that they are made of Iron,
and that you owe me a hundred Pistoles upon the wager. Pray give 'em me now, as
you are obliged in honor, and take notice that if I have told you a merry
story, 'twas only to put you in mind of what you had lost, and at the same time
to divert you, that you might part the freer with your money. The next time I
would have you to be more wise, than to take an invented story for a true one.
'Twas not probable that so many extraordinary adventures should befall one
single man, and much less so, that I would have told you such a story if it had
been true. He laughed as if he had been distracted, he admired the prodigious
wit of his Wife, and commended it before his Servants, who were perhaps as
arrant fools as himself. See now, cries he as loud as he was able, and laughed
at the same time, see now by what a cunning fetch the Gypsy has told me that I
have lost. The Duchess had liked to have killed her self with laughing, her
Woman seconded her, and Don Pedro was half dead with stifling his laughter in
the Chest. At last, the Duke, after he had ordered the Steward to pay his Wife
a hundred Pistoles, leaves her to go to his own Apartment, often saying to
himself that she was a true Devil, and sometimes that she had the Wit of a
Devil. The Duke's Servants repeated the same words after their master, so that
all the while the Duke was going toward his Chamber, you could hear nothing
else upon the stairs, but different voices, crying, my Lady Duchess has the
wit of Devil, my Lady Duchess is a true Devil. In the mean time the Steward
paid the Duchess her 100 Pistoles, and went his way. The Duchess shut her
Chamber door, and freeing Don Pedro out of his little ease, who had scarce
recovered out of his fright, she endeavored to convince him, that a woman of
Wit could disengage herself with honor out of a scurvy business, the very
thoughts of which would have made a fool dye with fear. She would have had him
take part of a Collation, which her women had just set upon the Table; but he
begged her pardon, and desired her to let him go. She gave him the hundred
Pistoles she had won of her Husband, with a Gold Chain and her Picture, that
were worth as much more, conjuring him not to forget her, but to let her hear
from him now and then. After this she tenderly embraced him, and put him into
the hands of her Maids, who let him and his Mule out privately by a back door.
He did not think it convenient to lie in that place, but rode two leagues
further till he came to the Town, where he intended to have dined the day
before, if the Duchess had not stopped him. This odd adventure, with the
Catalonian Duchess, ran perpetually in his head. Be could not enough wonder at
her falling in love with him so on the sudden before she knew him, at her
rashness in relating to the Duke a story so nice, but so true, and last of all
at her great address in applying it to her wager. He likewise admired the good
temper of the Duke, he pitied his condition, and fortified himself more than
ever in his opinion, that a woman of wit was hard to be looked after, and
doubted not but that if the Duchess had not too much relied upon the goodness
of her invention, she durst never have carried on her intrigue so far, nor had
the boldness to communicate it to her Husband. He promised himself that he
would never run any such risque of being ill-married, because he would either
take no Wife at all, or if he did, pitch upon one that was so foolish, that she
should not be able to distinguish between Love and Aversion. As he was making
these wise reflections, he arrived at Madrid, where he found his Cousin Don
Rodrigo, had inherited his Father's Estate, and was married to his Kinswoman.
He was informed by him that Violanta had disposed of herself in Matrimony, and
that the beautiful Virginia, was gone to the Indies with her Husband. From
Madrid he arrived at Granada. The first visit he paid was to his Aunt, who
welcomed him with a thousand embraces, and told him that Seraphina lived like a
Saint, and that her Lover had died of grief, because he could not persuade her
to quit the Cloister to marry him. Next day he went in company with his Aunt to
see the young Laura, Seraphina's Daughter. She had been put into a Convent when
she was but four years old, and then might be about sixteen. He found her as
beautiful as all the Angels put together, and as foolish as all the Nuns that
come into the world without Brains, and are taken out of it in their Infancy,
to be buried alive in a Convent. He gazed upon her, and was charmed by her
beauty; he made her talk, and admired her innocence. He now flattered himself
that he had found out what he had been so long looking after, and what made him
take a greater fancy to Laura, was that she much resembled Seraphina, with whom
he had once been passionately in love, tho the Copy infinitely exceeded the
Original. He told his Aunt that she was not his Daughter, and acquainted her
with his resolution to marry her. The old Gentlewoman approved his choice, and
communicated the good news to Laura, who neither rejoiced, nor was sad at it.
Don Pedro furnished his house, looked out for the most foolish Servants he
could find: He likewise endeavored to get a set of Maids, full as great fools
as Laura, which gave him no small trouble. He presented his Mistress with the
richest Clothes and the finest things that Granada could afford. All persons of
quality in the Town were invited to the Wedding, and were as much pleased with
Laura's Beauty, as they were disgusted at her Simplicity. The company broke up
very early, and our new couple were left alone by themselves. Don Pedro sent
his Servants to bed, and ordering his Wife's Maids to retire, so soon as they
had undrest her, shut the Chamber door. And now the Devil put it into his head
to execute the most nonsensical frolic, that ever man was guilty of, who had
past all his life for a man of sense. He ^at down in a Chair, making his Wife
stand all the while before him, and spoke the following words to her, or others
much more impertinent. You are my Wife, and I hope I shall have reason to bless
God for it, so long as we live together. Be sure to remember what I tell you,
and carefully observe it while you live, lest you offend God, and displease
^^e. At these words the Innocent Laura made many profound Courtsies to him,
whether seasonably or no it signifies nothing; and with her two little roguy
blinking eyes, she looked as fearfully upon her Husband, as a new Scholar does
upon an imperious Pedagogue. Do you know, continued Don Pedro, how married
people ought to live? Not I, forsooth, replied Laura, dropping him a Courtsie
much lower than all the rest, but if you will teach me, I Will remember it better
than my Ave Mary; and then she dropped him another. Don Pedro thought himself the
happiest man upon earth, to find more simplicity in his Wife than he ^urst have
hoped. He took from his Armory, a very ^ich, but light suit of Armor, which he
had wore former^y at a magnificent Reception, that the City had made for ^he
King of Spain. With this he equipped his pretty Idiot, ^he put a little gilt
Murrion on her head, finely adorned with Plumes, he girt a Sword by her side,
and putting a Lance into her hand, gravely told her, that it was the du^y of
(...) married Wives, who had a mind to be thought (...) to watch their Husbands
while they slept, arm^d (...) points as she was. She answered him with (...)
(...) Court'sies, and kept on Court'sing, till he bid (...) or three turns
about her Chamber, which (...) to perform with so good a grace, her (...)
Beauty, and her Military habit not a little contributing to set her off, that
our too refined Politician of a Husband, was perfectly charmed with her. He
went to Bed, and Laura continued in motion till five a Clock in the morning.
Our Gentleman, who was the most considering and discreet of all Husbands in the
Universe, or a^ least thought himself such, got up, dressed himself, disarmed
his Wife, helped her to pluck off her Clothes, put her into bed, which he had
just quitted, and kissed her a thousand times, weeping for mere joy, that he
had at last found so unestimable a Jewel. He then wished her a good repose, and
forbidding his Servants to awake her, went to Mass, and about his other
affairs: for I had forgot (...) inform the courteous Reader, that he had
purchased a Plac^ in Granada, much like that of our Maires, or Provosts (...)
the Merchants. The first night of their Marriage passed (...) the manner as I
have re^a^xsed it, and the Husband was suc^ a confirmed Sot, as to employ the
second no better. A^cordingly Heaven punished him for his stupidity. An u^lucky
business happened, which obliged him to take (...) that very day, and ride to
Court. He had only time (...) change his Clothes, and take leave of his Wife,
enjoyni^ her under pain of offending God and displeasing him, ^observe exactly
in his absence the duty of married wom^^ Those that have business at Court, let
them be as good A^strologers as they please, cannot assign the precise ti^ when
it shall be concluded. Don Pedro did not think ^ staying there above five or
six days at farthest, but was for ^ to wait five or six months. All this while
the simple Lau^^ did not fail to pass her nights in her Coat of Armor, a^^
spent her day^ in working at her Needle, which she h^^ learnt in the Convent. A
Gentleman of Cordova came ^ Granada at this time about a Lawsuit. He was no
fool^ to his intellectuals, and was well made as to his perfo^ He often saw
Laura in her Balcony; he thought her (...) ^ceeding pretty; he passed and
re-pass'd before her Wi^dows a hundred times a day at least, after the Mode ^
Spain, and Laura let him fairly pass and repass without knowing what it meant,
or so much as desiring to know ^ There lived over against Don Pedro's House, a
poor so^^ ^ a woman, but charitable in her nature, and ready to ^^lieve the
wants of her Neighbors, who soon perceived be^ the Strangers love, and the
small progress he had made ^ the charming Laura's affections. She was a woman
of ^ (...) and her chief business was that of bringing good (...) together, for
which she was admirably fitted by her Trade, which lay in Commodes, Towers,
Washes, Essences, Elixirs, and some fine secrets for beautifying the Skin, and
taking off freckles; but what recommended her most to this virtuous employment,
she was supposed to be skilled in the Black Art. She so punctually bowed to the
Cordovan Gentleman, and good-morrow'd him so often as he passed before Laura's
Windows, that he fancied she did not do it without some design. He accosted
her, and all at once struck up an acquaintance and friendship with her; he
discovered his passion to her, and promised to make her fortune if she served
him in his Amor. This old Agent of Lucifer loses no time, gets herself
introduced by the foolish Servants into the Company of their foolish Mistress,
under pretense of showing her some fine curiosities. She commended her Beauty,
lamented her being so soon forced to lose her Husband's Company, and when she
found herself alone with her, she spoke to her of the fine Gentleman that
passed so often before her Windows. She told her that ^e loved her more than
his life, and that he had a violent ^nclination to serve her, if she saw
fitting. In truth, I am very much obliged to him, replied the innocent Laura,
and I should like his service well enough, but our House ^ full of Servants,
and should any of them go away, I ^urst not receive him in my Husbands absence.
Howe^er, I will write to him about it, if the Gentleman desires ^t, and I don't
doubt but I shall obtain what I ask of him. This was enough to so experienced a
Bawd as ours was, to ^onvince her that Laura was simplicity it self. She
therefore endeavored to explain to her as well as she was able, in what manner
this Gentleman desired to serve her: She ^old her that he was full as rich as
her Husband, and that ^f she had a mind to see any proofs of it, she would
bring her from him the finest Jewels, and the richest Clothes that ^ould be.
Alas! Madam, says Laura, I have so much of what you talk of, that I don't know
where to put them. Since it is so, answered this Ambassadress of Satan, and you
don't care that he should present you, suffer him at least to ^isit you. He may
do that, says Laura, when he pleases, no one will hinder him. That is as well
as may be, replies this venerable Bawd, but yet it would be much better still,
if your Footmen and Maids knew nothing of it. That Is ^asy enough, answered
Laura, for my Maids don't lie in my Chamber, I go to bed without their help,
and very late. Take this Key which opens all the rest in the House, and about
eleven at night he may come in at the Garden-door, where he will see a little
Staircase, that will lead him to my Chamber. This old Beldame took her hands,
and kissed them a hundred times, telling her she was going to bestow new life
upon this poor Gentleman, whom she had left a dying. And how came that about?
cries Laura all in a fright. Why it is you that have killed him, replies this
dissembling Gipsy. Laura looked as pale as if she had been convicted of Murder,
and was going to declare her innocence, if this wicked woman, who did not think
it convenient to abuse her ignorance any longer, had not left her, throwing her
arms about her neck, and assuring her that the sick man would not dye. You may
imagine she understood her Trade too well to forget the miraculous Key that
could open all the doors. Some malapert Critic now will fall upon my bones for
this Key, and tell me, it is all over witchcraft, and smells of a Fable; but
let him know from his most humble and most obliged Servant, that the Gentlemen
in Spain have such sorts of Keys, which they call Mistresses, and that in the
days of yore people were better bred and more civil than to blame what they did
not understand. Let him maul fore-stroke and back-stroke, all that falls within
the compass of his little Capacity, but I should be reckoned as great a Coxcomb
as he, to trouble my head any more about him. To return then to our old Matron:
She went to find out the impatient Lover, and told him with an infernal sneer,
what progress she had made in his business^ he rewarded her like a liberal
Gentleman, and expected the night with impatience. The night at last arrived,
he opened the Garden-door, and stole up as softly as he could to Laura's
Chamber, at the time when this silly creature was walking up and down in her
room, armed at all points, with a Lance in her hand, according to the salutary
instructions of her extravagant Husband. There was only a small light in a
corner of the Room, and the door stood open, without question to receive the
Cordovan Gallant. But our Spack seeing a person all in Armor, did not doubt
but that they designed to get him in their clutches^ His fear then prevailed
over his love, as violent as it was and away he fled faster than he came,
fearing that he should not get into the street soon enough. He went to his
trusty Goer-between, and informed her what a hazard he had run, who being
mightily concerned at what had happened, went directly to Laura's house, to
discourse her about the matter. Our silly Innocent no sooner saw her, but she
asked her why the ^entleman did not come, and whether he was still sick? He is
not sick, replies old Iniquity, but came to wait on you last night, and saw an
armed man in your Chamber. At this Laura made a long-winded laugh, then she
fell into a second fit, and then into a third, and all this while the old woman
could not tell what to make on it. At last, when she had fully satisfied herself
with laughing, and was at liberty to talk, she told the Reverend Beldame, that
it was plain the Gentleman was not married, and that it was she who walked all
armed in her Chamber. Our virtuous Matron could not imagine what to make of
these words, and for a pretty while believed that Laura was a downright
natural, but after she had put several questions to her, she came to
understand, what she could not otherwise have believed, as well the great
simplicity of a Girl of fifteen, who ought to have known what was what at that
age, as the extravagant precaution her Husband used, to secure his Wives
Chastity. However, she thought it best to leave Laura in her error, and instead
of showing herself surprised at the novelty of the thing, as much as she was,
she fell a laughing with Laura, at the great fright the Gallant had been in. A
meeting was appointed that night, the old woman encouraged the Gallant, and
admired as well as he at the strange stupidity of our Husband and his Wife. The
night came, he got into the Garden, crept up the little Staircase, and found
his Lady in Armor, performing her Conjugal Duty, as she thought He embraced
her all covered with Iron as she was, and for her part she received him, as if
she had known him from her Cradle. At last he enquired of her what she designed
to do in this Armor. She fell a laughing, and told him that she durst not take
it off, nor pass the night in any other Equipage; and informed him, since it
seems he knew it not, that it was a Mortal sin to do otherwise. Our charitable
wheedling Cordovan took abundance of pains to undeceive the poor Creature, and
persuade her that she was abused, and that married persons passed their time
after another manner. At last he prevailed with her to disarm, and to learn a
more easy and pleasant way of performing the duties of Matrimony, than her
Husband had taught her, which Laura owned to be a cruel fatigue. He was not
long in getting off her Armor, he likewise helped her to unrig, finding she was
too long about it herself, and then threw himself into the bed by her side,
where he made her confess that Chalk and Cheese were not more different than
his precepts of Matrimony, and those of her Husband. In short, he taught Laura
all that he knew; who for her part was not backward to learn it, while her
Husband danced attendance at Court. At last she received a Letter from him,
wherein he sent her word, that his business being at last over, he was now
preparing to come home: and at the same time our Cordovan having dispatched his
affairs at Granada returned to Cordova, without taking leave of Laura, being,
as I suppose, not very much concerned to part with her, since nothing is so
short-lived as our love of a fool. Laura was not much mortified at it, and
received her Husband with as much joy, and with as little concern for the loss
of her Gallant, as if she had never seen him. Don Pedro and his Wife supt
together, to their mutual satisfaction. The night was now pretty well spent:
Don Pedro went to bed according to his custom, and you may judge what a
surprise he was in, when he saw his pretty Consort in her smock coming to lie
by him. Being much disturbed in his righteous spirit, he asked her why she was
not in her Armor? Oh, says she, I know a much better way of passing the night
with one's Husband, which my other Husband taught me, I thank him. What, have
you got another Husband? replies Don Pedro. Yes, says she, and so fine and
handsome a Husband too, let me tell you, that you would be pleased to see him; but
in truth I don't know when we shall see him, for ever since the last Letter you
sent me he has not been here. Don Pedro dissembling his vexation, asked her who
he was? but she could not resolve him that question, and like a loving Tit
proposed to Don Pedro to show him what a pretty Game her other Husband had
taught her. Our unfortunate Gentleman pretended to be sick, and perhaps was so,
at least in mind. He turned his back to her, and chewing the cud upon the
blessed choice he had made of a Wife, who had not only violated the honor of
his Bed, but had not sense enough to conceal it from him, bethought himself of
the wholesome advice of the Catalonian Duchess, detested his errors, and owned
(but it was somewhat of the latest) that a woman of Wit knows how to preserve
the laws of Honor; or if out of weakness she breaks them, knows at least how
to keep her transgression private. At last he comforted himself as well as he
could for a calamity that was not to be redressed: he feigned to be indisposed
for some time, to see whether the instructions of his Deputy would have any
other effect than just teaching her a Lesson, which he had done better to have
taught her himself. He lived several years with her, had always a watchful eye
upon her actions; and when he died left her all his Estate, upon condition that
she would take the habit of a Nun, in the same Convent where Seraphina lived,
who was informed by him that Laura was her Daughter. He sent all the
particulars of his History to his Cousin Don Rodrigo at Madrid, and confessed
to him how finely he had found himself mistaken in his erroneous opinion. He
died: Laura neither rejoiced nor grieved at it. She entered herself in the same
Convent where her Mother lived; who finding what a great Estate Don Pedro had
left her Daughter, founded a Religious House with it. The History of Don Pedro
was divulged after his death, and convinced all those people, who doubted of it
before, that virtue cannot be perfect without good sense, that a Witty Woman
may be honest of herself, but that a Fool cannot be so without assistance, and
good looking after.

NOVEL III.
The Hypocrites.
IT was at that lovely season of the year, when Flora and Apollo, no, I beg
your pardon, Apollo and Flora, dress the Earth in her gayest livery, that a
Woman arrived at Toledo, the most ancient and most renowned City of Spain. She
was fair and young, as subtle as the old Serpent, and so great an enemy to
truth, that for several years she never suffered that virtue to approach her
lips; and what is more wonderful, she did not find herself a jot the worse for
it, at least she never complained of it. Thus she traffick'd in lies, and
generally made a good market of them; for nothing is more certain, than that a
Cheat of our Heroine's complexion has sometimes stole herself into the
approbation even of those persons, who have a mortal aversion to falsehood. She
had a magazine of fiction large enough to furnish all the Poets, Heralds,
Vision-mongers, Quacks and Astrologers in Christendom. In short, this natural
qualification, which she had taken care to cultivate from her infancy, joined
to the charms of her face, had got her in a short time a fine parcel of
Pistoles. Her eyes were black, lively, sweet, large, as fine as fine could be,
but most notorious killers, convicted of some four or five murders, suspected
of fifty more that were not sufficiently proved upon them; and as for the
wretches they had wounded, their numbers could not be computed, nor even
imagined. No woman in the Universe dressed finer than she; the least pin set on
by her hand carried a particular charm with it. She advised with no other
Councellor as to her dress but her Looking-glass, which was her Chief Minister
of State, her Treasurer, and Father Confessor. She was a most dangerous woman
to see, that is certain, for a man could not for the heart of him help loving
her, and could not be long her Gallant, without being her Slave as long. Well,
our Lady, such as I have described her to you, arrived at Toledo toward the
evening, just at the very nick of time when all the Cavaliers of the City were
preparing a Masquerade for the Wedding of a young Gentleman of the
neighborhood, who was to marry a Lady, descended of one of the best Families
in that City. The Windows were illuminated with Torches, but much more with the
brighter eyes of the fair Ladies, and the incredible number of Waxlights
triumphed over the vanquished night, and restored another day. Women of the
least quality showed all their finery upon this occasion. A world of Beaux had
most nicely spruc'd up their fine persons with a felonious intention to kill
the Ladies; I mean those empty Fops, that all great Cities are plagued with,
who don't care a farthing whether they make real Conquests, provided they can
but have the reputation or scandal of them, choose you whether: who never attack
but in a Troop, and always with insolence; and who by virtue of a handsome
Face, Red Stockings, a gilt Snuff Box and a fine Perriwig, think they can
command the lives of all they meet, and murder all the women with love, and all
the men with fear. Oh what a fine time had the men of complement that day to
show the fruitfulness of their imagination; and how much glittering Rhetoric
was thrown away upon Goddesses, who had not been deify'd a full hour? Among the
rest, a dapper Younker, who from a Schoolboy had advanced himself to the
dignity of a Page, surpassed himself in talking magnificent nonsense before our
Heroine, and never was better pleased with his dear person than then. He had
seen her alight out of the Stage-Coach, by the same token he was terribly
smitten with her; but resolving not to stop there, he followed her to the very
door of the House where she hired a Room, and from thence to all the several
places where her curiosity led her. At last our stranger stopped at a certain
place, where she might behold the Masks at her ease; and our eloquent Page, who
had put on his best Linen that day, and was finer than ordinary, immediately
entered into a conversation with her, and began to display his talent. She was a
woman that understood the world very well, and loved dearly to banter and laugh
at your forward young Prigs, that think they are born with a Patent to be
troublesome. Judge therefore, if finding our Page an everlasting Talker, that
cared not what came uppermost, she did not ^oon carry the shallow sot out of
his depth, and manage him as she pleased. She intoxicated him with her praises,
so that ^oth his heart and soul were at her service. He told her, that ^e
waited on an ancient Cavalier of Andalusia, Uncle to the young Gentleman that
was to be married, for whom the City made all this rejoicing; that he was one
of the richest men of his quality, and that he had no other Heir but this young
Nephew, whom he loved exceedingly, although he was one of the most extravagant
young fellows in Spain, a lover of all the women he saw, and besides a little
army of Whores and other Women whom he had inveigled, either by fair Speeches,
or Money; had committed several Rapes, without respect to age, degree, or
condition. He added, that his follies had been very expensive to his old Uncle;
who was the more desirous to link him in Matrimony, to see whether he would not
alter his manners with altering his condition. While the Page discovered all
the affairs and secrets of his Master, she made him giddy with her flatteries,
commending every word he spoke, and bidding the company observe with what a
grace he told his story; in short, omitting nothing that might help to turn the
head of a young Fop, who had already but too good an opinion of his own parts.

The commendations and applauses that come from a fair mouth are dangerous and
deceitful. Our indiscreet Page had no sooner informed Helen that he was a
Native of Valladolid, but she began to express herself very much in favor of
that City and its Inhabitants; and after she had put herself to the expense of
some hyperboles in praising them, she assured our young Coxcomb that of all the
fine Gentlemen she had known of that Country, she never saw one so well made
and accomplished as himself. This was the finishing complement, that pinned up
the basket. Just as our Page was going to take his leave of her, she invited
him to conduct her to her Lodgings, and you must not ask the question why she
gave her Lilly-white hand to him rather than another. This unexpected favor
made his heart leap within him, so that he was perfectly out of his little
senses; and he concluded within himself that a man ought not to despair of his
good fortune, although he is never so miserable. When our charming Flatterer came
ito her Room she placed the Page in the best seat: He was so confounded with
this treatment, that for want of taking due care, he came souse with his breech
to the ground: his Cloak fell one way, and his Hat and Gloves another, and he
had like to have run himself through with his Poniard, which dropped out of the
Scabbard as he fell. Helen went to help up our poor Spark, and seemed to be
mightily concerned at his mischance: She put up his Poniard, and told him she
could not see him wear it any more that day, after the slippery trick it had
played him. The Page picked up the scattered remains of his Shipwreck, and made
several wicked complements suitable to the occasion. All this while Helen made
as if she could not recover herself from her late fright, and began to admire
the fine workmanship of the Poniard. The Page gave her to understand that it
belonged to his old Master, who had formerly bestowed it upon his graceless
Nephew, with a Sword and other accoutrements belonging to it; and that he had
chosen it among several more, that were in his Master's Wardrobe, on purpose to
make a better figure upon a day of such public solemnity. Helen made the Page
believe she had a mind to go out in disguise, to see after what manner people
of quality were married at Toledo. The Page told her that the Ceremony would
not be performed till midnight, and offered her a small Collation in the
Chamber of the Master of the House, who was his friend. He railed at his
unpropitious Stars, that he was forced to quit the most agreeable company in
the world, to wait upon his Master, who kept his bed by reason of his illness.
He added, that his Gout was the reason why he did not assist at the Wedding,
which was to be kept in a great House in the City, at a good distance from his
own, that was called the Hotel of the Count de Fuensolide. He was pumping his
brains to make some pretty complement at parting, when he heard somebody knock
very hard at the door. Helen seemed to be strangely discomposed at it, and
desired the Page to retire into a little Closet, where she shut him up longer
than he imagined. He that made such a rapping at the door was Helen's Gallant,
half Pimp and half Bully, whom, to stop the mouths of the wicked, she was
pleased to call Brother. He was the trusty Accomplice of all her wicked
actions, and drudge in ordinary to her private pleasures. She told him how she
had disposed of the Page, and discovered to him her design to finger some of
his old Masters Pistoles, which required as much speed as dexterity in the
execution. The Mules, tho very well harassed, were immediately put into the
Coach, that had carried them from Madrid; and Helen with her company (which was
composed of the terrible Montafar, the venerable Mendez, and a small Lackey)
embarked in this foundered Vessel, which carried them to a sort of Long-lane,
where a parcel of Christian-Jews live, whose faith is as threadbare as the
second hand Clothes they sell. The Masks ran still about the streets; and it so
happened, that the Bridegroom, who was masked as well as the rest, met Helen's
Coach, and beheld our dangerous stranger, who seemed to him to be Venus in
disguise, or the Sun hurrying about the streets. He was so strangely tempted at
this bewitching sight, that he was within an Ace of leaving his Bride Elect in
the lurch to run after this unknown fair; but at that time his prudence had
power enough to stifle this growing passion. He followed his companions in the
Masks, while the Stage-Coach drove furiously on toward the aforesaid street,
where the Brokers lived, and here without much higgling and making of words,
Helen soon equipt herself in mourning from top to toe, together with the
ancient Mendez, Montafar^ and the little Boy. After this getting into the Coach
again, she ordered the fellow to stop at the Hotel of the Count de Fuensalide.
Our diminutive Lackey went in first, enquired out the Apartment of the Marquis
de Villefagnan, and told him that a Lady from the Mountains of Leon was at the
door, who had some business of great importance to communicate to him. The good
Gentleman was surprised to hear of a visit from such a Lady, and at such an
hour: he raised himself upon his bed as well as he could, adjusted his wrinkled
Cravat, and ordered two Cushions to be put under his back, to receive so
important a visit with a better Grace. He kept himself in this posture, with
his eye still fixed upon the Chamber door, when he saw enter the room (not
without the great admiration of his eyes, and as great a palpitation of his
heart) the sorrowful Montafar, muffled up in as much black Crape as would serve
half a score Herses, followed by two Women in the same habit, the youngest of
whom he led by the hand, and who covering part of her Face with her Vail,
seemed to be the most sorrowful and considerable of the two. A Lackey held up
her train, which was so enormously prolix, that when it was spread out it
covered the whole floor. At the door they saluted the sick old Gentleman with
three profound Reverences, not reckoning that of the little Lackey, which was
worth nothing: In the middle of the room with three other Reverences all at the
same time, and three more before they took their Seats, which were brought them
by a young page, Comrade to him whom Helen had locked up safe in the Closet;
but these three last Reverences were so extraordinary, that they effaced the
remembrance of the former. The Courteous soul of our old Gentleman was
strangely surprised at so odd a Scene, the Ladies took their Seats, and
Montafar and the little Lackey retired bare-headed toward the door. The gouty
Cavalier was at his wits end to find them complements, and he afflicted himself
at their mourning, before he knew the cause of it, which he entreated them to
let him know, as likewise the reason why they did him the honor of a visit at
so unusual an hour for persons of their condition. Helen, who needed not to be
informed what a strange efficacy and persuasion there is in tears that come
from beautiful eyes, immediately poured out a torrent of tears, intermixed with
violent sobs and sighs, raising and falling the tone of her voice as she saw
most proper. She discovered ever and anon her white hands, with which she wiped
her tears, and sometimes showed her face, to let him see she was as beautiful
as afflicted. The old Gentleman expected with impatience when she would open,
and began now to hope it, for that impetuous flood of tears, which had
overflowed her charming Field of Lillies and Roses, was in a manner stopped, when
the venerable Mendez, who judged it convenient to reassume this mournful
harmony, which the other had finished, began to weep and sob, and lay about her
with that violence, that it was a misfortune and shame to Helen that she did
not grieve enough. The old Matron did not stop here, but resolving to outdo
Helen, thought that to tear a handful or two of her Hair, would not have an ill
effect upon the Audience. It was no sooner thought of, but done: she committed
most horrible ravage upon her Locks, but in truth this was no mighty loss to
her, for there was not one single hair of the growth of her head. After this
manner did Helen and Mendez strive who should exceed the other, when Montafar
and the Lackey, at a signal concerted between them, began a doleful Consort at
the Door, and wept and sighed so cruelly, that one would have thought they
designed to outrival the two pensive Ladies near the Bed; who by this new
striking up of the Chorus, began to play their parts so furiously, as if they
had been too remiss before. The old Gentleman was almost distracted, to see
them weep so immoderately, yet know nothing of the occasion. He wept however to
keep them company, as well as he could, sobb'd as strenuously as the best of
them, and conjured the afflicted Ladies by all that was good and sacred, by
their seraphical Eyes, and their celestial Charms to moderate their grief a
little, and acquaint him with the cause of it; protesting, that his Life was
the least thing he would hazard for their sakes, and regretting the loss of his
youth, which hindered him from showing the sincerity of his Heart by his
Actions.

At these words the Sky began to clear up a little, the Countenances were not
so overcast as before, and they thought that they had wept enough in all
conscience, since they could weep no longer without spoiling the jest. Besides,
they were good Husbands of their time, and knew that they had not a minute to
lose. Our old Matron therefore lifting up her Vail above her head, to the end
that her venerable looks might give her all the credit she wanted on this
occasion, declaimed in the following manner. God of his Almighty Power and
Goodness preserve and shield my Lord Marquis de Ville-fagnan from all harm, and
restore him to his former health. Although to speak truth, the tragical Story we
are going to tell him, is not very proper to give him joy, which is the Elixir
of Health: but O^^ misfortune is of that nature, that we must communicate it,
At this the poor Marquess de Ville-fagnan striking himself with the palm of his
hand upon his Thigh, and fetching: sigh from the bottom of his Heart; Heaven
grant, says he, that I am mistaken, but my foreboding mind tells me, that it is
some foolish Frolic, or rather some Extravagance of my Nephew. Go on Madam, go
on, and excuse me for interrupting you. Our old Matron fell a weeping, instead
of returning him an Answer, when the pensive Helen took up the Discourse. Since
you know by sorrowful Experience, says she, that your Nephew is a Slave to his
extravagant Appetites and have been but too often troubled to compound for his
Outrages, you will make no difficulty to believe his brutal usage of me. When
you unhappily sent him to Leon la^^ Spring, he saw me at Church, and at this
first interview said some things to me, which, had they been true, neither of
us ought to have stirred out of that holy ground; my self, for fear of Justice,
as being his Murderer, and he as ^ dead Man, and fit to be put in his Grave He
told me ^ hundred times that my Eyes had killed him, and omitted none of those
insinuating wheedling tricks, that Lovers employ to abuse the simplicity of
poor Virgins. He followed me home to my Lodging, he rode before my Windows
every day, and serenaded me every night. At last, finding that all his amorous
arts signified nothing, he corrupted by his Money a Black Wench, a Slave of
ours, to whom my Mother had promised her liberty, and by her infernal treachery
surpised me in a Garden we have in the Suburbs of the City I had none but this
perfidious Maid with me: he was ^ companied by a Man as wicked as himself, and
had (...) the Gardner to go to the other end of the Town under (...) of
business. What need I say more; he clapped his Poniard to my throat, and finding
that my Life was less dear to me than my Honor, by the help of the Companion
of his crime, he took that by force, which he could never obtain by fair
promises. The Black acted the part of a distracted Woman, and the better to
hide her perfidy, she wounded herself slightly in the hand, and then vanished.
The Gardner returned: your Nephew affrighted at the blackness of his Crime,
leapt over the Garden-wall in so much precipitation, that he dropped his Poniard,
which I took up. However, this insolent young man had nothing then to fear; for
not being in a condition to stop him, I had command enough over my self, to
dissemble the inexpressible misfortune that had befallen me. I did all I could
to appear no more concerned than I used to be. The wicked Slave was not to be
seen from that moment. Soon after I lost my Mother, and I might say that I lost
every thing with her, if my Aunt, whom you see there, had not been so kind as
to take me to her own House, where she makes no difference between her tow
beautiful Daughters and my self. There I came to be informed, that your Nephew
was so far from designing to make me reparation for the injury he had done me,
that he was upon the point of marrying in this City. Upon this I flew hither in
the greatest haste I could, and expect, before I go out of your Chamber, that
you will give me in Money or Jewels, the worth of two thousand Crowns, to
settle me in some Convent; for after what I have known by fatal experience of
the temper of this Cavalier, I can never bring my self to marry him, although he
and his Relations should endeavor to persuade me by all sorts of Offers and
Entreaties. I know well enough that he is to be married to night, but I Will soon
stop all proceedings, and raise such a hurricane, as shall make his heart ache
as long as he lives, if you don't comply with my proposal: And to let you see,
continued this dissembling Hypocrite, that what I have told you of your Nephew
is so true, that nothing can be more, see the fatal Poniard which he clapped to
my throat; and would to God he had done something more, than only threatened me
with it. She began to weep afresh at the conclusion of the Story. Mendez took
it in a higher Key than she, and the harmonious Consort at the Door, of which
the little squeaking Lackey made the Treble, and Montafar the Bass, tuned their
Pipes to admiration. Our old Gentleman, who had already but too easily
believed, (...) the greatest ch^at of her Sex had told him, no sooner saw the
Poniard, but he immediately knew it to be the same he had formerly bestowed
upon his Nephew. Therefore all his care was to prevent this Story's taking air,
lest it should hinder the Match.

He would have sent for him with all his Heart, but he was afraid lest some
people should be so curious as to enquire into the occasion; and as it is
natural for us to fear where we desire, he no sooner saw our afflicted Ladies
rising from their Seats, and making as if they were going to break this
Marriage to pieces, which he so earnestly desired, and had taken so much pains
to bring about, but he ordered his Page to bring him his Cabinet, and tell out
two thousand Crowns in four Pistole pieces. Montafar received them, and told
them one by one, and the old Marquis having made them promise him to honor him
with a visit next morning, excused himself a hundred times to the Ladies, that
he was not able to wait upon them to their Chariot. Away they went very well
satisfied with their visit, and ordered the Coachman to drive back to Madrid,
concluding with themselves, that if they were pursued, it would be on the Road
to Leon. In the mean time their Landlady finding that her Lodgers did not come
home, went into their Chamber, she found the Page in the Closet, who could not
imagine why they shut him up there, and she let him go about his business,
because she knew him, or rather because upon enquiry she found none of her
movables missing. Those people that make a Trade of robbing, and wholly
subsist by it, tho they don't fear God, always fear man. They are of all
Countries, and yet are of none, as having no settled habitation. As soon as
they set foot in one place, they make the most on it they can, and when they
have grazed it bare, remove to fresh quarters. This cursed occupation, which is
learnt with so much pains and danger, differs from all others in this respect,
that whereas we leave the rest when we grow old, purely for want of strength to
follow them, that of robbing generally leaves a man in his youth, and yet it is
for want of living longer^ One would think that the Gentlemen that follow it,
must find some unaccountable charms in it, since for its sake they venture a
great number of years, which are sooner or later concluded by the Hangman.
Helen, Mendez and Montafar, had none of these pious reflections in their head,
(...) rather were in perpetual fears lest they should be (...) sued. They gave
the Coachman double his fare to (...) the more haste, who, without question,
did all he (...) please his passengers that paid him so liberally; so that we
may reasonably conclude, that never did any Leathern Vehicle make more
expedition to Madrid Montafar was very uneasy, and showed by the many sighs
that escaped from him, that he was rather in a penitential than a merry strain.
Helen, who had a mind to divert his melancholy, by recounting to him the
particulars of her life, which till that moment she had carefully concealed
from him: Since I find thou art in such a musty humor, said she to him, I will
satisfy the great longing thou have always expressed to know who I am, and what
adventures have befaln me before we came acquainted together. I could tell thee
that I am descended from a noble family, and according to the vanity now
predominant give my self an illustrious name, as easily as any of my
neighbors; but I will be so sincere with thee, as to acquaint thee, even with
the least faults of those who sent me into the world. You must know then, that
my Father, of happy memory, was a Gallician by birth, a Lackey by profession,
or to speak more honorably of him, a Footman. He held the memory of the
Patriarch Noah in singular veneration, for his noble invention of the Vine; and
were it not for his particular respect to the juice of the Grape, one might say
of him that he cared but little for the vanities of this wicked world. My
Mother was of Granada, to speak frankly to you, a Slave, but you know there is
no contending with our destiny. She answered to the name of Mary, which her
Masters gave her at her Baptisin; but she was better pleased to be called Zara,
which was her Moorish name: for since I am to tell you the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth, she was a Christian in complaisance and
fashion; and a Moor in reality. Nevertheless she frequently confessed, but it was
rather the sins of her Master than her own; and as she amused her Confessor not
with her own failings, but with the things she was forced to suffer as a
Servant, and showed him of what a meek, humble, and patient spirit she was, the
charitable old Father, who was a godly man, and judged of others by himself,
believed her upon her word, commended her instead of reproving her, so that any
one that had stood near enough, would have heard nothing but praises on both
sides. Perhaps you are in pain to know ^ow I came acquainted with so particular
a secret, and you may very well imagine that my Mother never disclosed it to
^e: but I must inform you, that I am very inquisitive in my nature, and as
young as I was at that time, my Mother never confessed herself, but I got as
near her as I could to overhear her confession. But to proceed, as tawny, or to
express my self more properly, as black as she was, her face and shape were not
disagreeable, and there were more than six Cavaliers, Commanders of red and
green Crosses, that were her humble admirers, and strove who should be most in
her good Graces. She was of so charitable a temper, that she granted them all
they asked of her, and her gratitude to her Masters was so great, that to make
them some amends for the pains they had been at in rearing her from her
Childhood, she did all that lay in her power every year to give them a little
Slave, Male or Female: but Heaven did not second her good intentions, and all
her morly progeny, her checkered issue, I mean all the squawling Demi- Negroes
of her making, died as soon as they were born. She was happier in bringing up
the Children of other people. Her Masters that had lost all their own in the
Cradle, got her to nurse a young Child, despaired of by the Physicians, who in
a short time, by her good looking after it, and the good qualities of my
Mothers Milk, was perfectly recovered of its ilness, and showed all the
symptoms of a long and healthful life. For this piece of service to her Family,
my Mothers Mistress gave her her liberty when she died. Being now at her own
disposal, she set up for washing and whitening of Linen, and succeeded so
well, that in a short time there was scarce a Beau or Courtier in Madrid, that
thought his Linen well washed unless it passed her hands. And now she began to
practice those Lessons again, which her Mother had formerly given her, I mean
to renew her acquaintance with her correspondents in the other world. She had
laid aside this ticklish employment rather out of modesty, and because she was
tired with the encomiums that were given her for being so well skilled in her
art, than for any fear of justice, or apprehensions of the Magistrate. In
short, she applied herself afresh to it, only to oblige her friends, and in a
little time made so great a progress (...) this noble Science, and acquired
such a credit in the Kingdom of darkness, that Demons of the highest
reputation were not thought to be worth a farthing, if they were not in league
with her. I am not vain, neither do I love to tell lies, added Helen; for which
reason I will not bestow any good qualities upon my Mother which she did not
possess, but I am obliged at least to pay this testimony to her virtue. The
secrets which she fold, those which she revealed and her Oracles, which made
her pointed at in the Streets were vulgar talents among those of her Nation, in
comparison of what she knew in the Mystery of Maidenheads. That
incomprehensible Flower was much better after she had lent it a helping hand,
than before it was gathered, and bore a greater price at its second Edition,
with my Mother's Corrections and Amendments, than at the first. She might be
about forty years old, when she married my Father, the good Rodrigo. All the
Neighborhood wondered that a man who loved Wine so well, would marry a woman
that never tasted it, as if she still continued a Disciple of Mahomet, and who
had her hands always in water, as being a Landress by profession. But in answer
to this, my Father worthily replied, that love cleared all difficulties, and
made every thing easy. Some time after, her Belly swelled to her chin, and she
was happily delivered of me. But this joy did not last long in our Family. I
was about six years old, when a certain Prince clothed a hundred Lackeys in
his own Livery against a Bull-feast. My Father was one of the number, drank a
large mornings Draught, and being Pot-valiant, must needs encounter a wild
Bull, who tossed him two or three story high, and tore out his Guts. I remember
they made Ballads upon my Fathers death, and the burden of the Song was, That
two of a Trade can never agree. I did not understand the meaning on it then, but
I have been informed since, that it alluded to his being a cornuted Animal like
a Bull: but you know it is impossible to stop peoples mouths, if they have a
mind to prate, and vent their ill-natured mirth. My Mother was afflicted at my
Fathers misfortune, and so was I, she was comforted and so was her Daughter.
When I was grown up, my Beauty began to make people talk of me; and Lord! what
pressing and thronging there was to carry me to the Park, to the Playhouse,
and to give me Collations upon the Banks of the Mansanares. My Mother watched me
like a second Argos, so that I grumbled to be so confined; but she soon made me
sensible that it was for my advantage. Her severity, and the high price she set
upon me, enhanced the value of her Merchandise, and raised a terrible
competition between those that pretended to my favors. I was as it were put up
by way of Auction, each man thought he had the better of his rival, and each
man fancied he had found that, which was long ago gone and vanished. A rich
Genoese Merchant who courted me in private, so dazzled the eyes of my prudent
Mother with his yellow Metal, and bled so plentifully, that she favored his
good intentions. He possessed the f^^st p^ace in my affection, but this
superiotity proved very expensive to him. We continued faithful to him, so long
as we believed he doubted us: when we found him no longer upon his Guard, we
fairly duped him. My Mother was too tenderhearted, and sensible of the pains
of Lovers, not to be touched with the continual complaints of these Gentlemen,
who were all of them topping Cards at Court, and as rich as Croesus. It Is true,
they did not throw their Money about them so plentifully as the Genoese, but my
Mother, as she knew how to set a value upon great gains, so she did not despise
the smaller; and besides, she was obliging rather out of a principle of Charity
than Interest. The Genoese in short was declared a Bankrupt, and I don't know
but we might lend a helping hand to his breaking. He was engaged in several
scuffles and quarrels for me: The Magistrates came to visit us more out of
civility than for any other reason; but my Mother had a natural aversion to the
Gentlemen of the long Robe; and no less hated your Bullies and Rakehelly
Red-coats, that began to besiege us. She therefore thought it expedient to
remove to Sevil, turned all her Plate and Furniture into ready money, and took
me with her in the Stage-Coach. We were betrayed by our villainous Coachman,
robbed and stripped of all we had, and my Mother was so bruised and battered,
because she defended her own Goods as long as her little strength would give
her leave, that before I could drag her along with me to a wretched Inn, she
gave up the Ghost at the foot of a Rock. I armed my self with resolution, although
I was but very young. I bundled up every rag belonging to the old Gentlewoman,
but our Thieves had been so careful that they left me little to carry off. Thus
I left her to the discretion of the next passengers, not doubting, but that
upon so great Road as it was between Madrid and Sevil, some charitable
Christians would come by, and take care to see her Corpse interred. I arrived at
Madrid; my Lovers were acquainted with my misfortune, and in a short time I was
equipped with new Rigging and Furniture. About that time I happened to meet
with thee at one of my Female Companions, and I was perfectly charmed with thy
good qualities. What has happened since I need not relate to thee, since we
have never been asunder. We came to Toledo; we left it in haste, but made so
good a Market there, that if thou art a man of that courage as I take thee to
be, thou wou'd'st be merrier than thou art. But since this long story has made
thee inclined to take a nap, as I find by thy yawning and nodding, lay thy head
upon my Lap and sleep: But know, that if there is any thing good or useful in
fear, it is before we have committed a crime, for it is the vilest and most
dangerous quality in the world after we have done one. Fear always discomposes
the minds of the guilty, in such a manner that instead of flying from those
that pursue them, they throw themselves frequently into their hands. Montafar
fell asleep, and the morning awaked, so beautiful and charming, that the Birds,
the Flowers and the Fountains saluted her each after its manner; the Birds by
singing, the Flowers by perfuming the air, and the Fountains by smiling or
murmuring, no matter which, for one is as true as the other. And now the Nephew
of the Marquis de Ville-fagnan, the sensual Don Sancho was getting up from his
new Bride, tired enough in all conscience, and perhaps already glutted with the
pleasures of Matrimony. He could think of nothing but the pretty stranger, I
mean the dangerous Helen, whom he had seen the night before in the Stage-Coach,
and fancied to be the Phoenix of her Sex; in which particular he was guilty of
great injustice to his own Lady, who was very beautiful, and so amiable that
several Lovers in Toledo sighed for her, while at the same time she sighed for
her ungrateful Husband, and that monster of inconstancy sighed for an infamous
mercenary Strumpet, that would have licked the Devil's cloven foot for half a
Crown. But nothing is so irregular as our appetites. A Husband that has a
pretty Wife runs after a draggle-tail'd nasty Servant-wench. A Nobleman that
has his Ragous and Ortolans, despises what he sees before him, and calls for
the sturdy Beef and Pottage that his Footmen dine on. All the world has a
depraved taste in many things, but your men of Quality more than any. As they
have more wealth than they know what to do with, and fondly perplex themselves
in searching after what is never to be found, they choose course ordinary
things, only for variety. Thus we see they spare neither pains, nor money to
purchase trifles; and sometimes court some common ^ilt a twelvemonth before
they can obtain those favors of her, which she flings away upon others without
asking. Heaven permits this, on purpose that they may punish themselves with an
evil of their own seeking. Wretched man! on whom Heaven has bestowed those two
things that contribute to make life happy, Riches in abundance, and a lovely
Wife: Riches to support and relieve those that deserve, but have them not, and
to secure thee from stooping to those meannesses, to which poverty often
exposes the most generous souls; and a Wife that equals thee in quality,
beautiful both in her body and mind, wholly perfect in thy eyes, but much more
so in the eyes of others, who see farther into the affairs of their neighbor
than their own; and, in short, possessed of those shining qualifications,
Moderation, Chastity and Virtue. What is it thou art looking for elsewhere?
have thou not at home thy other half, thy Wife, whose wit can divert thee, who
yields her body entirely to thy pleasure, who is jealous of thy Honor, frugal
of thy Fortune, careful to preserve thy Estate, who gives thee Children to
divert thee in their childhood, to support thee in thy old age, and to keep up
thy name after thou art dead. What is it I say thou art looking for abroad? I
will tell thee in a few words, to ruin thy estate and reputation, to enfeeble
thy body, and lose the esteem of thy friends, and to create thy self abundance
of enemies. Think thou that thy honor is safe, because thou have a virtuous
Wife? Alas! thou have little experience of the things of this world, and art
little acquainted with humane frailty. The most tractable and quiet Horse in
the world grows restiff under an ill Horseman and throws him to the ground. A
Woman may now and then resist a temptation of doing ill, and yet commit a crime
of the last consequence, when she fancies herself most upon her Guard. One
fault draws many after it, and the distance between virtue and vice sometimes
is not above a day or two's journey. And now methinks I see some malapert
Critic cock his Hat, toss his Wig over his Shoulders, look fierce, and ask how
these Moral Aphorisms come to be thus brought in hand over head. Why, pray Sir
don't be so choleric; make use of them, or let them alone as you see fit; it is
all a case to your humble Servant, I Will assure you^ but under favor, Sir,
methinks you ought to thank the man who gives you them for nothing. But to
return to our story: Don Sancho was ready to rise from his young Wife^ when his
Unkle's Steward brought him a Letter, wherein the old Gentleman sent him word
of the strange Lady who had visited him the night before, and whom he suspected
to have cheated him, because she was not to be found in any of the Inns in
Toledo, where he had sent to enquire after her, and desired him in the same
Letter to send him one of his Servants to pursue this notorious Cheat to Madrid
whither he supposed she steered her course, because he had sent his people upon
all the great Roads from Toledo to me neighboring Cities, and could hear no
news of her. (...) Sancho was not made of Brass, or Marble. He found himself
attacked in the weakest part of his Soul, and was wondrous fierce and uppish to
be once in his life wrongfully accused of a fault, who had been found guilty of
so many before. The loss of so great a sum, and the sham that had been put
upon his Uncle equally incensed him. He told the (...) story his Wife and some
of his Relations, who came to give our married pair the good morrow, and being
not to be dissuaded from his resolution by the entreaty of his Wife, or the
advice of his Friends, he dressed himself in a minute, eat a little Breakfast,
and ran to his Unkle's house. The Page, who had introduced Helen into the old
Marquis his Chamber, described the Coach to him, informed him how many they
were in company, and by what marks they might be discovered. He took post from
Toledo to Madrid, attended only by two Footmen, whose courage was not unknown
to him. He rode four or five stages so fast, that he had no leisure to think of
the Beautiful Stranger; but when his indignation was a little evaporated by his
journey, Helen took place again in his fancy, but so beautiful and charming,
that he was in the mind once or twice to return to Toledo to find her out. He
wished himself a hundred times at the Devil, for concerning himself so far
about his Unkle's Robbery; and called himself sot and blockhead, and enemy to
his own pleasure as often, to fatigue himself thus in riding Post, whereas he
might have employed his time to better purpose, in seeking a happiness, the
possession whereof, in his opinion, would have made him the happiest man in the
world. While these amorous reflections took up his thoughts, he often talked to
himself, as fools use to do, and so loud, that his Servants that rode before
him stopped short, and turned back to enquire what he would have. Why, would he
often say to himself, did I leave the place where I first beheld her, and shall
not I be the most unhappy of all men, if this Stranger leaves Toledo before my
return? Well, it is no more than what I deserve, who must take the office of a
Thief-catcher upon me, unasked and unsought; but, continued he, if I return to
Toledo without doing something, what will my Friends say of me, who would have
dissuaded me from this enterprise, and ought I to leave those villains
unpunished that have robbed my Uncle in so unheard of a manner, and besides
have so perfidiously wounded my reputation? These different agitarions employed
the mind of our young Extravagant, when near Xetaffe his Footman discovered
Helon's Coach by the marks that had been given them. They cried out with one
voice to their Master, Yonder are the Thieves, and without staying for him,
rode up to the Coach with their Swords in hand. The Coachman stopped, being
terribly affrighted, and Montafar was much more than he: Helen ordered him to
let down the Glasses, and looked out to see how she might prevent so dangerous
a storm. She saw Don Sancho riding toward her with Sword in hand, whose angry
countenance promised no good; but our amorous Gentleman no sooner cast his eyes
upon those two bewitching Stars, which had so terribly wounded him, but his
wounds bled afresh, and he immediately believed that his Servants had mistaken;
for we have always a good opinion of the person we love; and as if he had known
Helen from his Cradle to have been a Lady of unblemished credit, he laid about
his Footmen with his Sword like a distracted man. You Dogs, cried he, you
Villains, did not I bid you have a care not to mistake; and don't you deserve
to have your Throats cut for offering this rudeness to a Lady who deserves
respect from all Mankind? The poor Footmen, who had fallen so hastily upon the
Coach, seeing it had all the marks the Page had given them, and sound within it
a Lady of so much beauty, which commands veneration even from the most brutal
Clowns, kept off at a distance to avoid their Masters fury, who thought he had
reason on his side for what he had done, and that he was kind to them not to
cut them to pieces. Don Sancho begged Helen's pardon, and acquainted her with
the occasion why those Sons of a thousand Whores his Footmen had attackt her so
rudely, which she knew as well as himself. See, I beseech you Madam, says he,
in what premunires these Rascals may engage their Masters; had not I happened
to be with them, these Blockheads upon a few foolish marks would have set the
whole Country in an uproar, raised the Mob, and by mere force have carried you
to Toledo for a Thief: Not but that you are one, ^ cries our Gentleman,
smoothing his Countenance, but Madam, you steal hearts and nothing else. Helen
thankt Heaven within herself for giving her a face that stood her in such
stead, by clearing her from the wicked actions she used to commit, and
recovering out of her fright, answered Don Sancho with a great deal of modesty
and in few words, knowing that to take a world of pains to clear ones self of a
thing that is laid to ones charge, rather increases than lessens the suspicion.
Don Sancho was surpised to find that Treasure by mere accident, which he had
so violently longed to see, and was such a fool as to think that Heaven
favored his passion, since it hindered him from going back to Toledo, as it
had been in his thoughts, which had he done, he had missed this happiness. He
asked Helen what her name was, and where she lived in Madrid, and begged her to
give him leave to wait on her, that he might by his actions confirm the
services he offered her. Helen told him both false; adding, that she should
think herself very happy to be honored with his visits. He offered to see her
safe home, but she would by no means consent to it, representing to him that
she was married, and that her Husband was to meet her on the Road, and
whispered him in the ear, that she was afraid even of her Domestics, but much
more of her Husband's jealous temper. This small confidence she seemed to
repose in him made Don Sancho believe that she did not hate him. He took his
leave of her, and carried swifter by his hopes than by his trusty Steed (if I
may be allowed so to express my self) made the best of his way to Madrid. He no
sooner arrived there, but he inquired after Helen, and her habitation, by the
marks she had given him. His Footmen were foundered in looking after her, nay,
he employed all his friends upon this occasion, but to no purpose. When Helen,
Montafar, and the venerable Mendez came to Madrid, their first care was how to
get out of it. They knew well enough that it would be impossible for them to
escape the Toledo Cavalier, and that if they stayed to give him a more
particular knowledge of their merits, they should find him as dangerous an
enemy, as then they took him to be their humble admirer. Helen disposed of all
her movables, and the next day after her arrival bought Pilgrims habits for
herself and companions. In this equipage they beat the hoof toward Burgos,
where Mendez was born, and where she had a Sister of her own profession still
living. In the mean time, Don Sancho lost all hopes of meeting with Helen, and
returned to Toledo, but so confounded and ashamed, that he did not speak one
word from Madrid till he came to his own house. After he had saluted his Wife,
who gave him a thousand caresses, she showed him a Letter from his Brother, who
lived in one of the finest Cities in Spain, where he had very good preferment
in the Cathedral Church, and was one of the richest Clergymen in all the
Country, wherein he sent him word that he was at the point of death. So he
stayed but a night at Toledo, and took post, either to contribute to his
Brother's recovery, or in case he died, to take possession of his Estate. In
the mean time Helen pursued her Journey to Burgos, being as much dissatisfied
with Montafar, as she had formerly loved him. He had shown so little bravery,
when Don Sancho and his Footman stopped their Coach, that she did not question
but that he was a rank Coward. This rendered him so odious to her, that she
could scarce endure his sight, her thoughts were wholly employed how to deliver
herself from this domestic Tyrant, and she flattered herself with hopes that
she should soon get out of his clutches. It was the venerable Mendez that first
put it into her head, and fortified this pious resolution, with all the reasons
her prudence could suggest to her. This industrious Matron was vexed to the
heart to see a lazy useless Lubber command her, govern Helen, and enjoy all the
fruits of their labor, while he did nothing himself. She incessantly
represented to Helen the unhappiness of her condition, which she compared to
that of Slaves working in the Mines, who enrich their Masters with the Gold
they dig out of the Earth with incredible labor and hardship, and instead of
being the betber treated for it, are commonly rewarded with drubs and
bastinadoes: She continually preached to her, that Beauty was a good of a short
duration, and that her Looking-glass, which showed her nothing now but what was
amiable, and never spoke to her but to her advantage, would in a short time
present her with a sight that would not please her, and tell her most dismal
news. Madam, says she to her, a woman that has seen thirty, loses every sixth
month one of her charms, and sees some new blemish or wrinkle rise up every day
in judgment against her face and body. That wicked thing called Time makes
young women old, and old women wrinkled. If a woman that has enriched herself
at the expense of her Chastity and Reputation, yet is for all that despised by
the world, notwithstanding her wealth and fortune, think how wretched and
miserable she must needs be, if she joins poverty to infamy; and what reason
has she to flatter herself that any one will relieve her in her misery? If with
the Money you have acquired by certain means that are not approved by all the
world, you should free an honest fellow out of Jayl and marry him, you would do
an action pleasing to God and man, and the end of your life would make some
sort of atonement for the beginning of it: but you throw away your self and all
that you have upon a Rascal, who is as villainous as he is cowardly, who makes
it his sole ambition to fleece poor women, whom he only gains by his menaces,
and keeps under by his Tyranny; now, under the Rose be it spoken, this is to
squander away ones wealth, on purpose to make ones self the greatest wretch
alive, and to take pains to advance ones ruin. By these and such like
discourses the judicious Mendez, who knew much better how to talk than act,
endeavored to turn the Heroic Montafar out of the good affections of the
virtuous Helen, who had no other reason almost for loving him, but because she
had been so long used to his company, and who was a woman of too good sense not
to approve those reasons in her own thoughts, that the old Matron laid before
her. In short, they were not urged to no purpose. Helen received them in good
part, and so much the more readily, as Mendez's interest alone was not
concerned in them; and because at that time Montafar was coming up to them,
that they might enter Guadarrama in a body, the place where they intended to
dine, they adjourned to a more convenient opportunity, their thinking of ways
and means how to give him the slip, and get rid of him. He seemed to ^e very
much disgusted all dinner time, and going to ^ise from Table was seized with a
great shivering, and afterward a violent Fever, which held him the rest of the
day and all night, and increasing upon him next morning, gave Helen and Mendez
some hopes that this lucky Distemper might assist their designs. Montafar
finding himself so weak that he was hardly able to crawl, gave our Ladies to
understand that they must not stir out of Guadarrama, that ^hey must send for a
Doctor whatever it cost, and must take ^ll imaginable care of him. He spoke
this with as much ^aught^^ess and authority, as if he had talked to his Slaves,
and was master of their Lives as well as their Money. In ^he mean time the
Fever found a way to his Pericranium, and brought him to so low a condition,
that if he had not ^all'd now and then for drink, one would have sworn he had
been as dead as a door nail. The people of the Inn wondered why they delayed so
long to send for a Confessor to him, when Helen and Mendez, who did not doubt
but this Fe^er would give him a lift into the other world, sat on both sides of
his Bed, where Helen began the discourse as follows. ^f thou can remember, my
dear Montafar, in what manner thou have always lived with me, to whom thou have
all ^he obligations imaginable, and likewise with Mendez, ^enerable for her age
and virtue, thou may easily ima^ine, that I shall not very much importune
Heaven to re^tore thee to thy health: but although I should desire it as hear^ily
as I have just reason to wish for thy death, yet the will of Heaven must be
done for all me, and I ought to offer up ^o it with the utmost resignation what
I loved most. To deal frankly with thee (for this is not a time to dissemble)
both of us began to be so weary of thy Tyranny, that our parting was not to be
avoided, and if providence had not kindly visited thee with this sickness,
which will soon do thy business (for know to thy consolation that thou art
riding full gallop to another world) we would have endeavored at least to have
settled in some place in Spain, where we would have no more thought of thee
than if thou had never had a being. In short, whatever foolish desire thou
may have to live, thou oughtst to be very well pleased with thy death, since
Heaven, for reasons unknown to men, gives thee a more honorable end than thou
do deserve, permitting a Fever to do that for thee, which either the Hangman
does for such Villains, or fear for such mean-spirited Rascals as thou art. But
my dear Montafar, before we part for good and all, tell me sincerely once in
thy life, Did thou ever think I was such an errant fool as to stay here to
watch thee a nights, to give thee thy Juleps, thy Potions, thy Cordials, and
administer thy Clysters. Don't suffer such vanities as these to come into thy
noddle so near death, Tho it concerned not only thy health, but that of thy
whole family, I would not stay here a quarter of an hour longer. Cause thy self
to be carried to some Hospital, and since thou have always followed my advice,
don't despise this, which (...) the last thou art like to have from me. I mean,
my poo^ Montafar, don't send for a Physician, for he will most assuredly forbid
thee Wine, and that alone, without the help of a Fever, is enough to kill thee
in twenty four hours. While Helen talked, the charitable Mendez ever now and
then felt Montafars pulse, put her hand on his Forehead, and finding that her
Mistress had done, she thus reassum'd^ the discourse. In truth, Signior
Montafar, your head is as hot as a Glass-house, and I am mightily afraid that
this distemper will carry you off without giving you leave to reflect on your
past life. Take me therefore this Chaplet, added she, and run over your Beads
devoutly till your Confessor comes. This will do full as well for the discharge
of your Conscience. But if we may believe the Annalists of the Hangman of
Madrid, that have so often employed their Pens to describe your gallant
Exploits, your Excellence^ exemplary life will not require much repentance;
besides Heaven will reckon to you without doubt the dolorous perambulation you
made in the principal Streets of Sevil, i^ the sight of so many people, and
guarded by so many Offic^^ on Horseback, that one would taken you for the (...)
(...) but that he always marches at the head of them, and you were content at
that time to march in the rear. And what may further help to wipe off your
Scores, is your notable life at Sea, where for six years together, you did
abun^ance of things pleasing to your Maker, working much, eating little, and
always in action and what is more consideable, you were scarce twenty years
old, when to the great ^dification of the Neighborhood, you began that holy
Pil^rimage. Nor is this all, says our ancient Matron, for it is ^ot to be
supposed, but that you will be amply rewarded in other World, for the care you
have taken in this, that the women that live with you should not be lazy and
unactive, ^aking them maintain themselves, not only by the labor of their
hands, but by the sweat of their whole body. After ^ll, if you die in your bed,
it must be an inexpressible con^lation to you, that you will put a pleasant
cheat upon the ^dge of Murcia, who swore a great Oath that he would ^ake you
die in your shoes, who expects to have the satis^hction to see you cut capers
in the air, and will be ready (...) hang himself, when he comes to hear that
you were so ^alicious as to dye of your self, without the help^ of a ^ird Man.
But I lose time in talking to thee, not ^onsidering that it is high time to
begin our Journey, which ^e so earnestly desire: And therefore, old Friend of
mine, ^ceive this Embrace with as good a heart as I give it, for ^am of
opinion, that we shall see one another no more, as soon as she had concluded
this comfortable speech, Men^z threw her Arms about his Neck, Helen did the
same, ^d thus they went out of the Chamber, and soon after out (...) the Inn.
Montafar, who had been accustomed to their ^illery, and could return them a
Rowland for their Oliver ^on occasion, thought that they had said all this only
with design to divert him, and had not the least suspicion of ^em when he saw
them quit the Room, fancying to him^f, that they were gone down to make him
some Water^uel or Posset Drink. After this he fell into a slumber, and ^o he
could not be properly said to be fast asleep, yet it held ^m so long, that our
Damsels were got a league of their ^ay before he awaked. He asked the Woman of
the Inn here they were, who told him that they were gone, and ^d given her
Orders not to disturb him, because he had not ^pt a wink the night before.
Montafar then began to be^ve that the Lasses had left him in good earnest. He
cursed (...) Innkeeper and Inn to the pit of Hell, he threatened even ^e
ground they walked upon, and the Sun that gave them light. He must needs rise
to put on his Clothes, but was so feeble that he had like to have broke his
Neck. The good Hostess endeavored to excuse the two Damsels, and backed what
she said with such impertinent reasons, that it set out sick Man a raving like
one distracted, and he called her all the vile Names he could think of. He was
so vexed, that he would not eat a Morsel in four and twenty hours; and this
no-diet joined, with plenty of Choler, had that good effect upon him, that
after he had recruited himself with (...) little Water Gruel, he found himself
lusty enough to pursue his fugitive Slaves. They were got two days journey
before him; but two hackney Mules, that were sending back to Burgos furthered
his design, as much as they ruined that of our two pretended Pilgrims. He
overtook them within s^^ or seven Leagues of Burgos, they changed Countenance
a^ soon as they saw him, and excused themselves as well as they were able.
Montafar did not seem to be in the jest angry with them, so great was his joy
to have them in his Clutche^ He laughed as heartily as they did at this merry
frollick o^ theirs, and acted his part so well, that they believed him i^ their
Souls to be a down right passive Blockhead. He per^swaded them that they had
lost the road to Burgos, an^ leading them among some Rocks, where he very well
knew that no body would come to interrupt him, he put his ha^^ upon a Baggoner,
to which they had always paid a world o^ respect, and told them, like a
merciless Devil as he wa^ that they must immediately deliver all their Gold and
S^^ver, and Jewels. At first they believed that their te^^ would accommodate
the business. Helen threw her Ar^^^ about his Neck, and wept most plentifully;
but our Ca^^^lier was so haughty, now he had them in his power, that (...) was
deaf to all their Prayers and Entreaties, and signi'y'd (...) them his last
will and pleasure, which was, that they mu^^ surrender up all to him in a
quarter of an hour; otherwise they knew what to expect. Thus our poor Damoseis
(...) forced to sacrifice their Purses to their safety, and it was (...) the
last regret that they parted with their Money, whi^^ they loved so
passionately. But Montafar's revenge did (...) stop here, for he produced
certain things called Cords, (...) which he had purposely provided himself; and
binding (...) of them to a Tree, just over against one another, he (...) them
with a treacherous smile, that knowing how rem^^^ and negligent they had been
in doing penance for the sins, he was resolved to give them holy discipline
with (...) own hands, that they might remember him in their (...) He executed
his pious design with some Broom-branches, and after he had satisfied himself
at the expense of their backs, he sat himself down between these two
meek-hearted sufferers, and turning himself toward Helen, he spoke to her as
follows. My dear Helen, take not in ill part what I have done, but consider my
good Intention, and know that every one is bound in conscience to follow his
own Vocation: It Is thine to be malicious; for alas, the World is composed of bad
as well good, and it is mine to punish the malicious. Whether I have acquitted
my self as I ought, thou know better than any one; and if I have heartily
chastis'd thee, be satisfied that I as heartily love thee. If my duty did not
render me deaf to all pity, I would not leave so virtuous and honorable a
Damosel naked and tied to a Tree, to the mercy of the next Passenger. Thy
Illustri^ous Birth, with which thou did lately acquaint me, deserves another
destiny; but thou will own, I know, that thou would do the same that I have
done, if thou were in my place. What falls out most unlucky for thee is, that
being so public as thou art, thou will be soon known; and ^tis to be fear^d
that our Magistrates, out of a Maxim of po^icy, will order this wicked Tree, to
which thou art as it were incorporated, to be burnt, together with the wicked
Fruit it produces; but know, to thy great comfort, that if thy wicked Actions
put thee now in bodily fear, the time will come, when it will be a pleasure to
thee to relate them, and when among thy other laudable qualities, thou will
^ossess that of being able to pass a long Winter night, and set^ing folks
asleep with the recital of thy famous Exploits. But should give the good Mendez
just occasion to complain of any unkindness, should I address my discourse any
longer to ^hee, without taking notice of her: Nay, I should be wanting in my
duty to my Neighbor, if I should not in ^harity give her some advice, that may
be useful to her in ^he present posture of her affairs. They are, continues he,
and turning himself toward Mendez, in a worse condition ^han you imagine, let
me persuade you therefore, to recom^end your self seriously to your Maker, once
in your life at ^ast, since your old foundered Carcass will scarce be able to
^^pport the fatigue of this day; and On! that my Prayers (...) as easily
procure you a Confessor, as it is certain that (...) want one. Not but that your
exemplary life may leave our Conscience in repose; you have been so
publick-spirited ^d charitable all your days, that instead of censuring (...)
magnifying the faults of others, you have repaired those of a Thousand young
Maidens; and since you have taken such pains to study the most darkest and most
concealed Sciences, ought you not to be commended for it? It Is true, the
Inquisition has no great kindness for you upon this score, nay, and has given
you some public marks of its displeasure, but you know it is composed of wicked
men, and that it is natural for people of the same profession to hate one
another. This is not all, for those Gentlemen have a very ill opinion of your
Salvation; but although what they say should be true, yet a little time will
reconcile one to the worst place that is, even to Hell itself, where you may
take it for granted, that you will receive all imaginable marks of civility
from the Inhabitants, having conversed and dealt with them from your infancy. I
have one word more to say to you, and I have done: I might have chastis'd you,
Madam, after another manner, but I considered that old people, according to the
Proverb turn Children again, that your Ladyship is old enough to be in your
first state of innocence, and therefore whipping was more proper for the little
trick of youth you played me, than any other chastisement. And thus Ladies I
take my leave of you, earnestly desiring you to have a care of your dear
persons Having raillied them in this fashion, good or bad, as the Reader
pleases, away he went, and left them rather dead than alive, not so much for
the grief of their having been whipped, as because all their Money was gone, and
they were left in a lonely place tied to Trees, where they must expect to be
devoured by Wolves. With these Melancholy contemplations in their heads, as
they were looking sorrowfully at one another, without saying a word, a Hare
crossed the Road before them, and some time after a Greyhound thundering after
poor Puss, and a Cavalier well mounted thundering after the Greyhound. Who
should this Cavalier be but Don Sancho de Villefagnan, who had made a Journey
to Burgos to see his sick Brother, and kept him Company at a Country house not
far from thence, whither he had retired to take the fresh air: He was extremely
surpised to behold two women thus bound to their good behavior, but much more
so, when he found one of them to resemble the beautiful stranger whom he had
seen (...) Toledo, whom he searched after at Madrid, and whom he had ever since
perpetually in his mind. Being firmly perswade^ that she was a woman of Quality
and married, he doubte^ whether this was she, for he could not imagine what
shou'^ bring her into that part of the world in so wretche'd an equipage; But
Helen's Face having lost nothing of its former Beauty, although somewhat
disordered by her fright, made him conclude, that he at last had accidentally
met with that treasure, which had cost him so many desires and inquietudes. So
he raised himself upon his Stirrups to see whether the Coast was clear, and was
fool enough to suspect that this was nothing but a Diabolical Illusion, which
Heaven had permitted to punish him for his sensuality. Helen on her side was
taken up with a thought full as mortifying, and fancied that her ill Stars had
chosen that unlucky day, to show her to all those that had any thing to say to
her. Don Sancho looked upon Helen with great amazement, and she looked upon him
with no less disorder; each expected when the other would speak first, and Don
Sancho at last was going to begin the discourse, when a Servant came full speed
to tell him, that ^ome of his Relations were going to ^ill one another. Upon
this he spurred his Beast, attended by the Servant; and when he came to the
place where a left his Company, he found some four or five drunken Fellows,
calling one another Rogue and Rascal, with their Tilters in their Hands, and
flourishing them notably in the air, to the prejudice of some Neighboring
Trees, that lost some of their best branches upon this occasion. Don Sancho,
who was enraged to be deprived of the charming Vision he had so lately seen,
did all he could to reconcile these furious and terrible Gentlemen; but all his
Arguments, his Entreaties and his Menaces had signified little or nothing, had
not the Wine that over^oaded their Brains, and down right lassitude tript up
their Heels, and left 'em snoring on the ground, as peaceably as if they had
never fallen out. Don Sancho spurred his Horse toward the happy Tree, which
kept the Idol of his heart, and was at his wits ends, when he saw the Women
were gone: He turned his eyes all about him, to see which way they could be
gone, but saw nothing but a lonely melancholy place; he spurred his Horse and
examin^d every cornere, and at last came back to his beloved Tree, which like a
good natured Tree as it was, still kept its old place. But as Don Sancho was a
Poet, and what is more, a tenderhearted whining Poet, he had not the same
indifference for this insensible Tree. He alighted therefore from his Horse,
and harangu'd it after the following manner, or at least he ought to have done
so, if he was really so great a Coxcomb, as I have been told he was. Oh thrice
happy Trunk! since thou have had the honor to be embraced by that divine
Creature, whom I love without knowing her, and whom I know only because I love
her. May thy Leaves for ever shine among the Stars; let the sacrilegious Ax
never presume to wound thy tender Bark; may the Thunder reverence thy Boughs,
and the worms of the Earth not dare to approach thy root; let the Winter spare,
and the Spring adorn thee; let the proudest Pines envy thy condition, and
lastly, may Heaven protect thee. While our worthy Gentleman spent himself in
these vain contemplations, or if you please, in these Poetical follies, which,
by the by, are of greater importance than any other, and ought not to be used
every day in the week, his Servants, who knew not what was become of him, after
they had looked for him a pretty while, at last found him and brought him home.
He returned to his Brother's House very much concerned at his late adventure;
and unless I am mistaken, I have heard some people say, that he went supperless
to bed. Some Critics perhaps will tell me, that I have left my Reader too long
in suspense, who without question is impatient to know by what strange
Enchantment Helen and Mendez came to disappear to the amorous Don Sancho. But
let him have patience, and I will soon inform him. Montafar was at first
pleased with that piece of justice he had done upon the two Fugitives; but no
sooner did the heat of his revenge begin to cool, but love inflamed him, and
represented Helen to his thoughts, infinitely more charming than he had ever
seen her. He considered with himself, that the prize he had taken from her
would be soon spent, whereas her Beauty was a certain revenue to him, so long
as he kept well with her, whose absence was already become insupportable to
him. So he came back the same way he went, and with those individual barbarous
hands, that had so rigorously bound the two Dames to the Trees, and afterward
had so unmercifully lashed them, he broke their Chains, that is to say, he
either cut or untied their Cords, (for Historians differ) and set them at
liberty, at the same time when Don Sancho was employed not far off, to
reconcile his drunken Companions, that were in a fair way to cut one another
throats. Montafar, Helen and Mendez shook hands upon the road, and after they
had mutually promised to forget all that was pas^, embraced with as much
tenderness, as if nothing had happened; doing just as your'great persons do,
who neither hate nor love, but accommodate these two contrary Passions to their
Interest, and the present state of their affairs, They deliberated which way to
take, and 'twas agreed, Nemin^ Contradicente, that it was by no means
advisable for them to go to Burgos, where they would be in danger of having
their quarters beaten up by the Toledo Cavalier. Therefore they pitched upon
Sevil to be the place of their retreat, and Fortune seemed to approve their
design; for coming into the Madrid road, they met a Muleteer with three empty
Mules, who agreed to carry them to Sevil, at the very first proposal that
Montafar made him. He took care to regale our Damsels upon the road, to make
them forget the ill treatment they had received from his hands. At first they
could hardly bring themselves to trust him, and had resolved to be revenged on
him the first opportunity that presented it self; but at last, rather for
reasons of State, than any principle of charity, they became better Friends
than ever. They considered that discord had ruined the greatest Empires, and
believed that they were in all probability born for one another. They did not
think fit to give any specimen of their Profession upon the road to Sevil; for
as their design in shifting their Country, was only to get at a distance from
those that might pursue them, they were afraid of bringing themselves into new
trouble, which might hinder them from going to Sevil, where they had great
designs to put in execution. They alighted within a league of the City, and
having satisfied the Muleteer, got thither about the dusk of the Evening, and
took up their Lodging at the first Inn they found. Montafar hired a House,
furnished it with very ordinary Furniture, and dressed himself all in black,
with a Cassock, and a long Cloak of the same color. Helen took the Habit of a
Religious Sister, that had devoted herself to works of Piety. Mendez went
dressed like a Saint, valuing herself upon her hoary locks, and a huge
monstrous Chaplet, each Bead of which was big enough to load a Demi-culverin.
The very next day after their arrival, Montafar showed himself in the Streets,
apparelled as I have already described him, marching with his Arms across, and
looking on the ground when he met any Women. He cried out with a shrill voice
that was enough to have rent a Rock, blessed be the holy Sacrament of the
Altar, and the thrice happy Conception of the Immaculate Virgin, and uttered
many more devout Exclamations, with the same everlasting Lungs of leather. He
made the Children whom he met in the street repeat the same words, and
assembled them sometimes together, to teach them to sing Hymns and Songs of
Devotion, and instruct them in their Catechism. He repaired to the Goals, and
preached before the Prisoners, comforting some, and relieving others, begging
Victuals and other Provisions for them, and frequently walking to the Prison
with a heavy Basket upon his back. O detestable Villain! thou wanted'st nothing
but to set up for a Hypocrite, to be the most profligate accomplished Rascal in
the Universe. These actions of Virtue, in a fellow that was the least virtuous
of all Mankind, gave him in a little time the reputation of a Saint. Helen and
Mendez likewise did all that in them lay to deserve Cononization. The one
called herself the Mother, the other the Sister of the thrice blessed Friar
Martin. They went every day to the Hospitals, and there they assisted the sick,
made their Beds, washed their Linen, and did all this at their own expense. By
these means the most vicious people of all Spain obtained the universal
admiration of all Sevil. About this time, a Gentleman of Madrid happened to
come thither about some private Affairs. He had formerly been one of Helen's
Lovers, for women of her character have more than one string to their bow: He
knew Mendez to be a notorious Cheat, and Montafar to be no better. One day as
they came out of the Church together, encompassed by a great number of persons,
who kissed their very garments, and conjured them to remember them in their
prayers, they were known by the aforesaid Gentleman, who burning with a
Christian zeal, and not able to suffer three such notorious Impostors to abuse
the credulity of a whole City, broke through the Crowd, and giving a hearty box
on the ear to Montafar, You wicked Cheats, cried he to them, do you neither
fear God nor man? He would have said more, but his good intention, which in
truth was somewhat of the rashest, had not the success it deserved. All the
people fell upon him, whom they believed to have committed Sacrilege, in
offering this violence to their Saint. He was beaten down to the ground, and
had certainly been torn to pieces by the Mob, if Montafar by a wonderful
presence of mind had not undertaken his protection; covering him with his body,
keeping off those that were most enraged against him, and exposing himself even
to th^^^ blows. My Brethren, cried he to them as loud as he was able, let the
poor wretch alone for the love of God; be quiet for the love of the Blessed
Virgin. These few words appeased this horrible tempest, and the people made
room for Brother Martin, who got up to the unfortunate Gentleman, well pleased
in his heart to see him so used, but showing by his looks that he was mightily
concerned for him. He raised him up from the ground, he embraced and kissed him
all covered with blood and dirt as he was, and reprimanded the people for their
rude behavior. I am a wicked man, said he to the standers by, I am a sinner, I
am one that never did any thing that was pleasing in the eyes of God. Do you
believe, continu^d he, because you see me dressed in this Religious garb, that I
have not been a Robber all my life, the scandal of others, and the destruction
of my self? Alas you are mistaken, my Brethren: make me the mark of your
contumelies, pelt me with Stones, and draw your Swords upon me. Having spoken
these words with a counterfeit sorrow, he went to throw himself with a zeal yet
more counterfeit than that, at the feet of his Enemy, and kissing them, not
only begged his pardon, but likewise gathered up his Sword, Cloak and Hat,
which he had lost in this confusion. He helped him on with them, and leading him
by the hand to the end of the Street, took his leave of him, after he had
bestowed abundance of embraces, and as many benedictions upon him. The poor man
was as it were out of himself with what he had seen, and with what had been
done to him, and was so full of confusion, that he durst scarce show his head
in the Streets all the while his affairs detained him at Sevil. Montafar had
won the hearts of all the City by this pretended action of Devotion. The people
gazed at him with admiration, and the Children cried after him, a Saint, a
Saint, as they cried out a Fox, a Fox, when they saw his Enemy in the Street.
From this moment he lived the happiest life in the world: The Nobleman, the
Cavalier, the Magistrate, and the Prelate perpetually invited him to Dinner,
and strove who should have most of his company. If he was asked his name, he
would answer, that he was a beast of Burden, a sink of Filth, a vessel of all
Iniquity, and such like noble Attributes did his counterfeit devotion dictate
to him. When he visited any of the Ladies, he complained to them incessantly of
the nothingness of his dispensation, and the deadness of the inward man;
adding, that he wanted concentration of heart, and recollection of Spirit; in
short, he always talked to them in this magnificent cant, and holy Gibberish. No
alms were given in Sevil but what passed through his hands, or those of Helen
and Mendez, who were not wanting on their side, to act their parts to
admiration, and stood as fair to obtain the red-letter'd preferment of the
Almanac, I mean to be Sainted, as Montafar himself. A Lady of quality who was
a Widow, and devout even to superstition, sent 'em every day two dishes of Meat
for their Dinner, and as many for Supper, and these dishes were dressed by the
best Cook in all Sevil. Their house was too little to receive the numerous
presents that were sent to them: A woman that had a mind to be with child put
her petition into their hands, that by their mediation it might be presented to
the Tribunal of Heaven: Another that had a Son in the Indies did the same, as
likewise a third that had a brother prisoner in Algiers. Nay, the poor Widow
who had to contest with a powerful adversary before an ignorant or a covetous
Judge, did not doubt the success of her cause, when she had once made a present
to them according to her ability. Some gave them Sweetmeats and Conserves,
others Pictures and ornaments for their Closet. Several charitable persons
trusted them with great quantities of Linen and Woollen Cloth, to dispose
among the needy that were ashamed to beg, and with considerable sums of Money
to distribute as they saw convenient. No one came to visit them with empty
hands, and their future Canonization was as firmly believed as an Article of
Faith. At last, the the credulity of the people ran so high, that they came to
consult them about their doubtful affairs, and things to come. Helen, who was
as subtle as a Devil, managed all the answers, delivering her Oracles in a few
words, and those capable of receiving different interpretations. Their beds
were mean and homely, covered in the day time with course Blankets, but at
night with all the fine Furniture that a man could desire, that loves to sleep
deliciously; their house being plentifully furnished with good Feather-beds,
fine Coverlids, and in short, with all sorts of Movables that contribute to
the convenience and pleasure of life: and all this they pretended was to be
given to some poor Widow, whose Goods were seized in Execution, or to furnish
some young Woman's house, who had married without any fortune. Their doors were
shut up in Winter at five, and in Summer at seven a clock, as punctually as in
a well-regulated Convent; and then the Jack was wound up, the Spits turned
merrily round, the Capons were set down to the Fire, the Table was handsomely
spread, and our Hypocritical Triumvirate eat heartily, and drank plentifully
their own healths, and those of the people they cheated. Montafar and Helen lay
together for fear of Spirits, and their Footman and the Maid, that were of the
same complexion, copied so pious an example. As for the good Mendez, she always
lay alone, being more taken up with contemplation than action, even since she
had addicted herself to the Black Art. This was their constant practice of
life, instead of employing their time in mental prayer, or doing penance. It Is
no wonder if living so jolly a life, they looked plump and fat. All the City
blessed Heaven for it, and were mightily surpised that persons of so much
austerity and self-denial looked better than those that lived in luxury and
ease. For the space of three years they deceived the eyes of all the
Inhabitants of Sevil, receiving presents from every one; and appropriating to
their own use the alms that passed through their hands, they heaped together an
incredible number of Pistoles. All good success was ascribed to the efficacy of
their prayers; they stood Godfathers for all Children, made matches for all
the City, and were the Arbitrators of all differences. At last Heaven was weary
of conniving longer at their impious life. Montafar, who was choleric in his
temper, used frequently to beat his Valet, who could not bear it, and had
quitted his service a hundred times, if Helen, who was more discreet than her
Gallant, had not prevented it, by appeasing him with fair words and presents.
One day he drubb'd him immoderately for little or no reason; the Boy got to the
door, and blinded by his passion, ran directly to the Magistrates, to inform
against these three Hypocrites, whom the world took for Saints. Helen's
diabolical Spirit misgave her what would happen, so she advised Montafar to rub
off with all the Gold they had in the house, and retire to some place of
security, till this Tempest, which threatened them, had spent itself. It was no
sooner said but put in execution: They carried off the most valuable things
they had, and walking down the Street as unconcerned as if they dreaded
nothing, they went out at one gate, and came in at another, on purpose to lose
the scent of their Pursuers. Montafar had insinuated himself into the good
graces of a Widow, as vicious and as rank a Hypocrite as himself. He had
communicated this secret to Helen, who was no more jealous of this Matron, than
Montafar would have been of a Gallant, that would have promoted the good of
their little Commonwealth. Here they absconded in safety, and lived
luxuriously, the Widow loving Montafar for his own sake, and Helen for
Montafar's. In the mean time the Justice was conducted by the vindicative Valet
to the famed Mansion of our pretended Saints. When he came there he found the
Birds were flown, and the Maid was not able to inform him whither they were
gone: However, he sealed up all their Trunks, and took an exact Inventory of
all that was in the House. The Sergeants found more Provision in the Kitchen,
than would serve to regale them one day, and you may be sure took care to lose
nothing of what they might privately sink to their own use without being
observed. In the midst of this bustle the venerable Mendez entered the House,
little imagining what had happened. The Sergeants apprehended her, and carried
her to prison with a vast concourse of people at her heels. The Servant and
Maid were likewise sent thither to bear her company, and having talked too
much, as well as the old Matron, they were condemned as well as she, to receive
two hundred lashes on the back. Mendez died three days after this Chastisement,
it being somewhat of the severest for a person of her age, and the Servant and
Maid were banish^d Sevil for their lives. Thus the foreseeing Helen preserved
her dearly beloved Montafar, and herself from the hands of the Magistrates, who
sear^chd after them in vain, both within and without the City. The people were
all ashamed to be so notoriously cheated, and the Ballad-singers who, had sung
their praises the week before, employ^d their Hackney-Sonnetiers to expose
these pretended Saints in lamentable Doggerel. These Insects of Parnassus
exhausted all their little Stock of scandal upon this subject, and the wretched
Rhymes they compos^d against these godly Cheats, who, not long before were the
Idols of the people, are still sung in Sevil. Montafar and Helen took the Road
to Madrid, as soon as they could do it with safety, and arriv^d there rich, and
in the circumstances of Husband and Wife. The first thing they did was, to
enquire after Don Sancho de Villefagnan, and finding that he was not in Madrid,
they appeared in Public; he dressed as fine as a Lord, and she in the Equipage
of a woman of quality, and as beautiful as an Angel. She was married to
Montafar, as has been said above, but it was upon this condition, that like a
Husband of good sense and great patience, he should not take ill the visits of
her beauty occasioned her, and she on the otherwise Promoters of a good
intelligence, between the two Sexes, vulgarly called Bawds, or to speak more
honorably of them women of intrigue, soon came acquainted with Helen, and
directed her how to manage herself. One day they made her show herself at the
Playhouse, the next day in the Park, and sometimes in the high Street of
Madrid in her Coach, where bestowing a glance upon one, a smile upon another,
and giving hopes to all, she soon furnished herself with a set of Lovers enough
to man a Galley. Her dear Husband religious^y observed every Article of the
Original Contract; he encouraged his Wife's bashful Gallants by his obliging
behavior, and led them as it were by the hand to her Apartment, where he was
so courteous and discreet, that he always pretended some extraordinary business
or other called him out, in order to leave them by themselves. He scorned the
acquaintance of any that were not, rich and would not spend their money freely,
and never knocked at the door till he was assured by a certain Signal that
always hung out of his window, when his virtuous Spouse was taken up in private
business, that his presence would spoil no sport; and if the aforesaid Signal
forbid his coming in, he trooped off merry and well satisfied, as knowing
business went on in his absence, and passed away an hour or so at some gaming
Academy, where every one caressed him for his Wife's sake. Among the rest that
paid Tribute to Helen, a certain Gentleman of Granada surpassed all his
Competitors in his excess of love and his expenses. He was descended of so good
a Family, that the Titles of his Nobility were to be found in the Archives of
the Capital City of Judea, and those that were particularly acquainted with his
pedigree, have affirmed, that his Ancestors were the Hang-men of Jerusalem,
both before and after Caiphas. His great affection to Helen made him release a
great number of Pistoles, ou^ of an obscure Dungeon, where he had imprisoned
them for many years. In a short time Helen's house was the best furnished of
any in Madrid. A Coach and Four that cost her nothing the keeping, came
punctually every morning to her door to receive her orders, and waited on her
where she pleased to command them till night. This ^rodigal Lover took one of
the side Boxes at the Playhouse. ^or her for a whole Twelvemonth, and scarce a
day passed over ^is head, but he provided some magnificent collation for her
^^nd her Friends, at one of the Summer-houses near Madrid. Montafar who loved
his belly like a Churchman, never ^all'd to make one of the number. He went as
fine as a ^rince, had as much Money in his Pocket as a Clerk of the ^reasury,
eat like a Frenchman, and drunk like a German. ^e paid a wonderful deference
to our Granada Gentle^an, who was so liberal of his Money, and indeed had
na^rally an esteem for persons of that character. But at ^st the wind veer'd
about, and raised a terrible storm. He^^^^ now and then used to receive visits
from a young Swag^ring Spark, one of those furious Heroes that never made.
Campaign in their lives, tho they talk of nothing but slash^^g and killing, but
live upon some wretched Harlot, whom they insult at discretion, who go every
day to the Playhouse, to pick Pockets, or make quarrels there, and at night
draw their Swords and hack them against some passive wall, swearing next
morning that they were engaged in a dangerous rencounter the night before with
at least half a dozen Bullies at once. The sage Montafar often told Helen, that
he was not pleased to see such a visitant in his house, from whom they could
expect nothing; but for all he could say to her, she was not in the mind to
part with her Gallant. Montafar was angry with her, and to make himself some
amends out of her Carcass, treated her with the same chastisement, which Mendez
of happy memory and she had formerly suffered in the Mountains of Burgos. Helen
pretended to be easily reconciled to him, but meditated revenge in her heart.
The better to accomplish her design, she caressed him so lovingly for eight
days together, that Montafar persuaded himself she was one of those tractable
women that adore their Tyrants, and use their humble Servants scurvily. One day
that our Granada Gallant had promised to sup with them, but by reason of some
unexpected business, could not come to the noble entertainment he had provided
for them, Montafar and Helen drank hand to fist several Bumpers to their
Benefactor, to whom they were obliged for all this good cheer. Montafar got
fuddled according to his laudable custom, and toward the end of the repast,
must needs taste a Bottle of perfumed Hipocrass, which the Gentleman had sent
them as an extraordinary present. It is not certainly known whether Helen, who
opened the Bottle before Supper, put any poisonous Drugs into it: but this is
agreed on all hands, that soon after Montafar had emptied it, he felt a strange
heat in his Bowels, and intolerable pains after that. He suspected that he was
poisoned, and ran toward his Sword, at the same time that Helen ran toward
the door, to avoid his fury. Montafar went in to his Chamber, thinking she had
hid herself there, and lifting up the Tapestry, he discovered Helen's young
Gallant, who without any more ceremony whipped him through the Guts. Montafar,
tho h^ had received his death's wound, held him fast by the throat. The
Servants made such a hellish noise with crying out Murder, that the Justice
coming that way ran into the house, just as the young Bravo, who had done
Montafar's business for him, was making his escape. In the mean time Helen, who
had got into the Street, and knew not which way to take, ran into the first
house she found open. She saw a light in a lower room, and a Cavalier walking
up and down in it. Without asking him any questions, she threw herself at his
Feet to implore his assistance and protection, and was strangely surpised to
find it was Don Sancho de Villefagnan, who on his part was no less astonished
to see the Idol of his heart, this being the fourth time of his meeting with
her by accident. Don Sancho had lately fallen out with his Wife, who had
procured herself to be divorced from him upon the score of his ill usage of
her, and his disorderly life. He had obtained a Commission at Court to go and
settle a new Colony in the Indies, and was to embark at Sevil in a short time.
While Helen told him a thousand lies, and he was ravished to find she was ready
to follow him into America: the Justice apprehended the Assassin of Montafar,
and made a strict search after Helen in Madrid, and seized all that he could
find in her house. Don Sancho and Helen arrived happily in the Indies, where
several Adventures befell them that cannot be contained in so short a volume,
and which I promise to oblige the public with, under the name of the Perfect
Courtezan, or the Modern Lais, if I find the world inclined to receive it.

NOVEL IV.
The Innocent Adultery.
THe Spanish Court was very much be-daggled and be-mir'd at Valladolid, where
they are as much be-daggled as they are at Paris, according to the observation
of a famous Spanish Poet, when in one of the coldest nights of a very cold
Winter, and about the time when most of ou^ Convents ring to Mattins, a young
Gentleman, Don Garci^ by name, came out of a house where he had spent the
evening in conversation, or else in play. He was now got into the Street where
he lodged, and although the night was exceeding dark, because the Sky was
overcast, yet he had no light with him, whether it was because his Footman had
lost his Link, or because he was a Gentleman that did not stand upon these
Punctilio's, when a door opened all (...) the sudden, and he saw some body
thrown out of it with so much violence as to fall on the other side of the way
where he was. If he was surpised at so odd an Adventure, he was much more so,
when going to lend his hand to th^^ person that was so rudely treated, he
perceived that s^^ was in her Smock, and heard her sigh and lament herself
without making the least effort to rise. He concluded she was hurt with the
fall, and with the help of his Footm^^ having set her on her Legs again, he
desired to know where^ he might serve her. It Is in your power to save both
(...) Life and Honor, answered this unknown person, in a (...) interrupted
with frequent sobbs, and which discovered (...) him that she was a woman. I
conjure you, added she, (...) the same generosity that inclined you to pity my
misfortun^ to carry me to some place of security, provided that not but
yourself, or such whose fidelity you can trust, (...) know where I am. Don
Garcias covered her with his (...) and commanding his Footman to hold her upon
one side, as he did on the other, he soon arrived at his lodging, where every
one was gone to bed but the Maid, who opened the door, and very heartily cursed
them for making her sit up so late. All the answer the Footman made her was to
blow out the Candle, and while she went to light it, and called him a hundred
Rogues for his pains, Don Garcias conducted, or rather carried the afflicted
Lady, who could scarce make a shift to stand, to his room, which was up one
pair of Stairs. His man soon brought a light, and then Don Garcas beheld one of
the most beautiful women in Spain, who at the same time inspired him with love
and compassion. Her hair was as bright and as black as Jet, her complexion a
mixture of Lillies and Roses, her eyes two Suns at least, her ^reast above all
comparisons, her arms admirable, her hands much more than her arms, and her
shape like that of a Queen of one's own creating: but this black hair was in
dis^^der, this charming complexion was eclipsed, these piercing yes were full
of tears, these incomparable breasts were ^oody, these arms and hands were in
no better a pickle; in ^ort, this fine body so delicately shaped was covered
all over ^ith black and blue marks, as if it had undergone the disci^ine of a
Dog-whip or a Cat-of-nine-tails, or something as (...) as that. If Don Garcias
was ravished to behold so beau^^^ul a creature, this beautiful creature was as
much Con^^n'd to see herself in her present circumstances, in the ^wer of an
unknown Gentlemen, who seemed not to be (...) twenty five years old. He was
sensible of it, and did (...) that in him lay to persuade her that she had no
reason to (...) any ill usage from a man, who should think himself (...) to dye
in her service. In the mean time his Foot^^^ made a little Coal-fire, for in
Spain they use scarce any (...) firing, which by the by is none of the best in
the world. (...) laid a pair of clean sheets, or at least he ought to have
(...) them, on his Master's Bed, who wishing the Lady a (...) night, left her
in possession of his Chamber, which he able locked, and went to lie, under what
pretense I can(...) tell you, because our History is here silent, with a (...)
of his acquaintance, that lodged in the same house. slept in all probability
much better than his Guest, who at all night long. The day appeared, Don
Garcias arose, dressed himself as spruce as a Courtier for a Ball. He list^^^ at
his Chamber door, and hearing the poor Lady still (...) herself, he made no
difficulty to come in. As soon (...) saw him, her grief attacked her with new
violence. You see, says she to him, a woman who was yesterday the most esteemed
in Valladolid, now infamous to the last degree, and that more deserves to be
pitied, than ever she did to be envied; but let my misfortune be never so
great, the charitable protection you have so seasonably given me, may still
alleviate it in some measure, if at night you will see me conducted in a Chair
or Coach to a certain Convent I shall name to you. But, continued she, after so
many obligations ought I to beg the favor of you to step to my house, and
inform yourself what is said and done there, and in short to know in what
manner the Court and City talks of an unfortunate woman, whom you have so
generously protected. Don Garcias offered to go wherever she would be pleased
to command him, with all the eagerness of a man who begins to be in love. She
gave him all the instructions that were necessary upon this occasion: he took
his leave of her, promising to return immediately, and the poor Lady fell a
weeping and lamenting herself as violently as if she had begun but that very
moment. Don Garcias did not stay a full hour before he came back, and finding
his beautiful Guest as much afflicted, as if she already knew that he had ill
news to impart to her: Madam, says he to her, if you are Eugenia, the Wife of
Don Sancho, I have something to tell you which nearly concerns you. Eugenia, is
not to be found, Do^ Sancho is in the hands of the Magistrate, accused for the
death of his Brother Don Lewis. Sancho is innocent, cries she, I am the
unfortunate Eugenia, and Don Lewis was the most wicked of all men. Her tears
which trickled down a pace, and her sighs which redoubled their violence, would
not give her leave to say any more; and in all probability Don Garcias was not
a little perplexed all this while, (...) put on a sorrowful air to keep her
company. At last, ^ violent things are never of long continuance, Eugenis grief
began to abate, she wiped her tears, her sighs (...) gentler than before, and
she reassumed the discourse in (...) following words. It Is not enough that you
know (...) name and quality of the unhappy Woman, whom you ha^^ so highly
obliged in so short a time, she is willing to (...) quaint you with the
particulars of her life, and to testify (...) some manner her gratitude to you,
by reposing this co^^dence in you. I am, continued she, descended from one
(...) the best Families of Valladoli^d. I was born rich, and (...) beauty
enough to make me proud of it with some (...) The charms of my person brought
me more Lovers (...) those of my Fortune, and the reputation of both toget^^^
gave me adorers in the remotest Cities of Spain. Among the rest who believed
they should be happy in possessing me, Don Sancho, and Don Lewis, two Brothers,
equally befriended by Fortune and Nature, signalized themselves by the excess
of their passion, and by the mutual emulation there was between them, who
should render me the most important services. My Relations declared themselves
in favor of Don Sancho, who was the eldest, and my inclination following their
choice, I gave up my self entirely to a man of above forty years old, who, by
the sweetness of his temper, and the extraordinary care he took to please me,
had made as great a progress in my affections, as 'twas possible for any
person, whose age had been better suited to my own. The two Brothers,
notwithstanding they were Rivals, had all along lived very amicably together,
and Don Sancho when he had married me, did not lose the Friendship of his
Brother Don Lewis. Their Houses were contiguous, or properly speaking, were but
one house, for ^he Wall that divided them, had a door, which by com^on consent
was always left open. Don Lewis did not ^orbear to pay the same devoirs to me
before his Brother, as (...) had done while he was his Rival, and Don Sancho,
whose love increased after possession, and who loved me better ^an his life,
was not in the least offended at his Gallan^^y. He himself was used to call me
the Mistress of his Bro^^er, who on his side made a real love pass for a
feigned ^e, with so much address, that I was not the only person ^at was
deceived by it. In short, after he had accustomed (...) to hear him talk of his
passion before company, he ^oke to me of it in private with so much
importunity, ^d so little respect, that I no longer doubted that his ^ssion was
criminal. As young as I was, I had discretion ^ough to make him still think
that I took his love to be on^meant in mirth. I made a jest of what he spoke in
ear^t, and though I was never more enraged than at that (...), yet I forced my
self as well as I could, not to lose my ^inary temper. He was provoked at it,
instead of (...) a right use of it, and looking upon me with his eyes, (...)
his wicked designs had made wild and staring; No (...) Madam, says he to me, I
feign much less since I have (...) you, than I did when I had some hopes to
possess you; (...) tho your rigor is great enough to deliver you soon ^n the
importunities of your Lover, yet you have so long ^^stom'd me to suffer, that
you will do much better -- Never to be alone with you if I can help it, said I
interrupting him. One of my women that came into my room at that time, hindered
him from carrying his insolence farther, and me from showing him my resentment
of it as it deserved, and I was going to do. I was afterward very glad that I
did not do it, as well for my Husband's sake, as because I was in hopes that
this wicked Brother would at last love me less, and come to esteem me more; but
still he continued to make feigned love before company, and to solicit me in
private. I combated his Transports with all the severity I could summon to my
help; nay, so far as to threaten him to acquaint his Brother with it. I used
all my address to cure him of this folly. I prayed, I wept, I promised to love
him as my Brother, but he would be loved as a Lover. In short, sometimes a
sufferer, sometimes ill-treated, but always as much in love as he was hated, he
had made me the most unhappy woman in Spain, if my conscience, that can
reproach me with nothing, had not preserved tranquillity in my Soul. But at
last my Virtue, which had all along so well defended me against so dangerous an
Enemy, abandoned me, because I abandoned it first, and helpd to betray my self.
The Court came to Valladolid, and brought all its gallantry along with it. As
all new things are apt to please, our Ladies fancied they saw more in the
Courtiers than they could find in the City-Gallants, and the Courtiers
endeavored to please our Ladies, whom perhaps they looked upon as assured
Conquests. Among the other Cavaliers that attended the Court, in hopes of being
recompensed for their services, a Portuguese, whose name was Andrada, had
rendered himself one of the most considerable, by his wit and good mein, but
much more by his expensive way of living, the most efficacious charm to gain
women of no experience who judge of the beauty of the Soul by that of the
equip^ or habits: He had no great fortune of his own, but pla^ made him master
of that of other people, and his gains the way were so considerable, that he
made as great a (...) as the richest and most magnificent Nobleman at Court. ^
was unfortunate enough to please him, and when my (...) vanity, backed by his
continual Addresses, had perswade^ me that I was not disagreeable to him, I
reckoned myse^ the happiest woman upon Earth. I can hardly expre^ to you how
well he knew to make himself be beloved, ^ to what excess I loved him. My
Husband, so good, ^ dear, and so respected, became to me in a little time ^
contemptible as odious. Don Lewis appeared more hate^ to me than ever. In
short, nothing pleased me but Andrada. I loved none but him, and in all places
where I did not see him, I surpised all the Company with my distractions, and
restless behavior. Andrada on his side loved me full as passionately. His
Predominant passion for Play gave way to his love: his Presents gained my
women; his Letters and his Verses charmed me, and his Serenades set all the
Husbands in our Street a thinking for whom they were designed. In short, he
attackt me so well, or I defended my self so ill, that I surrendered. I promised
him all that it lay in my power to give him, so that now we had no other
difficulty to surmount, but that of a convenient time and place. My Husband had
engaged in a hunting match, which would keep him several days in the Country. I
sent to acquaint my dear Portuguese with this news, and we agreed to execute
our amorous designs that very night, after my Husband was gone out of Town. I
was to leave at a certain hour the backdoor of our Garden open, and under
pretense of passing part of the night there, by reason of the excessive heats,
I was to set up a Field-bed in a little Summer House, that was open on all
sides, and encompassed with Orange trees and Jessamines. At last my Husband
quitted Valladolid, and that day seemed to me the longest I ever knew. The
night came, and my women having set me up a Bed in the Garden, I pretended to
be very sleepy, and as soon as my Maids had undressed me. I commanded them all
to go to bed, except one Chambermaid, who knew the secret of my Amor: I had
scarce laid me down, and the Maid, whose name was Marina, had scarce shut the
Garden-door that faced the house, and opened the back door, when my women came
to tell me that my Husband was coming. I had but just time enough to shut the
Garden door, which I had ordered to be left open for Andrada. My Husband
caressed me as he used to do, and you may may imagine how I received him. He
told me that he was forced to come back, because the Gentleman, who had invited
him to the sport, had unluckily fallen from his Horse, and broken his Leg.
After this he commended my Judgment for choosing so cool and refreshing a
place, and concluded that he would take up his quarters there. He got himself
undrest at the same time, and came to bed to me. I did all I could to conceal
my vexation for his return, and to show him by my feigned embraces that his
were not ungrateful to me. In the mean time Andra^a came at the hour of
assignation, and finding the door shut, which he thought to have found open, by
the help of his Valet he leapt over the Garden-wall, where he had hoped to pass
the night with me. He has confessed to me since, that his jealousy put him
upon so hardy and dangerous a design; that he did not doubt but that some happy
and better beloved Rival enjoyed that happiness, which I had promised him.
These suspicions of his, that perhaps I diverted my self at his expense with
another Gallant, so inflamed his anger, that he was resolved to use me ill, in
case he found what he suspected to be true, and to revenge himself upon his
Rival to the last extremity. He crept up to the Summer House, where we lay
together, as softly as he could. The Moon shone very bright, I saw him, and
knew him as soon as he came in: he saw that I was very much affrighted, and
made a sign to him to be gone. At first he could not discern, whether the
person, that was in bed with me, was my Husband or some one else; but observing
in my countenance less fear than confusion and shame, and seeing upon the Table
the Clothes and Plume of Feathers, which he had seen my Husband wear that very
day, and which were as singular as they were remakable, he saw satisfied that
it was Don Sancho, whom he saw a bed with me, and found him to be faster asleep
than a Gallant in all probability would have been. However, he drew near that
part of the Bed where I lay, and stole a kiss from me, which I could not well
hinder, considering the fear I was in, lest my Husband should awake. He had no
mind to keep me longer in this fright, but went away, lifting up his eyes to
heaven, shrugging his Shoulders, and showing all the marks of a man that was
deeply afflicted at this disappointment, and leapt back again over the
Garden-Wall, with the same facility as before. Early in the morning I received
the most passionate Letter from him that I ever read, accompanied with a pretty
Copy of Verses upon the Tyranny of Husbands. He spent the remainder of the
night, after he had parted with (...) writing them, and next day when I
received them, (...) could hardly do any thing else but read them over and
over^ as often as I could do it in private. Neither of us sufficient^^ reflected
upon the hazard we had run, to make it a wanting to us not to expose our selves
so any more. But altho^ had not been inclined of my self to grant him all that
^ asked of me, or had loved Andrada less than I did, or had not yielded to the
insinuating flattery of his Letters, yet could not have resisted the persuasion
of my Chambermaid who talked to me incessantly in his favor. She repreach'^ me
with want of resolution, which had made me think no more of Andrada, and talked
of the passion he had for me with the same vehemence, as she could have told a
Sweetheart of her own, what a kindness she had for him. By this I found that
she was not to learn her Trade now, and likewise saw of what importance it is
to be careful in the choice of those persons, that are placed about those of my
age and condition. But I was resolved to ruin my self, so that if she had been
more virtuous than she was, she had enjoyed a less share in my confidence. At
last she over-perswaded me to receive Andrada in a Dressing Room near my
Chamber, where she lay by herself; and we agreed that so soon as my Husband was
fast asleep, she should lie by him in my place, while I passed the night with
Andrada. Thus we got him concealed into my Dressing Room; my Husband fell
asleep, and I prepared to meet my Lover with all the emotions of one whose
desires are violent, yet who has a great deal to fear, when a terrible noise of
confused voices that cried out Fire, Fire, alarmed my ears, and waked my
Husband: At the same time my Chamber was all in a smoke, and I could perceive
the flames through my Windows. A Negro Maid, that served in the Kitchen, had
set it on fire being drunk, and it was not perceived till it had taken hold of
some dry Wood, and the neighboring Stables, and now had seized the boards of
my apartment: My Husband was very well beloved: In an instant the house was
full of neighbors that came to help us to quench the fire. My Brother-in-law
Don Lewis, whom the common danger had made more active and diligent than the
rest, was one of the first that helped us with his Servants, and pushed on by
his passion, made his way into my Chamber through the flames, that had already
seized the Staircase. He was in his shirt, and had nothing over it but his
Nightgown, in which he wrapped me up, and taking me between his arms, who might
more properly be said to be dead than alive, for the danger to which Andrada
was exposed, rather than for my own; he carried me to his own room, through the
communication his house had with ours, and setting me down upon his bed, left
me there, accompanied (...) some of my Women. In the mean time my Husband, and
all that had concerned themselves in this accident, that had (...) us,
bestirred themselves so notably, that the fire was ^ut out, after it had done a
great deal of damage. Andrada made his escape without difficulty among the
crowd and (...) of people that came to help us; and you may imagine how joyful
I was when Marina told me the agreeable news. He writ to me a hundred foolish
things the next day, which I answered with more transport than he had shown;
and thus we made a shift by writing to one another to soften and relieve that
pain, which absence gave us. After we had repaired all the mischief that the
fire had done us, and I had left Don Lewis's room to return to my own, Andrada
easily persuaded me to let him try the same way once more, which had not failed
the last time but for so unfortunate and unexpected an accident. That very
night we pitched upon to make ourselves full amends for the time which the fire
had made us lose, a Cavalier of my Husband's acquaintance, who was in some
trouble about a Duel, and had fled to an Ambassadors house, where he did not
think himself safe enough from the Civil Magistrate, was obliged to abscond
somewhere else. My Husband carried him privately to his own house, and took
himself the key of the street door, which he caused to be locked before his
face, lest any servant through treachery or indiscretion should discover the
place of his retirement. This order, at which. I was equally surpised and
troubled, was unluckily put in execution just as Andrada made the signal in the
street, which he had told Marina of before. The poor Maid was in a strange
confusion, what to do, and made him a sign from a low Lattice Window to stay a
moment. We deliberated upon the matter a little, and afterward she went and
told him in a low voice what new obstacle our illnatur'd destiny had trumpt up
to oppose our design; so she proposed to him to stay till all our people were
gone to bed, and then he should try to get in through one of the Kitchen
Windows, which she would open for him. Nothing seemed difficult or dangerous to
Andrada, provided he could satisfy his love. My Husband saw his friend to bed,
and went to bed himself in good time, after the example I set him; all our
Servants did the same; and Marina, when she thought the whole family was fast
asleep, opened the little Window for Andrada, who with all the ease in the
world got half way through, but so indiscreetly or unfortunately, that after
several efforts, which rather did him a mischief than help^ him, he stuck fast
by the wast between the Iron bars of the Window, without being able to stir
backward or forward. His Valet could not help him from the street, no more
could Marina from the place where she was, without some one else to assist her.
So she went to call up one of the Maids, in whom she could repose confidence,
and told her that she had been over-perswaded that night by her Sweetheart,
whom she loved entirely, and was to marry in a little time, to try to let him
in at the Kitchen Window, but that he stuck so fast in the Iron Bars, that
there was no getting him out without filing them, or wrenching them out of
their place. She desired her therefore to assist her in this extremity, to
which the other readily consented, but for want of a Hammer or some such Iron
utensil, Andrada had not been a farthing, the better for the help of these two
wenches, if he had not be thought himself of his Poniard, which did the
business so effectually, that after a great deal of struggling and sweating the
Iron Bars were by main strength wrested from the Wall, and my Gentleman
delivered from the terrible fear of being found so scandalously wedged in a
place, where he could be taken for nothing else but a House-breaker. However,
this could not be done with so little noise but that some of the Servants heard
it, and looked into the street, at the same time when Andrada carrying with him
the Iron hoop, which enclosed him about the wast, rubbed off as hard as he
could drive, attended by his Footman. The neighbors and our servants cried
out Stop Thief after them, and made no question but that some Villains had
attempted to rob Don Sancho's house, especially when they saw the Iron Bar
gone. In the mean time Andrada got safe to his lodgings, and was forced to file
off the Iron Bar, which gripped him as close as a Belt; for notwithstanding all
the tricks that his man and he played, there was no getting it off otherwise.
This third accident put him in a very ill humor, as I came to be informed
afterward. As for me, I took it quite otherwise, and while Marina, not yet
recovered from her fright, told me the story, I thought I should have killed my
self with laughing. However, I was no less concerned than he, at this series of
disappointments, which rather inflamed than cooled our desires, and would not
let us defer the happy minute of enjoyment any longer, than the very next day
after this pleasant but unlucky Adventure. My Husband was in the City,
endeavoring to make up his friends business for him, which in all probability
would keep him there the remaining part of the day. I sent trusty Marina to
Andrada's Lodg^^gs, that were not far from my house, she found him a (...),
still discomposed with the fatigues of the last night, and (...) dejected by
these unlucky crosses in his amors, that Ma^^na was partly scandalized to see
with what coldness he re^eiv'd the advances I made him, and to find him so
backward (...) give me the meeting, although she often assured him, that (...) was
an opportunity that was not to be lost. To make short of my story at last he
came, and I received him with all the transports of joy which a woman wholly
abandoned to her passion can feel. I was so blinded by it that I did not
perceive, as well as Marina did, with what indifference he made his approaches
to me, although it was too visible. However my embraces at last drew on his.
Hitherto our mutual joy could not be otherwise expressed than by our silence, and
the thoughts of what each of us desired with so much ardour, put me into so
great a confusion, that I could not look Andrada in the face, and by this means
gave him an opportunity to attempt what he pleased, when Marina, who like a
discreet Chambermaid had gone out of my room to be upon the watch, came in all
affrighted, and told me my Husband was come home. She carried Andrada into my
dressing room, rather dead than alive, and seeming to be much more concerned
than my self, although I had more reason to be so. My husband gave some orders to
his people below before he came up into my chamber. In this interval I had just
time enough to compose my self, and Marina to empty a great coffer full of
lumber, into which she put the despairing Andrada She had scarce stowed up her
Lover in this little sanctuary, when my Husband came into my room, and only
kissing me as he passed by, without any farther, stay went into my dressing
room, where he found a Book of Plays and unhappilly opened it. He lighted upon
a place that pleased him, and had engaged him to read longer, if Marina had not
advised me to go to him, and try to bring him into my chamber. My misfortune
did not stop here, for Don Sancho, finding me strangely discomposed and
thoughtful, as I had but too much reason to be, endeavored by his own good
humor to put me in a better. Never in his life did he take so much pains to
divert and please me as now, and never did he vex and importune me more. I
begged him to quit my chamber, pretending to be so sleepy that I could not hold
up my eyes; but by an unseasonable fit of pleasantry which was not usual with
him neither, he kept me company in spite of what I could say to him, and tho he
was the most complaisant man alive in his temper, yet he showed so little of it
then, that I was forced to turn him out. As soon as (...) had locked my Chamber
door, I ran into my dressing room to deliver Andrada out of his prison. Marina
opened in a^ have the Coffer wherein she had put him, and both of us had like
to have died of fear and grief, (...) we found him without pulse and without
motion lik^ a dead man, and so in effect he was according to all appearance.
Imagine to your self what terrible agonies thi^ fight gave me, and what
measures it was possible for me to take in so cruel an extremity. I wept, I
tore my hair, I grew desperate, I believe I had resolution enough to stabb my
self with Andrada's Poniard, if my excessive grief had not so enfeebled me,
that I was forced to throw my self upon Marina's bed. This maid, although she was
concerned to the last degree, yet preserved her judgment better than I did, in
this our common misfortune, and bethought herself how to remedy it, which for
my part I wanted strength to execute, although my reason had not been disordered
in the least. She told me that perhaps Andrada was only in a swoon, and that a
Surgeon either by bleeding, or some other speedy relief might restore him
that life, which he seemed to have lost. I looked upon her without returning
her any answer, my grief having in a manner made me stupid. Marina lost no time
in asking me more questions, but went to put in execution what she had proposed
to me; but no sooner had she opened the door with this intention, but my
brother-in-law Don Lewis pop't in upon us, and this second disaster was more
terrible than the first. Although the Body of Andrada had not been exposed to his
view, as it was, yet the confusion and surprise he might read in our faces,
would have told him that we had been engaged in some myssterious affair, which
he would not have failed to examine to the bottom, being so much interess'd in
me as he was, both as a Brother-in-law and a Lover. I was therefore obliged to
throw my self at the feet of a man, whom I had often beheld at mine, and
relying upon the love which he had for me, and upon his generosity, the
essential quality of every Gentleman, to resign the dearest thing I had in the
World entirely to his will. He did what he could to raise me up, but being
resolved to continue upon my knees, I frankly told him, as well as my tears and
sighs would give me leave, what a sad accident had befallen me, at which I
don't at all question but he was pleased in his heart. Don Lewis, said I to
him, I don't implore thy generosity now to prolong my Life a few days: my
misfortunes have made it so odious to me, that I would take it away myself,
were I not afraid that my despair could not effect it, but at the expense of my
honor, from which that of Don Sancho, and even his life are perhaps
inseparable. Thou may believe, that the disdain I have all along shown thee,
was rather the effect of my aversion than of my virtue, thou may rejoice at
my disgrace, nay and glut thy revenge with it; but dare thou reproach me with
a crime, which thou have so often tempted me to commit, and can thou want
indulgence for her, who has so often shown it to thee? Don Lewis would not let
me go on, But Madam, says he to me, you see that Heaven has justly punished you
for bestowing your affections upon one, whom you ought to have hated: but I
have no time to lose, that I may convince you, by drawing you out of this
praemunire, that you have not a better friend in the world than Don Lewis.
Having said this, he left me, and returned a moment after with two Porters,
whom he had ordered to be sent for. Marina and I, in the mean time had put
Andrada's Body again into the great Coffer. Don Lewis lent a helping hand to
put it on the fellow's Shoulders, and bid them carry it to a certain friend's
house, to whom he had discovered this Adventure, as he had before trusted him
with the secret of his amor. Here, after he had before taken Andrada's Body
out of the Coffer, he ordere'd it to be laid at full length upon a Table, and
while they were taking off his Clothes he felt his Pulse, and put his hand on
that part of his breast, where the palpitation of the Heart is best to be
discovered, and found there were still some sparks of life left in him. He sent
for a Chyrurgeon in all haste, while in the mean time they put him to Bed, and
employed all the remedies that were proper to bring him to himself again. (...)
^ort, he came to himself, and was blooded. A Servant was left to attend him,
and the company quitted the room to afford time to nature and rest to complete
that cure, which their remedies had so successfully begun. You may imagine how
great Andrada's surprise was, when after so long a deliquium he found himself
in Bed, and could only remember what a fright he was in, when they put him into
the Coffer; he knew not where he was, nor what he had to hope or fear. He was
taken up with these mortifying thoughts, when he heard the Chamber door open,
and when the Curtains were drawn, he saw by the light of some tap^^, that were
brought into the room, Don Lewis, whom he very well knew to be my
Brother-in-law, and who having taken a chair, spoke to him as follows. Am I a
stranger to you Signior Andrada, and don't you know, that I am Brother to Don
Sancho? Yes replied Andrada, I know you well enough. And do you remember, cries
Don Lewis, what happened to you to day at his House? Take my word for t,
continues he, that if you pretend any more to carry on your intreagues with my
Sister-in-law, or if I ever see you more in our Street, you shall sorely repent
it; and know that thou had been a dead man, if I had not taken compassion on
a foolish and unfortunate woman, who has been pleased to put her life and
honor in my hand, and if I were not fully assured, that thy criminal designs
against my Brother's honor have not been put in execution. Change your
habitation, continues he, and think not to escape my resentments, if you break
the promise I expect you should make me. Andrada promised him more than he
asked, he made him the meanest and most abject submissions he could think of,
and protested to him that he owed him a life for saving his now. He was weak
enough in all conscience to keep his bed, but his excessive fear gave him
strength enough to get up. From that very moment he conceived as great an
aversion for me, as his affection before had been violent, nay he had my very
name in horror. In the mean time I was uneasy to know what was become of him,
but I had not assurance enough to ask Don Lewis, nay not to look him in the
face. I sent Marina to Andrada's Lodging, where she arrived just at the same
time as he came in himself, and had ordered his trunks to be got ready, in
order to remove to another quarter of the Town. As soon as he saw her, he
forbad her to come to him any more from me, and recounting to her in a few
words all that had passed between Don Lewis and himself; he added that I was
the most ungrateful and most perfidious woman in the world; that he would only
consider me for the future as one that designed to ruin him, and desired that
I would no more think of him than if I had never seen him. Having said this, he
turned Marina out of his Chamber, who was extremely surprised at his treatment:
However her astonishment was not so great, but that she had presence of mind
enough to dog him him at a distance, and observing the house where his Trunks
were carried, by that means came to know his new lodging. The vexation I felt
to be accused of a crime, whereof I was innocent, and to be hated by the man,
whom I loved so tenderly, and for whom I had hazarded my life and reputation,
hindered me from taking so much satisfaction in his safety, as otherwise I
should have done. I fell into a fit of melancholy, which threw me into a
sickness, and my distemper, which the Physicians could not tell what to make
of, was no little affliction to my Husband. To complete my misfortune, Don
Lewis began to value himself upon the important service he had done me; he
incessantly importuned me to grant him that happiness, which I had intended for
Andrada: reproaching me that I was in love with the latter, all the time I
preached to him what I owed to my Husband, and what he owed to a Brother. Thus
being hated by the man I loved, loved by the man I hated, seeing Andrada no
more, seeing Don Lewis too often, and perpetually accusing my self for having
been so ungrateful to the best husband in the World, who left nothing undone to
please me, and who was distracted at my illness, when he had the justest
provocations to take away my life: being thus troubled with remorse of
conscience, of love, and hatred, two passions so contrary, I kept my Bed for
two Months, expecting every moment my death with joy; but Heaven, it seems
reserved me for greater misfortunes. My youth, in spite of my self, assisted me
against this inconsolable grief. In short, I recovered my health, and Don Lewis
persecuted me much more than ever he had done. I had given orders to my women,
and particularly to Marina, never to leave me alone with him. Enraged at this
usage, and the resistance I made him, he resolved to obtain by the blackest
piece of treachery that ever was known, that which I refused him with so much
steadiness. I have already told you, that there was a way from his house to
ours, through a door that was seldom shut. On the night he pitched upon for the
execution of his damnable design, and at the hour when he thought every one was
asleep both at his house and ours, he got in by this door, opened the gate
toward the Street, then turned all our Horses, out of the Stable, that
immediately ran into the Court, and from thence into the Street. The noise they
made soon awakened the Servants that looked after them, and my husband. He was
very fond of his Horses, as soon as he knew that they were got into the Street,
he immediately ran after them in his Morning Gown, swearing heartily at his
Grooms, and at the Porter, who had forgot to shut the great Gate. Don Lewis,
who had hid himself in my Antichamber, and saw my husband go down stairs,
followed him into the Court soon after, and having shut the Street door, and
tarried a little to give the greater probability, to what he had a mind to
effect, came to Bed to me, personating my husband so well, that it is no wonder
if I was mistaken. He was excessive cold with standing so long in his Shirt.
Good God Sir, said I to him, how cold you are! It Is very true, answers he,
counterfeiting his voice, I had like to have been starved in the Street. And
are your Horses, I said to him, retaken? My Servants are gone after them, cries
he, and then drawing nearer to me, as to warm himself, and embracing me very
lovingly, he proceeded to betray me, and dishonor his brother. As Heaven
permitted this crime, perhaps it reserved the punishment of it to me, that so
my honor might be retrieved by my own hands, and my innocence known. Having
satisfied his wicked desire, he pretended to be in pain for his Horses, so up
he got, and opened the Street gate, and then retired to his own lodging, well
pleased perhaps with his crime, and rejoicing in that which would be the cause
of his destruction. My husband came in soon after, and getting into Bed crept
close to me, half frozen and starved as he was, and obliged me by his caresses,
which I thought were extraordinary, to desire him to let me sleep. He thought
it strange; for my part I was surpised, and did not doubt but that some
treacherous trick had been played me^ could not sleep a wink till it was day, I
got up much earlier than I used to do, I went to Mass, and there I saw Don
Lewis in his finest Clothes, and with his countenanceas gay, as mine was sad
and melancholy. He presented me with the holy water, which I received very
coldly, then looking upon me with a malicious sneer, Good God, Madam, says he,
how cold you are! At these words, that were the same I spoke to him the night
before, and made me no longer doubt my misfortune, I turned pale and then
redden'd. He might easily find by my eyes, and the disorder these words gave
me, how hainously I resented his insolence. I parted from him, without so much
as looking at him, I passed all the time at Mass very uneasy, as you may well
imagine. I made my Husband so too, when at dinner, and all the rest of the day,
I looked like a distracted woman, sighing incessantly, and showing that I was
troubled in mind, notwithstanding all the care I took to conceal it. I retired
to my Chamber sooner than I used to do, pretending a slight indisposition. I
thought of a hundred different designs to revenge my self. At last my
indignation put me upon that which I resolved to put in execution. The night
came, I went to bed when my Husband did: I pretended to sleep to oblige him to
do the same; and when I saw him fast, and supposed that all our servants were
so too, I got up, I took his Poniard, and wholly blinded and transported by my
passion, I made a shift however, by the same door and the same way through
which my cruel enemy had got to my bed, to find the way to his. My fury made me
not do things at random. I grop'd out where his heart lay with my hand that was
free, and discovered it by its palpitation: My fear of missing my blow did not
make the other tremble wherein I held the Poniard. I sheathed it twice in the
heart of the detestable Don Lewis, and punished him by a gentler death than he
deserved. In the heat of my rage I gave him five or six hearty stabs more, and
returned to my Chamber in that tranquillity and peace of mind, that convinced
me I never did any thing with more satisfaction. I put up my husband's Poniard,
all bloody as it was, into the Scabbard: I dressed my self in as much haste, and
with as little noise as I could; I took with me all my Jewels and Money, and as
much transported by my love, as I had been lately hurried by my revenge, I ran
away from my husband, who loved me better than his life, to throw my self into
the arms of a young man, who had not long ago taken care to let me know that I
was become odious to him. The natural cowardice of my Sex was so well fortified
by the impetuous passions that reigned in my Soul, that tho it was midnight,
and I all alone by my self, yet I walked from my own house to Andrada's Lodging
with as much assurance, as if I had been going to do a good action in the day
time. I knocked at Andrada's door, who was not at home, being engaged it seems
at play at a friend's house. His Footmen, who knew me well enough, and were not
a little surpised to see me there, received me with a great deal of respect,
and lighted a fire for me in their Master's Chamber. He came home soon after,
and I suppose little imagined to find me in his Room. He no sooner saw me, but
looking wildly upon me, What has brought you hither, Madam Eugenia, says he;
and what have you to say to me of all men living, whom you designed to
sacrifice to the revenge of your Brother-in-law and Gallant? How! Andrada, said
I to him, do you put so ill a construction upon an an inevitable accident,
which forced me to have recourse to the only man in the world whom I was most
afraid to be obliged by? and could you pass so disadvantageous a judgment of a
person, who had given you so many proofs of her affection? I expected something
else than reproaches from you, which you would not have been in a condition now
to make, had I not done that very thing for which you condemn me, and charge me
with as a crime. Alas! if I have been guilty of a crime, it is not against you,
but against my husband, to whom I ought to have been faithful, to whom I have
been ungrateful, because I would not be so to you, and whom I have left to
throw my self upon a cruel man that uses me ill. When your death, which I
looked upon to be real, had flung me into that despair, which how could a woman
avoid, that expected every moment surpised by her husband; and when Don Lewis
found me in this deplorable condition, what could I otherwise do than rely upon
his generosity, and the love he had for me? He has most treacherously betrayed
me at the expense of his own honor, but it has been also at the expense of his
own life, which I have just now taken from him: and ^tis this, my dear Andrada,
that has brought me hither. It Is necessary that I should conceal my self from
Justice, till I find a proper time to inform the world what Don Lewis's crime
was, as well as my own misfortune. I have Money and Jewels enough to maintain
you with splendor in any part of Spain, where you will think sit to accompany
a miserable woman. I shall convince the whole world in a little time that I
rather deserve to be pitied than blamed, and my future conduct shall justify
my past actions. Yes, yes, cried he, interrupting me, I will go and take Don
Lewis's place, now thou art cloyed with him, and have my throat cut like him,
when thou art cloyed with me. Ha! thou lascivious woman, continues he, how well
does this last wicked action of thine confirm me in my belief that thou
designedst to sacrifice me to thy Gallant? but think not to come off with
reproaches only, I will rather be the punisher of thy crime, than the
accomplice of it. He had no sooner spoke these words, but he stripped me by
main force, in so barbarous a manner, that even his servants were ashamed at
it; he gave me a hundred blows, naked as I was, and after he had satisfied his
rage till he was quite weary, he threw me into the street, where if I had not
happily met with you, I had died e're this, or fallen into the hands of those who
perhaps are now searching for me. When she had ended her discourse, she showed
Don Garcias the black and blue marks in her arms, and those parts of her body,
which modesty would allow her to show, and then resumed it as follows. You have
heard, generous Don Garcias, my deplorable history: Tell me therefore, I
conjure you, what measures an unhappy woman ought to take, who has caused so
many calamitous misfortunes? Ah, Madam, cries Don Garcias interrupting her,
that I could as easily advise you what to do, as punish Andrada, if you would
give me leave! Don't rob me of the honor of revenging your quarrel, and don't
refuse to employ, ^n whatever you think fit to command him, a man who is (...)
less concerned for your misfortune, than for the outrage that has been done
you. Don Garcias pronounced these words with a heat, which convinced Eugenia
that he no less loved than pitied her. She thanked him in the most obliging
terms that her civility and gratitude could suggest to her, and ^^egg'd him to
give himself the trouble to go once more to ^^er Husband's house, to inform
himself more particularly what people said of her flight, and of the death of
Don Lewis. He happened to come there just at the time, as they were carrying
Don Sancho to prison, together with his Domestics, and those of Don Lewis, who
had deposed that their Master was in love with Eugenia. The common door between
the two houses which had been found open, and the Poniard of Don Sancho yet
reeking with blood, were circumstantial proofs that he had murdered his Brother,
of which nevertheless he was as innocent, as he was afflicted at it. The
running away of his wife, his Jewels and Money that were missing, so strangely
surpised him that he could not tell what to make on it, and this troubled him
infinitely more than his imprisonment and the proceedings of the Magistrate.
Don Garcias was impatient to carry this news to Eugenia, but he could not do it
so soon as he desired. One of his friends, who had business with him, stopped him
a long while in the street where his lodging was, that happened to be over
against Andrada's, from whence he saw a servant come out booted, carrying a
Portmantle. He followed him at a distance, accompanied by his Friend, and saw
him stop at the Post House. He came in after him, and found he had hired three
Horses, that were to be got ready in half an hour. Don Garcias let him go, and
ordered the same number of Horses to be ready at the same time. His friend
asked him what was the meaning of this, he promised to tell him, provided he
would make one of the number, to which the other readily consented, without
troubling himself what the matter was. Don Garcias desired him to put on his
Boots, and stay for him at his Lodgings^ while he made a short trip to his own.
Thus they parted, and Don^^ Garcias went immediately to wait upon Eugenia to
inform her what he knew of her affair. At the same time he gave orders to his
Landlady, who was a woman he could trust, to furnish Eugenia with Clothes and
other necessaries, and carry her that very night to a Convent, the Governess
whereof was her relation and friend. After this he privately ordered his man to
carry his riding Coat and Boots to the Gentleman's Lodgings, whom he last
parted with, and having once more conjured the woman of the House to take care
of Eugenia, and conceal her from all the World, he went to call upon his
Friend, and walked with him to the Posthouse, where they had not been a minute
but Andrada came there. Don Garcias asked him whither he was going, he told him
to Sevil. Why then, replied Don Garcias, we shall need but one Postillion.
Andrada liked the motion, and perhaps thought Don Garcias and his Friend were a
brace of Cullies, whom he might easily bubble of their money at play They rode
out of Valladolid together, and galloped a pretty while, without doing any
thing else but gallop, for I think it is agreed on all hands, that when men ride
post they are none of the best conversation. Don Garcias finding they were now
in a fine open plain, fit for business, and remote enough from any house, rode
a little way before the company, then come back and bid Andrada stop. Andrada
asked him what he would have. I must fight you, answered Don Garcias, to
revenge if I can Eugenia's quarrel, whom you have mortally injured by the most
cowardly, and villainous action that ever was known. I don't repent me for what
I have done, replied Andrada to him fiercely, without seeming to be surpised,
but perhaps you may have occasion to repent of this insolence. He was a man of
Courage, and alighted from his Horse at the same time that Don Garcias alighted
from his, who would not vouchsafe him an answer. They were now coming up to one
another with their Swords in hand, when Don Garcias's Friend told them that
they must not offer to tilt without him, and offered to fight Andrada's
Footman, who was a well shaped young Fellow, and of a promising countenance.
Andrada protested, that although he had the best Swordsman in Spain for his
second, he would only fight one against one. His Footman not contenting himself
with his Masters protestation, protested likewise, that for his part he would
fight no man whatever, for what cause whatever, at any Weapon whatever. So Don
Garcias's friend was forced to be an humble Spectator, or if you please,
Godfather to the two Combatants, which is no new thing in Spain. The Duel did
not last long, heaven so much favoring the righteous cause of Don Garcias,
that his Enemy pressing upon him with more fury than skill, ran upon his Sword,
and fell down at his feet, losing his blood and life together. Andrada's
Footman and the Postboy, neither of whom were made for Heroes, threw themselves
at the Feet of Don Garcias, who meant them no mischief. He commanded Andrada's
Footman to open his Masters Portmantle, and give him all that Andrada had taken
from Eugenia. He obeyed him immediately, and put into his hand a rich Manteau
Gown and Petty-coat, and a little Box, which by its weightiness would have made
a blind man swear that it was not empty. The Footman found the Key of it in his
Masters pocket, and gave it to Don Garcias, who bid him do what he pleased with
his Master's body, threatening to cut his throat if he ever saw him in
Valladolid. He commanded the Postboy not to come back till the dusk of the
evening, and promised him he should find the two Horses, that he had hired, at
the Post House. I suppose he was punctually obeyed by these two worthy
Gentlemen, who were ready to dye for fear, and thought they were exceedingly
obliged to him, because he did not kill them as he had done Andrada. History
leaves us in the dark as to what his Footman did with his Body, and as for his
movables, it is very probable that he kept them for his own use. Our Memoirs
likewise are wanting to inform us how the Post-boy managed himself in this
affair. Don Garcias and his Friend galloped it all the way to Valladolid, and
alighted at the Imperial Ambassador's House, where they had Friends, and stayed
till it was night. Don Garcias sent for his Footman, who told him that Eugenia
was in pain to see him. The Horses were sent back to the Post House by an
unknown person, who cunningly rubbed off, after he had delivered them to one of
the Ostlers. As for Andrada's death, the people of Valladolid either talked
nothing of it, because they never heard a word of it, or if they talked of it,
they said no more but that a Cavalier was killed by some unknown Enemy, or by
Thieves. Don Garcias returned to his Lodgings, where he found Eugenia dressed in
the Clothes which his Landlady had taken care to provide for her. I am apt to
believe that she took them up at a Broker's, for in Spain it is a common thing
for persons of quality, both men and women, to rig themselves in such places.
He restored Engenia her things again, and particularly her Jewels, and informed
her after what manner he had revenged her quarrel upon Andrada. Being of a
sweet and tender disposition, she was extremely concerned for the unfortunate
end of a person, whom she had once loved so dearly, and the thoughts that she
was the cause of so many Tragical disasters, afflicting her as much as her own
misfortunes, caused her to shed abundance of tears. That day public notice had
been given at Valladolid that no one should entertain or conceal Eugenia, and
two hundred Crowns were offered by way of reward to any one that could bring
any news of her. This made her resolve to get into a Convent as soon as she
could. However she passed that night in the lodging where she was, and slept as
little as she did the night before. Don Garcias rose by break of day to go
visit the Governess of the Convent that was related to Eugenia, and promised to
receive her, and keep her private as long as she was able. From thence he went
to hire a Coach, and ordered it to stop at a by-street adjoining to his,
whither Eugenia came, accompanied by the Gentlewoman of the house, both of them
being covered in their veils. The Coach carried them to a certain place, where
they ordered the Coachman to set them down, and there they alighted, that no
one should find out the Convent, where Eugenia retired. She was courteously
entertained there; Don Garcias's Landlady took her leave of her, and went to
inform herself how matters were like to go with Don Sancho. She was told that
things looked with an ill aspect, and that the least they talked of doing to
him was to give him the Question. Don Garcias communicated this news to
Eugenia, who was so much concerned to see her husband in danger of being
punished for a crime, which he was no way guilty of, that she was resolved to
surrender herself into the hands of Justice. Don Garcias dissuaded her from it,
and advised her rather to write to the Judge Criminal to let him know, that
only she could inform him who it was that killed Don Lewis. Upon this the
Judge, who by good luck was related to her, went attended with several other
Officers of Justice, to discourse her. She freely confessed to them that she
had killed Don Lewis, acquainted them with the just provocation he had given
her to serve him so, and recounted to them the particulars of all that had
passed between Don Lewis and herself, except what related to Andrada. Her
confession was taken down in writing, and a report of it made to his Catholic
Majesty, who, considering the blackness of Don Lewis's crime, the just
resentment of Eugenia, her courage and resolution, the innocence of Don Sancho
and his Domestics, ordered them all to be set at liberty, and granted his
Royal Pardon to Engenia, at the instance of all the Court, who appeared in her
behalf. Her husband was not much displeased with her for the death of his
Brother, nay, if one knew the truth, perhaps he loved her the better for it. He
made her a visit as soon as he was enlarged, and would fain have taken her home
with him, but she would not consent to it, notwithstanding all his
importunities and prayers. She did not question but that he took Don Lewis's
death as he ought to take it, but she knew very well that he had heard
something of what had passed between her and the Portuguese Cavalier; that the
least blemish in a Woman's honor may raise her Husbands jealousy, and sooner or
later untie the Conjugal Knot, let it be never so well tied. Poor Don Sancho
visited her often, and endeavored by all the tenderest remarks of kindness he
could show her, to oblige her to return home, and be absolute Mistress of his
Estate and him. She continued inflexible in her resolution, reserving for her
self a pension suitable to her quality and fortune: But though Don Sancho could
not prevail with her to go home with him, yet she behaved herself so obligingly
to this good Husband, that he had all the reason in the world to speak well of
her. But all that she did in the Convent to please him, only encreas^d his
concern that he was not able to get her out of it. This threw him at last into
so deep a melancholy, that he fell sick, and his sickness brought him to deaths
door. He conjured Eugenia to give him the satisfaction of seeing her, before he
must part with her for ever. She could not refuse this sorrowful pleasure to a
Husband who had been so dear to her, who had loved her so tenderly, and who
still loved her so well. She went to see him dye, and had like to have dy^d
herself with grief, to see him show so much joy in seeing her, as if she had
restored that life to him, he was going to lose. This goodness of Eugenia did
not go unrewarded: he left her all he had, by which means she found herself one
of the richest and beautifullest Widows in Spain, after she had found herself
upon the brink of being one of the most unhappy Women in the world. Her
affliction for the death of her husband was as real as it was great. She gave
necessary orders for his Funeral, took possession of his Estate, and returned
to her Convent, resolving to pass the remainder of her days there. Her
Relations proposed to her the best matches in Spain, but she was resolved not
to sacrifice her repose to her ambition: and finding herself everlastingly
persecuted by crowds of pretenders, whom her beauty and wealth drew after her
to the Parlor of the Convent where she was, she would at last be seen by no one
but Don Garcias. This young Gentleman had served her so opportunely upon so
important an occasion, and with so much warmth, that she could not see him
without saying to herself that she owed him something more than bare civilities
and compliments. She discovered by his livery and equipage that he was not
over-rich, and she was generous enough to offer him some assistances, which a
person in ordinary circumstances may receive without shame from one that is
richer than himself. In the little time she had been at his lodgings, and in
the conversation he had often had with her, he made her sensible that he had a
lofty soul elevated above the common rank, and entirely disengaged from all
fordid Interests, and wholly devoted to honor. She was therefore afraid that
she should affront him if she made him any present, which to be sure would have
been answerable to her generous temper, and on the other hand she feared that
he would have but a sorry opinion of her gratitude, if she did not give him
some proofs of it by her liberality. But if Don Garcias gave her some pain upon
the aforesaid occasion, she gave him no less on her side, and so was even with
him. In short, he was in love with her, but tho the respect he bore her could
not have hindered him from acquainting her with it, how durst he mention the
word Love to a Woman, whom Love had so lately exposed to such terrible
misfortunes, and that at a time too, when the sorrowful air of her face, and
the tears which trickl'd down incessantly, were evident demonstrations, that
her Soul was yet too full of grief to be capable of receiving another passion:
Among the rest that made their visits to Eugenia, in quality of her
thrice-humble Slaves, in hopes I suppose to become one day her thrice imperious
Masters; among the rest, I say, who had offered themselves to her, and she had
refused, there was one Don Diego, who having nothing else to distinguish him,
was resolved to signalize himself by his constant persecutions. He was as
foolish as it is possible for a young fellow to be, as unmannerly as he was
foolish, as troublesome as he was unmannerly, and hated by all the world for
being troublesome, unmannerly, and foolish. His body was of a piece with his
soul, ugly and ill-fashion^d, he was as poor in respect of the blessings of
this transitory world, as he was covetous to obtain them. But being descended
from one of the best families in Spain, and nearly related to one of the
principal Ministers of State, which only helped to make him the more insolent,
people showed him some little respect for the sake of his quality, although it was
not recommended by the least merit. This Don Diego, who was for all the world
such a Spark as I have describ^d him, thought that Eugenia had every thing that
a man could desire in a woman, and hoped to obtain her with ease by the credit
of his friends at Court, who and promised to make up the match for him. But
Eugenia was not to be so easily persuaded into an affair of that importance, as
they imagined, and to favor a private man the Court would not commit a
violence that must needs have disgusted all the World. Eugenia's retiring into
a Con^ent, her resolution never to leave it, her positive orders to receive no
more visits, the coldness of those that at first encouraged Don Diego in his
pretensions, made him despair of ever obtaining her without difficulty. For
this reason he was resolved to carry her by main force out of her Convent, ^n
attempt the most criminal that can be undertaken in Spain, and which none but a
fool like himself would ever have dreamt of. He found for his money fellows
that were as great fools as himself, and gave orders to have fresh horses left
upon the Road down to the Seaside, where a Vessel lay ready for him; in short,
he forced the Convent, carried off Eugenia, and that unfortunate Lady had
become the prey of the most dishonorable Wretch alive, if Heaven had not
raised up an unexpected Champion for her, even then when she thought herself
most abandoned by it. One single Gentleman, whom Eugenia's cries drew after her
ravishers, opposed their whole body, and hindered them from passing farther,
with so much valor that he immediately wounded Don Diego, and several of his
Accomplices, and gave time to the Townsmen, who had taken the alarm, and to the
Civil Magistrate to come down upon them with such numbers as to force Don Diego
and his Companions to surrender, ^ else lose their lives upon the spot. Thus
Eugenia was delivered, but before she would suffer herself to be carried (...)
her Convent, she desired to know what was become of tha^ valiant Gentleman, who
had so gallantly exposed his life for her sake. They found him wounded in
several parts of his body, and he had almost lost all his blood as well as his
senses. Eugenia had a mind to see him, and no sooner (...) her eyes upon his
face, but she knew him to be Don Garcias^ If her surprise was great, her
compassion was no less, an^ she gave such tender proofs it, that the standers
by might have interpreted it to her disadvantage, if she had not a just
occasion besides to afflict herself. She prevailed with the^ by her entreaties
and prayers, not to carry her generous (...) fender to prison, whom Don Diego,
who was upon the poi^^ of expiring, and his Accomplices confessed not to belong
to their Company, but to be the man that had attacked the^^ So he was carried
to the next house, which happened to ^ that where Don Sancho lived formerly,
and now belonged (...) Eugenia, who had left all her Furniture, and a few
Servan^ in it. He was put into the hands of the Surgeons be^longing to the
Court and City. Eugenia retired to her Convent, but was forced the next day to
leave it, and return her own house, because a new order was issued out, whi^^^
prohibited all Convents of Nuns to receive and Seculars a^mong them. Next
morning Don Diego died, and his Re^^tions had interest enough to hinder his
process being man after his death; but his Accomplices escaped not so, (...)
were punished according to their deserts. In the mean (...) Eugenia was almost
distracted to see Don Garcias out of (...) of a cure. She implored the
assistance of heaven, and offered to give the Surgeons whatever they could
demand; but their Art was exhausted, and they had no hopes but in heaven, and
the youth of the sick party. Eugenia would not stir from his bedside, and
attended him night and day so carefully, that she was in danger of bringing
herself into the same condition, I mean, of wanting another to do the same
offices for herself. She heard him often pronounce her name in the delirious
fits of his Fever, and among a thousand incoherent things, which his disturbed
imagination made him say, she heard him often talk of love, and discourse like
a man that is afighting or quarrelling. At last Nature, assisted by so many
remedies, surmounted the obstinacy of his illness; his Fever abated, his wounds
began to close up, and the Chyrurgeons assured Eugenia there was no danger,
provided no unexpected accidents befell him. She gave them handsome presents for
their pains, and ordered Prayers to be put up in all the Churches of
Valladolid. 'T was at this time that Don Garcias was informed by Eugenia that
she was the woman whom he had saved, and that she came to be informed by him
how he happened to come so seasonably to her relief, as he was returning home
from a friends house. She could not forbear to let him know how many
obligations she had to him, and he could not conceal his excessive joy for
serving her so opportunely, but durst not presume to acquaint her with a thing
of greater importance. One day when she was all alone with him, and conjured
him not to let her be any longer ungrateful to him, but to make use of her upon
some important occasion, he thought it a proper time to discover the real
sentiments of his soul. He sighed at the very thought of what he was going to
do, he looked ^pale, and the disorder of his mind was so visible in his
countenance, that Eugenia was afraid that something extraordinary ail^d him.
She asked him how his wounds fared? Alas, Madam, answered he, my wounds are far
from being my greatest misfortune. And what is the matter? said she to him,
very much affrighted. It Is a misfortune replied he, that is without Remedy.
It Is true, answered Eugenia, you were unfortunate to be so dangerously wounded
for an unknown person, who was not worth the while, for you to expose your life
for her^ but still it is a misfortune that cannot (...) always, for your
Surgeons don't doubt but that you will be well in a little time. And this it
is that I complain of, (...) Don Gracias; If I had lost (...) in serving you,
con^^^ he, I had died gloriou (...) I must drag a wretched life against my
Will, and live to be the most unhappy man in the world. With all the good
qualities that you possess, I cannot believe you to be so unhappy, as you talk,
replies Eugenia. How Madam, says he to her, don't you think that man very
unhappy, who knows your value, who esteems you more than any one living, who
loves you better than his life, and with all this, who cannot pretend to merit
you, tho Fortune had been as favorable as she has hitherto been averse to him?
You mightily surprise me, said she to him blushing, but the great obligations I
have to you, give you a privilege with me, that under my present circumstances
I should allow in none but your self. Only think of getting well, continued
she, and rest assured that your misfortunes shall not trouble you long, when it
is in Eugenia's power to put an end to them. She would not stay for his answer,
and by that means saved him a world of Compliments, which fell out luckily for
him, because he must have strained hard to make good ones, and that perhaps
might have done him harm in his present weakness. She called to some of her
Servants that looked after him, and went out of the room, just as the
Surgeons came in. Satisfaction of Mind is a Sovereign remedy to a sick body.
Don Garcias gathered such hopes of the happy success of his Amor from
Eugenia's words, that from the deep Melancholy, wherein he was plunged like a
despairing Lover, he now gave up himself to joy, and this joy contributed more
to his cure, than all the Remedies of the Surgeons. He was perfectly cured,
and out of good manners quitted Eugenia's house, but not his pretensions to her
heart. She had promised to love him, provided he did not make any public
discovery of it; and after all perhaps she loved him as much as he loved her,
but having lately lost her Husband, and been engaged in some adventures, which
rendered her the common subject o^ conversation in Court and City, she thought
it not advisable to expose her self afresh to the malicious censures of the
world, by a marriage so unseasonable, and against the rules of decency. At
last, Don Garcias over came all these difficulties by his merit and constancy.
He was so well made in his person, as to make any Rival whatever despair. He
was a younger brother of one of the best Families of Arragon, and although he had
not actually signalized himself in the Wars, as he had very gallantly, yet the
long services his Father had done the Crown of Spain, might (...) make him hope
to find a reward of as great profit^^ honor at Court. Eugenia could not defend
herself against so many noble qualities, nor was she willing to be any longer
in his debt, after she had received so many obligations from him. In short, she
married him: Both Court and City approved her choice; and that she might not
have any reason to repent of it, not long after it so happened, that the King
of Spain bestowed a Commandery of St Iago upon Don Garcias: And before that
happened, it so happened, that our Bridegroom convinced Eugenia the first night
of his bedding her, that he was another sort of a man than Don Sancho, and she
found in him what she had not found in the Portuguese Andrada. They had
abundance of Children, because they took abundance of pains to get them; and
the people of Spain to this day tell their History, which I have given you here
for a true one, as it was given me.

NOVEL V.
The Generous Lover: OR, The Man of Deeds, and not of Words.
UNder a King of Naples, whose name I cannot tell, however I suppose it might
be Alphonso, Leonard de St Severin, Prince of Tarento, was one of the greatest
Lords of his Kingdom, and one of the most celebrated Generals of his time. He
died, and left the Principality of Tarento to his Daughter Mathilda, a young
Princess about seventeen years old: as beautiful as an Angel, and as good
conditioned as she was beautiful, but so extremely good conditioned, that those
that did not know she had an infinite deal of wit, would have been apt to call
it in question. Her Father long before his death had promised her in marriage
to Prosper, Prince of Salerno. This latter was a man of a haughty disagreeable
temper, and the sweet and gentle Mathilda, by virtue of being long accustomed
to bear with him, was so well prepared to love and fear him, that never did
Slave depend more upon the imperious will of his Master, than this young
Princess did upon that of old Prosper. I think a man at the age of forty-five
may very well be called old, when he is mentioned with one so young as
Mathilda. Her affection to this superannuated Lover may be said to proceed
rather from custom than inclination, and was as sincere as his was interressed.
Not but that he was as fond of her too, as 'twas as possible for him to be, and
this was no more than what any man would have done as well as himself, for
indeed she was all amiable; but 'twas not in the nature of the beast (I beg his
pardon, but it is out) to love very much, and he rather esteemed a Mistress for
her dirty acres and unrighteous Mammon, than for her merit and beauty. The
truth is, he made love but awkwardly: however he was so happy, or, to express
my self more properly, she was so easy to be pleased, that although he did not pay
her half the respect and complaisance which one might expect from a generous
Lover, yet for all that he was absolute master of her heart, and had brought
her to such a pass as to submit to all his ill conditions. He found fault with
all her actions, and plagued her incessantly with those musty advices that old
men in their great wisdom so often inculcate to the young, and the other so
little care for. In short, he would have been a greater thorn in her side, than
a peevish malicious Governante, if he could have found out any faults in her
conduct. It is true, that when he was in a good humor, he would tell her
stories of the old Court, play on his Guitarre, and dance a Saraband before
her. I have already told you his age, but to go on with his Character. He was
spruce in his Person and Clothes; curious in his Pertiwigs, an infallible sign
that his hair was none of the best; he took mighty care of his Teeth, tho time
began to play tricks with them; he valued himself. upon his Lilly-white hands,
and suffered the Nail of his left little Finger to grow to a prodigious length,
by the same token he thought it one of the prettiest sights in the world. He
was nice to admiration in his Feathers and Ribbonds, punctually twisted up his
Mustachio's every night, was always perfumed, and always carried some tid bit
in his pocket to eat, and some Verses to read. As for himself, he was an
execrable versifyer, was a walking Magazine of all the new Songs, played upon
most Instruments, performed his Exercises with a grace, but his chief Talent
was Dancing. He loved the wits that asked him nothing, had performed some
actions in his time that were brave, and some that were otherwise, and as one
might say, he had two Buzzards to one Hawk, or if you please, two Blanks to one
Benefit. In short, I may properly apply to him a burlesque Song of my own
making, the latter part of which is almost worn into a Proverb.

SONG.
HEre lies a sine wight,
That could sing you at sight,
And dance like a sprite,
And verses indite,
And bravely recite.
What Is more, he could fight,
(I swear by this light)
Like Fury, or Knight.
He knew what was what,
Could gallop and trot,
And toss off his Pot,
And swear at the Shot.
Yet with all he had got,
It was the hard lot
Of this boaster, God wot,
To be a damned sot.
With all these fine qualities, one of the loveliest Princesses in the world
was desperately in love with him. It Is true indeed, she was but seventeen years
old; but our Noble Prince of Salermo did not stand much upon that. There is no
doubt but the Princess Mathilda, being so rich and beautiful as she was, would
have had a hundred Gallants more, if it had not been universally believed in
Naples, that her Marriage with Prosper was as good as concluded in her Father's
time, or if that Prince's quality had not discouraged other pretenders, who
(tho they wanted his Title) were men of fortune and birth good enough to be his
Rivals. Thus the greatest part of these Lovers, either governed by a principle
of fear or discretion, were content to sigh for her in private, without daring
to speak. Hippolito was the only man that had the courage to own himself in
public the Rival of Prosper, and the respective Lover of Mathilda. He was
descended from one of the best Families in Spain, and came in a direct line
from the great Ruis Lopez^d^ Avalos, Constable of Castile, who was so
remarkable an instance of the inconstancy of fortune, since from the richest
and most powerful Grandee of his own Country, he was turned out of it poor and
miserable, forced to borrow money of his Friends, and fly to the King of
Arragon, who took him into his own protection, and gave him a fortune
sufficient at Naples to support him according to his quality. This Hippolito
was one of the most accomplished Cavaliers of his time: His valor had gained
him reputation in several parts of Europe, and all the world owned him to be a
man of the nicest honor. As I have already told you, he was an humble admirer
of Mathilda, and tho he could never hope to succeed, so long as she loved
Prosper, yet he resolved to love her on to the end of the Chapter. He was
liberal even to prodigality, whereas his Rival was thrifty even to avarice. He
omitted not the least opportunity to show his Magnificence to Mathilda, and
although he carried it as far as his Fortune would give him leave, yet she seldom
saw it, for her Tyrant Prosper hindered her from giving any countenance to these
gallantries of love, let them come from what quarter they would. Our obstinate
Lover frequently ran at the Ring before his Mistress's Window, often gave her
Serenades, and diverted her with Tilts and Tournaments. The cipher and colors
of Mathilda were to be seen in all his Liveries: the praises of Mathilda rung
through all Italy, in the verses he composed, and in the Airs and Songs he
caused to be made; but she was no more moved with all this, than if she had
known nothing of it. Nay, by the express order or the Prince of Salerno, she
must go out of Naples, whenever there was to be any Running at the Ring,
Dancing, or any Gallantries of the like nature, which the amorous Hippolito
provided for her. To make short, she affected to disoblige him upon all
occasions, with a cruelty that seemed to be a violence upon her Nature, and
made all the world exclaim against her. This did not in the least discourage
Hippolito, and the ill treatment of Mathilda increased his love instead of
lessening it. He did more than this: he showed that respect to Prosper, which
he did not owe him, and to please Mathilda, paid him the same deference, which
is usually shown to persons of superior quality, although there was no other
difference between the Prince of Salerno and him, than their Estate. In short,
he respected his Mistress in his Rival, and perhaps forbore to hate him,
because he was beloved by Mathilda. But Prosper was not so complaisant: he
hated Hippolito mortally, he made a hundred scurvy jests upon him, nay, would
never have scrupled to tell lies of him, if he thought any one would have
believed them. But Hippolito was the delight of Naples, and his reputation was
so well established there, that although he had actually deviated from his
Character, he could hardly have destroyed it. Thus Prosper was the happy man,
and stood possessed of Mathilda's affection, tho he did nothing to deserve it.
That beautiful Princess did not think she saw him often enough, tho she saw him
every day, when Fortune all on the sudden threw her from the height of
happiness, into the extremity of misery. She had a Cousin-german by her
Father's side, who might have passed for a man of merit, had he been a man of
less ambition and avarice; he had been bred up with the (...) was of the same
age, and had insinuated himself so (...) his good graces, that he was the sole
manager of all his pleasures and sports, and the dispenser of all his Favors.
This Roger de St Severin (for so he was called) was possessed with a fancy, that
the Principality of Tarento belonged to him, and that a Daughter could not
legally inherit it, to the prejudice of the Male line. He spoke to the King
about it, who encouraged him to claim his right, and promised to support him by
his Authority. The affair was kept secret; Roger made himself Master of
Tarento, and had placed a good Garrison there, before Mathilda had the least
mistrust of it. Our poor Princess, who had never been in any trouble before,
was as it were thunderstruck with this news. No one but Hippolito declared
himself in her favor, who scorned to truckle to the King's Favorite; and
Prosper, who was more obliged to her than any man living, did even less for her
than any man, whereas Hippolito not only discharged his duty, but was carried
by his zeal beyond it. He waited on her to offer her his service, but she durst
not accept of it, for fear of disobliging her Prince of Salerno, who since her
misfortune did not visit her so often as he used to do, when she was peaceable
Mistress of Tarento. In the mean time Hippolito talked boldly of the injustice
that was done her, and sent a challenge to Roger: for which he had Guards
placed about him, and was commanded to desist; but as he was generally beloved
by all people, he might have easily raised a party in Naples, strong enough to
have made the Favorite doubt the success of his ill designs. He made several
attempts upon Tarento, all which miscarried, by reason of the great care Roger
had taken to prevent all accidents of that nature. At last the breach between
the two pretenders growing wider every day, and most of the Italian Princes
interesting themselves one way or the other, the Pope employed his mediation to
procure a peace, made them lay down their arms, and prevailed with the King of
Naples to refer the decision of the dispute between his Favorite and Mathilda,
to Judges of known integrity. The Reader may easily guess what an extraordinary
expense Hippolito was at, being the head of a Party, and so liberal in his
temper; he may likewise easily imagine, that Mathilda, as much a Princess as
she was, was in a short time reduced to very pressing necessities. Roger had
possessed himself of her Lands. He had persuaded the King that she kept private
intelligence with his Enemies; her rents were no longer paid, and no one durst
lend money to the woman, whom the Favorite had a mind to ruin. Prosper
ab^ndon'd her at last, but she still loved him so violently, (...) she less
resented his ingratitude, than his forgetfulness. Hippolito would not offer her
money, because he knew she would refuse it, but went a more generous way to
work. He sent her some by one of his Friends, who took the honor of it upon
himself, and without telling her that it came from Hippolito, obliged that
Princess by oath never to talk of it, lest this kindness might draw upon him
the indignation of the Favorite. In the mean time the Process came on, and
sentence was given in favor of Mathilda. The King was displeased at it, Roger
was enraged, the Court was astonished, every one was vexed, or rejoiced
according to his own inclination or interest, but the generality of people
admired and praised the probity of the Judges. Mathilda, who to her glory had
obtained so important a Process, sent a Gentleman to Prosper, with a transport
that can hardly be imagined, to acquaint him with the happy success of her
affair. Prosper^ rejoiced exceedingly at the news, and to testify it to this
Gentleman, he hugged and embraced him at a strange rate, and promised to serve
him, whenever an opoportunity should present itself. Hippolito knew nothing of
it till after his Rival, yet he bestowed a Diamond Ring of great value upon the
man that brought him the news. He feasted all the Court, prepared Lists before
Mathilda's window, and for eight days together run at the Ring against all
people. Gallantries of this nature generally make a great noise. Several
Princes of Italy, and most of Mathilda's Relations and Friends were present at
it, and signalized themselves: nay, the King himself, who passionately admired
this sort of Exercise, was pleased to honor it with his Royal Presence. Roger
had interest enough with his Master to have hindered him, but by a cunning
fetch of his politics he had reconciled himself to Mathilda, and declared to
all the world, that unless he had really thought that Tarento belonged to him,
he would never have attempted to make himself Master of it. The King was
mightily pleased with him for so readily submitting to the sentence of the
Judges, and that he might recompense him for the loss of his trial, and his
pretensions upon Tarento, gave him one of the most important Governments of the
Kingdom, besides the places he had before. Hippolito performed wonders at
running at the Ring, and carried away the honor of it. Prosper had a mind to
dispute it with him, so all be-plumb'd and be-feather'd, that any one would
have taken him for an American Prince. But he was thrown the very first course,
either through his own fault or that of his Horse's, and was sufficiently
bruised, or at least pretended so to be. He was carried to Mathilda's house,
who for vexation quitted her Balcony, and cursed the amorous Hippolito a
hundred times for his pains. He came to hear of it, and was so concerned that
he broke up the Assembly, and retired in the greatest despair, to a fine house
he had within a league of Naples. In the mean time Prosper was so enraged at
his fall, that he treated Mathilda after a most terrible manner, telling her
that she was the cause of his disgrace, and reproached her with being in love
with Hippolito. Mathilda, always gentle, always humble, and always blindly fond
of her haughty Tyrant, begged his pardon, and in short, was as chicken-hearted,
as he was brutal. Hippolito had a Sister that was bred up with the Queen of
Spain, and was lately returned to Naples, for reasons that I don't know, and
signify nothing to our history. Besides that she was beautiful to a miracle,
she was a Lady of extraordinary merit, that rendered her deserving of the vows
of the best men in the Kingdom. At her return from Spain, she found her
Brothers Affairs in so low a condition, that when he set up the running at the
Ring, she would not appear at Court, because she wanted an Equipage suitable
for a person of her quality, but always kept at her Brother's house, which was
all that was left him of his Estate, for he had parted with his Lands. She came
Incognito to see the running at the Ring, and observing her Brother break up
the Company, and leave Naples so abruptly, followed him home, and found him in
the most lamentable condition that could be. He had broke his Lances, tore his
Feathers and his Hair, mangled his Clothes and his Face; in short, he was in
such a distraction, that she would have despaired of ever seeing him come to
his Senses again, had she not known very well, that a smile, nay an indifferent
look from Mathilda, would have made him forget a thousand ill treatments. She
did all that lay in her power to bring him to a good humor, gave way to his
passion instead of combating it, railed at Mathilda, when he stormed against
her; and said all the good things she could think of her, when after all his
Transports the Scene changed, and she found him the most amorous Lover that
ever was. But the surly Prosper had not the same complaisance for Mathilda; his
fall still broiled in his Stomach, and he daily laid it to her charge, though she
was by no means accessory to it. One day, when after having thanked her Judges,
she went to wait upon the King to thank him likewise, although he had been against
her; but a Court it is a point of indiscretion to speak one's real thoughts, or
receive a denial otherwise than with fawning and cringing: One day therefore
when she was in the King's Antichamber, she saw the obsequious Prosper come
in. Ever since his fall he had never made her a visit but to scold and quarrel
with her for suffering Hippolito to run at the Ring under her window. Nothing
could be more unjust than Prosper's complaints. It was not in Mathilda's power
to hinder a public diversion, even tho it had not been designed for her sake,
since her Palace took up one side of the great square: and although it had been in
her power, yet she ought not to have done it, unless she resolved to be thought
a woman of no manners nor gratitude. Prosper was the only man, who by his false
way of his reasoning fancied that she had done him an irreparable injury, and
his anger sowr'd him to that degree that he went no more to visit her, as if he
had broke off with her for good and all. The poor Princess was ready to run
distracted about it, and no sooner saw this Tyrant of hearts, who was just
going into the King's chamber, but she threw herself in his way and stopped him.
He endeavored to avoid her, and pressed forward: she caught hold of him by the
arm, and casting a look at him that was enough to charm any one but this
haughty Brute, she asked him, what she had done to him that he should shun her
thus. What have you not done, replied this Prince arrogantly, and how can you
ever retrieve the reputation you have lost by suffering the Gallantries of
Hippolito. I cannot hinder them, nor hinder him from loving me, answers
Mathilda, but it is in my power not to approve either his Love, or his
Gallantry; and I think, continues she, that I have sufficiently testified my
dislike of them, when I went from my Balcony, before the show was over. You
should not have appeared there at all, replies Prosper, and the reason why you
went a way at last was only because you saw all the company pointed at you for
being there. But your love for Hippolito has made you lose all your reason, and
his Gallantries have quite effaced all the services I am capable of doing you.
Mathilda was vexed to the heart to hear this, and was going to answer him, but
he would not give her time: besides the anger, that appeared in his
countenance, made the Princess so afraid of him that she was perfectly
speechless. When you were no more Mistress of Tarento, said he to her, and the
King ordered you to be apprehended, I had a mind to see how far your
indiscretion and mean spirit would carry you, and whether Adversity could cure
your faults. For this reason I made no Feasts like your Gallant, nay I
pretended to be no longer in your Interesta. In the mean time Hippolito made a
mighty bustle, and did you little service, and your affairs for a long time
seemed to be in a desperate condition. Then you could condescend to make some
advances toward me, in order to bring me back to you again, but this was only
a copy of your countenance, since you still preserved your Hippolito. Your
Politics I confess were not amiss: You drained this poor despicable Gallant
while he had a drop to part with, flattering your self, that after you had
exhausted him to all intents and purposes, you should do me an extraordinary
favor to take me in his room; and you made account, that although you should
lose Tarento at your Trial, yet your Beauty would make you Princess of Salerno,
when ever you pleased. But no sooner did a favorable Decree revive your hopes,
but you changed your Maxim of State with your Maxim of Love. You thought that a
young ruined Prodigal would better fit your turn than me, and considered, that
if you married the Prince of Salerno, you must expect to live with a Master,
authorized by Custom and the Laws, whereas you would find in Hippolito a supple
Slave, that would make it all his business to please you. Imprudent Princess!
continued he, durst such a poor needy wretch as Hippolito pretend to make love
to a Woman of your Quality, unless she gave him encouragement; and can any one
believe, that for bare hopes only, he would have put himself to such an
expense, that he is utterly beggared; and so foolishly too, that he enriched,
with one single Present, the Man that came from you, to bring him the news that
you had gained your cause? Yet after all these Testimonies I have of your
indiscretion and infidelity, you are vain enough to believe that I love you
never the worse for them. Be happy if you can with your Hippolito, but delude
your self no longer that I will be unhappy with Mathilda. He would have left
her after he had spoke these words, but the Princess still kept her hold, and
once in her life had the courage to contradict him. Ungrateful Prince! said she
to him, one of the greatest proofs I can give thee that I yet love thee, is not
to hate thee, after thou have said so many disobliging things to me. They
rather make against thee than me, and I cannot employ them better to thy
confusion and my own advantage, than by confessing that they are true. Yes,
continued she, Hippolito has loved me; Hippolito to serve me, neither feared
the hatred of a Favorite, nor the indignation of a King; he respects me, he
does every thing to please me. He would have protected me when I was abandoned
by all the world, nay, he has done more, for he has ruined himself for my sake.
What did thou ever do like this? Thou will tell me that thou love me; how!
love me, and not show common civility to me; thou who ought to have shown it
to my Sex, although it was not due to my Quality. And yet what ill-condition'd
Master ever treated a Slave more unworthily than thou have treated me, and who
would have thus trampled on a person who loves thee so well as I do? No, no,
Prince, thou have no reason to complain, and thou art obliged to me that I
don't. But I will go farther than this: I will own, if thou will have me,
Crimes that I never committed. I will never see Hippolito more, nay I will be
ungrateful to him, that thou may not be so to me. In fine, to regain thy
Heart, there is nothing so difficult but I will put it in execution. And there
is nothing impossible to those bright eyes, says the Prince to her, adjusting
his Perriwig. They have disarmed me of all my anger, and provided they always
keep their favorable glances for me, the too happy Prosper will never adore
any one but the beautiful Mathilda. The amorous Princess thought herself more
than paid with these few Compliments of her old Gallant. In a less public
place perhaps she would have thrown herself at his Feet, to thank him for this
mighty condescension, but neither time nor place would give her leave to answer
him. The King came out of his Chamber: She begged of Prosper to stand by her
when she spoke to him, but he shrinking away from her, told her, that it was
not convenient for them to be seen together, for some reasons that he could
tell her. She perceived well enough, that he was afraid of making his Court
ill, but she was so near the King, that she had not time to reproach Prosper,
with being a better Courtier than a Lover. She presented herself to the King,
paid her respects to him, and made her compliment of thanks. The King received
her very coldly, and his answer was so ambiguous, that it might be interpreted
as well to her disadvantage as otherwise But the sweet things that Prosper had
said to her, gave her such satisfaction, that his last ingratitude, in refusing
to introduce her to the King, made no impression upon her mind, no more than
the ill reception his Majesty gave her, so much transported she was to be
reconciled to her imperious Lover. That day she was visited by all the Ladies
of Quality in Naples, who agreed to go a hunting the next morning a Horseback,
in a Campaign dress, and Caps set off with Feathers. The greatest Gallants at
Court were there, so we may easily imagine, that the Prince of Salerno, who was
Gallantry it self, made one of the Company. This was not all; he resolved to
make the Princess a Present, which he had never done before. He sent her a most
passionate Letter, attended with a fine Cap; but to tell the truth, he himself
sorted and ordered the Feathers, by the same token that there was not one new
Feather amongst them. As I take it, I have already observed, that he had an
admirable fancy at Feathers. This was the only Vanity on which he would lay out
any Money, though to do him justice, he husbanded his Plumes to a miracle, for he
would often diversify them, transplanting them from one Cap to another, and as
old as they were, knew how to make them appear fresh and new upon occasion, as
well as if he had served seven Years Apprenticeship to the Trade. I am willing
to believe that he sat up the best part of the night to put it in order, that
nothing might be wanting to so magnificent a Present. The Princess received it
as if it had been sent her from Heaven, gave him a hundred more thanks than it
deserved, and promised him in a Letter she sent in answer to his, that she
would honor herself with this miraculous Cap as long as she lived. I will not
tell you what sport they had in the Chase, because the particulars never
arrived to my knowledge. But we may reasonably suppose, that some of their
Horses foundered, that the Cavaliers were so well-bred as to wait upon the
Ladies, that Prosper displayed all his Gallantry, and that he engrossed the
whole talk to himself, being the greatest Talker of his age. Our Ladies were so
well pleased with the Chase, that they resolved to take their pleasure the next
day; and in order to change their Diversion, they designed to go by Sea to
Puzzolo, where the Princess Mathilda promised to give them a Collation and
Music. They no less spruc'd themselves up for their Voyage by Water, than they
had done the day before for hunting. The Boats that carried them were finely
adorned, covered with rich Tapestry, whether of Turkey or China, I will not be
positive, and the meanest Cushions were of Silk or Velvet. Prosper would needs
go thither by land, and had none but his dear self to accompany him, either to
save Money, or because he was melancholy, for some folks are so out of pride.
He was mounted upon his finest Horse, had dressed himself in his richest
Campaign Suit, and loaded his head with the spoils of many an Ostridge.
Hippolito's House lay in the road to Puzzolo, near the Sea, and the Prince of
Salerno must of necessity ride just by it. He no sooner saw it, but a noble
thought came into his head. He knew that Hippolito was at home, and alighted
from his Horse to have a little Conversation with him. Hippolito received him
with all the respect and civility that was due to his Quality, although the other
had not the manners to return it. Prosper made him a very rude Compliment upon
his presuming to be in love with a Princess, who was to be his Wife. Hippolito
bore all his impertinence for a long while, and answer^d him with all the
sweetness imaginable, that he ought not to be offended at his Gallantry, which
a Love without hopes put him upon. But at last Prosper's Insolence forced him
to change his Language, and he had already called for his Horse to go out and
fight him, when word was brought him that the Sea was very tempestuous, and
that the Boats wherein the Ladies were, which they could behold from the shore,
were in danger of being dashed against the Rocks. Hippolito did not doubt but
that these Ladies were Mathilda and her Company, he persuaded Prosper to run to
the relief of their common Mistress, who excused himself upon his not being
able to swim, and that he was not yet recovered of the bruise he received when
he run at the Ring. The generous Hippolito, detesting in his Soul the
ingratitude of his Rival, ran or rather flew to the Seashore. His Servants
followed him, threw themselves into the Sea after his example, and by the
assistance of some Fishermen, who happened by good luck to be upon the Coast,
they made a shift to save Mathilda's Life, and the Ladies in her company. Their
Boats were overturned within a hundred Yards of the shore; and Naples had
bewailed the loss of all its Beauties at once, if it had not been for this
seasonable relief. Hippolito was so happy, that Mathilda owed her life to him.
His love made him soon distinguish her from the other Ladies, whom the waves
were going to dash against the rocks that bound the shore. While the Fishermen
and his Servant helped the first persons they found, he caught hold of the
Princess just as she rose above water, and holding her with one hand, while he
swum with the other toward the shore, he happily gained it without any one to
help him. Mathilda found herself much more ill after her Shipwreck, than the
rest of the Ladies that were saved with her. After they had vomited their
salt water, changed their Clothes and recovered their fright, they were able
that very day to take Coach for Naples. As for the Princess of Tarento, it was
a long time before they brought her to herself. Even then they much doubted her
Life, and Hippolito and his Sister Ir^ne took all the care of her that was
possible. He sent to Naples for the ablest Physicians, besides him belonging to
the Princess, and quitted his House entirely to Mathilda, and to some of her
Domestics that came to wait on her. He and his Servants made a shift to lodge
at a little Farm not far from his own House, and sent every other moment to
enquire how the Princess did, when he could not go thither himself. As for
Prosper, very well pleas^d with the rough Compliment he had passed upon
Hippolito, he left Mathilda and the rest of the Ladies to swim for themselves
as well as they could, without troubling his head what became of them; thinking
perhaps, that since he was none of the fittest man to help them, he ought not
to pollute his eyes with so (...) a spectacle, and so jogged on gently to
Naples, expecting the doubtful event of the Shipwreck, to rejoice at it or
otherwise, according as it would have made him happy or unhappy. In the mean
time Mathilda, assisted by her youth, and the remedies that were given her,
recovered her Health and Beauty all at once, and was extremely satisfied with
the great care of Hippolito and his Sister, who dexterously insinuated to her,
with what indifference Prosper had beheld the peril she was in. Mathilda did
not discover the least mark of resentment in her face or discourse; whether it
were because her love mastered it, or because she dissembled her ill usage. The
Night before she designed to leave Hippolito's House and return to Naples, she
could not sleep, and called for a Book and a Candle. Her Women were gone out of
her Chamber to sleep or do something, else, when she saw Prosper come into the
Room. We may readily guess what a surprise she was in, to see him at so
unseasonable an hour, and how much she looked upon herself affronted by so
disrespectful a visit: She spoke to him of it with some warmth. Prosper was
warmer than she, and as if this Princess had thrown herself into this danger of
losing her life, on purpose to give Hippolito the glory of saving it, he
reproached her with her Shipwreck, as a blemish to her honor, and taxed her
with infidelity, because she was in the House of one that was in love with her,
lodg^d in his Chamber, and lay in his Bed. Mathilda would not condescend to
show him how unjust his reproaches were, but retorted upon him for not having
endeavored to save her, and in a cutting way of raillery, complained of him
for not being able to swim, as also for not being fully recovered of his late
dangerous fall. Prosper redden'd with anger and confusion, treated her with
opprobrious language, and told her he would never see her any more, since Roger
the King's Favorite offered him his Sister, and with her all the advantages he
might expect from the alliance of a Man in his Post. Mathilda could not hold
out against so terrible a menace; her Blood curdl'd within her, and her Love
soon conquered her Indignation. She had began to exert herself a little, but
all on the sudden became a suppliant. He relented too on his side when he saw
her humbl'd as much as he thought convenient, and according to his custom
cajoled her, and said the same soft things to her as he ought to have done, if
in all the love qurrrels he had had with her, he had never trespassed against
the respect and tenderness he owed her. He made new protestations of Love to
her, and straining hard to surprise her by some topping Compliments, he made
very impertinent ones, for he wished her all sorts of Adversities, that he
might have an opportunity forsooth of convincing her, how much he was her
humble Servant For God's sake Madam, said he to her, in a passionate tone, why
are you not out of favor at Court? Oh that you were still persecuted by Roger!
Oh that you were yet out of your Principality of Tarento! that you might see
with what zeal and ardour I would solicit the King for you! with what vigor
I would espouse your cause against your Enemies, and whether I should be afraid
to venture my Person, and all that I am worth in the world, to re-instate you
in what was usurped from you. Come, come, says the Princess, there is no
necessity that I should be more unfortunate than I am, to give you the
opportunity of showing your generosity; and I would not willingly put your Love
to so dangerous a proof. They were engaged in this discourse, when a noise of
confused and dreadful voices, that cried out fire, made them run to the
windows, where they saw all the lower part of the House under them, vomiting
fire and smoke, and at the same time the flames began to enter the Chamber by
the Staircase, and took from them all hopes of saving themselves that way, as
Prosper was preparing to do. The Princess all in a fright, conjured him not to
abandon her in so great a danger, and proposed to him to make use of the Sheets
and Hangings to get out of the window. The Prince, as much affrighted as she,
told her, that they would not have time to do it; and measuring with his eyes
the height of the windows, and considering which would be the best way to leap
into the Court, he told Mathilda very plainly, that upon these occasions every
one ought to shift for himself. But thou shall not go without me, said she to
him very resolutely, and I will run no danger here, which the most ungrateful
and ungenerous Man alive shall not partake with me. She had no sooner said
these words, but she caught hold of Prosper, and her indignation at his
baseness gave her so much strength, that in spite of all his striving and
struggling, he could not disengage himself from her. He swore, he called her
names, he was Brute enough to threaten to drub or kill her, (I don't know which
of the two it was) and had certainly been as good as his word, if at the time
as he was tugging with her, as rudely and fiercely as if he had been to deal
with an Enemy, the generous Hippolito had not come into the Room. The Princess
seeing him, left Prosper at liberty, and came up to Hippolito, who without
giving her time to speak to him, covered her with a wet Sheet, which he had
brought on purpose, and taking her in his Arms, he threw himself like a Lion
with his prey through the flames, which now filled all the Staircase. He had
no sooner set her down in a place of safety, but was so generous to do the same
service for his Rival. It Is true, he burnt his Clothes, singed his Hair and his
Eyebrows; but I would fain know what signifies the burning of ones Clothes or
the singing of ones Hair, to a Man whose Heart was burnt to a coal by Love?
While Mathilda recovered her Spirits, and Prosper got back to Naples, without
so much as thanking his Deliverer, the other beheld his House burnt down to the
ground, and with that his Furniture and Horses, in short, all that his former
profuseness had left him: Mathilda was afflicted at it, I will not say more
than he was, for alas he scarce thought at all of it, but as much as if she had
seen all that she had dear in the world destroyed. She looked upon herself to
be the occasion of this misfortune to him, and indeed she was not mistaken. Her
Cousin Roger, who had reconciled himself to her with no other intention, but to
accomplish her ruin more easy, had bribed some of Hippolito's Servants, that
were Villains enough to take his Money, to lay a great deal of combustible
stuff in the Vaults and Cellars of his House, and set it on fire in the dead of
the night, when all the Family was asleep. This unjust Favorite made no
conscience to ruin a poor Gentleman, nay, procure his death too, provided he
could do the same to a Relation, whose Estate he hoped by this means to
inherit; and as if her death would not satisfy him, which had most infallibly
happened, in case his design had succeeded, he likewise endeavored to make her
Memory odious. At the time when Hippolito's House was on fire, Roger had
managed his Cards so dexterously, that Messengers were ordered to search
Mathilda's Palace, and opening her Closet found some forged Letters there,
which seemed to be written to the Duke of Anjou, and plainly convinced her of
keeping a private intelligence with that dangerous Enemy of the Government. Our
unfortunate Princess received this unlucky News, just as she was going to send
to Naples for her Coaches to bring her home. She was extremely troubled at it,
and without staying a moment longer, ran to Naples with all her Servants a foot
in the most lamentable condition that can be imagined. Hippolito offered to
accompany her, but she positively forbid him, fearing I suppose to disoblige
her musty Spark Prosper; and thus our unhappy Lover saw her depart, and was
infinitely more concerned at this last Misfortune which had befal'n the
Princess, and at her commanding him to leave her, than at the burning of his
House. Mathilda no sooner came to Naples, but she was taken into custody. She
demanded to speak with the King, but it was refused her. She sent to speak with
Prosper, but the old Gentleman pretended to be wondrous sick, and thus Mathilda
beheld herself all at once abandoned by all her Friends, as if she had been
infected with the Plague. The very same day she received an Order from the King
to leave Naples. Her own Domestics basely and scandalously deserted her; her
Creditors, without any respect to her Quality, persecuted her most
unmercifully: In short, she was reduced to so wretched a condition, that she
could not procure Coach nor Horse, to carry her to a certain Prince of Italy,
who was the nearest Relation she had in the world next to Roger, and who had
always espoused her quarrel against that haughty Favorite. Being thus forsaken
by all her Friends, destitute even of the necessaries of Life, and incapable of
obeying so rigorous an Order, she took sanctuary in a Convent, where they would
not receive her without his Majesty^s permission for so doing, who granted it,
upon condition that she should leave it that very night. She went out of it in
disguise^ and so secretly, that with all the search and enquiry Hippolito could
make, he could not meet the least information which way she was gone. However,
he resolved to follow her just as chance directed him, rather than sit still at
home, and make no enquiry after her. While he was in quest of her, or at least
fancied he was, she thought no more of him, and Prosper thought no more of her.
He represented her as a Criminal of State, made his Court very regularly to the
King and his Favorite: and as the generality of Mankind use to alter their
Measures with the time, he made love to Camilla, Roger's Sister, and begged of
the King to help on the Marriage. The King, who looked upon it as an
advantageous Match for the Sister of his Confident, whom he loved the best of
any Subject in his Dominions, spoke about it to his Favorite, who always likes
that which his Master likes. This Sister of Roger was one of the most beautiful
Ladies of Naples, and though she shared in her Brother's good Fortune, yet she
had no hand in his wicked designs. As she was looked upon at Court to be the
best Match in the Kingdom, she looked upon Hippolito to be the compleatest
Gentleman of his time, and perhaps loved him, or at least would have loved him,
if she had not beheld him so passionately in love with another. She took
Mathilda's misfortune so to heart, and was so generous in her temper, that if
she had in the least suspected that it was all owing to her Brother, she would
most undoubtedly have reproached him with so black an action, and been one of
the first to exclaim against it. She was so afflicted at Hippolito's late loss,
that not valuing what the World would say of her, she went to find him at his
Habitation that was burnt down to the ground, to offer him Money, or whatever
he wanted that lay in her power. She met with his Sister there, who little
expected such a visit, much less to be invited to take up her Quarters at
Camilla's House. This beautiful Lady could not refuse so obliging an offer, and
went with her to Naples. What better course could a young person of her Sex and
condition take, who found herself without a Farthing to relieve her, without a
House to cover her, without hopes of mending her Fortune, in a Country too,
where she scarce knew any one but her Brother, who was as good as lost to her,
since as soon as he was informed that Mathilda had left Naples, he ran in quest
of her like a Madman, without knowing whether she was gone. That day on which
Camilla went to find Irene at her Brother^s House, with a design to carry her
home with her, the King was pleased to honor her with a visit, and presented
to her our gallant Prince of Salerno and all his Gallantry. Camilla, who had
Hippolito always in her thoughts, received Prosper's Compliments with as much
indifference, as she expressed thankfulness to the King for condescending to
see her. The sorrowful Irene bore her company, and under all her affliction
appeared so charming to the eyes of the young King, that he fell in love with
her. His Love was violent in its very infancy. He approached her with as much
respect and awe, as if she had been in his condition, and he in hers. He said a
thousand fine things to her upon her beauty, and this lovely young Lady, who
demeaned herself neither with too much haugh^ness nor submission, discovered at
once so much wit, prudence and modesty, that he considered her from that very
moment as the only happiness that was wanting to his fortune. He stayed at
Camilla's house as long as possible he could, and the pleasure he took in
conversing with Irene, was so much the more taken notice of, as the young King
had alw^ys seemed insensible to love, and behaved himself with great coldness
toward all the most celebrated beauties of Naples. Irene was so charming that
it was impossible for a man, tho never so little inclined to Love, and never so
incapable to judge of her merit, to avoid falling in love with her. Camilla
before she knew her, intended to serve her for her Brothers sake, but no sooner
came she acquainted with her, but she loved her for her own. She easily
believed that the King was in love with her, because she desired it, and far
from envying her good fortune, as any other handsome Lady but herself would have
done, she rejoiced at it exceedingly. She congratulated Irene upon so important
a Conquest, and had without question flattered the vanity and hopes of any Lady
less presuming than her. But this modest Damsel could not be persuaded, but
that the King was more a Gallant than a Lover, that he had no other design but
only to divert himself, and that he would think no more of her, when he was out
of her sight. But she was mistaken: it was not long before the King came again
to her to acquaint her with his passion, which was so impetuous that it would
not suffer him to be longer without seeing her than that very evening after he
fell in love with her. He told the Prince of Salerno that he was resolved to go
incognito after the Spanish mode to make love to Irene under Camilla's Balcony.
Prosper was mightily pleased to be made the confident of his Master's
Pleasures, and accompany him in an amorous Adventure. In all probability Roger
had been chosen for this affair, or at least had bore his share in it, but that
very day he had taken his leave of the King to go to Tarento, whither some
important business called him. The Night came, and the King accompanied by
Prosper, who was armed like himself after the Italian manner, that is to say,
with more offensive Arms than a single man can be suppos^d to want, came under
Camilla's Balcony, who had been before hand acquainted with his coming by
Prosper. She knew the method and good breeding of the Court too well, not to
leave the King at liberty to entertain himself with his Mistress in private.
For this reason she retired to another Balcony, notwithstanding all the
entreaties of Irene to stay with her. The King reproached this young Lady for
her uneasiness to be alone with him, and told her, that she ^ow'd at least some
complaisance to a King, who had for her something above it. I should owe all to
your Majesty, replied Irene, if I did not likewise owe something to my self,
which I cannot owe to any one else. And what do you owe to your self, says the
King, which you do not owe to my Love? Why not to believe that you have any for
me, answers Irene. Alas! cries the King sighing, there is nothing so sure, and
there is nothing I would not willingly do to hinder you from doubting it. If I
could believe what you tell me, says she, I should have more reason to complain
of your Majesty, than thank you for it. How cruel Damosel, answered the King,
and can a passion so sincere as mine offend you. It would be a honor to some
great Queen, replies Irene, but it would very much call in question the
Judgment of any one else. It Is true indeed, says the King, that you are no
Queen, but she that deserves to be one, is in a possibility of making one. I am
not so vain of my own merit, answers Irene, as to expect any such alteration in
my fortune, and your Majesty has more goodness, than to divert yourself longer
at the expense of an unhappy Creature. Beautiful Irene, says our amorous
Prince, I love you as much as it is possible for the most passionate and
faithful Lover in the Universe to love you, and if my Tongue has informed you
of what my looks and sighs could not have acquainted you with in so short a
time, don't think that I have any design to dispense by my quality any of the
pains of a long servitude, or any of the services and cares which the most
charming woman upon earth may expect from the most respectful Lover. But so
violent a pain as mine wants a speedy remedy, and you ought to be satisfied in
my opinion, however scrupulous and rigid you may be toward a King, who is
afraid to displease you, with this declaration of my Love. He said to her
abundance of things more passionate than this, which the person who overheard
them unluckily forgot, as I can assure you he did. So I leave the discreet
Reader to imagine them within himself; for to make a King of Naples express
himself so tenderly as ours did, and at the same time not to maim his thoughts,
a man must be as much in love as he was, which I humbly presume is none of my
business at present. Irene always answered him with her usual modesty, and
without showing herself too hard, or too easy to be persuaded, she disengaged
herself so handsomely from so nice a Conversation, that it increased the King's
esteem for her, who parted from her infinitely more in love than he had been
before. From that time there passed not a day over his head, in which he did
not visit Camilla and Irene, nor a night but he came to that Lady's Balcony,
where he employed all his amorous eloquence, to persuade her of the sincerity
of his Passion. One night that he had given orders to his Guards not to attend
him, he walked in a disguise through the Streets of Naples, accompanied only by
the Prince of Salerno, and found so much diversion in this Ramble, that the
greatest part of the night was spent when he came to Camilla's Balcony. He
found this Post already taken up by two Men, or at least they stood so near it,
that they must needs have overheard every word of the Conversation he hoped to
have with Irene. One of these Men parted from the other and went into Camilla's
House, and his Companion tarried in the Street. The King stayed a while to see
whether he would not go away of himself, and leave him the Street free; but
finding that he stirred no more from the place than a Statue, he grew
impatient, and commanded Prosper to go and see what the fellow meant by staying
there, and oblige him to retire. The Prince of Salerno walked toward him, with
as much difficulty as if he had been sent upon some dangerous exploit, and the
other seeing him come up retired from him. Prosper was resolved to see who he
was, the other mended his pace, and seeing that Prosper did the same, he very
fairly betook himself to his Heels, and the Prince of Salerno ran after him,
and cours'd him into another Street. In the mean time the King did not stir
from his place, expecting every moment when Prosper would come back, that he
might send him to Camilla and Irene, to let them know that he expected them
under her Balcony, and in all probability he was wholly taken up with his
Amor, for a Lover does nothing else when he is alone, when the Man who had
parted from him whom Prosper pursued came out of Camilla's House, and mistaking
the King for his Comrade: Look Calixtus, said he to him, here is your dispatch.
The Governor of Cajetta will order you a Vessel to carry you to Marseilles.
The King without returning any answer, received the Packet of Letters which ^e
presented to him. Calixtus, adds this unknown Person, ^he rest depends upon thy
diligence: And thou have in thy ^^ands the fortune of the Duke of Anjou, thy
Master and ^nine. Ha! ungrateful Villain and Traitor! What wicked ^esigns art
thou carrying on against me, cries the King, lay^ng his hand upon his Sword.
Roger, for it proved to be ^im, distracted at his making so fatal a mistake,
and hurried ^n by his despair to be more wicked than he was, thought of nothing
but losing his life, and taking away that of the King, who had loved him so
tenderly. The reproaches which he so unjustly expected for his unparalleled
ingrati^ude and villainy, affrighted him as much as the severest tor^^ents that
could be inflicted on him. He put his hand to ^is Sword almost at the same time
as the King did, who ^arg'd him with so much vigor and fury, that Roger,
trou^ed with a remorse for his crime, was for a long time forced to defend
himself. At last, his rage filling him with new strength and courage, he pushed
furiously at the King, whom he looked upon now to be no otherwise than his
enemy; and by the desperate thrusts he made at his sacred person, obliged him
likewise to defend himself. But Kings, who may be valiant as well as other men,
are usually assisted by a more powerful genius than that of ordinary mortals.
Roger, as brave and furious and desperate as he was, could not have maintained
his ground long against his incensed Prince, although the clashing of Swords had
not brought several persons upon the spot, who could hardly be kept from
hacking to pieces an execrable Villain, who durst attack the Life of his
Sovereign. His own Domestics, and those of Camilla were the first that came
with lights into the Street, and were strangely surprised to see their Master
engaged with the King. The unfortunate Roger no sooner saw the light which
exposed him to the terrible looks of his Prince, but he was utterly confounded.
His rage and his valor abandoned him both at once, and his Sword dropped out of
his hand. The King, who had the pleasure to see him wounded, after he had had
occasion for all his valor to hinder himself from being wounded by him, seized
him with his own hands, and gave him to the Captain of his Guards, who came
luckily by with a party of Soldiers, and had received orders to watch all night
long the avenues leading to Camilla's House. In the mean time Prosper ran after
his men, who, flying from him as fast as his legs would carry him, unluckily
fell into the hands of the Watch, who were walking their rounds that night, as
their custom was to prevent all disorders in the streets. He seemed so
astonished, and falter'd so strangely in his answers, that they had certainly
stopped him, although Prosper, who pursued with Sword in hand, and had made himself
known unto them had not commanded them in the Kings name to secure him and to
be answerable for his forth coming. He immediately sent back to acquaint the
King with what he had done and if he was surpised to see such a number of
Flambeaux i^ the street, and the King surrounded by such crowds of people, he
was much more so to find what had past between the King and Roger; and to see
that Favorite, who^ all the Court so lately adored, cursed by all the company
and in the hands of the Guards, who were carrying him to prison. That night the
King did not see Irene, because (...) would avoid the sight of Camilla, whom he
ordered Prosp^^ to wait upon, and to assure her from his mouth, that (...)
distinguished her from her Brother, whose crime should not in the least lessen
his esteem for her. Irene writ to him in favor of Roger; and to oblige
Camilla, did that which the repeated instances of an amorous Prince could not
obtain from her. The next day Roger was examined, and found guilty of High
Treason, for maintaining a private correspondence with the Duke of Anjou, who
had a great party still in the Kingdom of Naples. He had been informed by some
of them of the insatiable ambition of Roger, and having offered to him in
Marriage a Princess of his own blood, with certain advantages, which he could
not hope from his present Master, this ungrateful Favorite, violating his
Faith and Honor, had engaged to receive the French in Cajetta and
Castellamara, whereof he was Governor. The same Judges who convicted him of
Treason against his Prince, discovered his villainous Plot against the Princess
of Tarento; and now that mirror of Constancy the Prince of Salerno, who had
abandoned her when he saw her in disgrace, to offer his services to Camilla,
whom he saw in favor, no sooner did he find the King repent of the ill
treatment he had given her, and resolved to re-instate her in her former honor
and fortune, which had been unjustly taken away from her, but likewise to
confer new ones upon her, but this generous Lord, who had so lately importuned
the King to marry him to Camilla, now humbly entreated him to dispense with his
promise, and give him leave to carry on his pretensions to Mathilda, and
desired his Majesty, who designed to make enquiry after her, to leave the care
of that to him, and give him a Commission to go and find her wherever he
could hear any news of her, in order to bring her again to Court. The Kings
affection was too deeply settled upon the beautiful Irene, not to think of her
Brother Hippolito, and be concerned that no body could tell where he was. He
dispatche Courriers into all parts of Italy, who had orders to enquire after
him as they searched for Mathilda, and in case they found him, to bring him to
Naples. He hoped by this means to convince Irene, how cordially he espoused the
interests of her family, and how much it afficted him, that she knew not what
was become of her Brother, whom she loved so dearly. This amorous Cavalier,
after he had searched a long time for his Princess with the utmost care and
diligence, without being able to find her, resigned himself to that blind guide
chance, and ^ambl'd wherever his Horse carried him, making no longer a stay in
any place than his Horse and that of his Servants, who we may suppose were not
so sollicitous in the search of Mathilda, had time to rest themselves. As for
him, he enjoyed no more repose than a condemned Criminal, and after he had
passed whole days in sighing on Horseback, he spent whole nights in complaining
to the Trees and Rocks of the cruelty and absence of Mathilda, and quarrelling
with the innocent Stars, that generally lighted him to Bed, because he lay in
the open Fields, and under the Canopy of Heaven. One day, when he was so taken
up with his melancholy thoughts, that he did not consider that his Servant and
his Horses could not like himself, feed upon so slender a Diet as Love, he
found himself toward Sunsetting near a solitary Inn, which rather looked like
a retreat for Cutthroats and Banditti, than a place to lodge Travelers.
Hippolito rode beyond it, for your true Lover is an indefatigable Animal, when
his Valet informed him, that his Horses were not able to jog on a step further,
for mere lassitude and hunger, not to talk of himself, who wanted to eat and
repose himself as well as they; upon this our despairing Lover condescended to
alight, but the Innkeeper, who stood before his Gate, with his Wife and an
ill-look'd fellow, who seemed to be a Soldier, told him rudely, that he had no
place to entertain him in, and that his Rooms as well as his Stables were all
taken up. Hippolito was not much concerned that he could not get a lodging
here, and his Servant despaired of getting one, when the Soldier that stood by
the Innkeeper, after he had whispered a few words in his ear, told Hippolito
in Calabrian, that if he pleased he might come in, and that he should be very
proud to lend his room to so fine a Gentleman, and while Hippolito made a
scruple to accept so courteous an offer, the Man of the House, that spoke so
rudely to him a little before, came and held his Stirrup, while he alighted,
with a smiling cutthroat look, which showed he designed to make a penny of
him. Thus Hippolito was persuaded to come into the Inn. He would not eat a bit,
and having only drank a Glass of Water, (for Philosophers have observed that
Love and Sorrow are very dry) he walked out to take a turn or two, in a place
very proper to entertain his melancholy Contemplations, which he had observed,
not far from the Inn. In the mean time his Valet sat down to supper with the
Landlord and his Wife, and the civil Calabrian, who had so obligingly parted
with his Chamber to Hippolito. He fell on like a man that was half starved, and
did not guzzle down so much Wine as he could have done, because he was forced
to call upon his Master to put him in mind of going to bed, which was a thing
he frequently forgot. He went to find him among the Rocks, where he found him
feeding his Melancholy, by reflecting upon the ill condition of his affairs and
his Love, and brought him back to the Inn, where they showed a vile Room, with
a Bed more vile than that, and which having no Curtains, lay exposed to the Sun
and Wind on all sides. Hippolito would not undress, but threw himself with his
Clothes upon the Bed, and his Man upon another, where he slept so heartily,
that it would have made any man but his Master envy him, who for his part could
not sleep a wink; but a true Lover would think he had committed an unpardonable
sin, should he sleep like other Mortals. In a short time all the people in the
Inn were got to bed, and every thing was hushed, when some persons on Horseback
disturbed their repose, and thundered at the Gate, like Men that were impatient
to be let in. The Man of the House, that got up to see what the matter was,
knew them, and opened the Gate to them. Soon after Hippolito heard the next
Chamber to his open; several persons went into it, and some of them went out
again immediately, while the rest that stayed talked to one another. He was too
much taken up with his own private affairs, to have any great curiosity for
those of other people, and he had not listened to their discourse, if one of
them had not talked so loud, that he fancied he was not unacquainted with the
voice. This made him desirous to know what they talked of, and at last he heard
them speak the following words distinctly. Yes, my dear Iulia, I must once more
say it, few persons of my condition have been treated worse by Fortune than my
self, she has plunged me in miseries that are not to be paralleled: But as
great and vexatious as they are, they don't so much disturb me as the
ingratitude wherewith the basest of men requites my affection for him; and this
ingratitude does not sit so heavy on me, as mine to the man whom I ought to
love. I blame myself incessantly for it, and my inquietude on this score is
infinitely more afflicting to me, than all the losses I have sustained, and all
the calamities that oppress me. The other person that took up the discourse
talked so low, that Hippolito could hear nothing but a few incoherent words,
that were frequently interrupted by sighs. He got up and crept to the Wainscot
which divided the two Rooms, but the noise he made was heard by the persons
whom he had a mind to listen to, so their Conversation ceased, but not the
sighs of the afflicted party, whose voice he imagined to resemble that of
Mathilda. The Reader may easily guess how impatient he ^as to know whether he
was mistaken, and to satisfy himself in so important a doubt, he was preparing
to go out of his Chamber, when all on the sudden the door opened, and by the
^^ght of a dark Lanthorn, he saw four Men come into the Room with their Swords
in their hands, among whom he observed the Calabrian Soldier and the Master of
the House. If he was surpised at so unseasonable a visit from these men, who
did not seem to come with any good design, they were no less so to find him up
and awake, who they hoped was in a sound sleep. Hippolito clapping his hand to
his Sword, asked them what they wanted in his Chamber at such an hour and in
such an equipage; and he no sooner saw them put themselves in a posture to
attack him, but he fell upon the first with such bravery and skill, that he
soon made the Room too hot for 'em. In the mean time his Footman awaked,
followed the noise, and seeing his Master set upon by so many Enemies, seconded
him very valiantly at that instant, when having wounded all those that had
attacked him, he had laid the most dangerous of them at his feet. These Men
defended themselves like Fellows that did not value their lives; but tho they
had been more in number than really they were, yet they could not have resisted
the valiant Hippolito, seconded by so courageous a Servant. He killed another
of his Enemies, and the two that were left very fairly betook themselves to
their heels. He was so vexed at a slight wound he received in his own arm, that
he was resolved to pursue them, and in all probability had cleared the World of
them, as well as he had done of the other Sparks, if these Villains had not
been so wise in their fear, as to make one leap of it down the Staircase, and
shut the door after them. Hippolito was a long while before he could open it,
which gave the two Murderers time enough make their ^^escape, so that he and
his man returned to the Inn without them. He ran directly to the Chamber, where
he thought he had heard Mathilda's voice, but found it open and no one in it,
no more than in the rest of the rooms in the House, which he searched with as
much care as inquietude Fulvio, said he to his Man, I heard Mathilda talk, I
knew her voice, and no one but such an unhappy wretch as I am, could have mist
her when she was so near him. He afterward repeated to Fulvio the words he
heard Mathilda speak, interpreted them to his advantage, as he had some reason
to do, but instead of giving him consolation, they only ^^^^reas'd his
affliction, for he thought this was a trick of For ^^^^e, to let him hear
Mathilda's voice, for no other end (...) to make him more concerned for not
being able to (...) her, or know what was become of her. He looked a (...) this
Princess in all the places thereabout, and was (...) otted as to come back to
the Inn to search her there, (...) a Soul was to be seen, except only in the
Stable (...) whence Fulvio took four Horses besides his own (...) Master's.
Hippolito quitted this Inn in the most pensive Condition that can be imagined.
Fulvio proposed to carry off the Theives Horses, as being lawful Prize, and
represented to him, that perhaps they might find Mathilda, and then they should
want a Steed to mount her on. Hippolito did not hear what he said, or else
would not vouchsafe to make him an Answer, so strangely was he taken up with
his Melancholy Thoughts. Fulvio took his Masters silence for consent, and tying
the Horses by the Tail, drove them before him, designing, I suppose, to make
ready Money of them, the first Chapman he could find, They rode part of the Day
together, without Hippolito's answering so much as one of the many Questions
Fulvio put to him, in order to divert him: They lost their way, and at last
were got among a parcel of barren Rocks by the Seaside that was hard by, and
ended in a sandy Plain. Among these Rocks, in a Creek where the Sea run into
the Land, as they came from a narrow Lane, they fell upon a Company of
Peasants, armed with all sorts of Clubs and Weapons, who where at first
surpised to see two Men on Horseback, followed with so many Horses without any
to ride them; but taking Heart of Grace to see so few, and themselves so many,
for there was at least a Hundred of them got together, they encompassed them in
a tumultous manner, and held the butt ends of their Muskets against them; some
cried out, Who goes there? Others, Who are you for? Others, Knock them down,
and lastly, some more Conscientious, Who are ye? Hippolito could not answer so
many Questions at once, and these ill-bred Clowns made such a confounded noise
that there was no hearing of him. At last an old Man of a tolerable good
aspect, who afterward discovered that he commanded these formidable Hero's
(for then every Man set up for himself) partly by speaking out a loud to them,
which set him a coughing like an Alderman at Church, and partly by the
Rhetoric of a good Oaken ^^dgel, made a shift to compose the mutiny. He asked
Hippolito peaceably and civilly who he was, and what business he had in so
Solitary a place, so remote from the great Road. Hippolito told him that he was
a Cavalier of Naples, and that he had lost his way to Ancona. He then asked the
old Spark what business brought so many People together, who informed him that
some Corsairs of Barbary had ^anded a great number of Soldiers, that had
pillaged some places near the Sea, and finding none to oppose them, and
^^ovetous of a greater Booty, were so Foolhardy as to March higher into the
Country. He added, that most of these Men whom he saw Armed, were Robbed, and
that they resolved under his Conduct to wait the coming of the Enemy, and fight
them as they came back with their Slaves and the Plunder of a Neighboring
Village, which in all probability they were gone to Attack; that 'twas
impossible for the Moors to escape them, there being no other way for them to
get back to the Sea again but this, and that it was not so much the loss of
their Goods that had encouraged these Peasants to attempt so bold a design, as
that of their Wives and Children. Hippolito offered to venture his Life in
their Quarrel, and they took him at his Word. The old Man gave him the Command
of them, which he accepted, to the great Satisfaction and Joy of our Boors, who
promised themselves mighty matters from Hippolito's Military Phiz. Four of the
likeliest among them, of which the old Fellow was one, were mounted upon the
four Horses, which the provident Fulvio had brought with him from the Inn.
Hippolito divided his Men into three Parties. He posted one among the Rocks,
where they could not be seen by the Enemy, with orders not to fight them before
they came up to them. He posted the second in a narrow Passage that led toward
the Sea, to hinder the Infidels from getting back to their Ships, and he placed
himself with his Men on Horseback at the Head of the third, encouraging them to
behave themselves bravely, and fall in with the Enemy to make their Arrows
uneffectual. He had scarce given these Orders, and Posted his Men, when the
Enemy appeared to the number of a Hundred and Fifty Men. They drove several
Horses before their Main-Body laden with Booty, and the Women and Children they
had made their Slaves. Being old experienced Soldiers, they were not at all
discouraged to see Hippolito and his Troop march toward them, or perhaps they
despised so small a number. I will not trouble my self to set down the
particulars of this noble Battle between the Moorish Corsairs and our Peasants,
although Hippolito did abundance of Gallant Actions there, which deserve to be
remembered. I will only tell you that his Orders were well Executed, that the
Arrows of the Moors did them little or no harm, because they fell in with them
so Gallant^y, that he began their overthrow with the Death of their Captain,
and concluded it by that of their stou^est Men. Our Peasants when they were
once blooded put all the Moors to the Sword, whether they cried out Quarter or
no, notwithstanding all the endeavors Hippolito used to prevent this Massacre,
The Dead were lamen^ed as much as the common Joy would give them leave, and the
Wounded bound up their Wounds. Hippolito received a thousand Commendations, and
as many Thanks from these poor People, who believed they should not have got
the better if it had not been for him. They offered him the best part of the
Booty they recovered from the Enemy, which be refused, as likewise to go and
make Merry with them after the Victory, when Fulvio brought two Women before
him in the Habit of Pilgrims, one of whom had no sooner taken off a great Hat
which hid her Face, but he knew her to be Mathilda. He alighted, or rather he
leapt from his Horse, to throw himself at the Feet of this Princess, who
embraced him with all the marks of Tenderness that showed nothing of that
disobliging Treatment, which the Tyranny of the Prince of Salerno had obliged
her formerly to show to Hippolito. This faithful Lover wanted Expressions to
tell Mathilda how glad he was to see her, never did his Eloquence leave him so
in the lurch; never did he so strain to declare his Thoughts, and at the same
time Murder them. In short he did not know what he did, so great was the
disorder of his Mind. He was uncertain for some time whether he should inform
Mathilda of the pains he had been at to find her, so much did his excessive
Modesty keep him from valuing himself upon his Services. However he gave her at
last a true recital of his Adventures, ever since he had left Naples for her
sake, and forgot not to acquaint her with what happened to him ^n the Inn,
where as he fancied, he had heard her Voice. Mathilda gave him abundance of
Thanks for these last Obligations she had to him, adding that she looked upon
herself to owe both her Life and Honor to him, since the defeat of the Moors
was entirely owing to his Bravery and Conduct. She owned to him that it was she
who was in the next Chamber to him at the Inn, promised to inform him by what
accident she was carried thither, and in short to give him her whole History,
when she had a convenient time and place. The other Pilgrim that accompanied
Mathilda was one of her Chamber-Maids called Iulia, who was the only Servant
that had Fidelity enough to follow the same Fortune with her Mistress, and bear
a part in all her Afflictions. It Is very probable that Fulvio and she were
^^lad to see one another; and for my part, I am apt to believe that they said
abundance of fine things, and displayed their Subaltern Eloquence (if I may so
express my self) very plentifully upon this occasion. Our Victorious Peasants
that observed with what concern Hippolito and Mathilda received one another,
redoubled their courteous offers to Hippolito, who made no difficulty to accept
them for the Princess's sake. Among the rest the old Man, who as I have already
taken notice, led the Peasants on to Battle, before Hippolito came to them,
begged of him and Mathilda that they would do him the Honor to take a sorry
Lodging at his House, which they accepted. He sent one of his Sons in all haste
to get all things ready at Home for the better reception of his Guests, and now
they prepared for their Journey. Mathilda and Iulia were mouuted upon the two
best Horses they could find. Among several Women, whom they freed out of the
Hands of the Moors, Fulvio observed one, whom he thought he had seen somewhere,
who avoided as much as she could his looking at her, as if she knew him, but
had no mind to be known by him. At last he came up to her, and found her to be
the Inn-keeper's Wife that designed to Murder them. He went to inform his
Master of it, and desired some Peasants to look after her. Toward the dusk of
the Evening they arrived at the Village: Mathilda and Hippolito were received
by our old Man with all the Marks of Esteem and Gratitude. The other Peasants
of the Village went home to their own Houses, to make Merry after so notable a
Victory, and those that lived farther off, marched homewards likewise.
Hippolito commanded the Inn-keeper's Wife, whom Fulvi^ had apprehended, to be
brought before him, and upon the very first threatening to deliver her into the
Hands of Justice, she confessed, that their Inn was a Meeting place of
Bandities and Robbers, that her Husband kept a Correspondence with all the
Thieves of the Country, and tha^ the Reason why he at first refused to
entertain Hippolito, was because he expected a famous Highway-Man that Night.
Companion to the Calabrian, whom he had seen at the Inn, to confer with him
about some Robberies they had in hand. She likewise informed Hippolito, that
the Calabrian had a great mind to his Horse and Equipage, to rob him of which
after he had whispered with her Husband, and persuaded him to join in the
Action, he had lent him his Room. History does not tell us what they did to
this Woman, after they had learnt out of her all that they desired to know
Hippolito and Mathilda, the better to conceal their Quality^ made Fulvio and
Iulia, the old Man and his whole Family, to Sup with them. After Supper (I
cannot tell whether it was a good or a bad one) Mathilda would not suffer
Hippolito to languish any longer under his Impatience to know her Adventures,
and informed him by what Accident she came to the Inn, and afterward into the
Hands of the Moors.

After the King had commanded me, said she, to him, to quit Naples, and by the
great Interest of my Enemies, I had but one Night allowed me to put my self in
a Condition to obey so rigorous an Order; I implored the Assistance of some
Gentlemen at Court, whom I thought I had obliged enough to be my Friends, but I
found to my disappointment, that they were only Friends to my Fortune, and not
to me. I had more reason to complain of my Domestics, who all abandoned me in
this Extremity but Julia. She had a Brother Married in Naples, who had the
Generosity to leave his Family at the entreaty of his Sister, and to Conduct me
to the Place where I designed to Steer my Course. He bestirred himself so
effectually, that the very Night I was commanded to leave Naples, I got every
thing ready for my Journey, before break of Day. We dressed our selves in the
Habit of Loretto-Pilgrims, by which means we were not discovered at the City
Gates. I Walked that Day as many Miles as could be expected from one of my Sex,
who had never been used to Travel before, and we jogged on peaceably several
Days, without any cross Adventures to disturb us. Yesterday a little before
Night, we were met in a narrow Way by three Men on Horseback, that had the
Looks of Villains. I designed to avoid them, and did it in so much baste, and
so unluckily, that my Foot slipped against a piece of rising Ground in the
Highway, and so I fell at the Foot of one of the Horses that came thundering
after me. My large Hat which covered my Face, and my Head clothes tumbled off
with the Fall, and my Hair fell about my Shoulders. My ill Stars would so have
it, that these Men saw something in me that did not displease them. They talked
a while together, then alighted from their Horses, one of them seized Julia,
another caught hold of me, while the third attacked Julia's Brother, who put
himself in a Posture to Defend us, and whom we saw fall soon after, being r^n
through the Body. After so many Misfortunes which had happened to me, and which
from a happy Princess, at least so in appearance, made me the most miserable
Woman in the World, I had some reason to believe, that all the Prudence and all
the Precaution imaginable, signify nothing against Fortune, that we must even
let her Act as she pleases, and persuade our selves, that her Inconstancy which
makes us feel her Hatred, then, when we thought our selves the most secure from
it, will restore us likewise to her Friendship, when we least expect it. Thus I
resigned my self, continues Mathilda, to my private Destiny, and when I found
my self stopped and seized by these Strangers, I submitted my self without any
struggling, to be mounted upon one of their Horses, because I knew they could
otherwise have done it by main Force, and although I was in their Hands, yet
Death could deliver me from them, when ever their Insolence should oblige me to
have recourse to this last Remedy. Julia, who fell a screaming and crying out
as loud as she was able, when she saw her Brother drop, suffered her self to be
carried off after my Example, but still continued afflicted. At Night we
arrived at the Inn, where you heard my Voice. Your Engagement with the Robbers
troubled us exceedingly at first, but when you had driven them out of the
House, and the noise was over, Julia and I quitted our Room. Finding no Body in
the Inn, we resolved to make our escapes out at the Garden-door, which stood
open, and the fear of being re-taken, made us double our speed. We walked all
Night and part of the next Day, till the heat of the Sun, and our Weariness
together, forced us to rest our selves among the Rocks, not far from this
Place, where we found a convenient Shade, and were taken asleep by the Moors,
whom you defeated.

Matilda concluded the recital of her Adventures, with making fresh
Protestations to Hippolito, that she would never forget what he had done for
her. However she did not tell him the Name of the Place where she intended to
retire, and for his part, he did not ask her to do it, No doubt on it, but it
was to one puny Prince or other in Italy, in which Cattle that Country abounds,
for any Man that has Money enough, may be made a Highness, without any other
Qualification. I might easily have bestowed what Name I pleased upon him, since
History has been silent in the matter, but I found upon second Thoughts, that
his Name would be no great Ornament to the Narration. Hippolito offered to
Conduct her whither she had a design to go, but she would by no means suffer
it, however she was forced at the repeated Instances o^ our officious Cavalier,
to take his Servant Fulvio with her and two Horses for her self and Iulia. I
will not mortify the Reader with the Melancholy parting between Hippolito and
Mathilda, I will let her go in quiet to Ancon^ where she sold some of her
Jewels, and bring back the poo^ Hippolito to the sad Ruins of his House, where
he arrived without a Farthing in his Pocket, and all the Earthly Goods he had
in this transitory World, was the Horse he rode upon. He had scarce set Foot to
Ground, when he met with a Neapolitan Gentleman, who was in quest of Mathilda,
as well as several more, whom the King dispatched to all Parts of Italy to find
her out, and went just as Chance directed him. He acquainted Hippolito with
Roger's Disgrace, after what manner Mathilda's Innocence came to be discovered,
the Orders the King had given to find her if possible, in short, with all that
had happened at Naples ever since he had left it, except his Majesty's violent
Love of the Beautiful Irene, which was known to all the World; however our
Gentleman concealed it from him, whether out of an excess of Discretion, or for
some other Reason which I don't know. You may imagine, that Hippolito, Generous
as he was, and loving Mathilda better than himself, was extremely pleased to
hear of so unexpected a Revolution in her Fortune, although at the same time, he
came to know that his own Condition was more desperate than ever. This
Gentleman assuring him, that the King had promised Prosper, that he should
Marry this Princess, as soon as she returned to Naples. This last News hindered
the wretched Hippolito from going to Court, it made his Life odious to him, and
he avoided all manner of Company so carefully, that he was the only Man in the
Kingdom, who knew not what a great Ascendant his Sister had over the King. In
the mean time Mathilda was no where to be heard of, although the Gentleman that
had accidentally met with Hippolito, went to Ancona, whither he told him she
was gone, yet he could hear no News of her, notwithstanding all the enquiry he
made to that purpose. A Report ran of this Princesses Death, and some People
pretended to relate the very Circumstances of it, at last it came to
Hippolito's Ears, and threw him into a fit of Sickness, which had like to have
cost him his Life. But in short, his Body recovered a little Strength, in spite
of the Indisposition of his Mind. He sometimes rode on Horseback along the
Seashore, and 'twas in one of these Melancholy Freaks, that after he had made
several Reflections upon the Misfortunes of his Life, he resolved to go and end
his Days in the War which the Grecian Princes were at that time carrying on
against the Turk, who began to extend his Conquests from Asia into Europe. At
last Mathilda was found, and Hippolito was so ravished with Joy, that he
bestowed his Horse, the only Moveable he had left him in the World, upon the
Man that brought him the News. The same Day his Servant Fulvio came to him, and
was exceedingly astonished to find his Master so Melancholy, and in so bad an
Equipage, at a time when all Italy talked of nothing but the great Power his
Sister Irene had over the King, and the Love he had for her. He told Hippolito
the Princes's Name, where Mathilda retired, he informed him in what manner
Prosper came to Compliment her from the King, and Conduct her to Naples, and
according to the laudable Custom of Servants, that always make have to tell
their Masters ill News, he exaggerated to him the joy Mathilda had discovered
when she saw Prosper, and the Marks of Affection she showed him. Her Passion
for him is so increased, continues this indiscreet Valet, that she has newly
spruc'd up the old Cap of Plumes, with which Prosper formerly presented her,
which he has so often upraided her with, and which is so well known at Naples,
by the many Jests that have been made on it at Court. I cannot imagine, says he,
where the Devil she had laid it up, to find it at so so critical a Iuncture,
but to be sure she must set a mighty value on it. After this rare trusty Fulvio
began to rail at the Princess of Tarento a little more than became him; but
Hippolito bid him hold his Tongue, and perhaps had Cudgel'd him, if he had not
given off, or altered his Language. Fulvio likewise told his Master, that the
Princess desired him to come and meet her. How! cries Hippolito, and does she
not sufficiently afflict me by not loving me, but to enhance my Affliction,
must she make me see how well she loves another, and will she Caress Prosper
before me? To give him I suppose the Pleasure to see me die of Grief, as if
their Happiness wanted nothing to complete it but my Death. But, continues
Hipoli^o, I must obey her, and see how far her Injustice will go. He was in a
good Vein to complain of his ill Treatment, and perhaps had effectually done
it, as he had just provocation, when he saw afar off a Body of Horse, which
Fulvio assured him, came with the Princess of Tarento, who designing to see
Hippolito, would needs pass by his House, in hopes to find him there. Although
the King had sent his Coaches for her, yet she was resolved to make her Entry
into Naples on Horseback, Prosper looked as big upon his Prancer, as a
Holiday-Heroe, and being all over covered with Feathers like an Indian Monarch,
rode by her side. He entertained the Princess with a World of treble resin'd
Compliments, and every other Moment Sung some Amorous Ditties to her, very
Methodically, and like a Man of Art. Hippolito, who was out of sorts, both as
to his Mind and Body would fain have declined seeing his Rival, and appearing
before so much Company, but Mathilda, who knew him afar off, because perhaps
she saw Fulvio with him, who had parted from her so lately, rode up to him, and
Prosper and the rest of the Company did the same. Mathilda repreached Hippolito
in the most obliging manner that could be, that being her best Friend, he had
not done her the Honor to meet her on the Road, as some of the best Quality in
City and Court had done. Hippolito protested to her, that he had never heard of
her happy Return till now, and added, that although he had known of it, he had
not presumed to meet her, for fear such an unhappy Wretch as he was, should
infect and disturb the public Joy. Mathilda assured him, that he had disturbed
hers, if she had not been so happy as to meet him. She conjured him to come and
take part in her good Fortune, as he had done all along in her Adversity, and
added, that having a design to Marry, because she had found by woeful
Experience, that a young Princess without Father and Mother, had occasion for a
Husband of Power and Interest to Protect her, and that having cast her Eyes
upon the Man she designed to make Prince of Tarento, she desired him to do her
the Honor to assist at her Wedding, which she would not Celebrate without him.
Prosper, as having the principal Interest in this Affair, joined his Prayers to
those of his Mistress, and contrary to his Custom, spoke abundance of Civil
things to his Rival, and pretended to be overjoyed to have his good Company. A
despairing unhappy Man, interprets every thing to his disadvantage, as a sick
Man beyond all possibility of recovery, turns the best Aliments into Poison.
Hippolito took the Civilities and Obliging words of Mathilda, to be so many
Cruelties she was minded to persecute him with. He could not conceive how she
could have so hard a Heart, as to make him be a Spectator of the Nuptial
Ceremonies. He could not tell what Answer to make her, and looked upon her with
Astonishment. The Faithful Fulvio, who was as much scandalized as himself,
cursed her heartily behind his Master, and whispering him in the Ear, desired
him of all Love not to go: Swearing that she was a Fury incarnate, to ask him
to see her Married to Prosper. In the mean time Mathilda redoubled her Petition
with so much Importunity, that Hippolito was not able to refuse her. She would
have him that very Minute get upon a Horse that was brought to him, and perhaps
it might so happen at that time, that he was not Master of a Pair of Boots.
Thus we see Hippolito mounted, very much out of Humor, and out of Countenance,
by Mathilda's side, who rode between him and Prosper. The Princess still
continued to talk very obligingly to him: She exaggerated the Obligations she
had to him, and entertained the Company with a recital of all the valiant
Actions performed by Hippolito, both against the Robbers that attackt him in
the Night, and against the Moors, whom he attackt in the Day, although they were
much Superior to him in Number, with a small Body of unexperienced Peasants.
She was interrupted by Prosper, who with an Impertinence peculiar to himself,
must needs acquaint her with the Miracles of that famous Night, in which Roger
was taken, and with what swiftness he persued the above mentioned Calixtus, who
was privy to the Correspondence, which that chief Minister kept with the
Enemies of the State. Mathilda did not bestow much Attention upon his
Discourse, and still addressed he self to Hippolito, although the latter seldom
made her any Answer. But Prosper by telling the same Story a hundred times
over, made People listen to him, whether they would or no, and whatever
happened to be talked of, he perpet^ally loaded the Conversation with the
important Service he had done the King and Government, in running after
Calixtus. He had mortified the Company much longer with this important Exploit,
if the King had not appeared, attended by all the Topping Persons of both Sexes
at Court and City. Prosper to show what a fine Figure he made, rode toward the
King, and then without knowing why or wherefore, rode back again to Mathilda,
with full as little Reason, and presented her to his Majesty, although there was
no occasion for it. She was received by him, as well as she could desire or
expect: He excused himself for all his ill Usage of her, laying the blame of it
upon Roger, and to make her some reparation for the Injuries, which by the
Instigation of this treacherous Favorite he had done her, he bestowed upon her
one of the best Preferments in the Kingdom. Mathilda thanked the King with a
great deal of Humility, but much more Wit. I will not here pretend to set down,
any of the fine Compliments, that her Gratitude suggested to her upon this
occasion. I will only tell you, that they were admired, nay, and applauded by
all the Company, as I have been credibly informed. Prosper likewise interposed
to thank the King for her, but only repeated what she had said before. In the
mean time Irene rode up to Hippolito, whom she knew behind some of the
foremost, and seeing her self out of the King's sight, threw her self about the
Neck of her dear Brother, who had made her shed so many Tears, and drew some
from her now. Hippolito, who loved Irene as much as so amiable a Sister
deserved, embraced her in so tender a manner, that it was enough to soften a
Heart of Iron or Marble, according as the Reader pleases. The King who missed
Irene, and could not be long without her, looked for her in the crowd, and
perceiving her with her Brother, his amorous impatience must needs make him
ride up to her. He did not receive Hippolito as a bare Subject, when she
presented him to his Majesty. Mathilda Prosper, and in short all the Persons of
Quality about the King, observed that he talked to Hippolito after such a
manner, as made some of the Politicians in the Company then conclude, that this
Cavalier would make no little figure at Court. But all the King's smiles could
not cure him of that mournful Air, which the Gaiety of his Rival occasioned in
him, who appeared as jolly and well satisfied as if he had the whole World at
his beck. All this while the Sun who darted his Rays very fiercely upon this
noble Company, warmed most of their Heads deliciously, but especially those
that were bald. All the Flies from the Seashore, the Gnats from the
Neighboring places, those which the Horses belonging to the King's Retinue had
brought with them from Naples, those which Mathilda's Horses brought with them
more distant Parts; in sine, all these buzzing Insects, which we may call the
Parasites of the Air, incommoded their Faces exceedingly, tormented their
Horses cruelly; and those poor Tits were most exposed to these cursed Flies,
that had the least Tails to whisk about them. I must own indeed that the
Umbrellas protected those that had them from the Sun, but not from the burning
Reverberation of the Earth, or from the Clouds of Dust, with which the Si^tole
and Diastole of the Lungs commonly called Respiration, filled the Throats of
all the Company, his Majesty not excepted. In a Word, the place was not
tenable; but to the great Consolation of those who suffered most by the Sun and
Flies, the King who was never weary where Irene was, had not as yet told
Mathilda all that he had a mind to tell her, and therefore talking loud enough
to be heard by those that were about him, he spoke the following numerical,
individual Speech to her, for it was faithfully repeated to me Word for Word.
Beautiful Princess! after the Persecutions you have suffered from me, and in
some measure by my orders, and after all the losses you have sustained, you
would have little reason to be satisfied with me, and I should have as little
to be satisfied with my self, if I did not do all that lay in my Power to
contribute as much to your Happiness, as hitherto I have done to your
Misfortunes. It Is not enough that I have declared you Innocent, that I have
restored to you all that was taken from you; nay, that I have increased your
Fortune by my Favors, if I don't see you married to the Prince of Salerno. By
making you this present of the Prince, I acquit my self in part of what I owe
you; and by rewarding him with so beautiful a Lady as your self, I think I
sufficiently require him for all the great Services he has done the State. Ah!
Sir, said Mathilda to him, let your Majesty take care that while you intend to
be just to Mathilda, you be not so to Prosper. Acknowledgment has its excess,
as well as Ingratitude. You will not give Prosper all that he deserves, in
giving him only Mathilda, and in giving me the great Prince of Salerno, you
will give me more than I deserve. I am as well satisfied with your Majesty, as
it is possible for me to be; and these last Testimonies of your Goodness, which
I owe to my Misfortunes, render them so dear to me, that they will be the most
agreeable things I can think of as long as I live. But, Sir, continued she,
since your Majesty is so Religious as to pay what you think you owe, and since
a Subject ought to govern himself by the good Example of his Prince, will not
your Majesty give me leave, now you have put me in a Capacity to pay my Debts,
to do it immediately upon the Spot, and pay others in the same Coin they have
paid me. Draw near therefore brave Hippolito, said she to this Cavalier,
turning toward him, come and thank my Gratitude, after you have had so much
reason to complain of my Unkindness. I owe you a love of many Years, which is
not in the least lessened by my illtreatment of you. I owe you, besides the
Expenses wherein this constant Passion has engaged you, and besides the
greatest part of your Estate which you spent to support my Quarrel, and your
^ine House, which was burnt all along of me; I owe you I say, my Honor and my
Life, that were in danger between the Robbers and the Moors, and I owe you
likewise a Life, which you hazarded in my deliverance. I will take care to
acquit my self, Generous Hippolito, of all these Obligations; but those I have
to Prosper, being of the oldest date, are consequently the more pressing, and
must be first discharged. Hippolito looked as pale as Death at these last Words
of Mathilda, and immediately redden'd after he had looked pale. Prosper Smiled
upon him, and gazed at Mathilda with a very Amorous look, who spoke to him as
follows. Prince of Salerno! You would make me believe that you loved me from my
Infancy, and indeed you have always treated me like an Infant. You made your
self to be feared by her, whom you called your pretty Mistress, you have always
amused her with sine Complements and Songs, or treated her with Reproaches and
Reprimands, at the time when she expected the most important Services from you.
In fine, the greatest token of Love you ever gave me, was a Present of some of
your old Feathers, which I promised to keep for your sake, and have been as
good as my Word. With this she took the Cap off her Head, which Prosper had
given her, in the Days of Yore, and presenting it to him. At the same time,
continued she, that I discharge my Debt, by returning you the fair Words and
Feathers you gave me, I bestow my self upon Hippolito, and make him Prince of
Tarento, to acquit my self toward the most generous of all Men, whom I have
always found to be a Man of Deeds and not of Words. When she had said these
Words, she gave Prosper his fatal Cap with one Hand, and with the other the
took that of the despairing Hippolito, who from that happy Moment ceased to be
so, and no more dreamed of this unexpected Happiness, than Prosper did of being
repaid with his Cap. The King, as well as his Courtiers, was not a little
surpised at this sudden turn of the Scene; but Irene's great Interest with
him, and the Justice as well as generosity of Mathilda's Action, made him
approve it: And the Commendations he bestowed upon the Princess at the same
time, kept the Prince of Salerno in his Duty, who blushing with Shame and
Confusion, could not tell how to behave himself, and we may suppose that if it
had not been for the fear he lay under of displeasing his Master, he would have
quarreled with Mathilda, according to his ancient Custom, if the Interest of
his Fortune had not been too prevalent for his natural Arrogance. The King took
pity of him, and presenting Camilla to him after he had talked a while in
private with her and Iren^, told Prosper that so beautiful a Lady with all her
own Charms, and her Brother Roger's Estate might very well comfort him for the
loss of Mathilda. In the mean time all the Court strove who should be most
forward to Congratulate this Princess upon her just choice of Hippolito, and to
assure this happy Lover how overjoyed they were at his good Fortune. They were
most plaguily embarrassed on both sides, to find out Compliments to serve them
upon this occasion, and were forced to repeat the same things over and over
again: But the King came very luckily to deliver them out of this trouble.
Beautiful Princess! says he to Mathilda, you have taught me that we ought to
discharge our Debts when we are able. I therefore acquit my self of the Debt I
owe to Irene's Beauty and Wit, and this Day make her Queen of Naples. This
unexpected Declaration of his Majesty surpised, as we may imagine, the Company
infinitely more, than that of Mathilda had done. Irene throwing her self at the
King's Feet, testified to him by her Respect and her Silence, her Humility and
Resignation. The King raised her up, kissing her Hand, and from that Moment
treated her as he would have done the greatest Queen in the World. All these
strange Adventures so took up Peoples Thoughts, that those that were most
incommoded by the heat, complained of it no longer. In short they turned back
toward Naples, where all sorts of Rejoicings began, till all things were
prepared for the King's Marriage, who caused that of Hippolito and Mathilda, as
likewise that of Prosper and Camilla to be deferred, that the same Day might be
^ignaliz'd by three such illustrious Weddings. The King never repented of
chosing Irene for his Wife. Mathilda, who was of so loving a temper, that she
loved Prosper more then he deserved, for no other reason but because he
happened to be loved by her first, loved Hippolito exceedingly, who for his
part loved her as much when a Husband, as he had done when a Gallant. Only
Camilla lived unhappily with Prosper. She durst not refuse him for fear of
offending the King, who punished Roger only with Banishment; and thus to save
her Brother's Life, she rendered her own uneasy, being married to a Covetous,
Impertinent, Jealous Prince, who while he lived was the scorn and laughter of
the Court of N^ples.

FINIS.
THE BOOKSELLERS TO THE READERS.
WE shall not trouble you with a long Harangue in Praise of our Author, he
being known to be one of the wittiest Men of his Age, and Husband to the great
Madam de Maintenon, whose Polities and Wit have made her famous all Europe
over; but to give you some account of this Edition, we having observed that the
Comical Works of Scarron had been several times printed at Paris, at Amsterdam,
and elsewhere, thought it would not be unacceptable to the English Reader, if
we got them Translated and Collected into one Volume, which we were the more
induced to undertake, because the Third Part of the Comical Romance was never
in English, as likewise several of his Novels and Characters, and because Part
of his Works had been Translated near Forty Years ago, from Copies neither so
Correct nor full, as this last Paris Edition, from which we had this
Translation. Besides that, what was Printed of our Authers in English, was part
in a Folio Volume, and partly an Octavo, and so could not be bound together.
Some Persons may object why is not the City Romance here? To which we answer,
it was none of his, but only Fathered upon him to make it sell; and our design
was only to Publish his Genuine Works, which we have done from the best Paris
Edition; and as to the English, we hope the Translators have done themselves
and you Justice, several of these Novels being interspersed in the Comical
Romance, we here add the Names of them and Page, for the ready finding of them,
and remain

Your Servants, etc.


Scarron's Novels.
The Invisible Mistress. p. 20. The History of Destiny and Mrs. Star. p. 44.
The Impostor out Witted. p. 103. The History of Cave. p. 151. Leander's
History. p. 162. The Judge in her own Cause. p. 198. The Two Rival Brothers. p.
240. The History of the Prior of St. Lewis. p. 303. The Two Jealous Ladys. p.
341. The Capricious Lady. p. 346.
All these in the Comical Romance.
Avarice Chastis'd, or the Miser Punished. p. 1. The useless Precaution. p. 20.
The Hypocrites. p. 66. The Innocent Adultery. p. 92. The Generous Lover. p.
121.
SELECT LETTERS OF M. SCARRON.
Done into English by Mr. Brown.
LETTER I.
To the Countess of Fiesque.
Madam,
YOU have not a better Friend upon the Face of the Earth than Fame. If you knew
how many Good Offices she daily does you wherever she goes, you would own you
have a thousand Obligations to her. Ever since the City of Orleans has been
taken -- by a Young Princess, attended by Two Countesses, who wont give the
Wall to any two Counts in Christendom, this everlasting Babbler has deafen'd
all the World with the Recital of your Exploits. But it is agreed on all hands,
that it is impossible for her to talk too much of them: so let us even leave her
to prattle as she pleases, and not Reproach her for being guilty of the Sin of
Repetition. I confess, the Action was Noble and Heroic, and my Muse lies under
a violent Temptation to try how she can Celebrate it, though I have laid an
Injunction upon her to be a Mute as long as I live. How in the name of Wonder!
What Scale a City? I defy our fiercest Heroes to do more than your Illustrious
Heroine; even Clorinda and Camilla could not have behaved themselves more
bravely at the Assault, than your Ladyship and Madam de Frontenac. You are two
Bold-spirited Amazons, and I will maintain you to be such, not only in F^ance,
but all over the Universe. Neither la Hire, nor Poton, nor the Gallant Dunois,
have carried their Glory farther by following the Steps of the Old Maid of
Orleans, that was burnt, than you have acquired Reputation by imitating the
Modern one, who Burns all that behold her: Her Charming Eyes inflame the Nation,
And cause a General Conflagration.
In short, let the Great Prince, who will make her change her Name one of these
days, be as Brave as he pleases, I question not but all the World will own,
that the Lady is in all respects as good as the Lord; nay, I dare almost swear,
before I have seen America, whither my Dog of a Destiny will send me in my
latter days, that at my coming there I shall hear the Indians talk of the Noble
Exploits, which her Incomparable Royal Highness, attended by her Brave
Lieutenant-Generals, has performed for the Party. I would expatiate upon this
Argument in Verse and Prose, if I concerned my self at all in the Affairs of
Europe: and besides, it would look ill in such an Unfortunate Wretch as I am,
to pretend to meddle with any gay Sub^ects. My meaning therefore in Writing to
you now, was only to thank your Ladyship for being so kind as to remember my
last Petition; for which I shall be obliged to you as long as I live, though the
Business does not succeed. I am

Your Ladyships most humble, and most obedient Servant, Scarron.

LETTER II.
To Mademoiselle de Nevillan.
Madam,
Although in the common Language of the World we use to say Damned Poets and Poor
Cripples, yet certainly there is nothing like being one of the two or both;
since with these unhappy Qualities, I have deserved a Letter from Madam de
Nevillan. However I will be so wise as not to Boast of this Favor; for if I
should, every Coxcomb in Town would fall a writing of Verses, though he had no
Genius for 'em, and your Ladyship would be perpetually persecuted by these
wretched Rhimers. In the next place a world of our well-shap'd Beaus would
immediately break their Legs and Arms, to put themselves in the same
Predicament with me, and that would really be a pitiful Sight; yet after they
had done so, perhaps you would not Write to them, and that would be the Devll
and all of a Disappointment. For this Reason I will not thank you in Public
for the Obliging Letter you were pleased to Write to me. I beg you to believe
that I shall always be obliged to you for it, and that I am,

Madam, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, Scarron.

LETTER III.
To Madam de St. Denis. Nun.
Madam,
THE Present you made me is very Pretty, but the Letter you sent me is
infinitely more. I am resolved to wear your Bracelets on all Days of Ceremony,
and I will carefully preserve your Letter among my Richest Curiosities. But
it is not enough to thank you in Prose.

Your Present, Fair Nun,
Has your Vassal undone.
To my sorrow I say it,
He can never repay it.
This I plainly declare,
But you will force me to Swear.
Why let Fevers attack me,
Or Rheumatism rack me.
If this wo'n't suffice,
You some Oath must devise
Of a terrible Size.
Let it be what it will, I Will Swear like a Dragon,
Or Gamester that loses, and has not a Rag on.
The Spirit of Versifying being spent, I return to my Prose, to tell you that I
am,

Madam, Your most humble Servant, Scarron.

LETTER IV.
To Monsieur Sarrazin.
YOU must certainly have little or no Business upon your hands in your Kingdom
of Bourdeaux, since you can condescend to Write to such a mean Fellow as I am;
or else Madam de Viger has got entire Possession of your Heart and Soul, since
you could put your self to the Expense of so many Lines, to let me know what
famous Exploits she has performed in Peace and War. For my part, if she is so
handsome as you tell me she is, I must freely own to you, that I would much
rather break my Leg, than have known her when I was able enough to lead up a
Country-Dance; and I would advise you, dear Friend of mine, not to meddle
there, since you have not much time to lose. But after all, is not this Miracle
of Beauty purely framed in your own Imagination? For you tell me such strange^
Stories of her, that I protest I should not believe 'em, but that I know you
too well to think you would say so many fine things for nothing. Till you
thought fit to undeceive us, 'twas an Article of Faith with us at Paris, that
nothing at Bourdeaux was capable to inspire Love but M. Guyonet: Whose Smiling
Looks and Charming Air,
The Hearts of every Nymph ensnare.
But since we have read your Letter, we easily believe, that if Madam de Viger
makes a right use of her Charms, she will at least make as many Slaves, as
Guyonet has made unhappy Damsels, and will abundantly revenge her self upon
the poor Men, for all those Ravages which that dangerous Hero of Bourdeaux has
made on her own Sex. But tell me dear Friend of mine, fairly and honestly tell
me, are you not afraid to make one of those Slaves; you that pretend to be such
a Servant to Love? As for me, were I now what you tell me you are, Qualis eram
bonae
Sub regno Cinarae
And were at this present Writing upon the Banks of the Garonne, where she
makes so many Flowers spring under her Feet, it would -- let me see -- it would
at least cost me two or three Thousand Inquietudes, seven or eight Hundred
Jealousies, the Devil and all of restless Nights and uneasy Days, and
numberless Tuns of Tears; for you must know, I have as good a hand at Crying as
any Man in the World, nay even as your self, though you can cry like any Priest
in a Lent-Sermon. But to return to Madam de Viger, it is a thousand pities that
she is Wiser than Solomon: to my knowledge there are abundance of Men in the
World, that would be content with all their hearts, to be as great Fools for
her, as the Queen of Sheba was for the aforesaid King of Jerusalem. For
instance, your humble Servant, who does not pretend to be so Wise as the Son of
Bersheba, as she it seems tells you I am, though for my part I think her ten
times more Amiable than the Queen of Sheba, would immediately ride Post to
Bourdeaux to see her, if I went to Bareges, as I designed; but a confounded
Planet, that breaks all my Measures, will force me in my own Defense to set
sail for America within this Month. What fortifies me in this Resolution, is,
that we are eternally plagued here in Town with a New Crop of Sots, who call
themselves Platonists forsooth, and are perpetually plaguing us with their
damned airy Doctrines. They^ no longer trouble their heads to enquire whether a
Man is a Man of Honor, or Worth, and so forth, but whether he is a Wit of the
new Stamp, and can talk Platonically. I don't doubt but we should soon see
these Platonic Rogues hooted out of the World, but some of the most
considerable among them give out, that they are countenanced by a certain great
Princess, whose Wit in truth is equal to her high Rank, otherwise these refined
Platonists, with a Pox to them, had been hissed off the Stage long ago. Thus,
my most Witty Frien^, I have laid before you, my Reasons why I am resolved to
go to the West Indies, I have been tempted too for a Thousand Crowns to enter
my self in our New West India Company, which is going to settle a Colony within
3 Deg^ of the Line, upon the Banks of the Lorillaine and the Lorenoque. So
adieu France, adieu Paris, adieu ye She-Devils in the Shape of Angels, adieu ye
Menages, ye Sarrazins, and ye Marignies: I take my leave of Burlesque Verse, of
Comedies, and Comical Romances, to go to a Happy Climate, where there are no
Affected Beaus, no Godly Canting Rascals, no Inquisition, no Rheumatisms to
Cripple, and no confounded Wars to Starve me.

LETTER V.
To Madam de Sevigny.
I Have lived the most Regular Life in the World, and have taken as much Care
of my self as a dying Pope, and all in Obedience to the Commands you were
pleased to lay upon me, not to Die till you had seen me. But Madam, with all my
Care and Caution I find my self a Dying, out of the impatient desire I have to
see you. If you had better considered your own Strength and mine, you would
never have put me upon so unrighteous a Task. You Ladies, forsooth, with your
Charms and other Merits, imagine that you have nothing to do but Command, and
carry all before you; but we poor Wretches forsooth cannot dispose of our Lives
just as you would have us. In my Opinion now, you may content your selves to
kill those Gentlemen, that see you sooner than they desire, without obliging
those to Live, who are deprived of your Sight, as long as you desire it. You
may even thank your self if I cannot Obey this first Command of yours, since
you have hastened my Death: though one would have thought, that, to please your
Ladyship I should have had as good a Stomach to live a Hundred Years as any Man
else. But Madam, can you not change me this kind of Death? for if you could,
you would infinitely oblige me. These foolish Deaths that come from Love and
Impatience, are by no means proper for one of my Age, much less are they things
I have a fancy for; and if I have Wept a hundred times in my life for those
unhappy Gentlemen that died of these Distempers, pray consider how lamentably I
shall bewail my self, who take it for granted, that I shall die this pretty
Death. But it is impossible for a Man to avoid his Destiny, and whether I had
been your Neighbor, or lived a thousand Miles from you, it is all one, for I am
fated to receive my Deaths Wound from you. What comforts me is, that if I had
seen you, my Death had been ten times more cruel than now it is like to be. I
am informed on all hands, that you are a very Dangerous Person, and that those
who look upon you without due Care, grow Sick upon it immediately, and are not
Long-lived. Therefore Madam, I will keep to the Death you have allotted me, and
forgive you for it with all my heart. Adieu, Madam, I D^e your most Obedient
Servant, and I pray to Heaven, that your Diversions in Bretagne may not be
spoiled, by any Remorse of Conscience, for killing an Honest Fellow that never
did you any Harm: At least remember, Fair Ingrate,
That if I Die before I see you,
Heaven knows it is no Fault of mine.
These are none of the best Rhimes, that is the truth on it; but at the Hour of
Death a Good Christian rather thinks of Dying well than Rhiming well.

LETTER VI.
To the Marquess de Villarceaux
FOR the Discharge of my Poor Conscience, I am obliged to tell you, that your
Lordship did not know what you did, when you offered me your Friendship, and
demanded mine in exchange. As much accustomed as you are to do Generous
Actions, yet your wishing well to such an Unfortunate Fellow as I am, is a
strain of Charity more dangerous to put in Execution than you would imagine.
For my part, I see but very little for you to Hope, and a great deal to Fear,
though I am never so great a Gainer by the Bargain. This, and nothing in the
World else, cost Armenti^res his Life in the Days of Y^re, and the other Week
poor Haucourt; not to mention to you the Lord knows how many more, whom I could
name, but you don't know them, who all Died Suddenly and before their time, for
no other Reason, but because they had a Kindness for me. Would you have me cite
you other Examples to convince you, that my Unhappiness is Contagious? Know
then, that Cardinal Richelieu Died within a Month after I had the Honor to be
introduced into his Company and to please him. The late Prince of Orange no
sooner show^d an Inclination to be kind to me, but he fell ill of the
Smallpox, which carried him off. The President de Mesme fell immediately into
a Consumption, after he had given himself the trouble to Visit me in my
Quarters Three Story high. In short my Friendship is so certain to hurt, and
that speedily too, that I cannot for the heart of me unriddle it, how our New
Cardinal de Retz came to be promoted to the Purple, against Wind and Tide as
the saying is, at the time when he was so indiscreet, as to tell all the World
that he had an Esteem for me. Now after all these Fatal Instances, if you are
resolved to Honor me with your Heart, I surrender my self Body and Soul to
your Discretion. I am not such a Coxcomb as to refuse Happiness when it is
proffered me, or slight the Friendship of a Person whom I Passionately Love, as
well upon the Score of his own shining Qualities, as my own Natural
Inclination. However, I cannot help Pitying you exceedingly, for once more I
must tell you, that I am the unluckiest Devil in the Universe, and a certain
Forerunner of Mischief wherever I come. I will tell you more of this matter
to Morrow, at Madam de Lenclos's, whither I will come in a Chair about
Dinnertime, etc.

Your most humble, and Most obedient Servant, Scarron.

LETTER VII.
To the Queen of Sweden.
Madam,
TO Offer your Majesty a Play of my own Composing, is to make you a Present
unworthy of your Merit and Quality; but it is my Opinion, that every Man ought
to be Taxed according to his Estate, toward the Payment of that Tribute, which
all our present Writers are obliged to pay you. The Authors of the Augustan
Age, paid the same Tribute in Verse and Prose to that Patron of Wit, Mecaenas
of Happy Memory, whom your Majesty knows much better than my self, by the
Testimony of all the Poets, to have been a very generous gallant Person. But
notwithstanding all the Noise that his Name has made in the World, he has no
other Advantage over your Majesty at present, than that of being born before
you, and I durst lay every farthing I have in the Kingdom of Parnassus, that
your Majesty would have carried away all his Practice from him, and made him as
angry, as the Great Gustavus your Father would have made his Master Augustus,
if he had been to dispute the Empire of the Universe with him. But Madam, if so
inconsiderable a Wretch as I am may be allowed to put a few Questions to so
great a Queen as you are, does not your Majesty find your self sometimes
incommoded by being so great a Heroine? Even extraordinary Merit has its
Inconveniences, and those solemn Trifles called Epistles Dedicatory, which we
Poets, forsooth, would palm for Incense upon the Persons whom we pretend to
deifie, are not always of the same Value, nor have they the same Effect. Some
of these Druggs make a mighty Smoke, but do not perfume; and indeed I am not
Prophet enough to foretell whether what I now offer to your Majesty will pass in
your Court for right Spanish, or Common Essence. The late Prince of Orange
thought otherwise of it, and found it to answer. If your Majesty likes it, pray
don't be sparing of it. I shall soon have a Recruit and will keep it for your
Use, whom all the World unanimously owns to surpass in Merit all the Princes of
former Ages, to eclipse all those of the present, and to be the best Example
for all that come after you to Copy. This is as true, as that I am, with the
profoundest Humility,

Your Majesty's most Obedient Servant S --

LETTER VIII.
To --
YOU are taken ill of a Tertian Ague; if it turns to a Quartan, we must even
expect to be plagued with it all this Winter; for you need not question but it
will torment me as much as your self. Pray be so kind as to inform me how many
Fits we have already had, and what the Physicians say to them for you have them
first, and it is a very odd business, upon my word, that you should know all my
News four or five hours before I my self do. It Is a Sign I have a good Opinion
of my Strength, since mortified thus by my own Distempers, I can afford to bear
so great a share in yours. I don't know whether I had not done much better to
have stood upon my guard against you the first time I saw you: It Is plain, I
ought to have done it, if we are to judge of things by their Events. But who
the Duce would have thought that a young Lady would disturb the Repose of an
Old Fellow, and prove such a Thorn in my Side as to make me lament my unkind
Destiny, because I am not in a Condition to revenge my Quarrel upon her.
Jesting apart, I know you are very ill, but don't know whether the People about
you take such care of you as they ought. This Inquietude not a little augments
my Concern to see you so unhappy, and my self incapable of doing you any
Service. While you all naked in your Bed
Those wanton roguy Breasts display,
Where Cupid does recline his Head,
And Sleeps his happy Hours away.
I toss and tumble 'till the Morn,
I pass the Night in restless Sighs:
The God of Sleep my Prayers does scorn,
And from my wearied Eye lids flies
And all this I suffer forsooth for loving you more^ than I thought to do. Good
Heavens! that I should not only love you, but that like a Sot I should dote on
you so vainly. Od's Life, How comes this about, that every moment of the Day I
should long to go to Poitou, though the Weather is so cold, that Bears in their
Russian Furs would scarce venture to peep abroad. Is not this downright
Conjuration? Return Madam for Heaven's sake, return, since I am such a Milksop
as to disquiet my self for your Absence, Indeed I ought to know my self better,
and to consider that it is Plague enough for me to be a Cripple from Head to
Foot, without being bedevil'd with that cursed Disease, which our New Weekly
Bills call The Impatience to see you. It Is a confounded Disease, that is
certain. Don't I see how it racks and persecutes poor M -- because he cannot
see you so often as he would, although he sees you every Day in the Week. He writ
to me like a Man in Despair, and I dare engage to you that this very Minute I
am talking to you, he is on the side of the Damned, not because he is a Heretic,
but for loving you, and that is enough in all Conscience. However Madam you
ought at last to put a stop to your Conquests, and suffer poor Mortals to live
in Peace.

Command those Eyes to leave off Killing,
If to oblige Mankind you're willing.
'Twere happy for you, Fair Lady, that you had nothing to do with me, for I
shall certainly be even with you. Perhaps you laugh at these Menaces; but know,
imperious Fair, that Men will never be wanting to assert their Rights, where
the Public is concerned. What! can you find no better Employment than to kill
and murder poor People? Tell me, my charming Tormenter, are you a Christian?
Set your Hand to your Heart and resolve me this Question. You are a Turk, upon
my honor, I know it full well, and one of the worst sort of Turks too. Your
Turks of the better sort are a good-natured honest People, and delight in works
of Charity; but I know by Experience that you are of a different Temper, and
would not do the least Act of Goodness for an Empire, even to those that love
you as their Eyes; therefore I must bluntly tell you that you are not worth a
Farthing, although your Outside is one of the finest in the world, and you are
made up of a thousand good and pretty Ingredients. No one confirms the Truth of
the Proverb so well as your self, that all is not Gold that glisters. In short,
you are as much a Devil as you are Fair. But after all this (see what it is to
be beautiful) no Man loves and honors you more than

Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, S --

LETTER IX.
To --
Sir,
I Am informed by Monsieur Du Pin with what Generosity and Readiness you
offered to do me any good Services with the King, which you may expect to
succeed in, for a thousand Reasons that shall be nameless: But if I should
suffer you to combat with my ill Fortune that has hitherto persecuted me, I am
afraid you would have the Dissatisfaction to see your self once in your Life
disappointed, in your Generous Designs. For this Consideration, I would advise
you not to pretend to oppose my unlucky Destiny; however, I have all those
Obligations to you for your kind Offer, which a Man ought to have, who has
scarce the Honor to be known to you, who never did you the least Service, who
is incapable to do you any, and to whom, notwithstanding all this, you have
offered your Protection. This uncommon strain of Generosity is so peculiar to
you, that as far as I know you by your Reputation, I should immediately have
guessed it to come from you, though M. du Pin had concealed your Name from me. I
have a particular Veneration for those Persons that resemble you, and am vexed,
that the little time I have to live, will hinder me from knowing all your
History, which I would have Studied with as much Satisfaction, as I have done
that of the most Illustrious Men. Although Nature never out me out for a good
Courtier, yet I am one of those Persons, to whom the Greatest Men in the
Kingdom have oftenest made Liberal Promises, and oftenest broke their Word.
However, neither this Misfortune, nor a thousand others that attend me, shall
hinder me from being very well satisfied with my Fate, while you believe that I
am with the utmost respect,

Sir, Your most humble and most obedient Servant, Scarron.

LETTER X.
To --
WHY how now Madam! You are a Lady of the most quarrelsome Temper I ever met
with. Had you not some other good Qualities to balance it, upon my word I
should pass but an uneasy Life with you. A very pretty Business this! To have
all this Noise and Clutter about ones Ears, because I was once worse than my
Word. Why Madam I can break my Word with you a Hundred times over, and yet not
Love you a jot the less. Be satisfied, I love my Friends so violently, so
terribly and all that, that I am even ashamed on it; but then I must inform you
at the same time, that there are some small trifling Inconveniences to suffer
from me. In the first place I am as Lazy as the Devil, and to convince you that
what I say is true, it is out of pure Laziness that I cannot stir to my Cabinet
to look out the Verses I promised you, although I have as great a Desire to do it
as your self, however I will do it anon. When you Rail at me next for this, you
shall see with what a Christian Patience I will bear it; and then I will leave
you to judge, whether I am not at least good to be Railed at, though I am good
for nothing else. Your Nephew needs not give himself the trouble to set us at
Variance, for you and I will make a shift to Quarrel between our selves like
two Furies, without any Body's interposing; but then we'll be Friends again in
a Minute, and that will be a Diverting Scene. Adieu, Madam, I am your most
humble and most obedient Servant, or may the Old Gentleman in Black hurry me to
his Dominions.

LETTER XI.
To the Bishop of Man's.
My Lord,
I Am not Dead, Heaven be praised for it, as your Eight Canons, whose Prebends
you have disposed of, and yet you have made so free with your humble Servant as
to give away mine. I should be heartily concerned if they were no more Dead
than I am; not but that I love my Neighbors very well, but if they were not
Dead, Mons. Costar and de ^Eslee, who perhaps are still my Friends, would not
be Archdeacons and Deacons. I cannot tell how I came to stumble upon this Word
perhaps. Perhaps I had not used it if I had thought better of the matter. The
next time do my self the Honor to Write to you, I will have a foul Copy by me,
because I will do nothing against my Conscience. But to return to my Prebend,
since you have given it away, you ought to give me another in recompense, nay,
though it were only to make me amends for losing so much time in relying upon the
Promises of your late Uncle of Happy Memory, and no Performances. I need not
inform you what you are to do; but if I were in your place, I would bestow a
good Benefice upon one that would be in mine: for^ I know you never want means
to make Vacancies, without offending against Good Manners; as an Eunuch did,
whose Name was Mortier, Uncle to the Abbot of Evron, and who was himself of
Marmoustier, I don't mean Eunuch but Abbot. This Jewel of a Monk Poisoned a
Score of Priors once at a Dinner, and thereupon Writ a Treatise, entitled, A
Method to make Benefices Vacant, Published by the Right Reverend Father in God,
such a one, etc. It Is a great sign that I grow Old, when I set up for a Teller
of Stories. But the Clock has struck Twelve, and the Laverdins, who are great
Talkers, don't love those that Talk as much as themselves, and as for my self,
I am one of the greatest Talkers I know. For this Reason therefore, and because
I Writ this Letter only to tell it you, I will conclude. However, I will make
bold to add, that now you are in the Kingdom of your Fathers, you ought to
remember, my Friend Menage, who with all his Merit and Learning, has got but
little Preferment in the Church, and you would do well to give him a lift. I
bethink my self likewise, that I have forgot to Flourish my Letter here and
there with as many My Lords, as are due to a Prelate, but I will avoid this
Fault for the future, and never Write to you without having a foul Copy by me.
I am,

My Lord, Your most humble and most obedient Servant, and what is more, Your
dutiful Canon, Scarron.

LETTER XII.
To his Eminence my Lord Cardinal de Retz.
My Lord,
YOU have made me Rich in spite of Fortune, in getting your self made Cardinal
in spite of your Enemies. I hazarded all I was worth in the World, that you
would be advanced to this Dignity; and if I have to do with Gentlemen of
Honor, I shall be worth half as much again as I was before. I pray God that
you may be able to say the same; and let his Providence bring it about as he
shall think most convenient. It Is likely he will do it all at once, and your
New Purple will soon, I hope, be supported with every thing Necessary to its
Grandeur, to show all the World, that the Hand which made Amboise and Richelieu
Cardinals, has not yet shown all it is able to do. I hope we shall in a short
time have the Satisfaction of seeing this come to pass. In the mean time, My
Lord, I humbly entreat you to believe, that in France, in the Indies, or
wheresoever my Unfortunate Destiny shall carry me, I will always be, with the
utmost Zeal and Respect,

Your Eminence's Most humble and most obedient Servant, Scarron.

LETTER XII.
To the Duke of Retz.
My Lord,
YOU take a Pleasure perhaps to be Generous, but pray be undeceived. It Is the
greatest Plague can happen to a Person of Quality, when he is so indiscreet as
to show any Favors to such an unfortunate Fellow as I am. It Is not enough with
us Authors to be once obliged, for we are importunate Duns to our Patrons as
long as we live. The Other day you gave me Voiture's Works, and am I not an
Impudent Fellow to ask you a thing of greater Importance? I know some Lords in
the World that would immediately change color upon these Words, but the Duke
of Retz, I am persuaded, will read 'em without any dread, and I dare engage,
that he is as impatient to know what I am going to Beg of him, as I am
confident I shall obtain it. The Matter, in short, is as follows. A Young
Gentleman of my Acquaintance, who at Twenty Years of Age has Fought Twenty
Duels, and all as Noble as that of the Horatii and Curiatii, and who is as Wise
as Valiant, has Killed an Impudent Scoundrel that forced him to Fight him. Now
he cannot get his Pardon out of Paris, and by his good will would be in
Security there, because he has a Natural Aversion for Hanging. I could make a
shift to find him a Lodging at a certain Prince's Palace, but then he would run
the risque of Starving there; now I humbly conceive, that Famine is rather
worse than the Gallows. If you will be pleased to afford him Sanctuary in your
House, I know he will have no reason to fear either one or the other; and
besides, 'twill be no little Satisfaction to you, to have protected a Young
Gentleman of his Merit. This is not all, for you will take the greatest Pleasure
in the World to see him Snuff the Candles with a Pistol, as often as you have a
mind to see the Pastime. As you are the most Generous Person living, I don't
doubt but you will thank for me giving you so handsome an occasion to exercise
your Generosity, and for my part I promise you it shall not rest here; for as
soon as you have granted me this Favor, I will every day importune you to
employ your own Interest and that of your Friends to obtain his Pardon. The
Burlesque Muse will not be silent of such a Kindness, but will endeavor to
show her Gratitude, though till now she never engaged in an Affair of this
Nature. I ask you a thousand Pardons for the length of this Letter; and as
often Kiss your Fair Hands, or such as they are. Oblige with a few Lines,

My Lord, Your most humble and most obedient Servant, S.

LETTER XIII.
To the Queen of Sweden.
Madam,
I Have sent your Majesty some of my Works, which perhaps you have not yet
seen. If you find any thing in them to Please you, I shall be as glad as it is
possible for a Man to be, who after he has had the Honor of seeing you, is now
so Unhappy as to be deprived of that Blessing. Nothing was wanting to complete
the Calamities of my Life, but that I should afflict my self for your Majesty's
Absence, and at the same time Envy all those that are near you. I don't know
whether these Persons are sensible of the Happiness they enjoy, but I shall
reckon them the most Stupid of all Irrational Animals, if they entertain not
the highest Admiration and Respect for your Majesty. As for me, if I were in
their place, and able to ramble from one Country to another, I should
immediately set up for a little Orlando for your sake. It Is true, I should not
with one single Stroke of my Sword fell so many thumping Trees, or commit so
many Ravages as my Brother Hero in Ariosto. My Follies should give more
Diversion than his, though they were nothing near so Terrible, and perhaps they
would not excite less Compassion. You see Madam, I have made use of the
Permission your Majesty gave me, as being a Gallant of no Consequence, to be
that for the greatest Queen that ever was, which this Romantic Blusterer was
for a Queen that was never in being. 'Twas well your Majesty gave me this
Permission, for otherwise I might have taken it, and by refusing it, you might
have seen your self Dis-obey'd by one, who would not do it upon any other
Occasion, though it cost him his Life. Setting aside Majesty, you are, Madam, one
of the most Admirable Women in the Universe. Wherever you go, your Eyes make
you more Subjects than a great Kingdom gave you, and as they do of themselves
all those Miracles we have seen them do, without your taking any Pains to Teach
them, we must be forced to own, they are the Finest and most Charming Eyes in
the World, but withal the most Dangerous. Thus I behold nothing but Rivals in
all the Persons that come to see me, and I behold no fewer Rivals among the
Ladies, which is none of the least Miracles your Majesty has performed, I mean
your makin^ them so Just to you, who are naturally Envious to the (...) their
Sex. I should fear Madam, that I took too much (...) with your Majesty, if you
did not know better than ^y one, that a great deal of Icarus and Ixion enters
into the Composition of a Poet, and that the History of these two rash
Adventurers, though by the by, their end is not very much for the Advantage of
these Traders in Immortality, is of all Fables that which pleases them most,
and is of the greatest use to them. There is not a Poet to be found, who would
not prefer the Reputation of being a Modern Ixion, to that of turning a Stanza
handsomely, and a happy Boldness (for so they are pleased to Christen their
Love of Contemplation) to the Laurel or Money, or both together. But Madam,
perhaps I begin to abuse the Command your Majesty laid upon me to write to you,
if I have not already abused it. I beseech you therefore, that if you think fit
to continue this Honor to me, you would let me know how far my Letters may be
privileged with you, that they may never go beyond the Respect I owe you. I am,

Your most humble, most obedient, and most dutiful Servant, Scarron.

To the Countess de Brienne.
Paris, August 7. 1657.
Madam,
YOU had the Curiosity to see me as well as the Queen of Sweden; you ought
therefore, like her, to give me leave to be in love with you, and allow me the
Honor of a Passion, which now perhaps no longer depends upon your consent. If
you are of opinion that I ask more than you ought to grant me, or that I
undertake more than I am able to perform, I will content my self with being one
of your Friends, and conceal the Lover from you. Unless you think fit to allow
me this Favor, you must even discard me your Service, which will be a severe
Mortification to me, for I have a furious desire to please you with all my
Might. After so frank a Declaration, you may very well imagine, that I would
not deceive you for all the World, I will therefore honestly acquaint you with
all the good and ill Qualities of the Person, who is resolved to devote himself
to you while he lives. His Body, in truth, is somewhat ill-shap'd and out of
sor^s, as you could not but observe when you saw him, and Women with Child are
forbidden to make him any Visits. As for his Soul, he is so well satisfied with
it, that he would not exchange it with any but yours. When he is in love, he
loves with so much violence, that he is sometimes ashamed of himself for it;
and since all must out, although he is nicely punctual in discharging the
Offices of Friendship, yet he is a little remiss in writing to his Friends. But
then he speaks well of them upon all Occasions, with a sort of Fury too, and
sometimes so much, as to tire his Hearers; and when he is obliged to espouse a
Man's part whom he pretends to love, a Lion and he are one and the same thing.
If you like me after this Description, I am entirely at your Service. Thus
expecting that you will pronounce either my good or bad Destiny, I am, and always
shall be, after what rate soever you think fit to treat me,

Your Languishing Ladyship's most Passionate Admirer, Scarron.

LETTER VII.
To the Countess de Brienne. Paris, Aug. 8. 1657.
Madam,
IT was in your Power, I own it, to choose whether you would receive a
Declaration of Love from your humble Servant: but as it was not in your Power
to hinder him from being so bold and presumptuous as to make one, allow me to
doubt, whether you have rejected it, till such time as you absolutely Command
me to believe the contrary. If you a Common Beauty were,
One Frown might make your Slave forbear.
But Madam, who can you behold,
Made of Nature's richest Mould,
A Nymph so Charming who can see,
And not with Love transported be?
And when with his resistless Dart
The little God has pierced the Heart,
What Mortal can conceal the smart?
No, the poor Wretch is forced to show it;
By sad Experience I know it.
Come, let us go to Confession, Madam, and honestly own, that neither of us
were so sincere as we ought to have been in the first Letters we writ to one
another, and that if it is impossible not to speak to you of Love, being so
Beautiful as you are, it is no less so for me, who pretend to an indifferent
Judgment, to content my self with only being one of your Friends, as I
intimated to you in my last. If the Conclusion of your Letter is as sincere as
the Beginning of it is otherwise, the good Opinion you promise to have of me,
will produce tragical Effects at Court; and you will see hundreds of Pretenders
there cripple themselves, and all to rival me. For my part I cannot help it if
they do; and though I shall strive by the Violence of my Passion to deserve what
your natural Goodness permits me to hope, yet I shall not be so lovesick
neither, as to attempt to please you at the Loss of my Understanding.

LETTER XVII.
To the Count de Vivonne. June 12. 1660.
IN vain, my Lord, you post it away,
And kill your Brace of Steeds a day,
And over the dusty Plains come pouring,
Like Husband for a Midwife scouring,
Or Winds the Clouds before them driving,
Or Parson scamp'ring for a Living.
You Will come too late to see that The Marriage of Lewis XIV. of France, and
Anne of Austria.
Sight
That does two Warlike Realms unite,
And in eternal Friendship join
The Golden Tagus and the Seine:
Oh that the Happy Royal Pair,
(And faith, my Lord, they promise fair)
Would get this Night a Son and Heir!
Or, to complete the Peoples Ioys,
Give them a Brace of Chopping Boys.
What Shows, what Triumphs would be seen,
How should we bless and thank the Queen!
How would it scare both Turk and Persian,
Pox on it, I want a Rhyme for Ersian.
Then since Thalia jaded grows,
I Will throw up Verse, and come to Prose.
To return then to my Prose; Oh, brave Count de Vivonne, I come to tell you,
although you know it as well as my self; but I must write you a Letter, and have
but little or no Matter to fill it with, I must tell you then that Paris is
exactly as it was when you left it; that for one Man of Sense, you may see a
hundred thousand that are not, and never will be, and that it is with the Women
just as it is with the Men. The young Sparks of Paris carry the World before
them in the Absence of the Court; wear their long Perriwigs and Swords, and set
off every thing with an Air of Quality. There is scarce a Quarter of the Town
but some Poet, either good or bad, lives in it; or a House that receives
Visitants but is plagued every Day, at least, with half a score empty Praters
or conceited Coxcombs. Now I talk of Houses, mine is the only House in France,
where the merriest Tales are to be heard, and where you have the greatest
Power. Your Health is often drank among us, and d'Elbene rails at you like a
Dragon, when he and I are at our Kickshaw Repasts. As for me, I find my self
daily decline, and go down the Hill much faster than I could desire. I have a
thousand Pains, or rather a thousand Legions of Devils in my Legs and Arms; yet
in this wretched Condition have been so undaunted and rash, as to love you most
inordinately. I cannot tell how the Freak came to take me in the Head; but this
I know full well, that you are a great deal of Friendship and Esteem in my
Debt; so that if you do me Justice, I shall have Reason to boast that I was so
happy in the latter end of my Life, as to make the most advantageous
Acquaintance I ever had, meaning your self. It Is true, my Ambition, as great as
it is, ought to stop here; but you have told me so many things of Monsieur
Manchini, that I am resolved never to release you of the Promise you made me,
to bring me acquainted with him; provided always, nothing in this Letter to the
contrary notwithstanding, that he is not a Man of mighty Complements, and the
Reason is because I immediately fall a weeping whenever I hear 'em, or am
forced to make 'em my self, and come off so sneaking and pitiful that you would
laugh at me. In short, Compliments are my Aversion, as Serpents and Toads are
that of all Mankind; and I am as much afraid of them as of a strong Breath, or
an Old Lady's hollow Tooth, or a wou'd-be Wit. That nothing of this kind may be
laid to my Charge, I will send my Letter without making you one, that is to
say, a Compliment; and will bluntly and roundly tell you, that no Man in the
World honors you more than,

Sir, Your most humble and most obedient Servant, Scarron.

LETTER XVIII.
To Monsieur du Rincy. Feb. 23.
Sir,
THE Proceedings at the Town Hall to morrow will be another Battle of Pharsalia
to me. I mean, my Destiny will be decided there; and I shall know in a few
Minutes whether it is worth my while to live, or whether I must go hang my self.
I therefore conjure you, Oh Gallant du Rincy, to represent to the generous
Pelisson, that this is an Affair of Consequence, that he must now or never
redouble the Recommendation of his Patron, before whom every Knee bows, and get
him to speak to the Provost of the Merchants, and the four Sheriffs who are to
meet on Thursday Morning about ten, at the Townhall. It will not be enough
barely to desire them to do Justice, for that they owe to the meanest
Scoundrel, but to beg a Favor of them, if there be Occasion for it: But
between Friends the Affair is honest, and they may easily pass it without
getting the ill will of one Man in the City.

LETTER XIX.
To Monsieur de Marigny.
Sir,
TO deal freely with you, I scarce know how to behave my self, after the Prince
of Conde has done me the Honor to remember me, and although I am the most
wretched and melancholy Man that ever was, yet I must publish my Joy to all the
World, since you send me word, that his Highness is pleased to divert himself
with reading my Letters. I cannot imagine how you come to think them so
pleasant at Brussels, for the Person that writes them at Paris is to my
Knowledge sometimes so confounded splenetick and ill humored, that there is no
enduring him. And who, in Lucifer's Name, would not be so under my
Circumstances? It Is true indeed, the World sometimes seems to have an Esteem
for me, and often too think me worthy of their Pity, but alas, that is all; for
they take no care to relieve me.

Each Hour, Alas! I older grow,
Time on my Temples sheds his Snow.
And as I find my self decay,
And hasten to my Mother Clay,
My past and present Ills conspire
To jade my Muse, and damp my Fire.
When I consider that I was born well enough made, to have served the Respects
of the Bois-Roberts of my time.

That merry bant'ring Priest, you know,
Who not a Rag of Sense can show,
Thanks to his noble Front of Brass,
For a profound Divine does pass.
When I bethink my self, that till the Age of Twenty seven I had a Constitution
strong enough to out-drink a Dutchman; that I am still so sound within, that I
drink all sorts of Liquors, and eat all sorts of Meat with as keen an Appetite
as the greatest Epicure of them all. When I consider, that for the Faculties of
my Mind, I am neither dull, nor weak, nor impertinent; that I am free from
Ambition and Avarice, and that if Heaven had been pleased to have left me the
Use of my Legs, which in the Days of Yore could have made a shift to lead up a
Dance, and of my Hands which once knew how to paint, and tickle a Violin, and
in short, my Body strait and well-shap'd, I might have lived a comfortable
Life, though somewhat obscure. When these cruel Thoughts come into my Head, I
swear to you, dear Friend of mine, that if it had been lawful for me to make
away with my self, I had long ago dispatched all my Miseries with a hearty Dose
of Poison; and in my Conscience I shall be forced to come to it at last.

Under those cruel pains I groan,
Would force Complaints from Hearts of Stone;
And cannot hope to find Repose,
Till Death my wearied Eyes does close.
Why should my barbarous Stars delight
On me to shed their restless Spite?
It Is plain, I suffer for the Crime
Of trespassing in wicked Rhyme.
To make you amends for this Melancholy Letter, wherein I was forced in spite
of my Teeth to unbosom my self to you, I send you six new Stanza's which I have
added to my Baroncide.

The Novel called the Spanish Paralitic, which was trump'd up against me to
outdo what I had done of that Nature, as far as I can find, has done me no
Harm, but made the Author ridiculous. Spanish Grammars did not sell for 50000
Livres, as you sent me word, but they did not come much short of it. However
that Tongue was never so corrupted in this World as it has been of late years
in Paris. I am exceedingly obliged to you for the Trouble you gave your self to
procure me the Spanish Plays, and remain, etc.

LETTER XX.
To the same. Aug. 1.
Sir,
IT vexes me that at the very time, when you tell me I might divert his
Highness, I cannot write to you with that Gayety as I would, and that my Hand
rebels against my Inclinations; for to my sorrow I have been plagued with a
cruel Fit of the Gout for this Month last past as well as his Highness; as if I
had not had Miseries enough before to torment me. All I can do under this new
Indisposition and those other Calamities my ill Fortune persecutes me with,
though I say it without Boasting, is, that I swear as heroically, and with as
good a Grace as any Man in France; and I humbly conceive that if his Highness
would now and then condescend, like other frail Mortals, to swear a little, he
would find some Relief and Benefit by it. I would by no means advise him to lay
it on so plentifully as I do; but if his Highness would sometimes stumble upon
an Oath or so, without any Wicked Intention, but only to expectorate himself; I
fancy it would not be amiss. For my part I am sometimes so very mad, that if
all the Furies in Hell came to fetch me away, I believe in my Conscience, I
should almost go and meet them halfway. This is the second Melancholy Letter I
have plagued you with. If his Highness were as well acquainted with the
nonsensical Stuff of our witty Coxcombs as he is with Military Affairs, and
every thing else that happens in the World, it would be some Diversion to him
to read this Letter. Mademoiselle de l' Enclos, who supt last Night with
d'Elbene and my self, told me she would write to his Highness to Day^ I sent to
compliment Monsieur de Rochefort at the Hostel d'Estree, but he took no notice
of it; but it is ten to one I shall be even with the Gentleman e're long, and
quit Scores with him at Paris. My Letter is of the shortest as well as yours
was; but next Friday I will take care to make you amends. Adieu.

LETTER XXI.
To the same. May 8th.
Sir,
YOU oblige me in the most sensible Part, when you write to me. I have no other
Comfort in this World but my generous Friends; and when you are pleased to
assure me that you are still one of that Number, you rejoice me infiniteely
more than the General Peace will do. This Comparison at first Sight, I suppose,
will appear weak to you; and indeed I must needs own that the Affairs of Europe
may change a hundred times, and still for the better, whereas mine are in no
likelihood of mending. But I have a wonderful Desire to see your Prince once
more in France, if it were for no other Reason, but because France has had a
very ill hand at Princes this year, although she has more of them than ever, and
perhaps the succeeding years will be no better than the former, as likewise to
embrace my fat, my plump, my jolly M -- for I make no question but that the
Flemish Double Beer has improved his Shape to a Miracle. But is it possible
that the Great Conde should know I am still in the World? My Friend Guenault
told me that he saw the Second Part of my Comical Romance lie upon his Table,
which has made me as proud as Lucifer. These Furious Devils called Hero's would
be worth their weight in Gold, would they but stoop so low as to have a little
Love for us poor Mortals, who love them exceedingly. As for yours, one would
swear that a Hundred Hero's at least went to the making of him, since he has
put our invincible Troops so often to the scamper. It may truly be said of him,
that if he was a great Prophet in his own Country, which the Scripture tells us
no Man ever was, he was a greater in a Foreign Country. If he takes the Trouble
to cast his Eye upon the Five Letters I have sent you, pray let me know what he
says of them. The Melancholy Letter comes just now from me piping hot, the rest
were written last year. I will shortly send you a Sketch or Essay that has
something of the Spirit of Satyr in it; it is my Misfortune that it is writ upon
a Rascal who is not known enough in the World. In short it is a Son of a Whore
of an Extortioner that owes me Six hundred Pistols, and refuses to pay me. But,
to drop this Villain, I will tell you after what Manner the Third Volume of my
Comical Romance begins. There were not as yet any Iilting Females in the World,
and these Jansenists of Love had not as yet began to despise Mankind. Our Ears
were not as yet persecuted with Life of Life, Angelick Fair, and Charming
Goddess, when the little Ragotin, etc.

Well, Old Tossed, and how do thou pass thy time? Tell me, Bully Rock, art thou
still strong and Iusty? Are the Bona Roba's kind, and will they venture a
Broadside with one? Adieu, thou everlasting Devourer of Tarts, thou Ocean of
Custards, and Walking Quagmire of Butter. When the gallant Persan comes to
Paris, 'twill be his Fault if we don't drink the other Pot of Tea in my little
Room. Pray give my humble Service to him, and make a Compliment in my Name to
those worthy Gentlemen, Bouteville and Rochefort. Take care in good time to
inform the pretty Lady, who you say is fallen in love with me, that for the
Punishment of my Sins, my Person is become so hideous and terrible, that here
in Paris they forbid Big-bellied Women to come near me. To conclude, I must
conjure you still to love me, by your -- Long and Strong, I will not say -- but
such as Providence has given it you.

Lazarillo de Tormes.

LETTER XXII.
To the Marshall d'Albret. Aug. 20.
My Lord,
YOU may conclude we have little News stirring here, when I am reduced to so
low an ebb, as to tell you that Boncaur and Charleval are in Normandy, and that
Madam de Martel and her Daughter came yesterday to Town. If I must needs send
you a long Letter, and by the Pains I take to divert you, must at least
convince you that it was not my Fault if I could entertain you no better, it is
certain that in this present dearth of News I must bestir my self most notably.
Though the Sights at the The Place of Execution at Paris.
Greve, are none of the properest things to send to a Person of your Quality,
yet I must inform you that we hang and break upon the Wheel every Day in the
Week, that the Hangman is wearied with so much Drudgery, and talks of taking in
a Partner; and that Madam -- who next to Monsieur de -- loves nothing in the
World so much as to see People die in Public, begins to be glutted with such
Sights, and if it were not upon St. Ange's Score, whom she desires to see broke
upon the Wheel whatever it costs her, she would forswear going to the Greve
this twelvemonth. All these worthy Gentlemen are Natives of Paris, most of
them the Sons of Pastry^cooks and Vintners, who robbed all the Coaches and
Chairs that came in their Way, and several Gavottes, Fanchons, and Nanons, that
have now Stone Doublets upon their Backs, are in great Danger of swinging in
the Air. I must tell you be way of Digression that my Countrymen the Parisians
are, generally speaking, valiant enough in all Conscience, but they have a
strange Inclination to die in their Shoes, and cut Capers under a cross piece
of Timber. Now I talk of violent Deaths, I will tell you of one that is not
altogether so scandalous as Hanging, but full as terrible. Before I enter into
my Story, you are to understand that at Charenton, the next Day after their
Sundays or Holidays, the Devil a jot of any thing you can get to eat there, and
new Bread is as hard to come by as a Maidenhead at Court. It was upon a Monday,
when the Furious Rincy, the Eloquent Pelisson, the never-to-be-too-much
commended Madam Scudery, and the discreet Madam Bocquet, at half an hour after
Ten precisely in the Morning, sent word to that Pink of Courtesy the Noble
Izar, who had been about eight Days at Charenton to take the Air, that they
intended to dine with him, and that he needed to provide nothing else but a
good Soop and a Dessert, because they would bring Victuals along with them from
the Cook's. Izar and a Man of the Law, whose Name was du Mas, that kept him
Company in the Country, set all Hands to work, for the better Reception of
these Illustrious Guests; for you must know the four Persons abovementioned are
not to be seen every day together. Three Pullets were thrown into the Soop,
with abundance of Green Pease; and while a Fellow was sent on horseback to
Bagnolet to buy Strawberries, the most celebrated Pastry-Cooks in Charenton
were employed in making Tarts and Cheese-cakes. The Garden was pitched upon as
the fittest Place to dine in, and both the Table-cloth and the Napkins, that
smelt most daintily of Lavender, were covered with a heap of new-gather'd
Flowers. At last our jolly Company of Wits arrives. Rincy alights out of the
Coach, and immediately runs into the Kitchen. The Soop displeased him, and all
the Preparations that Izar and du Mas had made, and he delivered himself with
so much Vehemence and Authority, that from that very moment du Mas began to
respect and fear him. He that had a mind to wash his hands, washed them. At
last down to Dinner they sat; Rincy made Jests upon the Country-Soop, and was
trying to cut a Loaf asunder, but finding it hard and over-baked, he made no
more ado but flung it at a neighboring Apricock-tree, by the same token he
spoiled it for ever bearing Fruit more, by breaking its greatest Boughs. He
tries a second Loaf, and finding it stale and hard as the former, with the same
Vigor and Alacrity he discharges it at another Tree. In short, with six or
seven Loaves of the same hardness with their Predecessors, he knocks down as
many Fruit Trees more, to the exceeding Vexation of the Woman of the House, who
ran to prevent the Desolation of her Garden, and made most horrible Outcries.
Rincy was not a jot moved by them; he swore that no Body should eat a Bit till
they got him some new Bread. Messengers were forthwith dispatched to all the
Houses that baked, and they found at last some Bread just coming out of the
Oven. It was laid before Rincy, who found it so terrible hot, that they were
glad to pick up, among the broken Boughs of the Trees, those Loaves that had
been thrown away, but were much more eatable than this Bread that burnt their
Mouths. Rincy's blunt Behavior and Talk exceedingly surpised our Counselor
du Mas, and his imperious Air no less affrighted him. From that very hour he
had Rincy always in his Imagination. He could not sleep without terrible
Dreams, and these Dreams were full of nothing but Rincy. At last the Fright
that Rincy gave him, threw him into a Fever. This Fever carried him off in less
than fifteen Days, and he died stark raving Mad, talking incessantly of Rincy.

This is all I know at present, My Lord, that is worth the while to communicate
to you. Madam Scarron bids me tell you that she cannot resolve to write to you,
till she sees something cheerful and pleasant in your Letters. This makes me
reflect that if you suffer your self to be as much afflicted at P^^s as you
were at Paris, this Letter of mine comes to visit you at a very improper
Season; but Time, and more-especially your Reason, will I hope produce their
ordinary Effect upon a Misfortune that is not to be remedied. I am, with the
utmost Respect,

Your Lordships most humble, and most obedient Servant, S --

LETTER XXIII.
To the same. Febr. 4. 1660.
My Lord,
I Cannot tell whether you have received a Letter twenty eight Pages long, which
I sent you the last Post. That long tedious Epistle shall atone for the
Shortness of this: For which Reason I accompany it with my Epigrams upon --
till the Baroncide is finished, which I hope to send you on Sunday next. I
likewise send you a Ballad which is not contemptible, some Verses of Benserade
that follow those he composed upon the Peace, and a Sonnet upon Enjoyment,
written by a young Lady of about Nineteen, whose Name is -- It Is a thousand
pities that she is not so Handsome as she is Coming, and that her Face is not so
good as her Intentions. I daily expect to see the Effect of the Promises of
Monsieur le sur Intendant, as much as the Jews do to see the Messiah. The Devil
on it is, that a Man is upon the Rack all the while he hopes, at least he is
uneasy, and Delays in Affairs of this Nature, never do any Good, but
frequently Hurt. As for me, I am so unlucky a Dog, that I never had any good
Fortune befall me in the whole Course of my Life, but I was forced to break
through a thousand Difficulties first. You will pardon this Melancholy
Reflection in a Wretch who is the Football of Destiny, and can scarce make a
shift to keep Soul and Body together. I have been in this confounded
Predicament two Months and upwards. We begin to despair of the Recovery of the
Duke of O^leans. Yesterday the Duke of Lorrain took Post for Blois. Vilarceau
lies still in the Bastile, although those worthy Gentlemen the M^reschals gave
him hopes that he should only go in and come out again. This, my Lord, is all
the News the Town at present affords. If any of my Letters have not been
employed to light Fires, I beseech you to let me have them again. I may pick
some Fragments out of them, perhaps, that may serve to fill a new Collection I
am going to publish.

LETTER XXIV.
To the same. Dec. 2. 1659.
My Lord,
SInce the Pasty you were pleased to send me, I have received your excellent
Cheeses. For my part I believe you design to pamper me with the greatest
Rarities in the World. Your Liberality has extended it self to all my Boarders,
who are civil Persons, I Will assure you, and have drank your Health very
plentifully. If your great Pasty was admirable, your Cheeses deserve no less
Commendation, being as good as it is possible for Cheeses made of Mortal Milk to
be. But not to rob your fine Presents of the Praises they deserve, you must
permit me to say something of the Letter you did me the honor to write to me,
and to tell you that nothing could be more spritely and more gallant;
particularly as for that Passage where you are pleased to tell me that you
leave it to others to regale my Wit, whereas you only pretend to regale my
Taste, I defy our finest Writers to say any thing so happily upon such an
Occasion. By this, my Lord, it appears that you are a Person of insatiable
Ambition, and that you are not content with the Glory you have acquired in the
War by your Arms, but you must triumph over us poor Authors in the time of
Peace, win our Laurels, and carry away the Prize of Eloquence from us. I wish I
had any News to send you. All the Talk of the Town is about Meniville who is
dangerously sick. All our Courtiers are returned to Paris except the Marshall
de Villeroy. So soon as any thing happens that is worth the writing, I will
take care to let you see by so small and inconsiderable Service as that is, and
which indeed is the only one I am able to do you, with what Zeal I am,

My Lord, Your most humble and most obedient Servant, Scarron.

LETTER XXV.
To --
My Lord,
IT belongs in a peculiar Manner to those of your Family to carry their
Generosity and Goodness as far as it is possible to go. Your Brother the
Attorney General has been pleased to give me a Pension, without my asking it;
and your Lordship has been pleased to come and see me at my poor Habitation,
without my soliciting the honor of a Visit from you. This unparalled
Goodness, to express my self in the new Language of my Brother-Writers, has
engaged me most terribly to your Lordship. I know full well, my Lord, that it is
one of the Meanest Presents that can be made you, but I offer it with so good a
Heart, that yours must be very hard indeed if you will not condescend to
receive it, and give me leave as long as I live to assume the Quality of,

My Lord, Your most humble, and Most obedient Servant, Scarron.

LETTER XXVI.
To the Attorney General and Sur-Intendant of the Finances.
My Lord,
IT IS not for so worthless and inconsiderable a Wretch as I am to ask Favors
of you; but I am already in Possession of receiving them, and you have already
given me so many Proofs of your Goodness and of your Compassion for my
Misfortunes, that without applying my self to any other Persons, who have more
Interest in your Lordship, and honor me with their Acquaintance, I have
presumed to rely on my own single Credit with you, to beg a small Favor of
your Lordship. It Is one of those Favors you sometimes grant, as you may see by
the Petition I have sent with it; and I humbly beseech you to have the Goodness
to read it. It Is for a Relation of my Wife, who has always been a faithful
Servant to the King, and who is persuaded that your Lordship does me the Honor
to love me. It lies on your side, my Lord, to let him see that he is not
mistaken, as it will on mine to publish to all France that you are the most
Generous of all Men, as well as you are the Ablest Minister of the Age. I am,

My Lord, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, Scarron.

LETTER XXVII.
To the same.
My Lord,
I Knew not a Syllable till Yesterday, of your great Loss, but in the little
time I have had to afflict my self for it, I have as well acquitted my self as
those who knew of it long before me. I have great Reason to complain of
Monsieur de Chaulne for not acquainting me with it sooner, that I might have
had the Honor of coming one of the first, to assure you how much I am
concerned at whatever affects you. It Is undoubtedly the Effect of my constant
ill Fortune, which would endeavor to make me seem wanting in my Duty to you,
contrary to my Inclinations, in order to make me unworthy of the Favors I
receive from you, and which I never received from any one besides. Monsieur de
Mares who did me the Honor yesterday to make me a Visit, can tell you how much
it troubled me that I should be a Stranger to that which all the World besides
knew. Upon his Encouragement I have composed a wretched Sonnet, which I made
some Difficulty of sending to you, for fear I should renew your Grief. But my
Lord, I had rather be blamed for coming too late, than give you the least
Umbrage that I am unconcerned at any Affliction, which has made such an
Impression upon you. I am,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc.

LETTER XXVIII.
To the same.
My Lord,
I Was, it seems, but too true a Prophet, when I sent you word some time ago,
that my Ill Fortune was never to be vanquished, but by a Person of the same
Generosity and Authority with your self. Under my present Circumstances, I
cannot make a better Requital to Mons. Pelisson, for his kindness in speaking
to you of my Affair, and acquainting me with the obliging Answer you made him,
than to send you the Letter he writ to me on that Occasion. It so truly
discovers the profound Respect he has for your Lordship that I presume I shall
not make his Court amiss to you, in letting you know by this means, without his
knowing any thing of the matter, what, perhaps, he is very desirous you should
know, but dares not say it to you. It Is a difficult thing to talk of you,
though it were before your Face, and not to Praise you; it is no less difficult
to Praise and not to displease you, but it is the most difficult thing of all
for one to avoid Praising you. For this reason I would have some body else tell
you in my stead, that you are the most Generous Man in the Universe, and that
all the Favors you have shown me, have far exceeded my Wishes and
Expectations. But my Lord, will you not be apt to suspect, that the Good
Office, which I imagine I do my Friend, is not altogether free from Interest,
and don't you think, that my showing his Letter and commending it to you, so
frankly as I do, is a cunning Trick to make use of his Thoughts, in order to
express my own to you, without running the hazard of trespassing against your
Modesty? I must honesty own to you, that there is something of that in it; but
since I am not able to conceal it from you, judge by this Free Confession, how
sincere I am in my Nature; and believe, that nothing is so true, as that I am
more than any Man breathing,

My Lord, Your most humble and most obedient, and most dutiful Servant, Scarron.

LETTER XXIX.
To the Same.
My Lord,
IF a Man did not find a Satisfaction within himself when he^ does a Charitable
Action, I cannot assign any reason why you should do so many to me. I don't
pretend to be in the least serviceable to you, and I dare not desire that ever
I may be so, for fear of wishing something that might be Disadvantageous to
you. Neither can I hope to contribute much to your Diversion, not being in a
condition to wait upon you, nor to make my self any otherwise known to you,
than all the rest of the World knows me, that is, for being an unfortunate
abandoned Wretch, and for Writing of Books sometimes, that is to say, for being
(so my unlucky Stars would have it) one of the greatest Plagues and Nusances of
Humane Life. But though I were Master of better Qualities, though an
Acquaintance of many Years had gained me your Friendship, and though I were in
a capacity to cultivate it by a Commerce of Letters, yet the Affairs of the
Ministry would not allow you time to read them. In truth, my Lord, these
Thoughts give me no little uneasiness, as often as I partake of your
Liberality; and I am much ashamed, that I have no way to preserve my self in
your remembrance, but by some miserable Productions of my Mind, to which a Body
more miserable, and a Destiny still more miserable than that jaded Body, have,
in a manner, denied all Tranquillity. But, my Lord, since I have happened to make
mention of my Writings and all that, has my Fable of Hero and Leander had the
Happiness to please you? Mons. de Chaulne would fain make me believe it has,
but perhaps he only designed to flatter an unhappy Wretch. I conjure you, my
Lord, either to give me your Approbation of it under your hand, which I shall
prefer to the Testimony of all the Academies in the World, or else to censure
it, in order to make me know my self. I am,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc. Scarron.

LETTER XXX.
To the Same.
My Lord,
THE Goodness you were pleased to show me in not despising the Comedy I
presumed to Dedicate to you, is of it self Obligation enough to make me devote
my self to your Lordship, although you had not engaged me to do so, by
overwhelming me with new Favors. I flatter my self, that I thank you in some
manner for them, when I honestly confess to you, that I cannot thank you
enough, and that I better express my Gratitude to you by this Confession, than
by all the Complements in the World. I am,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc. Scarron.

LETTER XXXI.
To the Same.
I So little deserve the last Favor you were pleased to confer upon me, that I
should have been surprised at it, if I had not already received so many Marks
of your Liberality, or if I were the only Man in the Kingdom who was ignorant
that you are incessantly doing Good to all Mankind. I beg you to believe, that
I have as grateful a Sense of all your Favors, as it is possible for one to
have. But, my Lord, if it is the greatest Satisfaction to me to find, that all
the pressing Affairs of State, which you so wisely manage, cannot hinder you
from thinking of mine; it is no small Affliction to me, that I cannot conceal
your Kindnesses without Ingratitude, nor publish them without making the World
suspect, that it is less out of Inclination than Interest, that I have been all
my Life,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc. Scarron.

LETTER XXXII.
To the Same.
My Lord,
NEver was any Sur-Intendant in France so much Esteemed and Beloved as you are;
and indeed never was any Man so Generous and Obliging. But I am of opinion,
that it costs you not a little; and that this Fine Reputation exposes you to a
thousand Importunities. As for me, I should have a continual Remorse of
Conscience for troubling you all my Life, and not being able to leave it off
yet, did I not see at the same time, the Wealthiest Persons, and those of the
highest Condition, beg Favors of you with more importunity than I do, although
they have not such a right to pretend to your Favors, as an Unhappy Wretch
like me, whom you have promised to make easy. It Is, my Lord, an Undertaking
worthy of you: And that I may give you the Satisfaction of seeing it sooner
over, I have made bold to recommend to you my Interests in the Affair of the
Debentures. You know very well, my Lord, that you were pleased, at my instance,
to grant the Confirmation of them. The Persons for whom I solicited you,
offered me a small Part in the Business; but as I was never Fortunate in my
Life, and could not tell what would be the Success of it, I rather chose to
accept the Six Hundred Pistoles, which they promised me under Hand and Seal,
upon the first Sums they received. At present I have no manner of Concern in
the Affair, neither have I received a Farthing of the Money they promised me, in
case I procured a Grant for them. Now one Word from you to the Party who has
the Management of it, would secure me either one or the other, or, perhaps,
both together. I make no question but you will grant me this Favor, since I am
more than any one living,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble, etc. Scarron.

LETTER XXXIII.
To the Same.
My Lord,
I Take the Freedom to make a Request to you with as much Boldness, as if after
a Court of many Years I had done you some important Service; but Men of your
Quality, and Generous to that degree as you are, not only oblige their Friends
and Servants, but all those that want their help. They are incessantly busied
to protect the Unfortunate, and see Justice done them; and as for you, my Lord,
I believe there scarce passes a day over your Head, but some Knight or unhappy
Damosel comes to beg relief of you. I therefore conjure you, as being the most
miserable Man in the World, but one who honors you the most, to grant me a
small Favor. It Is, my Lord, that you would be pleased to prevail with the
Provost of the Merchants, that he would n't oppose the establishing some
Offices in the City, the Propriety whereof I have acquired. This Affair may
make me easy in the World, and be worth to me two or three Thousand Livres a
Year. But my constant ill Destiny, which loses not the least opportunity to do
me a Mischief, has raised a busy, troublesome Coxcomb against me, who,
although he has not the least Interest in this Affair, has prepossest the
Provost of the Merchants, and made him my Enemy. I desired the President Mons.
de Guenegot, to speak a good word for me, and he was so kind as to carry Mons.
de Franquetot and my Wife to him; but his Recommendation has signified little
or nothing. I expect another sort of effect from one of your Letters to him,
which I humbly beg you to write, and send by one of your own People. When you
once let him see that I have the Honor of being known to you, he will soon
draw this Inference, that it will be worth his while to Oblige me. But if you
would farther be pleased to intimate to him, that I am not indifferent to you,
he will make my Business his own, since he will believe that it is yours in some
manner; and you will receive this Satisfaction by it, that the most Zealous of
your Servants will not be likewise the Poorest, and thus he will with more
Serenity enjoy the Honor of your Friendship. I am,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc. Scarron.

LETTER XXXIV.
To the Same.
My Lord,
ALthough you are the most able Minister of State we have, yet give me leave to
tell you, that you did not know what you did, when you condescended to assure
me by the most obliging Letter in the World, that I had some share in your Good
Will and Friendship. The Unfortunate, in which number I may justly reckon my
self, are often Troublesome against their Inclination, and Persons of the same
Generosity with your Lordship, have sometimes reason to repent of their being
so. After all these mighty things you have done for me, for which I shall be
obliged to you so long as I live, although the Success of 'em does not answer my
Expectation, I should not have a pretense to importune you any more, if either
my Unhappy Stars would leave persecuting me, or if 'twas possible for your
Generosity to be wearied. But, my Lord, you have made me too great Promises to
give me any Apprehensions of asking too much: Besides, that the Affair I beg
you to dispatch for me, is one of those that are seldom or never rejected at
the Council Table. It Is what I signified to you in my last, which in a little
time will bring Money into the King's Coffers; and if it succeeds, I shall have
as much reason to bless my Fate for your Favors to me, as I hitherto had to
bless them for your extraordinary Civility. But let things fall out as they
will, I should be the most Ungrateful Man in the World, if I were not whilst I
live,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc.

LETTER XXXV.
To the Same.
My Lord,
DOn't I take too much freedom upon me to persecute you with my Letters? Let me
know your Mind I beseech you, that if I have committed a Fault, I may amend it
for the future. To deal frankly with you, I cannot help being a little familiar
with those Persons whom I exceedingly love, nor be serious till I come to the
end of my Letter, though I begun it with MY LORD, in huge Capital Letters. I
would not have you infer from hence, that I am ever wanting in my Respect for
your Lordship: I will always acquit my self toward you, as I am in Duty bound,
and will attempt to write to you in the sublime Style when there is occasion
for it: But this same individual Man, my Lord, that will sometimes place half a
Foot distance between your Title and the beginning of his Letter, who will
lavish all his Stock of Hyperboles there, and will not forget the least of your
Qualities, to make his Performance more Solemn and Authentic, will be
sometimes so bold as to trouble you with Trifles, and strive to cheer up a
little that serious Countenance, which, in my opinion, becomes you so well when
you are making Decrees. In short, he will sometimes endeavor to Vn-Cato you,
if I may so express my self. He will not indeed presume to offer at this, when
you are taken up with important Affairs of State, and when you are
Attorny-General, Sur^Intendant of the Finances, and Minister of State
altogether. Mons. de Chaulne will take you at a more seasonable time, and will
not introduce me to you, but when you are plain Mons. Fo^quet, that is to say,
the most Obliging and Generous Man in the Universe, when you shine by your own
proper Light, without borrowing that of your Dignity and Offices; when having
quitted the Magistrates Robe, you are walking in your Chamber, either at St.
Man^e, or at Paris, in a short Coat, and almost the same Equipage and Humor
Scipio was in, when he gathered Cockle-shells on the Seashore with his Friend
Laelius. At such a time as this, my Lord, if I had the Happiness to be in your
Company, I would say every thing to you that came first into my Head, and
display my self with all the Gayety that Heaven has bestowed upon me. However,
I would not presume to make so bold with you, till I had your permission for
it, as the late Cardinal de Lion, upon asking, used to allow me; and as I take
without asking of the Cardinal de Retz, when he reposes himself just by me upon
a little yellow Couch, and we talk of something else besides Politics and
Religion. I may boast, that with these two Eminences I have triumphed over that
Formal Gravity that uses to accompany the Red Hat. Both of them formerly made
me believe that they had a Kindness for me. After such Presidents, you may
vouchsafe to afford me a little of your Love without any Shame, and by the
extraordinary Care I took to deserve their Favor, you may judge with what Zeal
I am resolved to devote myself to you. Your Lordship wishes me well for no
other consideration, but because I am Unfortunate; and you have done more for
me in Fifteen Days, than a great number of Noblemen even promised to do for me,
ever since I have been condemned a perpetual Prisoner to my Chair. Within these
twenty Years, there has scarce passed a Year over my head, but some of those
Honorable Peers, who come to see in my Chamber just as People went formerly to
see an Elephant, out of Curiosity, or who come to spend an Afternoon with me,
when they are disappointed in their Visits, or have nothing else to do; there
has scarce passed a Year over my head, I say since then, but some of these
Pretenders to Generosity, and Friends in Masquerade, have made me most
Magnificent Promises, and voluntarily offered to serve me, or any of my Friends
without my asking: Whereas Mons. the Chief President, whom I never had the
Honor to see in all my life, sent me last Year a considerable Present by Abbe
Menage, a little after I had Dedicated a Book to him; whereas you, who did not
know whether I was in the World, have Honored me with your Favors, and in a
manner too more Obliging than the Favor itself. I presume, my Lord, I ought
not any farther to explain to you what I desire of you, though you have laid an
injunction upon me to do it: I ought indeed to receive whatever Kindnesses you
think fit to confer upon me, with all imaginable Gratitude, but I have no Right
to prescribe them to you, or to importune you for them. A Person of your
Generosity needs not be instructed what he is to do. It Is enough for the
Comfort of my Life hereafter, that you have been pleased to look down from the
Eminent Station wherein you are placed, upon that wherein I am; and I don't at
all doubt, after the obliging Letter you did me the Honor to write to me, and
which I will carefully preserve, that I may justly apply to you, what a
Celebrated Poet formerly said of his Benefactor,

Deus nobis haec otia fecit. LETTER XXXVI.
To the same.
My Lord,
THough I had been as ill received by the Queen of Sweden, as my Reception has
all along been otherwise, yet every time I ordered my self to be carried to the
Louvre, to divert her Majesty, I was told that I should not be unwelcome if I
now and then waited upon you, and paid my Respects to the Person, to whom I am
more obliged than any Man living. I had long before this gratified my impatient
Desire to see you, if my Health had not obliged me to go to take the Air within
a League of Paris, where I hope to finish a Play, and the Conclusion of my
Romance. In the mean time, my Lord, I beseech you to remember the Promise you
made my Wife, concerning the Marquisate of her Cousin de Circe, and to permit
Mons. Patriau to make a Report of it to you. I confess, it is a great Favor we
ask you; but I think I have already told you, that you cannot grant small ones,
and still I protest to you, that if I were not fully satisfied that this
Estate, for which we entreat your definitive Sentence, is one of the most
Seigneurial in France, I would not have presumed to speak to you about it,
although all my Wife's Relations in Poictou have daily importuned me. But I
will no longer trespass upon your Patience. I am,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc.

LETTER XXXVII.
To Mons. Pelisson.
Sir,
YOU may read what my Patron writes to me before it comes to my hands. After
all the good Offices you have done me with him, you may very well open the
Letters he writes to me, and I have some reason methinks to complain of you,
for not reading that of to day's date before I had it It Is full of the kindest
Expressions that can be imagined; it has warmed my Gratitude to so high a
Degree, and thrown me into so great a Confusion, that if he should write me
many more Letters of the same strain, I believe that I, who ought to Love him
more than any Man in the World, should at last go and Stab my self at his Feet,
to express a Resentment so sincere as mine is. I have sent you this Letter,
that you may confess with me, that nothing can be more obliging. Send it me
back I beseech you, for I will lodge it amongst my most valuable Archives, as a
Pledge of that Kindness, which the most Generous Man upon Earth has been
pleased to express for me. Pray send me your Opinion, whether you think he was
diverted with the Epigrams that I composed upon B --. Unless I am mistaken, two
of them are pleasant enough.

LETTER XXXVIII.
To --
Sir,
IT IS almost impossible for one to be Obliging as you are, and not to be very
often importuned. For my part, I am very sensible that I am troublesome to you,
but Importunities may in some manner be allowed to Unfortunate Persons, in
which number I am sorry to rank my self, and besides, you your self must needs
think me a strange, unconsidering Wretch, if I did not make some Advantage of
the Honor of your Friendship, and the Kindness you have all along expressed
for me. My Servant left yesterday at your House, a Memorial of my Affair with
Mons. le Tardif, who to be sure would never refuse you a Matter of greater
Importance, and to whom I will communicate, whenever he thinks fit, the Grounds
upon which I build my Pretensions. I beseech you, Sir, to speak a word or two
to him about it, and to give me leave to send somebody to him as from you to
beg that of him, which you will find in the Memorial I have sent you. It Is one
of my Friends at Dreux that give^ me this Advice, and who has made me find my
private Advantage in it, besides the Satisfaction of Serving him. I am,

Sir, Your most humble and most obedient Servant, Scarron.

LETTER XXXIX.
To --.
Sir,
IT IS a mighty Loss to me, that I am not so well known to you as you are to me:
You would not then question, that I have all that due Sense of your Generosity
which you can desire, and for the several Obligations I have to you, all the
Gratitude that I can show or express. I was told to day by Mons. Tardif, what
Measures you intend to take to serve me; and I have satisfied him how far all
these obliging steps you make in my behalf are free from all suspicion of
Interest, since I am the most useless, insignificant Wretch alive. I beseech
you, Sir, to continue them, and to complete a Work, which could only be
undertaken by one that has as large a Soul as your self. If you will appoint
any day for it, I Will take care to give due notice to Mons. Tardif. I am
impatient to owe all my Ease in this World to you, not so much to see my
Affairs soon established, as that I may have more right to say, that I am more
indebted to you than any one, and I beg you to believe, that this will always
be the highest Ambition of,

Sir, Your most humble and most obedient Servant, Scarron.

To --.
Sir,
I Wish I were able to write a Letter to you that deserved to be shown to your
Patron, and would make him give a second Order to Mons. Bruant. But is it
possible for a Man to Write well, when he has not a Farthing to bless him? For
my part, I was never so plaguily out with Fortune as I am at this present
Writing. Out of Three Lotteries I could get nothing but Blanks, when Madam
Scarron could get two silver Cups; but as they don't belong to my jurisdiction,
they only make me envy her Good Luck, and rail at my own ill Destiny. Add to
this, Bois-Robert and the Corneill^s. Whom your Patron so sage,
The Maecenas of the Age,
In Honor to Wit,
He the best Judge of it,
So often invites
To see him a Nights.
This, under the Rose,
Disturbs my Repose;
As the famous Exploits of a Grecian Commander,
Inferior in nothing to Great Alexander,
Kept nightly awake
An Athenian Rake.
By my troth I cannot tell
In what Olymp'ad it fell,
It Is without it as well.
By this I find the Good Old Proverb, A Man's Face is his best Spokesman, to be
one of the truest in the World. If I could go up and down like the rest of the
two-legg'd Creation, it would save you at least twenty troublesome Letters a
Week, and I would certainly make my Court in my own Person, as Deformed and
Monstrous as it is. I have often, on my word,
Tried to visit your Lord,
And to make my best show,
Dressed and prim'd like a Beau.
But the Plague on it lies here;
When I Am put in my Chair,
My Pains strait begin,
Both without and within,
To make their Attack,
And maul me thwick thwack;
Then I swagger and roar,
Call Son of a Whore;
Ha! jernie, morbleu,
And swear like a Jew,
Or a Porter at Put,
Or Beau at a Slut,
Or a Coachman at Spark
When bilk'd in the dark,
Or Bully at Dun,
Or German Dragoon,
Or a Sharper at Play,
Or a Seaman for Pay,
Or a Rake for a Whore,
Or a Priest for a Cure.
But I Have plagued you enough
With this Tragical Stuff.
That which I have hinted to you here in Verse, the good People of Narquois de
Bigot use to call being Visited by the Lord; and I have frequently heard some
Priests and Monks Congratulate me, because the Good Lord Visited me oftener than
any one else, and they seemed to envy me this Happiness, which I would have
quitted to them with all my heart, as great a step to Salvation as they think
it. In troth, I am at present so bad a Christian, that I can hardly return my
Thanks for such Visits, and want several Rounds of the Ladder, before I can
mount up to so perfect a Resignation of my self to the Will of Providence. In
the mean time, I languish in expectation of what you have made me hope from
Monsieur Bruant. I believe, as you send me word, that he is willing enough to
oblige me, but I very much question, whether he will be able to do much for me.
I am likewise of opinion, that he is puzzled enough in all Conscience to find
Money for the beginning of the Campaign; but so small a Sum would suffice to
Equip me for mine; and what I expect from him would so little contribute to
make him easy, that he may soon put an end to all my Troubles without
increasing his own. It Is your Interest, I must tell you, to prevail with him to
do it, that you may deliver your self from the Persecution of my Billets and
Epistles. Now it comes into my Head, I was Yesterday put into bodily fear. Word
was brought me, that Mons. Meraut, Master of the Accounts, must speak with me.
I expected some terrible Business or other; but he only talked of the Repairs
of his House, the Overflowing of the Seine, the Affair of Hedin, and above all,
told me, I was a Happy Man to have so much Wit.

Sir, Your most humble, etc. Scarron.

LETTER XL.
To --.
Sir,
I Am going to tell you a Story that concerns you, and which will divert you,
unless I Am mistaken. About three days ago I happened to be without Money, an
Accident that befalls me oftener than I could wish, so I sent my Servant to Mons.
Richmond, of whom I Quarterly receive Four Hundred Livres, which the
Sur-Intendant is pleased to allow me, and prayed him to advance me Ten Days
Payment of the Quarter then running. There happened to be in the Room one Mr.
-- to whom I am an absolute Stranger, and who censured this as a great Fault in
me, which however I believe I shall not correct in my self this pretty while
yet. Seeing my Servant, says he to him, I don't know your Master, he knows no
body but Mons. de Lorme, and never Dedicated or gave any of his Books to me;
tell him that he shall not have a Penny of his Money till the end of the Month.
You may see, Sir, how this cursed, plaguey Poverty draws Contempt upon a Man,
and that although Queens and Princesses, and all the Persons of Quality in the
Kingdom have had the Curiosity to see me, Honor me with their Visits, and
Excuse me from returning them, a rude Whipster of a Fellow shall impudently
insult me. You may likewise see, that although you are esteemed and loved by
all the World, you are not able to escape the Malice of some Envious Brutes,
who are vexed at your Reputation. But I will no longer make the Men of Business
murmur, who wait you in your Antichamber, by amusing you to read a Letter of
so little Importance. I am,

Sir, Your most humble, most obedient, and most Passionate Servant, Scarron.

LETTER XLI.
To --.
Sir,
I Now send you the two Letters I read to you yesterday, because I observed
they did not displease you. In the mean time, I will order some more to be
Copied out for you, and likewise a few Verses. At present I am wholly taken up
with my Play, because I have my chief Subsistence from the Theater. This
Writing of Plays is a confounded Fatigue that does not turn to Account, when a
Man spends a World of Time and Thought about them, and there is little or no
Reputation to be got, when they are made in a hurry. All other things require
Repose and Tranquillity. A Man can scarce enjoy either one or the other, when
he is as ill in his Health as in his Affairs; and for my self, I make no
scruple to own, that I find my Gaiety sensibly decay, since, like an unhappy
Workman, I am forced to write Verses to get my Bread. I find my self too not a
little perplexed in my Thoughts about the Attorney^General, for if I don't
thank him as often as my Gratitude prompts me to do it, he will suspect I have
none; and if I thank him as often as I am desirous to do it, I fear he will
think I act wholly upon Interest. I know well enough, that he is too Generous
to expect Compliments from those he obliges, and that his Judgment is too
discerning not to know, that to give to such an useless Wretch as my self, is
properly Charity; whereas, to oblige a Person who may requite us again in
Specie, is not doing a Kindness, but downright Trafficking and Policy. In
short, Sir, there is a certain Conduct I am to observe in this Affair, which I
can only learn from your self, who have known him so long. I did not think to
write so gravely to you, but a Man cannot help sometimes having Clouds in his
Brain, which must have time to disperse. Tell me the Name of your Friend, that
I may certainly know to whom it is I am obliged. I am,

Sir, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, Scarron.

XLII. A Character.
SInce Drawing of Characters is so much in Fashion, I am resolved to attempt
one: but having a just diffidence of my own Talent, I will choose a Subject so
Fertile, that my Performance, although perhaps it is ill executed, shall
nevertheless find Admirers enough. The Person whom I design to Paint, is a Man
of Quality; Great by his Birth, since he is descended from the Blood of our
Princes, but much greater still by his Merit. When but Thirty Years old, he was
scarce thought sufficiently rewarded with one of the highest Posts at Court. He
was made an Officer of the Crown, I don't mean one of those, who are only
obliged to serve the King in a Pair of Silk Stockings, and glitter at a
Court-Masquerade; but one of those who want but one Step higher to arrive at
the Supreme Command of War, and whom our Kings may safely trust with the
Defense of our Frontiers, and the Conduct of our Armies. But he is not as yet
where he ought to be. If Fortune leaves him where he is, it is impossible for
her to be more unjust, and if she should heap upon him all that it is in her
power to give, I cannot tell whether it would be all he deserves. He possesses,
without contradiction, all those shining Qualities, that are required in what
we commonly call a Hero or Demi-God. He was so to me ever since I had the
Honor to know him, and will always be so to the rest of the World that have
any discernment. The greatest Heroes of Antiquity were in no respect superior
to him; and of all those that have wore the Sword (for there are People that
wear it in all Professions) I know none that have so Gloriously employed
theirs, as my Hero has done both in France and Flanders. In both these places,
they take a pleasure to talk of his Victories, as they formerly did in Rome to
relate that of Horatius over the Curiatii, and, if like that valiant Roman, he
has been Praised for having always beaten his Enemy, he cannot, like him, be
blamed for ever turning his Back. But if he possesses in a more eminent manner
than any Man living, all the essential Ingredients that enter into the
Composition of a Hero, he has no less his Mien. The Charms of his Person answer
his other Qualities, and by them he has triumphed over the most formidable
Beauties of the Court, as he has over the Bravest by his Valor; and his
Victories in Love equal those of War. It Is true, that he is accu'd for running
incessantly after New Conquests; but the Ambition of a Conqueror scorns all
Bounds, and he that can Vanquish with ease, can hardly forbear to make an
Attack. He is somewhat above the common Size, but not too Tall; and by what we
find his Shape at present, we may easily guess that it has been one of the
Finest in the World. His Head comprehends all the good Sense we bestow upon
Gray Hairs, without wearing their Livery, and from the agreeable Air it gives
his Face, and from that it receives from it, there results a Noble Masculine
Beauty, which, without having the Delicacy of that of the Women, has,
notwithstanding, every thing that makes them be beloved. I would not in so
particular a manner draw the Portrait of his Visage, nor of his entire Person,
did I not fear to be reproached, for speaking only of his Advantages, and
haying a design to omit the rest. Therefore, after I have said that he has fine
Teeth, a Beauty that belongs to Men as well as Women, and without which, the
most Accomplished may give disgust. I will own, that his Eyes, though lively and
full of fire, are weak to see any thing at a distance, though they lose nothing
of what they see near at hand, and that they are the sweetest in the World.
Some Ladies impute to them the Inconstancy which they condemn in him, and
complain of him for suffering himself to be conducted by such treacherous
Guides, which make him run after every new Object, and are frequently apt to
make him go astray. But is it not their fault? And the Crime they accuse him
of, does it not proceed from their bad Example? And do they practice those
Duties which they pretend he neglects? A Man may sometimes give his Eyes leave
to look upon Objects that are unworthy of him, provided he does it only en
passant, and as in my Character, I have hitherto only drawn that which he may
have in common with others, yet what he possesses above the ordinary rank of
Men, what he derives neither from his Birth and Fortune, but only from himself,
is of a much greater Price, and more difficult to Paint. I mean his Soul, that
was never shaken by any Accidents of Fortune, his Wit that equals the
Tranquillity of his Soul, and his natural facility of expressing himself, that
is, neither affected nor too studied. A Man may be sometimes allowed to be
inconstant in Love, when he is, like him, the most constant Man in his
Friendships. When I talked of the Beauty of his Shape, I forgot that of his
Legs, at a time when our great Guns have concealed the Defects of many of our
Ba^dy-leg'd Courtiers, and when those who pretend to set up for handsome
Sparks, and are, in appearance, the best made, very often have none of the
straitest.

To --
Paris, June 14th. 1657.
Sir,
I Am going to give you a convincing Proof, how much I am your Friend, by
bringing you to the knowledge of Madam de Mongeron's Son, and by giving you an
opportunity to oblige a Lady of her Merit in the Person of her Son, who really
deserves, what for my sake you will grant him, a room in your Friendship. You Will
give me a Proof of your own, if you gratify me in this particular, and for
this piece of Service to you and him, I expect abundance of Thanks from both of
you, before the Campaign will be over. Among the other good Qualities that
shine in this young Gentleman. I will acquaint you but with one, that perhaps
he would conceal from you. He plays upon the Lute better than any Man of his
Condition, and yet the time he has spent to acquire this Skill, has not done
the least prejudice to his other Exercises, no more than it has hindered his
Studies, and his Traveling into Spain, Germany and Italy. Though his Modesty, I
know, will incline him to conceal his own Worth, yet a Person of your Judgment
will soon discover what I tell you to be true, and much more, which we will
talk of next Winter. In the mean time, Oh thou most Passionate of all Men, but
the least punctual in every thing, except Friendship, I am,

Sir, Your most humble, etc. Scarron.

To --.
Sir,
You Will find me good for something, since I put an opportunity into your hands
of obliging a very honest Gentleman. It Is Mr. R --. of whom I spoke to you
the other day. He is as much my Friend as I can for the heart of me desire him to
be. By this I design to let you understand, that he has a great deal of Merit.
For your own Reputation you ought not to suspect that I don't know you; I who
know at first sight what you value, and who would buy your Friendship at the
highest Price you can set upon it, were I able to Purchase it. Monsieur de
Rosleau will let you know the rest. I am,

Sir, Your most humble, etc. Scarron.

To --.
Sir,
MY Wife has informed me, what obliging Designs you have proposed to serve us.
These new Marks of your Generosity, have added nothing to the good Opinion I
have had of you before. In that little time I had the Honor of seeing you, I
was sufficiently convinced of what your Reputation long ago had given me the
greatest Assurances; and I sincerely protest to you, that although the
Expectations I have built to my self upon your Protection and Friendship,
should be attended with no good Success, yet I shall only complain of my
untoward Destiny, and extol your Generosity while I live. The World, I believe,
does not take me for an ungrateful. Fellow, and I can give you no better Proof
of it, than by desiring you to observe, that though I am the most useless
insignificant Man alive, yet several Persons of Condition and Merit are my
Friends, or at least pretend to be so. But I must ingeniously own to you, that
among those who appear the most Zealous to serve me, not one has offered to do
it at so critical a Juncture as your self Your time, as precious as it is, is
less bestowed upon your self than others; and I am sensible, that I should make
you lose too much of it, if I should here pretend to set down all that my
Gratitude inspires me with. Till I have an opportunity to make you a Public
Acknowledgment of it, be pleased to take up with this sincere Protestation I
make you, of being, while I live,

Your most humble, etc. Scarron.

LET. XLIII.
To --.
Most Reverend Father,
YOU send me word, that Father Vavasseur has Written a Treatise against the
Burlesque Sti^e. It Is well done of him; I even envy him for so good a Design,
and you will exceedingly oblige me, to let me have a sight of a Book, which
deserves so well of the Public. If I were to write against any of the crying
Sins of the Age, I would most certainly level my Pen at Burlesque Verse: and
you have a very ill Opinion of me indeed, if you think I am angry with this
worthy. Author for his Performance. Next to a stinking Breath, and to a dull
Rogue that always affects to be Witty. I know no greater Plague in the World,
than this execrable sort of Poetry: and since I am, in some measure, the
occasion of its mighty spreading, I cannot take it ill of Father Vavasseur, if
when his hand is in, he gives me a Lash or two. Those that told you I was angry
with him, don't know me. For my part, I had not known at this very Minute, that
he had written against these Insects of Parnassus, these Scoundrils of Helicon,
if you had not given me notice of it. The Public ought to return him Thanks
for this Noble Work, which I hope will effectually reform so enormous an Abuse;
and you ought likewise to let me see him as soon as you can contri^^ it, to
make me amends for the Wrong you have done me, in believing me capable of being
displeased at so Charitable a Design. I am Father Vavasseur's and your

Most humble Servant Scarron.

LET. XLIV.
To --.
Madam,
Although my Affair were wholly desperate, I should prefer it to the best Fortune
in the World, since it has been the occasion of my receiving a Letter from you.
It Is impossible for any thing to be written in a more obliging manner, and were
I not a Gallant wholly dead to this wicked World^ I could hardly forbear
growing vain upon so great a Favor. Perhaps, Madam, you only thought to write
me a civil Letter; you have gone much farther, and I must freely declare to
you, that of the unhappiest of all Men, you have so (...) reconciled me to my
Fortune, that I look upon my self to be rather an Object of Envy than Pity. In
short; the Satisfaction your Goodness has given me, employs all the Faculties
of my Mind, and takes me up to that degree, that I don't know how to talk to
you about my Affair with Mons. de la Noue Renart. But since you enjoin me to do
it, and it is more reasonable I should obey you than follow my own Humor, I
will tell you, Madam, that provided you will signify to Mons. de la Noue Renart,
that Madam Scarron and I are so happy to have some share in your Graces, it is
impossible but my Affair must succeed in his hands, though he were as much
against me, as I know him inclined to serve you.

Madam, Your most humble, etc. Scarron.

LET. XLV.
To --. Apr. 2.
Sir,
I Cannot tell whether you are as effectually lost to your other Friends as you
are to me. For my part, I see you no more than if you were already one of the
Deans of the Angelick Choire, toward which place you are riding in Post-hast.
However, I think you are not ill provided for in this Transitory World; and in
my Opinion, Twelve Thousand Livres a Year in pure Benefices, and a Foolish
Estate of Eight Hundred Thousand Livres more, may easily reconcile a Man to
make a longer stay among us poor Mortals. Raillery apart, What is the reason I
never see you? Is it because your Hours of Devotion take up all your time, or
you are resolved to break off all Commerce with so great a Sinner as my self.
This would be the true Action of a Pharisee, and you ought much rather to
endeavor my Salvation, as a thing to be feared, and not leave me off, till you
saw the young Saint of your own planting, sprout up and flourish.

Sir, Your most humble, etc. Scarron.

LET. XLVI.
To Mons. de Segruis.
Sir,
HER Highness does me a great deal of Honor, to think that so worthless an
Insect as I is still in the World, and you do me no little Honor on your side,
to believe me capable of drawing a Character as it ought to be. Though I should
be so vain, as to flatter my self upon this Article, and my desire to please
you should give me that to Paint, yet the Portraits which her Highness has
made, would wholly discourage me from attempting any thing of this nature. They
are, as far as I am able to judge, the finest that were ever drawn; and our
Wits would have reason to complain of this Princess, for robbing them of the
Glory of Writing well, if she did not make them sufficient amends, by the
Honor she does them to be of their Profession. A good Character is a much
harder Performance than one would imagine. A Man ought to be very well
acquainted with his Subject, before he presumes to describe it; but as far as I
can see, we scarce know any thing well but our selves, and some of our intimate
Friends. Now I will appeal to you, whether a Man of Breeding can commend
himself without a great deal of Vanity, and on the other hand, is he obliged to
lay open his blind-side to others as he would to his Confessor? In like manner:
Can a Man praise his Friends without tiring them, or expose their Defects
without offending them? There are no less inconveniences in praising those
Persons that are indifferent to us: For as a Portrait ought to be of a known
Subject^ and a Man has no other way of making himself known but by his Quality
and Merit, we run the risk of Disobliging those whom we ought to Respect and
Esteem, if we don't give them the Praises they deserve. We are taken for
impertinent Fools, if we bestow false Commendations upon them, and let us
manage the Panegyric as nicely as we can, yet nothing, in my Opinion, is more
fulsome and tedious, either for him that receives it, or for him that gives it,
or for those that hear it. Besides these general Reasons, which have made me
take up a Resolution not to draw any Characters, I have some peculiar to my
self, which I don't doubt but you will allow. An unhappy Wretch as I am, that
never stirs out of his Chamber, can have no Knowledge either of Men or Things,
but by second hand from others; and you will agree with me that this is a great
disadvantage to a Painter, who ought to have his Imagi^tion full of a great
number of Idea's, that are only to be had in Conversation and seeing the World.
For my part, I find to my great Mortification, that a Man grows rusty at
long-run in a Chamber, as well as in the Country; and I am no less satisfied,
that he ought to have as great a stock of Wit and Judgment^ as the Princess
has, to be able to draw a Character well, and to be of the same Quality with
her, to be able to Praise and Blame without incurring Censure. I am,

Sir, Your most humble, etc. Scarron.

LET. XLVII.
To the Duke of Elboeuf.
I Know well enough what I owe to one of your Grace's Dignity, and will never
abuse it; but it is almost impossible for me to write to you without trembling,
and to preserve my cheerful Temper, in a Letter which is to begin with a May it
please your Grace, written in huge Gigantick Letters, and the rest following it
at half a Yard distance at least. Be not displeased that I take this
opportunity to send you a thousand Thanks for doing me the Honor to think of
me now and then, for all the Pies you have presented me with, and particularly
for the last which I just now received. We shall open it to Morrow with more
Pomp and Solemnity than Lawyers do the Term: there will be the Messieurs de
Vivonne, de Mata, d'Elbene, de Chastillon, and my self. We will drink your
Health most magnificently, and the Honor of your Remembrance shall fully
comfort me for the absence of Madam Scaron, whom Madam de Mont^ chevreuil has
carried away from me. I am mightily afraid lest that Debauched Lady should make
the Wife of my Bosom take a fancy to Wine and Women, and perfectly spoil her
before she sends me her home again. As for you, my Lord, let me advise you not
to squander away all your Radical Moisture among the Nymphs of Picardy, but
keep a little to comfort the poor Damsels of Paris, on questo. I am, of all
your most humble and most obedient Servants, the most dutiful and most zealous,

Scarron.

LET. XLVIII.
To Mons. de Villette. Nov. 12. 1659.
Sir,
I Was not in a condition to send you an Answer sooner, by reason of a great
Defluxion in one of my Eyes. Since that time you have written to Madam Scarron,
and likewise to Mons. de Nossac. Your two Letters are admirable in their kind,
and deserve to be learnt by heart. A Person of very good Sense, to whom you are
no Stranger, told me when he read them, that he was confident you were in very
good Health, and that your Affairs went well in the World, since you were able
to write two such diverting Letters. As for me, if I did not know that you writ
both of them with all the ease imaginable, I would say of your fine
Compositions in Prose, wherein you carry the Prize, what the aforesaid Mons.
d'Elbene said very pleasantly some time ago, of those People that are always
aiming to speak witty things in Company: That in truth, a Man got a great deal
of Credit by always speaking fine things, but that by straining to do so, he
put himself to a great Expense, and that he had made it his observation, that
such Gentlemen did not live long. May Heaven of its infinite Goodness still
preserve you in this secundity of Wit, and indefatigability of Hand, and may I
Fifty years hence be entertained with your happy Productions. But this only by
the by.

Madam Scarron is very unhappy that she has not a Coach and Six, and a fine
Equipage, to go up and down where she pleases, when so great a Happiness is
offered her, as that of being invited to Brouage by Mademoiselle de Manchini.
Tyber's rich Present, and the Pride of France. I hope she will make her self
amends for so great a Loss, so soon as the Court returns to Paris, and that
then she will have the Honor of being known to that incomparable Roman Lady, and
have some share in her Friendship. As for me, I would offer her my Incense (for
you know that we Poets must always have some Divinity to bestow it upon) but I
no less distrust the Merit of my Present, than I am persuaded, that no Person
in the World deserves the richest Figures of our Poets better than she; and you
know well enough that our Merchandise is slighted, when it is given before it is
called for. Paris is as empty as your Brouage is full, though I am scarce
sensible of it in my little Habitation here; for Company so crowds upon us,
that I have ordered my Servants to tell all the Princes, Dukes, and Officers of
the Crown that enquire for me daily, that I receive no Visits. This makes
People very ambitious to be admitted into our little Society, and there is
furious canvasing for it both in City and Court. I don't say this with a design
to insinuate, that we at Paris pretend to enter into any competition with your
Deities at Brouage, and with your other happy Persons, that enjoy such
instructive Conversation there: But their true Element is Paris or the Court,
and when upon their leaving Brouage, they leave you in your Primitive nothing
where they found you, you will be no better nor worse than Country-Bumpkins,
and mere Clowns. Adieu, my Hand aches with Writing.

LET. XLIX.
To the Count de Vivonne.
Sir,
I Have found the foul Copy of the Letter which I writ to you, and must needs
own to you, I think it very foolish; but since you have a mind to see it, I
send it you such as it is. It Is a wonderful satisfaction to me that you keep me
still in your Remembrance; and indeed you do me but justice, for you are
obliged in Conscience to think sometimes of a Man that esteems you so much as I
do; and I beseech you to believe that your retirement at Roissy is not half so
tiresome to your self as me, who should hope sometimes to see you at my poor
Quarters, if you were in Paris; I mean when you can find no body in the Ruedes
Tournelles, or elsewhere, and you have nothing better to employ you. Our
Neighbors should be the principal Subject of our Conversation, or, if you
please, the Burden of the Song, and to relieve the Scene, we would sometimes
tell merry bantering Stories, without which, I positively maintain, that all
Conversation in a little time becomes insipid and languishing. Mons. d'Elbene
and I, remember you frequently over our Wine, and I wish with all my Heart you
were here to Pledge us. Monsieur, de Mata is in Xaintonge, and 'twou'd be well
for me if he were in Paris; for then you would have less reason to fear being
tired with impertinent Chat, when you would be so good natured as to make a
short Visit to

Your most humble Servant, Scarron.

LET. L.
To --. Sept. 5. 1^60.
Sir,
AT last my Affair is Signed, and I owe all the Obligation of it to you. I wish
I were Master of something better than Complements, to testify my
Acknowledgment to you, but they are at least valuable upon this score, that
they are hearty and sincere; and I beg you to believe, that I would not publish
to all the World that I am the greatest Admirer of Mons. de Guiche, and the
most Zealous of his Servants, if I were not really so.

Scarron.

LET. LI.
To the Marquess de Villarceaux.
Sir,
I Am extremely obliged to you for refreshing me, when I walked this Morning,
with the agreeable Vision of the two Angels of your own making. It Is certain
you had an excellent Model by you when you made them, and that you must know
something more of those happy Beings than the rest of Mankind. Accident and
Chance never use to produce any thing so perfect as they are, especially in
things of this Nature, where a Man must run it off hand in spite of his Teeth,
and where he must finish all at a stroke, or else give over. My Friend Roisleau
said very pleasantly upon this occasion, that you ought to do nothing else but
get Children. To return now to yours, I confess they are admirable, and as
every thing has its value, the greatest is, in my opinion the Eldest of the
two; whether it be because he is more advanced than his Brother, who likewise
will have his Admirers stand up for him in his turn: or because my inclination
leads me that way and fixes me there, for which I can assign no reason. In
short, both of them are very worthy of their Father, and since you would have
me tell you by their Physiognomy what their Fortunes are like to prove; they
will commit a world of Ravages upon People of both Sexes. It will not be long
before the Eldest will begin to push on his Conquests, and perhaps will make an
Attempt upon some of yours^ May Heaven in Mercy avert such a Misfortune from
your Family, which may sow Division between two Brothers, and make Father and
Son two irreconcilable Rivals. There happened to be in my Room when they came
thither, three or four Gentlemen of very good Judgment and Sense, who agreed,
that both of them were Excellent, but were of my opinion, that the Elder was
the better of the two, and have given me their Votes for him. In truth, I
believe that one may justly say of him, His Shape is Divine, and so is his Face,
So in ^hort is all about him:
And if his Soul with his Body keeps pace,
What Mortal alive can rout him?


LET. LII.
To --.
I Am infinitely obliged to you for your Civility, and for offering to do me
good Offices with the Queen. Ever since I have been in Disgrace, I never durst
write to her Majesty, to complain of my ill Fortune, and make my Innocence
appear. The Vexation it gave me, did not allow me the least Intermission, till
such time as you gave me to understand, that her Majesty^ had asked for some of
my Plays; which makes me flatter my self that she still remembers such a Wretch
as I was once in the World. During the Troubles of the Regency, my unfortunate
Reputation made every thing that was printed at Paris, whether Good or Bad, to
pass under my Name. This Abuse still continues, notwithstanding all the Pains I
have taken to undeceive the World. Some insolent Libels against his Eminence
were fathered upon me, and the Reason perhaps was, because another Gentleman of
the Purple, who was of the contrary Faction to his Eminence, was pleased to
honor me with his Friendship, though I was both known and loved by him from my
Youth, long before his Reputation began to sink at Court. But suppose I had
been so ungrateful, and so thoughtless, as to be wanting in my Respect to her
Majesty and his Eminance^ May not a sincere Repentance hope to find that from
them, which it expects from Heaven? I am not so vain to ask to be admitted
again into her Majesty's good Graces, which the unhappiness of the Time, rather
than any Crime of my own, made me lose. I would only beseech her to drop her
Indignation against an unhappy Wretch, who has not long to live. This would be
worthy of the Generosity of her Soul, and if this great Happiness should arrive
to me, through your Mediation and good Offices, I should be more obliged to you
than any Man living. I am,

Sir, Your most humble, etc. Scarron.

To that pair of worthy Gentlemen, and my dearly beloved Friends, Menage, and
Sarrazin, or Sarrazin, and Menage.
Gentlemen and dear Friends,
TO Dedicate the same Book to two Persons, is to kill two Birds with one Stone.
I cannot tell whether I have any pretense to go upon this Proverb, being a
Cripple in my Hands and Feet, and perhaps this is introducing a Novelty in
Dedications, which my Brother Poets will never forgive me. But for my part, I
never stood upon writing correctly in my Life. It Is true, I might very well
have saved my self the Trouble of this preliminary Epistle, having trepass'd in
this kind too much already, and having Business enough upon my Hands, if I have
Constancy enough to finish my Virgil Tr^^estied. The Book I Dedicate to you,
contains a thousand Verses, so there is just five hundred a piece for each of
you. I must confess you deserve ten times more, for which reason I designed to
have tacked a small Romance to them, which I began some time ago, by the same
token that it promised fine things at its first setting out. But by some cursed
Misfortune, or my own Fault, I could not for the Heart of me hinder my poor
Hero from being sentenced to be hanged: And this hanging came in so naturally,
so prettily, and all that, that I could not change it into any other Adventure,
without spoiling the Conclusion of my Romance, and sinning against the Light of
my own Conscience.

The Duce on it, instead of expatiating upon your Praises, after the laudable
Custom of most Dedications, I have rambled so far from my Subject, that I don't
know how I shall be able to find my way home again. But not too much of the
Duce on it neither. Better late than never; and besides, it is in my Power to
make my Epistle as long or as short as I please. Stand fair then, Gentlemen, I
am going to -- commend you as hard as I can drive. But Oh my cruel Destinies!
Where shall I begin? Or indeed where shall I not begin; for as When Phillis to
a Garden goes
To pluck a Lily or a Rose
In order to regale her Nose:
The great Variety she meets
Distracts her in her Choice of Sweets.
Even so your Praises come so quick,
And crowd and justle in so thick,
That, may I be for ever cursed
If I know which to mention first.
Well, I never was so damnably puzzled in all my Life, that is certain. You are
the two finest Gentlemen of the Long Robe and Short Cloak; you are as much
Masters of the foreign Language as the Natives themselves. You know all the
Elegancies of your own to perfection. You are not to be matched either in Verse
or Prose; in short, you are more quick-sighted than all the Critics in the
Universe put together. One of you has an admirable hand at Dancing, Singing,
and playing upon Instruments, And tickles a Lyre
With a Fist so divine,
That all He^^ers combine
His skill to admire.
As for Shooting, Vaulting, jumping through a Hoop, Wrestling, etc. I will say
nothing, though I would not for a thousand Pounds take my Corporal Oath that
you know nothing of those Matters. But as for Conversation, all the World must
truckle to you: People point at you as you walk in the Streets. You are well
humored and well made, and gracious, and courteous, and jovial, and liberal;
nay, you are valiant, and amorous, if it were put home to you, although your
Professions excuse you from the former; and as for the second, I make no
question but that in your youthful Days, When your Pulses beat high,
And called you to toy,
You were not so stupid
As to quarrel with Cupid.
In short, you are truly Virtuous, and that (...) eminent a Degree, that when
any one has a Mind to be thought so, he cries, I am just come from Menage, I am
going to see Sarrazin. Menage and Sarrazin just now parted with me. And even I,
who talk to you, when either of you, or both together come to see me, cannot
forbear to acquaint all the World with it; nay, sometimes I tell it the same
Man twice or thrice, which I must own to you, shows a great deal of Vanity on
my side. But don't I make you blush? For I know you are as modest as the
Morning, you are Gentlemen that will easily blush, and I love and respect you
exceedingly for it. Come, come, don't disquiet your selves, I will bring no
Scarlet into your Faces. In short, I will persecute you no longer. Although A
Theme so fruitful does inspire
The dullest Beast with generous F^re:
Undone by Plenty, lost in Store,
I know not when I should give over.


The next Book I do my self the Honor to dedicate to you, (for if I am long
above Ground I shall trouble you with another Dedication) I hope you will own my
Style is much altered for the better, by reading some of our modern
Epistle-mongers, whom I dare not name, for fear of plucking an old House upon
my Head. So good Night to you Gentlemen. I am with all my Soul,

My dear Friends, Your most humble, etc. Scarron.

To Monsieur Morreau, one of the King's most Honorable Privy Council.
SIR,
THE Reason why I presume to Dedicate this Book to you, is because you advised
me to publish it; and the Reason likewise why I enlarge upon your Praises, is,
because Epistles Dedicatory are only calculated for the Meridian of Panegyric.
Among your other excellent Qualities that recommend you to the World, nothing
belongs in a more peculiar manner to you, than your happy Judgment in the
Choice of your Friends. None can boast that Honorable Title, but Men of Worth
and Honor; and to acquire such a Character, it is enough for a Man to be often
seen in your Company, or to be able to prove by Witnesses or otherwise, that he
is honored with your Friendship. I have not so little a regard to my
Reputation, but that I am very proud to take this Opportunity to let the World
know that you are pleased to love me. But that I may not be censured for
commending my self too much, I am content that the World should likewise know,
that I am only one of your Friends, by way of courtesy, (if I may be allowed
so to express my self) who is inferior to all the rest in Merit, but not in
the Esteem and Respect he will eternally preserve for you, who is,

Your most humble, etc. Scarron.

To that most Courteous and Complaisant Quadrupede, the Lady Guillemette, my
Sister's little Greyhound Bitch.
My Lady Guillemette,
I Am an Author, God help me, if a Man may be said to deserve that Title, whose
Name has appeared more than once in a Term-Catalogue, and at the Fag-end of a
Gazette, among strayed Horses, and now and then, dear Madam, among some of your
Ladyship's strayed Relations. It Is true, I came very cheap by this Title, and
am sensible that the little I have laid out upon it gives me in Justice no
higher a Rank than that of a Verse-Wright, or a turner of Burlesque-Rhimes.
Having made this modest Acknowledgement, I am confident that you will never lay
the Sin of Vanity to my Charge, and that you will hardly imagine (if the Proverb,
which says, No Man is a Prophet in his own Country, holds good in you Dogs)
that a Man whom you see every Day in Paris, where he was born, whose Head
always hangs on one side, and who never budges out of his Chair; in fine, one
that was cast in a different Mold from the rest of Mankind, has Courage enough
to set up for a Modern Author. By Apollo, Guillemette, nothing can be more
true; and by the same Apollo I swear to you, without any Equivocation or
Reserve, that I have no wicked Design upon the Bays. For my part, I am so far
from setting up for a Wit, that I freely and frankly give the World leave to
call my Works Rhapsodicks, or Taylor's Cushions, or what they please; because,
to my great Comfort, abundance of Modern Plays, and other Productions of our
Second-Rate Wits, deserve no better a Name; which I value little more than I do
a last Year's Almanac, wherein we may see, as well as in those Plays, the
Death of some great Man, a Statesman discarded, Phillis hanged in her Garters,
and such like noble Catastrophes of the Theater.

Now these noble Productions would from their very Infancy be employed to wrap
up Butter and Tobacco, to line Trunks and Bandboxes, or make Paper Kites, if no
Country-Chapmen came to Paris; or if they did not, make a shift to go off under
the Protection of some admirable Plays, and some diverting Romances, that
enrich their Authors, and so often raise a Civil War among our Booksellers.
When we set no great value upon a thing, we use to say, that it is scarce good
enough to be thrown to the Dogs. As your Merit and Beauty secure you from the
scandal of this Proverb, which was never intended for Dogs of your eminent
Quality, so I only cited it to convince the World, what an humble Opinion I
have of my own Compositions; and although, Madam, you are neither better nor
worse than a Brute, yet I rather chose to dedicate them to your Ladyship, than
to any of our topping Noblemen, whom I should certainly disoblige by such a
Presumption. For I must tell you, Guillemette, that an Author with a Book in
his Hand, is more formidable to one of these Worthy Peers; and the very sight
of him terrifies them as much, as a whole Covy of Creditors at their Levee: Not
but that we have some generous Lords still left us, Heaven be praised for it;
but most of our Modern Authors are such Idolaters of Money, that they would
much sooner Dedicate their Works to a Man, from whom they expect a round Sum of
Guineas, though they don't care if he were hanged the Hour after, than one whom
they love and esteem. These fordid Imitators of Virgil and Horace, that adore a
Lord merely for his Title make no scruple to dub him a Maecenas at first dash,
and ascribe to him Virtues he was never Master of, and all to wheedle him out
of a little Money, if he has any One would almost swear, that these Prodigal
Sons of Apollo had a wicked Design to squander away the whole Growth of Helicon
in one Dedication: they bestow Immortality upon the highest bidder, and will
furbish ye up a Demi God at a Minute's Warning, for a Suit of Clothes and a
long Periwig. In short, these m^rc^nary Scriblers plunder the illustrious Dead
of former Ages, to trick up some living Scoundril of Quality with their Merit;
which execrable Flattery Men of Sense despise, as they ought to do the grossest
Affront. It Is some Consolation to the few righteous and honest Friends of the
Muses, that these fawning Slaves are often bilk'd in their Expectations, and
that People have more Guts in their Brains than to part with their Money for a
few nauseous Complements. Even our Noblemen have found out the Trick to give
them nothing, and yet give them no Occasion to complain of them. Some will cry
to them, The God of Verse protect and bless you in all your Undertakings.
Another will treat them with as much Ceremony as they would a Foreign
Ambassador, and wait upon them down to the very Street; that is to say, see
them fairly out of their House. Some again pay them in the current Coin of
(...) giving them Incense back again for Incense, and Flattery for Flattery;
but the Devil of a Lord of 'em all will invite them to Dinner, and this is
enough to make a poor Author hang himself in his Garret. For this hungry
Wre^ch, that flattered himself in the Morning, that he should cram his Belly
with my Lord's Kickshaws and Ragoo's, or thought to treat himself most nicely
at an Eating-House, at the Expense of his Magnificent Patron, is forced to
return Home to his Quarters poorer than he went out, with being at the Charge
of binding his Dedication, Book in Vellom or Turkey-Leather. Then he exclaims,
as hard as he can drive, at the horrid Ingratitude of the Age, or at the
starving Planet he was born under, according as he his more of the Poet or
Orator in him. I forgot to tell you, Right worshipful Guillemette, that our
Authors, are sometimes paid by way of Exchange, in the very same Commodity
they brought with them, and receive no other Reward for all the fine
Complements they pass upon their Patron, than an Epistle for an Epistle, or a
Sonnet for a Sonnet: Our Persons of Quality pretend they learnt this Piece of
Conduct of the Emperor Augustus; but this is a Trick that is not to be played
Twice with People, who are so sharp as our Authors generally are. I have
therefore presumed to dedicate my Book to your Ladyship for the abovementioned
Reasons, or perhaps for others that I have no mind to let you know. I already
fancy with my self, that I see you grawing the Strings of my Book, ^umbling it
about, and tearing it in a Thousand Frolicksome Postures, which please me
infinitely more, than the cold Reception of a Supercilious Lord, that will not so
much as thank me for the Present I make him, because he thinks I have the
Impudence to expect another from him. Accursed be that Poet, say I, though he was
never so much a Master of his Profession, who first prostituted the Productions
of his Brain to this infamous (...) and baited his Dedications with Flattery,
to make the Court-^udgeons swallow them the easier! Ever since our Authors have
set up the noble Trade of begging in Prose and Verse, an Epistle Dedicatory has
been looked upon to be a sort of a Challenge; and if Maecenas is not able to
put by the Thrust, he reckons the Man that brings it to be no better than a
Pick-Pocket, of Highway-Man, that bids him deliver. Though an Author presents his
Trash to his Patron with a smiling Countenance, yet the other looks as musty as
a breaking Merchant when a thundering Bill is drawn upon him; nay, some of them
have been observed to look as pale as a Ghost, at the very sight of a Book that
promised them nothing less than Immortality. Well, those wicked Dedicators of
Books are most impudent Raskals, to haunt those Noble Lords, even in their
Chambers, and put them in bodily Fear, as they do. They should consider, that
these cringing Epistles, which ask where nothing i^ due, are really as much to
be dreaded as an Execution upon Coach and Six: so that for my part, I don't at
all wonder if it is not so much Pleasure to see his Genealogy derived in a
direct Line from Hector or Sarpedon, as it is a Mortification to him to part
with his Guineas, to buy the Author a new Drugget-Suit. However, I must needs
own, that it is wisely done of our Authors, not to walk the Streets in all those
Trappings, wherein we find them at the Frontispiece of their Books. For tell
me, dear Guillemette, would not your Ladyship fall a barking most inordinately,
should you see a Man with one Shoulder bare, and the other wrapped up in humble
Drugget, and a Crown of Laurel upon his Head. Yet it is neither the fear of
Dogs, nor the hollowing of Children that makes them decline this Equipage, for
they are only afraid of the surly Fellow at the Nobleman's Gate. Did they not
take this Course, the Porter would know them, who hates such as break in upon
his own Trade, and beg as he does, especially at this time of Day, when one
would think our Authors had bound themselves by an Oath, never to set Foot
within an House that does not belong to a Man of Quality. There is nothing else
hardly to be seen in the Palaces of our great Men, but a Showl of half-starv'd
Creditors in one Corner of the Hall, and half a Dozen Mendicant Rhimers in the
other; so that considering how the Affairs goat present, I am afraid that we
shall shortly see as many of them in our Hospitals, unless the Times mend, as
would be sufficient to set up a complete Academy: For alas! the World is not so
favorable to them as it has been formerly. I have known the time when there
was not a P^^t in the whole Kingdom, that did not hope to make his Fortune by
the Muses, as well as the Abb^ des Ports, and Bois-Robert, and several more of
the Poetical Fraternity had done before him, who were advanced to Bishoprics
and Abbeys, and the Lord knows what, for their fine Writings. With a Pension of
Six hundred Li^res a Year they made a shift to wear good Clothes on their
^^cks, and powder themselves as extravagantly as the nicest (...) of them all;
for which, dear Guillemette, I must highly commend them, for their Fancy was so
warm and all that, that it made their Heads sweat most excessively. Some of
them had Silver Spurs, and some kept a pad Nag, with all its Accoutr^ments, to
keep the Dirt from their Boots. But at this present writing, both the ^uskin
and the Gambadoes are alike Dirty, and some of our Poets have abdicated
Parnassus for good and all, while others have fallen in with the Players and
Booksellers. Whether it be, that Necessity is the Mother of Invention, or, that
Invention is an essential part of a Poet, some of our high flown Writers were
for making Friends in the Treasury, and applied themselves to those worthy
Gentlemen, that part with their Money as easily as they get it. I make no
question but that these Poetical Merchants were so profuse, as to bestow all
manner of Virtues, nay even the Military ones too, when their Hands were in, on
these liberal Publicans, and at least derived their Pedigree from him that was
Privy-Purse to Clodion the Hairy; or, because he was a Pagan by Religion, from
the Nephew of King Clovis's First Almoner. But these Politics, as I have been
informed, only succeeded with those, whose Works had been always received with
Universal Applause, while other poor Rogues, that were such Fools as to imitate
them, only got a good Dinner among these Sons of Mammon, for their Pains, and
perhaps a Surfeit afterward for eating too greedily. There needs no more Wit
than what your Ladyship is Mistress of, I mean than what belongs to a Dog, to
tell me that I have practiced what I condemn in others. It Is true indeed, dear
Guillemette, that I made bold to Dedicate a Play to a Person of great Merit and
Quality; but it is as true, that I had the Honor to be acquainted long before
that with Mons. le Baillif de Souvray, and always respected him, both because
he deserves it, and because he is my particular Friend. It Is my Misfortune that
I am one of those unlucky Men who are easily forgotten. when they are not seen.
And if our most incomparable Queen is still pleased to continue me the Pension,
which the Mare^chal de Schomberg's Lady procured for me, it is not because I
have now and then been so happy as to divert her with my Poetry; but because I
am the most miserable Wretch alive, and afflicted with a cruel Distemper, which
will not terminate but with my Life, no more than a confounded Lawsuit, on
which my little All depends. This of itself is sufficient, without being
possessed with the Devil of Love, to hinder a Man from sleeping, unless he took
his Hat full of Opium before he went to Bed. But it is impossible for my good
Humor to maintain its Ground much longer against these melancholy Thoughts,
that drop so unseasonably from my Pen, and now begin to seize me. Thus, dear
Guillemette, being weary of sitting with you so long, I must even conclude my
Dedication abruptly, without puzzling my Brains to present you with some
notable Complement at parting, and remain in the common Form,

Dear Bitch, Your Four-Leg'd Ladyship's, etc. Scarron.

FINIS.

